The ReBorn Marketplace: an Application Store for Industrial Smart Components
Renato Fonseca, Susana Aguiar, Michael Peschl, Gil Gonc¸alves
Institute for Systems and Robotics
Faculty of Engineering of University of Porto
Porto, Portugal
Email: {ee10264, saguiar, gil}@fe.up.pt
Harms&Wende
Germany
Email: michael.peschl@hwh-karlsruhe.de
Abstract—Rapid changing product portfolios and continuously
evolving process technologies require manufacturing systems that
are themselves easily upgradeable and into which new technolo-
gies and functions can be readily integrated. This new context
creates the need for novel manufacturing equipment and control
systems able to cope with the increased complexity, required to
manage product and production variability in mass customized
manufacturing. To achieve this agility modern manufacturing
environments need to encapsulate knowledge into sensors and
machines, turning them into Smart Components. Based on the
concept of logical encapsulation of manufacturing industrial
equipment, this paper proposes the creation of a marketplace
for Smart Components. This marketplace organises and stores
information of industrial machines, not only for potential cus-
tomers to check and compare different devices, but essentially
to allow for (semi)automatic update of the industrial equipment
controllers and functionalities on the ﬂy.
Keywords—Smart Components; Smart Components Application
Store; Intelligent Manufacturing Environments; Manufacturing
Systems; Industrial Equipment Re-usability; ReBorn Paradigm.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Increasingly, traditional top-down and centralized process
planning, scheduling and control mechanisms are becoming
insufﬁcient to respond to the constant variability in high-
mix low-volume production environments. These traditional
centralized hierarchical approaches limit the adaptability, con-
tributing to a reduced resilience of the system, as well as
to reduced ﬂexibility in planning and longer response times.
The ability of manufacturing system, on all the functional and
organizational levels, to reconﬁgure itself in order to quickly
adjust production capabilities and capacities in response to
sudden changes in the market or in the regulatory environment
is nowadays a major requirement.
In order to respond to the current industrial environment
requirements, the development of a Marketplace for Smart
Components is proposed. The proposed marketplace organises
and stores information of industrial machines, so potential
customers can check and compare different devices from a
broad perspective, as well as providing a web interface that
allows users to insert and change equipment information.
Additionally, the marketplace provides tools for integrating
interfaces and systems used by the equipment manufacturers
to easily update controllers ﬁrmware and equipment function-
alities.
The concept of the Marketplace for Smart Components was
ﬁrst introduced and discussed within the scope of the European
project ReBorn. The vision of ReBorn is to demonstrate
strategies and technologies that support a new paradigm for
the re-use of production equipment in factories. This re-use
will give new life to decommissioned production systems and
equipment, helping them to be reborn in new production lines.
Such new strategies will contribute to sustainable, resource-
friendly green manufacturing and, at the same time, deliver
economic and competitive advantages for the manufacturing
sector. ReBorn will make signiﬁcant step towards 100% re-use
of equipment focusing its approach on three main areas: mod-
ular Plug&Produce equipment, in-line adaptive manufactur-
ing, innovative factory layout design techniques and adaptive
(re)conﬁguration, ﬂexible and low-cost mechanical systems for
fast and easy assembly and disassembly.
This paper is organized as follows. In section II, a literature
review is presented, with a discussion regarding the current
state of the art in manufacturing systems, electronic platforms
and services. Section III, presents the needs and problem
deﬁnition, followed by the concept and solution in Section IV.
Section V describes a sample implementation of the proposed
solution and section VI concludes the paper by exposing some
ﬁnal remarks about the implemented solution and next steps
for future work are identiﬁed.
II.
STATE OF THE ART AND RELATED WORK
This section presents a short overview of the state of the art
in areas related with the work described in this paper. Related
work is reported from the areas of manufacturing systems,
platforms and services.
A. Manufacturing Systems
The manufacturing enterprises of the 21st century are in an
environment in which market demand is frequently changing,
new technologies are continuously emerging, and competition
is global. Manufacturing strategies should therefore shift to
support global competitiveness, new product innovation and
customization, and rapid market responsiveness. The next
generation manufacturing systems will thus be more strongly
time-oriented (or highly responsive), while still focusing on
cost and quality.
Such manufacturing systems will need to satisfy a number
of fundamental requirements [1], including amongst other: full
integration of heterogeneous software and hardware systems;
capacity to accommodate new subsystems (software, hardware,
peopleware) or dismantle existing subsystems on the ﬂy.
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

Next, a few approaches that intend to fulﬁll these require-
ments are described.
1) Networked Factories: Modern Industries have a con-
tinuous need to satisfy their markets at better costs in order
to keep competitive. This simple fact creates the continuous
need for new products, new production lines and new control
methodologies. The XPRESS (FleXible PRoduction Experts
for reconﬁgurable aSSembly technology) project [4], a cooper-
ative European project involving industry and academia studied
this issue in order to deﬁne a new ﬂexible production concept.
This concept, based on specialized intelligent process units,
is able to integrate a complete process chain, and includes
support for production conﬁguration, multi-variant production
lines and 100% quality monitoring.
2) Reconﬁgurable Manufacturing Systems: Reconﬁgura-
bility has been an issue in computing and robotics for many
years. In general, reconﬁgurability is the ability to repeatedly
change and rearrange the components of a system in a cost-
effective way.
According to [5] it is possible to deﬁne a Reconﬁgurable
Manufacturing Systems (RMS) as being designed at the outset
far rapid change in structure, as well as in hardware and
software components, in order to quickly adjust production
capacity and functionality in response to sudden changes in
market or in regulatory requirements.
Furthermore, Merhabi et al. [6] complement this deﬁnition
with the notion that reconﬁguration allows adding, as well as
removing or modifying speciﬁc process capabilities, controls,
software, or machine structure. This reconﬁguration aims at
improving or upgrading the existing manufacturing systems or
its components, rather than promoting its replacement.
RMS are seen as a cost-effective response to market
changes, that tries to combine the high throughput of dedi-
cated production with the ﬂexibility of ﬂexible manufacturing
systems (FMS), and is also able to react to changes quickly
and efﬁciently. For this to be accomplished, the system and
its machines have to be adapted for an adjustable structure
that enables system scalability in response to market demands
and system/machine adaptability to new products. RMS are
composed of reconﬁgurable machines and open architecture
reconﬁgurable control systems to produce variety of parts
with family relationships. Structure may be adjusted at the
system level (e.g., adding/removing machines) and at the
machine level (changing machine hardware, control software
or parameters).
Intelligent Reconﬁgurable Machines, Smart Plug&Produce
and the extensive integration of sensors - in line with the Cyber
Physical Systems (CPS) and Internet of Things (IoT) concepts
- are becoming more and more present in the industrial
shopﬂoor [11] [12]. Monitoring the current machines process
state, and increasing shop-ﬂoor analysis, enables rapid decision
making according to the production system demands.
B. Platforms
According to Smedlund and Faghankhani [2], it is possible
to deﬁne a platform as:
Deﬁnition 1: Any physical or virtual space where different
participants compose a market and a platform that participants
orchestrate can be deﬁned as a platform.
Platforms are composed of onion-like multilayered struc-
tures in which the technological core element is necessary for
complementary technologies that in turn provide ground for
software. It is possible to identify a wide range of different
types of platforms based on the nature of interactions between
its participants. There are, for instance, platforms that aim
to help members of some participant group ﬁnd a match in
another group, platforms that bring sellers and buyers together,
platforms that measure transactions between participants, and
platforms where participants share their input with other par-
ticipants.
Deﬁnition 2: Any virtual or physical venue that enables
all participating groups to co-create and co-capture value by
interactions which result in offering a system of products,
services or both.
Depending on the number of participating groups, plat-
forms make a one-sided, two-sided or multi-sided market
possible. In n-sided platforms, which include social media
platforms and smartphone ecosystems, the users connect to
each other, communicate and co-create value for themselves
and for the other users and participants. The user is no longer
a passive recipient and object of value delivery, but active co-
creator of value. This means that in order to fully beneﬁt from
platform offering, the end-user must give something back to
the platform.
Platforms are evolving systems capable of adaptation. They
can be expanded by either building upon new components or
connecting to other systems, or other platforms. After reaching
a certain threshold of momentum in the number of participants
and relationships between them, platforms develop in an evolu-
tionary manner (i.e. random variation, selection and retention
processes). An evolutionary attribute is necessary because it
allows the platform to maintain its current participants and
simultaneously attract new ones.
Platforms create a network of relationships among the
participants. Smedlund and Faghankhan describe and identify
two different trajectories on which networks are formed: Goal-
Directedness and Serendipity. In goal-directed networks, the
participants see themselves as a part of network committed
to some common goal. The network is formed to achieve this
goal. In serendipitous networking, there is no preexisting goal,
and the network develops in an evolutionary manner.
1) Platform Participants: Platform participant groups in-
clude End-Users, Platform Owners, Platform Providers,
Complementors and Orchestrators. For instance, when tak-
ing a look at a generic social media network model, Smed-
lund et. al proceeds to describe and identify the mentioned
participant groups. The user account holders are the End-
Users, which can also be called the demand side. Platform
Owners are the entity which in turn owns the social media
network, they can be easily differentiated from the other
participant groups as they hold the technological solution for
the system that deﬁnes its evolution. Platform Providers
can be exempliﬁed as Internet access providers. Their role is
to play the part of an intermediary between a user and the
platform, by doing so they become the primary contact points
of the platforms end-users. Complementors are a platform
participant with the ability to add value to the platform itself,
they offer complementary services or products to the value
proposition of the platform, and they comprise the supply side
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

of the platform. Complementors can be labeled according to
the complement they provide to the platform, by doing so
its then possible to differentiate them in different segments.
Regarding social media networks, a complementor might be
an application developer or for instance an advertiser.
It is then important to identify a focal actor, who strives
to uphold the platform standards, as well as maintaining its
integrity and its evolution according to the industry vision.
This focal actor, has been referred to by different terms in
different studies, as stated by Smedlund et. al it is possible to
deﬁne this central role as the platform Orchestrator.
C. Services
Service activities across industries are now widely rec-
ognized. Information and Communication Technology (ICT)
powered evolution of services is one of the main sources of
modern economic growth. Business logic has evolved from the
product-dominant logic into service-dominant logic [3]. Ac-
cording to this new business logic, services are conceptualized
as processes (rather than something that produces a unit output)
and its dynamics are driven by resources, such as knowledge
and skills. In this new mindset, value is now understood as a
collaborative process between providers and consumers.
The mobile phone industry has revolutionized the way
consumers look at a simple phone. Mobile phones have tran-
scended their original form, and through mobile information
and communication technology, they have long past surpassed
the form of a telephone. Instead, it is now evolving into
a platform like format, where it is possible to develop a
broad variety of complementary innovations. These surges
of platform-like services have now imprinted a heavy mark
on todays society and completely changed the recent social
interaction format as well as affecting a broad variety of
business models and approaches. Mobile internet, e-mail, per-
sonal productivity tools, entertainment services, such as games,
music, and mobile TV, are all examples of platform oriented
services.
Platform as a Service (PaaS), are continuously gaining
importance as n-sided markets, offering Software as a Service
(SaaS) to the respective platform participants. PaaS are bound
to co-habit ecosystems with users and autonomous SaaS sup-
pliers. In order to be successful an attempt is made to shape
the ecosystems form according to the platforms basic value
proposition, and control the service quality according to the
users requirements.
III.
REBORN MARKETPLACE CONCEPT & SOLUTION
This section describes the ReBorn Marketplace (RBM).
Starting from a motivation example from an industrial compo-
nent supplier, the concept for the marketplace and its require-
ments are elicited. The proposed solution is also discussed in
this section.
A. Component Supplier Needs & Problem Deﬁnition
Component Suppliers play an important part of in the
deployment of any production line. They feature control and
monitoring systems for all kinds of operations and pro-
cesses, as well as specialized individual process solutions.
Harms&Wende (HWH) is a component supplier specialized
in welding control systems for various sectors. Harms&Wende
customers often are welding machines manufacturers who use
the Harms&Wende welding control units. They offer resistance
welding equipment in form of control devices, quality assur-
ance systems and complete packages to well-known machine
construction companies. Once these components are integrated
in a production line, they face however a major implication.
Nowadays production line systems, thanks to the highly
competitive industrial environment, are required to be highly
ﬂexible. Flexibility directly translates into production systems
that need to be easy to update, and in which new technologies
and new functions can be quickly integrated. However, that
is not the case in the current industrial standard, from a
component supplier perspective, offering additional component
features and technologies in the form of services is not yet the
usual practice.
B. The ReBorn Marketplace Concept
RBM will offer its services in an online platform format,
as a platform as a system (PaaS). PaaS enables the creation
of an evolving market between actors who would not connect
on their own without the platform. PaaS comprises different
participant groups, making a multi-sided market possible.
Fig. 1, depicts the RBM platform participants.
Fig. 1. The ReBorn Marketplace Platform Participants
The RBM is a n-sided market, with service providers
on one end and service consumers on the other. This will
attract service suppliers in order to respond to the demand
side of the platform. The demand side, in the marketplace,
is comprised of any potential End-User to the platform of-
ferings. Service Consumers comprise the marketplace par-
ticipants which mainly relate to the RBM service offerings.
The Marketplace Service Suppliers can normally be instan-
tiated by any entity capable of offering its services to the
platform while altogether adding value to the platforms base
proposition. Service Suppliers are industrial machine builders
who provide equipment, as well as equipment information,
functionalities (software), and operations. Entities capable of
providing complementing services to the platform, in order to
co-create value, are labelled as Complementors. These can
be for instance independent software developers that provide
additional equipment functionalities.
1) RBM Case Application: Original Equipment Manufac-
turers (OEM), constitute a major segment of the marketplaces
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

end-users. When considering OEM as a potential platform end-
user, some forethought is needed. As stated previously, the
RBM attempts to implement a marketplace solution that is
adequate to a wide spectrum of platform end-users. As such,
it must be able to cope with multiple application scenarios for
any type of production system and factory environment.
When considering that each major OEM entity in the
industrial market potentially has a different set amount of
production facilities, each of them having a varied amount of
production lines, the marketplace when offering its services
must satisfy a huge variety of needs and requirements. Also,
production facilities from the same OEM can differ greatly.
Although they fall under the same company, they can possibly
follow different business model approaches, quality inspection
guidelines, and for instance factory ﬂoor communications
protocols. Todays industrial environment is characterised by
a lack of business models standardization, which means that
each production facility acts uniquely and in independently of
each other, while altogether engaging in a highly competitive
environment.
In order to test the ReBorns online marketplace on a factory
ﬂoor, its necessary to take some considerations into account.
Usually production lines equipments are closed off to outside
networks, which in turn makes any information ﬂow from the
inside of the factory plant to the outside an impossibility. Fig.
2 depicts the RBM OEM Case Application.
Fig. 2. The ReBorn Marketplace OEM Case Application
The local marketplace attempts to act as an exact copy
of the ReBorns marketplace online solution, but instead of
being hosted online it is instead hosted on a private network,
accessible only to its participants. The local marketplace would
employ all the features and available services provided by the
original ReBorn online platform. The local marketplace acts
as a proxy of the ReBorn marketplace. The local marketplace
from a platform perspective acts as a two dimensional plat-
form. Serving in one side each industrial equipment from the
factory ﬂoor, and on the other side the online ReBorn mar-
ketplace. Having identiﬁed the local marketplace participants,
it is important to discuss how the local marketplace interacts
with the online platform.
One could consider the local marketplace to possess direct
communication with the online platform, serving as a bridge
between the industrial equipments private network and the
ReBorn marketplace. On the other hand if the information ﬂow
between the local marketplace and the ReBorn marketplace
to an outside environment will be strictly enforced the local
marketplace can consider being manually updated, in order to
have the latest software content made available by the online
platform.
The later approach requires the local marketplace to be
managed locally. The update batch is made available by the
ReBorn marketplace, and then needs to be manually inserted
into the local marketplace. The two approaches have very
different results, whilst the ﬁrst approach instantly updates
the local marketplace with new content, the second approach
requires that the local marketplace manager is notiﬁed of the
available update batch. Only then he is able to proceed with the
update operation. This means that industrial equipment would
continue to work with out of date software for a longer period
of time, which might be critical for the production line. In
the worst case scenario, if a defect is found in an industrial
equipment software version and the only available solution
refers to a new solution contained by a software update batch
yet to be implemented on the local market, this could possibly
mean that the production would have to be put on hold until
the solution is implemented.
C. Problem Solution
The solution of the problem stated above is framed in the
scope of the ReBorn European project - Innovative Reuse of
modular knowledge Based devices and technologies for Old,
Renewed and New factories - and its main purpose is study
and implement a Marketplace for Smart Components, where
the information related to industrial equipment is provided in
a standardized way in order to make its use in the planning
process of production lines easier and promote the re-use of
equipment.
The main features to be developed in this project include
also the creation of a solution to integrate the virtualization of
the shop-ﬂoor equipment directly into the Marketplace. This
integration must provide different information access control
levels, as well as organize all the information at the cloud level.
The RBM aims to provide a pioneering service that is
yet to be seen in the current industrial environment. One of
the marketplace services key features is providing interfaces
with tools and systems used by the industry, in an application
format. From an industrial environment perspective, equipment
update or actualization is mainly done at a software level.
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

Each production equipment is represented by a cyber-
physical entity called Verson. Versons act as logical encapsu-
lation entities, which store and analyse information, enabling
industrial equipment to perform dynamic and highly special-
ized tasks. It is through speciﬁc applications stored in the
Verson, that these highly specialized tasks are made possi-
ble. The Versons modular architecture allows for individual
component management at shop ﬂoor level, with a modular
plug in and plug out application format. The Verson like
product equipment is accompanied by a functional platform.
The Verson Platform acts as an interface for the integration
of the applications provided by the RBM, as well as a service
handler for its requests.
An Open-Source E-commerce Shopping Cart Solution
is used as the RBM platform base. Additionally, the RBM
provides the Verson product equipment all the required appli-
cation content, through a series of Web Services which follow
a RESTful Architecture.
The RBM makes application management at a Verson level
possible, as it provides the Verson with a broad variety of
applications which feature a wide range of functionalities. By
offering industrial equipment update on production runtime,
the RBM makes industrial equipment monitoring, upgrading
and refurbishment a reality.
IV.
SOLUTION IMPLEMENTATION & VALIDATION
The RBM includes a key set of features that are aligned
with the new ReBorn paradigm. These features are directly
related to the application management services implemented
by the Versons and by the RBM. The application management
service, as stated previously, aims to locally manage the
application content of each equipment’s Verson, while the
equipment is installed in a production line. In the following
section, the implementation process and the validation sce-
nario of the marketplace application management services are
described.
The communication between a Verson device and the
ReBorn Marketplace online platform was developed to demon-
strate the application management service offered by the RBM.
A Verson product was provided for requirement validation and
testing. Fig. 3 depicts the applied test setup.
Fig. 3. REST Service Testing with HWH
The Verson acts as a logical encapsulation entity of the
production lines equipment, which is responsible for collect-
ing, storing and analysing information. The Verson extension
of production equipment is realized on a dedicated hardware
platform to enable an easy implementation of the concept. A
RaspBerry Pi SBC was used for this purpose in the sample
implementation.
By means of the Verson platform it is possible to see the
Verson’s currently installed device applications. The same plat-
form allows to initiate a request, which portrays an application
update nature, to the RBM. The Verson’s applications serve a
multipurpose nature. Through them it was possible to display
the equipment status, information and statistics, alongside the
current conditions on which the equipment is working. The
applications developed by the ReBorn project were developed
in PHP. Each application consisted of two PHP ﬁles and a
.dat ﬁle. The RBM in turn is responsible to provide all the
application content necessary to each request performed by
the Verson through the Verson Platform.
In order to establish communication between the Verson
and the RBM, the project solution was published on the HWH
local server as the provided Verson equipment is restricted to
the local private network.
In accordance to the system requirements, the Verson
acts as a mediator between the industrial equipment and the
ReBorn Marketplace. Requests made to the ReBorn platform
are handled by a REST based web service. The ReBorn
Marketplace is in turn responsible for providing the latest
application content on demand to the Verson equipment.
V.
CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK
The work presented in this paper only scratches the surface
of a vast subject. By describing and demonstrating the solution
for run-time (software) update and reconﬁguration of industrial
equipment, it highlights the underlining conditions of a real life
application of the RBM.
The ReBorn Marketplace concept discussed in the paper is
a potential solution adequate to different types of production
systems. By managing the Versons application content, through
the ReBorn Marketplace services, it is possible to integrate new
technologies and functionalities in industrial equipment on the
ﬂy.
The Versons modular architecture allows for plug-in and
plug-out application management. However, some considera-
tions have to be made in order to apply it to a real industrial
scenario. Applications can be easily installed and removed
from a Verson like equipment, but it is necessary to understand
if they are independent within the system architecture. Cross
dependencies between applications further increase the com-
plexity and create new challenges for the platforms application
content management services.
Business and service models are also important for the
industrial uptake of such a solution. One of the crucial points
relates to the identiﬁcation of the liable subject. The currently
implemented solution, when considering the platforms appli-
cation management service offerings, requires the Production
Line Maintainer to individually access each industrial equip-
ment in order to perform requests to the ReBorn Marketplace
platform: application update, install, and remove. In this case,
the Production Line Maintainer takes full liability of the
newly integrated (or removed) application content, in case
the application features are not up to the production lines
standards and requirements. This approach when applied to a
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

standard OEM production line, which might contain hundreds
of Versons, is unpractical. Individually accessing each Verson
in order to proceed with maintenance operations is not a viable
approach.
Considering automated application maintenance operations
at the Verson individual level, whenever new software content
is released and or whenever the new application licenses are
made available, sets new requirements for the RBM.
Further developments of the RBM include offering auto-
mated maintenance services as well as system restore service,
that cover possible unpredictable outcomes of upgrading and
installing new software content.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was partially supported by the ReBORN
project (FoF.NMP.2013-2)
Innovative Reuse of modular
knowledge Based devices and technologies for Old, Renewed
and New factories funded by the European Commission under
the Seventh Framework Program for Research and Technolog-
ical Development. We would like to thank all partners for their
support and discussions that contributed to these results.
REFERENCES
[1]
W. Shen, Q. Hao, H. J. Yoon, and D. H. Norrie.
”Applications of
agent-based systems in intelligent manufacturing: An updated review.”
Advanced engineering Informatics, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 415–431, 2006.
[2]
A. Smedlund and H. Faghankhani. ”Platform orchestration for efﬁciency,
development, and innovation.” 48th IEEE Hawaii International Confer-
ence on System Sciences (HICSS), pp 1380–1388, 2015.
[3]
V. K. Tuunainen and T. Tuunanen. ”Iisin-a model for analyzing ICT
intensive service innovations in n-sided markets.”
44th IEEE Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), pages 1–10,
2011.
[4]
F. Almeida, P. Dias, G. Gonc¸alves, M. Peschl, and M. Hoffmeister.
”A proposition of a manufactronic network approach for intelligent
and ﬂexible manufacturing systems.” International Journal of Industrial
Engineering Computations, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 873–890, 2011.
[5]
Y. Koren, U. Heisel, F. Jovane, T. Moriwaki, G. Pritschow, G. Ulsoy,
and H. Van Brussel. ”Reconﬁgurable Manufacturing Systems.” CIRP
Annals-Manufacturing Technology, vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 527–540, 1999.
[6]
M. Mehrabi, A. Ulsoy, Y. Koren, and P. Heytler. ”Trends and perspectives
in ﬂexible and reconﬁgurable manufacturing systems.”
Journal of
Intelligent manufacturing, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 135–146, 2002.
[7]
N. A. Dufﬁe and R. S. Piper. ”Non-hierarchical control of a ﬂexible
manufacturing cell.” ”Robotics and computer-integrated manufacturing”,
vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 175–179, 1987.
[8]
H. Parunak, A. D. Baker, and S. J. Clark.
”The AARIA agent
architecture: From manufacturing requirements to agent-based system
design.” Integrated Computer-Aided Engineering, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 45–
58, 2001.
[9]
H. Parunak, J. F. White, P. W. Lozo, R. Judd, B. W. Irish, and J. Kindrick.
”An architecture for heuristic factory control.” IEEE American Control
Conference, pp. 548–558, 1986.
[10]
H. V. Brussel, J. Wyns, P. Valckenaers, L. Bongaerts, and P. Peeters.
”Reference architecture for holonic manufacturing systems: PROSA.”
Computers in industry, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 255–274, 1998.
[11]
G. Gonc¸alves, J. Reis, R. Pinto, M. Alves, and J. Correia. ”A step
forward on Intelligent Factories: A Smart Sensor-oriented approach.”
IEEE Emerging Technology and Factory Automation (ETFA), pp. 1–8,
2014
[12]
M. Peschl, N. Link, M. Hoffmeister, G. Gonc¸alves, F. Almeida. ”De-
signing and implementation of an intelligent manufacturing system.”
Journal of Industrial Engineering and Management, vol. 4, no. 4, pp.
718–745, 2011.
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

