Infomobility and Vehicle Routing Problem 
Transportation Models of goods  
 
Giuseppe Salvo, Luigi Sanfilippo 
Technology and Economy of Transport 
University of Palermo 
Palermo, Italy 
giuseppe.salvo@unipa.it; luigi.sanfilippo@unipa.it 
 
 
Abstract—The research of optimization techniques in the 
system of goods distribution  from warehouses to final users 
(vehicle routing problem), made considerable savings on the 
total cost of transport and, consequently, on the final cost of 
goods, and produced the models applicable to other operating 
environments (e.g., transport for disabled people, school, 
municipal waste collection). The analysis conducted on the 
different models developed under the VRP highlights the 
support that these models can give on the infomobility of 
goods.  
Keywords-Infomobility of goods; Model of Vehicle Routing 
Problem; Models of DRAI; Logistic Operator; Mutimodal 
Transport Operator; Transport of goods  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The distribution of goods, delivery to a clients set or 
pick up of goods by one or more deposits, made with 
suitable transport, causes many problems. In particular, 
transport takes place in urban areas, deposits are located in 
the peripheral areas (suburban); customers are all in the 
urban area and vehicles used are mainly by road. In pick-up 
and delivery of goods lie the problems of vehicle routing 
and scheduling. 
In fact, the adoption of standard operating procedures 
which make extensive use of vehicle techniques routing 
allow sizing of fleet and driving staff, with positive effects 
on business management. On the other hand the reduced 
availability of time on the part of customers to receive the 
goods requires a careful scheduling of deliveries. 
The solution of a transporting goods problem in a 
predetermined time interval requires the determination of a 
trips set, all with original and final destination at the depot 
and carried out by various vehicles of the fleet, so as to meet 
the demands of customers, respecting operational service 
constraints and minimizing the overall cost for the transport. 
In recent years, thanks to the numerous technological 
advances, the Vehicle Routing Problem (VRP) [9] has been 
an active area of Operational Research. New approaches, 
new models and faster solution algorithms were developed 
as a result of more accurate techniques, (e.g., Asymmetric 
Vehicle Routing Problem AVPR [9]; Capacitated Vehicle 
Routing Problem CVRP [9]; Traveling Salesman Problem 
TSP [14]; Green Vehicle Routing Problem G-VRP [1]). The 
application of these approaches for solving vehicle routing 
problems is very useful in solving various problems (e.g., 
transport services disabled, school buses, on-demand, etc.). 
Much still needs to be done to determine the extent how the 
traffic information can help operators to solve logistical 
problems of routing and scheduling. 
Development 
of 
Operations 
Research 
models 
increasingly specialized is accompanied with proliferation 
of devices that, using information technology and 
communications (ITC), are able to expand the user's 
knowledge, leading to better decisions. As part of the 
transport activity, this involves, e.g., the knowledge of the 
congestion state of the network, the possibility of modifying 
in real time the route according to the changed conditions of 
the road network, the possibility, on the part of the customer 
to monitor the arrival of the goods pending. The availability 
of extensive and detailed information occurs affecting the 
structures of the VRP algorithms, giving origin to a 
continuous "loop".  
The objective of this work is to analyze the interaction 
in the transport of goods, between mobile information 
systems 
(e.g., 
devices, 
information 
technologies, 
communication protocols, etc.) and VRP models available 
in the literature. 
To this end, in Section II, it will be taken into account 
the needs of logistics operators to see how goods 
transportation changed and what are new requirements, 
passing in review the main traffic service and their 
usefulness in the transport of goods.  
In Section III, we will analyze the mathematical models 
for the transport of goods. In particular, we will focus on the 
problems DRAI (Dynamic Routing And Inventory), 
collection and delivery of goods, giving a classification of 
variable according to topology, type of goods, demand, 
kinds of decision, constraints/objectives, costs, solving 
approach. It will also analyze some of VRP models that 
offer the advantages of lower costs and better management 
of transport, in order to verify whether these models have 
among the explicit variables elements infomobility. 
In Section IV, we will comment on the analysis results, 
formulating hypotheses, for the integration of the already 
known models with the explicit variables related to the 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

availability of information on the road network state, and 
monitoring of the fleet. 
II. 
THE NEEDS OF LOGISTICS OPERATORS 
The factor which has made necessary a different 
approach toward the transport activities are: 
 
Compression of time in the supply chain. The 
shortening of the transfer of information within 
the chain has highlighted the relative slowness of 
the process of physical transfer of goods. It is 
obvious that effort have been focused on this 
process to make it faster and more reliable. 
 
Control of the transport process. In the effort of 
reduction in transit times in the supply chain, strict 
control of goods has become an inevitable 
requirement. Satellite vehicle positional system, 
system for the control in various links in the chain 
of the specific goods (tracking and tracing), 
systems for continuous communication with 
various units are indispensable tools today. 
 
Dissemination of outsourcing logistics and 
evolution of operators. The assignment to third 
parties by companies of their logistics activities 
has created a new market of the logistics 
operators. So in most cases not more carriers that 
perform the simple activity from origin to 
destination, but logistic operators can manage 
with tools, reality quite complex, requiring the 
ability to integrate with various systems of the 
client companies or other actors in the world of 
transport (customs, ports, etc.). 
 
Diffusion of the Internet. Even in the transport 
sector, as in many areas Internet has opened up 
new opportunities that require ability to adapt to 
the new technologies. The e-commerce further 
strengthens the compression of time, but it also 
poses considerable problems of reorganization to 
reach a new market in a competitive way. The 
availability of portals (market places) dedicated 
specifically to the various modes of transport 
offers new tools to operate more efficiently. 
The modern production processes resulted in a 
significant increase in demand for logistics and is more 
frequent in the case of manufacturing companies that make 
outsourcing, relying on established companies or applying 
spin-off of the business that deals with the logistics. Cost, 
time and quality are the basis of service, but the primary 
factor of success for a logistic enterprise is a service 
"tailored" to the customer. To be able to offer a service “ad 
hoc” we need a particular focus on the Human Resources, 
on the Information and Communication Technology (ICT). 
In particular, for logistic operators that operates as MTO 
(Multimodal Transport Operator), the availability of 
effective ICT tools to communicate with customers and 
other transport operators has a real strategic value [11]. 
Most of the "traditional" problems in the transportation 
of goods derive from the need to maintain continuous 
contact workers with staff on board, with customers and 
suppliers, as well as databases and service companies such 
as customs, insurance companies and banks. This also 
means a wide and full cooperation between all actors in the 
supply chain such as intermodal shipping companies, 
intermodal operators, terminal operators and transport 
providers (land/sea/air) for the exchange of all data of 
transport fundamentals to handle the shipping [13]. An 
adequate system of telecommunications is the support for 
the exchange of electronic documents to allow the tracking 
and control of shipments to foster the development of a 
"just-in-time" ensuring effective efficiency of the logistics 
cycle considerably higher than that now obtainable [8].  
The use of telecommunications networks, Internet and 
the introduction of the exchange data electronically help to 
pursue some primary objectives as: 
 
Reduction in production of paper documents; 
 
Reduction in time sorting the delivery documents; 
 
Reduction in procedural costs; 
 
Acceleration in cash flows; 
 
Reduction in errors and misinterpretations; 
 
Reduction in time and costs of storage; 
 
Information about the products location during 
transport; 
 
Optimization in use of means of transport; 
 
Information and documents; 
 
Contribution to the creation of statistical data on 
transport at national / international level. 
Therefore, it is essential providing a flow of information 
to ensure the fulfillment of the objectives listed above with 
particular reference to traceability of load, timely 
communication with forecast delivery date, and billing 
system on computer, agreed with customer, clear and 
standardized [12]. The same exchange of information must 
be provided by operator intermodal to its customers assuring 
certainty and timeliness in supply data using both 
mainframes and operating systems on a PC. 
Only upon reaching these goals the intermodality will 
expand its incidence rate in the world of transport and 
reducing the negative weight of some serious infrastructure. 
Several studies conducted in Europe (Davies, et al. [4] 
and Golob and Regan [7]) have examined the effects of the 
use of ICT in transport processes of goods, in the field of e-
commerce in particular is analyzed the influence of the use 
of technology information and communication technologies 
(ITC) on the organization of transport. In particular, the use 
of seven technologies:  
1. 
Satellite or radio based communication (S/RC); 
2. 
AVL technologies;  
3. 
AVI systems, including PrePass transponders; 
4. 
EDI; 
5. 
Vehicle maintenance software (VMS); 
6. 
Routing and scheduling software (R/SS); 
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

7. 
CB radio (CBR). 
This analysis was based on the results of a survey of 
transport operators with the aim of: 
a) Exploring the extent to which ICT is used by 
businesses. 
b) Checking that the transporters believe it is 
important to use the ITC. 
c) Identifying the efficiency of the fleet in terms of 
return empty running. 
d) Identifying sources of backloads. 
e) Analyzing the methods used to find backloads. 
f) 
Identifying the benefits and barriers to the view of 
the drivers' trade in goods. 
A first major finding from the survey, confirmed by a 
similar study conducted on a sample of transport companies 
of southern Italy, address the issue of management of empty 
running and significant impact on the total cost of transport. 
Less than 5% of companies are part of a network for the 
exchange of transport orders that allows them to reduce the 
distances 
with 
empty 
vehicles. 
The 
investigation 
demonstrated how ICT, although recognized as an important 
tool, is only partly used to support technical activities 
(planning vehicle routing, vehicle tracking, vehicle 
telematics) and how the perception of the informatics 
support is only limited to accounting matters. 
III. 
MATHEMATICAL MODELS FOR TRANSPORT OF GOODS 
A. Problems DRAI 
The logistics distribution, namely organization and 
implementation of physical distribution of goods, must also 
include, for example, the management of possible 
intermediate storage, handling from warehouse to vector 
and vice versa, the bargaining of times and modes of 
delivery goods to the customer. Mathematical models for 
this kind of issues must give a description integrated to 
whole process of physical distribution and consider, in 
addition to transport costs, other logistical costs such as 
those related keeping goods in the warehouse (inventory 
costs) and materials handling (handling costs). These 
models are described by Tinarelli [25], in case of single 
destination, and in Anily and Federgruen [26], in case of 
multiple destinations. Below, will be considered models that 
refer to problems characterized by at least the following 
three aspects: 
 
The need to define the paths that must be followed 
by the transport of goods; 
 
The existence of costs related to the quantity or 
value of the goods in question; 
 
The presence of dynamic aspects that require 
repeated decisions during a given time interval. 
The problems that fall within the context defined will be 
referred to here after as problems DRAI (Dynamic Routing 
and Inventory). The problem DRAI, concern how to manage 
the supply of customers geographically distributed during a 
given time interval, considering issues relating to both the 
transport and the management of the warehouses. DRAI’s in 
problems, it is assumed that the transport takes place via 
rubber and that time departure, loads and locations are 
subject to decision. It is also supposed that deployment task 
rather than collection occurs. In the context defined above, 
decision makers that make a problem DRAI must answer at 
least the following questions: 
 
When the shipments are made, in other words, 
when you have to load the vehicles and when they 
are visited customers; 
 
How much load in each vehicle and how much 
deliver to each customer; 
 
Which path should be followed by each vehicle to 
serve its customers. 
The literature has lots of articles speaking about Pick up 
and Delivery (PD), especially if the application is affected 
by conditions of uncertainty, in terms of geographical 
location of customers and/or terms of the amount of goods 
required. Interesting problems of PD are analyzed by 
Savelsbergh and Sol [18]. A classification of DRAI 
problems in literature is described in Table 1. 
 
TABLE I. 
CLASSIFICATION OF DRAI PROBLEM 
Topology 
Distribution 
Structure 
one to many 
many to many 
 
Types of goods 
Number 
one 
many 
 
Demand 
Knowledge 
known 
uncertain 
unknown 
Variability in 
time 
constant 
variable 
 
Distribution 
uniform 
not uniform 
 
Kinds of Decisions 
Domain 
time 
frequency 
 
Constraints / Objectives 
Vehicle 
capacity 
equal 
different 
 
Storage 
capacity  
infinite 
over 
 
Storage 
capacity 
customers 
infinite 
over 
 
Number of 
vehicles 
known 
decision 
variable 
non-binding 
Cost 
Warehouse 
conservation 
lost sales 
shuffle 
Transport 
fixed 
proportional 
to the distance 
proportional 
to number of 
stops 
Solving Approach 
Decomposition 
time 
regions - 
routes 
 
Grouping 
time 
frequency 
position 
Models / 
Algorithms 
exact 
approximate 
 
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

B. Models of DRAI 
The models considered here are well suit to problems 
where demand is almost constant or varies slowly over time. 
There are two dominant schools that study the models in the 
frequency domain. The first of these is the so-called 
Continuous Approximation (CA), while the second refers to 
the Fixed-Partition Policies (FPP).  
Both schools are based on some of the following results, 
which allow the assessment (asymptotically) the length of 
paths. 
1. Assuming it is worth the triangle inequality, 
minimum length Z of a closed path that from the 
central warehouse allows you to visit all customers 
in a particular region satisfies (1). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) 
where N is the set of customers to visit, di is the 
distance of the client from the warehouse and L* 
(N) is the minimum length of a Hamiltonian path 
between customers in N. 
2. If the set customers is partitioned according to any 
policy RP in R regions each, that containing q 
customers, the minimum value ZRP of the lengths 
sum of the paths of customer visit, meets (2). 
 
(2) 
where N (j) is the set of customers in region j. 
If the distance between any pair of customers is 
Euclidean, whatever policy of partition RP, (3) is true 
 
 
 
(3) 
where PRP is the length of perimeters of regions in which it 
was divided the area containing all customers to visit.  
If the distance between any pair of customers is 
Euclidean and they are distributed on a compact region of 
the plane at random and independent, (4) is the result on the 
asymptotic length. 
 
 
 
 
 
(4) 
where β is a constant that dependent on the law of random 
distribution of customers.  
In the case of Euclidean distances, if there are policies 
for which the term PRP increases with order less than O 
(|N|), the above observations allow us to affirm that the sum 
of the lengths of shortest paths that cover all customers with 
probability 1, asymptotically (5). 
 
 
 
 
(5) 
where E(d) is the average distance of customers from the 
warehouse.  
The length of the minimum Hamiltonian path, which 
covers all customers grows with the square root of the 
number of the same, while, if it is determined the maximum 
number of clients per path, the sum of the lengths of 
multiple paths necessary to cover the totality of customers 
grows linearly. 
C. 9.4.2 The Continuous Approximation 
This class of models offers a hierarchical approach to 
DRAI problems solving. The basic principle is that many 
specific data can be neglected, retaining the ability of 
analytical model to provide useful solutions. The discrete 
data, when sufficiently numerous, may be approximated by 
continuous functions so as to develop simple (but plausible) 
models. The solution process is to define a cost function to 
be minimized. This includes all relevant costs along the 
distribution cycle, which can be summarized as follows: 
 
Physical handling of goods: transport in strict 
sense, preparation and packaging of the lots to be 
dispatched; 
 
Storage: cost of renting facilities dedicated to 
storage, cost related to expectation of goods. 
The cost function under realistic conditions (such as 
economies of scale in goods flow) is a concave function. 
Concave functions have many local optima, which makes it 
difficult to determine the global optimum. Two important 
consequences of the concavity are: justifies the use of the 
approximation by continuous functions, and leads to 
solutions of "all or nothing". The main hypotheses 
underlying the Continuous Approximation approach are: the 
demand varies slowly with time, the geographical 
distribution of consumers varies slowly in space, the total 
cost can be expressed as the sum of costs of small 
components (disjoint) of the total region. 
An extensive review of the literature on Continuous 
Approximation is provided by Langevin, et al. [16] and  
Federgruen and Simchi-Levi [19]. 
D. The Fixed-partition policies 
Baseline scenario for the Fixed-partition policies, are as 
follows: 
 
Topology: one to many, with Euclidean distances 
approximately; 
 
Question: constant over time and uniform in space; 
 
Constraints: both on the capacity of vehicles on 
their number; 
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

 
Inventory 
costs: 
storage 
(possibly 
different 
depending on the customer), fixed of reorder; 
 
Transport costs proportional to the length of the 
routes, fixed costs; 
 
Solutions: heuristics, asymptotically optimal of the 
number of customers. 
Φ is the set of all policies FPP. Determine a strategy that 
minimizes the cost Φ respecting the constraints defined 
above is clearly NP-hard, since it must still determine the 
minimum Hamiltonian circuits. But taking advantage of 
structural properties the cost average value expression over 
the long term is shown that it is possible to define, without 
having to determine simultaneously Hamiltonian paths and 
frequency of clients access, a partition in regions, with 
probability 1, asymptotically optimal in the number of 
customers. 
Instead of Fixed-Partition Policies spoken Anily and 
Federgruen [28] and Bramel [20]. 
E. Problems Routing and Scheduling in the distribution of 
goods 
Below, we describe different characteristics of the 
problems routing and scheduling freight, considering key 
components of this problem - road network, customers, 
stores and vehicles - various operational constraints that 
may be imposed in construction of travel, and finally, 
possible objectives to be pursued in the optimization. The 
road network used for the transport, normally is described 
by a graph whose edges represent road sections passable and 
whose vertices correspond to remarkable points of the 
network, i.e., at intersections and at points where they are 
localized customers and deposits. Each customer is 
characterized by: 
 
Vertex of road graph; 
 
Amount of goods, possibly of different types, 
which must be delivered and / or collection; 
 
Intervals of time, also referred to as time windows, 
in which can be served; 
 
Time loading and unloading; 
 
Any subset of vehicles that can be used to serve 
him. 
If you cannot fully meet the demand of transport 
associated with all customers, some of them or are not 
served or are only partially. To this end are generally 
defined priority levels of service between customers. The 
travels for customers service have origin and destination in 
one or more deposits located in the vertex of the road graph. 
 The number and types of vehicles of each deposit, as 
well as the amount of goods that each store is capable of 
treating, may depend on the deposit. The transportation of 
goods is made using a fleet of vehicles that can be fixed or 
variable in size. The truck drivers are subject to restrictions 
of trade union different.  
Other limitations are given by Erdogan and  Miller-
Hooks [1] in Green Vehicle Routing Problem. The G-VRP 
seeks to find at most m tours, one for each vehicle, that 
starts and ends at the depot, visiting a subset of vertices 
including AFSs when needed such that the total distance 
traveled is minimized. Vehicle driving range constraints that 
are dictated by fuel tank capacity limitations and tour 
duration constraints meant to restrict tour durations to a pre-
specified limit Tmax, apply. 
Travel must meet a number of operational constraints, 
arising from the nature of the transport operation, the quality 
of the desired service and employment contracts of staff. In 
any moment the quantity of goods loaded on each vehicle 
may exceed the respective load capacity. The travel can 
include both pick-up and delivery of goods, or only one of 
these activities. The visit to the customer must be made 
within relevant time windows or can also be defined as a 
maximum total duration of journey. To this end, a complete 
graph whose vertices are the vertices of network 
corresponding to and deposits is defined, starting from the 
road network. For each pair of vertices i and j of the graph, 
there is an arc whose cost cij is the cost of the shortest path, 
in terms of distance or travel time, between the two vertices, 
measured on the original road network. In some cases the 
problem does not explicitly refer to a road network: the 
vertices 
(customers 
and 
deposits) 
are 
determined 
exclusively by their coordinates in a plane and the costs cij 
of the graph are defined by the Euclidean distance between 
the vertices i and j. These problems, known as Euclidean 
problems are obviously symmetrical and have the property 
of triangularity. The objectives that can be pursued in the 
solution of a problem of freight transport are numerous, 
including: 
 
Minimization of the total cost of transport 
(depending on the total distance traveled and/or 
time travel) and the fixed costs associated with the 
use of vehicles and crews; 
 
Minimization of vehicles numbers and/or drivers 
necessary; 
 
Balancing of the various paths from the point of 
view of the distance traveled or the workload 
associated; 
 
Minimization of the penalties associated with non-
or partial service to customers. 
Extensive surveys on the problems of vehicle routing 
and scheduling were presented by Laporte [24], Fisher [17], 
and Toth and Vigo [10] [14]. An annotated bibliography of 
these problems has been proposed by Laporte [15]. There 
are also available studies on the subject of comprehensive 
volumes such as Toth and Vigo [9]. 
Methods of solution metaheuristics for the standard 
version of the VRP were compared by Bianchessi and  
Righini, [5], in particular Tarantilis, et al. [6] analyzing 
various models (Type of moves employed; Intermediate 
infeasible solutions; Solution-attributes stored in tabu list; 
Tabu tenure; Diversification; Intensification). 
Definitions and formulations of the performance in 
distribution, or rather about effectiveness (that extent they 
are satisfied with the goals of rapid deployment) and equity, 
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

(ie the extent to which all recipients receive a similar 
service), are discussed by Huang, et al. [2]. They 
demonstrated that the efficiency is the total travel time for 
selected routes, the efficacy is the measure of which 
calculates the speed and sufficiency of deliveries, the equity 
is the measure the spread in service level across nodes.  
R. Bachmann and Langevin [3] developed an algorithm 
with few data (cost of delivering a load to each store and 
cost per stop in that region); this algorithm provides a viable 
solution and considers the decrease in capacity of trailers. 
F. Models and exact algorithms for the VRP 
The Asymmetric Capacitated Vehicle Routing Problem 
(ACVRP) is linked to Bin Packing Problem (BPP), which 
requires to determine the minimum number of identical 
containers (bins), each with capacity D, necessary to contain 
a given set of objects, the j-th of which is characterized by a 
non-negative weight dj.  
It is known in fact that in the particular case where cij = 
0 for all (i, j) ∈ A, i ≠ j, i ≠ 0, and c0j = 1 for all j ∈ V \ {0}, 
and ACVRP equivalent to BPP. Note that if the value of the 
optimal solution of the BPP associated to ACVRP (from (6) 
to (12)) is greater than K, the ACVRP have no solution. A 
linear programming model for whole ACVRP can be 
obtained using (n +1)2 x binary variables, one for each arch 
of the complete graph. The variable xij takes the value 1 if 
and only if the arch (i, j) and in the optimal solution 
assumes value 0 otherwise. For each S ⊆ V \ {0}, and σ (S) 
the minimum number of vehicles needed to serve all 
customers in S, i.e., the value of the optimal solution of the 
BPP with set of objects S. Note that σ (V\{0})≤K. It 
therefore has the following formulation: 
 
 
 
 
(6) 
 
 
 
 
(7) 
 
 
 
 
 
(8) 
 
 
  
(9) 
 
 
 
 
 
(10) 
 
 
(11) 
 
 
  
(12) 
G. Lower bounds and exact algorithms 
Being the TSP a relaxation of VRP, it is evident that any 
lower bound valid for TSP is also valid for VRP. 
Considering the symmetric version of the problem is 
possible to perform a relaxation which requires the 
computation of a spanning tree of minimum cost (Shortest 
Spanning Tree, SST) of undirected graph in place of 
arborescence. A "lower bound" alternative is given by the 
cost of the same SST on the graph G plus the cost of the K 
cost arcs. A second type of "lower bound" for ACVRP 
considering the graph extended, oriented and complete. 
Thoth and Vigo [14], Fischetti, et al. [21] Cornuejos and 
Harche, [23], and Fisher [22] presented review that offer 
relaxations of the Lower bounds and exact algorithms. 
H. The method of Clarke-Wright 
The algorithm of Clarke-Wright [9] is one of the first 
attempts to solve VRP with capacity constraints (CVRP). 
The algorithm starts from a solution no admissible where 
every guest is served in a different journey. Trips are then 
iteratively combined considering the saving sij (13), in terms 
of cost of travel, which can be achieved by serving two 
customers in one trip instead of leaving them in two 
separate trips. 
 
(13) 
Depending on the construction method of travel, it 
obtain two distinct versions of the algorithm (sequential and 
parallel), but in both cases the pairs of customers are taken 
into account for the possible union of travel which contain 
them to decreasing values of saving associated with them.  
The sequential version of the algorithm of Clarke and 
Wright builds a trip at a time, adding a new customer at the 
beginning or at the end of the trip, as long as no other 
customer can be inserted without violating the constraint on 
the ability or has reached the end of List of saving.  
The most widespread version of the algorithm of Clarke 
and Wright is parallel, where the list of saving is examined 
only once, and if both the couple's current customers are at 
the beginning or at the end of two trips and if the union of 
the two trips is eligible for the capacity constraint, the travel 
to which customers belong are merged into one trip, as long 
as the list of saving is not full. One can change the algorithm 
of Clarke and Wright in order to consider operational 
constraints also extremely complex, just merely do the 
unions of travel leading to a new journey admissible. 
I. 
The algorithm of Fisher and Jaikumar 
Fisher and Jaikumar [9] proposed an algorithm for 
CVRP based on a reformulation of the problem as a 
Generalized Assignment (Generalized Assignment Problem, 
GAP) non-linear, which determines an allocation of eligible 
customers to a number of trips and the objective function 
which takes into account the cost of sequencing customers 
in each trip. In the approach proposed, the non-linear the 
objective function is approximated by a linear function. The 
method of solution is of the type called a cluster-first-route-
second and is decomposed into two phases.  
In the first phase, customers are partitioned into subsets 
(clusters), eligible from the point of view of capacity 
constraint, solving a GAP with the objective function 
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

linearized. During the second stage, the final solution is 
obtained by sequencing of the customers of each subset 
using an algorithm (from (14) to (17)) for the resolution of 
TSP. 
 
 
 
 
 
(14) 
 
 
(15) 
 
 
 
(16) 
 
 
(17) 
where yik = 1 if and only if the i customer is assigned to the 
subset k and f(yk) is the cost of sequencing optimal 
customer assigned at the k trip, that is, the value of the 
optimal solution of TSP associated with the vertices of the 
subset Nk = { i | yik = 1} ∪ {O}. The focus of the algorithm 
is constituted by the construction of the linear objective 
function nonlinear f (yk). 
A possible way to construct this approximation is based 
on the determination of K customers (or points) seed the, 
il,..., iK, associated with vehicles 1, ..., K. The γik coefficients 
are calculated as the insertion cost of customer on journey 
from warehouse to seed ik and back. Due to the strong 
influence of seed on the placement of customers to different 
subsets made by the GAP, the choice of the set of seed is an 
extremely delicate phase heuristic Fisher and Jaikumar. 
J. 
Finishing techniques based on local search 
The solutions obtained by heuristic algorithms can often 
be improved using post-optimization procedures (called 
local search) based on movements of customers or 
exchanges of arcs. The algorithms of local search  
iteratively evaluate eligibility and cost of all solutions of the 
surroundings of the current solution, saving the best feasible 
solution found. If the cost of the best solution of the 
surroundings is lower than the current solution, it runs the 
transfer or exchange associated with it and it becomes the 
new current solution.  
The algorithm terminates when no solution of the 
surroundings current has lower cost than the current. The 
difference between current and new solution cost (18) is 
easily obtained considering only arcs removed from the 
current solution and those inserted in the new solution. 
 
(18) 
The procedures of local search easily are generalized so 
as to consider displacements of more than two clients or 
exchanges of more than two arcs. These generalizations 
produce better solutions. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Highlighting the interaction of ITS and goods 
transportation was essential to analyze the needs of logistics 
operators and the primary objectives that they pursue, 
describing goods transportation models in order to identify 
the main problems of the operators (DRAI; VRP). Defining 
a wide scenery of the models in the literature was useful for 
making a classification according to the following 
parameters: topology, type of goods, demand, kinds of 
decision, constraints/objectives, costs, solving approach.  
During the study, we analyzed models for goods 
transportation that interacted with ITS. These models have 
shown that the implementation of ITS not only reduces 
costs, but also facilitates an efficient organization and 
management of goods. Further studies could be developed 
to identify the extent to which the use of certain instruments 
of ITS vary some elements of a supply chain. 
A future work could include the study of fleet 
management, understood as tracking and tracing of vehicles 
that usually use the following services: 
 
Mobile terminals management; 
 
Fleet management and their list; 
 
Management of the position requests for terminal 
or fleet; 
 
Visualization of the terminal position on the map; 
 
Management of the terminal lists of a specific fleet; 
 
The introduction of this elements as decision 
variables in the VRP, would achieve more accurate 
results. 
In particular, it seem to be a priority: 
1. Knowledge of road network portion passable in 
function of the geometric characteristics vehicle 
and emissions into the atmosphere of own engine; 
2. Monitoring of average speeds along the network 
arcs used in the assigned itinerary to update the 
generalized cost of transport (at least for the travel 
time); 
3. Possibility to reserve the use of spaces for parking 
dedicated to the loading / unloading of goods, so as 
to reduce the search time of parking, to reduce the 
delay on the current traffic produced by illegal 
parking, and ultimately, reduce the crew of each 
vehicle. 
The use of mathematical models of routing and 
scheduling that considers the variables described above, 
could 
yield 
further 
improvements 
in 
business 
management. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Erdogan and E. Miller-Hooks, “A Green Vehicle Routing 
Problem,” Transportation Research Part E, vol. 48, pp. 100-114, 
January 2012; 
[2]  M. Huang, K. Smilowitz, and B. Balcik, “Models for relief routing- 
Equity, efficiency and efficacy,” Transportation Research Part E, vol. 
48, pp.2-18, January 2012; 
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

[3] R. Bachmann and A. Langevin, “A vehicle routing cost evaluation 
algorithm for the strategic analysis of radial distribution networks,” 
Transportation Research Part E, vol. 45, January 2009; 
[4] I. Davies, R. Mason, and C. Lalwani, “Assessing the impact of ICT 
on UK general haulage companies,” International Journal of 
Production Economics, vol. 106, pp. 12-27, March 2007; 
[5] N. Bianchessi and G. Righini, “Heuristic algorithms for the vehicle 
routing problem with simultaneous pick-up and delivery,” Computers 
& Operations Research, vol. 34, pp. 578-594, February 2007; 
[6] C.D. Tarantilis, G. Ioannou, and G. Prastacos, “Advanced vehicle 
routing algorithms for complex operations management problems,” 
Journal of Food Engineering, vol. 70, pp. 455-471, October 2005; 
[7] F. Golob Thomas and C. Regan Amelia, “Trucking industry adoption 
of information technology- a multivariate discrete choice model,” 
Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, vol. 10, pp. 
205-228, June 2002; 
[8] R. Danielis, “Domanda di trasporto merci e preferenze dichiarate,” 
Franco Angeli, Milano 2002; 
[9] P. Thot and D. Vigo, “Vehicle Routing Problem,” SIAM monographs 
on discrete mathematics & applications, Philadelphia, 2002;  
[10] P. Thot and D. Vigo, “Models, relaxation and exact approaches for 
the capacited Vehicle Routing Problem,” Discrete Applied 
Mathematics, vol. 123, pp.487-512, 2002; 
[11] Ministers of Transport (ECMT), European Commission (EC), 
“Terminology on combined transport, United Nations, New York and 
Geneva,” 2001; 
[12] Politecnico di Milano - Dipartimento di Economia, “Indagine 
sull’Evoluzione Strutturale delle Imprese della Logistica in Italia,” 
Assologistica, 2001; 
[13] O. Baccelli, “La Mobilità delle Merci in Europa: Potenzialità del 
Trasporto Intermodale,” Egea, 2001; 
[14] P. Thot and D. Vigo, “Exact Algorithms for Vehicle Routing,” in T. 
Crainc and G. Laporte, Eds. Fleet Management and Logistic, 1-33 
Kluwer Accademic Publisher, Boston, 1998; 
[15] G. Laporte “Vehicle routing,” M. Dell’Amico, F. Maffioli, and S. 
Martello, 
Eds. 
Annotated 
Bibliographies 
in 
Combinatorial 
Optimization, Wiley, Chichester, U.K, 1997; 
[16] A. Langevin, P. Mbaraga, and J.F. Campbell, “Continuous 
approximation models in freight distribution: an overview,” 
Transportation Research B, vol. 30, pp. 163-188, 1996; 
[17] M.L. Fisher, “The Vehicle routing,” in M.O. Ball, T.L. Magnanti, 
C.L. Monna, and G.L. Nemhauser, editor Network Routing, Vol. 8 
Handbooks in Operation Research and Management Science, pp 1-33, 
North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1995; 
[18] M.W.R. Savelsbergh and M. Sol, "The general pickup and delivery 
problem," Transportation Science, vol. 29, pp. 17-29, 1995; 
[19] A. Federgruen and D. Simchi-Levi, “Analysis of Vehicle Routing and 
InventoryRouting Problems,” in Handbooks in Operations Research 
and Management Science, M. Ball et al., Eds. 297-371, North 
Holland, Amsterdam, 1995; 
[20] J. Bramel and D. Simchi-Levi, “A location based heuristic for general 
routing problems,” Operations Research, vol. 43, pp. 649-660, 1995; 
[21] M. Fischetti, P. Thot, and D. Vigo “A Branch-and-Bound Algorithm 
for the Capacited Vehicle Routing Problem on direct graphs,” 
Operation Research 42(5), pp 846-859, 1994; 
[22] M.L. Fisher, “Optimal Solution of Vehicle Routing Problem Using 
Minimum k-Trees,” Operation Research 42(4), pp 626-642, 1994; 
[23] G. Cornuejos and F.Harche, “Polyhedral Study on the Capacitated 
Vehicle Routing Problem,” Mathematical Programming 60(1), pp 21-
52, 1993; 
[24] G. Laporte, “The Vehicle routing problem: An Overview of Exact 
and Approximate Algorithms,” European Journal of Operational 
Research 59, pp 345-358, 1992; 
[25] G.U. Tinarelli, “La gestione delle scorte nelle imprese commerciali e 
di produzione,” Etas Libri, Milano 1992; 
[26] S. Anily and A. Federgruen, “One warehouse multiple retailer 
systems with vehicle routing costs,” Management Science, vol. 36, 
pp. 92-114, 1990. 
 
160
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

