Open IDM 2.0 Framework: a Unifying Gateway for 
Interoperable Identity Management
Brahim En-Nasry
Information Security Research Team
Ecole Nationale Supérieure d'Informatique et d'Analyse des 
Systèmes, ENSIAS, Université Mohammed V-Souissi
Rabat, Morocco
ennasri@ensias.ma
Mohamed Dafir Ech-Cherif El Kettani
Information Security Research Team
Ecole Nationale Supérieure d'Informatique et d'Analyse des 
Systèmes, ENSIAS, Université Mohammed V-Souissi 
Rabat, Morocco
dafir@ensias.ma
Abstract—Today,  as  Internet  has  brought  individuals  and 
organisms within easy discovery and reach of each other, the 
role  of  identity  has  taken  on  great  importance  in  social 
interactions,  commercial  transactions  and  governance. 
Interoperability as the foundation and key enabler for cross-
domain Identity Management is still a complex challenge to 
achieve. However, efforts to build a unified framework for 
interoperability between Identity Management systems, that 
maps to different contexts such as business, government, real 
and virtual communities, will bring the breath solution that we 
all  need.  We  investigate  this  issue  from  stakeholder’s 
perspectives  and  across  many  technological  initiatives 
approaches.  Moreover,  we  also  discuss  advantages  and 
drawbacks of some Identity Management systems with respect 
to  interoperability  standards.  Finally,  we  highlight  the 
interoperability  requirements  towards  a  unified  model  and 
motivate the need of a mature model for Identity Management 
and interoperability.
Keywords - Security; Identity Management; interoperability;
framework.
I.
 INTRODUCTION
Digital Identity Management tools are designed to ensure 
effective  use  of  the  multiple  facets  of  identity  and 
identification  data  associated  to  individuals  in  Internet 
transactions. Digital identity is multifaceted and also context 
sensitive. It contains strong identifiers that uniquely describe 
a person, as well as non-exhaustive lists of other attributes 
ranged from weak to strong and from temporal to persistent: 
relationships, reputation, preferences, etc. The early purpose 
of  Identity  Management  Systems  is  to  facilitate  the 
establishment of security mechanisms. The ultimate goal is 
the control of access to assets, by supplying access control 
systems with reliable, up to date and consistent information, 
while  granting a tradeoff  between security,  usability and 
privacy. In other terms, within an organization, an Identity 
Management  System  integrates  many  processes 
(authentication, authorization, accounting, identification and 
personalization) to interact with central repositories. In open 
environments,  the  implementation  of  a  Digital  Identity 
System differs depending on the approach adopted to meet 
trust requirements and expectations of various stakeholders.
The former Identity Management  models, named “in 
silo“, have been developed in closed environments, and are 
running with proprietary systems, without any possibility 
for interaction with each other. Within the rise in electronic 
data exchange in various contexts (such as business and 
consumer applications, Web 2.0, tele-declaration, etc.), it 
becomes necessary to bridge different Identity Management 
systems and manage different identities islets scattered in 
various accounts. Identity Management interoperability for 
networked and distributed applications continues to present 
several unique challenges for users and developers.
To take a look at the state of art, existing models are 
discussed in this paper, varying from centralized, federated 
to user-centric ones, reflecting their adaptation to Internet, 
through the evolution of service concept, and technologies 
to which they are  associated.  Each model requires some 
prerequisites and starts from a specific background [1].
Today, the storage and use of credentials (government 
issued credentials, credit card number, address, birth date, 
etc.) are controlled by the entity in possession of those 
credentials  but  in  a  confused  manner.  Without  the 
distribution  of  defined  roles  and  the  delineation  of  the 
responsibility of each entity in all processes dealing with 
identity,  interoperability can  lead  to the proliferation  of 
solutions that spend the same problems.
A high level of interoperability can be reached if all 
entities in different domains can communicate to exchange 
identification information via a secure channel that permits 
strong  and  flexible  authentication.  This  level  must  be 
reinforced by policies that define restricted roles and limits 
assigned to stakeholders. It is then useful to think about 
interoperability from a stakeholder perspective, including 
“user”, “relying parties”, and “ID providers” perspectives.
This  paper  is  organized  in  5  sections:  after  this 
introduction,  Section 2 defines the global context of our 
study in terms of interoperability in current IDM approaches, 
especially under the scope of identity 2.0, in order to prepare 
the groundwork for an open interoperable IdM framework to 
access online services. Section 3 presents current approaches 
related to IDM existing frameworks. Section 4 proposes the 
model, consisting in a unified interoperable framework that 
will serve as a unifying gateway between all IdM solutions. 
Section 5 serves as a conclusion.
46
INTERNET 2011 : The Third International Conference on Evolving Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-141-0

II.
INTEROPERABILITY IN CURRENT IDM APPROACHES
In this section, we will discuss this problematic through 
the analysis of current  Identity Management solutions and 
we  will  see  if  they  can  allow  a  certain  level  of 
interoperability.
But  let  us  first  give  some  precisions  about 
interoperability from a stakeholder perspective, including 
“user perspective”, “relying parties perspective”, and “ID 
providers perspective”:
•
User perspective: In context of exchange between 
different  systems, privacy of identity attributes is 
thus a crucial problem. The privacy paradigm is that 
individuals will be able to protect their privacy if 
their information can only be collected, used, and 
disclosed with their consent. Thus, users would like 
to choose their Identity Provider so that they can 
efficiently  define  attributes  of  their  identity  and 
securely control how these attributes are gathered, 
stored,  shared  among  multiple  service  providers, 
with at least some level of portability;
•
Relying parties perspective:  RPs aim to cooperate 
each  other,  exchange  accurate,  up  to  date,  and 
relevant  information  about  individuals  from  any 
source  to propose  personalized  services  to  better 
serve users from wide communities. At the same 
time,  they  want  to  delegate  some  identity 
administration tasks to IDPs. This new trend extends 
the security perimeter. Hence, they need to build 
trust relationships, protect their users and also their 
assets.
•
ID  providers  perspective:  IDPs  want  to  provide 
identity as a service to users and relying parties and 
reinforce their positions as safe guardians of identity;
Current Identity Management solutions can be classified 
into 3 approaches:
A.
Centralized approaches
Most of Identity Management systems deployed early in 
the Internet were client/server-based and called silo models. 
A single entity which operates the  Identity  Management 
system can be either the service provider acting as both 
service provider and identity provider or a trusted identity 
provider  mixed  up  with  service  provider  controlling 
together the name space for a specific service domain, and 
allocating identifiers to users. A user gets separate unique 
identifiers from each service/identifier provider he transacts 
with.
This  approach  might  provide  simple
 Identity 
Management for service providers, but is rapidly becoming 
cumbersome for users who will have to remember many 
identifiers and credentials associated to each service.
This approach has several drawbacks because the IdP not 
only becomes a single point of failure, but it may also not be 
trusted. The silo model is not interoperable and many of its 
aspects present serious deficiencies.
B.
Federated approaches
A  federated  Identity  Management system  consists  in 
software components and protocols that manage the whole 
life cycle of identities. In such a model, we assume that user 
data are stored at various locations on the Internet. This 
model supports many identity providers with no centralized 
control  point.  The  distributed  storage  locations  linked 
together are also easily shared. A federated model is a group 
of sites or systems that establish a trust agreement where 
each entity trusts identification data coming from others.
Federation facilitates the use of user attributes across 
trust  boundaries  as  this  architecture  gives  the  user  the 
illusion that a single identifier authority exists. Even if the 
user has many identifiers, he doesn’t need to know them all.
With  Single  Sign  On  (SSO)  mechanism,  users 
authenticate themselves once by a federation member they 
trust, so they can navigate to any of the member service 
providers and be granted appropriate permissions based on 
their  unique  identifier  shared  among  multiple  service 
providers. The process of establishing a shared identifier for 
each user is often referred to as federating user’s identities. 
The level of interoperability within a federation is often 
fairly high, as they work better with seamless data transfer. 
The openness of a federation to new relying parties is more 
variable and depends on trust agreements, rules and the 
technology choices made by its designers.
Having  different  types  of  institutions  as  part  of  the 
federation (each with its own policies regarding its own 
users)  makes  it  difficult  for  administrators  to  properly 
determine the categories of users allowed to access to each 
resource:  Scalability  is  a  potential  problem  unless  the 
federation is relatively homogeneous.
Federations can cooperate with each other since they 
start to identify partners beyond their initial offerings. In 
this case, offerings to end users are improved substantially: 
but if the technology and rules used by federations are 
different, it can be difficult to implement cross-federation 
initiatives. A base level of interoperability is needed in order 
to broaden service availability provided by federations.
However, privacy protection is a serious problem, as it is 
difficult  to  know  to  which  extent  and  under  which 
circumstances federations driven by for-profit corporations 
will offer benefits to consumers. No one can grant  if a 
company that holds customer data will not sell access to user 
databases  to other  online  companies.  A  wide  variety of 
federated systems are possible, so the consequences for both 
corporations  and  consumers  of  federation  in general  are 
uncertain.  Relevant  proposals,  such  as  Liberty  Alliance, 
Shibboleth, and WS-Federation, are based on the notion of 
federated identity. In Liberty Alliance, a federation consists 
in a circle of trust including service providers (SPs) and IdPs 
with mutual trust relationships. The circle of trust enables 
single sign-on (SSO) across different SPs’ websites. When 
an SP requests user authentication, the IdP authenticates the 
user and then issues an authentication assertion. The SP 
validates the assertion and determines whether to accept it. 
The unique first authentication of a user is enough to sign on 
to other service sites.
47
INTERNET 2011 : The Third International Conference on Evolving Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-141-0

C.
User-centric approaches
User-centric models [2] are driven by privacy concerns 
and aim to leave control with the user as to initiate or 
approve any transfer of personal information before it takes 
place, either directly or through a mediator with predefined 
rules for authorization. A user-centric model must have a 
basic level of interoperability in order for an individual to 
use their digital ID for multiple services. 
Though data can still be stored with a relying party once 
data is given in a transaction, this model allows individuals 
to disclose minimal information. The information provided 
by the user can be easily checked with the Identity Provider, 
causing greater accuracy and less potential for fraud.
A  major  drawback  of  the  user-centric  model  is  its 
complexity.  There  are  significant  technical  challenges 
related to creating a system that sufficiently satisfies all 
parties, so that they actually use it. One should not forget 
also social  challenges in educating business owners and 
users. Most web businesses are accustomed to asking users 
to provide identifying information – often more than strictly 
necessary – and users are used to providing it, and setting up 
a username and password for each site. This situation is 
familiar, if cumbersome. 
In contrast, a user-centric model requires both user and 
relying party to develop relationships with one or more 
trusted Identity Providers and possibly install and learn new 
software. This attitude could be a barrier to widespread 
adoption.  Furthermore,  businesses  that  currently  collect 
identifying data may be reluctant to give up control over 
their customers’ data, by using it for marketing or selling it 
to direct marketers.
Interoperability  between  user-centric  and  non  user-
centric  systems  is  not  always  possible  due  to  the 
preconditioned  circle  of  trust  and  trust  agreement 
requirements.
III.
CURRENT EXISTING FRAMEWORKS TO INTEROPERABILITY
Many initiatives are currently under work to develop the 
Internet-based Identity Management services called Identity 
2.0. They are based on the concept of user-centric Identity 
Management, supporting data mapping, authentication and 
identity verification protocols while protecting privacy by 
letting user with a margin freedom to express her consent 
and  control  her  identities  when  doing  Internet-based 
transactions. Until now, there are two categories of Identity 
2.0 initiatives: URL-based and Infocard-based. The main 
difference among such proposals is the protocol they use to 
verify user identity. In CardSpace, the user selects from a set 
of information cards representing the digital identities that 
satisfy a relying party’s (RP’s) policy. The identity provider 
(IdP) that issued the card releases to the user a security 
token,  encoding  claims  corresponding  to  the  selected 
information card. The user then passes the card and the token 
to the RP. Credentica and CardSpace support similar identity 
verification protocols: The RP verifies the user’s identity 
based on an IdP issued ID token, encoding claims about the 
identity presented by the user to the RP.
Contrariwise,  OpenID  is  a  URL-based  protocol  and 
when users access an RP’s website, they provide an OpenID 
that is the URL of a webpage listing their IdPs. The RP 
selects an IdP, and the browser is redirected to the IdP’s 
webpage.
If the IdP successfully verifies the user’s identity, the 
browser is redirected to the designated return page on the 
RP website, along with an assertion of user authentication.
We should not forget that the frameworks listed below 
are unified solution to interoperability. They just propose 
initiatives to solve some aspects of interoperability within 
Identity  Management approaches. Higgins is a model that 
will be useful, if modified to become a powerful bridge 
between many models.
A.
XRI
The Organization for the Advancement  of Structured 
Information  Standards  (OASIS)  has developed  a unified 
identifier scheme to help companies tackle today's rampant 
Identity Management interoperability problems.
The  Extensible  Resource  Identifier  [3]  (XRI) 
specification  establishes  an  interoperable  framework  for 
expressing, resolving and establishing equivalence between 
identifiers  of any kind for any resource  type,  including 
people, applications, network devices and corporate assets. 
XRIs build on the ubiquitous Uniform Resource Identifier 
(URI)  and  Internationalized  Resource  Identifier  (IRI) 
standards - widely used by Identity Management solutions - 
by defining standard ways to express characteristics such as 
type, language and date. The lightweight HTTP- and XML-
based  XRI  resolution  framework  lets  a  consuming 
application quickly and easily discover metadata related to 
resources, such as an alternative synonym  identifier that 
works better in the application's local Identity Management 
system.
Metadata isn't limited to alternative identifiers. Imagine 
that  an  XRI-identified  resource  is  a  technical  manual, 
available as a PDF or Word document and retrievable from a 
variety of mirrored network locations via various protocols. 
In  a broad  sense,  the manual  is the same document 
irrespective of where it is located, how it is retrieved or in 
which format it is represented. XRIs are ideally suited for 
identifying resources at this level of abstraction because the 
resolution process lets the consuming application choose the 
best network location, retrieval method and file format for its 
needs from the available options.
Like URIs, XRIs are composed of an authority portion 
and a path portion. XRI resolution converts the authority 
portion and the path portion of an XRI to an XML document 
called an XRI Descriptor. The XRI Descriptor describes the 
identified  resource  and  the  means  by  which  the  digital 
representation of the resource can be retrieved.
By providing an additional level of in direction away 
from  concrete  instances  of  a  resource,  XRIs  provide  a 
permanent, unbreakable reference on which stable business 
relationships can be based.
48
INTERNET 2011 : The Third International Conference on Evolving Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-141-0

B.
SAML
The initial versions of SAML [4] v1.0 and v1.1 define 
protocols  for  SSO,  delegated  administration,  and  policy 
management. The most recent version is SAML 2.0. It is 
now  the  most  common  language  to  the  majority  of 
platforms that need to change the unified secure assertion. It 
is very useful and simple because it is based on XML.
This protocol enables interoperability between security 
systems (browser SSO, Web services security, and so on). 
Other  aspects  of  federated  Identity  Management as 
permission-based attribute sharing are also supported.
C.
Identity Web Services Framework
In the second phase, the specifications offer enhancing 
identity  federation  and  interoperable  identity-based  Web 
services.  This  body  is  referred  to  as  the  Identity  Web 
Services Framework  (ID-WSF). This framework involves 
support  of the new  open standard  such  as WS-Security 
developed  in  OASIS.  ID-WSF  is  a  platform  for  the 
discovery and invocation of identity services - Web services 
associated with a given identity. In the typical ID-WSF use 
case, after a user authenticates to an IdP, this fact is asserted 
to an SP through SAML-based SSO. Embedded within the 
assertion is information that the SP can optionally use to 
discover and invoke potentially numerous and distributed 
identity services for that user. Some scenarios present an 
unacceptable  privacy  risk  because  they  suggest  the 
possibility of  a user’s  identity being  exchanged  without 
user’s consent or even knowledge. ID-WSF has a number of 
policy mechanisms to guard against this risk. But ultimately, 
it is worth noting that many identity transactions (automated 
bill payments) already occur without user’s active real-time 
consent (users appreciate this efficiency and convenience).
As a standard, SAML supports a standard syntax for the 
representation of assertions about identity attributes and IdP 
authentications but does not provide an identity verification 
protocol. SAML is important in our approach as it facilitates 
the exchange of identity tuples and mapping certificates 
across domains in a federation.
To build additional interoperable identity services such 
as  registration  services,  contacts,  calendar,  geolocation 
services, and alert services, it’s envisaged to use ID-WSF. 
This specification is referred  to as the  Identity Services 
Interface Specification (ID-SIS).
D.
Shibboleth
Shibboleth [5] allowed interoperation between academic 
institutions  by  developing  architectures,  policy  structure, 
practical technologies, and open-source implementation.
E.
OpenID 2.0
OpenID  authentication  2.0  [6]  is  becoming  an  open 
platform that supports both URL and XRI user identifiers. 
In addition, it would like to be modular, lightweight, and 
user oriented. Indeed, OpenID  auth. 2.0 allows users to 
choose,  control  and  manage  their  identity  addresses. 
Moreover, the user chooses his identity provider and has a 
large interoperability of his identity and can dynamically 
use new services that stand out, such as attribute verification 
and reputation, without any loss of features. No software is 
required  on  the  user’s  side  because  the  user  interacts 
directly  with  the  identity  provider’s  site.  OpenID 
Authentication provides a way to prove that an end user 
controls an Identifier. It does this without the Relying Party 
needing access to end user credentials such as a password or 
to other sensitive information such as an email address. 
OpenID is decentralized. No central authority must approve 
or register Relying Parties or OpenID Providers. An end 
user can freely choose which OpenID Provider to use, and 
can  preserve  their  Identifier  if  they  switch  OpenID 
Providers. OpenID Authentication is designed to provide a 
base service to enable portable, user-centric digital identity 
in a free and decentralized manner. It uses only standard 
HTTP(S) requests and responses. 
The exchange of profile information, or the exchange of 
other  information,  can  be  addressed  through  additional 
service types built on top of protocol to create a framework.
F.
InfoCards
CardSpace  is  Microsoft’s  code  name  for  this  new 
technology  that  tackles  the  problem  of  managing  and 
disclosing identity information [7]. CardSpace implements 
core of identity meta-system, using open standard protocols 
to  negotiate,  request,  and  broker  identity  information 
between trusted IdPs and SPs. It is a technology that helps 
developers integrate consistent identity infrastructure into 
applications, Web sites, and Web services.
G.
Higgins
Eclipse  Foundation  [8]  has  developed an  open 
framework  built  around  info-cards,  to  enable  user’s 
interaction  with  multiple  authentication  protocols.  This 
framework allows software developers to use identity cards 
as  a  form  of  authentication  to  integrate  and  leverage 
multiple identification protocols within their applications. 
Three  components  provided  by  Higgins  for  enabling 
information-card authentication:
1)
Identity selector applications:  end-users can use to 
sign-in to web sites and systems that are compatible with 
Info-Card-based authentication.
2)
Complete code: necessary for Identity Provider web 
services  as  well  as  for  the  “relying  party”,  it  enables 
websites and systems to be information card- and Open Id-
compatible. Software developers can incorporate this code 
into their applications to make it easier for their users to 
login  to  their  site.  There  are  currently  two  web-site 
developer solutions available (STS, IdP-for, WS-Trust and 
SAML2 IdP –for SAML2)
Higgins Global Graph (HGG) data model and the Higgins 
Identity Attribute Service (IdAS): Developers now have a 
framework that provides an interoperability and portability 
abstraction layer over existing “silos” of identity data. The 
HGG/IdAS layer of Higgins offers integration opportunities 
between several identification protocols such as OpenID, 
WS-Trust, SAML, and LDAP.
49
INTERNET 2011 : The Third International Conference on Evolving Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-141-0

IV.
“OPEN IDM”: A UNIFIED INTEROPERABLE FRAMEWORK
A.
Motivation
To  reach  a  basic  level  on  interoperability,  federated 
identity solution must, by its very nature, be standards-
based. The key underlying standard for federated identity is 
SAML. SAML is the most mature and widely deployed 
identity federation protocol today and offers the highest 
potential for interoperability with federation partners. The 
latest version, SAML 2.0, marks the convergence of the 
SAML, Liberty ID-FF, and Shibboleth specifications into a 
single unified standard. A federated model must be user 
centric to allow the user to maintain control over its identity.
Distributed  solutions  are  also  interoperable  and  user 
centric if they use the same approach and technology. Level 
two is possible if at least two approaches are interoperable.
B.
Proposed Unified framework
Interoperability  between  multiple  Digital  Identity 
systems has become an important and complex issue. Even 
if many initiatives exist, high level interoperability is far 
from  being  achieved  outside  circles  of  trust.  Existing 
models are not clearly interoperable and are deficient in 
unifying  standard-based  protocols  due  to  the  conflicting 
requirements  for  each  approach.  In  untrusted  domains, 
privacy  concerns  and  user’s  attribute  controls  are 
fundamental when offering identity to users; on the other 
hand,  the  same  users  ask  for  flexible  access  through 
homogenous  user  friendly  interfaces.  Taken  as  a  single 
solution, it may not exhaust all possible solutions to the 
issue, but when bridging all solutions, this approach will 
federate all efforts currently under development.
From  a  logical  point  of  view,  high  level  of 
interoperability will be assured by a unified framework, an 
open user-centric bridge managed by a new entity so called 
Master Identity Provider (Figure 1). This framework serves 
as a unifying gateway between all existing models. In one 
side,  as  industry  and  other  organizations  continue  to 
introduce capabilities and standards guided essentially by 
the approach adopted and suitable for only one  specific 
community within a specific context, but not for all possible 
use cases. In other side, all identity problems come from the 
lack of visibility towards IDPs that work separately without 
any well-defined relationships between them.
Thus,  a  Master  Identity  Provider  acting  as  a  Root 
Authority  to  identities,  will  federate  all  relationships 
between  IDPs  in  order  to  build  the  identity,  during 
enrolment processes, piece by piece starting with the root 
while  avoiding  any  duplication  and  any  unnecessary 
information which represents nothing.
This unified framework serves as a metasystem to bridge 
all  scenarios  of  Digital  IDM  Systems,  which  must  be 
interoperable. This new arrangement of accepted standards 
enables  decentralized  identity  infrastructure  to  work 
together as a single Identity Management system, including:
1) External standards: such as XML, SAML, etc.
2) Open Software standards: such as java or Linux
3) Hardware standards: they support interoperability
Figure 1. Architecture of the proposed framework
C.
“Open IDM 2.0” Framework modules
1)
Policies  agreement  module:  it  includes  Service 
Provisioning  Policies,  Service  Provider  Privacy  Policies, 
Privacy Preferences and Federation Agreement Policies.
2)
Identity  mapping  and  integration  of  profiles  and 
relationships  module:  A  first  step  toward  achieving 
interoperability is the adoption of a standard to describe 
assertions and identity profiles.
3)
Negotiation  protocols  module: it  integrates  all 
negotiation aspects especially trust negotiation when entities 
are not previously known to each other. Before meaningful 
interaction starts, a base level of trust must be established.
4)
Life cycle management module: All federated identity 
solutions must provide management capabilities to perform 
required tasks to create, provision, manage and monitor it.
5)
Security module: manages all security concerns.
6)
Heterogeneous  identity  verification:  heterogeneity 
among identity verification protocols and naming, especially 
in the context of the clients’ identity verification process. It 
specifies  such a set  of identity attributes. If  clients use 
names for the identity attributes from different vocabularies, 
after a client request for a resource or a service from an RP, 
they may not understand the adequate identity attributes.
7)
Security Credentials and Token module: it supports 
different identity tokens and related encryption algorithms.
8)
Protocols to exchange attributes: this module enables 
exchange of attributes in a cryptographic way
9)
User-Centric and Privacy module: Users should have 
the maximum  control  possible  over  the  release  of  their 
identity attributes. They should state under which conditions 
these attributes can be disclosed.
10) Context and profile manager: identity and context are 
closely  related;  during  interoperability  analysis,  context 
issue must provide consistent experience across contexts.
11) Centralized  identity  stocks: playing  the  role  of  a 
repository in order to concentrate all IdM resources.
50
INTERNET 2011 : The Third International Conference on Evolving Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-141-0

The  proposed  unified  framework  interacts  with  the 
global IDM architecture, through the following elements:
•
User  Identity:  relates  to  a  person,  device  or 
application, in order to define identity strength.
•
Identity  Bus:  supports  interoperability  between 
varieties  of  IDM  technologies  available  from 
different vendors, an Identity Bus that will provide 
interoperability functionalities is necessary.
•
Consistent  user  interface:  Lack  of  usability  will 
make  the  control  of  identity  by  user  almost 
impossible to take place. The model must facilitate 
the  developer  with  adequate  support  for 
implementing usability through a user interface.
D.
Analyzing the Framework
Trustworthiness of an identity depends on the initial 
enrollment  process,  the  security token  being  issued,  the 
level  of  collaboration  and  the  depth  of  the  relationship 
between entities. As identity providers and relying parties in 
current  ecosystems  don’t  directly  communicate  during 
enrollment process, identity islands remain as data silos 
between  each other.  This  framework  as  a  harmonized 
identity  metasystem  aims  to  solve  the  problem  of 
consolidation  of  distributed  identity and  provide  secure, 
privacy enhanced and seamless experiences.  Reasonable-
diligence  of  services  needs  to  validate  the  identity  of 
individuals or organizations requesting credentials that will 
enable them to participate in information exchanges. Trust 
will  convey  through  inter-domain  exchange  of  identity 
attributes as well as any useful information and policies to 
collaborate in tracking down all identity transactions.
To consolidate identity, we acknowledge that an  Open 
IDM framework should integrate -but should not be limited 
to- the two main following processes :
Enrolment process required by a service: in Figure 2, (1) 
user contacts SP (2) user is redirected to the IDP which SP 
trusts. (3) SP specifies to his IDP what attributes it needs. 
(4) IDP contacts his direct MIDP where user is referenced 
and user is redirected to MIDP to be identified. (5) If the 
user is really referenced, a profile negotiated with user is 
generated  with  respect  to  the  principle  of  minimal 
disclosure. (6) MIDP provides IDP with minimal attributes 
and new credentials are issued.
Access to service: a user attempts to gain authorization to 
do something online. User contacts MIDP to know if service 
is referenced and user already enrolled. Authentication is 
activated towards IDP with adequate protocol and credential.
Figure 2. Enrollment process
This  proposed  framework  presents  many advantages: 
True interoperability will be possible with the open gateway 
serving as interface to standard protocols.
•
Technologies like OpenID, SAML,  Liberty ID-FF 
and WS-Trust should be supported. Data format and 
authentication  systems  at  endpoints  support  new 
credential  arrangements. Data is decoupling from 
application and IDM layer from application layer.
•
User  control  empowerment:  users  have  full 
knowledge regarding information they disclose. 
•
User preferences customize relying parties services  
Our framework presents drawbacks, such as the unifying 
gateway. This point of failure will be a part of future work.
E.
Implementation issues of the framework
This framework encompasses several modules. Research 
will now develop all those components and proceed towards 
the implementation and evaluation of associated prototype 
solution.  Modules  and  interactions  between  platform 
components  will  be  developed,  implemented  and  tested 
successfully.  Investigations  will  be  conducted  to  select 
components supporting proposed aspects.
V.
CONCLUSION
This  article  discusses  ongoing  concerns  with  the 
interoperability  between  different  Identity  Management 
solutions. Current  solutions are  developed  independently 
but their functionality complement each other. This unified 
gateway  will  exploit  all  specifications  to  define  new 
standards to encapsulate different protocols. 
In future work, as part of the PhD thesis, we'll tackle 
description for options and parameters of protocols and how 
parameters are interpreted and mapped to each other.
Bringing a Unifying Gateway for Interoperable Identity 
Management as a response to interoperability challenges will 
enhance  trust  and  encourage  the  wide  use  of  identity 
systems. But, Trust relationships have to be established.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Authors  thank  University  Mohammed  V-Souissi,  for 
supporting this work (research project 006/ENSIAS/2011).
REFERENCES
[1]
E. Bertino et al. “Identity Management: Concepts, Technologies, and 
Systems”, pp. 110-111, Artech House, 2011
[2]
R.  Marx  et  al.  “Increasing  Security  and  Privacy in  User-centric 
Identity Management: The IdM Card Approach”, 2010 International 
Conference on P2P, Parallel, Grid, Cloud and Internet Computing, 
pp.  459-464, IEEE, 2010
[3]
P. Mishra et al. “Conformance Requirements for the OASIS Security 
Assertion Markup Language V2.0” OASIS SSTC, 19 pages, March 
2005
[4]
OASIS (Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information 
Standards) project: http://www.oasis-open.org, 2011
[5]
G. Connor, “Shibboleth: A Templar Monitor”, Kessinger Publishing, 
216 pages, 2010
[6]
D. Recordon et al., “OpenID: The Definitive Guide: Identity for the 
Social Web”, 225 pages, O'Reilly Editions 2011.
[7]
V.  Bertocci  et  al.  “Understanding  Windows  CardSpace:  An 
Introduction to the Concepts and Challenges of Digital Identities”, 
384 pages, Addison-Wesley Progessional, 2008
[8]
Higgins Personal Data Service: http://www.eclipse.org/higgins, 2009
51
INTERNET 2011 : The Third International Conference on Evolving Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-141-0

