AccessWeb Barometer 
A Web Accessibility Evaluation and Analysis Platform 
 
Ramiro Gonçalves a, b, José Martins a, b, Frederico Branco a, b, Jorge Pereira a, Carlos Peixoto a, Tânia Rocha a, b 
aUniversity of Trás-os-Montes e Alto Douro 
Vila Real, Portugal 
bINESC TEC and UTAD 
Vila Real, Portugal 
ramiro@utad.pt, jmartins@utad.pt, fbranco@utad.pt, Jorge.pereira@infosistema.com, carlospeixoto76@hotmail.com, 
trocha@utad.pt 
 
Abstract—The 
constant 
evolution 
of 
all 
Web 
related 
technologies, 
and 
the 
considerable 
adoption 
of 
these 
technologies in our society’s everyday life, has brought to the 
discussion table the ability of these Web technologies and Web 
contents to become accessible to all, including those with some 
sort of disability. During the past years, a research project has 
been executed in order to, not only give the Web accessibility 
topic more visibility within our society, but also to achieve 
indicators on the levels of accessibility presented by privately 
held company websites. Considering the growing need to 
rapidly achieve Web accessibility indicators, whose complexity 
has significantly increased, the research team inherent to the 
referred project developed a software platform, entitled 
“AccessWeb Barometer”, that has the ability to perform Web 
accessibility evaluations to multiple websites in simultaneous. It 
also has the ability to analyze and publish the results inherent to 
those evaluations, and to allow its users to create their own 
analysis and dashboards. In this paper, we present the 
AccessWeb Barometer software platform architecture, its 
overall characterization and validation, and also the possibilities 
of what a platform like this can bring to Web content developers 
and to organizations worldwide. 
Keywords- 
Web 
Accessibility; 
AccessWeb 
Barometer; 
Evaluation Platform; Analysis Service; Diagnostic Service. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The topic of Web accessibility has been of major relevance 
for the global community, and particularly for those who have 
some sort of impairment or disability. When analyzing the 
majority of existent websites one can recognize that their 
compliance levels with current Web accessibility standards is 
incredibly low [1-3]. The referred topic can be simultaneously 
seen as an ethical and social problem, but also as an 
economically relevant issue. By merging these facts with 
current economic and financial difficulties assumed by almost 
all organizations, one can pinpoint the importance of a project 
that focus on, not only identifying websites accessibility 
issues, but also on providing information on how to solve 
those same issues. 
We present a three layer architecture proposal for a 
software platform whose goal is to be able to simultaneously 
evaluate several websites against international Web 
accessibility, usability and compliance standards, and 
simultaneously create analytic dashboards that will be made 
available to all Internet users through a set of collaborative 
Web platforms. 
The present paper is divided into five sections, starting 
with an introduction section where a very brief approach to 
the paper’s main topic is made. A second section presents the 
readers with a detailed perspective on the theoretical 
background inherent to both the relevance of Web 
accessibility topic and Web accessibility evaluation tools and 
systems already present in the literature. In third section, a 
comprehensive description and characterization of the 
proposed software platform design is made. A fourth section 
was developed in order to address the validation tests 
performed in order to ensure reliability to the proposed 
software solution. The paper finalizes with a fifth section 
containing some conclusions on the performed work, and on 
the expected future work. 
 
II. 
WEB ACCESSIBILITY BACKGROUND 
CHARACTERIZATION 
A. Conceptual Framework 
The internet offers a variety of information that, by nature, 
is constantly changing and evolving, both in size and in 
complexity, thus becoming an indispensable tool for 
individuals and organizations in everyday life [4]. 
Though the Internet is to be used by all, there is a niche of 
individuals whose physical and/or mental characteristics 
increases the level of difficulty associated with the referred 
interaction. Despite their limitations, these individuals should 
be allowed access to the Web and all its resources in the same 
manner as a normal user [2]. With this concern in mind, Babu 
and Sekharaiah [1] argue all Web resources need to 
incorporate accessibility characteristics that allow disabled 
users to use them by themselves or by using assistive 
technologies to do so.  
Gonçalves, et al. [5] presented the term “accessibility” as 
the ability that allows people with some sort of disability or 
incapability to interact with any product, resource, service or 
activity in the same manner as an individual without any 
impairment would. Complementarily, Henry [6] argues that 
“Web accessibility” is the term used to characterize the ability 
possessed by Web interfaces that allows them to be perceived, 
understood, navigable and easy to interact with. Recently, 
several authors [3, 7, 8] also complemented this initial 
definition by assuming that it represents Internet usage by 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-435-0
INTERNET 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Evolving Internet

everyone, regardless of their physical, perceptive, cultural or 
social capacities or skills. 
According to Gilbertson and Machin [9], there are two 
parallel approaches one can make to study and work the Web 
accessibility topic: 1) a more functional approach that focuses 
on the user’s limitations and on the possible solutions (within 
the available technology) for those limitations; and 2) a more 
technical approach that focuses on Web technologies and how 
they can be used, modified or created to diminish or eliminate 
the obstacles opposing the users to fully benefit from the 
potential associated with the Web. 
 
B. Legal and Regulatory Concerns 
In the last two decades, the Web accessibility topic has 
been on the agenda of several national and international 
regulatory entities, which allows to highlight the importance 
of the topic [2].  
In recent years, several organizations have been working 
on the Web accessibility topic. The most prominent one is the 
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), mainly due to its Web 
Accessibility Initiative (WAI) and its Web Content 
Accessibility Guidelines (now in a second and more updated 
version) [10]. These guidelines are a set of detailed 
descriptions to accessibility issues associated with the 
development of Web applications and content that everyone 
can use [11]. The current version of the referred guidelines 
were defined according to several layers of conceptualization, 
including: principles, general strategies, testable success 
criteria, a collection of techniques to promote the Web 
accessibility topic, and a set of complex documentation on all 
the possible accessibility faults and errors [12]. 
In parallel with W3C, the International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO) has been aiming their activities on 
improving the knowledge inherent to the Web accessibility 
topic, and to establish a set of standards that should bring the 
much needed normalization to the area. The most public 
results of ISOs work have been the ISO TS-16071, ISO 9241-
111 and ISO 9241-171 standards that aimed on, not only 
implementing a set of rules that should be fulfilled, but also 
helping both the public and organizations to create accessible 
Web platforms, websites and Web content [13-16]. 
Despite the existence of several international standards 
and regulations focused on the Web accessibility topic that 
were adopted by the majority of the countries, some of them 
decided to create their own regulations and enforce them at 
their own will. An example of this creation is the Web 
accessibility regulation by the United States of America, 
entitled “Section 508”, which highlights the existing right for 
all data or information be made available by any ICT related 
systems or any Web platform, to be accessible to all citizens, 
including those with some sort of disability or incapability 
[17, 18]. 
Even though there are several legal and/or regulatory 
requirements, W3Cs WCAG 2.0 is the most relevant Web 
accessibility standard. This is the one that most countries and 
organizations have adopted as the basis for developing 
accessible Web content. 
C. Recent Perspectives 
According to Burger [19], global tendencies towards 
increasing Web accessibility levels have significantly 
improved. Several major software houses and Web consulting 
agencies are now incorporating accessibility concerns in all 
their products and contents. The referred author also 
highlighted that several researchers are also focusing their 
research activities into, not only developing the technologies 
in order for them to become more accessible, but also into 
creating and improving the existing Web development 
platforms and technologies. This helps developers create 
accessible Web content and also to promote the Web 
accessibility topic in both the scientific community and to the 
general population. 
In 2012, Rocha, et al. [20] performed a research project 
that was aimed at understanding the social and economic 
reality of individuals that presented some sort of disability or 
incapability. With this study, these authors were able to 
conclude that the great majority of the analyzed individuals 
are unemployed or don’t have a factual economic activity, but 
receive 
monetary 
governmental 
complements 
and 
subventions in order to survive. By acknowledging this fact, 
one can perceive that organizations who do not implement 
accessible websites are directly neglecting a market share that, 
due to their impairments, are prone to adopt and use such 
websites. 
Braga, et al. [21] performed a research project in which the 
authors intended to evaluate the accessibility levels of Bank 
of Brazil’s online banking system. The research was done by 
using a manual evaluation process that allowed them to better 
identify the barriers and struggles posed to the referred system 
users. Assuming that the proposed evaluation methodology 
was correctly defined, after performing the evaluation 
activities, the authors were able to acknowledge that some 
changes were needed and had to be implemented in order for 
their methodology to be totally usable and reliable. 
Nevertheless, through the execution of this project, a set of 
important accessibility faults and issues was identified and 
transmitted to the bank’s IT department in order for them to 
incorporate the necessary changes. 
As stated by Oh and Chen [22], Web accessibility 
represents an increasingly important variable within the 
organization’s corporate and social responsibility scope. An 
organization collaborator can perform a decisive part in 
enforcing both the need to create accessible Web content and 
presenting an accessible website. With this concern in mind, 
Santarosa, et al. [23] proposed an accessible e-learning 
platform that complied with W3C WCAG 2.0, aiming on 
allowing for universities to offer their students a change, in 
concerns to the access of information on their courses or 
classes. In their work, the authors also present strategies to 
train teachers and educators in order for them to be able to 
create accessible learning content. 
Evaluating websites against Web accessibility standards is 
not an easy task; the present time surrounds itself with a 
significant 
margin 
for 
individual 
or 
manufacturer 
interpretation [24]. As reasoned by W3C, when assessing 
websites accessibility levels one should use a mixed approach 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-435-0
INTERNET 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Evolving Internet

and combine both automatic and manual testing in order to 
guarantee a significant level of reliability [25]. 
There are several tools to perform Web accessibility 
assessments in an automated or semi-automated manner, but 
these tools lack the necessary combination of both a machine 
perspective and a human comprehension, thus tending to not 
responding to both the users and the Web content 
development firms needs [7, 26-28].   
 
III. 
ACCESSWEB BAROMETER – A WEB ACCESSIBILITY 
EVALUATION AND ANALYSIS SOFTWARE PLATFORM 
With the AccessWeb Barometer software platform, the 
research team envisioned to simultaneously create a 
diagnostic tool that delivered accurate and easy to analyze 
results, and to raise awareness on the accessibility and 
usability practices inherent to the design of corporate 
websites. Execution of website accessibility diagnostics on a 
large-scale represents a very considerable challenge since the 
known test instruments are manual or semi-automated, and 
require the allocation of an unsustainable amount of human 
resources in order to ensure an acceptable execution time [29]. 
From the experience collected from previous research and 
development projects, the research team was able to perceive 
that each website evaluation takes an average of 6 hours to be 
evaluated by the software tools. After that, another 40 minutes 
of specialized work, performed by an expert, in order for the 
evaluation results to be analyzed. With this in mind, the 
proposed system allows the execution of a great number of 
simultaneous evaluations in a smaller period of time. Above 
all, it increases the degree of confidence in the results, by 
eliminating the error inherent to human intervention in the 
analysis of the evaluation data. 
Besides the diagnostic and analytics layers of the proposed 
software platform, another very important part is the Website 
component because it represents the platform’s public 
interface where users can become more aware of the Web 
accessibility topic, and interact with the various outputs and 
results from all the performed Web accessibility evaluations. 
With this component users can, in a collaborative manner, 
acquire several new information and resources on the Web 
accessibility topic. Users can also perform synchronous and 
asynchronous discussions with other users and with the 
platform administrators or moderators. 
 
A. Proposed System 
The proposed architecture for the evaluation and analysis 
platform is composed of three different layers (Figure 1), with 
two of them representing the back end (responsible for the 
diagnosis and analysis - Diagnostic Layer; Analytics Layer) 
and the other one representing the Website Layer and serving 
as an accessible front end. 
 A three tier system was defined and implemented in order 
to address a fault very much present in the everyday life of 
those who are responsible for developing Web content and 
platforms, and to those who are facing the need to have 
accessible websites in order to benefit from its content. By 
allowing for a full automatic mechanism that only needs a list 
of websites to start evaluating them and to publish their results 
in a modern and dynamic manner that simply allows users to 
create their own results analysis and achieve more personal 
acknowledgements.  
AccessWeb Barometer
Diagnostic Layer
Automatic
Communication Service
Analytics Layer
Database
Data Visualization Service
Website Layer
Barometer
ETL
Collaboration
Best Practices
Interaction
Dashboards
Manual
Scripting
Web Site Testing
Output Preparation
Requirements Analysis
Interaction Analysis
Processing Results
 
Figure 1. AccessWeb Barometer Software Platform Architecture. 
At each layer, there are a set of well-defined tasks that 
need to be performed and that are responsible for delivering 
input to the components of the upper layer. 
In the following sections, we describe in detail the intrinsic 
function of each component that integrates the AccessWeb 
Barometer platform architecture. 
 
B. Diagnostic Layer 
In the proposed architecture, the diagnostic layer 
represents all the components responsible for the accessibility 
evaluations that is to be performed during the execution of the 
project inherent to the AccessWeb platform. All Web 
accessibility evaluations will be supported by W3C WCAG 
2.0 and will follow the indications from W3C and use both 
automatic and manual evaluation mechanisms and techniques 
[12]. The automated tools are usually fast, but are not able to 
identify all existent accessibility, usability and compliance 
issues. Thus, there is a need to complement these automatic 
assessments with manual reviews. This helps to ensure issues 
such as language clarity and navigation ease. 
The proposed platform incorporates both the use of 
automated evaluation tools and manual reviews with real 
users in real environments. This aims on achieving a unified 
model for analyzing and reaching conclusions on the real 
limitations that a given website might pose to its users. 
1) Manual Evaluation 
In the first architectural layer, the Diagnostic Layer, we 
will focus on the assessment of websites by inspecting their 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-435-0
INTERNET 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Evolving Internet

compliance with international guidelines, which are presented 
to a specialist, and an evaluator. They verify if the system 
complies with each guideline and registers all failures 
observed. During the manual evaluation stages the research 
team will include in the evaluation activities real users and 
evaluators. The main objective of presenting new and more 
hands-on results can complement the ones achieved during the 
parallel automatic evaluation procedure. Therefore, the 
evaluators will use a manual direct review approach to 
proceed with the inspection of compliance with Web 
accessibility and usability guidelines. On the other hand, real 
users will also be included in the evaluation procedures and 
through direct interaction, will explore and assess the tested 
websites interfaces [30-32]. 
In this context, we will use the barrier’s walkthrough 
method and set-up the following stages of assessment [33]: 1) 
Identification of scenarios involving two types of users (with 
visual and motor disability); 2) Definition of accessibility 
evaluation objectives; 3) Execution of scenarios identified; 4) 
Analysis of the results; and 5) Presentation of a list of 
problems with severity level for each of the problems 
identified by the evaluator. 
The assessment of accessibility is not complete without an 
additional usability evaluation; therefore, we will follow the 
criteria for measuring usability established by the ISO 9241 
standard: 1) Analysis of the characteristics required of the 
product in a specific context of use; 2) Analysis of the 
interaction process between the user and the product / system 
/ design; and 3) Analysis of efficiency (agility in enabling 
work), effectiveness (guarantee that the planned results are 
obtained) and satisfaction, resulting from the use of the 
product [34]. 
Within this scope, in order to achieve the above criteria, 
we will apply the following usability evaluation techniques: 
usability testing, cognitive walkthrough, questionnaires and 
interviews. 
2) Automatic Evaluation 
There is a wide variety of software and online services that 
help determine if a given website complies with the existent 
Web accessibility and guidelines, and also with other 
technology standards. The AccessWeb Barometer platform 
was not envisioned to be just another assessment platform, but 
instead, it aims on providing a public barometer that reveals 
an extensive set of indicators, in a graphical manner, that 
encourage discussion on the degree of preparation presented 
by websites, and on the possible interest to society of having 
accessible and usable websites and Web content.  
Despite the existence of several Web accessibility and 
usability evaluation software tools, to our knowledge there are 
no solutions for performing multiple and simultaneous 
websites evaluations. In the proposed platform, the automatic 
diagnostic component consists of multiple virtual machines, 
mounted according to the size of the pool of websites that are 
going to be evaluated, giving the platform a very interesting 
scalability level. The limits inherent to this approach lie on the 
physical resources presented by the virtualization servers and 
on the available Internet access bandwidth. 
The Communication Service subcomponent running on 
each virtual machine has the role of orchestrating and 
commanding all of the evaluation process of a given website. 
Its first task is to validate the existence of records on the queue 
containing the websites to be evaluated. This action is done 
through proper database queries, which return specific 
websites attributes (such as name and url), that are needed to 
perform the referred evaluation and make sure that only those 
who haven’t been evaluated yet are queued. Each website 
evaluation is launched at the same pace that the virtual 
machine becomes available. This ensures that a given website 
is only evaluated once and by a single machine. At the same 
time the process starts, an update to the website database 
record is made, in order to “mark it” as already in evaluation. 
By being aligned with these procedures, the Communication 
Service subcomponent passes the website url parameter to the 
scripting application, named “AutoIt 2015”, which is 
responsible for coordinating the execution of the software that 
will be used to conduct the evaluations. 
AutoIt scripting tool runs on each virtual machine, serving 
to automate the graphical interface of Windows operating 
system, (i.e., assumes the user's role and performs all the steps 
that need to be performed for the site to be properly analyzed 
and evaluated). The proposed website evaluation software 
platform also incorporates Power Mapper’s “SortSite V5.0” 
whose aim is to perform website evaluations against 
international Web related standards, such as Section 508, 
WCAG 2.0 and usability.gov guidelines. 
After SortSite finishes the evaluation of a given website, 
the scripting tool stores the generated reports, passing the 
workflow 
again 
for 
the 
Communication 
Service 
subcomponent, which will move the evaluation reports to a 
shared folder (“dump” folder) on the platform server machine 
(virtual machine responsible for Extract, Transform and Load 
(ETL) and Data Analysis/Visualization). This process ends 
with an update to the database, thus ensuring that the website 
record will be marked as already evaluated and starting a new 
website evaluation cycle. 
The data treatment inherent to the generated reports is 
performed by the Analytics Layer components described in 
the following section. 
 
C. Analytics Layer 
The intermediate layer, entitled Analytics Layer, of the 
proposed software platform architecture, runs on the server 
side. It is responsible for the analysis and process of data 
collected by the lower layer, and aims to prepare it to be 
presented in the next layer. In practical terms, the components 
inherent to this intermediate layer is responsible for the 
Information and Knowledge needed to feed the dashboards 
that are going to be displayed to the public through the 
Website Layer. 
The first task of this layer workflow is performed by the 
ETL component, which is of vital importance since it involves 
moving data from their original sources into the BI system. 
The ETL component is used to construct and populate the 
central data repository of the BI architecture, but it is also for 
identifying relevant data sources in order to build a stable data 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-435-0
INTERNET 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Evolving Internet

model (which uniforms, through metadata, all kinds of data), 
and organize data according to business policies and data 
storage [35]. In the proposed architecture, the ETL extracts the 
evaluation report files, stored in the dump folder, and treats 
and stores the inherent data into new database records. When 
this process is finished, the component will move the reports 
files to a “log folder”, ensuring a copy of the evaluation results 
and a possible future data recovery. 
Given the need to store and access data by almost all of the 
proposed architecture components, a database component was 
incorporated in order to serve as a central data repository 
structure, according to a traditional transactional approach. 
For the set of data analysis related tasks, some Self-Service 
Business Intelligence (SSBI) techniques and technologies 
were used. The main goal of the SSBI is to assist managers in 
making decisions based on highly complex data analysis and 
involving less IT know-how’s. This allows for the common 
user to add new perspectives to the predefined analysis and 
produce their own queries and reports. This increase of 
autonomy allows productivity gains for both regular users and 
IT departments that don’t need to allocate their elements to 
provide analytical technical support [36]. 
Having detected the need for a solution that allowed for 
the representation of complex data in a graphic form, the 
research team decided to incorporate a Data Visualization 
(DV) approach, which by definition allows for the visual 
representation of data and enhances the value of the available 
information, allowing for an easy identification of trends, 
exceptions and deviations that are normally hidden in massive 
amounts of data stored in data sources [37, 38]. This feature 
of the proposed platform is highly critical because it uses 
creativity, design concepts, colors, shapes and sizes, to create 
visual contents that represent the knowledge inherent to a 
large amount of data [39]. To support this activity, several DV 
techniques and technologies were used, such as analytical 
models and statistical functions, whose results are presented 
visually through interactive dashboards composed of tables, 
charts, graphs, diagrams, histograms and maps [40]. 
In the analytics layer, in order to perform the data analysis 
and visualization, a decision was made to use the Microsoft’s  
BI stack (“Microsoft Power BI”), which responds to all 
requirements specified for this software platform and for the 
graphical representation of data. 
 
D. Website Layer 
Website Layer corresponds to the front end of the 
platform, (i.e., serves to interact with all the users). Although 
the architecture in this layer is composed by two components, 
the “Barometer” and the “Collaboration” component, a 
special attention is given to the Barometer component as it is 
the one that is directly related to the evaluation system results. 
As a consequence, the Collaboration component enjoys a 
certain degree of independence by enabling users’ access to 
additional resources, such as, documentation on best practices 
in the areas of accessibility, discussion forums and blogs, 
which have no direct relation with the evaluation system. 
Barometer component serves to share all the knowledge 
extracted from the multiple evaluations carried out to different 
organization websites through visually rich dashboards; for 
example, providing a varied combination of graphics, 
manipulated by a wide range of filters, according to the users' 
preferences. These indicators range from the analysis of 
various sectors of activity, analysis of the most common 
mistakes, and the geographical distribution faulty websites. 
 
As shown in Figure 2, AccessWeb Barometer software 
platform acknowledges and also incorporates the prominent 
role of studying and analyzing the accessibility, usability and 
compatibility of websites when accessed through the various 
types of existing devices. All the front-office related 
components are defined to not only have an attractive and 
updated design, but also to be responsive (adaptable to both 
desktop and mobile environments), be compliant with WCAG 
2.0 guidelines and compliant with international usability 
guidelines. 
 
IV. 
PROPOSED PLATFORM VALIDATION 
Given the complexity associated with the proposed 
solution, the research team decided that an initial validation 
stage was needed in order to ensure that, not only all the 
platform outputs were adequate and correct, but also to 
acknowledge that an increase of efficiency and performance 
of the Web accessibility evaluation process was verified. 
In order to perform the referred initial validation, and 
following previous works [5], 1000 Portuguese privately held 
companies with the biggest business volume were chosen to 
be used as the evaluation target group. In Figure 3, it is 
possible to perceive that from the 1000 initial companies, only 
862 were evaluated, mainly because the remaining were 
without a website or had one that was in maintenance or was 
incompatible with PowerMapper Sortsite tool. 
After performing the analysis of the target group and 
achieving the list of the 862 companies whose websites were 
to be evaluated, the research team registered that same set of 
websites in the Analytics Layer “Database” component and 
started the websites evaluation procedure against WCAG 2.0. 
 
Figure 2. AccessWeb Barometer software platform workflow. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-435-0
INTERNET 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Evolving Internet

 
 
Figure 3. AccessWeb platform initial validation target group analysis. 
When all evaluation results were registered in the 
Analytics Layer by the Diagnostic Layer we were able to 
achieve all the visual dashboards needed to acknowledge the 
accessibility levels and compliance presented by the evaluated 
websites. 
 
 
Figure 4. Statistical analysis of the Web accessibility evaluation results. 
From the analysis of Figure 4, one can perceive that, 
despite the average number of evaluated elements from each 
website is significant ( ≈ 2900), the average number of 
detected accessibility errors is still very considerable of what 
might represent, in line with previous studies [2, 5, 41]. Those 
levels of compliance with WCAG 2.0 are still very low and 
those with some sort of disability cannot access the majority 
of the target group websites without encountering several 
difficulties or impossible to transpose barriers. 
By examining the achieved results, one can acknowledge 
that the proposed platform is capable of delivering valid and 
accurate results that allow for a simple and direct 
understanding on the Web accessibility status of a given 
website or sets of websites. 
 
 
Figure 5. Comparison between the duration of previous Web accessibility 
evaluations and the one perfomed with AccessWeb platform. 
 
Another critical issue for the research team was the 
performance presented by the proposed platform. In Figure 5, 
one can observe a direct comparison between the performance 
from previous evaluations that the research team performed to 
the same target group, and the performance presented by this 
new Web accessibility evaluation performance. From this 
observation, one can easily highlight the significant 
improvement of the time necessary for undergoing an 
evaluation to a set of 1000 companies. 
 
 
Figure 6. Comparison between the average number of hours necessary for 
evaluating a website against WCAG 2.0 when using a semi-automatic 
approach and when using the AccesWeb platform. 
By analyzing Figure 6, it is possible to recognize that the 
use of the AccessWeb platform brings a very interesting 
improvement to the overall Web accessibility evaluation. 
Given that, it can reduce in a considerable manner the number 
of hours necessary to fully evaluate a website, to validate and 
store the achieved results, and to reach visual dashboards that 
allow for a direct visualization of the referred website 
accessibility status. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
An accessible website should allow all users, regardless of 
their physical or mental situation or impairments, to 
understand, navigate and interact with the published content. 
When analyzing the current perception on the Web 
accessibility concept, one can easily perceives that it is no 
longer just a technical issue, but also an ethical and social 
issue, a market (economic) issue, and a SEO issue. 
According to W3C one of the most common reasons to the 
lower levels of accessibility presented by websites is the lack 
of knowledge which organization managers, Web software 
developers and Web content creators have; on topics such as 
Web accessibility standards, assistive technologies and 
development tools. Drawing on this assumption, the research 
team inherent to the present project projected a software 
platform, entitled “AccessWeb Barometer”, for performing 
multiple accessibility evaluations to sets of websites (mainly 
belonging to private organizations), giving public access to 
the results of those evaluations and with this, increasing the 
global awareness on the Web accessibility topic, and on the 
importance that it has on the lives of those with some sort of 
disability or incapability. 
With this paper we propose an architecture proposal for 
the referred software platform that is composed by three main 
layers, a diagnostic layer (constituted by several components 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-435-0
INTERNET 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Evolving Internet

directly responsible for the accessibility evaluations to the 
chosen websites), an analytics layer whose components have 
a direct intervention in the extraction of the data inherent to 
the evaluation processes, in the storing of that same data and 
in the creation of sets of analyzed and treated information that 
will be serving as the basis for the public dashboards that are 
to be available to users through the website layer. This third 
layer will not only be constituted by the graphic elements that 
will show the evaluations results to the users, but also by a set 
of collaborative tools and technologies that should be used to 
increase the public awareness on the Web accessibility topic. 
Currently, all architecture components have been 
developed and an initial Web accessibility evaluation to a set 
of 1000 Portuguese company websites was performed, 
allowing not only to validate that the proposed platform is 
accurately evaluating the chosen websites, but also to verify 
that output results are valid and in line with other similar Web 
accessibility scientific works.  
From the referred platform validation, the research team 
could also identify that the proposed platform ensures a very 
significant improvement in the overall Web accessibility 
evaluations field, not only by decreasing the amount of time 
necessary to perform bulk Web accessibility evaluations, but 
also by reducing the average time necessary to evaluate a 
single website. 
By incorporating all the considerations achieved from the 
actions mentioned above, the research team is already 
planning a future Web accessibility evaluation that focus its 
attention on websites belonging to both large European 
companies and SMEs. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper was supported by the project AcessWeb – 
Barómetro da Acessibilidade Web em Portugal, financed by 
the Portuguese Science and Technology Foundation, with an 
eligible investment of 50.000,00€. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J. Babu and C. Sekharaiah, "A Panorama of Web Accessibility," 
International Journal of Computer Science and Mobile 
Computing, vol. 3, pp. 311-317, 2014. 
[2] 
R. Gonçalves, J. Martins, J. Pereira, M. Oliveira, and J. Ferreira, 
"Enterprise Web Accessibility Levels Amongst the Forbes 250: 
Where Art Thou O Virtuous Leader?," Journal of Business 
Ethics, vol. 113, pp. 363-375, 2013/03/01 2013. 
[3] 
E. Capra, S. Ferreira, D. Silveira, and A. Ferreira, "Evaluation 
of Web Accessibility: An Approach Related to Functional 
Illiteracy," Procedia Computer Science, vol. 14, pp. 36-46, 
2012. 
[4] 
N. Fernandes, D. Costa, C. Duarte, and L. Carriço, "Evaluating 
the Accessibility of Web Applications," Procedia Computer 
Science, vol. 14, pp. 28-35, 2012. 
[5] 
R. Gonçalves, J. Martins, J. Pereira, M. Oliveira, and J. Ferreira, 
"Accessibility levels of Portuguese enterprise websites: equal 
opportunities for all?," Behaviour & Information Technology, 
vol. 31, pp. 659-677, 2012. 
[6] 
S. Henry, "Understanding web accessibility," in Web 
Accessibility, ed: Springer, 2006, pp. 1-51. 
[7] 
M. Sánchez-Gordón and L. Moreno, "Toward an Integration of 
Web Accessibility into Testing Processes," Procedia Computer 
Science, vol. 27, pp. 281-291, // 2014. 
[8] 
W3C. (1997, July). World  Wide  Web  Consortium  Launches  
International  Program  Office  for  Web  Accessibility 
Initiative. Available: http://www.w3.org/Press/IPO-announce 
[9] 
T. Gilbertson and C. Machin, "Guidelines, icons and marketable 
skills: an accessibility evaluation of 100 web development 
company homepages," in Proceedings of the international 
cross-disciplinary conference on web accessibility, 2012, p. 17. 
[10] 
S. Henry, "Understanding web accessibility," in Constructing 
accessible web sites, ed: Springer, 2002, pp. 6-31. 
[11] 
Y. Rogers, H. Sharp, and J. Preece, Interaction design: beyond 
human-computer interaction: John Wiley & Sons, 2011. 
[12] 
W3C. (2008, July). Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 
(WCAG) 2.0. Available: http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/ 
[13] 
ISO, "9241-110: 2006. Ergonomics of human system 
interaction-Part 110: Dialogue principles," International 
Organization for Standardization (ISO). Switzerland, 2006. 
[14] 
ISO, "TS 16071: 2003: Ergonomics of human-system 
interaction–Guidance on accessibility for human-computer 
interfaces," International Standards Organisation, Geneva, 
Switzerland, 2003. 
[15] 
ISO, "9241-171 (2008) Ergonomics of humansystem 
interaction--Part 171: Guidance on software accessibility," ed: 
ISO, 2008. 
[16] 
D. Rømen and D. Svanæs, "Validating WCAG versions 1.0 and 
2.0 through usability testing with disabled users," Universal 
Access in the Information Society, vol. 11, pp. 375-385, 2012. 
[17] 
P. Jaeger and M. Matteson, "e-government and technology 
acceptance: The case of the implementation of section 508 
guidelines for websites," Electronic Journal of e-Government, 
vol. 7, pp. 87-98, 2009. 
[18] 
Section 508, U. S. Government 2015, 1998. 
[19] 
D. Burger, "Putting e-Accessibility at the Core of Information 
Systems " Business Case White Paper Series, p. 32, 2013. 
[20] 
T. Rocha, M. Bessa, R. Gonçalves, E. Peres, and L. Magalhães, 
"Web Accessibility and Digital Businesses: The Potential 
Economic Value of Portuguese People with Disability," 
Procedia Computer Science, vol. 14, pp. 56-64, 2012. 
[21] 
H. Braga, L. Pereira, S. Ferreira, and D. Silveira, "Applying the 
Barrier Walkthrough Method: Going Beyond the Automatic 
Evaluation of Accessibility," Procedia Computer Science, vol. 
27, pp. 471-480, 2014. 
[22] 
L. Oh and J. Chen, "Determinants of employees’ intention to 
exert pressure on firms to engage in web accessibility," 
Behaviour & Information Technology, vol. 34, pp. 108-118, 
2015/02/01 2014. 
[23] 
L. Santarosa, D. Conforto, and B. Neves, "Teacher Education 
and Accessibility on E-Learning System: Putting the W3C 
Guidelines into Practice," Teacher Education, vol. 4, 2015. 
[24] 
V. Centeno, C. Kloos, J. Fisteus, and L. Álvarez, "Web 
Accessibility Evaluation Tools: A Survey and Some 
Improvements," Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer 
Science, vol. 157, pp. 87-100, 5/22/ 2006. 
[25] 
M. Snaprud, K. Rasta, K. Andreasson, and A. Nietzio, "Benefits 
and Challenges of Combining Automated and User Testing to 
Enhance e-Accessibility – The European Internet Inclusion 
Initiative," in Computers Helping People with Special Needs. 
vol. 8547, K. Miesenberger, D. Fels, D. Archambault, P. Peňáz, 
and W. Zagler, Eds., ed: Springer International Publishing, 
2014, pp. 137-140. 
[26] 
A. Iglesias, L. Moreno, P. Martínez, and R. Calvo, "Evaluating 
the accessibility of three open-source learning content 
management systems: A comparative study," Computer 
Applications in Engineering Education, vol. 22, pp. 320-328, 
2014. 
[27] 
R. Bernard, C. Sabariego, D. Baldwin, S. Abou-Zahra, and A. 
Cieza, "BETTER-Project: Web Accessibility for Persons with 
Mental Disorders," in Human-Computer Interaction: Users and 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-435-0
INTERNET 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Evolving Internet

Contexts. vol. 9171, M. Kurosu, Ed., ed: Springer International 
Publishing, 2015, pp. 25-34. 
[28] 
F. Kamoun and M. Almourad, "Accessibility as an integral 
factor in e-government web site evaluation: The case of Dubai 
e-government," Information Technology & People, vol. 27, pp. 
208-228, 2014. 
[29] 
M. Gordon, "Web accessibility evaluation with the crowd: using 
glance to rapidly code user testing video," in Proceedings of the 
16th international ACM SIGACCESS conference on Computers 
& accessibility, 2014, pp. 339-340. 
[30] 
D. Kreps, "How the web continues to fail people with 
disabilities," presented at the ALT-C, Leeds, UK., 2008. 
[31] 
L. Law and E. Hvannberg, "Complementarity and convergence 
of heuristic evaluation and usability test: a case study of 
universal brokerage platform," in Proceedings of the second 
Nordic conference on Human-computer interaction, 2002, pp. 
71-80. 
[32] 
A. Lepistö and S. Ovaska, "Usability evaluation involving 
participants with cognitive disabilities," in Proceedings of the 
third Nordic conference on Human-computer interaction, 2004, 
pp. 305-308. 
[33] 
T. Rocha, "Metáfora de Interação para o Acesso à Informação 
Digital de uma Forma Autónoma por Pessoas com Deficiência 
Intelectual," PhD Thesis, Universidade de Trás-os-Montes e 
Alto Douro, Vila Real, 2014. 
[34] 
ISO, "9241-11. Ergonomic requirements for office work with 
visual display terminals (VDTs)," The international 
organization for standardization, vol. Parts 1–17, 1998. 
[35] 
S. Bergamaschi, F. Guerra, M. Orsini, C. Sartori, and M. 
Vincini, "A semantic approach to ETL technologies," Data & 
Knowledge Engineering, vol. 70, pp. 717-731, 2011. 
[36] 
A. Abelló, J. Darmont, L. Etcheverry, M. Golfarelli, J. N. 
Mazón López, F. Naumann, et al., "Fusion cubes: Towards self-
service business intelligence," 2013. 
[37] 
J. Heer, M. Bostock, and V. Ogievetsky, "A tour through the 
visualization zoo," Commun. ACM, vol. 53, pp. 59-67, 2010. 
[38] 
J. Heer and B. Shneiderman, "Interactive dynamics for visual 
analysis," Queue, vol. 10, p. 30, 2012. 
[39] 
H. Grierson, J. Corney, and G. Hatcher, "Using visual 
representations for the searching and browsing of large, 
complex, multimedia data sets," International Journal of 
Information Management, vol. 35, pp. 244-252, 2015. 
[40] 
D. J. Janvrin, R. L. Raschke, and W. N. Dilla, "Making sense of 
complex data using interactive data visualization," Journal of 
Accounting Education, vol. 32, pp. 31-48, 2014. 
[41] 
S. Henry, S. Abou-Zahra, and J. Brewer, "The role of 
accessibility in a universal web," in Proceedings of the 11th 
Web for All Conference, 2014, p. 17. 
 
 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-435-0
INTERNET 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Evolving Internet

