Application of Steganography for Anonymity through the Internet
Jacques M. Bahi, Jean-François Couchot, Nicolas Friot, and Christophe Guyeux
FEMTO-ST Institute, UMR 6174 CNRS
Computer Science Laboratory DISC
University of Franche-Comté
Besançon, France
{jacques.bahi, jean-francois.couchot, nicolas.friot, christophe.guyeux}@femto-st.fr
Abstract—In this paper, a novel steganographic scheme
based on chaotic iterations is proposed. This research work
takes place into the information hiding security framework.
The applications for anonymity and privacy through the
Internet are regarded too. To guarantee such an anonymity, it
should be possible to set up a secret communication channel
into a web page, being secure. To achieve this goal, we propose
an information hiding scheme being stego-secure, which is
the highest level of security in a well deﬁned and studied
category of attacks called “watermark-only attack”. This
category of attacks is the best context to study steganography-
based anonymity through the Internet. The steganalysis of our
steganographic process is also studied in order to show its
security in a real test framework.
Keywords-Privacy; Internet; Steganography; Security; Chaotic
iterations.
I. INTRODUCTION
In common opinion or for non specialists, anonymity
through the Internet is only desirable for malicious use.
A frequent thought is that individuals who search or use
anonymity tools have something wrong or shameful to hide.
Thus, as privacy and anonymity software as proxy or Tor [1]
are only used by terrorists, pedophiles, weapon merchants,
and so on, such tools should be forbidden. However, ter-
rorism or pedophilia existed in the absence of the Internet.
Furthermore, recent actualities recall to us that, in numerous
places around the world, to have an opinion that diverges
from the one imposed by political or religious leaders is
something considered as negative, suspicious, or illegal.
For instance, Saudi blogger Hamza Kashgari jailed, may
face execution after tweets about Muhammad [2]. Generally
speaking, the so-called Arab Spring, and current ﬁghting and
uncertainty in Syria, have taught to us the following facts.
First, the Internet is a media of major importance, which is
difﬁcult to arrest or to silence, bearing witness to the need for
democracy, transparency, and efforts to combat corruption.
Second, claiming his/her opinions, making journalism or
politics, is dangerous in various states, and can lead to the
death penalty (as for numerous Iranian bloggers: Hossein
Derakhshan [3], Vahid Asghari, etc.).
Considering that the freedom of expression is a fundamen-
tal right that must be protected, that journalists must be able
to inform the community without risking their own lives,
and that to be a defender of human rights can be dangerous,
various software have emerged these last decades to preserve
anonymity or privacy through the Internet. Excepting of the
Mix-Network principle [4], the most famous tool of this kind
is probably Tor, the onion router. Tor client software routes
Internet trafﬁc through a worldwide volunteer network of
servers, in order to conceal a user’s location or usage from
anyone conducting network surveillance or trafﬁc analysis.
Another example of this kind is given by Perseus [5], a
ﬁrefox plugin that protect personal data, without infringing
any national crypto regulations, and that preserve the true
needs of national security. Perseus replaces cryptography
by coding theory techniques, such that only agencies with
a strong enough computer power can eavesdrop trafﬁc in
an acceptable amount of time. Finally, anonymous proxy
servers around the world can help to keep machines behind
them anonymous: the destination server (the server that
ultimately satisﬁes the web request) receives requests from
the anonymizing proxy server, and thus does not receive
information about the end user’s address.
These three solutions are not without ﬂaws. For in-
stance, when considering anonymizers, the requests are not
anonymous to the anonymizing proxy server, which simply
moves the problem on: are these proxy servers worthy of
trust? Perseus can be broken with enough computer power.
And due to its central position and particular conception,
Tor is targeted by numerous attacks and presents various
weaknesses (bad apple attack, or the fact that Tor cannot
protect against monitoring of trafﬁc at the boundaries of the
Tor network).
Considering these ﬂaws, and because having a variety of
solutions to provide anonymity is a good rule of thumb, a
steganographic approach is often regarded in that context [6].
Steganography can be applied in several ways to preserve
anonymity through the Internet, encompassing the creation
of secret channels through background images of websites,
into Facebook photo galleries, on audio or video streams, or
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-204-2
INTERNET 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Evolving Internet

in non-interpreted characters in HTML source codes. The
authors’ intention is not to describe precisely these well-
known techniques, but to explain how to evaluate their se-
curity. They applied it on a new algorithm of steganography
based on chaotic iterations and data embedding in least
signiﬁcant coefﬁcients. This state-of-the-art in information
hiding security is organized as follows.
In Section II, some basic reminders concerning both
mathematical notions and notations, and the Most and Least
Signiﬁcant Coefﬁcients are given. Our new steganographic
process called DI3 which is suitable to guarantee anonymity
of data for privacy on the Internet is presented in Section III.
In Section IV, a reminder about information hiding security
is realized. The attacks classiﬁcation in a steganographic
framework are given, and the level of security of DI3 is
studied. In the next section the security of our new scheme
is evaluated. Then, in Section- VI, the steganalysis of the
proposed process is realized, and it is compared with other
steganographic schemes in the literature. This research work
ends by a conclusion section, where our contribution is
summarized and intended future researches are presented.
II. BASIC REMINDERS
A. Mathematical deﬁnitions and notations
Let Sn denotes the nth term of a sequence S, and Vi
the ith component of a vector V . For a, b ∈ N, we use the
following notation: Ja; bK = {a, a + 1, a + 2, . . . , b}.
Deﬁnition 1: Let k ∈ N∗. The set of all sequences which
elements belong into J1; kK, called strategy adapters on
J1; kK, is denoted by Sk.
□
Deﬁnition 2: The support of a ﬁnite sequence S of n terms
is the ﬁnite set S (S) =

Sk, k < n
	
containing all the
distinct values of S. Its cardinality is s.t. #S (S) ⩽ n.
□
Deﬁnition 3: A ﬁnite sequence S ∈ SN of n terms is
injective if n = #S (S). It is onto if N = #S (S). Finally,
it is bijective if and only if it is both injective and onto, so
n = N = #S (S).
□
Remark 1: On the one hand, “S is injective” reﬂects the
fact that all the n terms of the sequence S are distinct. On
the other hand, “S is onto” means that all the values of the
set J1; NK are reached at least once.
□
B. The Most and Least Signiﬁcant Coefﬁcients
We ﬁrst notice that terms of the original content x that
may be replaced by terms issued from the watermark y are
less important than other; they could be changed without be
perceived as such. More generally, a signiﬁcation function
attaches a weight to each term deﬁning a digital media,
depending on its position t.
Deﬁnition 4: A signiﬁcation function is a real sequence
(uk)k∈N.
□
Example 1: Let us consider a set of grayscale images
stored into portable graymap format (P3-PGM): each pixel
ranges between 256 gray levels, i.e., is memorized with eight
bits. In that context, we consider uk = 8−(k mod 8) to be
the k-th term of a signiﬁcation function (uk)k∈N. Intuitively,
in each group of eight bits (i.e., for each pixel) the ﬁrst bit
has an importance equal to 8, whereas the last bit has an
importance equal to 1. This is compliant with the idea that
changing the ﬁrst bit affects more the image than changing
the last one.
□
Deﬁnition 5: Let (uk)k∈N be a signiﬁcation function, m
and M be two reals s.t. m < M.
• The most signiﬁcant coefﬁcients (MSCs) of x is the
ﬁnite vector
uM =

III. THE NEW PROCESS: DI3
In this section, a new algorithm, which is inspired from the
scheme CIS2 described in [7], is presented. Unlike CIS2
which require embedding keys with three strategies, only
one is required for DI3. Thus it is easyer to implement
for Internet applications, especially in order to guarantee
anonymization. Moreover, because in DI3 there is no op-
eration to mix the message, this new scheme seems to be
faster than CIS2, which is a major advantage to have fast
response times on the Internet.
Let us ﬁrstly introduce the following notations. P ∈ N∗
is the width, in term of bits, of the message to embed into
the cover media. λ ∈ N∗ is the number of iterations to
realize, which is s.t. λ > P. The initial state x0 ∈ BN is
for the N LSCs of a given cover media C supposed to be
uniformly distributed. m ∈ BP is the message to hide into
x0. Finally, S ∈ SP is a strategy such that the ﬁnite sequence

Sk, k ∈ Jλ − P + 1; λK
	
is injective.
Remark 2: The width P of the message to hide into the
LSCs of the cover media x0 has to be far smaller than the
number of LSCs.
□
The proposed information hiding scheme is deﬁned by
an iterative process applied on LSCs of the cover media as
follow:
Deﬁnition 6 (DI3 Data hiding scheme):
∀(n, i) ∈ N∗ × J0; N − 1K:
xn
i =

xn−1
i
if Sn ̸= i
mSn
if Sn = i.
□
The stego-content is the Boolean vector y = xλ ∈ BN,
which will replace the former LSCs (LSCs of the cover
media are replaced by the vector y).
Remark 3: The implementation of this data hiding scheme
is exposed in a complementary work [8].
□
IV. DATA HIDING SECURITY AND ROBUSTNESS
A. Security and robustness
Even if security and robustness are neighboring concepts
without clearly established deﬁnitions [9], robustness is
often considered to be mostly concerned with blind ele-
mentary attacks, whereas security is not limited to certain
speciﬁc attacks. Indeed, security encompasses robustness
and intentional attacks [10], [11]. The best attempt to give
an elegant and concise deﬁnition for each of these two
terms was proposed in [10]. Following Kalker [10], we will
consider in this research work the two following deﬁnitions:
Deﬁnition 7 (Security [10]): Watermarking security refers
to the inability by unauthorized users to have access to
the raw watermarking channel [...] to remove, detect and
estimate, write or modify the raw watermarking bits.
□
Figure 2.
Simmons’ prisoner problem [12]
Deﬁnition 8 (Robustness [10]): Robust watermarking is a
mechanism to create a communication channel that is mul-
tiplexed into original content [...] It is required that, ﬁrstly,
the perceptual degradation of the marked content [...] is
minimal and, secondly, that the capacity of the watermark
channel degrades as a smooth function of the degradation
of the marked content.
□
In this article, we will focus more speciﬁcally on the se-
curity aspects, which have been formalized in the Simmons’
prisoner problem.
B. The prisoner problem
In the prisoner problem of Simmons [12], Alice and Bob
are in jail, and they want to, possibly, devise an escape plan
by exchanging hidden messages in innocent-looking cover
contents (Fig. 2). These messages are to be conveyed to
one another by a common warden, Eve, who over-drops all
contents and can choose to interrupt the communication if
they appear to be stego-contents.
C. Classiﬁcation of Attacks
In the steganography framework, in the Simmons’ pris-
oner problem context, attacks have been classiﬁed in [13]
as follows.
Deﬁnition 9 (Classes of attacks):
WOA: A Watermark-Only Attack occurs when an attacker
has only access to several watermarked contents.
KMA: A Known-Message Attack occurs when an attacker
has access to several pairs of watermarked con-
tents and corresponding hidden messages.
KOA: A Known-Original Attack is when an attacker has
access to several pairs of watermarked contents
and their corresponding original versions.
CMA: A Constant-Message Attack occurs when the at-
tacker observes several watermarked contents and
only knows that the unknown hidden message is
the same in all contents.
□
A synthesis of this classiﬁcation is given in Table I.
In this article, we will focus more speciﬁcally on the
“Watermark-Only Attack” situation, which is the most rel-
evant category when considering anonymity and privacy
protection through the Internet.
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-204-2
INTERNET 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Evolving Internet

Class
Original content
Stego content
Hidden message
WOA
×
KMA
×
×
KOA
×
×
CMA
×
Table I
WATERMARKING ATTACKS CLASSIFICATION IN CONTEXT OF [10]
D. Reminder about Stego-Security
The stego-security, deﬁned in the Watermark-Only Attack
(WOA) framework, is the highest security level that can be
deﬁned in this setup [13].
Deﬁnition 10 (Stego-Security):
Let K be the set of em-
bedding keys, p(X) the probabilistic model of N0 initial
host contents, and p(Y |K1) the probabilistic model of N0
watermarked contents. Moreover, each host content has been
watermarked with the same secret key K1 and the same
embedding function e. Then e is said stego-secure if:
∀K1 ∈ K, p(Y |K1) = p(X).
Until now, only three schemes have been proven stego-
secure. On the one hand, the authors of [13] have established
that the spread spectrum technique called Natural Water-
marking is stego-secure when its distortion parameter η is
equal to 1. On the other hand, we have proposed in [14]
and [7] two other data hiding schemes satisfying this security
property.
V. SECURITY STUDY
Let us prove that,
Proposition 1: DI3 is stego-secure.
□
Proof: Let us suppose that x0 ∼ U

such cover media will be considered to be noisy by any
given attacker.
Let us remark that, in the ﬁeld of data anonymity for
privacy on the Internet, we are in the “watermark-only
attack” framework. As it has been recalled in Table I,
in that framework, the attacker has only access to stego-
contents, having so no knowledge of the original media,
before introducing the message in the random channel
(LSCs). However, this assumption of the existence of a
random channel, natural or artiﬁcial, into the cover images,
is clearly the most disputable one of this research work.
The authors’ intention is to investigate such hypothesis more
largely in future works, by investigation the distribution
of several LSCs contained in a large variety of images
chosen randomly on the Internet. Among other things, we
will check if some well-deﬁned LSCs are naturally uniformly
distributed in most cases. To conduct such studies, we intend
to use the well-known NIST (National Institute of Standards
and Technology of the U.S. Government) tests suite, the
DieHARD battery, or the stringent TestU01 [15]. Depending
on the results of this search for randomness in natural
images, the need to introduce an artiﬁcial random channel
could be possibly removed.
□
Remark 5 (Distribution of the messages m): In order to
prove the stego-security of the data hiding process DI3,
we have supposed that m ∼ U

instance, LSCs will be embedded into various frequency
domains. The robustness of the proposed scheme will be
evaluated too [22], to determine whether this information
hiding algorithm can be relevant in other Internet domains
interesting by data hiding techniques, as the semantic web.
Finally a cryptographic approach of information hiding
security is currently investigated, enlarging the Simmons’
prisoner problem [23], and we intend to evaluate the pro-
posed scheme in this framework.
REFERENCES
[1] www, “Tor: Anonymity online - protect your privacy. defend
yourself against network surveillance and trafﬁc analysis.”
02 2012, [On line - 2012.02.22]. [Online]. Available:
https://www.torproject.org/
[2] A. Wordsworth, News in National Post.com, Feb. 2012,
availlable
at
http://news.nationalpost.com/2012/02/13/
hamza-kashgari/.
[3] Wikipedia,
“Hossein
derakhshan
—
wikipedia,
the
free
encyclopedia,”
2012,
[Online;
accessed
1-May-
2012]. [Online]. Available: http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.
php?title=Hossein_Derakhshan&oldid=488149891
[4] ——,
“Mix
network
—
wikipedia,
the
free
encyclopedia,”
2012,
[Online;
accessed
2-May-2012].
[Online].
Available:
http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?
title=Mix_network&oldid=478408804
[5] ESIEA, “Perseus technology for anonymity through the
internet,”
02
2012,
[On
line
-
2012.02.22].
[Online].
Available: http://www.esiea-recherche.eu/perseus.html
[6] C. Guyeux and J. Bahi, “An improved watermarking algo-
rithm for internet applications,” in INTERNET’2010. The 2nd
Int. Conf. on Evolving Internet, Valencia, Spain, Sep. 2010,
pp. 119–124.
[7] N. Friot, C. Guyeux, and J. M. Bahi, “Chaotic iterations
for steganography - stego-security and chaos-security,” in
SECRYPT, J. Lopez and P. Samarati, Eds.
SciTePress, 2011,
pp. 218–227.
[8] J. M. Bahi, F. Couchot, N. Friot, and C. Guyeux, “A robust
data hiding process contributing to the development of a
semantic web,” in INTERNET’2012, The Fourth International
Conference on Evolving Internet, Venice, Italy, Jun. 2012, pp.
***–***, to appear.
[9] L. Perez-Freire, P. Comesanñ, J. R. Troncoso-Pastoriza, and
F. Perez-Gonzalez, “Watermarking security: a survey,” in
LNCS Transactions on Data Hiding and Multimedia Security,
2006.
[10] T. Kalker, “Considerations on watermarking security,” in
Multimedia Signal Processing, 2001 IEEE Fourth Workshop
on, 2001, pp. 201–206.
[11] P. Comesaña, L. Pérez-Freire, and F. Pérez-González, “Funda-
mentals of data hiding security and their application to spread-
spectrum analysis,” in IH’05: Information Hiding Workshop,
ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, M. Barni, J. Herrera-
Joancomartí, S. Katzenbeisser, and F. Pérez-González, Eds.,
vol. 3727.
Lectures Notes in Computer Science, Springer-
Verlag, 2005, pp. 146–160.
[12] G. J. Simmons, “The prisoners’ problem and the subliminal
channel,” in Advances in Cryptology, Proc. CRYPTO’83,
1984, pp. 51–67.
[13] F. Cayre, C. Fontaine, and T. Furon, “Kerckhoffs-based em-
bedding security classes for woa data hiding,” IEEE Trans-
actions on Information Forensics and Security, vol. 3, no. 1,
pp. 1–15, 2008.
[14] C. Guyeux, N. Friot, and J. Bahi, “Chaotic iterations versus
spread-spectrum: chaos and stego security,” in IIH-MSP’10,
6-th Int. Conf. on Intelligent Information Hiding and Multi-
media Signal Processing, Darmstadt, Germany, October 2010,
pp. 208–211.
[15] P. L’Ecuyer and R. Simard, “Testu01: A software library in
ansi c for empirical testing of random number generators,”
Laboratoire de simulation et d’optimisation. Université de
Montréal IRO, 2009.
[16] P. Junod, Cryptographic secure pseudo-random bits genera-
tion: The Blum-Blum-Shub generator.
August, 1999.
[17] K. Solanki, A. Sarkar, and B. S. Manjunath, “Yass: Yet
another steganographic scheme that resists blind steganaly-
sis,” in Information Hiding, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, T. Furon, F. Cayre, G. J. Doërr, and P. Bas, Eds.,
vol. 4567.
Springer, 2007, pp. 16–31.
[18] T. Pevný, T. Filler, and P. Bas, “Using high-dimensional im-
age models to perform highly undetectable steganography,” in
Information Hiding, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
R. Böhme, P. W. L. Fong, and R. Safavi-Naini, Eds., vol.
6387.
Springer, 2010, pp. 161–177.
[19] J. J. Fridrich, T. Pevný, and J. Kodovský, “Statistically
undetectable jpeg steganography: dead ends challenges, and
opportunities,” in MM&Sec, D. Kundur, B. Prabhakaran,
J. Dittmann, and J. J. Fridrich, Eds.
ACM, 2007, pp. 3–
14.
[20] P. Bas, T. Filler, and T. Pevný, “Break our steganographic
system — the ins and outs of organizing boss,” in Information
Hiding, 13th International Workshop, ser. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, T. Filler, Ed.
Prague, Czech Republic:
Springer-Verlag, New York, May 18–20, 2011.
[21] J. Kodovský, J. Fridrich, and V. Holub, “Ensemble classiﬁers
for steganalysis of digital media,” IEEE Transactions on
Information Forensics and Security, vol. PP Issue:99, pp. 1 –
1, 2011, to appear.
[22] J. Bahi, J.-F. Couchot, and C. Guyeux, “Steganography: a
class of secure and robust algorithms,” The Computer Journal,
pp. ***–***, 2011, available online. Paper version to appear.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/comjnl/bxr116
[23] J. M. Bahi, C. Guyeux, and P.-C. Héam, “A complexity
approach for steganalysis,” CoRR, vol. abs/1112.5245, 2011.
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-204-2
INTERNET 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Evolving Internet

