Protection of Personal Information in South Africa: A Framework for Biometric 
Data Collection Security 
 
Phiwa Mzila 
Modeling and Digital Sciences, Information Security 
CSIR 
Pretoria, South Africa 
e-mail: pmzila@csir.co.za 
 
 
Abstract—The use of biometric technology as a means to 
improve national security and reduce fraud has been adopted 
by many countries including South Africa. This technology 
involves the collection of biometric data which is attributed as 
part of one’s personal information. Like many other countries, 
South Africa, in 2013 officially approved and enacted the 
Protection of Personal Information (POPI) Act, which gives 
guidelines that should be followed when processing personal 
information. The Act regards biometric data in the same way 
as any other personal data. As such the processing of biometric 
data is regulated in the personal information protection act of 
the country. The responsible party for the collection of 
personal 
information 
needs 
to 
implement 
strict 
and 
appropriate measures to protect personal data against 
unauthorised access. In areas where biometric systems are 
implemented, biometric data cannot be collected without the 
knowledge of the concerned person. Designers of biometric 
systems must engage with appropriate biometric security 
experts 
to 
ensure 
that 
security 
vulnerabilities 
are 
appropriately tackled, especially if existing systems are 
migrated to the internet. This is particularly important 
because once a biometric data is compromised; it cannot be 
replaced like passwords and tokens. In this paper we proposed 
a framework for biometric data collection security using South 
Africa as our case study. The framework aims to bridge the 
gap between the collectors of biometric data, biometric 
security experts and the law enforcement agency for 
compliance with the POPI Act.  
Keywords 
- 
privacy; 
personal 
information; 
security; 
compliance; biometric data; protection scheme. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The adoption and use of biometric systems world-wide 
has gained massive momentum. Biometric systems are 
mostly used for authentication, which comprises of 
verification and identification. Verification involves the 
presenting of an actual biometric image and in order to assert 
whether or not it belongs to a specified person. This process 
is referred to as a “one-to-one” search, whereas identification 
involves the presenting of an actual biometric image and 
then asking the system to search for a match from a database. 
This process is referred to a “one-to-many” search [1]. As 
prominent as they are, biometric systems also create a lot of 
anxiety as far as privacy and security are concerned. Such 
privacy and security risks come in the form of attacks on 
databases storing biometric data [2]. When biometric data is 
compromised, the identity of the person is exposed, and it 
can then be used for any malicious activities [3]. This 
behavior can lead to the violation of some policies that are 
put in place by the authorities of the country, such as in the 
POPI Act in South Africa. 
Biometric data may be collected and used for various 
purposes. For example, in South Africa, the collection of 
biometric data at major border gates is aimed at securing the 
movement of people in and out of the country [3]. 
Furthermore, this is done to accurately identify people and 
determine whether they pose a risk to South Africa. By using 
biometrics, South Africa’s immigration prevents the use of 
fraudulent documents, protects visitors from identify theft 
and stops criminals and immigration violators from entering 
the country. In other cases, biometric data is collected from 
places such as residential complexes, learning institutions, 
work places for control of access to high security and 
restricted areas and governmental organs such as police 
departments and home affairs. In the process of biometric 
data collection, written policy and clear guidelines should be 
developed to ensure proper use of the biometric data 
collected. This should include among others, awareness, 
protection mechanism, and penalties for failure to comply. 
In South Africa, there is the POPI act, biometric data 
subjects, responsible parties (data collectors), biometric 
experts from research and development (R&D) institutions 
such as CSIR, universities and Centres for Excellence, but 
there is still no proper framework that integrates all these 
entities together in ensuring a harmonized protection of 
biometric data that is being collected by different 
organizations for different purposes. 
Throughout this research work, biometric technologies 
that improve national security capabilities in access control, 
identity verification, and online transaction security in a 
manner that is compliant with the South African POPI act, 
are analysed. To achieve this objective, relevant South 
African departments responsible for national security, border 
control and security, and the law enforcement and financial 
institutions, are studied. In this paper, we propose a 
framework for biometric data security in South Africa that 
incorporates the POPI Act and biometric template protection 
schemes. 
 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-516-6
INTERNET 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Evolving Internet

 
Figure 1. General biometric system 
Security aspect of any biometric system can be measured 
by the level at which biometric data (biometric templates or 
images) is secured. All levels in the system should maintain 
high security and privacy protection. These levels are at the 
enrollment phase, storage phase, matching and updating 
phase.  Amongst these phases, the most critical phase that 
imposes risk for biometric data loss, theft or compromise is 
at the storage phase. Hence employment of biometric 
templates protection schemes is critically important at all 
institutions that collect and process biometric data or uses 
biometric systems including personal information.  An ideal 
template protection scheme will provide solutions such as 
how to revoke or cancel a compromised biometric template 
from the database. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follow: in Section II 
biometric data as personal information is discussed, in 
Section III, areas where biometric data is collected in South 
Africa are outlined, a brief overview of POPI Act of South 
Africa is defined in Section IV, in Section V biometric 
protection schemes are discussed, Section VI presents a 
proposed framework and Section VII concludes the paper. 
II. 
BIOMETRIC DATA AS PERSONAL INFORMATION 
According to the POPI act of South Africa, examples of 
personal data for an individual could include, among others, 
photos, voice recordings, video footage, and biometric data 
[4]. A general biometric system will operate as depicted in 
Fig. 1. At the presentation of biometric modality, the scanner 
captures an image and performs feature extraction, from 
which a template is created. A biometric template is a 
mathematical file representation of location of unique 
biometric extracted features from a chosen modality image. 
This file can be anything from a binary mathematical file to a 
statistical model [5]. Biometric templates are then stored in 
the database, not the actual image of a biometric image. 
There are arguments [6] that the data stored in biometric 
systems are not personal data because firstly, the stored 
biometric data is just a meaningless binary numbers, and 
therefore are not personally identifiable information; and 
secondly, a biometric image cannot be reconstructed from 
the stored template. If we look at the first argument, having 
these binary numbers linked to other personal identification 
particulars there is no denying that they are capable of 
identifying an individual. After all, the purpose of collecting 
the data and transform them into numbers is to identify and 
verify a person whose information is associated with the 
numbers. This is similarly true in the second scenario. A 
reconstructed template will ultimately reveal the identity of a 
person. Hence, no matter how the templates are constructed, 
they are be considered to be the personal data when 
combined with other identifying particulars of a data subject, 
hence should be treated with the most privacy and protected 
just like any other personal information as mandated by the 
POPI Act. 
III. 
COLLECTION OF BIOMETRIC DATA IN SOUTH AFRICA 
     Biometric data may be collected for different reasons, 
but whatever the reason might be, a responsible party should 
ensure that the process is lawful and compliant with the 
POPI act. Let us consider the following four classified areas 
in which biometric data is being collected in South Africa: 
border gates, banking, physical access control and 
governmental organs. A common major concern in all these 
four areas is that there is no mechanism implemented for 
securing users collected biometric data, and by so imposing 
high risk of fraud and cyber-crime. 
A. Border gates 
The South Africa government launched its biometric 
collection pilot at all ports of entry as part of country’s 
project to modernize its Enhanced Movement Control 
System (EMCS) towards the end of 2015. By using 
biometrics, South African border gates want to prevent the 
use of fraudulent documents, protect visitors from identity 
theft and to stop criminals and immigration violators from 
entering the country. In the wake of the recent terrorist acts, 
the country has now enforced the implementation of this 
initiative which aims to counter-act such malicious events 
while assuring safety for all [7]. 
B. Banking 
The top five banks in South Africa are all exploring 
biometric initiatives to prevent bank fraud activities. As a 
result, the South African Banking Risk Identification Centre 
(SABRIC) was developed together with Online Fingerprint 
Verification System. The joint initiative will allow banks to 
access the Home Affairs National Identification System 
(HANIS) to verify the identity of the enrolled and active 
clients using their fingerprints. This electronic identity 
verification system is commended for having the capacity to 
combat bank-related identity fraud and corruption. It 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-516-6
INTERNET 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Evolving Internet

contributes to a positive environment in which the citizens 
feel safe about their and are indeed secure in the hands of the 
various banking institutions. 
Fingerprints data retrieved from HANIS by banks will 
not be stored in the databases of banks. The Department of 
Home Affairs will continue being the only guardian of the 
HANIS database. Banks will not have a full access to data in 
the database, but only the ability to verify the identity of a 
client through information in the database [8]. 
C. Physical Access Control 
South Africa is one of the fast developing countries. 
Organizations are becoming increasingly security conscious, 
with a growing attention to advanced physical access control 
and robust access control technologies such as biometric 
systems. The adoption of biometric systems in physical 
access control places such as residential complexes, homes 
and working places is taking a steady growth in South 
Africa. The biometric system approach that is employed 
mostly in physical access control setup is 1 to 1, which is 
verification. Responsible parties, for example in residential 
complexes, use fingerprint scanners to capture and collect 
fingerprint images in huge volumes during enrollment for 
later use as an access control protocol in the complex. This 
process is repeated for every new resident moving in. 
Biometric data subjects are not made aware, let alone being 
guaranteed that their fingerprints will be securely stored. 
Furthermore, responsible parties do not assure biometric 
data subjects what happens with processed data once the 
contract ends and the resident has to vacate the complex. Is 
the data deleted or kept in the database? If it is kept in the 
database, the question then is for how long? Will it not be 
cross matched in other applications for malicious activities? 
This conveys biometric security in physical access control 
under scrutiny, especially in South Africa.  
D. Governmental Organs 
South Africa’s Home Affairs National Identification 
System (HANIS) was developed as a verification service, 
which is an initiative that uses fingerprints to verify the 
identity of active clients and prevent identity fraud‚ irregular 
insurance claims and related crimes. This system uses a 
National Population Register database of fingerprints for all 
registered citizen of the country. This database can be 
accessed by all organs of government for different purposes, 
such as vetting for State Security Department, grant 
payments for South Africa Social Security Agency and crime 
investigation for Police Department. 
IV. 
POPI ACT OF SOUTH AFRICA 
      In attempt to enforce the procedure of protecting 
personal information, South Africa enacted the POPI act 
which is summarized in this section. 
A. Overview of POPI Act 
In this paper and in POPI Act, unless the context 
indicates otherwise, ‘‘biometrics’’ means a technique of 
personal 
identification 
that 
is 
based 
on 
physical, 
physiological or behavioral characterization including blood 
typing, fingerprinting, DNA analysis, retinal scanning and 
voice recognition to promote the protection of personal 
information processed by public and private bodies [4]. 
POPI Act binds every entity that is involved in the 
processing of personal information. It can be any public or 
private body or any person alone in conjunction with others 
determines the purpose of and means for processing personal 
information. In simple terms, the purpose of the POPI Act is 
to ensure that all South African institutions follow the right 
procedures when processing (collect, share, store or access) 
one’s personal information by holding them accountable 
should they abuse or compromise it. Personal information is 
widely stated and could include but not limited to the list in 
Table 1. 
TABLE I.  
CLASSIFICATION OF PERSONAL INFORMATION 
 
The POPI Act basically considers one’s personal 
information to be precious goods and therefore aims to 
bestow upon all citizens of South African, as the owners of 
their personal information, firm rights of protection and 
control over the following:  
 
when and how to share their personal information 
(requires consent) 
 
the type and extent of their information to share 
(must be collected for valid reasons) 
 
providing access to their own information as well as 
the right to have data removed and/or destroyed 
upon request 
 
who has access to their information, i.e., there must 
be adequate measures to prevent unauthorised 
people from accessing their information 
 
how and where their information is stored [4] 
The POPI Act lists eight core mandatory information 
processing principles [9]: 
1) Information quality: The responsible party must take 
reasonably practical steps that the personal information is 
complete, accurate, not misleading, updated and taking into 
account the purpose for which it is collected. 
2) Purpose specification: Personal information must be 
collected for a specific, explicitly defined and lawful purpose 
related to a function or activity of the responsible party. The 
responsible party must take necessary steps to ensure those 
Personal Information 
Contact details 
Email, telephone 
address etc. 
Demographics 
Age, sex, race, birthdate, 
ethnicity etc. 
History 
Employment, 
financial, 
educational, 
criminal, 
medical etc. 
Opinion 
Opinions of and about the 
person 
Biometrics 
Fingerprints, 
iris, 
palm, 
veins, DNA, face, behavior, 
etc. 
Correspondence 
Private correspondence 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-516-6
INTERNET 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Evolving Internet

data subjects are aware of the purpose for which their data is 
being collected.  
3) Accountability: The responsible party must ensure 
that the eight mandatory information processing principles 
are complied with. 
4)  Processing limitation:  Processing must be lawful 
and personal data may only be processed if it is adequate, 
relevant and not excessive given the purpose for which it is 
processed. 
5) Further processing limitation: This is where personal 
data is received form a third party and passed on to the 
responsible 
party 
for 
further 
processing. 
In 
these 
circumstances, the further processing must be compatible 
with the purpose for which it was initially collected. 
6) Openness: Personal data may only be processed by a 
responsible party that has notified the information protection 
regulator. 
7) Security safeguarding: The responsible party must 
secure the integrity of personal data in its possession or 
under its control by taking prescribed measures to prevent 
loss of damage to or unauthorised destruction of data. 
8) Data subject participating: A data subject has the 
right to request a responsible party to confirm, free of charge, 
whether or not the responsible party holds personal data, 
including information about the identity of third parties, who 
have, or have had, access to the information. 
B. Collecting and Recording of Personal Information 
Under the POPI Act, responsible parties processing 
personal information from data subject [4]:  
 
can only collect personal information directly from 
the owner of the information 
 
should acknowledges the owner before they collect 
personal information and obtain his or her consent 
 
should have adequate reason for collecting this 
information 
 
should provide enough transparency on the purpose 
and intended use of this information 
 
may only share this information with authorised 
parties 
Responsible parties have a strong mandate from the POPI 
Act that after the information has been collected from data 
subject the following two obligations should be followed:  
 
They should only use the information for lawful 
purposes that the data subject agrees to. Any further 
processing must be compatible with the original 
purpose. 
 
Access to this information should be limited to 
authorised parties only and only for as long as they 
need to perform their duty. Once the third party has 
completed his or her part, unless authorised for 
other duties, he or she may no longer have access to 
this information. 
V. 
BIOMETRIC DATA PROTECTION SCHEMES 
To comply with the POPI Act, responsible parties need to 
provide an assurance that collected data is securely stored 
and protected from hackers and fraudsters in their databases. 
Traditionally, biometric data (captured image), during 
enrollment is transformed into unreadable format or file 
called template as shown in Fig. 1. The template is then 
stored in the database. From a naked eye, a biometric 
template should be secure enough since it is a mathematical 
representation of the actual image, making it to be difficult to 
recreate the original biometric image when associated with 
other information of the same person, the personality of the 
person can be revealed. But recent studies [10] [11] [[12] 
have successfully proved that, it is indeed possible to 
reconstruct the original biometric image from a mere 
biometric template. 
Researchers have proposed different schemes in order to 
secure biometric templates. These schemes should meet four 
desirable properties for protection biometric templates [13]:  
1) Diversity: To ensure privacy, secure template must 
not allow cross matching. 
2) Revocability: Compromised template should be 
revoked and it must be possible to reissue a new template 
from the same biometric data. 
3) Security: It should not be possible to generate the 
original template from the secured template. 
4) Performance: The operation of the protection  
scheme should  not  degrade  the  recognition  performance  
(FAR and FRR) of the biometric system. 
Biometric data protection schemes can broadly be 
classified into two, namely: cryptosystem based approach 
and feature transformation based approach.  
A. Cryptosystem Based Approach 
Biometric cryptosystem approach is also known as helper 
data based method because in this approach some public 
information about the biometric template is stored [14]. 
Helper data does not reveal any significant information about 
the original biometric template. Cryptosystem can be 
classified either as key binding or as key generating as 
shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 respectively.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In key generation method, helper data (H) is extracted 
only from the biometric template (T). The cryptographic key 
(K) is generated from the helper data and the biometric query 
(Q). Therefore if the template and query are from the same 
 
Figure 2. Key generation 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-516-6
INTERNET 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Evolving Internet

 
Figure 5.  Proposed framework 
 
 
 
user, the generated keys will be the same with close 
probability [15]. In key binding method, helper data is 
obtained by binding a chosen cryptographic key with a 
biometric template. During the matching/authentication 
process, the system attempts to recover the cryptographic 
key from the helper data using a biometric query [16]. The 
design of a key-binding biometric cryptosystem should 
always ensure that the key can be successfully recovered 
with overwhelming probability if the query is from a 
legitimate user. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. Feature Transformation Based Approach 
In a typical feature transformation based approach, also 
known as cancellable [17], during enrollment, the original 
template T is transformed using transformation function (F) 
into T’ = F(T), and thus the original biometric data are not 
required to be kept in the biometrics system to ensure user 
privacy. During the probe stage, a user submits his query 
biometric data (Q) to the same transformation function Q’ = 
F(Q). The matching module will then match the transformed 
Q’ against T’ template.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the event of a compromise, a renewed template can be 
simply generated with fresh auxiliary information. An 
advantage of this approach is that it is possible to generate 
multiple templates using the same piece of biometric data, 
since these templates show that there is no correlation that 
exist between them [18].  
VI. 
PROPOSED FRAMEWORK 
A. Framework for Biometric Data Collection Security 
     The POPI Act defines biometric data as personal 
information. It further imposes an obligation towards 
businesses and those that are responsible for collection of 
personal information to apply reasonable security measures 
to protect it. In the case of biometric data, techniques and 
methods used for the protection of biometric data 
(templates) must meet the four properties: security, 
diversity, performance and revocability [12] as explained in 
the previous section. 
     In this paper, we propose a framework where an ideal 
biometric data protection scheme is the solution for 
responsible parties from various sectors, such as industries, 
government, academics and societies for ensuring that the 
biometric data which they process is properly secured. This 
framework will ensure the protection of privacy in biometric 
data and also enforce compliance with the POPI Act of 
South Africa. Fig. 2 depicts a proposed framework as the 
structure that can close the gap which currently exists in the 
adoption of biometric systems across different sectors of the 
country. The framework consists of three main entities: 
compliance, ideal secure scheme and responsible parties.   
1) Compliance: These are the key principles highlighted 
by the POPI Act as mandatory to all responsible parties. 
2) Ideal secure scheme: These are four properties of an 
ideal biometric data protection technique responsible for 
securing the processing of biometric information, e.g., 
capturing, collection and storing  of biometric data. 
3) Responsible parties: These are the organisations, 
industries, academic institutions and societies that are 
processing biometric information and are responsible for its 
 
 
Figure 3. Key binding 
 
 
Figure 4. Feature transformation  
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-516-6
INTERNET 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Evolving Internet

safety and privacy. They need to comply with the POPI Act 
by implementing the ideal biometric data protection scheme. 
     This framework seeks to influence the  law enforcement 
experts in the government to ensure that each and every 
biometric data (as it is classified as personal information) 
collector  implements a proven and tested  biometric data 
protection scheme.  
B. Rationale of Biometric Data Security 
      Consequences of stolen biometric data can be very 
severe. In most biometric applications, biometric data is 
stored in central databases as templates, otherwise smart 
cards, mobile devices, and tokens can also be used to store 
it. This poses several risks about privacy and security such 
as identity theft and cross matching.  An adversary can 
create a fake modality to spoof biometric systems. He can 
also track activities of a victim in other biometric 
applications. Unfortunately a biometric modality is hard or 
impossible to change. Compromise of biometric data is 
permanent. Renewing or revocation of biometric identities 
is infeasible [19].  
VII. CONCLUSION 
     The exposure of biometric information can result in 
serious security and privacy concerns. It has taken a long 
period of time for experts in law enforcement to realize the 
significance of considering the protection of biometric 
information in drafting legislation documents that govern 
the country. South Africa, for example, passed the 
protection of personal information act in 2013. The POPI 
Act gives various mandates and instructions to everybody 
who collects and processes personal information to follow 
prescribed practices in the act. Furthermore, the POPI Act 
provides the list of rights to data objects (public) about their 
personal information. One of the critical personal 
information a human being possesses is biometric 
information. The responsibility of ensuring that this 
biometric information is properly secured wherever it is 
stored is purely assigned to responsible parties. 
     Considering the impact a compromised biometric data 
can have in the society, such as identity theft and cyber-
crime, in this paper a framework for biometric data 
collection security has been proposed. This framework 
enables existing solutions that securely protect stored 
biometric data, in the form of templates to support the 
adoption of the POPI Act in different sectors, such as 
industries, government organs, academics and societies 
where responsible parties are employed. The proposed 
introduction of four properties regarding privacy and 
security fills the gap and projects an ideal solution that 
supports the eight principles of the POPI Act.  
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] W. Penny, “Biometrics: A Double Edged Sword - Security 
and Privacy”, Bioprivacy Impact Framework,   International 
Biometric Group. GSEC Certification Practical Version 1.3. 
[2] G. M Snijder,  “Report on Security & Privacy in Large Scale 
Biometric Systems”, European Biometrics Forum, 2006. 
[3] White Paper: Protecting Against Criminal Use of Stolen 
Biometric Data, HID Global Corporation, 2015.  
[4] Republic of South Africa Government Gazette: Protection of 
Personal Information Act, 2013. 
[5] R. Das: What a biometric template is. [Online], Available 
from: http://www.biometricupdate.com/author/ravi-das/ 
2016.05.18. 
[6] R. B. Woo, “Challenges posed by biometric technology on 
data privacy protection and the way forward,” The Privacy 
Commissioner for Personal data, Hong Kong, 2010. 
[7] J. Lee, Biometric Update [Online], Available from: 
http://www.biometricupdate.com/201512/south-africa-plans-
entry-biometrics-at-every-port-of-entry-by-august-2016 
2016.05.18. 
[8] M. Gigaba: Department of home affairs budget vote 
2015/2016, Republic of South Africa Government Services. 
[Online], 
Available 
from: 
http://www.gov.za/speeches/minister-malusi-gigaba-home-
affairs-dept-budget-vote-201516-6-may-2015-0000/ 
2016.04.08. 
[9] LexisNexis Risk Solutions: POPI Safeguarding right to 
Privacy. [Online], Available from:www.lexisnexis.com/risk 
2016/05/20. 
[10] M. Bromba, “On the reconstruction of biometric data from 
template data,” Bromba Biometrics, 2006. 
[11] A. Kholmatov and B. Yanokoglub, “Realization of correlation 
attaxck against fuzzy vault scheme,” In Proceedings of SPIE 
Security, Forensics, Steganography, and Watermarking of 
Multimedia Contents, vol. 6819, 2008. 
[12] W. J. Scheirer and T. E Boult, “Cracking fuzzy vaults and 
biometric encryption,” In Proceedings of the Biometrics 
Symposium, 2007. 
[13] R. Tigga and A. Wanjari, “A survey on template protection 
scheme for multimodal biometric system,” International 
Journal of Science and Research (IJSR), 2013, ISSN:2319-
7064, 2013. 
[14] Y. J. Chang, W. Zhang, and T. Chen, “Biometrics-based 
cryptographic key generation,” In Multimedia and Expo, 
ICME'04. 2004 IEEE International Conference on vol. 3, pp. 
2203-2206, 2004. 
[15] P.Poongodi and P. Betty, “A study on biometric template 
protection techniques,” International Journal of Engineering 
Trends and Technology (IJETT), vol.7(4), 2014. 
[16] C. Li, J. Hu, J.  Pieprzyk, and W. Susilo,  “A New Bio-
cryptosystem-oriented Security Analysis Framework and 
Implementation of Multibiometric Cryptosystems based on 
Decision Level Fusion,” IEEE Transactions on Information 
Forensics and Security, 10 (6), pp. 1193-1206, 2015. 
[17] P. Paul and  M. Gavrilova, “Cancelable Template: Securing 
biometric face templates,  IJAIT,  4(1),  pp. 25-34, 2012. 
[18] Y.J. China, T.S. Onga, A.B.J. Teohb, and K.O.M. Goh, 
“Integrated Biometrics Template Protection Technique based 
on 
Fingerprint 
and 
Palmprint 
Feature-level 
Fusion,” 
Information Fusion, vol. 18, pp. 161-174, 2014. 
[19] P. Tuyls and J. Goseling, “Capacity and examples of template 
protecting 
biometric 
authentication 
systems,” 
BioAW, 
LNCS3087, pp.158-170, 2004.  
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-516-6
INTERNET 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Evolving Internet

