Quality of Service Assurance in Multi-domain Content-Aware Networks for 
Multimedia Applications 
Marius Vochin, Eugen Borcoci, Serban Georgica Obreja, Cristian Cernat, Radu Badea, Vlad Poenaru 
University POLITEHNICA of Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
emails: marius.vochin@elcom.pub.ro, eugen.borcoci@elcom.pub.ro 
serban.obreja@elcom.pub.ro, cristian.cernat@elcom.pub.ro, radu.badea@elcom.pub.ro, vlad.poenaru@elcom.pub.ro 
 
 
 
Abstract —Content Aware Networking is a “light” variant of 
Information Centric Networking (ICN) architectural solution, 
responding to the significant Internet orientation to content 
and multimedia. The contribution of this paper is focused on 
the implementation and new experimental results validating 
previously designed solutions for Virtual Content Aware 
Networks (VCAN), QoS enabled, built over multi-domain, 
multi-provider IP networks, in the framework of an ecosystem 
offering multimedia services. A multi-domain pilot is shortly 
described, 
and 
QoS 
related 
experiments 
are 
shown, 
demonstrating the benefit of provisioned VCANs dedicated to 
transport media flows with QoS guarantees. 
Keywords — Content-Aware Networking, Network Aware 
Applications, Multi-domain, Quality of Services, Multimedia 
distribution, Future Internet. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A 
significant 
Internet 
trend 
is 
its 
stronger 
information/content-centric orientation [1]-[5]. Related to 
this, a high increase in media traffic amount is seen, driven 
by media oriented applications. On the other side, several 
current Internet limitations have been emphasized, related to 
the needs of today communication. Consequently, changes in 
services and networking have been proposed, including 
modifications 
of 
the 
architectural 
basics. 
The 
Information/Content-Centric Networking (ICN/CCN), [3][4], 
approaches propose revision of some main concepts of the 
architectural TCP/IP stack. In parallel, evolutionary solutions 
emerged, as Content-Awareness at Network layer (CAN) 
and Network-Awareness at Applications layers (NAA), seen 
as a light ICN solution. This approach can create a powerful 
cross-layer optimisation loop between the transport, 
applications and services.  
The 
European 
FP7 
project, 
“Media 
Ecosystem 
Deployment Through Ubiquitous Content-Aware Network 
Environments”, 
ALICANTE, 
[10]–[13], 
adopted 
the 
NAA/CAN approach. It defined a multi-domain architecture, 
and then specified, designed and implemented a Media 
Ecosystem, on top of multi-domain IP networks, to offer 
media services for business actors playing roles of 
consumers and/or providers. The solution adopted as main 
principles the content-type recognition at network level and 
light virtualization (separated Data Plane virtual networks, 
but a single management and control plane). This solution is 
believed to offer seamless deployment perspectives and tries 
to avoid the scalability problems, while are still open 
research issues, of the full ICN/CON approaches. 
In this paper, the “environment” denotes a generic 
grouping of functions working for a common goal, which 
vertically span one or more several architectural (sub)layers. 
Several cooperating environments are defined, including 
business entities/actors: User Environment (UE), containing 
the End-Users; Service Environment (SE), containing High 
Level Service Providers (SP) and Content Providers (CP); 
Network Environment (NE), where a new CAN Provider 
exists (CANP - managing and offering Virtual Content 
Aware Networks- VCANs); traditional Network Providers 
(NP/ISP) - managing the network elements at IP level. 
A VCAN is constructed at request of an SP, to a CAN 
Provider, based on Service Level Agreement (SLA) 
spanning one or several independent network domains, and 
featuring different levels of QoS guarantees. The CANP 
offers to the upper layers enhanced connectivity services, 
VCAN-based QoS enabled, in unicast and multicast mode, 
over multi-domain, multi-provider IP networks. The VCAN 
resources are managed quasi-statically by provisioning and 
also dynamically, by using adaptation procedures for media 
flows. In the Data Plane, content/service description 
information (metadata) can also be inserted in the media 
flow packets by the Content Servers and treated 
appropriately by the intelligent routers of the VCAN. 
This paper continues a previous work dedicated to 
system architecture, design, and algorithms for resource 
management. Section II makes a short overview of related 
work. Section III summarizes the overall system architecture. 
Section IV and V contain the main novel contributions of 
this paper, presenting the experimental pilot structure and 
few samples of validation results, extracted of a large set, 
[12] performed during overall system validation. Section VI 
contains some conclusions and future work outline. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The 
current 
challenges 
and 
research 
on 
content/information networking for the Future Internet are 
well presented in [1][2]. Information/Content Centric 
Networking (ICN/CCN), or Content Oriented Networking 
(CON) [3]–[5] change the traditional TCP/IP stack concepts 
(with agnostic network layer) by putting more intelligence 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-349-0
INTERNET 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Evolving Internet

in the network nodes, which primarily process the data, 
based on content objects recognition and not based on 
location address. However, full ICN/CCN poses significant 
problems of scalability and seamless deployment possibility 
[6]. 
“Light” approaches are Content-Awareness at Network 
layer (CAN) and Network-Awareness at Applications layers 
(NAA) [10]. Here, only content-type of data are recognized 
by network nodes and treated accordingly. Thus the full 
ICN scalability and complexity problems are avoided and a. 
seamless field deployment is possible. The approach brings 
new benefits for both, Service and Application Layer and 
Network layer, thus creating a powerful cross-layer 
optimization loop. 
Network virtualization is an important set of tools to 
overcome the ossification of the current Internet [7]-[9]. In 
our system [10]–[13], a light virtualization is adopted, by 
creating VCANs as parallel Internet planes [14], each one 
being content aware and QoS capable. The virtual logical 
slices (VCANs) exist and are separated in the Data Plane 
only, while the Management and Control (M&C) Planes are 
unique at system level. To solve the QoS guarantees, each 
VCAN has associated a QoS class or meta-QoS class as in 
[15][16], but in a more powerful way, given the content 
awareness of the VCANs. 
III. 
ALICANTE SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE SUMMARY 
A. General Architecture 
The general ALICANTE architecture is already defined 
in [10][11][13]. The traditional business actors are SP, CP, 
NP - Providers and End-Users (EU). A novel actor is the 
CAN Provider (CANP) which offers virtual layer 
connectivity services. The EUs are connected to VCANs via 
home and/or access networks. Note that VCANs do not 
control access networks resources, given their large variety 
of technologies. Home-Boxes (HB) – may exist, partially 
managed by the SP, the NP, and the end-user, located at end-
user's premises and gathering content/context-aware and 
network-aware information. The HB can also act as a CP/SP 
for other HBs, on behalf of the EUs. Correspondingly, two 
novel virtual layers exist: the CAN layer and the HB layer. 
The novel CAN routers are called Media-Aware Network 
Elements (MANE) to emphasize their additional capabilities: 
content and context - awareness, controlled QoS/QoE, 
security and monitoring features, etc. 
The CAN layer M&C is partially distributed. It supports 
CAN customization to respond to the high level services 
needs, including 1:1, 1:n, and n:m communications and also 
performs efficient network resource exploitation. The 
interface between CAN and the upper layer assures cross-
layer optimizations interactions. A hierarchical monitoring 
subsystem (at user, service, CAN and respectively network 
layer) supervises several points of the service distribution 
chain and feeds the adaptation subsystems with appropriate 
information, at the HB and CAN Layers. 
Figure 1 presents a partial view on the ALICANTE 
architecture (complete description is in [11]), with emphasis 
on the CAN layer and management interaction. The network 
contains several Core Network Domains (CND), belonging 
to NPs (they can be also seen as Autonomous Systems - AS). 
The Access Networks ANs are out of scope of VCANs. One 
CAN Manager (CANMgr) exists for each CAN domain to 
assure the consistency of VCAN planning, provisioning, 
advertisement, 
offering, 
negotiation 
installation 
and 
exploitation. Each domain has an Intra-domain Network 
Resource Manager (IntraNRM), as the ultimate authority 
configuring the network nodes. The CAN layer cooperates 
with HB and SE and offers CAN services to them. 
 
CND1 
Intra-NRM 
@NP 
CND2 
Intra-NRMr 
@NP 
CAN 
Manager  
CAN 
Manager 
 
2 
3 
1 
Multi-domain VCAN 
QoS enabled 
NIA 
 
HB + SP 
 Environment 
 
MANE 
MANE 
Service  
 Provider 
5 
CAN_RMgr 
4 
OL 
MANE 
Access 
Network 
Access 
Network 
HB 
 
 
MANE 
Home 
Network 
EUT 
 
Service  
Manager@SP 
 
SLS 
SLS 
HB/CS 
 
 
 
Figure 1: High level ALICANTE architecture: multi-domain 
VCANs and main management and control interactions 
Notations: RM – Resource Management; HB - Home Box; 
CS - Content Server; EUT - End User Terminal;  
OL - Optimization Loop; NIA - Network Interconnection 
Agreements; SP, NP – Service, Network Providers 
 
B. VCAN Management 
The VCAN Management framework has been defined in 
[13]. A short summary is recalled here only for sake of 
clarity. At the Service Manager SM@SP, the CAN Network 
Resources Manager (CAN_RMgr) performs, on behalf of 
SP, all actions needed for VCAN support: VCAN planning, 
provisioning (i.e. negotiation with CANP) and then VCAN 
operation supervision. The CANMgr@CANP performs, at 
the CAN layer, VCAN provisioning and operation. The two 
entities interact based on the SLA/SLS contract initiated by 
the SP. The interface implementation for management is 
based on Simple Object Access Protocol (SOAP)/Web 
Services. 
The M&C contracts/interactions of SLA/SLS types 
(Figure 1) are: SP-CANP(1): the SP requests to CANP to 
provision/ modify/ terminate VCANs while CANP replies 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-349-0
INTERNET 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Evolving Internet

with yes/no; CANP-NP(2): CANP negotiates resources with 
NP; CANP-CANP(3): negotiations might be needed to 
extend a VCAN upon several NP domains; Network 
Interconnection Agreements (NIA) (4) between the NPs or 
between NPs and ANPs; the latter are not novel 
functionalities, but are necessary for NP cooperation. After 
the SP negotiates a desired VCAN with CANP, it will issue 
the installation commands to CANP, which in turn 
configures, via Intra-NRM (action 5), the MANE functional 
blocks (input and output). 
The content awareness (CA) is realized in three ways:  
(i) by concluding a SP - CANP SLA concerning VCAN 
construction. The Content Servers (CS) are instructed by the 
SP to insert some special Content Aware Transport 
Information (CATI) in the data packets. This simplifies the 
media flow classification and treatment by the MANE; (ii) 
SLA is concluded, but no CATI is inserted in the data 
packets (legacy CSs). The MANE applies packet inspection 
for data flow classification and assignment to VCANs. The 
flows treatment is still based on VCANs characteristics 
defined in the SLA; (iii) no SP–CANP SLA exists and no 
CATI. The flows treatment can still be CA, but conforming 
to the local policy at CANP and IntraNRM. 
The DiffServ and/or MPLS technologies support splitting 
the sets of flows in QoS classes (QC), with a mapping 
between the VCANs and the QCs. Several levels of QoS 
granularity can be established when defining VCANs, by 
using one of the implemented QCs: EF, AF1, AF2 or BE. 
The QoS behavior of each VCAN (seen as one of the parallel 
Internet planes) is established by the SP-CANP. 
Generally a 1-to-1 mapping between a VCAN and a 
network plane will exist. Customization of VCANs is 
possible in terms of QoS level of guarantees (weak or 
strong), QoS granularity, content adaptation procedures, 
degree of security, etc. A given VCAN can be realized by the 
CANP, by combining several processes, while being possible 
to choose different solutions concerning routing and 
forwarding, packet processing, and resource management. 
The mapping between multiple domain VCANs and 
network resources are developed in [17]. Special combined 
novel algorithms for multi-domain QoS enabled routing, 
resource reservation (at aggregated level) and VCAN final 
mapping have been designed and implemented as to assure 
VCAN QoS capabilities. 
IV. EXPERIMENTAL PILOT INFRASTRUCTURE 
Figure 2 presents a part of the ALICANTE pilot, i.e. an 
island deployed in Bucharest, UPB. It is a hybrid diagram 
showing both physical network infrastructure and some 
architectural elements.  
 
 
 
AN1 
 
CND1 
HB1 
 
CND2 
MANE 
11 
Core Router 
(LINUX  based) 
CS1
2 
Intra-NRM_1 
CANMgr_1 
HN1 
Ethernet 
EU21 
MANE 
32 
MANE 
13 
MANE 
31 
MANE 
12 
MANE 
22 
MANE 
21 
 AN4 
 
AN5 
 
Intra-NRM_2 
CANMgr_2 
Intra-NRM_3 
CANMgr_3 
EU11 
 
EU12 
 
EU4 
 
EU22 
HB4 
SW-MANE 
or  
HW-MANE 
SP2 
SP1 
Bucharest Island 
 
CND3 
Bordeaux Island 
CS 1 
AN3 
HB3 
MANE 
23 
HB2 
 
AN2 
 
EU3 
 
 
Figure 2: Bucharest Island – general network Infrastructure and architectural elements 
The island is also connected via international links to 
other islands. Here, a summary only emphasizing some 
specific aspects is given. Its objectives are to validate and 
demonstrate the capabilities of the overall system for: 
CAN 
and 
network 
environment 
(CNE) 
transport 
capabilities; CAN and networking support for High-level 
services. Several Use Cases have been defined in the 
project to validate high level services capabilities: UC1 - 
“Distribution of User Generated Content”, UC2 - “High 
Popularity Video on Demand” and UC3 - “Multicast Live 
TV”. 
The UPB island is composed by three Core Network 
Domains and several access networks (ANs). The 
infrastructure allows multi-domain and multi-provider 
experiments to be performed locally and also in multi-
island 
environment 
(e.g., 
Bucharest 
- 
Bordeaux). 
Specifically, the pilot supported the validation of the 
following: CAN functionality (mono and multi-domain 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-349-0
INTERNET 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Evolving Internet

experiments); High-level services scenarios UC1, UC2, 
UC3 (local/local-remote experiments, mono and multi-
domain). In the local demonstration, all business entities 
(EUs, HBs, SP, CP/CS entities) are placed within, and 
connected to the UPB island network infrastructure. In the 
multi-island demonstrations, a part of the service related 
entities resides in the UPB island and others are connected 
to the other pilot islands. The roles of the ALICANTE 
entities are detailed in [11]. 
The MANE edge routers are content-aware while the 
interior routers are core regular routers, DiffServ and 
MPLS capable. The core routers were implemented on 
Linux machines. The MANE is based on HW + SW 
configurations provided by the ALICANTE project. The 
CAN Managers and Intra-NRMs run on Linux based PC 
machines. The HBs, SP and CP Subsystem’s entities (SP 
or CP servers, Content Servers (CS), Service management 
entities, Service Registry, etc.) run also on Linux based PC 
machines. Access Network and Home networks are based 
on Ethernet technology. 
Details on the tests performed in the project pilot, and 
complete sets of validation results are described in [12]. 
V. VALIDATION RESULTS 
This section presents a few samples of the 
experimental results performed to validate the system. 
In particular the following example shows a VCAN 
created, to demonstrate its ability to protect unicast media 
traffic. It has two logical channels (pipes): one inter-
domain pipe, starting in Domain 2 and ending in Domain 
1, and a second intra-domain located in Domain 1 – see 
Figure 3. This test shows that traffic belonging to the 
VCAN pipe is protected against traffic with low priority, 
in this case, best effort traffic. A video stream is sent 
through the inter-domain VCAN's pipe, from MANE 22 to 
MANE 11. The bit rate for the video stream is around 
2.5Mbps. A high rate data flow, streamed from node e.134 
to node e.131, will be used as "noise" traffic. The data rate 
for the "noise" traffic is sent using iperf application. It is 
UDP traffic and it is sent with a data rate of 1Gbps. The 
results obtained with and without VCAN installed will be 
presented below. 
The VCAN's pipes have a Committed Information 
Rate (CIR) of 4Mbps and a Peak Information Rate (PIR) 
of 6Mbps. 
 
 
Figure 3: Sample of VCAN topology installed for unicast oriented tests.  
The system has been fully implemented for its M&C 
and data plane components. In Figure 4, the queues of the 
Hierarchical Token Bucket (HTB) for Traffic Control 
Filters (TC) filters installed on the MANE 12 node (e.126) 
are shown. The HTB filters shown belong to the interface 
eth2, which represents the output interface for the VCAN 
pipe 1. Appropriate classes are created as a result of the 
VCAN Create request, issued by the Service Provider. In 
the left figure, the "noise" traffic is not present, that's why 
only the queue associated with the VCAN 1 traffic has 
traffic in it. The data rate measured for this queue is 
around 2.5 Mbps, which corresponds to the movie's bit 
rate. In the right figure, the queues belonging to the same 
filter are shown, but in this case, the "noise" traffic is sent 
through the e.126 node. It can be seen that, in the default 
queue for the best effort traffic, the "noise" traffic is 
present. Its rate is around 40Mbps, because it is reduced by 
the HTB filter. 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-349-0
INTERNET 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Evolving Internet

  
 
Figure 4: The queues of the HTB TC filter on e.126: left - no "noise" traffic; right - with "noise" traffic 
Several complex test campaigns have been performed 
to fully validate the functionality and measure the system 
performance, [12]. Given the limited space of this paper a 
qualitative example is given below. 
In this test, two movies were continuously streamed at 
a constant bitrate, the left one is protected by the installed 
VCAN, and the right one is sent best-effort. In Figures 5 
and 6, a snapshot of the videos received at the output of 
the VCAN pipe is shown. Both snapshots are taken with 
one VCAN configured and installed. Figure 5 corresponds 
to the case when the background noise is not present and 
both movies transmitted are running fine. Figure 6 is taken 
with background noise flowing active. The movie 
protected by VCAN will have good quality because its 
flow is prioritized and protected against low priority 
traffic, while the best effort movie is very affected by 
noise. The conclusion is that VCAN has a provisioning 
effect for QoS protection of dedicated flows. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The paper presented experimental results, validating 
the solutions for a Media Ecosystem Deployment Through 
Ubiquitous 
Content-Aware 
Network 
Environments”, 
developed over multiple IP network domains. The 
architecture and implementation has been fully validated, 
giving the possibility for multiple providers to cooperate 
by creating overlay networks over multiple domains.  
 
 
 
   
 
Figure 5: Received video stream with VCAN installed, and no background noise 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-349-0
INTERNET 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Evolving Internet

 
 
   
 
Figure 6: Received video stream with VCAN installed and network loaded with background “noise” 
 (left: protected traffic flowing through VCAN pipe; right: unprotected traffic)  
 
We emphasize the main merit of the system, which 
provides the possibility of creation of parallel multi-domain 
VCANs customised for different classes of services, with 
content type awareness in edge routers, while the QoS 
supporting technologies can be diverse (e.g. DiffSErv, 
MPLS, combinations). 
The VCANs, provisioned as overlays by the CAN 
providers, at Service Providers requests, can serve properly 
the media flow transportation in different conditions of the 
network load. The system still admits best effort traffic, thus 
preserving network neutrality.  
Future work will be done to extend the functionality of 
the system towards Software Defined Networking, given that 
the proposed architecture fulfills the main SDN concepts –
decoupling between the Control and Data Plane, partial 
centralization and programmability of network level 
forwarders. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was supported partially by the EC in the 
context of the ALICANTE project (FP7-ICT-248652) and 
partially by the project POSDRU/107/1.5/S/76903. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Pan, S. Paul, and R. Jain, “A survey of the research on 
future 
internet 
architectures”, 
IEEE 
Communications 
Magazine, vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 26-36, July 2011. 
[2] C. 
Baladrón, 
“User-Centric 
Future 
Internet 
and 
Telecommunication Services”, in: G. Tselentis, et. al. (eds.), 
Towards the Future Internet, IOS Press, pp. 217-226, 2009. 
[3] J. Choi, J. Han, E. Cho, T. Kwon, and Y.Choi, “A Survey on 
Content-Oriented Networking for Efficient Content Delivery”, 
IEEE Communications Magazine, March 2011, pp. 121-127. 
[4] V. 
Jacobson 
et 
al., 
“Networking 
Named 
Content,” 
CoNEXT ’09, New York, NY, 2009, pp. 1–12. 
[5] W. K. Chai, et. al., “CURLING: Content-Ubiquitous 
Resolution and Delivery Infrastructure for Next-Generation 
Services”, IEEE Communications Magazine, March 2011, pp. 
112 - 120. 
[6] A. Ghodsi, S. Shenker, T. Koponen, A. Singla, B. Raghavan, 
and J. Wilcox, “Information-centric networking: seeing the 
forest for the trees”, In Proc. HotNets, 2011, pp. 1:1-1:6. 
[7] T. Anderson, L. Peterson, S. Shenker, and J. Turner,, 
“Overcoming the Internet Impasse through Virtualization”, 
Computer, vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 34–41, Apr. 2005. 
[8] 4WARD, “A clean-slate approach for Future Internet”, 
http://www.4ward-project.eu/. 
[9] N. 
M. 
Chowdhury 
and 
Raouf 
Boutaba, 
“Network 
Virtualization: State of the Art and Research Challenges”, 
IEEE Communications Magazine, July 2009, pp. 20-26. 
[10] FP7 ICT project, “MediA Ecosystem Deployment Through 
Ubiquitous 
Content-Aware 
Network 
Environments”, 
ALICANTE, No. 248652, http://www.ict-alicante.eu, Sept. 
2013. 
[11] ALICANTE, Public Deliverable D2.1, “Overall System and 
Components Definition and Specifications”, http://www.ict-
alicante.eu, Sept. 2011. 
[12] ALICANTE, 
Public 
Deliverable 
D8.3: 
“Trials 
and 
Validation”, http://www.ict-alicante.eu, Sept. 2013. 
[13] E. Borcoci, S. Obreja, et. al., “Resource Management in 
Multi-Domain Content-Aware Networks for Multimedia 
Applications , International Journal on Advances in Networks 
and Services”, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, pp. 43-57. 
[14] M. Boucadair, et al., “A Framework for End-to-End Service 
Differentiation: Network Planes and Parallel Internets”, IEEE 
Communications Magazine, Sept. 2007, pp. 134-143. 
[15] P. Levis, M. Boucadair, P. Morrand, and P. Trimitzios, “The 
Meta-QoS-Class Concept: a Step Towards Global QoS 
Interdomain Services”, Proc. of IEEE SoftCOM, Oct. 2004. 
[16] M. P. Howarth, et al., “Provisioning for Interdomain Quality 
of Service: the MESCAL Approach”, IEEE Communications 
Magazine, June 2005, pp. 129-137. 
[17] R. Miruta and E. Borcoci, "Optimization of Overlay QoS 
Constrained Routing and Mapping Algorithm for Virtual 
Content Aware networks" ICNS 2013 - Lisbon, Portugal. 
http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=
icns_2013_4_30_10174, March, 2013. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-349-0
INTERNET 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Evolving Internet

