Wireless Sensor Network for Monitoring Water Factory 
 
 
Seung-Jun Lee *, Young Jin Kwon †, and Do Hyun Kim  
Electronics and Telecommunication Research Institute, Daejeon, Korea; 
 E-Mail: lsj0209@etri.re.kr; youngjin.kwon@etri.re.kr; dohyun@etri.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract— Wireless sensor network (WSN) is widely applied in 
industrial field for monitoring conditions of machines or 
number of products. This paper presents the WSN system for 
monitoring product line of water factory. We designed and 
demonstrated the sensor nodes with photo sensor, and other 
instrumentation device with a serial interface. Sensor nodes 
and gateway are communicated with wireless signal in 2.4 GHz 
ISM band according to the schedule of sending time. As the 
results show that, maximum packet error rate is measured 
approximately 5 %.  To reduce the risk of data loss due to 
electromagnetic interferences from machines, sensor node 
periodically sent the packet data in 200 msec intervals, also 
sending data implies the accumulation value of measurements. 
Keywords-Wireless sensor network;Sensor node;Monitoring 
system. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Accurate information of factory operation state has been 
one of the main issues in industrial field. Due to machine 
deterioration or unknown environmental changes in factory, 
defective products are produced at several points of 
production line. Therefore, number of end products are 
different even if same amount of materials are injected. To 
monitor and manage the amount of materials and products, 
manufacturing standards, such as Industry 4.0 has been 
developed [1].  However, those standards define design 
principles of machine, it is not able to upgrade machines that 
have been worked in the factory. Additional installation of 
monitoring system is one of the methods for measuring real-
time state of product line in factory. This system consists of 
several sensors and a main computer to collect sensor data. 
Real-time monitoring information of several points of 
product line is able to improve factory management and 
quality of products. 
In this paper, we designed and demonstrated WSN for 
monitoring products manufactured each process of water 
factory. WSN has advantages of cost and installation due to 
the reduction of wiring construction [2][3]. Our proposed 
system 
performed 
real-time 
monitoring 
and 
data 
management. Fig. 1 shows the process of water factory. 
Product line is composed of three steps: bottle manufacture, 
water filling and release.  Bottle manufacture is the process 
that manufactures the polyethylene terephthalate (PET) 
bottle from PET resin. Next, bottle is filled with water and 
labeled. Finally, bottles are shrink-wrapping and they are 
released by the form of pallet. The role of wireless sensor 
node is that measures the weight of PET resin, PET preforms, 
bottles and pallet of bottles.  
This paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we 
describes the components of WSN system. In Section 3, we 
presents actual system installed in factory and results of 
demonstration. Finally, we conclude the proposed system in 
Section 4.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Schematics of manufacturing process in water factory. 
II. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
WSN system includes sensor nodes, gateways and server. 
Fig. 2 shows the designed sensor node and gateway of the 
system. Sensor node consists of two microcontroller (MCU) 
MSP430F5438 manufactured by Texas Instruments (TI) for 
stable operation. One MCU manages sent and received 
packets and controls a wireless transceiver module. In this 
system, 2.4 GHz ISM band is used for wireless 
communication. Wireless transceiver module is selected 
CC2520 and CC2590 range extender manufactured by TI to 
improve the link quality. Another MCU manages sensors or 
external components, which include serial interfaces, such as 
RS-232 or universal asynchronous receiver/transmitter 
(UART). Sensor node periodically generates packet data, 
then sensor node send the data to gateway. Gateway controls 
the operation of sensor nodes and gather measurement data 
from 
sensor 
nodes. 
Gateway 
consists 
of 
wireless 
communication module and Ethernet port for communicate 
with sensor nodes and server, respectively. Measurement 
data sent from sensor node finally reaches to server passing 
through the gateway. 
Sensor nodes and gateway are wireless communicate 
based on time division multiple access (TDMA) method. 
TDMA has an advantage of periodically data transmission 
without carrier sensing. Sensor node operates according to 
the time schedule of superframe and send packet to gateway 
in assigned time slot. To prevent the risk of packet loss due 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-516-6
INTERNET 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Evolving Internet

to wireless environment of factory, sensor node tries to 
resend the packet at its time slot when no acknowledgment 
packet sent from gateway is received within a certain period 
of time. Also, packet included the accumulated values of 
measurement data and send every cycle while measurement 
data is not changed.  
 
 
Figure 2.  HW designs and installation locations of (a) sensor node and (b) 
gateway. 
III. 
EVALUATION 
The demonstration was implemented in a working water 
factory. In this demonstration, sensor node counted several 
number of targets that were produced in product line. Targets 
and methods of counting each target are described below. 
 
The amount of PET resin is measured using the 
crane scale tool supported  the RS-232 interface 
 
Bottle Preforms are counted using photo sensor. 
 
Bottles filled with water are counted using photo 
sensor. 
 
Pallets of bottles are counted using photo sensor 
Each sensor node continuously measured the targets and 
periodically sent measurement data to gateway. Sensor node 
and gateway were installed shown in Fig. 3. A total number 
of four gateways were installed in product line and distance 
between gateway and sensor node was under 50 m.  
Packet sent from sensor nodes were displayed shown in 
Fig. 4. Packet contains measurement data and time tick. As 
the results of demonstration, maximum packet error rates 
between sensor nodes and gateway was approximately 5 %. 
However, sensor node sent packet every 200 msec, 
undelivered data possibly sent to gateway next period or 
within 1 sec.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
We designed wireless sensor nodes with several sensors 
and gateway and implemented in water factory for 
improving factory management. Sensor nodes operate the 
sensors to measure amount of PET resin, number of bottle 
preforms, bottles and pallets of bottles. Demonstration result 
shows that collected data sent from sensor nodes is 
successfully sent to server passing through the gateway.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Targets for monitoring by sensor nodes; (a) PET resin, (b) bottle 
preforms, (c) bottles and (d) pallets of bottles. 
 
Figure 4.  Log data sent from sensor nodes. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research funded by the Industrial Strategic 
Technology Development Program of MOTIE [10054535, 
Real-time process data based on quality, advanced core 
technology development]. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] F. Shrouf, J. Ordieres, and G. Miragliotta, “Smart factories in 
Industry 4.0: A review of the concept and of energy 
management approached in production based on the Internet 
of Things paradigm,” IEEE International Conference on 
Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management, pp.697-
701, 2014. 
[2] J. 
Valverde 
et 
al., 
“Wireless 
Sensor 
Network 
for 
Environmental Monitoring: Application in a Coffee Factory,” 
International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, Article 
ID 638067, pp.1-18, 2012. 
[3] V. C. Gungor and G. P. Hancke, "Industrial wireless sensor 
networks: Challenges, design principles, and technical 
approaches," IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, 
pp.4258-4265, 2009.     
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-516-6
INTERNET 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Evolving Internet

