A New Approach in System Integration in Smart Grids 
 
J.I. Guerrero, Enrique Personal, and Carlos León 
Department of Electronic Technology  
University of Seville 
Seville, Spain 
e-mail: juaguealo@us.es, epersonal@us.es, cleon@us.es 
 
 
Abstract—The emergent technologies related to Smart Grids 
provide new scenarios with new challenges. Specifically, the 
deployment of Smart Grid management infrastructures 
involves very hard scheduling, very high economic investment, 
and a lot of resources. Moreover, the traditional systems are 
based on proprietary architectures, which make more difficult 
the deployment process. The solution proposed in this paper 
makes easier the integration process of modern and old 
systems, in two levels, at level of metadata and data with the 
Heterogeneous Data Source Integration System, and at level of 
web services with the Web Service Integration System. Both 
systems are based on advanced analytics techniques, like Web 
Service Mining, Process Mining, Metadata Mining, Decision 
Support Systems, etc. Additionally, this paper establishes a test 
environment for the simulation of the deployment projects, 
called Simulation Engine. The proposed solution performed a 
successful integration and increased the efficiency of 
infrastructure in more than 30%, increasing in each iteration. 
Keywords- heterogeneous data source integration; web 
service mining; metadata mining; data mining. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The emergent technologies related to Smart Grid (SG) 
are providing a new scope of functionalities and possibilities 
for management the power grid and increasing the available 
services for clients and companies. Moreover, SGs are 
changing the current scenario of energy markets (due to: the 
renewable penetration, the electricity batteries, the electric 
vehicles, etc.), in which the companies manage the energy in 
different ways. Traditionally, the energy was an utility, but, 
in the SG scenario, energy has turned into goods, with which 
the companies commercialize it.  
Additionally, the SG ecosystem compounds a great 
quantity of systems with different standard functionalities. 
Some of these systems are only aggregators of data or 
services, to make them available for other systems. Other 
systems 
have 
specific 
functionalities, 
like: 
Energy 
Management System (EMS), Distributed Management 
System (DMS), Customer Information System (CIS), Meter 
Data Management System (MDMS), etc. Moreover, these 
systems 
could 
integrate 
or 
implement 
advanced 
functionalities at different levels of SG, for example: 
Building Management System (BMS), Vehicle to Grid 
Management 
System 
(V2GMS), 
Electrical 
Lighting 
Management System (ELMS), etc. Each of these systems has 
different needs, requires different information and services, 
and have different user roles (with different user interfaces). 
Although, there are several technologies that provide the 
possibility to integrate different systems: MultiSpeak, 
Enterprise Service Busses (ESBs), etc. and these systems are 
usually accepted by standards, the main problem of these 
technologies is: the success of integration process is based on 
the compliance of several restrictions or adaptations by 
different systems. Currently, the systems are developed to 
come to terms with restrictions of these technologies. 
However, the deployment of the new systems related to SGs, 
needs several intermediate steps, that compounds the 
integration of traditional systems with modern systems. This 
integration should be in service and data contexts.  
Additionally, several organizations are working on the 
description of Smart Grid Architecture Methodology 
(SGAM). Although several organizations have different 
models, it is possible to shape each other, providing an 
interpretation or comparison between them. For example, 
GridWise Architecture Council (GWAC) defines an 
interoperability stack; The Open Group’s Architecture 
Framework 
(TOGAF) 
provides 
the 
Architecture 
Development Method (ADM); the European Standardization 
Organizations (ESO) like the European Committee for 
Standardization 
(CEN), 
European 
Committee 
for 
Electrotechnical Standardization (CENELEC), and the 
European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) 
provides an SGAM aligned to M/490 reference architecture, 
etc. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) 
provides the equivalences between these different models. 
These methodologies provide a general vision of SG 
ecosystem, and it is strongly recommended to take into 
account in the integration process, in order to identify the 
different levels or layers. 
Thus, in the SG ecosystems may be different types of 
systems with different information. The development of new 
systems should consider the information from old systems, in 
order to take advantage from the combination of an old and 
new information. But this process is very complex, and 
requires long developments and deployments. In this sense, 
the present paper proposes an automatic system to integrate 
all information and services from different systems, making 
available their resources to other systems in SG ecosystem. 
In Section II, a bibliographic review is included. In 
Section III, a general architecture of proposed solution is 
described. In Section IV, the Heterogeneous Data Source 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-576-0
INTELLI 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt)

Integration System (HDSIS) is described. In Section V, the 
Web Service Integration System (WSIS) is proposed, with a 
description of all its modules. In Section VI, the 
experimental results are described. Finally, in Section VII, 
the conclusion section is included.  
II. 
BIBLIOGRAPHIC REVIEW 
In this case, there are two technologies related with the 
proposed paper, the integration of heterogeneous data 
sources and the integration of the system at the service level.  
In the HDSIS case, there are a lot of studies and 
researches related to heterogeneous data integration based 
on, for instance, XML [1], Lucene and XQuery [2]. In the 
same way, heterogeneous data integration has been applied 
on many areas, such as Livestock Products Traceability [3], 
safety production [4], management information systems [5], 
medical information [6], and web environments [7]. 
There are also examples of the application of data mining 
mixed with Heterogeneous Data Source Integration (HDSI). 
These types of solutions increase the capability of solution to 
adapt it to different and heterogeneous data sources. 
[8]proposes a framework of a self-Adaptive Heterogeneous 
Data Integration System (AHDIS), based on ontology, 
semantic similarity, web service and XML techniques, which 
can be regulated dynamically. [9] uses On-Line Analytical 
Processing (OLAP) and data mining to illustrate the 
advantages for the relational algebra of adding the metadata 
type attribute and the transpose operator.  
In the integration of the system at the service level case, 
there are several technologies based on the definition of 
different interfaces and standards, but the Web Service 
Mining (WSM) [10] is used in this paper. There are also 
several solutions based on process mining [11], pattern usage 
discovery [12], hypergraph-based matrix representation with 
a service set mining algorithm [13], constraint satisfaction 
[14], semantics-based methods [15], customer value analysis 
[16], frequent composite algorithm [17], Heterogeneous 
Feature Selection [18], etc.  
III. 
GENERAL ARCHITECTURE 
The proposed solution is based on the merging of two 
previously published solutions: 
 
A solution for HDSI [19]. This solution provides the 
integration from different relational database or data 
source, providing a new data model based on 
information standards, and providing models for the 
main parameters identified in data, according to the 
results of the application of metadata mining and a 
decision support system. 
 
A solution for integration of web services in SG 
ecosystem [20]. This solution based on WSM and 
Swarm Intelligence, provides a way to automatically 
integrate the Web Service (WS) interfaces from all 
authorized systems, creating and configuring new 
WSs based on the usage of previously existing WSs. 
Both solutions have been integrated, and some modules 
were updated to interconnect each other. Thus, the proposed 
solution, shown in Figure 1, provides a solution to integrate 
information and services, which offers the possibility to 
create new WSs or information based on the integration 
process. 
Although some of the proposed modules have been 
previously published, several of them have been updated in 
order to adapt the architecture, providing additional basic 
and advanced functionalities. The updates and new 
functionalities are described below. 
 
 
Figure 1.  General Architecture. 
IV. 
HETEROGENEOUS DATA SOURCE INTEGRATION 
SYSTEM 
The HDSIS has several modules, mainly described in 
[19]. This system is based on the usage of a Decision 
Support System (DSS) and a Query Engine (QE), which 
supports different processes of Metadata Mining, Data 
Mining, and Text Mining. 
QE is an extended library, which provides connection 
interfaces to different databases or data sources, allowing 
advanced SQL queries. Decision Support System (DSS) is 
implemented as a framework, which allows to manage rules, 
applying them to the different data sources. 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-576-0
INTELLI 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt)

Metadata Mining Engine (MDME) has several stages. In 
a first step, the metadata is extracted from each data source. 
In the second step, the Characterization Engine characterizes 
columns, tables, relationships and data sources, calculating 
several indicators or coefficients. The indicators or 
coefficients are used to classify the metadata, checking the 
coherence, the quality, and some other features of data and 
metadata. Finally, all the generated information is stored in 
order to integrate all metadata and data.   
The Dynamic ETL (Extract, Translate, and Load) Engine 
(DETLE) implements an ETL with extended functionalities. 
This module was enhanced since the publication of the other 
papers. Nevertheless, this module has been modified in order 
to create specific ETL based on the information from 
Analytic Engine of WSIS to create specific and theme-
oriented data warehouse, with star or snowflake structure. 
Initially, DETLE was a module which creates a new 
relational database based on information standard from 
International 
Electrotechnical 
Committee 
(IEC) 
or 
Distributed Management Task Force (DMTF) or, even, data 
warehouse with star or snowflake structure, according to the 
information from MDME. Specifically, in this new proposed 
solution, the DETLE has new functionalities that can 
generate a new ETL based on information from Analytic 
Engine (WSIS) and from WSs usage, or can create a new 
ETL according to a requested model for a specific parameter 
in any data source integrated in the system. This new 
functionality has increased the intercommunication with 
other modules, like Data and Text Mining Engine (DTME). 
The DTME has increased their functionalities, too. 
Currently, this module implements an automatic modelling 
tool, which can model based on the information from 
MDME or based on information from WSIS. So, for 
example, a client can request by using a WS call a creation 
of a data warehouse for a specific parameter. When this call 
is fired the system retrieves all information related with this 
parameter (metadata and data) and tries to release the best 
data mining or/and text mining model, creating a data 
warehouse to feed it. The client can modify or update the 
model, or even, model again. 
The HDSIS has provided additional services for the 
WSIS, which are included in Web Service Hybrid 
Repository (WSHR). 
V. 
WEB SERVICE INTEGRATION SYSTEM 
The WSIS is based on WSM and Process Mining. The 
first version of this WSIS was previously published in [20]. 
However, there are new functionalities and some modules 
have been merged, and others have been updated with new 
functionalities. In this way, the Sniffer Module integrates 
functionalities related with monitoring and discovering of 
new WSs. Traditionally, this task was made by an Ant 
Colony Optimization (ACO) technique. Currently, this 
functionality is integrated in Hybrid Web Service Engine 
(HWSE) and Semantic Engine.  
The Analytic Engine analyzes the WS traffic based on 
WSM, in order to identify the sequences of WSs and their 
feasible relation to alarm or events in the ecosystem. Using 
the Web Service Factory (WSF), the Analytic Engine can 
create new WS with aggregated behavior of sequences of 
WS. Although the aggregation of WSs can be made by 
different ways, the proposed solution groups WS according 
to several features: the semantical interpretation of WS 
sequences, the number of invocation of the same WS 
sequence, and the feasible variations in a WS sequence. 
The Alarm and Event Monitoring Module provides 
information about the external events and alarms generated 
in low level systems. The low level systems usually work in 
real time, representing from Internet of Things (IoT) devices 
to Intelligent Electronic Devices (IEDs). 
A. The Web Service Hybrid Repository and the Semantic 
Engine. 
The WSHR implements a WS repository. Additionally, 
this module gathers all request or notification WSs in 
different systems.  
The Sniffer Module monitors the channel and performs 
the task of service discovering. 
The HWSE parses all WSs. This engine provided 
compatibility with different Service Oriented Architectures 
(SOA). HWSE is a bidirectional module. When is a request 
WS or a sniffed WS, and it has been generated by the 
external system, the WS message is gathered by the 
corresponding module (Sniffer module or WSHR) and 
analyzed by HWSE and, finally, by Semantic Engine, 
registering all information in the internal database. If the 
message is generated by WSIS the message makes the 
inverse route, it is constructed by Semantic Engine, 
translated to JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) or XML 
(eXtended Marked Language), and sent by the corresponding 
module. The details of both modules are shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Hybrid Web Service Engine and Semantic Engine details. 
The HWSE has different modules (Figure 2). Identifier 
module identifies the language of the message. According to 
this identification, the message is parsed by JSON or XML 
parser. Finally, the parsed message is enriched with 
additional information about statistics related to other 
messages or other systems. When this engine treats a 
message from the WSIS the modules make the inverse 
function. 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-576-0
INTELLI 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt)

The Semantic Engine has several modules (Figure 2), 
too. When the messages come from external systems, after 
they are treated by HWSE, they are sent to the Sequence 
Sketcher. This module establishes a relation in sequence call 
of different WS based on application of Process Mining 
techniques. Local Semantic is a module based on fuzzy 
logic, which extracts the semantic related to different parts of 
the message. After this step, General Semantic establishes 
the relation to other messages, and possible future messages. 
Th module is based on fuzzy and time series. Finally, in 
Statistical Module, several statistics and results from 
previous modules are registered in the WSIS database. 
When the message come from the internal systems, they 
are treated in a reverse way. At the end, the Sequence 
Sketcher sends the message to HWSE. Thus, all messages in 
the channel are registered by the WSIS. 
VI. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
The proposed solution was tested in a little cluster of 
computers, with different features and functionalities. 
Although, the proposed solution can work in distributed 
environments, in this case, the proposed solution was 
integrated in a unique computer.  
The cluster was implemented with four servers. The first 
server has an Intel i7 (3GHz), 16GB RAM and GTX750 
(2GB and 640 CUDA cores). The second server has an Intel 
Xeon E5 (2GHz), 64GB RAM and Quadro K1200 (4GB and 
512 CUDA cores). The third and fourth servers have the 
same configuration: i5 (2.7GHz) and 8 GB RAM. The two 
first servers are virtualized, and the rest of them are not 
virtualized, because they have low performance features. 
A. General Description of the Test Environment 
The proposed solution is integrated in a simulated 
ecosystem. In this way, several systems are simulated: 
 
EMS. This system simulates the generation of 
information related with the demand response and 
the energy flow management. The internal database 
follows the IEC standards implemented in a 
relational database for the Energy Management 
Systems. The demand response information is 
randomly generated limited to different intervals. 
Moreover, when the system detects that the random 
information is near to the end of proposed intervals 
generates alarms or events. This system has 
available several WS related to reporting activities, 
and several request/response WS that implements 
commands about consumption and generation. 
 
Commercial 
System. 
This 
system 
randomly 
generates information about consumption. This 
generation is based on the real consumption curves, 
from the residential and industrial consumers. The 
system generates random information for 3400 
residential and 50 industrial customers, although 
these parameters are configurable. The information 
is stored in a relational database with a non-standard 
structured, based on real database structure. This 
system 
integrates 
several 
WS 
of 
subscription/notification type, in order to notify the 
billing process, and request/response services to 
provide different information for reporting activities. 
 
Electric 
Vehicle 
Charging 
Infrastructure 
Management (EVCIM). This system implements 
several procedures to generate random information 
about consumption in different points of power grid. 
The original system is implemented with 6 charging 
stations, with a maximum power of 50 kW. The 
information is stored in a relational database without 
any information standard structure. There is not 
implemented any simulation system for routes and 
fleet management, only simulates the impact of 
information generated to manage the electric 
vehicles charging. 
 
DMS. This system stores information about the 
power grid infrastructure. The system simulates a 
segment of generic distribution grid. This segment is 
based on the IEEE 34 Node Test Feeder ([21]). The 
system stored all information based on International 
Electrotechnical 
Committee 
(IEC) 
Common 
Information Model (CIM), extended to allow the 
acquisition of information from the specific 
protection modules, which are randomly generated. 
The main services available in this system are 
requests/responses retrieving the information from 
the server and generating alarms and events. 
 
Photovoltaic 
Generation 
Management 
System 
(PVGMS). This system implements a simulated 
photovoltaic generation station, with 1.5 MWh. The 
data about generation is randomly generated, based 
on the model generated from real information of 
photovoltaic 
farm. 
This 
system 
has 
several 
responses/requests 
WS 
oriented 
to 
retrieve 
information from the server. Additionally, this 
system can receive different commands to manage 
the load on power grid. 
The interconnection of these systems are implemented 
based on an ESB. Two ESB have been tested: Mule and 
TIBCO. The proposed architecture is shown in Figure 3.  
B. Simulation Engine 
The Simulation Engine is the external system, which 
orchestrates the simulation. The Simulation Engine has 
programmed several simulation sequences related to: 
 
Normal operation. The request of different WS is 
related to the normal operation of power grid. In this 
sense, the DMS, EMS and Commercial System are 
the systems with a high number of request/response 
WS, 
although 
there 
are 
mainly 
a 
lot 
of 
subscription/notification WS. PVGMS and EVCIM 
receive commands and generate notifications about 
the generated information in each system. 
 
Fault in a specific feeder node. This case is 
characterized by a very high level of request WS 
without response, and additionally, the generation of 
several alarms and events from the simulated 
external systems. 
 
Billing period. In this case, the Commercial System 
increases its activity, with a lot of notification WSs. 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-576-0
INTELLI 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt)

SIMULATION ENGINE
Energy 
Management 
System (EMS)
Commercial 
System
Electric Vehicle 
Charging 
Infrastructure 
Management
Photovoltaic 
Generation 
Management 
System
Enterprise Service Bus (ESB) – TIBCO or Mule
Distribution 
Management 
System
HDSIS + WSIS
 
Figure 3.  Architecture of simulation infrastructure. 
 
Massive electric vehicle charging period. In this 
case, the Commercial System, the PVGMS and the 
EVCIM generate a lot of notification WSs, and EMS 
and DMS generate a lot of request WSs and 
commands. 
 
Mixed mode. In this case, a combination of two of 
the previously described cases are combined, 
generating alternative 
scenarios, 
which 
could 
provide variations in the detected WS sequences 
because of the interference of both cases. 
The Simulation Engine randomly runs each of these 
behavior patterns, until 100 patterns are performed. This 
parameter is configurable. The system converges to the best 
solution in each iteration, making variations of WS 
definition.  
Although, these sequences are programming according to 
standards in the Simulation Engine, the proposed solution 
has not any information about it. The proposed solution only 
gathers information from ESB. 
C. Simulation Results 
In the first stage of the system, the HDSIS makes the 
integration of all available metadata in different systems, 
providing 47 new WS, which provided access to the old and 
new information, generated by different models created by 
DTME. The data access is based on WS call that deals with 
metadata to address the data target. In this case, due to the 
lack of disk space, the integration was performed at metadata 
level. This is a configurable option in HDSIS. 
The Simulation Results show that after performing of 10 
patterns, the proposed solution has reduced the number of 
calls in 20.62%, and the response time in 17.6%. The 
proposed solution increased the efficiency in 32.09%. After 
the running the 10th pattern, the system can increase the 
efficiency with a low rate of variation between 0.2% and 
8.92% per each 10 performed patterns. After the 10th pattern, 
the WSHR has increased the available WS in 6 new WS, 
aggregated from existing WSs. 
After several iterations of simulation process, the 
increase of efficiency rate depends on the regularity of WS 
usage and the semantic coherence of response. It is very 
difficult to simulate all contingencies and scenarios of this 
type of ecosystems. However, the implementation of 
simulation infrastructure and the simulation processes 
performed for the project have provided several requirements 
and modules to establish a basic Simulation Engine for this 
type of system. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
The integration of different systems in a SG ecosystem is 
one of the most important topics in Smart City, one of the 
most important way to make a good integration is the 
standardization of different process related to SG. However, 
this process is still running and the current distribution 
system cannot afford them to discard the old system (with all 
information stored) and start with a new system and with 
new specifications. The distribution companies have to 
define hard deployment plans that allow the implementation 
and integration of the modern architectures with the 
traditional ones. 
The proposed solution is a novel approach to achieve this 
goal, making easier the deployment processes of old and new 
systems in a SG ecosystem. The new systems are integrated, 
providing new information and services, which could be 
available for other components or systems in the SG. This 
integration is performed at data level with an HDSIS and WS 
level with a WSIS, increasing the global efficiency than 
30%. 
Additionally, a Simulation Engine has been designed and 
tested, providing a test environment for this type of 
deployments, which, in the real case, requires a lot of 
hardware and software resources. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors are also appreciative of the backing of the 
SIIAM project (Reference Number: TEC2013-40767-R), 
which is funded by the Ministry of Economy and 
Competitiveness of Spain. 
 
 
 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-576-0
INTELLI 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt)

REFERENCES 
[1] X. Fengguang, H. Xie, and K. Liqun, “Research 
and 
implementation 
of 
heterogeneous 
data 
integration based on XML,” 9th International 
Conference 
on 
Electronic 
Measurement 
Instruments, 2009. ICEMI ’09, Beijing, 2009, pp. 
4-711-4-715. 
[2] L. Tianyuan, S. Meina, and Z. Xiaoqi, “Research 
of massive heterogeneous data integration based on 
Lucene and XQuery,” in 2010 IEEE 2nd 
Symposium on Web Society (SWS), Beijing, 2010, 
pp. 648-652. 
[3] X. d Chen and J. z Liu, “Research on 
Heterogeneous Data Integration in the Livestock 
Products Traceability System,” in International 
Conference on New Trends in Information and 
Service Science, 2009. NISS ’09, Beijing, 2009, 
pp. 969-972. 
[4] X. b Han, F. Tian, and F. b Wu, “Research on 
Heterogeneous Data Integration in the Safety 
Production and Management of Coal-Mining,” in 
2009 First International Workshop on Database 
Technology and Applications, Wuhan, Hubei, 
2009, pp. 87-90. 
[5] W. 
Hailing 
and 
H. 
Yujie, 
“Research 
on 
heterogeneous data integration of management 
information 
system,” 
in 
2012 
International 
Conference on Computational Problem-Solving 
(ICCP), Leshan, 2012, pp. 477-480. 
[6] Y. Shi, X. Liu, Y. Xu, and Z. Ji, “Semantic-based 
data integration model applied to heterogeneous 
medical information system,” in 2010 The 2nd 
International 
Conference 
on 
Computer 
and 
Automation 
Engineering 
(ICCAE), 
vol. 
2, 
Singapore, 2010, pp. 624-628. 
[7] H. Fan and H. Gui, “Study on Heterogeneous Data 
Integration Issues in Web Environments,” in 
International 
Conference 
on 
Wireless 
Communications, 
Networking 
and 
Mobile 
Computing, 2007. WiCom 2007, Shanghai, 2007, 
pp. 3755-3758. 
[8] Y. Cao, Y. Chen, and B. Jiang, “A Study on Self-
adaptive Heterogeneous Data Integration Systems,” 
in Research and Practical Issues of Enterprise 
Information Systems II, L. D. Xu, A. M. Tjoa, and 
S. S. Chaudhry, Eds. Springer US, 2007, pp. 65–
74. 
[9] T. H. Merrett, “Attribute Metadata for Relational 
OLAP 
and 
Data 
Mining,” 
in 
Database 
Programming Languages, G. Ghelli and G. Grahne, 
Eds. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2001, pp. 97–118. 
[10] G. Zheng and A. Bouguettaya, Web Service 
Mining: Application to Discoveries of Biological 
Pathways. 
Boston, 
MA: 
Springer 
Science+Business Media, LLC, 2010. p. 152. 
[11] W. v d Aalst, “Service Mining: Using Process 
Mining to Discover, Check, and Improve Service 
Behavior,” IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput., vol. 6, no. 
4, pp. 525–535, pp. 525–535, Oct. 2013. 
[12] Q. A. Liang, J. y Chung, S. Miller, and Y. Ouyang, 
“Service Pattern Discovery of Web Service Mining 
in Web Service Registry-Repository,” in 2006 
IEEE International Conference on e-Business 
Engineering (ICEBE’06), Shanghai, 2006, pp. 286-
293. 
[13] A. Zhao, X. Wang, K. Ren, and Y. Qiu, “Semantic 
Message Link Based Service Set Mining for 
Service Composition,” in Fifth International 
Conference on Semantics, Knowledge and Grid, 
2009. SKG 2009, Zhuhai, 2009, pp. 338-341. 
[14] Q. A. Liang, S. Miller, and J. Y. Chung, “Service 
mining for Web service composition,” in IRI -2005 
IEEE International Conference on Information 
Reuse and Integration, Conf. 2005, 2005, pp. 470-
475. 
[15] H. Luo, L. Liu, and Y. Sun, “Semantics-Based 
Service Mining Method in Wireless Sensor 
Networks,” 
in 
2011 
Seventh 
International 
Conference on Mobile Ad-hoc and Sensor 
Networks (MSN), Beijing, 2011, pp. 115-121. 
[16] W. Hu and Y. Hui, “Service-mining Based on 
Customer Value Analysis,” in 2007 International 
Conference 
on 
Management 
Science 
and 
Engineering, Harbin, 2007, pp. 109-114. 
[17] H. Meng, L. Wu, T. Zhang, G. Chen, and D. Li, 
“Mining Frequent Composite Service Patterns,” in 
2008 Seventh International Conference on Grid 
and Cooperative Computing, Shenzhen, 2008, pp. 
713-718. 
[18] L. Chen, Q. Yu, P. S. Yu, and J. Wu, “WS-HFS: A 
Heterogeneous Feature Selection Framework for 
Web Services Mining,” in 2015 IEEE International 
Conference on Web Services (ICWS), New York, 
NY, 2015, pp. 193-200.  
[19] J. I. Guerrero, A. García, E. Personal, J. Luque, and 
C. León, “Heterogeneous data source integration 
for smart grid ecosystems based on metadata 
mining,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 79, pp. 254–268, 
pp. 254–268, Aug. 2017. 
[20] J. I. Guerrero, E. Personal, A. Parejo, A. García, 
and C. León, “Forecasting the Needs of Users and 
Systems - A New Approach to Web Service 
Mining,” in The Fifth International Conference on 
Intelligent Systems and Applications, Barcelona, 
Spain, 2016, pp. 95-99. 
[21] W. H. Kersting, “Radial distribution test feeders,” 
in 2001 IEEE Power Engineering Society Winter 
Meeting. 
Conference 
Proceedings 
(Cat. 
No.01CH37194), vol. 6, no. 3, 1991, pp. 975-985. 
 
 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-576-0
INTELLI 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt)

