On Orchestration Interactions for Preparation of Slice Creation in Multi-domain 
5G Networking Environment  
 
Eugen Borcoci, Serban Georgica Obreja 
University POLITEHNICA of Bucharest  
Bucharest, Romania 
eugen.borcoci@elcom.pub.ro, serban@radio.pub.ro 
 
 
Abstract— Network slicing is a major concept in 5G 
networking technology, offering multi-tenant, multi-domain, 
multi-operator and end-to-end (E2E) capabilities.  5G slicing 
allows tenants to share resources while customizing their own 
services via slice isolation. Integrated management and control 
based on ETSI Management and Orchestration (MANO) is 
applied, but enriched, in order to cope with multi-domain 
slicing. Several architectures have been proposed in the 
literature, with different views on the complex orchestration 
functions. This paper is oriented to some open architectural 
issues. It presents a short analysis of the orchestration 
interactions, focusing to some aspects of initial slice design and 
preparation, 
in 
a 
multi-domain 
and 
multi-operator 
environment. A specific paper contribution is on inter-domain 
topology discovery and collection of information by a multi-
domain capable slice orchestrator, especially on specifying the 
design and preparation phase of a slice construction. 
Keywords-5G 
slicing; 
Multi-domain; 
Multi-tenant; 
Management and orchestration;  Software Defined Networking; 
Network Function Virtualization 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The emergent 5G mobile network technologies aim to 
answer the increasing demand and challenges addressed to 
communication systems and Internet [1]. 5G can support 
dedicated use-cases and provide specific types of services to 
satisfy simultaneously various customer/tenant demands in a 
multi-tenant fashion [2]-[4].  
The 5G network slicing concept (based on virtualization 
and softwarization) enables programmability and modularity 
for network resources provisioning, adapted to different 
vertical service requirements (in terms of bandwidth, latency, 
etc.) [2]-[9]. A Network Slice (NSL) is a managed logical 
group of subsets of resources, Physical/Virtual network 
functions (PNFs/VNFs) in the architectural Data Plane 
(DPl), Control Plane (CPl) and Management Plane (MPl). 
The slice is programmable and has the ability to expose its 
capabilities to the users.   
The NSL behavior is realized via Network Slice 
Instance(s) (NSLI), which are created (based on NSL 
templates) at request of a tenant or at Slice Provider initiative 
(the word “tenant” defines a user or group of users with 
specific access rights and privileges over a shared set of 
resources). A blueprint/template is a logical representation of 
network 
function(s) 
and 
the 
associated 
resource 
requirements. It describes the structure, configuration and 
work flows for instantiating and controlling an NSLI; it 
includes certain network characteristics (e.g., bandwidth, 
latency, reliability) and refers to the required physical and 
logical resources, and the sub-networks. An NSLI may be 
dedicated or shared across multiple Service Instances.  
The verticals may use a common infrastructure, with   
appropriate levels of isolation and Quality of Services (QoS)   
provisioning. The slicing allows 5G to create an eco-system, 
multi-tenant, multi-domain, multi-operator and end-to-end 
(E2E) - capable. 
Software Defined Networks (SDN) and Network 
Function Virtualization (NFV) technologies, combined with 
cloud/edge computing are used in 5G slicing architectures 
and implementations [10]-[13].  
In a multi-domain, multi-tenant, multi-operator, and E2E 
context, the slice construction includes a design and 
preparation 
phase. 
This 
phase 
requires 
a 
lot 
of 
orchestration/inter-domain interactions in order to construct 
the network services (NS) and NSL catalogues to be used 
later for actual slice creation in the subsequent phases. 
Information on available resources (network, compute, 
storage) in several domains should be collected by an 
orchestration entity charged with the task of creation of a 
multi-domain slice. 
The specific contribution of this paper is to propose a 
mechanism for multi-domain interconnection topology 
information collection, by the highest-level orchestration 
entity. The mechanism is essentially usable in the design and 
preparation phase of an NSLI. This work is still preliminary, 
limited for the time being, to architectural and high level 
interactions solutions. 
The structure of the paper is described here. Section II 
recalls some major features of the 5G management and 
orchestration framework. Section III provides few relevant 
examples of related architectural work on orchestration. 
Then, based on a generic relevant architecture, Section IV 
details the design and preparation phase interactions, 
providing inputs to the Section V. The latter is  focused on 
collection of topological information in a multi-domain 
context. Section VI presents conclusions and a future work 
outline. 
II. 
NETWORK SLICE MANAGEMENT AND 
ORCHESTRATION 
The objective of this section is to shortly introduce the 
slice management and orchestration framework, in order to 
help the identification of the work area for Section V  
The 5G networks need efficient services and resource 
orchestration and programmable management systems. It is 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-721-4
INTERNET 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Evolving Internet

necessary to model the E2E services and to abstract and 
automate the control of physical and virtual resources. 
Orchestration extends the traditional management: it consists 
in a coordinated set of activities to automatically select and 
control multiple resources, services and systems, aiming to 
meet certain objectives (e.g., serve a tenant requesting a 
specific network service) [14].  
At 
services 
level, 
the 
term 
Network 
Service 
Orchestration (NSO) can be defined, [15]-[17], as an 
automated management and control (M&C) process for 
services deployment and operations, performed mainly by 
telecommunication operators and service providers. The 
NSO involves different types of resources and potentially 
multiple providers; it can decouple the high-level service 
layer from the underlying management and resources layers 
(e.g., 
NFV 
functional 
components 
like 
Virtualized 
Infrastructure Manager (VIM), Element Management 
Systems (EMS), SDN controllers, etc.). The NSO defines the 
interaction with (chains of) network functions (NFs) of the 
underlying technologies and infrastructures through adequate 
abstractions. 
In 
a 
multi-domain 
(technological 
or 
administrative) context, the NSO should have an overall 
high-level view of all domains, including topology 
information, in order to be able to orchestrate E2E slices and 
associated services, independently of geographical location. 
The NSO cooperates with NFV MANO functional blocks. 
The orchestration activities can appear at several 
architectural levels (e.g., slice, resources and NFV MANO -
levels). An orchestration entity interacts, vertically and 
horizontally, with other M&C entities in the same or peer 
domains. Currently, there is not yet a standard for 
information 
exchange 
process 
in 
multi-domain 
technological/administrative environments. There are many 
multi-domain 
orchestration 
architecture 
variants 
and 
candidates, proposed (see [2]-[6] for examples). This paper is 
working in the information exchange area. 
The life-cycle management (LCM) of an NSLI comprises 
several phases performed by the Slice Provider: (1) 
instantiation, configuration, and activation, (2) run-time and 
(3) decommissioning [6].  The phase (1) is split into the 
instantiation/ 
configuration 
sub-phase 
(the 
necessary 
shared/dedicated resources, including NFs, are configured 
and instantiated, but not yet used) and the activation sub-
phase (the NSLI becomes active for handling network 
traffic). The run-time phase focuses on data traffic transport, 
reporting the network service performance and possible 
NSLI re-configurations or scaling, if dynamic conditions 
impose that. The phase (3) includes the deactivation and 
termination of the NSLI and release of the allocated 
resources. 
The LCM is preceded by a design and preparation phase 
(0) for the future instantiation and support of an NSLI. The 
functional architecture, steps and interactions within this 
preliminary phase are still open research issues. The paper is 
focused on design and preparation phase, treated in Section 
V. 
III. 
EXAMPLES  OF RELEVANT ARCHITECTURES 
This section presents few examples of relevant 5G slicing 
architectures in order to emphasize the orchestration entities 
roles. 
A. ETSI slicing architecture (high level) 
 
 
Figure 1.  Network slice management in an NFV framework (ETSI GR 
NFV-EVE 012 V3.1.1, [6]) 
NFV -Network Function Virtualization; EM - Element Manager; 
MANO - Management and Orchestration (NFVO – NFV Orchestration; 
VNFM – VNF  Manager; VIM Virtual Infrastructure Manager); VNF/PNF –
Virtual/Physical Network Function; NFVI -NFV Infrastructure; NS-
Network Service; OSS-Operations Support System. 
 
Figure 1 shows the ETSI NFV architecture [10], to which 
several new functional blocks are added in order to support 
the network slicing (ETSI-NFV EVE 012 [6]). 
The 3GPP TR 28.801 document [7] identifies three new 
management 
functions: 
Communication 
Service 
Management 
Function 
(CSMF) – it 
translates 
the 
communication service requirements to NSL requirements; 
Network Slice Management Function (NSMF) - responsible 
for the management (including lifecycle) of NSLIs (it derives 
network slice subnet requirements from the network slice 
related requirements); orchestration system. 
Network Slice Subnet Management Function (NSSMF) - 
responsible for the management (including lifecycle) of 
Network Slice Subnet Instances (NSSIs). The Os-Ma-NFVO 
Reference Point (RP) is the interface with ETSI NFV-
MANO. To interface properly with NFV-MANO, the NSMF 
and/or NSSMF need to determine the type of NS or set of 
NSs, VNF and PNF that can support the resource 
requirements for a NSLI or NSSI, and whether new instances 
of these NSs, VNFs, and the connectivity to the PNFs, need 
to be created, or existing instances can be re-used. 
B. 5GPPP slicing architecture 
The 5GPPP Working Group proposes in [1] a slicing 
architecture having four planes: Service, Management and 
Orchestration, Control and Data plane. The Service plane 
comprises the Business Support Systems (BSSs) and 
business-level Policy and Decision functions, as well as 
applications and services operated by the tenant. Note that 
this plane includes an end-to-end orchestration system. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-721-4
INTERNET 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Evolving Internet

The Management and Orchestration plane includes 
several functional blocks: Service Management, Software-
Defined Mobile Network Orchestrator (SDMO), and NFV 
managers like VIM and VNFM.   
The SDMO is composed of a domain specific application 
management, an Inter-slice Resource Broker, and NFV-
NFVO. The SDMO performs the E2E management of 
network services; it can set up slices by using the network 
slice templates and merge them properly at the described 
multiplexing point. The Service Management intermediates 
between the service layer and the Inter-slice Broker; it 
transforms 
consumer-facing 
service 
descriptions 
into 
resource-facing service descriptions and vice versa. The 
Inter-slice Broker handles cross-slice resource allocation. 
The domain-specific application management functions 
could be, e.g., for 3GPP: Element Managers (EM) and 
Network Management (NM) functions, including Network 
(Sub-) Slice Management Function.   
The Control plane includes two types of SDN –type 
controllers: Software-Defined Mobile Network Coordinator 
(SDM-X) and Software-Defined Mobile Network Controller 
(SDM-C), as well as other control applications. The SDM-C 
and SDM-X take care of dedicated and shared NFs 
respectively. Following the SDN principles, they translate 
decisions of the control applications into commands to VNFs 
and PNFs. Note that SDM-X and SDM-C, as well as other 
control applications, can be implemented as VNFs or PNFs.  
The Data plane comprises the VNFs and PNFs needed to 
carry and process the user data traffic.  
The architecture also includes a Multi-Domain Network 
Operating System containing different adaptors and network 
abstractions above the networks and clouds heterogeneous 
fabrics. It is responsible for allocation of (virtual) network 
resources and maintains network state to ensure network 
reliability in a multi domain environment. 
C. ETSI Multi-domain Multi-tenant slicing architecture – 
example 1 
Figure 2 shows (adapted from ETSI GR NFV-EVE 012 
[6] and J.Ordonez-Lucena et. al. [3][18]) a multi-domain 
slicing architecture, viewed at run-time phase. A given slice 
instance can span several Infrastructure Providers (InP) 
and/or administrative domains.  
 
 
 
NSL Instance 1 
Tenant SDN 
controller 
 
 
NSL Orchestrator 
 
Catalogs 
NS, VNF 
VNF 
chain,  
config 
NSL 
 Tenant 
1 
domain 
VNF LCM 
NS Provider 
 Domain 
NSL Instance n 
VNF 
VNF 
VNF 
Resource Orchestrator 
 
NSL 
 Tenant 
 n 
domain 
NSL Manager 
NS Orchestrator 
 
InP 2 Domain 
WAN 1 
VNFM 
VIM 
InP 1 Domain 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PoP 1 
VNF 
VNF 
VNF 
VM 
Virtualisation 
layer 
IC 
HW Resources 
WAN IC 
WIM 
VIM 
InP 3 Domain 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PoP 3 
VNF 
VNF 
VNF 
VM 
Virtualisation 
layer 
IC 
HW Resources 
VNFs running 
on orange VMs 
Instantiated 
for each slice 
instance  
 
Figure 2.  Run-time image of a multi-domain slicing architecture - example 1 (adapted from ETSI GR NFV-EVE 012 [6]  and Ordonez-Lucena [3][18]) 
NS – Network Service; NSL - Network Slice; VNF – Virtualized Network Function; VNFM – VNF Manager; SDN Software Defined Networking; LCM –Life 
Cycle Management; VIM – Virtual Infrastructure Manager; WIM – WAN Infrastructure Manager; IC- Infrastructure SDN controller; HW- Hardware; WAN – 
Wide Area Network 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-721-4
INTERNET 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Evolving Internet

The architecture is still high–level depicted, e.g., the NSL 
orchestrator and Resource Orchestrator are multi-domain 
capable, but not detailed. Note also that (for simplicity sake), 
this architectural picture focuses on the transport and core 
network domains, omitting the RAN (Radio Access 
Network) domain.  
The NSL provider can simultaneously operate multiple 
NSLIs, which run on top of a common infrastructure, 
spanning across multiple administrative domains and each 
belonging to a different infrastructure provider. The NSL 
provider, taking the role of an infrastructure tenant, rents the 
infrastructure resources owned by the underlying InPs and 
uses them to provision the NSLIs.  
The NSL provider has a Resource Orchestration (RO) 
functional block. The (RO) uses the finite set of resources 
that are at its disposal (the resources are supplied by the 
underlying VIMs/WIMs) and dispatches them to the NSLIs 
in an optimal way. All the NSLIs receive the resources 
needed to satisfy their (potentially different) requirements, 
while preserving their performance isolation. Note that RO 
should have information on resource availability in each 
domain, and this supposes a set of inter-domain interactions. 
The work [18] does not specify the implementation of the 
RO (distributed or centralized). 
Each NSLI has its own management plane, (to assure 
isolation across NSLIs), consisting of four functional blocks: 
NSL Manager, NS Orchestrator (NSO), Tenant SDN 
Controller, and VNF Manager (VNFM). The VNFM(s) and 
the NSO perform the required life cycle operations (e.g., 
instantiation, scaling, termination, etc.) over the instances of 
the VNFs and NS(s), respectively. Interactions between these 
functional blocks and the RO are necessary.  
The NSL Manager coordinates the operations and 
management data from Tenant SDN Controller and the NS 
Orchestrator, performing the fault, configuration, accounting, 
performance, and security management within the NSLI. 
Each tenant consumes its NSLI and operates it at its 
convenience (within the limits agreed with the NSL 
provider)  through the NSL Manager.  
The NSL Orchestrator (NSLO) is the highest layer of the 
architecture, having a key role in the creation phase and in 
the run-time phase. In the creation phase, NSLO receives the 
order to deploy an NSL instance for a tenant (or the Slice 
Provider decides to construct a slice). The NSLO has enough 
information (including on multi-domain) as to check the 
order feasibility and, if feasible, then triggers the 
instantiation of the NSL. To accomplish this, it interacts with 
RO, and accesses the VNF and NS Catalogues. These 
catalogues contain VNF and NS descriptors, exposing the 
capabilities of all the VNFs and services that an NSL 
provider can select for the NSLs.  
At run-time, the NSLO performs policy-based inter-slice 
operations, e.g., it analyses the performance and fault 
management data, received from the operative NSL 
instances, to manage their Service Level Agreements 
(SLAs). In case of SLA violations, the NSLO decides which 
NSL instances need to be modified, and sends corrective 
management actions (e.g., scaling, healing, etc.) to their NSL 
Managers. 
D. Multi-domain Multi-tenant Architecture -example 2 
Creation of slices across a federated environment is a 
complex task, in terms of slice decomposition (per-domain), 
both in the construction phase and (to assure the performance 
maintenance) in running phase. T.Taleb, I.Afolabi et.al., 
recently proposed in [17] a hierarchical multi-domain 
orchestration architecture (see adapted Figure 3). They 
introduced a Multi-domain Service Conductor (MSC) 
stratum, to perform service management across federated 
domains. The MSC analyses and maps the service 
requirements of incoming slice requests onto appropriate 
administrative domains and maintains the desired service 
performance during service lifecycle. Below MSC, a Cross-
domain Slice Coordinator is defined for each slice, which 
aligns cloud and networking resources across federated 
domains and carries out the (LCM) operations of a multi-
domain slice. It also establishes and controls inter-domain 
transport 
layer 
connectivity, 
assuring 
the 
desired 
performance. 
In [17], a multi-domain NSLI can combine several Fully-
Fledged NSIs that belong to distinct administrative domains, 
to get an E2E multi-domain (i.e., federated) NSLI. The 
constituent Fully-Fledged NSIs, instantiated in different 
administrative domains, can be called NSSI of the multi-
domain NSLI. 
When a slice request is received from a 3rd party, a 
sequence of actions will be performed [17]: 1) mapping of 
the service requirements onto capability requirements; 2) 
translating the capability requirements into: a. NSLI resource 
requirements (compute, storage, networking); b. NSLI 
topology and connectivity type, policy, isolation and security 
requirements; 3) identifying the infrastructure-domains with 
the required resources, able to assure the E2E NSLI 
functional and operational requirements; 4) instantiating 
NSSIs in each infrastructure domain and then “stitching” 
them to create the federated NSLI; 5) run-time coordination 
management operations across different domains for 
maintaining the E2E NSLI service integrity. 
The architecture introduces (at top level) a novel plane - 
Service Broker (SB) to handle incoming slice requests from 
verticals, Mobile Virtual Network Operators (MVNO), and 
application providers. 
The main SB operation are: NS admission control and 
negotiation, considering service aspects; management of 
slice user/owner relationship enabling a direct tenant 
interface with the MSC plane; billing and charging; NSLI 
scheduling, i.e., start and termination time related with slice 
composition and decommission.  
The SB collects abstracted service capability information 
regarding different administrative domains, creating a global 
service support repository. The SB interacts with the 
Operating/Business Support System (OSS/BSS) in order to 
collect business, policy, and administrative information, 
when handling slice requests. Each domain will have a 
dedicated Orchestration plane, involving the NFV style 
architecture for the management and control. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-721-4
INTERNET 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Evolving Internet

 
Service Conductor 
 
Service 
Repository 
End 
Users 
Multi-domain Service Conductor Plane 
Unified Connectivity 
Resource Manager 
 
 Tenants 
(verticals, MVNO, APP providers 
Unified Cloud  
Mediator 
 
OSS/BSS 
Cross-domain Slice Coordinator 
Cross-domain Slice Coordinator 
Cross-domain Slice Coordinator 
Slice A 
Slice B 
Slice C 
Logical Multi-domain Network Slices 
Multi-domain Network Slice Functions 
Control Plane  
VNFs 
Data Plane  
VNFs 
Virtualisation layer 
Physical Resources: 
Network, Compute, Storage 
 
NFVI 
Virtual Resources: 
Network, Compute,Storage, 
VNF-domain  
 
 
D1 
D2 
D3 
Service Management 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PoP 3 
Slice Life-Cycle Management 
Full-fledged Net Slice Orchestration Plane 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PoP 3 
Sub-domain NFV MANO 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PoP 3 
VNF 
VNF 
VIM/WIM 
NFVO 
VNFM (s) 
Domain 
specific VNF 
Catalogue 
Service Broker 
 
  
 
Sub-domain  
Connectivity 
control 
SDN 
Controller 
Multiple Admin Domains 
One per 
slice 
One per 
domain 
 
Figure 3.  Multi-domain Multi-tenant slicing architecture example 2 (adapted from [17]) 
 
IV. 
NETWORK SLICING DESIGN AND PREPARATION 
The design and preparation activities are very important 
in slicing technology. Among others, catalogues of available 
services and resources must be constructed in advance to 
slice instantiation, usable by the tenants in order to select a 
slice model fitted to their needs. 
The general steps performed by the management and 
orchestration (i.e., higher layers in the architecture examples 
1 and 2: NSLO and RO in Example 1; Service Broker and 
Service Conductor in Example 2) for a slice instance creation 
are [18]: a. Service ordering; b. Network slice resource 
description; c. Admission control; d. Optimization and 
Resource Reservation; e. Network slice preparation. 
Service ordering: the NSL provider should construct a 
Service Catalogue (business-driven), containing for each 
service a service template, i.e., a framework to specify the 
service offering. The Catalogue contains NSLs specifications 
optimized for different usage scenarios: general 5G services 
like enhanced Mobile Broadband (eMBB), massive Machine 
Type Communications (mMTC), and ultra Reliable Low 
Latency Communications (uRLLC), or vertical-specific 
applications. A service template includes all information 
required to drive the deployment of an NSL, e.g.: the NSL 
(technology-agnostic) topology, NSL network requirements 
(functional, performance, security), temporal, geolocation 
and other operational requirements [18]. The NSL provider 
offers APIs to tenants, to express their needs and giving them 
access to the Service Catalogue, where the tenant can select 
the service template that best matches its requirements. Some 
parameters and attributes can be customized by the tenant. 
The result of this dialogue is a catalogue driven NSL service 
order containing information to be mapped on RAN, 
transport, and core network domains). The Slice Orchestrator 
entity of the system should process such information. 
Network Slice Resource Description: this step creates a 
resource-centric view of the ordered NSL. Different levels of 
implementations (NSL-IL) can be defined (for a higher 
flexibility and better adaptation to the tenant needs) [18].  
The NSLO extracts the relevant content from a resource 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-721-4
INTERNET 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Evolving Internet

viewpoint 
(e.g., 
the 
NSL 
topology, 
NSL 
network 
requirements) and constructs an NSL-IL for the NSL 
instance, i.e.: the NSL topology serves to identify which 
NS(s) need to be deployed for the NSL, retrieving the 
corresponding NS descriptor(s) from the NS Catalogue;  the 
deployment option is selected for each descriptor (NS 
descriptor ID, NS FlavorID, NS-IL ID), that best matches the 
features and the performance level required for the NSL;  a  
NSL-IL is  constructed by referencing the selected triplet(s).  
 Admission Control: the target NSL-IL specifies the 
resources needed for the tenant’s demands. Now, an 
admission control (AC) will be enforced on the ordered 
NSL-IL, from a resource viewpoint, to decide acceptance 
/rejection for deployment. Several types of information are 
needed [18] in this process: (1) the NSL instance resource 
requirements (resources to be allocated for each VNF 
instance 
and 
virtual 
link, 
affinity/anti-affinity 
rules 
applicable between VNF instances, reliability requirements 
for each VNF instance and virtual link; (2) the geographical 
region(s) where each VNF is needed; (3) the time intervals 
for activation of the NSL instance; (4) information of the 
PoPs (Points of Presence) (and the WAN network(s) 
connecting them) to which the NSL provider is subscribed. 
Such information is available partially at the NSL 
orchestrator and partially at RO; therefore, these two 
functional blocks need to cooperate within the AC acting. 
Optimization and Resource Reservation: if several 
variants of NSL-ILs are found feasible by the AC, then RO 
can run an algorithm to select an optimal solution (note that 
this is a multi-criteria optimization problem). Afterwards, 
RO may proceed with resource reservation; it sends resource 
reservation requests to the underlying VIM(s)/WIM(s). The 
hard and soft nature of this reservation depends on the use 
case and NSL provider’s policies. 
Network Slice Preparation: this is the last step prior to 
get an operational NSL. It consists of setting up all that is 
required to manage the NSLI throughout its life cycle, i.e., 
from commissioning (instantiation, configuration, and 
activation) 
to 
decommissioning 
(de-activation 
and 
termination) (see 3GPP TS 28.801 V.15.1.0 [7]). It 
comprises preparation of 
the 
network 
environment; 
designing and on-boarding the NSL descriptor. 
For the preparation of the network environment, the NSL 
Orchestrator performs (see Figure 2) the following tasks: 
• 
negotiation with RO a priority level for the NSLI 
this allows the RO to manage the cases when the 
NSL instances compete for the same resources, or 
the case of lack of enough resources. 
• 
instantiation of the management plane of the NSLI 
(NSL Manager, Tenant SDN Controller, NS 
Orchestrator, 
VNFM(s)); 
it 
configures 
these 
functional blocks, making them ready for the run-
time phase.  
In parallel to the network environment preparation, the 
NSL Orchestrator builds up the NSL descriptor, which is a 
deployment template used by the NSL Manager to operate 
the NSLI during its life cycle. This descriptor includes the 
following parts: a set of policy-based workflows; the set of 
NSL-ILs available for use, constructed in the Network Slice 
Resource Description phase; VNF configuration primitives 
at application level and VNF chaining management 
instructions; information about management data, used for 
performance management. 
V. 
COLLECTING TOPOLOGY INFORMATION IN A MULTI-
DOMAIN ENVIRONMENT 
The focus and contribution of this section is on inter-
domain topology discovery and collection of information by 
a  multi-domain capable slice orchestrator (MDSO), in the 
design and preparation phase of a slice. Given the large 
number of variants of multi-domain slicing architecture, we 
consider, in this section, a generic MDSO; it could be 
equivalent to the NSL Orchestrator in Figure 2 or Multi-
domain Service Conductor in Figure 3. The MDSO could 
belong to a separate third-party business entity (call it Slice 
Provider), or each administrative domain can be a slice-
provider capable (i.e., each domain owns a MDSO). In the 
last case, peering relationships may exist between the 
different orchestrators. 
The (MDSO) needs to obtain (among others) topological 
inter-domain information, in order to be able to perform all 
steps of the design and preparation phase, including the 
admission control and split of the multi-domain NSL among 
the respective participating domains.  
Usually, the administrative independent domains are not 
willing to disclose their detailed topology and resource 
information to third parties. Therefore, a solution based on 
an abstract summary overlay network topology (ONT) [19] 
could solve the problem. Inside MDSO, a functional Inter-
domain Peering block can be defined, to provide an ONT-
service (ONTS), i.e., deliver information on inter-domain 
topology graph, inter-domain link capacities, etc.  
It is supposed here that a given MDSO is the initiator, 
which plans a new target NSL template (at a specific tenant 
request or following the Slice Provider initiative). The 
initiator MDSO obtains (from ONTS) the ONT information. 
The ONT should be sufficiently rich to span the geographical 
area of the required NSL. 
The objectives of the MDSO, with respect to network 
topology, are: to get ONT; determine the domains candidates 
to participate to the required NSL; get information on inter-
domain (links) resources; possibly - apply a constrained 
inter-domain routing algorithm (upon the ONT acquired 
from ONTS), with an appropriate metric depending on the 
target NSL characteristics.  Using this information, the 
MDSO can split the multi-domain NSL among the domains. 
Figure 4 shows a generic example of a tentative multi-
domain NSL (for simplicity the NSL covers only the core 
network and not the access networks (AN). The required 
NSL-0 should contain some domains, e.g., D1, D2, D7, D8. 
The identities of these domains result from the edge 
specification of the NSL wanted. However, to get a 
contiguous topology, possible some other transit domains 
should be involved (e.g., D4, D5), so the final slice will be 
NSL-1.  
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-721-4
INTERNET 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Evolving Internet

 
AN4 
D1 
AN1 
CS1 
D3 
D5 
D4 
D6 
D2 
D8 
D7 
AN3 
AN2 
AN5 
AN6 
AN7 
NSL-1 
Transit 
domain 
Contiguous 
NSL 
NSL-0 
 
 
Figure 4.  Multi-domain topology of a tentative slice  
Depending on the characteristics of the tentative NSL, 
appropriate routes can be computed (with a specific metric 
on inter-domain links). For instance, between AN1and AN4, 
one may have the paths D1, D2, D4, D8 or D1, D5, D7, D8. 
If some QoS requirements are imposed in this slice, then 
resource reservation (see section III) can be done on the 
inter-domain links. 
The sequence of MDSO actions related to collection of 
information on topology is shortly described below. 
The tenant/Slice Provider issues to an initiator MDSO an 
NSL_request (this could be mapped onto a given QoS class) 
for a target NSL-0. 
 The initiator MDSO:  
1. obtains from ONTS the inter-domain level ONT 
(topology graph, inter-domain link capacities, etc.). 
The ONT is sufficiently rich to cover the required 
NSL. 
2. Determines the involved domains in NSL-0 by 
using the border ingress-egress points knowledge 
(actually border routers addresses) indicated in the 
NSL_request.  
3. Determines a contiguous inter-domain connectivity 
graph (each domain is abstracted as a node) 
resulting in an extended NSL-1 (represented by 
dotted line in Figure 4). In NSL-1 graph, some 
additional transit core network domains need to be 
included, e.g., D4, D5. Therefore, a contiguous new 
NSL-1 is defined. Optimization techniques can be 
applied in this phase. 
4. Can run a constrained routing algorithm to 
determine inter-domain best paths. 
5. Can make the first split of the initial NSL among 
core network domains. This means to produce a set 
of NSL parameters valid to be requested to each 
individual domain. 
6. Negotiates with each MSDO of a domain, 
concerning the availability for that part of slice. 
7. Run admission control for the overall multi-domain 
slice. 
8. Prepare the networking environment and on–boards 
the slice template in the catalogue. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper analyzed several relevant 5G slicing 
architectures, from the point of view of the management and 
orchestration functions. It is observed that no unique vision 
about the scope of orchestration and its hierarchical spilt 
onto architectural layer exist today.  
The second part of the paper has been dedicated to the 
design and preparation phase of slices. A solution is 
proposed by this paper related to the problem of inter-
domain topology information acquisition and associated 
actions in a multi-domain context. Note that the solution 
discussed here only cover a part of information needed by 
the MDSO initiator in order to split the multi-domain NSL. 
More complete set of information should be considered (see 
Section II and III) in order to construct the NSL catalogues. 
A negotiation dialogue between the initiator MDSO and 
other MDSOs of peering domain must be performed to 
provide more information on resources of each domain 
involved. This will be for future study. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 5GPPP Architecture Working Group, “View on 5G 
Architecture”, Version 2.0, December 2017. 
[2] NGMN Alliance, “Description of Network Slicing Concept, 
NGMN 5G P1 Requirements & Architecture, Work Stream 
End-to-End Architecture”, Version 1.0, Jan. 2016. 
[3] J. Ordonez-Lucena, et al., “Network Slicing for 5G with 
SDN/NFV: Concepts, Architectures and Challenges”,  IEEE 
Communications Magazine, 2017, Citation information: DOI 
10.1109/MCOM.2017.1600935. 
[4] X. Foukas, G. Patounas, A. Elmokashfi, and M. K. Marina, 
“Network Slicing in 5G: Survey and Challenges”, IEEE 
Communications Magazine, May 2017, pp.94-100 
[5] P. Rost, et al., "Network Slicing to Enable Scalability and 
Flexibility in 5G Mobile Networks", IEEE Communications 
Magazine, Vol.55,  May 2017, pp.72-79. 
[6] ETSI GR NFV-EVE 012 V3.1.1 (2017-12), Release 3 “NFV 
Evolution and Ecosystem; Report on Network Slicing Support 
with ETSI NFV Architecture Framework”. 
[7] 3GPP TR 28.801 (V15.0.0) (09-2017): "Telecommunication 
management; Study on management and orchestration of 
network slicing for next generation network". 
[8] 3GPP TS 28.530, “Management of 5G networks and network 
slicing; Concepts, use cases and requirements”, Rel.15, 
April2018. 
[9] A. Galis “Network Slicing- A holistic architectural approach, 
orchestration and management with applicability in mobile 
and 
fixed 
networks 
and 
clouds”, 
http://discovery.ucl.ac.uk/10051374/ [retrieved: April, 2019]. 
[10] ETSI GS NFV 002 v1.2.1 2014-12,  “NFV Architectural 
Framework”. 
[11] ETSI GS NFV-IFA 009 V1.1.1 (2016-07) “Network 
Functions 
Virtualisation 
(NFV); 
Management 
and 
Orchestration; Report on Architectural Options”. Technical 
Report.  
[12] ETSI GR NFV-IFA 028 V3.1.1 (2018-01): “Network 
Functions Virtualisation (NFV) Release 3; Management and 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-721-4
INTERNET 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Evolving Internet

Orchestration; Report on architecture options to support 
multiple administrative domains” Technical Report. 
[13] ONF TR-526, “Applying SDN Architecture to 5G Slicing”, 
April 2016.  
[14] K.Katsalis, N.Nikaein, and A.Edmonds, "Multi-Domain 
Orchestration for NFV: Challenges and Research Directions", 
2016 15th Int'l Conf. on Ubiquitous Computing and 
Communications 
and 
International 
Symposium 
on 
Cyberspace and Security (IUCC-CSS), DOI: 10.1109/IUCC-
CSS.2016.034, ttps://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7828601 
[15] N. F. Saraiva de Sousa, D. A. Lachos Perez, R. V. Rosa, M. 
A. S. Santos, and C. E. Rothenberg, "Network Service 
Orchestration: 
A 
Survey", 
2018,  
https://arxiv.org/abs/1803.06596  [retrieved: April, 2019]. 
[16]  I. Afolabi, T. Taleb, K. Samdanis, A. Ksentini, and H. Flinck, 
“Network Slicing & Softwarization: A Survey on Principles, 
Enabling Technologies & Solutions”, IEEE Communications 
Surveys & Tutorials, Mar. 2018.  
[17] T. Taleb, I. Afolabi, K. Samdanis, and F. Z. Yousaf, "On 
Multi-domain Network Slicing Orchestration Architecture & 
Federated 
Resource 
Control", 
http://mosaic-
lab.org/uploads/papers/3f772f2d-9e0f-4329-9298-
aae4ef8ded65.pdf [retrieved: April, 2019] 
[18] J. Ordonez-Lucena, et al., "The Creation Phase in Network 
Slicing: From a Service Order to an Operative Network 
Slice", 
European 
Conference 
on 
Networks 
and 
Communications 
(EuCNC), 
2018, 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1804.09642 [retrieved: April, 2019] 
[19] F. Verdi, M. F. Magalhaes, “Using Virtualization to Provide 
Interdomain QoS-enabled Routing”, Journal of Networks, 
April 2007, pp. 23-32. 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-721-4
INTERNET 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Evolving Internet

