Purpose-bound Certificate Enrollment in Automation Environments  
 
Rainer Falk and Steffen Fries 
Corporate Technology 
Siemens AG 
Munich, Germany 
e-mail: {rainer.falk|steffen.fries}@siemens.com 
 
 
Abstract—Information 
security 
is 
gaining 
increasing 
importance for networked control systems. Examples are 
industrial automation, process automation, and energy 
automation systems. Characteristic for all these systems is the 
data exchange between intelligent electronic devices – IEDs, 
which are used to monitor and control the operation. In energy 
automation these IEDs provide the data for a obtaining a 
system view of connected decentralized energy resources – 
DER. Based on the system view, a set of DER building a virtual 
power 
plant 
(VPP) 
can 
be 
managed 
reliably. 
The 
communication is realized through domain-specific protocols 
like IEC 61850 or IEC 60870-5. The communication is 
performed increasingly also over public networks. Therefore 
IT security is a necessary prerequisite to prevent intentional 
manipulations, thereby ensuring the reliable operation of the 
energy grid. Basis for protecting metering and control 
communication are cryptographic security credentials, which 
need to be managed not only during operation, but most 
importantly during installation (initial enrollment). This 
process needs to be as simple as possible to not increase the 
overall effort and to not introduce additional sources for 
failures. Hence, automatic credential management is needed to 
ensure an efficient management for a huge number of devices. 
This paper describes a new approach for the automatic initial 
security credential enrollment process during the installation 
phase of IEDs. The approach targets the binding of the 
installed IEDs to the operational environment and also to the 
intended utilization of the IED by embedding specific 
information into the enrollment communication, which is then 
reflected in the issued X.509 certificates.  
 
Keywords–security; 
device 
authentication; 
certificate 
enrollment; real-time; network access authentication; firewall; 
substation automation; smart grid; IEC 61850, IEC 60870-5, 
IEC 62351 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Decentralized energy generation, e.g., through renewable 
energy sources like solar cells or wind power, is becoming 
increasingly 
important 
to 
generate 
environmentally 
sustainable energy and thus to reduce greenhouse gases 
leading to global warming. Introducing decentralized energy 
generators into the current energy distribution network poses 
great challenges for energy automation as decentralized 
energy generation needs to be monitored and controlled to a 
similar level as centralized energy generation in power 
plants. This requires widely distributed communication 
networks. Distributed energy generators may also be 
aggregated on a higher level to form a so-called virtual 
power plant. Such a virtual power plant may be viewed from 
the outside in a similar way as a common power plant with 
respect to energy generation capacity. But due to its 
decentralized nature, the demands on communication 
necessary to control the virtual power plant are much more 
challenging. Moreover, these decentralized energy resources 
may also be used in an autonomous island mode, without any 
connection to a backend system.  
Furthermore, the introduction of controllable loads on 
residential level requires enhancements to the energy 
automation communication infrastructure as used today. 
Clearly, secure communication between a control station and 
equipment of users (e.g., decentralized energy generators) as 
well as with decentralized field equipment must be 
addressed. Standard communication technologies as Ethernet 
and the Internet protocol IP are increasingly used in energy 
automation environments down to the field level [1] [2]. 
Figure 1. Typical Smart Grid Scenarios 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-349-0
INTERNET 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Evolving Internet

Figure 1 depicts example Smart Grid scenarios showing 
the increased communication demand, e.g., through the 
integration of microgrids, controllable loads, and also electro 
mobility. IT security is a base requirement to be addressed in 
all the scenarios to ensure the reliable operation of the smart 
grid. One base for the secure interaction are typically security 
credentials in the form of X.509 digital certificates, 
corresponding private keys, and a related security policy. All 
need to be provisioned during device installation and 
maintained during operation. Especially the exchange of 
devices with spare parts should not lead to breaches in 
security, which could occur if the key material of the 
replaced devices is not handled appropriately. To ensure that 
this key material cannot be misused, e.g., in the context of an 
unintended service or in an unintended environment, the key 
material has to be bound to the respective device purpose. 
Existing options, e.g., using key usage extensions in X.509 
certificates, may not always be sufficient, as they relate to the 
actual usage of the cryptographic key and not to the device 
application 
environment. 
The 
purpose-binding 
of 
a 
cryptographic key described in this paper therefore restricts 
the key acceptance depending on location information, and 
potential other parameters.  
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: 
Section II provides an overview of two example Smart Grid 
use cases. Section III depicts an overview of secure 
communication with respect to the use cases explained 
before. This section motivates the handling of security key 
material. Section IV introduces the Public Key Infrastructure 
as means for credential handling. Section VI introduces 
existing certificate enrollment methods, while Section VI 
describes 
an 
enhancement to have 
purpose 
bound 
certificates. Section VII concludes the paper and provides an 
outlook.  
II. 
SMART GRID USE CASES 
To motivate communication security, two example use 
cases are addressed in this paper, substation automation and 
DER incorporation in energy control networks. They  are 
explained in the following two subsections. 
A. Substation Automation  
Automation networks are typically shared networks 
connected in a ring, star, or bus topology, or a mixture of 
these. Most often, the time-critical part is realized on a 
dedicated network segment, while the rest of the 
communication supporting the automation systems is 
performed 
on 
networks 
with 
lower 
performance 
requirements.  
An example for energy automation is the communication 
within a substation. A substation typically transforms voltage 
levels, and includes power monitoring and protection 
functions. The example in Figure 2 shows a typical setup of 
a primary substation. The red rectangle shows the area, in 
which the IEDs communicate status information and provide 
this information into the substation automation zone and 
further up the hierarchy to the control center.  
Terminal
Server
Remote Access 
Server
Remote Serial 
Configuration Zone
Physical Substation Security Perimeter
PMU
RTU
System Operation Critical
Automation Zone
Remote Access Zone
IP Switch
Station Bus Zone
Serial Server 
/ Switch
Serial IED Process Zone
IEC 61850     
DCF 77
PMU
IED
IED
IED
Serial Server / Switch
`
Local HMI
Communication, e.g., via:
- IEC 61850
- IEC 60870-5-104
- IEC 60870-6 TASE2
Utility Communications Network
Historian
DMZ
File Server
Web Navigator
`
Local HMI
Business Critical
Logging
Logging
Logging
Logging
Logging
IED
Substation 
Controller with 
OCSP Responder
IED
IED
   
Figure 2. Substation – Functional Split into Zones  
As depicted in Figure 2, the substation bus can be 
realized as ring, connecting the protection relays, acting in 
real-time. There is a connection to other zones within the 
substation, separated from the real-time part using Firewalls. 
Examples are the automation zone or the remote access zone. 
Another example is the zone storing the historian 
information also interacting with a backend SCADA system. 
The historian is a device for archiving measurements, events, 
and alarms of the substation. Figure 2 already shows security 
elements deployed within a substation, like Firewalls, virus 
checking tools, or access control means to components or 
data. 
B. DER Incorporation  
Decentralized 
Energy 
Resources 
(DER) 
may 
be 
connected to the Smart Grid at two different connection 
points. Depending on the amount of energy provided, they 
may be connected to the low voltage network or to the 
medium voltage network (distribution network). The first 
one is rather typical for DER in residential areas, like a solar 
panel, while the connection to the medium voltage network 
is done for larger deployments like wind power farms or 
solar parks. Necessary for both is the connectivity to a 
communication infrastructure to allow a control center to act 
on provided information about current energy generation, but 
also to provide scheduling information to the DER, e.g., 
depending on the weather forecast, to better balance the feed 
in of energy into the electrical network. Communication with 
the DER may be done using different communication 
technologies, like Power Line Communication (PLC) or 
wireless communication via the UMTS network. For the 
distribution network operator (DNO), it is essential to know, 
which DERs are associated to his operational control. This 
can be supported by the used security credentials using 
additional information depending, e.g., on the geographic 
location of a DER or on the association with a dedicated 
DNO.  
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-349-0
INTERNET 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Evolving Internet

III. 
SECURE COMMUNICATION IN SMART GRID 
IEC 61850 [3], [4] is a standard for communication in the 
domain of energy automation. It is envisaged to be the 
successor of the currently used standards IEC 60870-5-104 
and DNP3 especially used in the North American region. 
IEC 61850 enables interoperability between devices used in 
energy automation. For example, two IEC 61850 enabled 
devices of different manufacturers can exchange a set of 
clearly defined data, and the devices can interpret and use 
these data to achieve the functionality required by the 
application due to a standardized data model. In particular, 
IEC 61850 enables continuous communication from a 
control station to decentralized energy generators or to IEDs 
(like protection relays) in a substation. 
IT security is increasingly important in energy 
automation as on part of the Smart Grid. Here, the IEC 
62351 framework [5] with currently 11 parts kicks in, 
defining 
security 
services 
for 
IEC 
61850 
based 
communication covering different deployment scenarios 
using serial communication, IP-based communication, and 
also Ethernet communication. The latter one is used locally 
within a substation to cope with the high real-time 
requirements. While it may be not always necessary to 
encrypt the communication to protect confidentiality, there is 
a high demand to protect the communication against 
manipulation and to allow for source authentication. IEC 
62351 relies on existing security technologies as much as 
possible and profiles it for the application environment . One 
example is the application of Transport Layer Security (TLS, 
RFC 5246 [6]) to protect TCP-based communication. Here, 
IEC 62351 basically reduces the manifold options of TLS to 
ease interoperability. Another example is the adoption of 
Group Domain of Interpretation (GDOI, RFC 6407 [7]) as 
group-based key management to distribute key material for 
the protection of status information and event signaling 
between IEDs in a substation or across substations using 
Wide Area Networks (WANs).  
A specific characteristic throughout IEC 62351 is the 
consequent 
application 
of 
X.509 
certificates 
and 
corresponding private keys for mutual authentication on 
network layer and application layer. This requires an 
efficient handling of X.509 key material and the availability 
of this information right from the installation. There is a 
strong need to provide these credentials without increasing 
the installation effort. For instance, devices may generate 
their own key pair, but certification needs to bind this key 
pair to the operational. This is a challenge from the pure 
technical perspective as a high number of devices need to be 
equipped with the key material. But also from the network 
operator process point of view this is challenging, as the key 
material has a lifecycle and needs to be updated once in a 
while. These aspects will be addressed in the following 
sections.  
IV. 
PUBLIC KEY INFRASTRUCTURE - PKI  
A PKI typically contains a variety of services requiring 
interfaces in the devices utilizing the PKI and also an 
accompanying 
process. 
In 
general, 
a 
Public 
Key 
Infrastructure provides a secure, reliable, and scalable 
environment for the complete lifecycle of key material, i.e., 
generating, distributing and querying public keys for secrecy, 
correctness, and sender verification. Moreover, it binds the 
“owner” to the public key using a digital certificate and thus 
enables identification of users and components utilizing 
certificates. Furthermore, it maintains and distributes status 
information for the lifetime of that binding, i.e., from the 
generation till the revocation. The general functionality and 
formats are described in RFC 5280 [8]. 
The following list provides a short overview about the 
different components, which are depicted in Figure 3: 
— Registration authority (RA) authenticates the user or 
IED or the data submitted by the user or IED, performs 
an authorization check and initiates the certificate 
generation at the CA. For machine-to machine 
communication the RA can be used to mediate between 
the device applying for a certificate and the CA. 
— Certification authority (CA) is a trusted entity that 
certifies public-keys by issuing certificates.  
— Key/certificate archive is a repository in which the CA 
stores certificates and/or generated key pairs.  
— Key generation is a function of the PKI responsible for 
the generation of key material (public and private keys), 
which are certified through the CA 
— Public Directory is a (usually publicly readable) 
database to which the CA stores all issued certificates 
— Revocation Lists are also a publicly readable database 
to which the CA stores all revoked certificates 
 
Figure 3. PKI Components 
In the context of smart grid, a PKI may be operated by a 
utility company working as internal PKI, or it may be a 
public PKI, also depending on the target use case and the 
need for interoperation between different parties. Moreover, 
the functionality provided by the PKI needs to be 
streamlined to the target environment to avoid unnecessary 
effort. In any case, the devices utilizing key material issued 
by the CA need to provide the technical interfaces to 
accomplish this task. This is described in more detail in IEC 
62351-9 targeting the key management explicitly.  
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-349-0
INTERNET 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Evolving Internet

Section VI describes an enhancement of the typical used 
PKI setup by introducing an intermediary, which provides all 
operational environment specific information. This avoids 
the pre-configuration of IEDs with this information. 
V. 
EXISTING CERTIFICATE ENROLLMENT METHODS 
This section describes common methods for certificate 
enrollment 
taking 
device 
capabilities 
into 
account. 
Capabilities in this context relate to local and remote key 
generation. Typically local generation of key material is 
desired to avoid the handling of private keys outside the 
devices.  Note that depending on the key usage, there may be 
requirements to also have the private key available in a trust 
center to ensure that encrypted information can be accessed 
even the device hosting the private key was either damaged 
or has been compromised. 
A. Manual Enrollment 
Manual enrollment relates to the manual connection of a 
device to an engineering tool to provide the key material 
during a local configuration session, prior to the connection 
in the target network. This approach requires a significant 
initial configuration effort and is especially cumbersome in 
case of device replacements. It may be realized using an 
offline engineering network to bootstrap the security 
credentials for connected devices. Here, the devices or 
components do not possess a cryptographic credential up 
front, as the separate network is assumed to be physically 
secure. In the simplest form, it may be a direct connection of 
an engineering laptop to the component to be administered 
using purely local point-to-point communication. 
B. Automated Enrollment 
Automated enrollment refers to the initial configuration 
of devices including the key material. This is shown in 
Figure 4. Field devices are connected to the network and 
contact the PKI server to obtain certified key material. 
 
Figure 4: Automated distribution using management protocols 
Here, the field devices generate their public/private key 
pairs locally and send a Certificate Signing Request (CSR) 
for the public key to the RA/CA (part of the PKI server). Part 
of the CSR may be a serial number of the device, against 
which the PKI server can check a configured list of devices 
allowed to be enrolled. This authorization may also be 
realized by other means like one-time passwords. According 
to RFC 2986 [9] the CSR is defined n ASN.1 as shown in 
Figure 5 below. 
CertificationRequest ::= SEQUENCE { 
certificationRequestInfo  
  CertificationRequestInfo, 
   signatureAlgorithm AlgorithmIdentifier{{  
     SignatureAlgorithms }}, 
   Signature BIT STRING 
   } 
CertificationRequestInfo: 
CertificationRequestInfo ::= SEQUENCE { 
version       INTEGER { v1(0) } (v1,...), 
subject       Name, 
  subjectPKInfo SubjectPublicKeyInfo{{ 
 PKInfoAlgorithms }}, 
Attributes [0] Attributes{{  
 CRIAttributes }} 
} 
 
SubjectPublicKeyInfo { ALGORITHM : IOSet}  
 ::= SEQUENCE { 
 Algorithm AlgorithmIdentifier {{IOSet}}, 
 subjectPublicKey BIT STRING 
} 
Figure 5: Certification Request structure [9] 
Several protocols are known for transmitting a CSR to a 
CA. Examples are: 
- SCEP – Simple Certificate Enrollment Protocol [10] 
- CMP – Certificate Management Protocol [11] 
- CMC – Certificate Management over CMC [12] 
- EST – Enrollment over Secure Transport [13] 
- XML Key Management Specification [14] 
These different protocols describe the communication of 
a CSR from a device to the CA, were the device ideally 
generates the key pair for itself. Additionally to identification 
information like the serial number, further information can 
be connected with the CSR, like a password (to be used to 
authorize a potential future revocation) or key usage 
restrictions. The CSR has to be protected to prevent 
illegitimate issuing of certificates. The CSR itself may be 
protected using the public key of the RA/CA as in case of 
SCEP. In case of CMP, the CSR is protected using an initial 
authentication key, and in EST, the CSR is transmitted over 
a secured communication link. Here TLS is applied, 
providing the opportunity to authenticate both peers during 
the connection establishment.  Also, there may be an 
intermediate RA located between the device sending the 
CSR and the CA, which already performs the verification of 
the CSR to reduce the load on the CA.  
When deployed in the operational environment, IEDs are 
typically not pre-configured. Hence, an intermediate 
component is used to enhance the CSR with additional 
information about the deployment environment before it is 
forwarded to the RA/CA. This information is not available at 
or provided by the sender of the CSR itself. The following 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-349-0
INTERNET 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Evolving Internet

section describes such an enhancement of the CSR 
communication on the way from the devices to certification 
server. This enhancement is proposed to provide additional 
information about the environment in which the device is 
deployed. Such information can either be contained in the 
certificate to be issued or associated with the device 
certificate by other means, like a central configuration 
database. This approach helps identifying, e.g., a physical 
movement of components or devices to other locations. 
Hence, key material valid in one location may not be 
misused in a different location. Moreover, the approach also 
enhances the options for asset management, by providing 
fine-grained information already during the authentication 
processes, employing the enhanced certificate.  
VI. 
ENHANCING CERTIFICATE ENROLLMENT WITH 
DEVICE PURPOSE BINDING 
This section outlines the introduction of an additional 
network component to extend a CSR with additional 
information. Such additional information is encoded as 
additional attribute added to the original CSR as sent by the 
device. This attribute indicates the context or other 
deployment specific information, to be added to either the 
certificate or the configuration database.  
This is achieved by adding a Certificate Attribute 
Intermediary (CAI) along the CSR communication path. The 
CAI adds at least one attribute to the original CSR (without 
otherwise manipulating the original CSR). The additional 
attribute acknowledges additional information about the 
operating environment. This additional information may be 
the membership of the CSR sender (device) to a dedicated 
zone or group or to a dedicated location either on a 
geographical base or on an organizational base. Moreover, 
the CAI may already check the CSR (like an RA) and signal 
this also in the attribute. The CAI may add information about 
intended usage restrictions of the certificate, depending on 
the device type and the security policy. This information can 
be part of the engineering information, which must then be 
available at the CAI. The CAI may also request that the 
certificate is issued using a dedicated signature algorithm.  
The attribute and the CSR build the Extended Certificate 
Request (ECR). The ECR is protected by a cryptographic 
checksum, binding the attributes to the original CSR. Ideally, 
this is a digital signature of the CAI. This could be realized 
as PKCS#7 structure [15] or as XML structure,  but may also 
be a symmetric checksum, involving a shared secret between 
the CAI and the CA. The ECR is then forwarded to the 
RA/CA, which verifies both the CSR and the additional 
attribute. If the RA and CA are separate entities, the CAI 
may be co-located with a local RA. After successful 
verification, the additional information from the attribute is 
included in the X.509 certificate within a certificate 
extension.  
Depending on the applied enrollment protocol the ECR 
may be transmitted via a TLS protected communication path 
using, e.g., HTTP POST, HTTP GET or as REST or SOAP 
message). 
Figure 6 depicts the on path enhancement of a CSR with 
attributes aa1, …, aa3. Also shown are potential functions to 
be performed by the CAI (e.g., CSR checking) and the 
enhanced functions on the RA/CA side.  
In a substation automation environment, the CAI can be 
part the substation controller or the remote access server as 
the central ingress and egress point of the substation. This is 
depicted in Figure 7. The different steps describe the single 
steps for the ECR processing. Note that the prerequisite is 
the availability of the central RA/CA root certificate in the 
IED. 
The following steps are performed for the initial 
enrollment of an energy automation device IED: 
1. Generation of key material (public/private key), 
generation of the CSR within the IED 
2. Send local generated CSR to Remote Access Server 
3. Verification of CSR through Remote Access Server. 
Remote Access Server acts as CAI. Generation of 
attributes and ECR. Send ECR to central RA/CA server 
of the distribution network operator. 
4. Verification of ECR signature through central RA/CA, 
verification of attributes (installation information, etc.); 
optional verification of original CSR  
5. In case of successful verification device specific 
certificate will be generated and send to the remote 
access server of the substation. 
6. Forwarding of certificate to IED 
7. Local automated installation of certificate upon 
receiving and successful signature verification against 
local RA/CA root certificate.  
 
Extended Certificate Request ECR:
Client
RA/CA
- receive ECR
- check ECR
- check CSR
- issue Certificate
- provide Certificate
CAI
- receive CSR
- check CSR
- determine 
additional attributes 
aa1, aa2, aa3
Certificate Request:
Name
Attributes
Public Key
Checksum
Certificate Request:
Name n
Attributes a1, a2, a3
Public Key pk
Checksum
Certificate
Name n
Attributes a1, a2, a3, 
aa1, aa2, aa3
Public Key pk
CA 
Signature
CAI 
Checksum
Additional 
Attributes
aa1, aa2, aa3
 
Figure 6: Realization option for on path CSR enhancement with attributes characterizing the deployment environment  
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-349-0
INTERNET 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Evolving Internet

 
 
Figure 7: Enhancement of the CSR path in a substation 
Note that this paper describes the concept of the 
enhancement. Implementations are not finished yet. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK 
This paper described security enhancements for energy 
automation systems involved in substation communication 
and smart grid. The cryptographic protection of control 
communication requires that cryptographic keys and 
certificates are provisioned on energy automation devices. 
Manual configuration would not scale to the huge number of 
devices, and be prone to configuration errors. Therefore, 
automatic configuration of automation devices is required 
not only during the operation, but especially for the initial 
device enrollment. To ensure the correct configuration of 
cryptographic device credentials, information is required at 
which location a specific device has been installed. An 
additional network element has been described that trustfully 
enhances a certificate signing request issued by an 
automation device with information on the network segment 
in which the device has been installed. This allows the CA to 
issue a device certificate that is bound to the operational zone 
of the device (“location”). Moreover, additional information 
for the CSR processing can also be provided. A relying 
device towards which the considered device authenticates 
using this zone-bound certificate, can verify whether the 
device belongs to the own zone. This ensures that an 
automatically provisioned device is operable using the 
established configuration only within the corresponding 
zone. When the device is relocated or put out of service, its 
device certificate cannot be misused, e.g., in other zones. 
Standardization is currently ongoing in the context of 
ISO/IEC62351-9, which defines interoperable means for 
automatic device credential management for energy 
automation equipment. The new approach described in this 
paper enhances the current credential management approach 
and will be proposed for to be considered in future energy 
automation security standards.   
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Fries and R. Falk, “Efficient Multicast Authentication in 
Energy Environments”, Proc. IARIA Energy 2013, March 
2013, 
ISBN 
978-1-61208-259-2, 
pp. 
65-71, 
http://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=energy_20
13_3_30_40056 [retrieved Dec. 2013] 
[2] M. Felser, “Real-time Ethernet – industry prospective,” Proc. 
IEEE, 
vol. 
93, 
no.6, 
June 
2005, 
pp. 
1118-1128, 
http://www.felser.ch/download/FE-TR-0507.pdf 
[retrieved: 
Dec. 2013]  
[3] IEC 61850-5 – “Communication requirements for functions 
and 
device 
models”, 
July 
2003, 
http://www.iec.ch/smartgrid/standards/.  
[4] “Efficient Energy Automation with the IEC 61850 Standard 
Application Examples”, Siemens AG, December 2010, 
http://www.energy.siemens.com/mx/pool/hq/energy-
topics/standards/iec-61850/Application_examples_en.pdf 
[retrieved: Dec. 2013]. 
[5] IEC 62351-x Power systems management and associated 
information exchange – Data and communication security, 
http://www.iec.ch/smartgrid/standards/. 
[6] T. Dierks and E. Rescorla, “The Transport Layer Security 
(TLS) Protocol Version 1.2”, RFC 5246, Aug. 2008, 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5246 [retrieved: Jan. 2014]. 
[7] B. Weiss, S. Rowles, and T. Hardjono, “The Group Domain 
of 
Interpretation”, 
RFC 
6407, 
Oct. 
2011, 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6407  [retrieved: Jan. 2014]. 
[8] D. Cooper et al, “Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure 
Certificate and Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile”, 
RFC 5280, May 2008, http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5280 
[retrieved: Jan. 2014]. 
[9] M. Nystrom and B. Kaliski, “PKCS #10: Certification 
Request Syntax Specification”, RFC 2986, Nov. 2000,  
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2986 [retrieved: Jan. 2014]. 
[10] M. Pritikin, A. Nourse, and J. Vilhuber, “Simple Certificate 
Enrolment 
Protocol”, 
Internet 
Draft, 
Sep. 
2011, 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-nourse-scep-23 [retrieved: Jan. 
2014]. 
[11] J.Schaad and M.Myers, “Certificate Management over CMS”, 
RFC 5272, June 2008,  http://tools.ietf.org/search/rfc5272 
[retrieved: Jan. 2014]. 
[12] C. Adams, S. Farrell, T. Kause, and T. Mononen, “Internet 
X.509 Public Key Infrastructure Certificate Management 
Protocol 
(CMP), 
RFC 
4210, 
Sep. 
2005, 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4210 [retrieved: Jan. 2014]. 
[13] M. Pritikin, P. Yee, and D. Harkins, “Enrollment over Secure 
Transport”, 
RFC 
7030, 
Oct. 
2013, 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7030   [retrieved: Jan. 2014]. 
[14] XML 
Key 
Management 
Specification 
http://www.w3.org/TR/xkms2/  
[15] B. Kaliski, “PKCS#7 Cryptographic Message Syntax Version 
1.5, RFC2315, March 1998, http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2315 
[retrieved: Dec. 2013]. 
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-349-0
INTERNET 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Evolving Internet

