Adaptability in Smart Manufacturing Systems 
 
Gil Gonçalves, João Reis, Rui Pinto 
SYSTEC, Research Center for Systems and Technologies 
Faculty of Engineering of University of Porto, 
Porto, Portugal 
email: {gil, jpcreis, rpinto}@fe.up.pt 
 
Michael Peschl 
Harms & Wende GmbH 
Hamburg, Germany 
email: michael.peschl@harms-wende.de 
 
 
Abstract—Adaptability and reconfigurability of the production 
system are two key enablers to address global competition and 
a 
constantly 
evolving 
demand. 
Adaptive 
and 
smart 
manufacturing systems, realized by a variable number of 
heterogeneous production Smart Components with specialized 
capabilities, is one promising approach to guarantee a high 
degree of adaptability to ever changing demand. This paper 
presents a realization of a smart manufacturing system based on 
a multi-agent system approach, discusses its values and 
drawbacks, and presents possible improvements on the 
conceptual realization. 
Keywords—smart manufacturing systems; production smart 
components; adaptability; reconfigurability. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Rapid changing product portfolios and continuously 
evolving process technologies require manufacturing systems 
that are themselves easily upgradeable, into which new 
technologies and new functions can be readily integrated [1]. 
This demands increased productivity through highly 
optimized production processes, creating the need for novel 
manufacturing control systems able to cope with the increased 
complexity required to manage product and production 
variability and disturbances, effectively and efficiently [2], 
and to implement agility, flexibility and reactivity in mass 
customized manufacturing. 
Increasingly, traditional top-down and centralized process 
planning, scheduling, and control mechanisms are becoming 
insufficient to respond to constant changes in these high-mix 
low-volume production environments [3]. These traditional 
centralized hierarchical approaches limit the adaptability [4], 
contribute to reduce the resilience of the system, as well as to 
reduce the flexibility of planning and contribute to a 
corresponding increase in response overheads [5]. The ability 
of a manufacturing system, at all of the functional and 
organizational levels, to reconfigure itself in order to quickly 
adjust production capabilities and capacities in response to 
sudden changes in the market or in the regulatory environment 
is nowadays a major requirement. 
This paper presents a realization of a smart manufacturing 
system based on a multi-agent system framework to 
implement the concept of adaptive and reconfigurable factory. 
Its contributions and limitations are discussed, along with the 
roadmap for future improvements. 
The paper is structured as follows. After presenting the 
motivation and objectives, Section 2 frames the problem and 
presents related work. In Section 3, the overall approach is 
presented and Section 4 presents the multi-agent system-based 
realization. Section 5 discusses the results, as well as future 
improvements, and Section 6 presents the conclusions. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The manufacturing enterprises of the 21st century are in 
an environment in which market demand is frequently 
changing, new technologies are continuously emerging, and 
competition is global. Manufacturing strategies should 
therefore shift to support global competitiveness, new product 
innovation 
and 
customization, 
and 
rapid 
market 
responsiveness. The next generation of manufacturing 
systems will thus be more strongly time-oriented (or highly 
responsive), while still focusing on cost and quality. Such 
manufacturing systems will need to satisfy a number of 
fundamental requirements, including [6]: Full integration of 
heterogeneous software and hardware systems within an 
enterprise, or across a supply chain; Open system architecture 
to accommodate new subsystems (software, hardware, 
peopleware) or dismantle existing subsystems “on the fly”; 
Efficient and effective communication and cooperation 
among different elements (units, lines, cells, equipment) 
within an enterprise and among enterprises; Embodiment of 
human factors into manufacturing systems; Quick response to 
external order changes and unexpected disturbances from both 
internal and external manufacturing environments; Fault 
tolerance both at the system level and at the subsystem level 
so as to detect and recover from system failures and minimize 
their impacts on the overall performance. Some possible 
approaches to fulfil these requirements are presented in the 
next sections. 
A. Networked Factories and equipment virtualization 
Modern Industries have a continuous need to satisfy their 
markets at better costs in order to keep their competitive edge. 
This simple fact creates the continuous need for new products, 
new production lines and new control methodologies. The 
FleXible PRoduction Experts for reconfigurable aSSembly 
technology (XPRESS) project [7], a cooperative European 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-646-0
INTELLI 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

project involving industry and academia, studied this issue in 
order to define a new flexible production concept. This 
concept, based on specialized intelligent process units, called 
manufactrons, was able to integrate a complete process chain, 
and included support for production configuration, multi-
variant production lines and 100% quality monitoring [26]. 
The concept was demonstrated for the automotive, 
aeronautics and electrical component industries, but it can be 
transferred to nearly all production processes.  
The latest trends in intelligent manufacturing are related 
with shop-floor equipment virtualization, fostering the easy 
access to machine information, allowing collaboration among 
shop-floor equipment and task execution on demand. The 
manufactron concept was further developed under the project 
called Intelligent Reconfigurable Machines for Smart 
Plug&Produce Production (I-RAMP3). The goal was to 
shorten the ramp-up phase time and manage the scheduled and 
unscheduled maintenance phase time. This goal was achieved 
by the development of the NETwork-enabled DEVices 
(NETDEVs), which acted as a technological shell to all the 
industrial equipment, converting it into an agent-like system 
and tackling the existing gaps between hardware and software 
[23]. NETDEVs are intelligent agent-based production 
devices that are responsible to equip the conventional 
manufacturing equipment - both complex machines, such as 
industrial PCs or PLC, and sensors & actuators - with 
standardized communication skills, along with intelligent 
functionalities for inter-device negotiation and process 
optimization. By wrapping equipment components with the 
NETDEV shell, they become equipped with built-in 
intelligence. This is at the base of the Smart Component 
concept [24], which will be further explored in Section 3. 
B. Reconfigurable manufacturing systems 
Reconfigurability has been an issue in computing and 
robotics for many years. In general, reconfigurability is the 
ability to repeatedly change and rearrange the components of 
a system in a cost-effective way. Koren et al. [8] define a 
Reconfigurable Manufacturing Systems (RMS) as being “[..] 
designed at the outset far rapid change in structure, as well as 
in hardware and software components, in order to quickly 
adjust production capacity and functionality [..] in response to 
sudden changes in market or in regulatory requirements”. 
Merhabi et al. [9] complemented this definition with the 
notion that “reconfiguration allows adding, removing or 
modifying specific process capabilities, controls, software, or 
machine structure to adjust production capacity in response to 
changing market demands or technologies [..] provides 
customised flexibility [..] so that it can be improved, upgraded 
and reconfigured, rather than replaced”. 
RMS are seen as a cost-effective response to market 
changes, that try to combine the high throughput of dedicated 
production with the flexibility of flexible manufacturing 
systems (FMS), and are also able to react to changes quickly 
and efficiently. For this to be accomplished, the system and its 
machines have to be adapted for an adjustable structure that 
enables system scalability in response to market demands and 
system/machine adaptability to new products. RMS are 
composed of reconfigurable machines and open architecture 
reconfigurable control systems to produce a variety of parts 
with family relationships. The structure of these systems may 
be adjusted at the system level (e.g., adding/removing 
machines) and at the machine level (changing machine 
hardware, control software or parameters). 
C. Industrial applications of agent systems 
Duffie and Piper [10] were one of the first to discuss and 
introduce a non-hierarchical control approach, using agents to 
represent physical resources, parts and human operators, and 
implementing scheduling oriented to the parts. Yet another 
manufacturing system (YAMS), introduced by Parunak et al. 
[11], applies a contract net technique to a hierarchical model 
of manufacturing system, including agents to represent the 
shop floor. The autonomous agents at Rock Island Arsenal 
(AARIA) [12] control a production system with the goal to 
fulfil incoming tasks in due time, focusing on the dynamic 
scheduling, dynamic reconfiguration and in the control of 
manufacturing systems that fulfil the delivering dates. The 
manufacturing resources, processes and operations are 
encapsulated as agents using an autonomous agent approach. 
Some relevant approaches have been introduced in this 
domain. The product resource order staff architecture 
(PROSA), proposed by Brussel et al. [2], is a holonic 
reference architecture for manufacturing systems, which uses 
holons to represent products, resources, orders and logical 
activities. Gonçalves et al. [13] presented an approach based 
on co-operating agents to the reengineering production 
facilities. The approach focus on several aspects related to 
enterprise dynamic reconfiguration due to product redesign or 
changing demand, and on optimizing the production process 
or removing errors that might have emerged. 
In spite of all the research described above, only a few 
industrial/laboratorial applications were developed and 
reported in the literature. Bussmann and Schild [14], as part of 
the Production 2000+ project,  use agent technology to design 
a flexible and robust production system for large series 
manufacturing that meet rapidly changing operations in a 
factory plant of DaimlerChrysler, producing cylinder heads 
for four-cylinder diesel engines. This agent-oriented 
collaborative control system, proved to be useful to control 
widely distributed and heterogeneous devices in environments 
that are prone to disruptions and where hard real-time 
constraints are crucial. 
Cooperative Engineering concerns the application of 
Concurrent Engineering techniques to the design and 
development of products and of their manufacturing systems 
by a network of companies coming together exclusively for 
that purpose. Gonçalves et al. [15] presented an 
implementation of a framework for Cooperative Engineering 
based on a general framework of distributed hybrid systems 
and MAS. More examples of agent-based approaches in 
manufacturing systems can be found in [16]-[18]. 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-646-0
INTELLI 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

III. 
ADAPTIVE SMART MANUFACTURING SYSTEMS 
The goal of XPRESS was to realize an Intelligent 
Manufacturing System (IMS) and to establish a breakthrough 
for the factory of the future, with a new flexible assembly and 
manufacturing concept based on the generic idea of 
“specialized intelligent process units” (referred to as 
manufactrons in the context of XPRESS) integrated in cross-
sectorial learning networks for customized production and 
flexible system organization. This knowledge-based concept 
integrates the complete process hierarchy, from the production 
planning to the assembly, the quality assurance of the 
produced/assembled products and the reusability of process 
units. Different functionalities within a factory are 
encapsulated in specialized intelligent process units called 
“Smart Components”. By doing so, a single Smart Component 
is able to perform the assigned tasks optimally within linked 
networks by considering their knowledge. The mechanisms of 
self-learning, 
self-organization, 
knowledge 
acquisition 
(experiments), as well as the use of shared communication 
opportunities, which are required for performing successfully, 
are stored in every Smart Component.  
A. Industrial Smart Components 
A Smart Component is a self-contained entity, which 
encapsulates expertise and functionalities, and that interacts 
with its environment by the exchange of standardized 
synchronous messages. Being self-contained, it is expected 
that a typical Smart Component can be included to a smart 
manufacturing system by just plugging an additional device 
(into the factory’s network). Therefore, the Smart Component 
has to be realized as an independent component (comprising 
software and hardware) rather than a distributed set of parts, 
where a lot of different parts of the component are to be 
integrated into different systems of the factory – Enterprise 
Resource Planning (ERP), Manufacturing Execution Systems 
(MES), or different kinds of Programmable Logic Controller 
(PLC) systems [19]. 
The Smart Component shall not only realize a simple 
functionality, but also provide expertise on this functionality 
to the outer world. This allows the outer world to state a task 
to be fulfilled to the Smart Component without the need to 
know about every small detail associated with the task. The 
encapsulation of expertise is therefore the solution to demands 
stated by multi-variant production and flexibility in terms of 
production resources.  
The Smart Component can be seen as an autonomous 
agent, able to decide the best way to reach its given goals, but 
not when to do it. The task execution is triggered from outside 
as defined by a Smart Component from a specific category, 
named “workflow manager”, responsible for overlooking the 
factory level with dedicated knowledge expertise [20]. This 
results in a Smart Component hierarchy: “Production Smart 
Components” (executing basic manufacturing tasks) and 
“Super 
Smart 
Component” 
(coordinating 
groups of 
Production Smart Components); “Workflow managers” 
(controlling the production flow of an item) conforming the 
manufacturing execution system up to production planning; 
“Configuration Smart Components” responsible for finding 
an optimum production configuration and for the creation of 
workflow managers for different product variants or for 
varying production conditions. 
B. Communication 
Communication between different systems is a major 
challenge in industrial environments. Most communication 
channels are particularly tailored to different systems and are 
often proprietary. Hence, integration of equipment requires 
additional engineering and makes it difficult the simple 
replacement of systems. On the other hand, if standard 
connections are used, the process slows down in most cases 
and finally just covers a subset of the necessary 
functionalities 
[19]. 
A 
generic 
understandable task 
description, describing the production tasks to be performed 
by a particular machine for a certain class of products can be 
a solution for this problem. The basic approach of the Smart 
Component communication scheme is a synchronous 
exchange of documents. For that, only three types of 
documents exist: Task Description Documents (TDD); 
Quality Result Documents (QRD); and Smart Component 
Self Description (SCSD). This approach led to the 
development of a uniform and standardized communication 
protocol for the Smart Component framework.  
C. Smart Component Networks 
The Smart Components are hierarchized into three 
categories according to their function: Configuration Smart 
Components responsible for finding an optimum production 
configuration and for the creation of a workflow manager 
template that can be instantiated to produce the product 
variant; Workflow Manager controls the production flow of 
an item according to the workflow manager template; 
Production Smart Components responsible for executing 
basic manufacturing tasks and/or for coordinating groups of 
production Smart Components. 
A major challenge of the approach is the interaction of the 
different 
components 
of 
the 
whole 
system. 
The 
communication scheme between components of the different 
layers (ERP, shop floor and cell level) and also within the 
layers must be powerful, flexible and extensible. The concept 
of Smart Component network comprises the Production 
Configuration System (PCS), the Workflow Execution 
System (WES), and the lower level Smart Components: Super 
Smart Component, Production Smart Component and 
Handling Smart Component.  
The PCS is divided in three components: production 
simulation system (PSS), production execution system (PES), 
and finally production quality system (PQS). The PSS 
performs simulation tasks, using different workflows with 
various production Smart Components and configurations. On 
the other hand, the PES is responsible for receiving and 
selecting the best configuration from production jobs issued 
by external ordering systems, such as SAP, Baan or MES. 
Regarding PQS, this component is responsible for storing and 
retrieving the quality results in XML formatted files 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-646-0
INTELLI 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

denominated quality result documents (QRDs), which are 
generated at the end of the production cycle and contain the 
complete quality information of the entire production process 
and the product itself. 
The WES, instantiated by the PCS during the simulation 
phase or production phase, consists of a workflow manager 
(WFM) and a quality manager (QM). This component, the 
WES, is the mediator between the PCS and all the other 
production Smart Components (PMs), handling Smart 
Components (HMs) or super Smart Components (SMs). Each 
started instance of WFM or QM is responsible for the control 
and organization of the Smart Components related to the 
process. This allows the WES to suspend or to persist the 
Smart Components, if no activity is to be performed. It is the 
responsibility of every Smart Component to communicate 
with lower or higher level Smart Components (SMs or WES 
“Smart Component”). As far as the communication goes, it is 
via the exchange of XML data between the components and 
the system. The system’s communication is synchronous, 
therefore, each TDD sent to a Smart Component must result 
in a QRD. In case that the operation is not performed, a QRD 
containing an error message must be sent to the upper level. 
A production system implemented via a Smart Component 
network, in which several production equipment and 
therefore Smart Components are considered to execute a 
process step, the Production Configuration System (PCS) 
collects the different specifications and generates a TDD. 
This file can then be understood by all Smart Components 
that are considered for the process. The structure of MSD and 
TDD documents is defined in such way that the integration 
and transformation can take place as easily and 
unambiguously as possible. An overview of the Smart 
Component architecture with the communication between 
layers is given in Figure 1. During production, the Workflow 
Execution System (WES) sends the TDD to a particular 
Smart Component (production equipment). Ideally, this 
happens simultaneously with the loading of the work piece. 
Due to the fact that it possesses all the necessary information, 
the Smart Component should now be able to execute the 
process step successfully. The task description is a high-level 
document and should not be mistaken for a batch sheet or 
recipe: in most cases the task description is less extensive but 
at the same time more flexible than a pure batch sheet 
specification. At the end of the process step, the product and 
quality data are returned to the WES simultaneously with the 
physical unloading of the work piece. The shape of the QRD 
sent to the WES is also predetermined by the MSD in order 
to ease the analysis of the resulting quality. 
The radical innovations of the “Smart Component 
Networked Factory” are knowledge and responsibility 
segregation, trans-sectoral process learning in specialist 
knowledge networks. The concept is built on coordinated 
teams 
of 
specialized 
autonomous 
objects 
(Smart 
Components), each knowing how to do a certain process 
optimally. This architecture allows continuous process 
improvement, and therefore the system is able to anticipate 
and to respond to rapidly changing consumer needs, 
producing high-quality products in adequate quantities while 
reducing costs. 
IV. 
MULTI-AGENT IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 
NETFACTORY 
As explained in the aforementioned sections, one of the 
steps forward on the reconfigurability in networked factories 
is the encapsulation of the equipment with software, extending 
it 
with 
communication 
capabilities 
and 
intelligent 
functionalities, such as negotiation. This kind of approach will 
allow not only the inter-equipment communication and 
collaboration, but also the communication between the shop-
floor equipment and any software component, assuming it is 
also encapsulated with the same technology. This will 
leverage a much more flexible and effective way of equipment 
configuration, paving the way for the Network Factory 
implementation, 
and 
therefore, 
the 
shop-floor 
reconfigurability. 
This way, a simple MAS was developed to mimic the 
pertinent behaviours and interactions between the most 
important Smart Components, and thus, analyse and predict 
the problems that might occur in a real industrial environment, 
at a collaborative and cooperative level. As can be seen in 
Figure 1, there are three different levels of abstraction present 
in the Smart Component Network, but only the first and the 
last ones were considered for the MAS modelling. This 
 
Figure 1 – Smart Component Network 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-646-0
INTELLI 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

selection lies on the fact that only problems on the shop-floor 
reconfiguration will be analysed, not considering if the 
production is running well or not (monitoring and 
controlling), but instead, take into account the negotiation and 
collaborative abilities to verify if the requirements for fast 
shop-floor reconfiguration are met, in the presence of a new 
product variant. 
Therefore, 
Configuration 
Smart 
Component 
and 
Production Smart Component Agents were developed, and as 
explained in Section 3, the first one is responsible to find the 
optimum production configuration according to some product 
requirements, and the latter one is intended to execute the 
basic manufacturing tasks. Hence, in terms of information 
flow, whenever a Production Smart Component Agent enters 
into the network, it should be able to generate a MSD, and 
send it to the already existing Configuration Smart 
Component Agents, so they can know how the shop-floor can 
be configured using the available equipment and according to 
some product requirements. The first step towards the 
production process is related with the information sent to a 
certain Configuration Smart Component Agent about the 
product 
specifications, 
and 
the 
generation 
of 
the 
corresponding TDD to subsequently send it to the available 
Production Smart Components Agent with the matching 
capabilities, for shop-floor operation. Furthermore, when the 
Production Smart Components Agents finish their operation 
on the production process, the next step is the generation of 
the QRD that is then sent to the Configuration Smart 
Component Agent to update and report the information about 
the equipment’s production performance. This quality 
feedback will drastically influence the selection of the 
available Production Smart Components in the optimum 
production configuration, benefiting the equipment with 
better performances, tending, this way, to choose the most 
reliable and effective ones. 
As previously mentioned, one of the MAS purposes is to 
study the problems associated with collaborative activities 
like the ones described earlier, when the Configuration Smart 
Component Agent delegates TDDs to Production Smart 
Component Agents to act accordingly, and subsequent 
feedback to report the process quality by means of QRD. 
However, most of the collaborative abilities can lead to a 
conflict situation, mainly when two different entities are 
trying to establish a partnership with the same third party. In 
the context of the Network Factory, this can occur when there 
are several instances of Configuration Smart Components that 
can include in their optimum production configuration the 
same Production Smart Component to operate on the shop-
floor level, if this search is made concurrently. One of the 
techniques associated for conflict resolution is the market-
based negotiation. This concept can be simply explained as 
the increase of a resource cost until only one “costumer” is 
willing to pay for the achieved price. For the implementation 
of this technique, Utility, Cost and Threshold functions were 
built to measure the overall usefulness of using a certain 
Production 
Smart 
Component 
on 
the 
production 
configuration. The first one measures how distant an 
equipment operation is from the ideal product specification, 
the second one returns a value of how much an equipment 
execution can cost (not its actual running cost, but only a 
measure representative for this problem) based on QRDs 
information – as much worse the equipment performance is, 
the higher is the cost associated to it, and the latter one is how 
much an agent is willing to pay, based on the utility previously 
calculated – if the utility is high, the threshold value will also 
be, and vice-versa. Hence, when the same Production Smart 
Component Agent is the most suitable one for different 
Configuration Smart Component Agents, the cost of 
Production Smart Component Agent’s execution will be 
increase, until only one Configuration Smart Component 
Agent remains with the threshold value above the cost. 
V. 
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK 
A. Results from the multi-agent implementation 
The strategies presented on the previous sections 
regarding MAS, along with the agent paradigm and well 
structured communication processes (MSD, TDD and QRD), 
proved to be an effective and reliable approach, since some of 
the problems that arise from equipment collaboration were 
studied and successfully solved using the market-based 
negotiation approach. The modelled MAS represents a short 
step forward, but not less important, towards a flexible and 
extensible production reconfiguration, taking into account the 
complex 
industrial 
dynamics 
and 
heterogeneous 
environments. One of the most important advantages of the 
MAS characteristics is undoubtedly the decentralized 
approach that verifies the fault tolerant property, in case of 
sudden equipment failure. The networked factory will 
maintain its communication and collaboration activities, 
avoiding stopping the production process due to component 
non-dependency issues, minimizing costs and maximizing the 
network reliability. Another important concept presented in 
this paper is the task-driven communication, in which 
equipment execution on shop-floor level are specified in 
XML-based format, and used to delegate responsibilities for 
operation according to precise specifications (TDD), and 
receive a valuable feedback on the equipment quality 
execution (QRD). Comparing with manual reconfigurability, 
which in turn reveals to be not cost effective, this concept is 
an important step forward regarding the automatic 
reconfiguration of equipment for shop-floor operation. 
B. Limitations and future extensions of the approach  
The main goal of the work presented in this paper is to 
provide methods, that can be either fully automated or an aid 
to the planning engineer, that selects which Smart 
Components to use for a specific job (new product or variant); 
this will answer the question: “which is the best configuration 
for this task?” 
From the modules that build the configuration Smart 
Component, the Production Simulation System (PSS) is the 
one responsible for the creation of new configurations to 
answer a specific Job description. The assignment problem is 
a special type of linear programming problem where resources 
are being assigned to perform tasks [21]. There is a simple 
algorithm to efficiently evaluate the solution. This algorithm 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-646-0
INTELLI 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

is known as the Hungarian Method and is able to retrieve the 
best set of Smart Components for a set of tasks. However, this 
approach is not helpful in the present context mainly due to 
the fact that the data made available by the Smart Component 
(each Smart Component provides a self description document 
with its typical production capabilities, times and quality 
levels) does not take into account the impact of working in 
tandem with other Smart Components. This is the main reason 
to include a simulation tool on the decision process. To be 
effective, this tool has to be able to analyse several hundreds 
of different line configurations. A specific data development 
analysis model referred to as Charnes, Cooper and Rhodes 
(CCR) [22] model is a fractional programming technique that 
evaluates the relative efficiency of homogeneous decision 
making units, in our case, the relative efficiency of Smart 
Components. The general efficiency measure, which will be 
referred as the cross-reference comparison, is presented in (1). 
 
E"# =
∑ &'()*(
(
∑ +',-*,
,
 
(1) 
where: Osy are the output measures y of the Smart Component 
s; vky are the weights of the “target” Smart Component k to 
output y; Isx are the input measures x of the Smart Component 
s; ukx are the weights of the “target” Smart Component k to 
input x; Eks is the cross- efficiency of Smart Component s, 
using the weights of “target” Smart Component k. 
An optimal value E*kk for the cross-reference comparison 
is obtained by maximizing (2): 
 
E""
∗ =
∑ &*()*(
*
∑ +*,-*,
*
 
(2) 
subjet to: 
E"# =
∑ O#0v"0
0
∑ I#3u"3
3
≤ 1 ∀ 𝑠 
𝑣;< ≥ 0, 𝑢;A ≥ 0, 𝑎𝑛𝑑 E 𝐼GA𝑣;A = 1
A
 
If E*kk is equal to 1 then there is no other Smart Component 
which is better than Smart Component k for its optimal 
weights. Solving this optimization to all the Smart 
Components, then it is possible to select the ones that are not 
optimal (E*kk < 1) and remove them from the solution space. 
The cross reference comparison leads to Pareto optimal 
solutions but it is not a sufficient condition. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The Smart Component network concept meets the 
challenge to integrate intelligence and flexibility at the 
“highest” level of the production control system, as well as 
the “lowest” level of the singular machine, and precludes the 
shift of the production process from a resource-efficiency 
perspective towards knowledge-based and customer-driven 
approach. This networked factory approach allows the 
implementation of a multi-variant system making it possible 
to have an adequate number of production lines for the 
manufacturing of adequate quantities of respective goods 
using an adequate the number of Smart Components in order 
to meet the requirements of increasing product variants and 
producing at ever-smaller lot sizes. Due to the knowledge and 
responsibility segregation within the system, the various 
production units are easily extendable and exchangeable and 
thus offer an unlimited “plug & produce” functionality. 
Different product variants can be produced with the same 
assembly units (Smart Components) on the same production 
line. The new Smart Component concept achieves a high 
level of reusability of assembly equipment and is fast, 
flexible, reconfigurable, and modular. New developments of 
this concept, currently being explored include its adaptation 
to fast ramp-up and equipment re-use scenarios [25]. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. G. Mehrabi, A. G. Ulsoy, and Y. Koren, "Reconfigurable 
manufacturing systems: Key to future manufacturing," Journal 
of Intelligent Manufacturing, vol. 11, pp. 403-419, 2000/08/01 
2000. 
[2] H. Van Brussel, J. Wyns, P. Valckenaers, L. Bongaerts, and P. 
Peeters, "Reference architecture for holonic manufacturing 
systems: PROSA," Computers in Industry, vol. 37, pp. 255-
274, 11// 1998. 
[3] G. Morel, P. Valckenaers, J.-M. Faure, C. E. Pereira, and C. 
Diedrich, "Manufacturing plant control challenges and issues," 
Control Engineering Practice, vol. 15, pp. 1321-1331, 11// 
2007. 
[4] L. M. Sanchez and R. Nagi, "A review of agile manufacturing 
systems," International Journal of Production Research, vol. 
39, pp. 3561-3600, 2001/01/01 2001. 
[5] H. Yang and D. Xue, "Recent research on developing Web-based 
manufacturing systems: a review," International Journal of 
Production Research, vol. 41, pp. 3601-3629, 2003/01/01 
2003. 
[6] W. Shen, Q. Hao, H. Yoon, and D. Norrie, "Applications of 
agent-based systems in intelligent manufacturing: an update 
review," Advanced Engineering Informatics, vol. 20, pp. 415-
431, 2006. 
[7] F. Almeida, P. Dias, G. Gonçalves, M. Peschl, and M. 
Hoffmeister, "A proposition of a manufactronic network 
approach for intelligent and flexible manufacturing systems," 
International Journal of Industrial Engineering Computations, 
vol. 2, pp. 873-890, 2011. 
[8] Y. Koren et al., "Reconfigurable Manufacturing Systems," CIRP 
Annals - Manufacturing Technology, vol. 48, pp. 527-540, // 
1999. 
[9] M. G. Mehrabi, A. G. Ulsoy, Y. Koren, and P. Heytler, "Trends 
and perspectives in flexible and reconfigurable manufacturing 
systems," Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, vol. 13, pp. 
135-146, 2002/04/01 2002. 
[10] N. A. Duffie and R. S. Piper, "Non-hierarchical control of a 
flexible manufacturing cell," Robotics and Computer-
Integrated Manufacturing, vol. 3, pp. 175-179, 1987. 
[11] H.V.D. Parunak, "An Architecture for Heuristic Factory 
Control", Proceedings of the American Control Conference, 
pp. 548-558, 1986. 
[12] H. V. D. Parunak, A. D. Baker, and S. J. Clark, "The AARIA 
Agent Architecture: From Manufacturing Requirements to 
Agent-Based System Design," Integrated Computer-Aided 
Engineering volume 8 (1), pp. 45-58, 1998. 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-646-0
INTELLI 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

[13] G. Gonçalves, J. Sousa, F. Pereira, P. Dias, and A. Santos, "A 
framework for e-cooperation business agents: An application 
to the (re)engineering of production facilities" in: Jagdev, H.S., 
Wortmann, J.C., Pels, H.J., eds., Collaborative Systems for 
Production Management (Kluwer Academic Publishers), pp. 
189-204, 2002. 
[14] S. Bussmann and K. Schild, "An Agent-Based Approach to the 
Control of Flexible Production Systems," presented at the 8th 
IEEE International Conference on Emergent Technologies and 
Factory Automation (ETFA 2001), Antibes Juan-les-pins, 
France, 2001. 
[15] G. Gonçalves, P. Dias, A. Santos, J. Sousa, and F. Pereira, "An 
implementation of a framework for cooperative engineering," 
presented at the Proceedings of the 16th IFAC World Congress, 
Czech Republic, 2005. 
[16] H. Dyke Parunak, "What can agents do in industry, and why? 
An overview of industrially-oriented R&D at CEC," in 
Cooperative Information Agents II Learning, Mobility and 
Electronic Commerce for Information Discovery on the 
Internet. vol. 1435, M. Klusch and G. Weiß, Eds., ed: Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, 1998, pp. 1-18. 
[17] B. Saint Germain, P. Valckenaers, P. Verstraete, Hadeli, and H. 
Van Brussel, "A multi-agent supply network control 
framework," Control Engineering Practice, vol. 15, pp. 1394-
1402, 11// 2007. 
[18] V. Mařík and J. Lažanský, "Industrial applications of agent 
technologies," Control Engineering Practice, vol. 15, pp. 1364-
1380, 11// 2007. 
[19] L. Neto, J. Reis, D. Guimarães, G. Gonçalves, "Sensor cloud: 
Smartcomponent framework for reconfigurable diagnostics in 
intelligent manufacturing environments", 2015 IEEE 13th 
international conference on industrial informatics (INDIN), pp. 
1706-1711, 2015. 
[20] M. Peschl, N. Link, M. Hoffmeister, G. Gonçalves, and F. 
Almeida, "Designing and implementation of an intelligent 
manufacturing system," Journal of Industrial Engineering and 
Management, vol. 4, pp. 718-745, 2011. 
[21] F. S. Hillier and G. J. Lieberman, Introduction to Operations 
Research, Eighth ed.: McGraw-Hill Primis, 2008. 
[22] A. Charnes, W. W. Cooper, and E. Rhodes, "Measuring the 
efficiency of decision making units," European Journal of 
Operational Research vol. 6, p. 429.444, 1978. 
[23] R Pinto, J. Reis, R. Silva, M. Peschl, G. Gonçalves, “Smart 
sensing components in advanced manufacturing systems”, 
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems 9 
(1&2), 181-193, 2016. 
[24] L Neto, J Reis, R Silva, G Gonçalves, “Sensor SelComp, a 
smart component for the industrial sensor cloud of the future”, 
2017 IEEE International Conference on Industrial Technology 
(ICIT), 1256-1261, 2017. 
[25] S. Aguiar, R. Pinto, J. Reis, G Gonçalves, “A Marketplace for 
Cyber-Physical Production Systems: Architecture and Key 
Enablers”, INTELLI 2017, The Sixth International Conference 
on Intelligent Systems and Applications, Nice, France, 2017. 
[26] M. Peschl, “An Architecture for Flexible for Flexible 
Manufacturing Systems based on task-driven Intelligent 
Agents”, Ph.D. dissertation, Uniiversiitatiis Ouluensiis, 
Finland, 2014. 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-646-0
INTELLI 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

