     Intelligent Tools for Electrical Energy Domain in Smart City  
Ary Mauricio Burbano, Antonio Martín
Higher Polytechnic School 
Seville University 
Seville, Spain 
e-mail: aryburcen1@alum.us.es, toni@us.es 
 Carlos León 
Technical High School of Computer Science 
University of Seville 
Seville, Spain 
e-mail: cleon@us.es 
Abstract— More technological tools that can improve energy 
efficiency are being used. The generation, transmission, and 
energy 
distribution 
undoubtedly 
needs 
management 
equipment. This article is an effort to expose information 
acquisition technologies, local service, communications, and 
service platform. In addition, it explains how artificial 
intelligence, the Internet of Things and ontology, help to 
master energy to improve its supervision and thus increase 
energy efficiency in cities. Developers and engineers in the 
electricity sector need to know what the new tools can be used 
in electrical networks and homes. It is important for smart 
cities that people involved in the generation and distribution of 
electric power, know and apply these technologies. The main 
goal of this paper is to present intelligent tools and their 
characteristics for the people involved in the energy sector that 
could use these in energy projects or efficiency energy projects. 
     Keywords- Electric; energy; intelligent tools; artificial 
intelligence; communications; ontology.  
I.
INTRODUCTION
    Many technologies have been developed to improve the 
lifestyle in cities. Technological advance in electronics 
generate better tools to increase energy efficiency in cities 
each year. All these electronic devices are connected to the 
Internet or intranet, where computers store information and 
organize thousands of data of energy consumption. 
However, technology has taken another step with artificial 
intelligence (AI), where computers process information and 
make decisions. Commonly, when people think in AI, they 
imagine robots that can speak with humans, make cars, and 
more recently, help people in physical. But the true 
development this moment is software, not hardware.   
Programs are now competent enough that to do jobs that are 
annoying for humans; for example, in the energy 
management of electric lines or energy consumption at 
home, the sensors can communicate in real time and make 
decisions to solve problems in a few seconds. If the problem 
is in the electric line and the solution is not possible, the 
machine sends a signal to the operator to check the fault.  
That is possible thanks to the communication and the 
electronic tools that communicate energy data to the 
computers to build the solutions in real time. 
      For the energy domain, there are many technical 
developments to improve management of this sector. One of 
these is ontology. Ontologies are constructed using 
appropriate formal languages called ontology languages, 
based on the logic of first order predicates, frameworks or 
descriptive logic. According to the literature [1], an 
ontology language must describe what it clearly means 
clearly for the machine. Therefore, an ontology language 
needs to include the ability to specify vocabulary and the 
means to formally the way it will work to automate 
reasoning. Especially today, with the fast evolution of the 
Web and the recent emergence of the Semantic Web, the 
emphasis is placed on ontology languages suitable for the 
Internet, which is based on established Web standards. Web 
ontology languages allow defining different vocabularies, 
and they are specifically designed to facilitate Web sharing.
     Authors in this paper present intelligent tools that help 
energy users improve energy efficiency. In the first section, 
the authors talk about the tools in energy domain; in the 
second section, they speak about the internet of things. The 
third section is about Artificial Intelligence, the fifth section 
presents an example of ontology in the energy domain and 
finally, in the sixth section the conclusions are presented. 
II.
ICT IN THE ENERGY DOMAIN
     Information and Communication Technology (ICT) is 
one of the key tools for the development of a smart city. The 
level of the advancement of ICT affects the strategy of 
planning for the development of smart cities. With ICT, it is 
possible to have whole digital platforms interconnected that 
support applications and private and public services.  Cities 
tend toward models that allow reducing the personal and 
global energy consumption, that support the big imbalance 
between energy generation capacity and municipal energy 
consumption [2]. 
    There are many tools that have played a great role in 
building and developing smart homes and cities. Among 
these are the internet, wireless networks, and systems such 
as Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, and Zigbee; Smart Phones including 
LTE, 3G, 4G, and 5G cell systems; body area sensor 
networks, smart grids and renewable energy, optical fiber 
systems and high-speed networks, Internet of Things (IoT), 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-576-0
INTELLI 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt)

wireless sensor networks (WSN), Vehicle Ad Hoc Networks 
(VANET), global positioning systems (GPS), geographic 
information systems (GIS), wireless navigation systems, 
world wide web (WWW), social networks, smart TV, radio 
frequency ID (RFID), sensor-enabled smart objects, 
actuators and sensors, cloud computing systems, intelligent 
transportation systems (ITS), biometric systems, e-based 
systems including e-commerce, e-government, e-business 
and e-service systems, network infrastructures, data 
management systems, analytics. Wireless power transfer 
(WPT) is used to transfer power over short distances using 
magnetic fields [3]. 
Figure 1. Technologies for Smart Cities 
     Every day, more ICT´s are implicit in our life; smart city 
devices (SCDs) have increased the influence of technology 
in our work, friends, and family.  As a generic approach, 
SCDs types are divided into two main groups: reactive and 
active devices. Reactive devices are dumber devices that 
only receive some information and acts. 
The generic objective of the reactive devices (R-SCDs) is 
increasing their energy efficiency without sacrificing 
performance [4]. One difference between reactive devices 
and active (A-SCDs) is that smarter devices can pursue a 
complete communication 
amongst other SCDs and 
operators. 
     Nowadays, people need energy for almost all activities in 
their daily life. SCDs have various elements that can be used 
in our lives, such as listening to music, talking, playing, 
shopping, health, financing etc. The apps now are very 
common, with infinite possibilities to achieve more energy 
efficiency. There are apps about house energy, car energy 
that indicate energy consumption and how many calories 
one’s body has burned.  This information could be analyzed 
and processed to improve our energy consumption. SCD´s 
are possible to use in all energy cycles; when energy reaches 
a home, many sensors, capacitors, Data logger and other 
devices are working to obtain the most efficiency possible. 
The Smart city must use elements, information management 
and interconnect various platforms that operate locally and 
autonomously. The layers of smart city models, from the 
technology point of view, are the following: 
A.
Adquisition of information  
    The layer of information acquisition uses sensors that 
receive information from the environment where they are 
integrated. The local service layer stores and registers the 
information of sensors with date and hour to transmit to the 
services platform. In all cases, this layer does not exist 
because the sensors and actuators are intelligent and are 
controlled directly by the services platform.  
    The sensors are elements, which collect information from 
different types and are transformed into an electric signal 
that could be sent and proceed. The digital signal only has 
two possible values or states, all or nothing, for example, 0 
V o 24 V. The analog signal has a continuous range of 
possible values, for example of 0 to 10, equivalent a 
measurement range of a physic variable, temperature 0 to 
100 ºC [2]. Besides, the data readers as detectors that 
perceive a determinate value. The simple sensors collect one 
or more measurements must be considered. Complex 
sensors collect information from a huge number of aspects. 
Identification sensors allow the identification of an object 
incorporating information from it. At Industrial level, we 
can see the example of ENDESA that leading smart meter 
installation in Spain with over 8 million smart meters, 
accounting for 72 % of the current fleet of 11.6 million 
meters [5]. 
    The capture devices of complex data are elements that   
captured data through cameras or lectors. The actuators are 
elements that transform a digital or analog signal through 
data bus in one action there. Exists all or nothing actuators 
of the digital signal, as relays or contactors, that allow, for 
example, the turning on or turning off a group of lamps. The 
regulation actuators of the analog signal generate one analog 
outlet, which allows moderating the light level. Many of 
these sensors and actuators can be consulted and active 
through the Internet, each grid used their own standards, 
protocols, and formats of data representation. This is a 
problem when it wants to homogenize a solution, that is 
why it is important to try to open standards or have one 
platform that help to manage and interconnect these 
heterogeneous devices.    
B.
Local Service 
There exists equipment that collects the signals of the 
sensors or detectors and sends the orders to actuators located 
in the installation. It also reports the information recollected 
from the sensors to the services’ platform and receives 
orders from this. The number of sensors that are controlled 
by the equipment comes from digital inputs for the detectors 
and analogue inputs for the analog sensors. In Figure 2, we 
can see the basic structure of interconnection of these 
control elements.   
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-576-0
INTELLI 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt)

Figure 2. Control Elements 
     The principal equipment in the local service is the Data 
logger, which is a device that stores information for the 
sensors and detectors, with the date and the hour when it has 
been produced. The Data logger does not receive orders 
neither signals for realizing functions of actuation, but only 
gives information to the service platform. However, there 
exists programmable automata that functions with specific 
programming. This type of equipment gives to the smart 
city the advantage of the flexibility, being able to adapt the 
individual form to the needs of each installation. 
C.
Communications 
     The transmission information layer is the infrastructure 
of communications that sends and receives necessary data 
for 
the 
application 
of 
global 
service. 
With 
the 
communication networks, the interconnection of the energy 
domain is possible and facility the collection of data through 
sensors for its later treatment and makes decisions. The 
networks 
implicated 
are 
very 
heterogeneous, 
the 
interoperability and transparency are very important. To 
support information collection, distribution, automated 
control and optimization of the power system, the smart grid 
communication system will rely on two major subsystems: a 
communication infrastructure and a middleware platform. 
The communication infrastructure consists of a set of 
communication technologies, networks, and protocols that 
support communication connectivity among devices or grid 
sub-systems and enables the distribution of information and 
commands within the power system. Basic requirements for 
such 
communication 
infrastructure 
are 
scalability, 
reliability, timeliness, and security. The middleware 
platform consists of a software layer, which is situated 
between the applications and the underlying communication 
infrastructure, providing the services needed to build 
efficient distributed functions and systems. A middleware 
runs on the devices that are part of the smart grid 
communication infrastructure. It supports data management 
services for example data sharing, storage, and processing, 
standard communication and programming interfaces for 
distributed applications and computational intelligence and 
autonomic management capabilities [6]. 
      The storage and analysis of the information layer is 
where all data are stored and also where it takes place the 
process for the analytic system to improve the management 
platform of the different services. The storage, in some 
cases of long duration, as the capacity of the process, allows 
the huge volumes of information generated for the grids of 
sensors and control equipment. As Guelzim says “Smart 
homes and cities will rely on the Internet of Things (IoT) 
devices, sensors, RFID chips, and smart electric meters, 
among others, to provide added value services to citizens 
and homeowners. However, these devices generate a large 
amount of data, big data, data sets, which are so big that 
traditional data processing techniques are not adequate to 
manage them” [7]. 
    The technique known as Big Data allows adding the 
information flows that come to the huge sensor network of 
the city, convert it to useful and apply knowledge to make 
decisions of management of the smart city services. Big 
Data is a term, which design growth the availability and the 
exponential uses of structured and disorganized information. 
A definition of Big Data could be "Big Data is not about 
size, but it's about granularity". The ability of software 
systems to identify individuals and personalized data is the 
ironic implication of "Big". It is the ability to focus on the 
minutiae of the individual, in real time [1]. Data are 
fundamental in all service in the framework of the smart 
city. The data management is a complex job because 
normally they are consumed in real time, are diverse and 
present different formats. A tentative estimation of the 
amount of digital information produced by mankind is 280 
EB of data [8]. 
D.
Service Platform 
     Finally, the services’ platform is the principal platform in 
the smart city domain, which is formed by various modules 
and management platforms and have interfaces with the 
final user. This platform offers a set of common modules to 
the multiple service and allows the operators to have a better 
and efficient service. The platform receives the processed 
information and interprets them, then it performs the actions 
according to the service of their destination. In the whole 
process, ICT increase the efficiency of the application of the 
generation, distribution, and energy consumption. Also, the 
control center could process the information and give to 
humans 
the 
possible 
failures 
solutions. 
With 
this 
technology, now the computers not only send and store 
information, also process the information. This implies 
guarantee of the interoperability at different levels; in 
hardware, the sensors, capacitors and data logger will be 
connected inwardly, and in software, the communication 
protocols, data structure and semantic will connect. 
     When talking about energy efficiency in smart cities it is 
important to talk about the ICT tools standardization, that 
allow increasing the security and clarity of energy sector, 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-576-0
INTELLI 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt)

through of the contribution and information in real time 
between installations and the users. On the other hand, it 
encourages the multidirectional communication amongst 
different persons that influence in the energy consumption 
of the installation and the buildings. The main challenges of 
the future applications of SCD networks in smart cities can 
be listed as follows: lack of central control that has a 
complete information about the topology, integration and 
application simplicity, excessive amounts of system need, 
compatibility between SCDs and networks.  To overcome 
these challenges, software-centered control structures need 
to be developed [9]. 
III.
INTERNET OF THINGS
    As utilities seek to modernize their grid infrastructure and 
day-to-day operations and services, enabled technologies are 
gaining increasing importance in enabling digitization and 
delivery of new energy models. The IoT is one of the major 
technologies that will shape the future of the digital world 
including Smart World, and Smart Cities and Homes. It is a 
mesh network of physical objects that either exchange data 
in P2P mode or communicate and relay information with the 
service provider [10].  
    There are many connected objects today such as 
electronic appliances, laptops, cameras, meeting, news as 
can see in Figure 3 that rely on RFID technology. IoT 
objects can be sensed and controlled across local area 
network or wide area networks. 
Figure 3. Internet of Things 
This allows the creation of many products and opportunities 
to better integrate the physical infrastructure with the digital 
systems. Many experts expect >10 billion IoT objects by 
year 2020 [7]. Big industry players such as Microsoft, IBM, 
Cisco, Siemens, and Google already play an important role 
in helping draft and put in place such technologies by 
offering cloud-based IoT services and devices. 
IV.
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
      A step forward is using artificial intelligence (AI) to 
improve saving and efficiency energy. With AI, citizen can 
delegate the decision to improve efficiency to the computer. 
At the home level, computers can take the decision about 
the information of the Smart energy management system 
(SEMS). When SEMS detect a high consumption at night at 
home, the system could turn off a home appliance that is 
guilty of the excess. The computer  could also turn on the 
home appliances when the cost of energy is low, for 
example, the washing machine could be turned on at night.
     As the authors said, the energy domain needs the 
optimization of the resources, this achieves with the 
measurement, monitoring of the grids and the used energy 
analysis at buildings. Besides, with the concept of the green 
city, a city without greenhouses gases, with green transport, 
green buildings, include more variables to consider.  This 
creates serious limitations when it comes to analyzing the 
data, especially if the analysis requires data from different 
fields, for example: technical, political, social, economic, 
environmental [11]. On the other hand, the difficulties of 
accessing multiple data sources and integrating them into a 
unified data model increases in the case of large volumes of 
data stored in data sources that support the models. Data 
describing the characteristics of similar articles using 
different standardization systems, different units of 
measurement applied [12]. As Keirstead said, it requires a 
systemic approach to understand “The combined process of 
acquisition and use of energy to meet the demands of a 
given urban area” by means of an urban energy system 
model, i.e., "a formal system that represents the combined 
processes of energy acquisition and used to meet the 
demand for energy services” [13].     
     Because of these difficulties, many researchers are using 
ontology to facilitate the interoperability between data 
model, which have been constructed by different experts 
from several domains using multiple techniques [14]. The 
Ontology is a taxonomy of concepts with attributes and 
relationships that provide a consensual vocabulary to 
defining semantic networks of units of information. 
Specifically, it is formed by a taxonomy that relates 
concepts and by a set of axioms or rules of inference, 
through which new knowledge can be inferred [15]. In the 
field of urban energetic systems, a shared ontology could 
facilitate the interoperability between data models building 
for different experts of various domains that use multiple 
techniques. There are various examples where are 
ontologies used. In the SEMANCO project for example, the 
semantics technologies have used standard tables to create 
models of urban energy systems, capable to evaluate the 
energy efficiency of urban zone. A semantic energy 
information framework brings together data sources at 
different scales and from different domains [16]. Another 
developed ontology with a similar objective is DogOnt [17], 
which aims to represent the different forms of energy 
production, depending on the construction, the number of 
occupants living in it, the devices, etc. DogOnt offers the 
ability to describe the location and capabilities of a home 
automation 
device 
and 
its 
possible 
configurations, 
device/network 
support, 
description 
of 
houses 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-576-0
INTELLI 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt)

independently, including architectural elements. Another 
example is SynCity (short for "Synthetic City"), a platform 
for modeling urban energy systems [13]. The SynCity 
Urban Energy Systems (UES) ontology serves primarily as 
a library of domain-specific components, consisting of a 
series of object classes that describe the main elements of an 
urban energy system and specific cases of these classes. 
V.
THE ENERGY ONTOLOGY
    The Energy Ontology (EO), shown in Figure 4, provides 
a flexible and extensible structure for modeling information 
about energy consumption, generation and storage, able to 
combine easy usage with the possibility to provide detailed 
descriptions. The ontology introduces a basic set of 
properties and classes to encode the most common energetic 
information used for system energy management that can be 
easily further extended using more specialized subclasses. 
The capability of OWL language can be also exploited to 
link EO with other ontology as ELM/OWL.  
Figure 4. A graphical representation of same classes and properties of the 
Energy Ontology 
      EO introduces two basic classes representative of the 
two main categories that classify the energetic behavior of 
devices and plants: Power Consumer and Power Producer.  
These classes expose basic properties to encode information 
about power production and consumption features like the 
minimum, maximum and average amount of power 
consumed/produced. Dealing with energy management it is 
important to store information of power consumption/ 
production combined with time information. In this way, for 
example, historical power consumption can be created and 
maintained to be use for estimating future consumptions or 
for defining the user consumption profiles. With such 
purpose, EO provides the Power at Time class that allows 
describing the amount of power at a certain time [17]. 
  An intelligent energy management for a complex home 
environment requires encoding and processing a wide 
number of information about actual and expected energy 
consumption and production. Dealing with solar and wind 
energy generation, the power output changes remarkably 
according to season, daytime and weather conditions.  
Particularly, the power output of a photovoltaic installation 
varies considerably on season scale, due to the different 
solar irradiation and weather conditions. Even more 
dramatically on a daily scale, due to solar irradiation 
ranging from the zero during the night to a maximum during 
the central hours of the day. Therefore, commonly, the 
system draws energy from the grid when the production is 
not sufficient to cover the energy needs, while releases 
energy to the grid when the produced energy exceeds the 
needs. Maximizing the amount of produced energy that is 
consumed locally in the house, is convenient both in terms 
of efficiency, avoiding energy loss in grid transportation, 
and profit, because the price at which energy is bought from 
the grid is higher than the price at which energy is sold to 
the grid, since power companies add delivery charges to 
energy price. In addition, reducing the request of energy 
from the public grid, which mostly relies on fossil sources 
especially in the rush hours, means to reduce pollution [18]. 
     A dynamic and intelligent task scheduling it is then 
necessary to exploit at best the produced energy for 
performing more tasks as possible when there is a surplus of 
produced energy and to limit later energy draw from the 
grid when energy production is scarce or null. This requires 
the management of a wide number of information, relying 
on them to implement intelligent control logic. It’s 
necessary not only to have a real-time measure of the 
consumed/produced energy but also to esteem how much 
energy will be produced in the next hours or days and how 
much energy the users will consume. Solar irradiation 
forecast curves, based on an average esteem of the solar 
irradiation measured on a region in the previous years, and 
weather forecast services can be used to get a row esteem of 
energy production. Forecast energy consumption can be 
evaluated using user’s energy consumption profiles, derived 
from the statistical analyzing of system logs of energy 
consumption, and considering the energy requested from 
already scheduled task. It's necessary also to rely on services 
descriptions to infer if and how much a service can be 
deferred or performed in advance and consider the time 
required for task completion. Moreover, it is necessary to 
evaluate the amount of energy required to perform each 
service to assign a priority for task execution and to manage 
eventual conflicts.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS  
     The digitization of city infrastructure is already a fact 
and is opening a world of opportunities in which all the 
stakeholders are called to be positioned and create value 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-576-0
INTELLI 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt)

from that. For example, the development of the Smart Grids 
should adapt the regulatory framework and do big 
investment in the grids, such as monitoring, equipment of 
consumption and smart meters in the consumer installations. 
     A smart city of the future should have more participation 
of renewable energy than hydro and fossil fuels.  In this city 
the transport and energy distribution will be through 
superconductors, all the energy system will be supervised by 
a master center that analyzes the information that arrives 
from the sensors and remote terminal units (RTU). This 
expert system solves the problems and failures, informs the 
operators if it is necessary to fix a point of the line. The 
Master learns the new cases and stores the cases for futures 
problems. So, when the energy arrives at homes, it comes 
with a few losses thanks to master center and then it is up to 
the user to be efficient. 
     In the cities, every day there are installed various energy 
efficiency technologies, whereby electric utilities and 
companies in the sector must make known the operation of 
these tools. For this reason, the decision makers in the 
electricity sector should create programs to disseminate this 
technology, and with the help of users, achieve significant 
reduction that minimizes the bill cost. 
REFERENCES
[1]
Pulido, J.R.G. Ruiz, M.A.G. Herrera, R. Cabello, E. Legrand, S, and 
Elliman, D, Ontology languages for the semantic web: a never 
completely updated review. Knowl. Based Syst, 2006, pp. 489-497,. 
[2]
Colado, Sergio. SMART CITY; hacia la gestión inteligente. 
Barcelona: Marcombo, pp. 91-101, 2014. 
[3]
Tseng, R. Von, Novak B. Shevde, S, and Grajski KA, Introduction to 
the alliance for wireless power loosely-coupled wireless power 
transfer system specification version 1.0. In: Proceedings of the 2013 
IEEE wireless power transfer conference, WPT’1, pp. 79, 83, 2013. 
[4]
Akgul, OU, and Canberk B, Self-organized things (sot): an energy 
efficient next generation network management. Comput Common, pp. 
74:52–62, 2016. 
[5]
Vollkwyn, C. (in press). Smart in the Spanish power sector. Metering 
and smart energy international (MSEI), Issue 4, pp. 32-40, 2016. 
[6]
Ancillotti, Emilio. Raffaele, Bruno, and Marco Conti. The role of 
communication systems in smart grids: Architectures, technical 
solutions and research challenges, Computer communications.  The 
International Journal for the Computer and Telecommunications 
Industry,  pp. 1-22, 2013. 
[7]
T, Guelzim. M.S, Obaidat, and B Sadoum. Introduction and overview 
of key enabling technologies for smart cities and homes. Smart Cities 
and Homes. Elsevier, pp. 11, 2016. 
[8]
Hilbert, M, and Lopez, P., The world’s technological capacity to 
store, communicates, and compute information. Science, pp. 60–5, 
2011. 
[9]
Akgul, OU, and Canberk B. Software defined thinks: A green 
network management for future smart city architectures. Smart cities 
and Homes, Key Enabling Technologies. Cambridge:
Morgan 
Kaufmann. Elsevier, pp. 41-44, 2016. 
[10] Atzori, L. Iera, A, and Morabito, G. The Internet of things: a survey. 
Comput Networks. The International Journal of Computer and 
Telecommunications Networking, pp. 787–805, 2010. 
[11] Heiple, S, and Sailor, D. J. Using building energy simulation and 
geospatial modeling techniques to determine high-resolution building 
sector energy consumption profiles. Energy and Buildings. An 
international journal devoted to investigations of energy use and 
efficiency in buildings, pp. 1426–1436, 2008. 
[12] Nemirovskij, G. Nolle, A. Sicilia, A. Ballarini, I, and Corrado, V. 
Data integration driven ontology design, case study smart city.In: 
proceedings of the 3rd international conference on web intelligence, 
mining and semantics (WIMS’ 13), pp.34-46,  2013. 
[13] Keirstead, J. Samsatli, N, and Shah, N. SynCity: an integrated tool kit 
for urban energy systems modeling. In: 5th Urban Research 
Symposium. University of Marseille, pp. 52, 2009. 
[14] Van Dam, K., and Keirstead, J. Re-use of an ontology for modeling 
urban energy systems. In 3rd international conference on next 
generation infrastructure systems for eco-cities. Shenzhen: Harbin 
Institute of Technology, pp. 11-13, 2010. 
[15] León, Fernández. Desarrollo de una ontología para la seguridad en 
caso de incendio en la edificación, Unpublished doctoral dissertation, 
Universidad de Sevilla,pp 36-50, 2008. 
[16] Corrado, V, and Ballarini, I. Guidelines for Structuring Energy Data, 
Report of SEMANCO Project. Retrieved January 10, 2017, from 
http://semanco-project.eu/index/files/SEMANCOD3.2 20130121.pdf, 
2013. 
[17] Bonino, B,and Corno, F. DogOnt e ontology modeling for intelligent 
domotics environments. In: The Semantic Web e ISWC. Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 790-803, 2008. 
[18] Grassi, M. Nucci, M, and Piazza F. Towards an ontology framework 
for intelligent smart home management and energy saving. 
Proceedings of the 20 II IEEE International Conference on 
Networking, Sensing and Control Delft, pp. 56-59, 2011. 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-576-0
INTELLI 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt)

