Forecasting the Needs of Users and Systems 
A New Approach to Web Service Mining 
Juan I. Guerrero, Enrique Personal, Antonio Parejo, Antonio García and Carlos León 
Department of Electronic Technology 
University of Seville 
Seville, Spain 
email: juaguealo@us.es 
Abstract—The Smart Grids provides a great scope of new 
technologies. The new technologies include the integration of 
heterogeneous systems which perform different task in the 
Smart Grid ecosystems. These new systems have their own 
users with different knowledge levels. It is important that the 
integrated system can assimilate the new systems without a 
complex implementations and deployments. Additionally, the 
users of these systems will increase their needs when new 
systems are integrated. The proposed framework forecasts the 
needs of new systems make available new Web Services (WSs) 
to users and systems. The standards related with Smart Grids 
include specifications for different Web Service Architectures. 
Thus, the proposed framework is based on Web Service 
Mining, using different modules, including semantic engine 
and analytic module, with time series classification and 
clustering. Finally, the proposed framework was applied in 
Smart Business Park (SBP), creating new WSs based on the 
analysis of Web Services activity information, forecasting the 
needs of users or/and systems. 
Keywords-web service mining; ant colony optimization; smart 
grids; computational intelligence. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
There are a lot of examples of technologies that makes 
our lives more comfortable, since robots with artificial 
intelligence to make different things (cooking, management, 
cleaning, etc.), to information technologies to optimize our 
task and reduce the time. Time is the only thing that you 
waste and never recover. Additionally, time is a very 
important asset for any company. Thus, all technologies that 
let you optimize any task are very important. There are 
several examples in different economic sectors. In health and 
e-health sectors, the new technologies related with data 
mining [1], biomedical imaging and image processing [2] 
have been reduced the diagnostic time and the quality of 
health services. In the power distribution sector, the 
emergent technologies related with Smart Grids (SGs) have 
provided new functionalities and services for consumers, 
reducing the restoring power supply time [3] and increasing 
the supply quality [4]. In information technology sector, the 
new technologies related with big data [5][6] and high 
performance computing [7] have improved the capabilities to 
store and analyze great volumes of information (applied in 
health, environmental control and monitoring, finance, 
telecommunication, and other utilities). In particular, Google 
[8] reduced the searching time using different techniques to 
rank the results of search requests. Sometimes, these systems 
are designed to recommend information [9] that could be 
interesting. This means the systems try to forecast the needs 
of the users in order to save time and increase the Quality of 
Service (QoS). Sometimes, some of the previously 
mentioned technologies could go unnoticed by the final 
users. There are other technologies as the previously 
mentioned ones: Web Service Mining. 
The Web Service Mining [10] is an emergent technology 
that deals with the WS in order to discover, check, and 
improve service behavior, based on service composition, 
service pattern discovery, managing service registry-
repositories, etc. There are several solutions based on process 
mining [11], pattern usage discovery [12], hypergraph-based 
matrix representation with a service set mining algorithm 
[13], constraint satisfaction [14], semantics-based methods 
[15][16], customer value analysis [17], frequent composite 
algorithm [18], Heterogeneous Feature Selection [19], etc. 
for cross-cloud environment [20], RESTful Web Services 
[21], etc. 
This paper proposes a novel web service mining 
approach based on computational intelligence and data 
mining framework. This framework creates new WSs based 
on the usage of existing WSs, in order to forecast 
functionalities for users and systems. This framework is been 
researched for a Smart Business Parks (SBPs). The current 
version has been tested with several systems related to SGs 
Ecosystem. Thus, the SG ecosystem is formed by several 
systems to allow the distributed management of power 
energy, 
for 
example, 
energy 
management 
systems, 
distributed energy resource management, etc. Additionally, 
the proposed framework could integrate the WSs of the 
additional system, which may be added to the ecosystem. In 
this sense, the proposed framework tries to learn the WS 
usage pattern made by the systems and users, providing the 
capability to forecast the needs of systems or users creating 
new WSs that can be useful for them. 
The proposed framework is formed by several modules 
which are described in this paper, each module implies 
different techniques. In Section II, the overview of proposed 
framework is included. In Section III, the description of each 
module is provided. In Section IV, the experimental results 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

are explained. Finally, in Section V, the conclusions and 
future works are described. 
II.
FRAMEWORK OVERVIEW
The proposed framework contains several modules, as 
shown in Fig. 1. Additionally, the architecture of the 
proposed framework applied in a SBP architecture is shown 
in Fig. 2. 
In this framework, there are several modules to add 
information to the database of the system. Monitoring 
Module stored all activity of WSs. Discovery and Check & 
Test modules are based on Ant Colony Optimization (ACO) 
Algorithms. Discovery Module performs an ACO in order to 
discovery new services in the ecosystem. Check & Test 
Module perform different tests in order to check the new or 
existing services. The Hybrid Web Service Engine (HWSE) 
provides to the previously described modules the possibility 
to interact with different type of services: REST and SOAP.  
The Web Service Database (WSDB) stores information 
about WSs registered in the ecosystem, adding metadata and 
analytic information, using the Analytic Module and 
Semantic Engine. 
The Analytic Module is based on time series. This 
module performs an analysis of all available information. 
The objectives of this module are: establish the importance 
of service, order the service by importance level and identify 
the WS groups. Additionally, the module establishes the time 
usage pattern of each WS and group. 
The Web Service Engine (WS Engine or WSE) creates 
the new WSs by composition of WS groups, registering in 
Web Service Hybrid Repository (WS Hybrid Repository or 
WSHR). 
The WSHR stores the information of each service in 
different WS standards. 
Figure 1. Framework overview 
The SBP ecosystem has several systems: Public Lighting 
Management System, Smart building Management System, 
KPI Monitoring System, Photovoltaic Management System, 
and other systems. The ecosystem includes a layer for 
system integration. This layer is the middleware or gateway 
to access to Intelligent Electronic Devices (IEDs), which is 
based on several standards like IEC 61850 and other 
standards related with SG Standard European Roadmap [22]. 
In this sense, the Alarm and Event Monitoring Module 
registers the information of events and alarms generated in 
the system, at high level in the application layer, and in low 
level in the IED layer. 
Public
Lightning
Management
System
Smartbuilding
Management
System
KPI
Monitoring
System
Other
System
INTEGRATION SYSTEM LAYER
INTELLIGENT ELECTRONIC DEVICES (IEDs)
DEVICE INTEGRATION API SERVICES
VPN
API WEB SERVICE (SSL/TLS)
Proposed 
Framework
Figure 2. Proposed Framework in SBP Ecosystem 
One of the most important requirements of this SBP 
ecosystem is the capability to assimilate new systems that 
complains with the established standards. Thus, the proposed 
framework is an intelligent framework to integrate the 
services of new systems in the SBP ecosystem. 
III.
DESCRIPTION OF MODULES
The proposed framework is composed of several 
modules (see Fig. 1), each of which are responsible of 
following tasks:  
A.
Hybrid WS Engine (HWSE) 
The Hybrid WS Engine is a parser of WSs. This module 
can extract information from messages in different WS 
standards: SOAP and REST. The information extracted 
includes data and metadata. 
B.
Monitoring Module 
The Monitoring Module gathers the information of all 
WS usage, using the HWSE in order to parse the messages. 
This module is always monitoring and registering the 
message traffic. The module stores the information of WSs 
(data and metadata) in the WSDB. Additionally, the module 
stores information about timestamps, response periods, 
preconditions, information to calculate frequencies (usage, 
requester, and provider), results, effects, average size, etc. 
This information is gathered for Analytic Module. 
C.
Discovery Module 
The Discovery Module takes advantage from different 
WS technologies: Universal Description Discovery and 
Integration 
(UDDI), 
Web-Service 
discovery 
(WS-
Discovery), electronic business using eXtensible Markup 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

Language (ebXML), Domain Name System (DNS), etc. 
Additionally, the Discovery Module uses the information 
stored in WSDB to improve the WS discovery. This 
information is loaded in an ACO algorithm. The ACO 
algorithm has two main objectives: discover the WSs which 
are not accessible to traditional WS discovery technologies; 
and extracting the functional information of WS. 
D.
Check & Test Module 
The check and test module performs an ACO in order to 
optimize the created or composed WSs. The non-functional 
attributes of WS limit the usage of this module. The security 
level and the critical nature of WS could avoid the WS check 
or test.  
This module has two main objectives: 
-
Check and test the new WS registered in WSHR. 
-
Check and test the existing WS registered in other 
repositories. 
This module support SOAP and REST. 
E.
Alarm & Event Monitoring Module 
This module was specially designed for SGs ecosystems. 
The module registers and stores information about any event, 
warning, or alarm fired in any system or in any device of SG. 
Alarms, warnings, and events are considered as information 
entities. These entities are one of the most important sources 
to improve the web service mining. Entities are usually 
related with the WS usage in a SG ecosystem. An entity has 
usually associated several WS usage patterns. The end of 
pattern is often marked by another entity. Thus, this module 
stores in WSDB all information about these entities: 
timestamp, source, etc. This information is gathered for 
Analytic Module. 
F.
Analytic Module 
This Analytic Module applies several data mining 
techniques to provide additional information about the WSs. 
This module was implemented in R. This new information is 
stored in WSDB. The objectives of this module are: 
-
Composite services according to WS semantic 
analysis. This analysis is based on the results of 
Semantic Engine combined with the results of time 
series classification.  
-
Analyze services according to the relation between 
WS invocations, alarms, warnings, and events (from 
Alarm & Event Module). This analysis is based on 
time series clustering. 
Both objectives are based on time series. Thus, the first 
step is to translate the data in the same temporal scale. The 
time series extract and build features from this information. 
According to the features of the time series and the 
information stored in WSDB: 
-
The time series classification applies Support Vector 
Machine (SVM) and decision tree, in order to 
aggregate or compose all the WS with similar 
pattern behavior. 
-
The time series clustering starts selecting the 
appropriate distance/similarity metric based on time 
series features and the results of semantic engine. 
Then this module applies several clustering 
techniques: K-means, hierarchical clustering, and 
density-based clustering, in order to get the best 
cluster. 
This module calculates several Key Performance 
Indicators (KPI). This KPIs measures the performance and 
the QoS [23]: throughput, availability, response time, 
interoperability, accessibility, and cost. 
G.
Semantic Engine 
The Semantic Engine provides additional information 
about WSs. This engine is based on Ontology Web 
Language – Services (OWL-S) that is a semantic markup for 
WS. Additionally, Semantic Web Rule Language (SWRL) is 
used to represent rules. 
This module has three main objectives: 
-
Identification of the service profile, describing the 
signature of the service in terms of its input, output, 
parameters, preconditions, service name, service 
type (stateless, state-based, etc.), provider, business 
domain, etc. 
-
Description of the service process model, describing 
how the service works in terms of the interplay 
between data and control flow. 
-
Description of the non-functional service semantics. 
In this case, the non-functional attributes are related 
to a QoS model: availability, delivery constraints, 
etc. Additionally, the semantic engine identifies: the 
security level, the critical nature of service, the level 
of service (software, middleware, or hardware), etc. 
H.
WS Engine 
This module gathers the information from the analytic 
module in order to create or composite the new WS. These 
new WSs are registered in WSHR, in order to start the test & 
check stage. 
I.
WS Database (WSDB) 
The WSDB stores WSs data and metadata. Additionally, 
the WSDB registers all information about the data and 
metadata analysis of WSs.  
The data model is based on Common Information Model 
(CIM) from Distributed Management Task Force (DMTF). 
Nevertheless, some extensions and modifications have been 
applied in order to store analytic information and speeding 
up the information exchange. 
J.
WS Hybrid Repository (WSHR) 
This module implements several repositories based on 
ebXML, UDDI, and DNS. The repository stores information 
of all composed and created WS. Additionally, there is a 
table in WSDB, which represents the stage of new WSs. 
There are several stages in the test process: NEW, CHECK, 
TEST, VALID, NON-VALID, BROADCAST, and USING. 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

NEW
VALID
TEST
CHECK
NON-VALID
BROADCAST
USING
INVOLVES CRITICAL ISSUES
INVOLVES CRITICAL ISSUES
MANUAL VALIDATION
Some WSs 
are not 
checked, 
only tested
Check and Test Module
Monitoring Module
Figure 3. WSs transition status diagram 
When the new WS is created the state is NEW. Then the 
Check and Test Module and the Monitoring Module change 
the status according to the results of different transitions 
showed in Fig. 3. Check and Test Module manage the 
transitions between stages: TEST, CHECK VALID, NON-
VALID and BROADCAST. Monitoring Module manages 
the transitions between stages: BROADCAST and USING. 
If the WS involves critical services or devices, it will be 
validated and tested by an expert. 
IV.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The first prototype of the proposed framework was 
developed as part of SBP. The main objective of the 
proposed framework was to detect the WS usage patterns to 
create new WS, which makes the system reliable and robust. 
The second objective was to make easy the integration of 
new systems in SBP. 
The SBP ecosystem has several systems (see Fig. 2). 
Each system provides its own set of WSs, although the 
systems have several WSs in common: 
-
Authentication. 
-
General services and metadata access. 
-
Monitoring services. 
These systems include services to interact with IEDs, 
except the KPI monitoring system, which interacts with other 
systems to extract information for KPIs.  
The Monitoring Module of the proposed framework was 
the first module of the implementation. This module was 
registering information during two months. The information 
is stored in a data base according to Distributed Management 
Task Force (DMTF) Common Information Model (CIM) 
Standard. This information is applied to test the Analytic 
Module. Additionally, this information was used to check 
and test the Semantic Engine and the HWSE.  
In case of Analytic Module, this module composed 
several WSs: 
-
WSs related with KPI Monitoring System. System 
were associated with renewable energy resources. 
The KPI Monitoring System gathered information 
from different type of renewable energy resources, in 
order to summarize all consumptions. The system 
found several cases: photovoltaic farms, wind farms, 
battery, and electric vehicles. The new WSs reduced 
time access to information and increased the 
efficiency. 
-
Some patterns related with alarms generated by 
some IEDs in substations. The new WSs involved 
critical devices. Critical devices can take effect over 
the continuity of supply. The management of these 
devices 
involves 
important 
protocols 
and 
methodologies designed by companies. The created 
Adapters for new WSs were successfully evaluated 
by companies. 
However, the systems in the SBP needed an adapter to 
take advantage from the new WSs created by the proposed 
framework. The created WSs were manually checked and 
tested successfully. 
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
The proposed framework can compose the WSs 
according to the discovery usage patterns and the relation of 
WS to alarms, warnings and events on the SBP ecosystem. 
The lack of adapters to take advantage of these new WSs 
makes difficult the automatic integration of new systems. 
Thus, the proposed framework can create composed WS 
which offers the aggregated functionality of several WSs, 
reducing the communications and speeding up the final 
effects. In this way, the system forecasts the needs of users 
and systems based on the usage data and metadata patterns. 
Additionally, the future works to improve the proposed 
framework are: 
-
Design and implementation of adapters which takes 
advantage of the new WS. 
-
Application of new techniques in the Analytic 
Module based on multivariable inference. 
-
Research of new module to composite WS from 
different WS standards (SOAP, REST, etc.) 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the Smart Business 
Project (SBP) (Reference Number: P011-13/E24), which 
provided data sources. Additionally, the authors would like 
to thank the IDEA Agency for providing the funds for the 
project. 
The authors are also appreciative of the backing of the 
SIIAM project (Reference Number: TEC2013-40767-R), 
which is funded by the Ministry of Economy and 
Competitiveness of Spain. 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

REFERENCES
[1] 
H. Yang and Y.-P. P. Chen, “Data mining in lung cancer 
pathologic staging diagnosis: Correlation between clinical 
and pathology information,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 42, no. 
15–16, pp. 6168–6176, pp. 6168–6176, Sep. 2015. 
[2] 
M. O. Visscher, S. A. Burkes, R. Randall Wickett, and K. P. 
Eaton, “Chapter 38 - From Image to Information: Image 
Processing in Dermatology and Cutaneous Biology A2  - 
Hamblin, Michael R.,” in Imaging in Dermatology, P. Avci 
and G. K. Gupta, Eds. Boston: Academic Press, pp. 519–
535, 2016. 
[3] 
F. Mekic, Z. Wang, V. Donde, F. Yang, and J. Stoupis, 
“Disributed automation for back-feed network power 
restoration,” 
in 
20th 
International 
Conference 
and 
Exhibition on Electricity Distribution - Part 1, 2009. 
CIRED 2009, 2009. 
[4] 
G. Blajszczak, P. Antos, and M. Wasiluk-Hassa, “Smart 
grid accommodation of distributed generation for more 
reliable quality of supply,” in 2011 11th International 
Conference on Electrical Power Quality and Utilisation 
(EPQU), 2011. 
[5] 
Y. Demchenko, C. de Laat, and P. Membrey, “Defining 
architecture components of the Big Data Ecosystem,” in 
2014 
International 
Conference 
on 
Collaboration 
Technologies and Systems (CTS), 2014. 
[6] 
C. Wu, R. Buyya, and K. Ramamohanarao, “Chapter 1 - 
Big Data Analytics = Machine Learning + Cloud 
Computing,” in Big Data, Morgan Kaufmann, pp. 3–38, 
2016. 
[7] 
A. Ali and K. S. Syed, “Chapter 3 - An Outlook of High 
Performance Computing Infrastructures for Scientific 
Computing,” in Advances in Computers, vol. 91, A. 
Memon, Ed. Elsevier, pp. 87–118, 2013. 
[8] 
X. Wang, M. Bendersky, D. Metzler, and M. Najork, 
“Learning to Rank with Selection Bias in Personal Search,” 
Proc. SIGIR 2016 ACM, 2016. 
[9] 
H.-T. Cheng et al., “Wide & Deep Learning for 
Recommender Systems,” ArXiv160607792 Cs Stat, Jun. 
2016. 
[10] 
G. Zheng and A. Bouguettaya, Web Service Mining: 
Application to Discoveries of Biological Pathways. Boston, 
MA: Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, 2010. 
[11] 
W. v d Aalst, “Service Mining: Using Process Mining to 
Discover, Check, and Improve Service Behavior,” IEEE 
Trans. Serv. Comput., vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 525–535, pp. 525–
535, Oct. 2013. 
[12] 
Q. A. Liang, J. y Chung, S. Miller, and Y. Ouyang, “Service 
Pattern Discovery of Web Service Mining in Web Service 
Registry-Repository,” 
in 
2006 
IEEE 
International 
Conference on e-Business Engineering (ICEBE’06), 2006. 
[13] 
A. Zhao, X. Wang, K. Ren, and Y. Qiu, “Semantic Message 
Link Based Service Set Mining for Service Composition,” 
in Fifth International Conference on Semantics, Knowledge 
and Grid, 2009. SKG 2009, 2009. 
[14] 
Q. A. Liang, S. Miller, and J. Y. Chung, “Service mining 
for Web service composition,” in IRI -2005 IEEE 
International Conference on Information Reuse and 
Integration, Conf, 2005., 2005. 
[15] 
H. Luo, L. Liu, and Y. Sun, “Semantics-Based Service 
Mining Method in Wireless Sensor Networks,” in 2011 
Seventh International Conference on Mobile Ad-hoc and 
Sensor Networks (MSN), 2011. 
[16] 
A. Zhao, K. Ren, X. Wang, and Y. Qiu, “An approach to 
service set mining for improving SWS based supply chains 
coordination,” in 2010 International Conference on 
Logistics Systems and Intelligent Management, vol. 3, 2010. 
[17] 
W. Hu and Y. Hui, “Service-mining Based on Customer 
Value Analysis,” in 2007 International Conference on 
Management Science and Engineering, 2007. 
[18] 
H. Meng, L. Wu, T. Zhang, G. Chen, and D. Li, “Mining 
Frequent Composite Service Patterns,” in 2008 Seventh 
International Conference on Grid and Cooperative 
Computing, 2008. 
[19] 
L. Chen, Q. Yu, P. S. Yu, and J. Wu, “WS-HFS: A 
Heterogeneous Feature Selection Framework for Web 
Services Mining,” in 2015 IEEE International Conference 
on Web Services (ICWS), 2015. 
[20] 
T. Wu, W. Dou, C. Hu, and J. Chen, “Service Mining for 
Trusted 
Service 
Composition 
in 
Cross-Cloud 
Environment,” IEEE Syst. J., vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1–12, pp. 
1–12, 2014. 
[21] 
A. Stroinski, D. Dwornikowski, and J. Brzezinski, 
“RESTful Web Service Mining: Simple Algorithm 
Supporting Resource-Oriented Systems,” in 2014 IEEE 
International Conference on Web Services (ICWS), 2014. 
[22] 
“SGCG/M490/G_Smart Grid Set of Standards. Version 
3.1,” CEN-CENELEC-ETSI Smart Grid Coordination 
Group, SGCG/M490/G-version 3.1, Oct. 2014. 
[23] 
L. K. Goel, S. K. Kottayil, M. Suchithra, and M. 
Ramakrishnan, “Efficient Discovery and Ranking of Web 
Services Using Non-functional QoS Requirements for 
Smart Grid Applications,” Procedia Technol., vol. 21, pp. 
82–87, pp. 82–87, Jan. 2015. 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

