Generating Simulation Models From CAD-Based Facility Layouts
Rui Pinto, Susana Aguiar, Gil Gonc¸alves
Research Center for Systems and Technologies
Faculty of Engineering, University of Porto
Rua Dr. Roberto Frias, 4200-465 Porto, Portugal
Email: {rpinto, saguiar, gil}@fe.up.pt
Abstract—The latest advances in industry have been boosted by
the application of the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), which
is being supported by the implementation of Cyber-Physical
Production Systems (CPPS). In this context, simulation and
optimization models have, for some time now, been used to reduce
CPPS design complexity, implementation time, and operating
costs throughout its life cycle. Considering the complexity and
heterogeneity of CPPS components and their different application
areas within the manufacturing context, simulation models may
contain unreliable representation of the real system, since the
behavior of the CPPS in a physical environment can be quite
different from the same CPPS, speciﬁed in a simulation model,
considering the same events. Thus, facing this inherent difﬁculty
in reliably modeling a CPPS in a virtual environment, the authors
propose a tool - Layout CAD Interface, which enables simulation
modeling software with automatic generation capabilities of
discrete-event simulation models. The tackled simulation software
was Simio, and the generation of simulation models was based
on Computer-Aided Design (CAD) ﬁles referring to shop-ﬂoor
layouts.
Keywords–Cyber-Physical
Production
System;
Simulation;
Simio; CAD.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Cyber-Physical Production Systems (CPPS) are used when-
ever complex manufacturing systems need to communicate
with the digital world, allowing their performance to be
optimized and their efﬁciency improved. This type of system
plays an increasingly important role in industrial processes
and production control, leveraging the concept of intelligent
factory in the context of the Industrial Internet of Things
(IIoT). This are being used to build Internet-based architectures
that facilitate remote control of currently isolated production
systems, leading to the fusion between the physical and virtual
worlds, which is the basis of IIoT applications
The complexity of production systems in the various pro-
duction sectors is increasing and results from a greater need
for ﬂexibility and interoperability to produce low volumes and
high variety of customized products, according to customer
speciﬁcations. This is known as the Mass Customization &
Personalization [1] production paradigm. To meet these re-
quirements, virtual environments based on optimization and
simulation models allow the real-time evaluation of the opera-
tional and safety characteristics of the real system. In this way,
virtualisation acts as an interface between the real productive
system and the decision makers, allowing the simulation and
prediction of the future state of the system against different op-
erating scenarios (e.g., different levels of demand) or stochastic
events (e.g., a signiﬁcant increase in demand).
The decision support systems, based on simulation and
optimization, are particularly interesting because they allow
simultaneously to predict and evaluate the functioning of
the productive systems in a virtual environment. The main
objective of the simulation and optimization methods is to
model the individual aspects of the manufacturing equipment
and the production lines with a high degree of detail, in order
to minimize the costs involved. These methods have been
used to anticipate the operational performance of work centers,
production lines and, when considering more complex systems,
the simulation and optimization models allow to create virtual
environments of complete factories by detailing the dynamics
of the ﬂow of materials, the effective capacity and efﬁciency
of the equipment, the time evolution of the Work-in-Progress
(WIP) and the intermediate stocks, and the existing wastes
associated with the tasks of rework, setup, or movement.
Manufacturing systems modeling and simulation is a re-
search topic that has been addressed by the academic commu-
nity and industry. Oztemel and Gursev [2] defend the impor-
tance for companies to primarily understand the features and
content of the Industry 4.0 for potential transformation from
machine dominant manufacturing to digital manufacturing.
These digital environments are highly oriented to the data that
different components/machines produce or collect. Jain [3],
Jain et al. [4] and Sacco et al. [5] argue that there must be
virtual models of the factory - Virtual Factory, in order to build
real system behavior analysis applications. Also, these models
also serve as generators of information, which can be used in
evaluating the conﬁguration and adaptation of the current real
systems.
Regarding the use of simulation models, as representa-
tions of the real physical systems, developing these models
imply studying the real system based on physical and/or
mathematical models, in order to replicate their behavior. The
execution of these models result in a deeper knowledge about
the behavior of the system in different contexts, allowing
to evaluate the impact of alternative strategies of operation.
However, the development of reliable simulation models is not
trivial and requires a high level of knowledge. If the model
is not a valid representation of the system under study, the
result of its execution will yield little useful information about
the actual system. Building a detailed and reliable model of
the production system is a task that can last from a few days
to a few weeks or months depending on the complexity of
the system that is being represented. Furthermore, several of
the current simulation tools require knowing the simulation
language being used. With this in mind, new approaches for
CPPS simulation should address the challenges associated with
the simulation model speciﬁcation and development.
The R&D Portuguese National project PRODUTECH-
SIF [6] focuses on the development of new methodologies to
promote the integration of the design, engineering, commis-
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-798-6
INTELLI 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

sioning, operation and maintenance phases regarding CPPS.
As such, these methodologies will signiﬁcantly reduce the
operating costs and the implementation cycles of improvement
actions, since they will allow the validation, in a virtual
environment, of the key characteristics of the systems and
reduce the risks of their implementation in the real scenario.
The main outcome consists in a tool, designated CPPS
Design Platform, which contemplates a reference design model
for the standardization of the design, implementation and
virtual installation of CPPS. This tool, available as a service
within an IIoT Platform for production information manage-
ment and service delivery, is supported by several modules,
such as: Simulation Module, for modeling stochastic behavior
and events on the factory ﬂoor; Optimization Module, for the
generation of optimized production plans; Layout CAD Inter-
face, for semi-automatic creation of simulation models based
on Computer-Aided Design (CAD) shop-ﬂoor layout ﬁles;
and Communication Interfaces, which provide interconnec-
tion between shop-ﬂoor equipment and external information
systems, such as Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP). IIoT
Platform also supports system diagnosis and the calculation
of performance indicators for further improvement, available
in the CPPS Performance & Diagnostic Platform, and the
generation and scheduling of production plans, available in
the CPPS Planning & Operations Platform.
The work described in this paper focuses on the Layout
CAD Interface development, which is part of the CPPS Design
Platform, and tackles the automation of the simulation model
generation, by enabling simulation software with automatic
generation capabilities of simulation models, or part of them,
depending on their complexity and customization. Thus, the
simulation model creation and execution is based on shop-
ﬂoor layout information, which is contained in CAD ﬁles [7],
and process data, which is contained in ERP systems. In this
work, the simulation software used was Simio [8] [9].
The structure of the paper is as follows: in Section II, liter-
ature review is provided. In Section III, the overall architecture
of the system being developed is described and, in Section IV,
the Layout CAD Interface tool functionalities are detailed. In
Section V, a CPPS use case scenario is introduced, where the
Layout CAD Interface is validated and, ﬁnally, in Section VI
the conclusion and future work are presented.
II.
RELATED WORK
Modern practice is to use CAD in the planning stage of
facility layout design, which consists on organizing facilities,
such as industrial equipment, in the shop-ﬂoor. The problem
of organizing facilities in the most efﬁcient way possible,
currently motivates active research work, in a ﬁeld known
as Facility Layout Planning [10]. CAD refers to the use of
computers, or more speciﬁcally, CAD software, to aid in the
creation, modiﬁcation, analysis, or optimization of a design.
These designs often represent technical, engineering, elec-
tronic/automation, mechanical and manufacturing drawings. In
the context of manufacturing, CAD speciﬁc tools are used to
develop and optimize 2D and 3D factory layout solutions, by
enabling the design layouts of machines, production lines or
entire manufacturing facilities. The main goal is to enable
factory managers to try different layout scenarios, arrang-
ing industrial equipment according to product demands or
equipment functionality, in order to identify the most efﬁcient
layout scenario, regarding waste elimination in material ﬂows,
inventory handling and management.
The term CAD gained its notoriety with the work de-
veloped by Douglas T. Ross in the computer-aided design
project [11] at MIT. The long-term goal of the project was
to use a computer as an active partner to the designer, thus
reducing the elapsed time and resources necessary in com-
pleting the design process. Regarding commercial software,
AutoCAD, which is Autodesk’s ﬂagship CAD software, has
grown to become one of the most widely used CAD program
for 2D non-specialized applications. Nowadays there are CAD
systems for all of the major computer platforms. Some of
the commercial tools most commonly used were developed
by Autodesk, Dassault Systems, Siemens PLM Software, PTC
Creo and SketchUp. Depending on the type of software tool
used, the CAD drawings can be 2D or 3D.
The most popular CAD ﬁle format is the DraWinG (DWG),
a native proprietary ﬁle format for AutoCAD, used for storing
2D and 3D design data and metadata. DWG is a binary ﬁle,
so all types of information are stored efﬁciently, including 3D
elements and photos. Since several CAD practitioners do not
have access to licensed software, such as AutoCAD, Autodesk
proposed the Drawing Exchange Format (DXF), which is
a neutral ﬁle exchange, i.e., uses an intermediary neutral
format to translate data between CAD systems, enabling data
interoperability between AutoCAD and other CAD systems.
DXF is a vector graphic ﬁle format that stores only 2D
drawings. Regarding ﬁle size, DXF is a plain-text format and
complicated drawings are usually slightly larger than DWG.
Considering drawing content, DXF only supports 2D shapes,
such as lines, polygons, circles and text. Other neutral ﬁle
exchange are the ISO 10303 – STandard for the Exchange of
Product model data (STEP) and Initial Graphics Exchange
Speciﬁcation (IGES).
Since CAD ﬁles typically deﬁne the static arrangement
of facilities in a shop-ﬂoor, only structural analysis can be
achieved with these tools, typically performed in the planning
phase. For a proper analysis of the manufacturing system
behavior and production dynamics, along with the planning,
evaluation and monitoring of the relevant processes in the
operational phase, simulation tools have been used for decades.
Also, for further system analysis in the context of virtual
commissioning as “emulation” for the real system, simula-
tion models must use real-time process data collected from
the shop-ﬂoor equipment. This can be accomplished by the
integration of simulation with tools such as ERP.
Dias et al. [12] underline the frequently usage of CAD,
process simulation and information systems software tools for
production system design, and claims that they have been used
with low levels of integration, resulting in duplicated work,
incoherence and errors during the planning phase. Facing this,
the authors propose an integrated approach for systematic
system design, based on these three software classes (CAD,
process simulation and information systems software tools).
Regarding the manufacturing virtual commissioning based
in simulation, according to AbouRizk and Mather [13], a
drawback of computer simulation is the investment required to
build simulation models, such as time to learn the languages
and human effort to put together the model. It is very important
to model accurately the system in a simulation model, in a
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-798-6
INTELLI 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

way that allows sufﬁciently exact predictions about the real
system behavior. To tackle this challenge, the authors refer
to approaches that automatically generate simulation models,
speciﬁcally structural approaches, where model generation is
based on data describing the structure of a system, typically in
the form of factory layout data from relevant CAD-systems.
These approaches are also known as “data-driven model gen-
eration”, and can be distinguished into either supporting the
planning phase or the operational phase of a factory.
According to Bergmann and Strassburger [14], challenges
for automatic model generation may be: 1) Incomplete data or
low level of detail within external systems; 2) Generation of
dynamic/complex behaviour, i.e, dealing with missing informa-
tion regarding the dynamic behaviour of the system; 3) Support
of cyclic approaches involving multiple generation cycles,
i.e., how to incrementally generate models, allowing manually
added details to survive in such cyclic model generation
scenarios; and 4) Support of multiple life cycle phases of the
production system, i.e., how models of the planning phase can
be adapted to work in the operational phase.
Considering the literature for automatic model generation,
proposed solutions may be supported by CAD-based data,
referring to the structure of a system, or non CAD-based.
Regarding CAD-based automatic model generation, Zhai et
al. [15] proposed an integrated simulated method, which
combines CAD, virtual reality and discrete event simulation
techniques, for virtual factory engineering. Regarding static
simulation for factory layout assessment, the authors use input
information of the factory plant that includes the shapes and
sizes of the facilities, operation rooms, among other. This
information may be collected from CAD ﬁles, however it is
not clear how this is accomplished.
Also, Dias et al. [16] proposed an approach for integrating
simulation and CAD. AutoCAD is used for the layout design
and WITNESS is the simulation platform. Microsoft Access is
used as the database for data exchange between AutoCAD and
WITNESS, enabling the integration of both software tools.
Hoffmann et al. [17] described concepts for the systematic
design of manufacturing system models, based on model
libraries and standardized recipes for the design of component
models from CAD data. The authors used CIROS for the plant
simulation tool, which provides import ﬁlters for STEP/IGES
ﬁle formats to collect geometric data from the plant. The
authors claim that manual simpliﬁcation of overly complex
geometry data may become necessary. Also, if manual hierar-
chical structuring of the CAD data into objects, sections and
components is not performed, the generated simulation model
is not usable for the functional modelling, nor would be a
simulation based on such model.
Lorenz and Schulze [18] focus only on the layout based
model problem generation, considering every type of layout,
such as barber shops, job shop, road trafﬁc or copper smelter.
Their approach can be used for any simulator with a language
oriented model description interface, and uses the DXF ﬁle
format as the layout basis for the model generation. The
DXF ﬁle is inputted into a modeling ﬁlter, which eliminates
unneeded layers of the ﬁle and transforms the DXF into a
Proof Layout ﬁle, for a native animation layout. Later, do-
main speciﬁc information regarding simulation and animation
speciﬁcs is appended to the native animation layout, resulting
in an animation layout and, after analysis, a structure ﬁle.
This structure ﬁle contains all classes, objects with names and
positions, messages, bars, plots and paths in a text format,
which is the input for the simulation model generators.
AbouRizk and Mather [13] propose an approach for simpli-
fying the process of building and experimenting with computer
simulation models of heavy earth-moving construction oper-
ations, where simulation models are automatically generated
from high-level descriptions in CAD. In this approach, a
commercial CAD tool (MicroStation) is extended for specify
construction information, such as facility/components to be
constructed, construction methods and resources, and sharing
these information with the simulation tool (Visual Slam). The
authors propose an add-on tool referred to as the ”Intelligent
Data Manager”, to exchange data between the two systems.
Other MicroStation add-ons, speciﬁcally developed for this
type of application, are used to relate CAD objects to the
construction objects and extract all construction objects from
the CAD model and translate them into simulation information.
Moorthy [19] proposed an automated method for generat-
ing simulation models and 3D model animations directly from
CAD drawings. First, facility layout drawings are developed
using the FactoryCAD (run from within AutoCAD application).
Then, from the FactoryCAD, a Simulation Data Exchange
(SDX) is generated, which is an ASCII text ﬁle, containing
a compilation of physical data, manufacturing and production
data, and simulation data. Finally, the SDX ﬁle is used as an
input to generate discrete event simulation models in several
tools. The simulation model generates animation data that is
subsequently available for dynamic viewing and analysis in
the FactoryTalk VIEW environment.
In this work, the authors want to achieve CAD-based
automatic simulation model generation in Simio, since this
is one of the most popular simulation tools among CPPS
scenarios. Also, the capability of representation of dynamic
information and components in the simulation model is highly
desirable, since layout planning is a task performed several
times during the entire manufacturing system lifecycle, ac-
cording to ever changing product demand (both variety and
quantity). Considering the literature review, the authors believe
that there are still gaps in current solutions, considering the
product described.
III.
OVERALL SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
Part of the work developed within the PRODUTECH-
SIF [6] project addresses, in an integrated way, the de-
sign, evaluation, operationalization and optimization of CPPSs.
These bring several beneﬁts, from a dynamic response in terms
of production to the variable demand for new products, as
well as real-time optimization of production and operation
processes (particularly value chains). Thus, the scenario where
the product diversity is high and its life cycle is tendentiously
shorter, the tools and methodology being developed allow
for the optimized design, evaluation and operation of CPPSs
for each reality. More speciﬁcally, the work focus is on the
development of an integrated tool, enabling factory simulation
and monitoring, planning and scheduling of operations, and
production diagnosis for performance improvement.
In the case of the PRODUTECH-SIF project, it was devel-
oped a solution, designated CPPS Design Platform, for ﬂexible
high performance CPPS design, used for the integration of
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-798-6
INTELLI 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

the design, implementation and installation phases of CPPS,
with the objective of reducing implementation time and risks,
and operating costs throughout their life cycle. This solution
contemplates the simulation of the manufacturing environment
and processes of the factory ﬂoor, as well as the optimization
of production plans, taking into consideration real time infor-
mation of the factory shop-ﬂoor, such as operating status of
the equipment, production orders, and WIP. Also, the CPPS
Design Platform integrates a CAD-based automatic simulation
model generation solution, designated Layout CAD Interface.
The CPPS Design Platform provides a service available
within the IIoT Platform, used for micro-services manage-
ment, which consist in modules involved in the design and
management of the CPPS. The IIoT Platform also provides
other services for the planning and scheduling of lot sizing,
capacity assessment, collaborative process management, and
real-time scheduling, which ensure efﬁcient, integrated and
adaptive management of the CPPS and the diagnosis of the
productive system in an agile and automatic manner, classiﬁ-
cation of the improvement needs and consequent identiﬁcation
of the resolution method to be implemented. Services regarding
planning and scheduling are provided by the CPPS Planning &
Operations Platform and services regarding methodologies for
diagnosis are provided by the CPPS Performance & Diagnostic
Platform. Figure 1 represents the overall architecture of the
system being developed within the PRODUTECH-SIF project,
regarding to solutions dedicated to the life cycle management
of CPPSs, from their design and development, to their opera-
tional management and improvement.
Figure 1. System Architecture Within the PRODUTECH-SIF [6] Project.
In this context, the IIoT Platform serves to interconnect
productive equipment, information systems, sensors, devices,
people and products that are part of a production system,
allowing the collection and sharing of information among all
stakeholders providing services. The integration and virtualiza-
tion of shop-ﬂoor entities into the IIoT Platform, such as sen-
sor & actuators, robotic manipulators, machines and material
handling equipment, is achieved by the encapsulation of such
entities, using the SmartObject and SmartBox concepts [20],
also developed within the scope of this project.
The CPPS Design Platform is expected to run simulation
and optimization models, which can use relevant information
of the factory shop-ﬂoor in real time during their operation
time. These models will include information from ERP sys-
tems, such as product process orders, available materials and
routes between the different shop-ﬂoor entities, as well as real
time information from the SmartObjects/SmartBoxes, such as
equipment state, failure events and WIP. In addition, these
simulation and optimization models may be integrated with
information from the CPPS Planning & Operations Platform,
aiming at solving the problem of integration of different
decision levels, from design, planning and scheduling. Finally,
the results of the simulation execution will be used as input to
the CPPS Performance & Diagnostic Platform, in order to run
diagnostic and performance improvement models based on the
calculation of several Key Performance Indicators (KPIs).
A. CPPS Design Platform
The CPPS Design Platform is supported by a simulation
modeling software, integrated with various modules, namely
the Simulation Module, Optimization Module, Layout CAD
Interface, and Communication Interfaces. The most relevant
communication interface of the CPPS Design Platform pro-
vides interconnection with the IIoT Platform, which manages
the overall interactions with ERPs, SmartObjects and Smart-
Box within the shop-ﬂoor, the CPPS Planning & Operations
Platform and the CPPS Performance & Diagnostic Platform.
Figure 2 represents the architecture of the CPPS Design
Platform.
Figure 2. CPPS Design Platform Architecture.
The simulation modeling software is the main component
of this platform, which, through the use of simulation models
representing the dynamics between all shop ﬂoor equipment,
operators, conveyors, as well as the various operations and
processes between them, allows the study of the behavior of
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-798-6
INTELLI 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

the system. For this, Simio is used. Simio is a simulation,
production planning and scheduling software to support the
object modeling paradigm. This approach is suitable to model
a CPPS, where complex stochastic simulation models are con-
structed by combining different objects representing different
components of the system under consideration. By using the
Simio GUI, the human operator can build and run 3D animated
models from a variety of systems.
In Simio, the concept of Process exists, which represents a
custom logic that can be included in the model objects, so that
they behave and react to events in a certain way. This custom
logic can be used to capture / free resources, assign values to
different variables, change the network connections used, eval-
uate alternatives, etc. Every Simio process consist of several
interconnected Steps, which can already exist, predeﬁned, in
Simio or be added to the Simio by the user, in order to extend
the base framework functionality. These User Deﬁned Steps
can be developed by the user using the Simio API.
The Optimization Module will implement a new methodol-
ogy related to operational planning and scheduling, to support
the simulation module. The Optimization Module will permit
to introduce variation in the generation of production plans,
contemplating the associated risks. Thus, a production plan can
be evaluated not only for its viability at the time the plan was
generated, but also for its robustness over time, considering
the associated risk in the order of execution of the various
operations (critical operations, which depend of factors such
as demand, existence of stocks and maintenance of equipment).
Before executing the simulation, the Optimization Module
obtains an estimate of the quantities of the manufacturing or-
ders, i.e., the optimization model will determine the products,
the quantity and the planning period in which the production
should take place. Taking into account this new dimension,
the Optimization Module aims to optimize production plans,
which will later make available to Simio, as a starting point
to execute a new simulation. In this case, the Optimization
Module will be based in the IBM-CPLEX tool [21].
Finally, the Layout CAD Interface, detailed next, pro-
vides to Simio automatic generation capabilities of simulation
models, or part of them, depending on their complexity and
customization, based in facility layout CAD ﬁles.
IV.
LAYOUT CAD INTERFACE
The Layout CAD Interface is a software application de-
veloped within the context of the PRODUTECH-SIF project,
and it is one of the modules of the CPPS Design Platform,
which enables simulation modeling software to automatically
generate simulation models based on shop-ﬂoor layout CAD
ﬁles. The main goal of the Layout CAD Interface is to provide
to a human operator means for simplifying CPPS simulation
modeling. When using the Layout CAD Interface, the human
operator is capable of extracting facility layout and other
information from a CAD ﬁle. Also, this tool is an Java software
application, independent from CAD and simulation modeling
speciﬁc software. Currently being developed, this tool is, so
far, capable of interpret DXF format CAD ﬁles. For this, it
uses the Kabeja open Java library [22]. Kabeja is a library
for parsing, processing, and converting Autodesk’s DXF ﬁle
format to other output formats, such as SVG, JPEG, PNG,
TIFF, PDF and XML.
Due to the nature of the DXF ﬁle type, extracting informa-
tion of industrial equipment and facility layout is not trivial.
As seen before, the DXF ﬁle is a vector graphic ﬁle format
that only supports simple 2D shapes, such as lines, polygons,
circles, and text [23] and [24], other more complex designs are
supported in, e.g., the DWG ﬁle format. In this ﬁrst version,
the Layout CAD Interface only supports the DXF ﬁle type,
since it is the most popular open-source format among every
licensed or unlicensed CAD-based software.
As for the integration with simulation modeling tools,
the Layout CAD Interface only outputs simulation data in a
speciﬁc format interpretable by Simio, since it is the simulation
modeling tool used among the partners involved in the project.
Figure 3 represents an UML Use Case Diagram of the Layout
CAD Interface tool.
Figure 3. UML Use Case Diagram of the Layout CAD Interface.
Considering the UML Use Case diagram of the Layout
CAD Interface, the system actors represented are every entity
that plays a role in the system. In this case, the represented
actors are the Human Operator, the ERP and the Simio. The
Human Operator represents the person responsible for the
CPPS design and simulation modeling, and which will in fact
use the Layout CAD Interface for simplifying the model gener-
ation. The ERP and the Simio actors represent external systems
that will interact with the Layout CAD Interface. Regarding
the use cases, which represent the features interactions or the
actions that an actor can do in the system, and the relations
among use cases and actors:
•
Input CAD ﬁle - The Human Operator can import to
the Layout CAD Interface a CAD ﬁle, which contains
a static information of the shop-ﬂoor layout. Currently,
the Layout CAD Interface is limited to DXF ﬁle
formats.
•
View CAD content - Since, currently, the Layout CAD
Interface is limited to DXF formats, the shop-ﬂoor
layout representations considered are in 2D. This use
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-798-6
INTELLI 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

case represents the Human Operator capability of
viewing, within a canvas, a 2D graphical represen-
tation the information contained in the CAD ﬁle.
•
Input dynamic information - While static information
of the shop-ﬂoor layout can be collected from the
CAD ﬁle, dynamic information, such as equipment
characteristics and links between facilities in a given
process, are collected from ERP systems. If the Layout
CAD Interface is integrated with an ERP, the Human
Operator can import dynamic information to include
in the simulation model. Currently, the Layout CAD
Interface is prepared to import a CSV ﬁle, containing
exported dynamic information from a ERP.
•
Export dynamic information - The ERP, represent-
ing ERP systems integrated with the Layout CAD
Interface, are capable of exporting CSV ﬁles, contain-
ing dynamic information regarding facilities, such as
equipment characteristics and links between facilities
in a given process.
•
Select facility - Since the 2D shop-ﬂoor layout is
represented within a canvas, the Human Operator can
select facilities, by drawing a rectangle around the
desired facility. This selection allows the Layout CAD
Interface to collect from the CAD ﬁle information
about the size and position of the facility selected.
•
Choose facility name - The Human Operator, after se-
lecting a facility, must choose a proper name. For this,
the Human Operator has the possibility of manually
writing the facility name, or, if dynamic information is
available from an ERP system, the Human Operator
can choose a name from a predeﬁned list of names
regarding every existing facility.
•
Choose facility type - The Human Operator, after
selecting a facility, can choose a facility type to be
included in the simulation model. Considering Simio’s
models, typical facility types are: server, workstation,
source, sink, and vehicle.
•
Specify links between facilities - If dynamic informa-
tion is available from an ERP system, the Human
Operator is capable of deﬁne links between facilities,
i.e., connections between different facilities, regarding
material and product ﬂow in a given process.
•
Export simulation model data - After deﬁning all
static and dynamic information to be included in the
simulation model, the Human Operator can export
the simulation model data, which will be used as
input to generate the respective simulation model. The
information considered contains the deﬁnition of all
facilities names, types, location on the shop-ﬂoor (x
and y coordinates), dimensions (length and width)
and the links between facilities. Since the simulation
modeling tool used is Simio, the simulation data output
is in a CSV ﬁle, with the format of the content
interpretable by Simio.
•
Input simulation model data - The CSV ﬁle generated
by the Layout CAD Interface tool is formatted to be
imported into Simio. This is achieved by the use of a
Simio User Add-in. In this case, the Simio User Add-
in, built in C#, using the Simio API, is capable of
importing the CSV ﬁle exported by the Layout CAD
Interface and generate the simulation model.
•
Generate simulation model - By executing the Simio
User Add-in, Simio imports the CSV ﬁle containing
simulation data outputted by the Layout CAD Inter-
face, to generate the simulation model.
V.
LAYOUT CAD INTERFACE VALIDATION
With the purpose of validating the developed Layout CAD
Interface, two test case scenarios were deﬁned, which will be
described next.
A. Test Case 1
Test Case 1 represents a process layout situation, where
the design of the shop-ﬂoor facilities aims to arrange facilities
according to their function. In this case, several equipments
within a given department are represented. Also, it is assumed
that only access to static data is available. Figure 4 represents
the Layout CAD Interface and the respective simulation model
layout in Simio, regarding Test Case 1.
In order to validate the Layout CAD Interface in Test Case
1, the Human Operator inputs the CAD ﬁle, already containing
the respective facility layout, which is then available in the
canvas. For this, button number 1 can be used - Open CAD
File in Figure 4 and view the CAD content in the canvas
(number 6 in Figure 4). Then, to select a given facility in
the canvas, the Human Operator can click and hold in one
of the facility corners and drag until the opposite corner, so
that the equipment is inside a red square. To save the facility,
pop-ups will appear, in order to manually input the name and
choose a type. In this test case, there are ﬁve workstations
(mvc1, mvc2, mvc3, mvc4, and mvc5) and two servers (mbj1
and mbj2). For this, it can be used the button number 3 - Save
Facility in Figure 4.
Finally, after all the facilities have been saved, the output
ﬁle is produced in a standardized format, to be used in
Simio, interpreted by the Simio User Add-in used. For this,
it can be used the button number 5 - Save File in Figure 4.
One limitation, regarding the placement of facilities within a
simulation model, is the orientation of the facility. In this case,
all facilities are placed with a 90o orientation, since Simio API
doesn’t currently allow adjusting this parameter.
B. Test Case 2
Test Case 2 represents a product layout situation, where
there is a production line and the facilities are arranged
according to a particular production sequence. In this case, it is
represented a simple wine bottling process, consisting of four
equipments with different functions: ﬁll the bottles with the
wine; seal the bottle with the cork; labeling the bottle; bottle
packaging. At the end of the process, a vehicle transports the
wine bottles to a warehouse. Also, it is assumed that access to
both static and dynamic data is available. Figure 5 represents
the Layout CAD Interface and the respective simulation model
layout in Simio, regarding Test Case 2.
Regarding the Layout CAD Interface in this test case,
besides inputting the CAD ﬁle, the Human Operator also
loads dynamic information exported from an ERP system, by
the input of the CSV ﬁle, containing the list of the available
facilities. For this, it can be used the button number 2 - Open
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-798-6
INTELLI 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

Figure 4. Layout CAD Interface and simulation model layout in Simio, regarding Test Case 1.
Facilities File in Figure 5. In this case, there is one source
(source1), four workstations (Filler, Cork crew, Labelling, and
Packing), one sink (warehouse), and one vehicle (Transport1).
When selecting a facility in the canvas, a pop-up appear, which
allows to choose a name and type from a drop-down list.
Finally, the Human Operator can specify links between
facilities in order to provide information regarding the pro-
duction process ﬂow. He can choose, from the predeﬁned
list of facilities, the facility that marks the process start and
end points, and the transport type facilities used. The option
”none”, will always be available and should be the choice
if no vehicles are used to transport the pieces between the
start and end point of the link. For this, it can be used the
button number 4 - Add Link in Figure 5. In this case, ﬁve
links are deﬁned, where only the link between the Packing
and Warehouse facilities have material transport. The other
links use conveyor belts for transportation. As in Test Case 1,
the output ﬁle can be produced and used in Simio (Figure 5).
Regarding the links between facilities, the tool limits the
type of facilities linked to each other, according to the Simio
capabilities. In this case, it is only possible to link source
or server with Workstation/Vehicles and again with a sink.
Also, moving facilities, such as vehicles, may be difﬁcult to
generate automatically, since these components usually are not
represented in static CAD ﬁles.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The current document refers to the development of a
tool, designated as Layout CAD Interface, focused in en-
abling the simulation software Simio, with the capability of
semi-automatic generation of discrete-event simulation models
regarding CPPS. This tool was part of the development of
the CPPS Design Platform, within the PRODUTECH-SIF
project, which supported the design and maintenance of CPPS.
Regarding the simulation model generation, while the Layout
CAD Interface contributed to the static information of the
model (shop-ﬂoor layout), the dynamic information (system
behavior and production) was collected from the ERP systems
and directly from the shop-ﬂoor equipment.
The Layout CAD Interface validation results showed that
the tool proposed is suitable for automatic generation of
simulation models, considering both process (Test Case 1) and
product (Test Case 2) layouts. While production layouts are
suitable for mass production with less job variety, process
layout are suitable for moderate production with more job
variety. According to the different levels of product demand
during the whole lifecycle of a manufacturing system, both
scenarios will greatly beneﬁt from the usage of such a tool,
since ﬂexible layout reconﬁguration and earlier planning for
cost reduction are frequent needs.
Regarding future work, the Layout CAD Interface may
be extended to support 3D designs, which will permit the
replacement of the Simio default simulation objects for the real
design models of the facility to be included in the simulation.
This may be achieved by adding the support of CAD ﬁle
formats that support 3D designs. Also, further deﬁnition with
the input of the dynamic components of the simulation model
are needed, in order to enable the fully automatic generation
of modules, such as: WIP, production plan within a given
time, facility scheduling, production capacity and down-times,
alternative process ﬂow and bill of materials.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This paper and the research behind it would not have
been possible without the exceptional support of all partners
within the project “programa mobilizador PRODUTECH SIF
– Soluc¸˜oes para a Ind´ustria do Futuro” (Solutions for the
Industry of the Future), which embodies a comprehensive
response towards the development and implementation of new
production systems, to meet the challenges and opportunities
of the Industry 4.0.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-798-6
INTELLI 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

Figure 5. Layout CAD Interface and simulation model layout in Simio, regarding Test Case 2.
REFERENCES
[1]
S.
J.
Hu,
“Evolving
paradigms
of
manufacturing:
From
mass
production
to
mass
customization
and
personalization,”
Procedia
CIRP,
vol.
7,
2013,
pp.
3
–
8,
forty
Sixth
CIRP
Conference on Manufacturing Systems 2013. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2212827113002096
[2]
E. Oztemel and S. Gursev, “Literature review of industry 4.0 and related
technologies,” Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, vol. 31, no. 1, 2020,
pp. 127–182.
[3]
S. Jain and G. Shao, “Virtual factory revisited for manufacturing data
analytics,” in Proceedings of the 2014 Winter Simulation Conference.
IEEE Press, 2014, pp. 887–898.
[4]
S. Jain, N. Fong Choong, K. Maung Aye, and M. Luo, “Virtual
factory: an integrated approach to manufacturing systems modeling,”
International Journal of Operations & Production Management, vol. 21,
no. 5/6, 2001, pp. 594–608.
[5]
M. Sacco, G. Dal Maso, F. Milella, P. Pedrazzoli, D. Rovere, and
W. Terkaj, “Virtual factory manager,” in International Conference on
Virtual and Mixed Reality.
Springer, 2011, pp. 397–406.
[6]
“PRODUTECH-SIF,” URL: http://mobilizadores.produtech.org/en/produtech-
sif?set language=en [accessed: 2020-09-14].
[7]
T.-C. Chang and R. A. Wysk, Computer-aided manufacturing. Prentice
Hall PTR, 1997.
[8]
C. D. Pegden, “Simio: a new simulation system based on intelligent
objects,” in Proceedings of the 39th conference on Winter simulation:
40 years! The best is yet to come.
IEEE Press, 2007, pp. 2293–2300.
[9]
D. T. Sturrock and C. D. Pegden, “Recent innovations in simio,” in
Proceedings of the 2011 Winter Simulation Conference (WSC). IEEE,
2011, pp. 52–62.
[10]
R. Pinto, J. Gonc¸alves, H. L. Cardoso, E. Oliveira, G. Gonc¸alves, and
B. Carvalho, “A facility layout planner tool based on genetic algo-
rithms,” in 2016 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence
(SSCI), Dec 2016, pp. 1–8.
[11]
S. A. Coons and R. W. Mann, Computer-aided design related to the
engineering design process. MIT Electronic Systems Laboratory, 1960.
[12]
L. Dias, G. Pereira, P. Vik, and J. A. Oliveira, “Layout and process
optimisation: using computer-aided design (cad) and simulation through
an integrated systems design tool,” International Journal of Simulation
and Process Modelling, vol. 9, no. 1/2, 2014, pp. 46–62.
[13]
S. AbouRizk and K. Mather, “Simplifying simulation modeling through
integration with 3d cad,” Journal of construction engineering and
management, vol. 126, no. 6, 2000, pp. 475–483.
[14]
S. Bergmann and S. Strassburger, “Challenges for the automatic gen-
eration of simulation models for production systems,” in Proceedings
of the 2010 Summer Computer Simulation Conference.
Society for
Computer Simulation International, 2010, pp. 545–549.
[15]
W. Zhai, X. Fan, J. Yan, and P. Zhu, “An integrated simulation
method to support virtual factory engineering,” International Journal
of CAD/CAM, vol. 2, no. 1, 2002, pp. 39–44.
[16]
L. Dias, G. Pereira, P. Vik, and J. A. Oliveira, “Integrated systems
design in an automotive industry-using cad and simulation in layout and
process optimization,” in 11th International Conference on Modeling
and Applied Simulation, MAS 2012.
Caltek Srl, 2012, pp. 326–334.
[17]
P. Hoffmann, R. Schumann, T. M. Maksoud, and G. C. Premier, “Virtual
commissioning of manufacturing systems a review and new approaches
for simpliﬁcation.” in ECMS.
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 2010, pp.
175–181.
[18]
P. Lorenz and T. Schulze, “Layout based model generation,” in Pro-
ceedings of the 27th conference on Winter simulation. IEEE Computer
Society, 1995, pp. 728–735.
[19]
S. Moorthy, “Integrating the cad model with dynamic simulation: simu-
lation data exchange,” in WSC’99. 1999 Winter Simulation Conference
Proceedings.’Simulation-A Bridge to the Future’(Cat. No. 99CH37038),
vol. 1.
IEEE, 1999, pp. 276–280.
[20]
L. Neto, G. Gonc¸alves, P. Torres, R. Dion´ısio, and S. Malh˜ao, “An
industry 4.0 self description information model for software components
contained in the administration shell,” in The Eighth International
Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications.
International
Academy, Research, and Industry Association, 2019.
[21]
C. Bliek1´u, P. Bonami, and A. Lodi, “Solving mixed-integer quadratic
programming problems with ibm-cplex: a progress report,” in Proceed-
ings of the twenty-sixth RAMP symposium, 2014, pp. 16–17.
[22]
“Kabeja,” URL: http://kabeja.sourceforge.net/ [accessed: 2019-06-12].
[23]
“Dxf
speciﬁcation
-
autodesk,”
URL:
https://images.autodesk.com/adsk/ﬁles/autocad 2012 pdf dxf-
reference enu.pdf [accessed: 2020-09-14].
[24]
I. Kumari and A. M. Magar, “Dxf ﬁle extraction and feature recog-
nition,” International Journal of Engineering and Technology, vol. 4,
no. 2, 2012, pp. 93–96.
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-798-6
INTELLI 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

