Overcoming the Condorcet’s Border in Collective Intelligence Systems 
 
Vladislav Protasov, Zinaida Potapova 
Center of Computing for Physics and Technology 
Moscow, Russia 
protvlad@gmail.com, zinaida.potapova@gmail.com 
 
Eugene Melnikov 
Center of Computing for Physics and Technology 
Moscow, Russia 
apinae1@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract – The paper presents a new approach of solving 
intellectual problems by means of collective intelligence. The 
essence of the approach is combination of two principles: 
Condorcet’s principle of the jury and evolutional coordination, 
based on reciprocal evaluation among intellectual agents. This 
method exploits both generative and evaluative abilities of the 
agents and allows to eliminate so called Condorcet’s border, 
which means that for obtaining correct solution every expert 
must make correct decision with probability greater than 0.5. 
The paper also observes the conditions that guarantee correct 
solution obtainment. 
Keywords – collective intelligence; genetic algorithm; 
coordination; generation; evaluation. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
In October 2010 in the “Science” magazine (USA) 
employees of the Center for Collective Intelligence of the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology headed by Pr. Thomas 
V. Malone published the first English language paper that 
proved the effect of excess of the collective Intelligence 
Quotient value over both group average and maximum 
individual IQ values [1]. The factor was identified that 
determines the successfulness of solution in intelligent groups. 
It was called the C-factor (collective factor). The factor 
analysis approved the existence of the only significant 
component for all collective activities. This component is the 
C-factor. 
The analysis of these experiments has provided two 
conclusions: first of all, the collective component, that defines 
group intelligence potential, exists, secondly, it can be 
evaluated objectively. 
There are also a huge number of well-known 
crowdsourcing application success stories [2], based on the 
application of Condorcet’s jury theorem [3]. The intellect gain 
effect during expert group work takes place due to several 
reasons. In the first case (Malone’s) it is defined mainly by the 
“legislative” component. It means that at the first step some 
solutions are generated and during further discussion they are 
combined by the collective intelligence of the group into a 
collective solution. In the case of crowdsourcing the process 
often consists of only the first step – ideas generation, and if 
every expert has a probability of correct solution 
5.0
GP 
, 
then at a great number of experts the probability of the 
collective solution correctness tends to 1. If for every expert 
5.0
GP 
, then the probability tends to 0, which is a big 
problem in application of crowdsourcing. 
Most papers upon collective intelligence refer the 
Condorcet’s principle [4].  This paper provides an approach of 
eliminating the Condorcet’s constraint of 0.5. First of all, the 
method will be introduced and explained. After that there will 
be a computer experiments report. In the end goes the 
definition of the condition that must hold in order to obtain 
correct result. 
In this paper, basic principles that are related to the 
algorithm are discussed in Section II, while Section III 
describes the method itself. Section III deals with theoretical 
and experimental substantiation of the method. Last section 
provides the conclusion. 
II. QUICK VIEW UPON THE BASIC PRINCIPLES 
The Condorcet’s jury theorem assumes that a group of 
individuals wishes to reach a decision by a majority vote. One 
of the two outcomes of the vote is correct, and each voter has 
a probability p of voting for the correct decision. The theorem 
contends that if p > 0.5 then with increasing the number of 
voters the probability of obtaining the correct solution tends to 
1; in other hand, if p < 0.5 then with increasing the number of 
voters it tends to 0. 
This means, for a jury group making a decision between 
two alternatives, if their p > 0.5 then a large group will make 
correct decision with higher probability than a small one, but 
if their p < 0.5 then one expert will make correct decision 
much more probably than a group. 
Another approach that lies on the foundation of this paper 
is Genetic Algorithms (GA) [5]. Its basis is rather simple. 
Each solution is assumed as a biologic individual that has a 
genotype (sequence of bits that encodes the set of its 
characteristics or so called phenotype). The algorithm starts 
with generation of initial set of individuals (solutions). The 
correct solution search passes like a biological cycle of 
population. It consists of three stages that repeat iteratively: 
1) Mutation of random individuals: each individual 
subjected for mutation changes random bits of its genotype. 
Usually only few bits are subjected for change – near 10%. 
2)  Natural selection: each individual has a value of  the 
fitness function. Basing on this values some “weak” 
individuals are eliminated and population decreases, usually 
on 50%. The selection algorithm may vary. 
3)  Crossover: all individuals divide into pairs and every 
pair give birth to two children – individuals that incorporate 
the genotypes of their parents. 
These stages run iteratively until the convergence 
condition holds. It may be an obtainment of some fitness 
161
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

value or end of the population progress (maximal fitness 
doesn’t increase). The individual with the highest fitness is 
selected as the final solution. 
As an example of GA application let’s assume a chemical 
experiment. We need to adjust the volumes of reagents to 
provide maximal heating of the mixture. The set of volume 
values represents an individual and is encoded into bits of its 
genotype. Fitness of each individual (solution) is evaluated by 
chemical modeling module. Since we have all the data 
presented in GA model, we can run the algorithm to obtain a 
rational solution. 
III. METHOD OF EVOLUTIONARY SOLUTIONS COORDINATION 
INTRODUCED 
As Malone’s experiments proved, in experts’ work, based 
on legislating and voting procedure, the leader effect and 
conflicts, 
hidden 
and 
evident, 
considerably 
worsen 
effectiveness of the group. 
This paper proposes the synthesis of the two approaches 
that is called by the authors Method of Evolutionary Solutions 
Coordination (MEC), which has advantages of two methods 
and considerably compensate their weaknesses. 
The method incorporates genetic algorithms (GA) [6], 
Condorcet’s theorem, Tychurin’s metasystem transitions 
theory [7] and collective intelligence systems theory, that is 
partially presented in this paper. 
The method is defined as follows. MEC is an approach of 
organization of collective work upon a project with predefined 
objectives and rules of interaction, based on classic GA 
principles. Experts work is usually organized by the means of 
a computer network. These are the rules of organization of 
intellectual agents work and interaction: 
1) Objectives of the project are defined 
2) Experts group and their interaction method are 
selected 
3) Frame (slots structure) of the project is created 
4) The first solutions are found, they may be 
incomplete 
5) Solutions are exchanged between the experts 
6) Exit condition is checked; if it’s fulfilled, algorithm 
halts 
7) New solutions are created from the old ones through 
crossover 
8) Some new solutions mutate 
9) Go to the point 5 
According to interaction rules the collective work 
instructions are developed considering features of certain 
problem, 
communication 
environment, 
abilities 
and 
qualification of the intellectual agents. The scheme of  MEC 
is illustrated on Fig. 1. 
 
Figure 1. MEC scheme 
Expert 1 
Expert 1 
Expert 2 
Expert 3 
Expert 1 
Expert M 
. . .  
. . .  
Slot 1 
Slot 2 
. . .      
1. Initial  
population  
creation 
2. Crossover,  
Mutation 
3. Iterative  
process 
162
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

On the zero iteration experts fill slots of the project 
according to their knowledge. In Figure 1 these slots are 
marked with dark rectangles. On the iterations of 
coordination, each expert checks others’ variants and picks 
some of those that he considers to be the best and fills blank 
cells of his variant with them. After performing several 
iterations, the process converges to a population of equally 
filled solutions. For accelerating the process, it can be 
adjusted with the Condorcet’s rule – a slot is considered as 
filled, if more than half of experts have made the same 
decision on it. 
Experiments on solving complicated intellectual problems 
from different creative areas by expert groups have 
demonstrated the MEC efficiency. With this method high 
level checkmate problems were successfully solved by 
collective intelligence, when the group members could not 
solve the problems individually. A witnesses group effectively 
restored an identikit, IQ measurement [8] upon verbal 
Eysenck’s tests [9] demonstrated an extremely high 
intellectual level of the group. There are many papers in 
Russian that refer to these results [10][11][12][13][14], but 
they are unknown for English-speaking audience. This paper 
partially makes up this lack. 
Most papers upon negotiation of agents group offer 
approaches to find some trade-off in preferences of several 
individuals [15][16]. They use predefined utility functions of 
the agents to obtain Pareto-optimal solutions. Supposed 
methods are considered to demonstrate high quality of 
negotiating in multi-party cases. There are also some papers 
[17] that describe complex approaches – concluding contracts 
are defined by utilizing several strategies of negotiation. All 
these theories aim to obtain a solution in case of multiple 
preferences of different parties. This signifies that each party 
has its own assumption upon correct solution. Such 
circumstances appear not frequently enough on complicated 
multidimensional problems. In real life situations not every 
agent can provide a value for each component of the solution. 
MEC deals with such situations throughout utilization of 
agents’ ability of estimating other agents’ solutions. In most 
cases even if an expert can’t provide his own solution of a 
problem, at least he can express his opinion upon an existing 
solution. 
IV. MODELING THE CALCULATION PROCESS 
The main way, considered to explore the proposed method 
in this paper, is computer modeling. The project, subjected for 
solving by a group of virtual experts, is meant to consist of K 
slots that must be filled with correct answers after several 
stages of coordination according to the vote majority. 
Let us draw up a computer model of a slot filling process 
with applying it to all slots of the project successively. The 
decision-making process is divided into several stages. The 
first stage is individual decisions creation, further follow 
stages of iterative coordination of the solutions by a group of 
M experts. Let us suppose that on the stage of individual 
decisions creation every expert gives a correct solution with 
probability       , an incorrect solution with probability 
       and with probability            he gives 
no solution. On coordination stages an expert, who didn’t 
make a decision, choses among other experts’ solutions – 
correct one with probability   , incorrect one with probability 
   – and choses no solution with probability         
  . 
All the probabilities are determined with consideration 
that correctness of solutions can be estimated. It is necessary 
for building the mathematical model, but in further 
application it isn’t essential – real life problems are not 
usually provided with fitness function and each solution is 
estimated by subjective opinion of an expert. And for MEC it 
isn’t matter if the estimation process is formulized or defined 
by certain expert’s opinion. 
Moreover, the assumption that correctness of solution is a 
binary function (correct/incorrect) is also considered only for 
durable mathematical substantiation. It can be discarded f.e. 
with application of fuzzy logic (every solution is correct and 
incorrect with some degrees). All further deductions can be 
completed with probabilistic functions of correctness. We 
assume that taking them into consideration is not essential and 
theoretical substantiation on strict correctness can be 
propagated to fuzzy functions. 
The algorithm of the decision-making process that lies 
upon the computer model can be easily described on cellular 
automata language. Let us suppose that experts fill the 
automata cells basing on the following rules. 
Initial state of the cellular automata is determined by    
and    parameters, it is represented by the vector      
      . 
   {
                         
                
                        
, 
where   is a random number in the interval (0, 1). 1 means 
that an expert has made a correct decision, 2 means an 
incorrect decision, 0 – the expert has not made a decision. 
Mean of the number of ones in the automata equals     , of 
the number of twos -     , of the number of zeros -     .  
The subsequent state    of the cellular automata, that 
imitates solutions coordination process, is filled according to 
the following rules. 
1. If     , then       (experts have filled their 
sells and now are waiting for other experts to fill up 
the cells). 
2. If     , then then the i-th expert uniformly choses 
another cell j such that      and randomly 
updates his   in the interval (0, 1). Depending on 
value of   he chooses one of three options: 
2.1. 
If       , then if     , then on the 
second state of the expert     , if     , 
then the expert ignores wrong decision and 
saves 0 to the    cell. 
2.2. 
If           , then if     , then 
the expert makes wrong decision – he 
ignores the correct 1 and saves 0 to the   . 
If     , he saves 2 to the    by mistake. 
163
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

2.3. 
If        , then the expert cannot 
estimate the    cell solution and saves 0 to 
the   . 
3. C array is saved to B. If it still has zeros, then 
proceed from the point 2, otherwise – move to the 
point 4. 
4. At this stage the group’s solution is defined by the 
votes majority. If ones dominate, then it’s 
considered, that the group has made a correct 
decision. If twos dominate, then the decision is 
wrong. 
Basing on this algorithm, a computer program was 
developed, that allowed to find G, the probability of making 
correct decision for one expert in the end of convergent 
iterative process, according to predefined parameters of the 
model:   ,   ,      , when he use his expert ability of 
choosing between others’ solutions together with the ability of 
ideas generation. To find P – the probability of finding correct 
solution by votes majority in the group of M experts – let us 
use famous formula, that follows from the Condorcet’s 
Theorem [3]: 
  ∑
  
           
   
 
   
 
 
(1) 
One of the research objectives was to explore the 
dependence of the group intellectual potential upon the model 
parameters. As the intellectual potential, the function    
    
  was considered. It is inversely proportional to the number 
of experts that have found correct solution with probability 
   , where   is a predefined small value. In our experiments 
       . 
Computer experiments were performed with different 
values of the parameters    and   . Their variations are  
given in the Table I. There are also presented the evaluated 
values of M (top left corner of a cell) and IP (bottom right 
corner of a cell) for  
  
     and  
  
      . Obviously, the 
cases where         are impossible. Furthermore, some 
small values of these parameters where       also give no 
results because the number of experts M in these cases tends 
to infinity. 
It is shown that intellectual potential of the experts differs 
by degrees and the legislative component brings a 
considerable contribution to the intellect structure. Moreover, 
it is the very thing that allows to overcome the Condorcet’s 
“border”.  
4. Conditions of correct solution obtainment 
Basing on the experiments the empirical inequality was 
defined that bounds up parameters of the model. When it 
holds, it’s always possible to find M, such that guarantees 
obtaining correct solution with probability 0.999 for the 
group: 
   
    
           
 
(2) 
 
For convenience, in practical applications, the constraint 
(2) can be deducted to: 
 
  
   
     
       
 
 
(3) 
 
Here are some consequences of the inequality (3): 
 
1. If experts have low ability of decision 
generation (     ), then for obtaining a 
correct solution it’s necessary for them to have 
high abilities of evaluation (     ). 
2. If experts have high ability of decision 
generation (     ), then for obtaining a 
correct solution it’s not necessary for the group 
to have high evaluation abilities (     ). 
3. If experts’ abilities of both generation and 
evaluation are both low, they cannot obtain a 
correct solution. Moreover, if the portion of 
such experts in the expert group increases, then 
correctness of the group work result decreases. 
Convergence of MEC to the correct solution and 
fulfillment of the inequality (3) in quantitative form were 
inspected also in condition of normal distribution of the model 
parameters. Just like in Condorcet’s research, in this paper, 
basing on computer experiments, it’s deducted that the results 
obtained in case of normal distribution of parameters in limits 
of statistical errors, concurred with results of inspection, 
preformed with average values of the parameters. 
Let us consider a practical example of the MEC usage. 
One of the experiments that were made by the authors is an IQ 
test. The test consists of a set of questions, i.e. 50. Every 
question is provided with several answers only one of which 
is correct. There are 10 students (experts) participating in the 
test solving. 
According to the MEC model solution template can be 
divided into 50 slots – one for a question. On the first iteration 
of MEC each of 10 students proposes answers for every 
question he is sure and leaves unanswered those he has doubt 
with. On the second and other iterations each expert receives a 
solution of another randomly chosen expert and rates his 
answers. If some answer of the expert being rated seems more 
correct that the one which the rater has in susceptive slot then 
he replaces his old slot value or blank slot with the value of 
that user. These iterations proceed until all solutions are 
similar (the students have come into conclusion). Thus, the 
solution that is left in the solutions population is considered as 
the most correct one. 
On multiple experiments the method demonstrated high 
increase of the intellect level of real students groups. 
 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
On the results of the research, the following conclusions 
were made: 
 
Simple and efficient iterative method of 
collective decision-making was proposed and 
explored. 
164
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

 
 
TABLE I. VALUES OF THE MODEL PROPERTIES 
    
⁄
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 
0.8 
0.9 
0.1 
129 
7.75 
81 
12.3 
55 
18.2 
39 
25.6 
29 
34.5 
21 
4.,6 
17 
58.8 
13 
76,9 
9 
111.1 
0.2 
535 
1.87 
233 
4.29 
127 
7.87 
81 
12.3 
55 
18,2 
37 
27,0 
27 
37.0 
21 
46.7 
- 
0.3 
- 
2147 
0.465 
531 
1.88 
233 
4.29 
129 
7.75 
81 
12.3 
55 
18.2 
- 
- 
0.4 
- 
- 
- 
2143 
0.467 
533 
1.88 
235 
4.26 
- 
- 
- 
    
⁄
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 
0.8 
0.9 
0.1 
- 
- 
- 
535 
1.87 
129 
7.75 
55 
18.2 
29 
34.5 
17 
58.8 
9 
111.1 
0.2 
- 
- 
- 
2145 
0.466 
233 
4.29 
81 
12.3 
39 
25.6 
21 
46.7 
- 
0.3 
- 
- 
- 
- 
535 
1.87 
127 
7.87 
55 
18.2 
- 
- 
0.4 
- 
- 
- 
- 
2147 
0.465 
235 
4.26 
 
- 
- 
 
 
The conditions were determined, that can 
guarantee obtainment of correct solution by a 
group of experts using the Method of 
Evolutionary Solutions Coordination. 
 
The experts’ competence of legislation and 
decisions evaluation was engaged together with 
the ideas generation competence. It helps 
experts groups to operate more efficiently and 
eliminate the Condorcet’s border. 
The obtained results have become the beginning of large 
research, that is divided into two branches. The first is 
exploring applications of MEC with creation of different 
variations of the method and different coordination models. 
For example, so-called Dynamic Slots variation was 
developed to apply the method in machine translation. Also 
MEC was utilized in collaborative text creation and concepts 
visualization. For all these applications software products 
were created. The second direction of the related work is 
improvement of MEC. A considerable part of theoretic 
research is related to elitist modification of the iterative 
process. It means that in creation and legislation stages 
experts’ weights differ according to their creative and 
evaluative skills. Several algorithms were developed for 
calculating these skills. 
Implementation of the coordination process in collective 
intelligence algorithms opens new fields of application for 
information technologies. Not everybody is able to create 
great solution for certain problem, but comparison of several 
solutions with picking the most impressive one is a simpler 
task, and usage of this point gives wide opportunities. In order 
to apply these concepts in practice we need to discover new 
models of collective work organization, that, first of all, can 
be attractive for experts, e.g., in the Wide Web, and in the 
second, will provide solutions for some actual problems. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 This work was supported by the Russian Foundation for 
Basic Research, grant #13-07-00958 “Development of the 
theory and experimental research of a new information 
technology of self-managed crowdsourcing”. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Woolley A. W., Chabris C. F., Pentland A., Hashmi N., and 
Malone T. W. Evidence for a Collective Intelligence Factor in 
the Performance of Human Groups // Science. 2010. V. 330 
pp. 686–688. 
[2] P. Venetis, H. Garcia-Molina, K. Huang, and Polyzotis N. Max 
Algorithms in Crowdsourcing Environments // April 16–20, 
2012, Lyon, France. 
[3] Le Marquis de Condorcet.  Essai sur l’application de l’analyse 
à la probabilité des décisions rendues à la pluralité des voix. 
1785.  Les Archives de la Revolution Française, Pergamon 
Press. 
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

[4] Bachrach Y., Minka T., Guiver J., and Graepel T. How To 
Grade a Test Without Knowing the Answers | A Bayesian 
Graphical Model for Adaptive Crowdsourcing and Aptitude 
Testing // 2012 pp. 1–2. 
[5] Mitchell M. An Introduction to Genetic Algorithms, MIT press 
//1996. pp. 2–23. 
[6] Kosorukoff A. Human Based Genetic Algorithm // Illinois 
Genetic Algorithms Laboratory, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Campaign. January 2001. 
[7] Turchin V. The phenomenon of science. A cybernetic approach 
to human evolution // Columbia University Press, New York, 
1977. 
[8] Stern W. The Psychological Methods of Intelligence Testing 
(G. Whipple, Trans.). // Baltimore: Warwick and York. 
[9] Eysenck H. J. The Structure and Measurement of Intelligence. 
// University of London. Institute of Psychiatry. 
[10] Гузеев В.В. Преподавание. От теории к мастерству. – М.: 
НИИ школьных технологий, 2009. pp. 261–264 
[11] Кузнецов 
В.В. 
Технологии 
интернет-образования 
. 
http://www.masters.donntu.edu.ua/2006/fvti/grach/library/st2.h
tm 
[12] Козленко 
А.Г. 
Информационная 
культура 
и/или 
компьютер на уроке биологии. 
[13] Чернухин 
Ю.В. 
и 
Здоровеющев 
В.В. 
Сетевой 
эволюционно-генетический 
алгоритм 
принятия 
коллективных решений в человеко-машинных системах.  
[14] Затуливетер 
Ю.С. 
Информация 
и 
эволюционное 
моделирование. 
Труды 
международной 
конференции 
«Идентификация и проблемы управления» SICPRO 2000, 
Москва. pp. 1529-1571. 
[15] Faratin P., Sierra C., and Jennings N.R. Using similarity 
criteria to make negotiation trade-offs. Proceedings Fourth 
International Conference on MultiAgent Systems. IEEE 
Comput. Soc. //2000. 
[16] Ehtamo H., Ketteunen E., and R. Hamalainen, Searching for 
Joint Gains in Multi-Party Negotiations. European Journal of 
Operational Research. //2001 
[17] Klein M., Faratin P., Sayama H., and Bar-Yam Y. Negotiating 
Complex Contracts. Sloan School of Management 3 
Cambridge Center, NE20-336. //2007  
 
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

