Inter-domain Routing Incentive Model Based on Cooperative Game 
Donghong Qin
*†, Jiahai Yang
‡, Lina Ge*, Zhenkun Lu*
*School of Information Science and Engineering, Guangxi University for Nationalities, Nanning China
†Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA USA 
‡Institute of Cyberspace and Network Science, Tsinghua University, Beijing China 
Email: donghong.qin@gmail.com, yang@cernet.edu
Abstract—An 
incentive 
mechanism 
should 
be 
incorporated 
into 
the 
current 
inter-domain 
routing 
architecture because it can motivate Internet Service 
Providers (ISPs) to provide efficient and lasting routing 
services 
such 
as 
multipath 
routing 
and 
routing 
customization. In this paper, we model the cooperation and 
competition behavior of ISPs in the special inter-domain 
routing system (i.e., UMIR: user-customizing multi-path 
inter-domain routing), and then propose a novel incentive 
model based on cooperative-game. We abstract and give 
some basic concepts such as a routing coalition, sub-coalition 
and their characteristic function, and then design and 
develop a fair and feasible revenue allocation algorithm 
called shapely value algorithm. The theoretical analysis and 
experimental results show that this incentive model benefits 
the deployment of UMIR protocol and the formation and 
stability of a UMIR routing coalition. Therefore, it will push 
the UMIR network to evolve healthily and orderly. 
Keywords—Internet routing; user-customized multi-path 
inter-domain routing; inter-domain routing incentive model; 
cooperative game 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
Currently the Internet hardly provides a routing 
service that assures the quality of service of various 
network applications, mainly because the Internet has not 
an efficient account & pricing function [1]. In the early 
days of the Internet, the U. S. government was uniformly 
responsible for the development and management of the 
ARPANET/NSFNET networks, at that time it was 
unnecessary for those networks to add the account & 
pricing function because this would decrease the technical 
or economic efficiency of the entire network [2]. Hence 
those initial networks are intrinsically shortage of the 
account & pricing function. Unfortunately, this function is 
hardly introduced to the current inter-domain routing 
architecture [3]. The shortage of the account & pricing 
function has brought up many challenges of the inter-
domain routing, such as path expanding and performance 
degradation, and has also reduced the enthusiasm and 
initiative of the Internet Service Provider (ISP) for 
deploying newly routing protocols or service. 
Generally, 
Internet 
traffic 
transmits 
multiple 
Autonomous Systems (AS) (for convenient expression, 
this paper alternates to use between AS and ISP) to arrive 
at a target network, where each AS is an independent and 
rational economic entity [4]. ASs with limited network 
resources must collaboratively transit their traffic with 
other peers, thereby accomplishing a globe-wide routing 
service. On the other hand, these independent and rational 
ASs would compete for their maximizing self-interests 
each other. In this paper, we consider the Internet routing 
as the routing game of all ASs, and then suppose that an 
AS would provide a special routing service and can obtain 
some economic revenue from stub networks or end users. 
For this goal, the AS needs other peer ASs to 
collaboratively provide the high quality of routing service. 
Therefore, how to model this inter-domain routing game 
and how to design the revenue allocation method among 
the Internet ASs will become two important challenges [5]. 
Our previous researches [6][7] have proposed a 
customizing inter-domain routing system called the User-
customizing Multi-path Inter-domain Routing (UMIR), 
whose key principle is constructing a special Internet-
wide AS-level topology to compute the Internet-wide one 
or multiple routes meeting user-customizing requirements. 
For some network users, the UMIR network not only 
improves their route-selecting flexibility but also meets 
their individualized routing requirements such as the 
multi-path 
routing 
and 
quality-of-service 
routing. 
However, the UMIR faces several challenges as following: 
First, since Internet paths available must be strategy-
compatible, those paths with incompatible AS strategies 
will be of no avail even though they may have better 
performance. Second, although ASs deploy the UMIR 
protocol to improve their competitiveness, ISP would be 
not willing to do this without efficient incentive. 
Therefore, we in this paper propose a routing incentive 
mechanism for the UMIR network. The basic principle of 
this mechanism is as following: in the UMIR network, 
ISPs provide the multi-path routing or quality of routing 
services for network users that would pay extra fee; 
meanwhile, ISPs must allocate some revenue to other 
cooperative ISPs. Finally, this mechanism will motivate 
ISP to actively deploy the UMIR protocol. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 
2 introduces the background of the UMIR network and the 
cooperative game; In Section 3, we provide a formal 
statement of the cooperative-game model of UMIR 
routing and have an analysis about the UMIR routing 
game and in Section 4 derive the revenue allocation 
method. In Section 5, we have carried on the experiment 
and given some performance evaluation. We conclude in 
Section 6 with a brief discussion of open problems and 
future works. 
II.
BACKGROUND 
This section mostly introduces the basic principles of 
UMIR networks and the relative concepts of the 
cooperative game. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-574-6
INTERNET 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Evolving Internet

A.
UMIR networks 
We have proposed a User-customizing Multi-path 
Inter-domain Routing (UMIR) [6, 7] whose main target 
includes (i) implementing the multi-path routing instead 
of the BGP single-path routing; (ii) meeting the routing 
requirements of network users about the route-selection 
flexibility and route-personalized characteristics. The 
UMIR-enabled networks are composed of multiple ISP 
agents deployed the UMIR system. In this network, AS 
nodes accepting users to customize the routing service are 
called as control node (CN), AS nodes including 
destination host or network are called as goal node (GN) 
and other AS nodes are called as cooperative nodes (CPs). 
Figure 1. The simplified  network (UMIR) 
Figure 1 gives a simple example of UMIR networks. 
Alice is a network user (e.g., a stub network), and it hopes 
to customize a best-performance route destination to the 
network E1 from its ISP. This network is made up of 
UMIR-enabled agent sets {Z, A, B, C, D, E, F, G}, where 
Z is a control node, G is goal node and others are 
cooperative nodes. The control node (Z) creates a special 
network topology by collecting routing information from 
others cooperative nodes, and then compute and choose 
the best routes to the destination network E1 (10.1.1/24). 
In this network, the control node (Z) must request some 
route 
information 
from 
other 
cooperative 
nodes; 
correspondingly, the cooperative nodes can send their 
routing information to the control node. The routing 
information is called as the route-let which lists several 
important fields as following. 
•
PID—an identifier of the route-let information 
which is composed of two neighboring AS 
numbers. 
•
Prefix—a target network which is customized by a 
network user. 
•
Metrics—link 
performance 
vectors 
(e.g., 
bandwidth, delay, etc.) of the route-let. 
•
Type—an incentive model used in the UMIR 
network. 
•
Cost—some fee that the network user pays to the 
individual ISP. 
In the UMIR network, users can customize the routing 
service to the target network from the UMIR-enabled ISP, 
and its control node initiates the UMIR computing process 
which constructs an Internet-wide AS-level topology to 
compute one or more best routes for the customizing user. 
Specifically, the UMIR process carries four steps as 
following: 
•
Customize the personalized routing service. 
Network users that need some special routing 
characteristics (e.g., low delay, high bandwidth) 
can pay their ISPs to purchase the customizing 
routing services. The ISP’s control node will 
transform these characteristics of the user-
customizing 
requirements 
into 
route 
profile 
parameters. 
•
Construct topology and compute the appropriate 
routes. According to the route profile parameters, 
the control node can construct an Internet-wide 
AS-level topology by requiring the route-let from 
other cooperative nodes, and then compute and 
choose best routes. 
•
Install the chosen routes. The control node will 
advertise every cooperative node to configure her 
individual data plane along the chosen path. 
•
Finish the settlement among relative ISPs. Since 
the 
control 
node 
(i.e., 
ISP) 
provides 
the 
customizing routing service for network users, 
these users must pay their ISPs with certain extra 
fee, in turn, which is allocated by the control node 
to other cooperative ISPs. 
B.
Cooperative game and its solutions 
The cooperative game is a mathematical model used to 
describe the cooperation and competition behavior of 
rational entities, and study how to rationally make 
decisions in this environment [8, 9]. We utilize the 
cooperative game to describe the AS relationship in the 
UMIR network, and model the UMIR routing process as 
an AS cooperative game model. Each AS plays the UMIR 
cooperative-game by announcing the route information, 
and then all participating ASs will obtain certain 
economic revenue from this routing game. 
The game solution is another challenge related to the 
cooperative game. Many experts of game theory have 
proposed a number of methods as for how to allocate 
coalition revenues. In the cooperative game, the allocation 
methods of coalition revenues are mainly classified into 
two categories [8]: dominant methods and valuation 
methods. Valuation methods have a unique allocation 
method for each cooperative game, which can balance 
some conflicting claims from various players and which 
can reflect the allocation equity and justice. The widely 
used valuation method is shapely-value method, because 
it has clearly economic implication and the simple 
calculation. Assume that there is a cooperative game 
CG=[N, v(S)], N=[1,…,n] and v(S) is the characteristic 
function of coalition S, which satisfies the axioms of 
symmetry, efficiency and additivity, the CG has one 
unique Shapely-Value as following: 
1
2
( )
(
( ),
( ),...,
n ( ))
v
v
v
v
ϕ
ϕ
ϕ
Φ
=
(
|
|)!(|
| 1)!
( )
[ ( )
( \{})]
!
i
S
N
n
S
S
v
v S
v S
i
n
ϕ
⊆
−
−
=
−
∑
⑴
Note that in (1), v(S) - v(S\{i}) shows the marginal 
contribution of the player i on the coalition S, if i does not 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-574-6
INTERNET 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Evolving Internet

belong to S, v(S) - v(S\{i}) is zero, that is, the player does 
not  have the marginal contribution toward the coalition S. 
III.
INTER-DOMAINS ROUTING UMIR GAME
MODEL 
This 
section 
firstly 
analyzes 
AS 
behavioral 
characteristics in the UMIR network by using the 
cooperative game, and then describes the AS survival 
scenario. Also, we discuss the rational basis to form a 
coalition and its stable conditions, and finally build a 
routing game model for UMIR networks. 
A.
UMIR game 
Each AS of the UMIR network is a rational entity and 
can control its routing behavior to maximize its own 
revenue. Under the incentive routing scenarios, an AS 
declares the own routing information to participate in the 
routing game, and gets the corresponding revenue. In the 
UMIR network, an AS may be the control node or 
cooperative node, or both. On the one hand, ASs need 
their mutual cooperation to forward the Internet traffic 
and obtain some economic revenues; on the other hand, 
different ASs compete with one another to maximize their 
economic revenues. Thus AS survival scenarios are 
consistent with the player’s of the cooperative game. 
Therefore, the inter-domain routing for the UMIR 
networks can be modeled by using the cooperative game, 
and the equilibrium outcome of the routing game is also 
gotten by the solution method of the cooperative game 
theory. 
The cooperation game model of the UMIR routing 
network can be described as following: assume that exist 
the players set N= {1 ... n}, which is composed of n ASs 
and each AS is a rational player. The routing system will 
select a path (i.e., a routing coalition made up of the 
path’s all ASs), and the coalition has also many sub-
coalitions 
and 
each 
sub-coalition 
can 
define 
a 
characteristic function. 
By using some terminology from cooperative game [8-
10], we give some relative definitions in the routing game 
model. 
Definition 1: Assume that for a routing game G = [N, 
v(S)], its players set N= {1, ..., n} consists of n ASs.  If S 
= {i, | i is a certain AS along the selected path of a 
customizing user}, S is called as the routing coalition. 
In the UMIR network, the member number of 
coalition S is far smaller than all player number N of this 
network, that is, |S|<<|N|. If the UMIR have selected a 
certain path, all ASs along this selected path will make up 
of a routing coalition. 
Definition 2: Given a routing coalition S = {1,…, k}, 
for any set M ⊆ S, M is called as the sub-coalition of 
coalition S. 
If M is allowed to take a null value and M = S is a 
routing coalition, and the number of sub-coalition M is 
Ck0 + Ck1 +…+Ckk = 2k. 
According to the UMIR network in Figure 2, given the 
path L = z-c-d, there is a routing coalition S = {z, c, d}, 
whose sub-coalitions have {z}, {c}, {d}, {z, c}, {z, d}, {c, 
d}, {z, c, d}. 
Figure 2. The example of the coalition revenue allocation
Definition 3: Given the routing coalition and its sub-
coalitions, the characteristic function v(M) of any sub-
coalition M is a mapping from the sub-coalition to the real 
number v : M⊆ S → R. 
Definition 4: Call the game CG = [N, v(S)] as a 
UMIR routing game only if this game has following 
characteristics: (1) The players set consists of all ASs of 
UMIR network, namely, N = {1,…, k}; (2) For a routing 
coalition S, its sub-coalition M has the characteristic 
function v(M). 
B.
Analysis of the UMIR routing game 
In the UMIR routing game, each cooperative ISP 
responses to the information request from the control node, 
and expects to be selected by the UMIR routing system 
(i.e., forming a routing coalition), which is a computing 
result of the routing system on the basis of the user route 
requirements and the current network resources. This 
coalition formation mechanism is determined by the 
internal and external demands of each participating ISP. 
An ISP’s internal demand refers to its customer’s 
personalized routing requirements, which urge it to deploy 
the UMIR-enabled system. If an ISP does not provide the 
customizing routing services such as multi-path or QoS 
routing, likely there rises the customer loss because of 
ISP’s lower performance and competitiveness. An ISP’s 
external demand means that it must consider its own 
economic interests as an independent and rational 
economic entity, thus an ISP must obtain certain benefits 
by providing extra and high quality routing services.  
Once an ISP customizes the personalized path for a 
network user by participating in the UMIR-enabled 
network, that is, there will form a stabilizing routing 
coalition because there has an economic incentive. The 
main reasons are as following: (i) ISPs almost have large 
network resources so that their marginal cost of providing 
collaborative routing is very low and there easily form 
multiple various coalitions; (ii) As long as their 
participating coalitions are available, ISPs will obtain the 
economic benefit from these routing coalitions. These 
reasons will essentially strengthen the ISP’s cooperation 
willingness, thus making the coalition more stabilizing. 
The above analysis shows that, in order to motivate 
ISPs to provide stabilizing and lasting routing services, we 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-574-6
INTERNET 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Evolving Internet

must develop some mechanisms for the UMIR network to 
regulate and restrain AS behavior, including revenue 
allocation and coalition formation mechanisms. A routing 
coalition’s formation is dependent on the user route 
requirements and existing network resources, which 
ensures that collaborative ASs have equally chance of 
being selected to provide the Internet routing service, i.e., 
it requires that the routing algorithm is fair and equitable. 
On the other hand, how to allocate the coalition revenue is 
a key problem solved for the coalition cooperative games. 
For UMIR networks, a revenue allocation mechanism is 
the basis of formation and stability of a routing coalition. 
In cooperative games, the revenue allocation is the solution 
of cooperative games, namely, how to allocate coalition 
revenue to each participating AS member fairly. For 
example, ASs can declare their routing-link information to 
the UMIR control node to participate into the routing 
game, if one AS is selected as the member of a routing 
coalition, it will obtain some expected revenue, and 
otherwise the expected revenue is zero. The AS expected 
revenue is a specific solution of routing cooperative 
games, such that the AS cannot change the link 
information to affect its due revenue. Only if all ASs 
obtain appropriate and reasonable revenue, the whole 
routing game will achieve an equilibrium solution, which 
is the Nash bargaining solution of cooperative games: if 
the UMIR networks exist Nash bargaining solution, no AS 
can obtain greater benefits by its self-declared strategy. 
IV.
REVENUE ALLOCATION METHOD 
For the solution structure of the cooperation game, the 
Shapley value method has been widely used for its good 
economic meaning and simple computing [9]. This 
section describes how to design the coalition revenue 
allocation algorithm by using the basic principle of the 
shapely values method. 
A.
Sub- coalition and its characteristic function 
The key elements of the shapely value method are the 
coalition definitions and the computing method of the 
characteristic function. In order to design an effective 
revenue allocation method, we must give the definitions 
of coalition and its characteristic function. According to 
Definition 1, the UMIR network forms a routing coalition 
by computing and selecting a concrete path, which this 
coalition is the result of multiple ASs routing game. The 
coalition members include all ASs along the selected path; 
moreover these ASs can further form a number of sub-
coalitions. 
By using a cost-plus pricing method [9] of the 
economics field, we give the definitions and computing 
expressions of characteristic function of the sub-coalition. 
Definition 5: The characteristic function of the sub-
coalition M is defined as sum of coalition cost and profit, 
and the computing expression is as follows: 
0
(
)
(
)
i
j
i M
j S M
v M
c
q
c
∈
∈ −
=
+
−
∑
∑
⑵
Where ci is the cost of the member i, q0 is the expected 
profits of a routing coalition, cj is the cost of non-coalition 
member j. In Equation (2), the coalition revenue consists 
of two parts: the first item is the cost of all members in the 
coalition M, and the second item is the expected profit of 
coalition M. 
By Definition 5, the sub-coalition revenue v(M) is the 
maximum benefit obtained from the coalition, and equals 
to the total cost of the coalition 
i S ci
∑∈
 plus the 
difference between the revenues of coalition (q0) and the 
cost 
j N S cj
∈
−
∑
  of no- coalition members.
Below gives an example introducing the computing of 
coalition revenue. As shown in Figure 2, for the UMIR 
network, given the coalition S = {z, c, d}, need compute 
the revenue of two sub-coalition M1 = {z, c} and M2 = {z, 
c, d}. Assume the coalition revenue q0 is the cost sum of 
the shortest path, namely q0= 6, the sub-coalition revenue 
v (M1) = 4 + 6 - 5 = 5, other sub-coalition revenue v (M2) 
= 9 + 6 - 0 = 15. 
B.
A simple example 
Section III has introduced the relative definition of a 
routing coalition and sub-coalition and the computing 
method of characteristic functions. We are going to 
discuss the revenue allocation method of SPA (Sha-Pley 
Apportionment). Assume the UMIR network uses one 
specific routing algorithm (e.g., BGP) to select a 
particular path according to user requirements, i.e., 
forming the routing coalition. The computing steps (see 
Figure 3) of the coalition revenue are as follows: 
•
Initialization that, given the coalition S, the 
expected revenue of its all members ci (1 ≤ i ≤ k, k 
is a member number) and some initial system 
parameters. 
•
ComputeSubcoalition that determines the sub-
coalitions in the coalition S, and the total number 
of sub-coalitions. 
•
RevenueOfSubcoalition 
that 
computes 
the 
revenue value of the sub-coalition M: for any sub-
coalitions M, compute the revenue value of the 
sub-coalition by Equation (2). 
•
RevenueOfeachAS that uses Equation (1) to 
compute each AS revenue value in the coalition S. 
Figure 3. Flow chart of computing coalition revenue 
Below we take Figure 2 as an example to show the 
computing process using the SPA algorithm. Assume a 
user want to customize the route from Z to G, and the 
control node selects the path {z-c-d} after running its path 
Initialization 
ComputeSubcoalition 
RevenueOfSubcoalition 
RevenueOfeachAS 
Equation (1) 
Equation (2) 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-574-6
INTERNET 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Evolving Internet

computing process, each AS revenue in the coalition S = 
{z, c, d} can be computed as following steps: 
a) Given the coalition S = {z, c, d}, S has eight sub-
coalition M such as φ，{z}，{c}，{d}，{z，c}，{z，
d}，{c，d}，{z，c，d}. 
b) Compute the revenue of the sub-coalition M by the 
Equation (2), their result is showed in Table 1. 
TABLE I. REVENUES OF SUB- COALITIONS 
Sub-coalitions 
Revenue
Ф 
0 
{z} 
3 
{c} 
1 
{d} 
5 
{z，c} 
5 
{z，d} 
13 
{c，d} 
9 
{z，c，d} 
15 
c) Compute the AS revenue of the coalition S by 
Equation (1): 
{ }
(
|
|)!(|
| 1)!
( )
[ ( )
(
\{ })]
!
i
S
n
S
S
v z
v S
v S
i
n
⊆
−
−
=
−
∑
1
1
1
1
(3
0)
(4 1)
(12
5)
(14
8)
4.67
3
6
6
3
=
−
+
−
+
−
+
−
=
Similarly, 
( )
1.67, ( )
7.67
v c
v d
=
=
d) All AS’s revenues of the coalition S are: Ф(v) = 
(4.67, 1.67, 7.67) 
Note: the AS’s revenue of the UMIR network only 
depends on its contribution of coalition revenue. The 
further simulations will give the validation and 
comparison of the SPA algorithm. Moreover, AS revenues 
are independent of their places or positions in the coalition, 
because this characteristic is guaranteed from the 
symmetry axiom of the shapely value method [10]. 
V. EXPERIMENT AND EVALUATION 
In order to testify the feasibility of our solution on 
the routing incentive model, we will do some experiments 
and have some analysis on the experimental results. 
A. Simulation experiment 
To evaluate the feasibility and effectiveness of several 
revenue allocation algorithms, we have developed a 
UMIR simulator [7] to carry out lots of experiments. The 
ASs are willing to participate in UMIR network with the 
incentive mechanism, so the experiments do not consider 
their business strategy and its impact on the routing 
selection results. Assume that the cost of AS inter-domain 
links complies with the uniform distribution of [10, 20], 
which refers to the spending cost that ISP forward or route 
user traffics (namely, it refers to the contribution under 
the cooperative routing).  
We choose two allocation algorithms named the 
original average apportionment (OAA) and the cost 
weighted 
average 
apportionment 
(CWA) 
as 
two 
comparison algorithms. OAA is a simple average revenue 
allocation algorithm. And CWA is an improvement on the 
OAA algorithm, which considers the cost value of each 
coalition member during the routing game and which is 
based on the weighted cost size. Both algorithms do not 
consider the contribution of various members to the 
coalition. For the rational AS, OAA and CWA algorithms 
are unstable allocation algorithms, so they cannot 
guarantee to produce a stable and lasting routing coalition. 
However, the SPA algorithm is essentially a revenue 
allocation based on the contribution of coalition members, 
and therefore, it makes the routing coalition become more 
stabilizing and lasting.  
The simulation experiment selects 1000 random AS 
node pairs (s, t) and runs the UMIR simulator where the 
selected routing algorithm is used to calculate the routing 
path of each AS node pair (s, t). And we evaluate the 
performance of SPA, OAA and CWA algorithms. 
B. The result and theoretical analysis 
Figure 4 shows the revenue allocation results of SPA, 
OAA and CWA algorithms respectively according to the 
participating AS with largest coalition contribution. For 
these AS nodes with big contribution of the routing 
coalition, SPA distributes the most revenue to them, CWA 
is the secondary and OAA is the minimum. For example, 
the data of No. 6 sample can be shown that for the greatest 
contribution in the coalition, SPA distributes the revenue 
of 41, CWA distributes the revenue of 36, and OAA 
distributes the revenue of 32. 
Figure 4. Comparisons of AS node with the most contribution degree 
Figure 5. Comparisons of AS node with the less contribution degree
Figure 5 shows the revenue allocation according to the 
participating AS with the smallest coalition contribution. 
For AS nodes with smallest contribution, OAA distributes 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-574-6
INTERNET 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Evolving Internet

the most revenue, CWA is the secondary and SPA is the 
minimum. Therefore, compared with the OAA and CWA 
algorithms, SPA is one allocation algorithm based on the 
contribution, which benefits to the formation and stability 
of a routing coalitions.
Figure 6 shows the member revenue changes with 
total coalition revenue under the SPA allocation algorithm. 
With the total coalition revenue increases, the member 
revenue increases too. This is because the member 
contribution to the whole coalition has not changed, such 
that the member revenue will linearly increase with the 
coalition total revenue. 
Figure 6. Influences of member revenue by coalition revenue change 
As can be seen from experiments, the revenue 
allocation algorithm (SPA) is based on the contribution to 
the whole coalition routing, which provides a fair and 
equitable allocation for the coalition members. Therefore, 
our designed incentive algorithm can motivate ISP to 
improve the willingness for deploying the new UMIR 
protocol, and is helpful to produce a stabilizing and 
lasting routing coalition, thereby accelerating the healthy 
and orderly development of the UMIR network. 
VI.
CONCLUSION 
The routing incentive is necessary to motivate ISPs to 
provide the efficient routing service in the globe–wide 
Internet, and then a fair and reasonable incentive scheme 
can benefit the cooperation between ISPs and maintain the 
Internet routing stability. In fact, there will be theoretical 
and practical significance as for how to use incentives to 
encourage ISP to deploy some efficient and valued- 
routing service or products. Based on the previous studies 
(i.e., UMIR), we had done the following studies in that 
paper: (1) analyze in detail the rational basis and stable 
conditions of  a routing coalition formation in the UMIR 
network; (2) propose a routing cooperative game model 
for inter-domain routing; (3) design an efficient revenue 
allocation algorithm for the routing coalition. In the future 
work, we will verify the consistent ability of the ISP 
routing services, based on the routing performance from 
some monitoring facilities; and further, we will build the 
routing trust evaluation model to solve the deceptive 
announcements problem in the routing cooperative game. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the National Natural 
Science Foundation of China (No. 61462009, No. 
61432009, No. 61561008), the Natural Science Foundation 
of 
Guangxi 
(No. 
2014GXNSFAA11 
8358), 
the 
Prospective Research Project on Future Networks of 
Jiangsu 
Future 
Networks 
Innovation 
Institute(No.BY2013095115), the Specialized Research 
Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education (No.  
20130002110058), the National Basic Research Program 
of China (863 Program) (No. 2015AA015601),the 
Guangxi 
University 
for 
Nationalities 
Science 
Foundation(No:2014MDQD017, 2014MDYB031). 
REFERENCES
[1]
R. Feigenbaum, C. Papadimitriou, and S. Shenker, “A bgp-based 
mechanism for lowest-cost routing”, Proceedings of the twenty-
first annual symposium on Principles of distributed computing, 
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2007:139-150. 
[2]
V. Cerf and R. Kahn, “A protocol for packet network inter-
connection”, IEEE Trans. Communications, 1974, 22(5):637–648. 
[3]
D. Clark, “The design philosophy of the DARPA internet 
protocols”, Proceeding of SIGCOMM'88, Palo Alto, CA, 
1988:106-114. 
[4]
Y. Rekhter, T. Li, and S. Hares, A border gateway protocol 4 
(BGP-4), RFC 4271, Internet Engineering Task Force, January 
2006. 
[5]
H. Sam, Internet Routing Architectures (v2). Eastland, TX, USA: 
Cisco press, 2011. 
[6]
D. Qin, J. Yang, and H. Wang, “Multipath Inter-domain Routing 
via Deviation from Primary Path”, Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Information Networking (ICOIN2012), Bali, 
Indonesia, 2012:222-227. 
[7]
D. Qin, J. Yang, and H. Wang, “Another Multipath Inter-domain 
Routing”, Proceedings of the 26th IEEE International conference 
on 
Advanced 
Information 
Networking 
and 
Applications 
(AINA2012). Fukuoka, Japan, 2012:581-588.  
[8]
L. Petrosian, Game theory, Hong Kong: World Scientific, 2006. 
[9]
R. Gibbons, A primer in Game Theory. Princeton, New Jersey, 
USA: Princeton University Press, 2008. 
[10] N. Nisan, T. Roughgarden, Algorithmic Game Theory, New York, 
NY, USA: Cambridge University Press, 2007. 
[11] M. Afergan, “Using repeated games to design incentive-based 
routing systems”, Proceedings of 25th IEEE International 
Conference on Computer Communications, Barcelona, Spain, 
2006:1-13. 
[12] M. Afergan and J. Wroclawski, “On the benefits and feasibility of 
incentive based routing infrastructure”, Proceedings of the ACM 
SIGCOMM Workshop on Practice and Theory of Incentives in 
Networked Systems, Portland, OR, USA: ACM Press, 2009: 197-
204. 
[13] N. Nisan and A. Ronen, “Algorithmic mechanism design” ,Games 
and Economic Behavior, 2002: 35(1): 359-379. 
[14] R. Cominetti and C. Guzmn, “Network congestion control with 
Markovian multipath routing”, Mathematical Programming, 2014, 
147(1-2): 231-251. 
[15] J. John and M. Therese, “Traffic Light Based Multipath Routing 
Mechanism for Non-Geostationary Satellite IP Networks”, Traffic, 
2015, 2(2). 
[16] J. Zhang, D. Zhang, and K. Huang, “Improving Datacenter 
Throughput and Robustness with Lazy TCP over Packet Spraying”, 
Computer Communications, 2015. 
[17] V. Shuvalov and I. Varaksina, “Estimation of control errors 
influence on availability of multipath routing system”, 2014 12th 
International Conference on Actual Problems of Electronics 
Instrument 
Engineering 
(APEIE). 
IEEE, 
2014: 
420-426.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-574-6
INTERNET 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Evolving Internet

