SDN Based Cloud Platform for Smart Vehicles 
 
Tijana Devaja, Živko Bojović, Anastazia Žunić 
 Faculty of Technical Sciences, University of Novi Sad 
     Novi Sad, Serbia 
emails: tijana.devaja@uns.ac.rs, zivko@uns.ac.rs, anastazia95@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract- Over the past few years, the advances 
in wireless communications, the expansion of cloud 
computing 
applications 
and the 
implementation 
of 
intelligent 
terminal 
equipment,  
forced 
vehicle 
manufacturers 
to rethink 
the 
role 
of 
advanced 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) in the 
vehicle industry. The process of designing, developing and 
deploying the 
new, 
smarter 
concept 
of  
vehicle 
management started by realizing the power of the 
collected data to improve vehicle services, to enable an 
integrated, effortless service experience, to engage with the 
drivers and implement the solutions for the well-being of 
all traffic participants. In this paper, we first define the 
key requirements for the integration of Smart Vehicle 
Computer System (SVCS) with cloud assisted automotive 
applications. Further, based on these requirements, we 
design a flexible and scalable cloud platform based on 
implementation of software defined networking into an 
architecture called Smart Vehicle to Cloud Integration 
Architecture (SVCIA). The goal is to provide a dynamic 
allocation of resources adjusted to the user needs and an 
easy implementation of new services, which makes driving 
safer and more comfortable for users.  The validation of 
the suggested solution has been done through simulation, 
where we used a cloud application based on Dijkstra 
algorithm in order to dynamically route the traffic and 
avoid congestions. The obtained results show that the use 
of this kind of solution can significantly improve drivers’ 
satisfaction and safety during the ride.  
 
Keywords- cloud; Smart Vehicle to Cloud Integration 
Architecture (SVCIA); Smart Vehicle Computer System (SVCS); 
Software Defined Networking (SDN); Dijkstra algorithm. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The future of the automotive industry is closely related to 
the development of advanced electronic systems and their 
integration with the applications on the cloud via Internet 
technology [1][2]. It is a part of new Internet of Vehicles 
(IoV) paradigm and the goal of this integration is to raise the 
level of intelligence of vehicles and to realize users’ 
requirements [3]. They can generally be divided into two 
categories: 
 
The requirements of drivers to realize quality 
Information Systems (IS) and to ensure effective circulation of 
information necessary to improve traffic safety and efficiency. 
 
The passengers’ need for greater comfort during the 
ride (vehicle as an office, entertainment), which means access 
to high-speed Internet. 
The realization of these requirements implies the design 
and deployment of complex and intelligent computing 
systems in cars: Smart Vehicle Computer Systems (SVCS). 
Their implementation includes integration of the Geographic 
Information System for continuous vehicle tracking, traffic 
monitoring and other data collections, such as effective traffic 
signalization, weather conditions, etc. [4]. SVCS applications 
and services are provided by different communication 
technologies, computer platforms, sensors and other active 
devices [5][6]. Therefore, it is a major technological challenge 
to network the vehicles and to implement new telematics 
applications. From our point of view, the platform should 
enable vehicle networking with a built-in module for 
autonomous decision-making and control in the SVCS. We 
are convinced that the development of smart systems for 
networking of vehicles is crucial for a large-scale introduction 
of intelligent solutions; a prerequisite is a cloud environment 
[7]. The advent of cloud technologies, more than ever, creates 
the possibility to substitute conventional methods of collecting 
and processing sensory information approaches by: 1) 
decentralization of detection and data collection, assuming 
that sensor data are detected and collected from different 
locations; 2) collecting information and resources from the 
cloud; 3) analytics of those data; 4) ad-hoc exchange of 
detected information with other vehicles in the case of 
breakup of cloud connectivity and their subsequent 
forwarding to the cloud in order to update the existing 
databases; 5) elastic provisioning of secure access for a 
specific cloud provider, while the IP address of the link 
provider is constantly changing due to soft hand-off between 
base stations. It is assumed that the users can scale resources 
up or down in real-time based on requests. 
We analyze how to enable the applications to use 
programmable dynamic interfaces to control and allocate 
network resources in order to differentiate the needs of users 
(such as SVCS) and the data types [8], and we propose the 
usage of Software Defined Networking (SDN) as a new 
solution for vehicle networking. This solution is a new and 
flexible combination of several existing contributions, 
including: 
 
Solution for providing the continuity of service, 
 
Ad-hoc communication between vehicles, important 
in case of interruption of the communication link between 
SVCS and traffic cloud, 
 
Centralized 
management 
and 
optimization 
of 
network resources, thus guaranteeing the reliability of services 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-644-6
INTERNET 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Evolving Internet

(the concentration of routing information in the controller 
provides fast traffic redirection in case of failure, choosing the 
alternative route with minimum cost). 
 
Dynamic subscribing - dynamic user registration 
according to economic criteria (service on demand),  
 
Scalability, achieved by adding the SDN controller. 
The remaining of the paper is elaborated as follows: 
Section 2 provides an overview of the research in the 
automotive 
industry 
with 
a 
focus 
on 
the 
field 
implementation of advanced ICT in vehicles and traffic 
management. In Section 3, we describe the proposed design of 
SDN-based architecture for vehicle to cloud integration. This 
concept, based on the SDN paradigm as an emerging 
technology, is described in Section 4. Section 5 provides an 
evaluation of the proposed solution from the traffic prediction 
standpoint. Section 6 concludes the paper and gives some 
details about how to reliably predict traffic. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
Today, there are many researches which deal with 
different aspects of application of advanced ICT solutions in 
the automotive industry and in traffic predictions. In ICT 
technologies, there are many new solutions. Different 
architectures are being developed, and the elements of an 
Intelligent Transport System (ITS) are being described. A 
large number of research papers have a goal to improve the 
implementation of Internet of Things (IoT) applications for 
smart traffic.  Wibowo et al. [9] provide a multi-criteria 
analysis used to calculate the “smartness index”, which 
represents 
the 
ability 
of 
the 
transportation 
system to help with a particular problem in order to develop a 
good strategy for a solution. Applications that solve traffic 
problems are often part of other projects, such as „smart city“, 
which has as goal to improve the quality of life in the city 
environment. Examples of such applications include: 
 
Experimenting Acoustics in Real environments using 
Innovative Test-beds (EAR-IT) sub-project [10], in which the 
focus of the research is the analysis of the sound coming from 
the surroundings, with the aim to draw a conclusion about the 
traffic density, deadlock or occupancy of the lanes. A couple 
of hundreds of units have been installed around the city; they 
are connected to a central processor in order to process the 
sound. These units have microphones and computers installed 
in them, and they are connected to sensors, which allow 
precise location of the coming sound. When cars with priority 
pass are observed, the system has the ability to keep track of 
the siren and to locate the vehicle, and this information is  
used to facilitate the passage of the vehicle with priority to the 
desired destination.  
 
Applications which are developed to show the 
number and position of currently available parking lots in the 
city [11]. 
Some research papers point out the development of a 
smart transport system based on IoT solutions, which helps in 
solving traffic problems, and even enables vehicles to drive 
without human intervention (Google Car project [12]). The 
main idea in these papers is to use advanced solutions 
efficiently, to collect information about the location (for  
example, the number of moving vehicles in order to estimate 
the duration of travel, travel conditions, car accidents, etc.) in 
order to detect risks, to determine the best path to destination, 
to reduce the emission of harmful gases, etc. Pyykönen et al. 
[13] present a system based on the application of Road-Side 
Units (RSUs) for monitoring the connection between the 
sensors placed in vehicles and databases [13]. This system is 
collecting data, with adequate accuracy, from RSUs and 
moving vehicles and stores them in databases. This 
information is forwarded to the drivers, in order to adjust the 
speed, and to employees in the road service in order to easily 
locate the part of the road which has to be fixed. There are 
also papers which describe quantifiers for determining the 
current state in traffic. iRide [14] is an application, which 
enables real-time information coming from sensors located 
near the road. This information is being forwarded to the 
server, where it is processed and sent to the drivers to enable 
them to learn about the road conditions. Collecting 
information is a process that requires accuracy and takes into 
account a dimension of several timelines. This is the reason 
why Vehicular Adhoc Networks (VANET) are a part of this 
research and they do not only include communication between 
vehicles, but also communication between vehicles and the 
infrastructure. In [15], the authors propose a Systematic 
Management of Road Traffic (SMaRTDRIVE) application for 
mobile phones and smart systems to help with traffic 
prediction. It has an aim to help vehicles with priority pass. 
Vehicles are equipped with On Board Unit (OBUs), which are 
used to collect data about the status of vehicles from different 
sensors. The server contains a database and a Web 
application. The SMaRTDRIVE application can also be used 
by pedestrians. By clicking the button, they can report 
accidents on the road, congestions, or some other problems. 
The OBU unit placed in the vehicle can automatically detect 
the accident in which a car participated and informs the 
services. RSU has a task to control traffic signalization. Many 
papers explain the usage of „smart phones“, and techniques 
such as “mobile crowdsourcing”. In [16], the authors show 
how this technique can be successfully used in traffic for 
finding the optimal routes, where the ranking of a route is 
done by many users. In order to get the best results, when 
finding of optimal routes, the crowdsourcing technique is 
being used in combination with other algorithms.  
III. DEVELOPING  A PLATFORM FOR INTELLIGENT VEHICLES 
The main prerequisite for the implementation of different 
applications, which should enable drivers to manage the 
vehicles  more efficiently, is to ensure the reliable transfer and 
storage of data from the related vehicles and from the 
environment, to the location where they are installed. We 
believe that the cloud as a centralized location for storing a 
large amount of data with implemented applications provided 
by Telematics, Infotainment, Navigation, Fleet management 
and other services is an excellent location and solution. That is 
why the goal of our research is to develop a new intelligent 
platform that would enable the use of mobile network services 
(3G, 4G, and future 5G) to store and analyze the data from the 
connected cars. From the spatial aspect, we introduce a 
concept of four-layered hierarchical architecture, as shown in 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-644-6
INTERNET 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Evolving Internet

Figure 1. The proposed concept of hierarchical SVCP 
architecture in the spatial sense consists of four different 
layers, described as follows: 
 
In the layer of vehicle clients, we are focused on 
three key areas:  
o 
monitoring the vehicles in motion, 
o 
internal and external sensing in order to collect the 
information which is needed for the prevention of failures, for 
improving safety in traffic, 
o 
internal and external sensing for the realization of 
solutions for the efficient interaction between the driver and 
the passenger with the embedded computer platform. 
 
At the transmission layer, we propose a solution 
which consists of a secure channel for information delivery 
from cloud through the available mobile network (3G, 4G, 
5G) and ad-hoc solutions for resource and safety information 
shared between vehicles. For example, the information about 
an accident can be transmitted to the drivers who are near, to 
be warned in time about the situation on the road. 
 
The platform layer provides vehicle intelligence 
through the usage of different interfaces in order to take a 
great amount of differently structured information, which is 
collected from the internal and external sensing and provide 
the customized services and specialized applications for the 
drivers and passengers. At this layer, the content of video 
cameras is transmitted to the server via the nearest available 
network access to the Internet cloud. Virtual machines with 
significant resources (processor, memory, and network 
bandwidth) at cloud servers guarantee the quality of service. 
Different users, such as drivers, traffic controllers and 
passengers, can collect information from the multiple cloud 
services via different interfaces. 
 
The application layer enables the applications that 
include distribution of information about traffic congestions, 
the availability of parking spaces in certain geographic 
locations.  
       The core element of the platform is the internal (in-
vehicle) virtual network, called SVCP, which provides the 
"smart" attribute [4]. A vehicle at the micro layer provides an 
efficient system for the real time collection and distribution 
of information from the vehicle and from the environment. 
This network consists of 1) different types of sensors, 2) a 
computer with a sensor aggregator which can perform a 
number of things in the computer itself like, store raw data 
locally, aggregate the raw data into data sets that can be more 
readily used, etc. and 3) a virtual switch that communicates 
through high data rate wireless communication links (e.g. 
Long Term Evolution (LTE) module) with the SDN 
controller on the cloud by the Open Flow protocol (see 
Figure 2.) [4]. The controller provides dynamic resource 
allocation and traffic routing in interaction with cloud 
network applications. It is designed so as to provide simple 
and efficient communications between virtual machines and 
the internal network in the vehicle, including humans and 
intelligent sensor devices. Virtual machines process the data 
collected on sensors, providing fast feedback to the vehicle 
user. Google economist evaluate that more data are being 
produced every couple of days now than in years before  
 
 
 
 
2003. Some experts expect data volumes to reach 35 
zettabytes by 2020. In 2013, 1.7 million billion bytes of data 
per minute were being generated globally. Due to a number 
of different driving technologies, we have explosive growth 
in data. The raw data, which is diverse, structured and 
unstructured in nature, is being sent to the cloud, where Big 
Data analytics correlate enormous amounts of data collected 
from a multitude of sources in real time, including millions of 
vehicles, drivers, weather, traffic, producers of parts (of 
types, windshields, bumpers, etc.) and other data in parallel. 
The relevant results of this Big Data analytics will be sent 
back to each vehicle in due time and either communicated to 
the driver or to the vehicle controlling algorithm [17].  
IV. SVCP ARCHITECTURE SUPPORTED BY SDN BASED 
TRAFFIC IN CLOUD 
In this paper, we design the SDN based SVCP architecture 
to provide more service contents (e.g., real-time traffic 
information, VPN service to the company location, gaming, 
etc.) for drivers, passengers and for better traffic control. The 
essential remark is that only SDN is responsible for central 
coordination of the quantity, speed and quality of data 
delivery, independently of the requests from the end user. The 
application of this platform significantly affects the safety, 
comfort and efficiency of driving. In order to explain the 
advantages of this platform, we have to clarify the processes 
that take place both locally and in the cloud. Different types of 
sensors are installed in vehicles, performing continuous 
measurements of a wide range of parameters, such as the state 
of individual functional units of the vehicle, the environmental 
conditions around the vehicle, the surrounding traffic signs, 
and the speed of vehicles coming from both directions, the 
state of health of the driver and passengers [18]. Usually, the 
degree to which vehicles are equipped with intelligent sensor 
devices as well as the quality of sensor devices vary. 
Therefore, it is justified to question the validity and extent of 
data obtained from the sensors. A particular challenge is the 
fact that from the available sample data, technologically 
limited local data processing systems, and with the available 
data analytics on board, it is not often possible to provide all 
the relevant information. Therefore, in the solution proposed 
in this paper, the emphasis is given to connecting the internal 
network to the cloud and processing them there as a part of 
evolution towards 5G [8].  
Figure 1. Concept of four-layered hierarchical architecture 
 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-644-6
INTERNET 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Evolving Internet

The data arrive to the cloud at a high speed, proportional to 
the increase of the number of vehicles on the road. The 
amount of this data is great, and they are characterized by 
diversity and often structured differently. The result of the 
arrival of large amounts of data to the cloud is the formation 
of a much more representative data sample. The more precise 
data can be obtained in real time, with the important 
addendum that information is extracted and delivered to the 
vehicle using advanced Big Data analytics that no local 
system can observe individually. An important advantage of 
applying this solution is that this extra information can 
significantly improve the safety and efficiency of traffic, 
despite the fact that there is no expressed demand for it by the 
end user. By implementing SDN solutions with a centralized 
view on the system of networked vehicles, the information 
obtained by Big Data analytics is forwarded to local systems 
in vehicles even without the request message sent by the 
protocol on the user side. Based on this information it is 
possible to predict the movement of vehicles in the near 
future, the possibility of incidents on the road (e.g. due to a 
malfunction of the vehicle) and perform pro-active collision 
avoidance [8]. The information generated in the cloud can be 
of great importance for road safety and more efficient 
regulation of traffic on the roads. Their timely distribution to 
large groups of users is, therefore of paramount importance. 
This imposes the need for the dynamic changes in the network 
in order to provide the necessary resources since there is the 
redistribution of available network resources. Traditional IP 
networks are not able to provide the necessary dynamic, 
because any change in the network requires additional time 
and commitment of the human factor. Troubleshooting 
dynamic allocation of resources is closely linked with the 
problem of a more flexible traffic management, which 
requires that the IP network has brought a greater degree of 
programmability. For this reason, we have implemented SDN 
networking technology to help ensure a higher degree of 
automation in terms of the allocation of the necessary 
resources and more flexible traffic. The reasons for the 
occurrence of traffic stoppers may be different (August 
humidity, defects in vehicles, etc.) and they can cause the 
creation of kilometers long queues. The analysis of the data 
from the field and by applying efficient algorithms for 
prediction, the cloud can timely calculate the size of traffic 
stopper that could arise in the foreseeable future. To avoid the 
problem, the information is moving towards a concrete road in 
order to comply with some of the criteria (shortest path, 
minimum load on the road, etc.). This requires immediate 
changes in the configuration of the network, which are 
necessary for the dynamic allocation of bandwidth to users 
that can be provided only by the SDN controller to 
significantly affect the size of the plug and efficiency of 
traffic, which is shown in Figure 3. The vehicles can exchange 
information with the traffic infrastructure surrounding, which 
is very important in the case of failure of the network 
communication with traffic cloud, in order to avoid eventual 
accidents on the road. It is possible to establish ad-hoc, point-
to-point or point-to-multipoint wireless communication 
(VANET) within a particular cluster [4]. 
V. 
SCENARIO FOR CLOUD SUPPORTED APPLICATION 
In this paper we have done a validation of a suggested 
solution, with an application scenario on how to avoid traffic 
congestions on the road in cases when accidents occur.  
      In the previous section, we have proposed the architecture, 
and in this section we are evaluating one of the possible 
applications, dynamic vehicle routing, which is based on the 
earlier mentioned architecture. The main idea is to perform 
parameter minimization selected by the user to reach the 
desired destination. In defining the criteria for routes 
comparison, we started with predefined parameters, which 
describe each road section: length and maximal speed 
allowed.  
We suggest an algorithm for realization, which will predict 
traffic using cloud technologies. Suppose that the traffic 
network which we are observing consists of 7 areas 
(theoretically it should be n areas: A1, A2…A7 which are 
shown in Figure 4.) Inside each area, we have more sections 
of the road. Each section can be characterized by different 
parameters: 
 
Quality of the road (whether it is a service, 
residential, tertiary, secondary or primary road) from point a 
to point b, it is denoted by Q(a, b). By primary road we think 
of highways, secondary roads are main roads in the city, 
tertiary are roads that lead to secondary roads, residential are 
roads through settlements and by service road we think of 
narrow roads which lead to residential roads. Each one of 
these roads has predefined speed limitations.  
 
Length of the section (road) expressed in kilometers- 
d(a, b).  
 
The parameters of the quality of the road can have one of 
the values from the next set: 
 
The system starts to work when the event happens and 
SVCS sends information to traffic cloud. The undirected 
weighted graph is formed. If the road is not in the function or 
if there was an accident a value of the parameter Q(a,b) is set 
to infinity.  Vector A (A1, A2… A7) is the range of areas 
which is shown in Figure 4. Each area consists of nodes 
collection (for example A1 has nodes S1, S2… Sn). For every 
area we continuously calculate weights of the path W(w1, 
w2,…, wn). The weights of the road should be calculated for 
every path. We are using Dijkstra’s algorithm in this paper,  
Figure 2. Concept of Smart Vehicle Computer System 
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-644-6
INTERNET 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Evolving Internet

 
 
 
which is adjusted to our needs. Dijkstra’s algorithm finds the 
shortest path between the nodes in the graph, which are 
represented with different weights listed above w(a,b). The 
vector of weights is as follows: 
 
The weighted path can be expresses like a function: 
+c
 
Where c is a constant used for scaling, and d represents 
distance between points a and b. 
 
Let us assume that we have a road system as it is shown in 
Figure 5. It is represented as a connected, undirected and 
weighted graph, with eight nodes. The weights are assigned  
with respect to the quality of the road Q(a,b). A user wants to 
find the shortest path from node A to node H. According to 
Dijkstra's algorithm, the user starts from the node A and is 
taking into consideration the paths to the remaining nodes. 
Since the nodes B, C and D are the neighbors of the node A, 
new ordered pairs are assigned to nodes B, C and D, 
respectively. By using the same idea, the algorithm moves 
through the graph and after a few steps the node H is reached. 
Analog to this, a user can choose other parameters (d(a,b), 
w(a,b)). In reality, the best road is not always the highway. In 
some occasions city road is a better choice, because route can 
be shorter than the route going along highway.  If an accident  
occurs, our algorithm iteratively calculates a new route. The 
map was extracted from OpenStreetMap [19] which is a free 
editable map of the world. For experimental purposes, we 
have used the map of the University of Novi Sad campus, 
where the fluctuation of traffic is huge and there are often big 
congestions. It is very important to redirect cars through 
different paths in order to reduce the possibility of 
congestions.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
The model of the campus is shown in Figure 6. Taking into 
consideration that we have two possible routes from starting 
position to ending position, we apply our algorithm, and based 
on the assigned weights, the optimal route is calculated. The 
optimal route is shown in Figure 7. If an accident or 
congestion occurs, the cars are redirected to other route 
consisting of residential road.  
 
Figure 5. Example of road network 
 
Transfer data 
to and from the cloud
Real time traffic data
Big data 
traffic analytics
Dynamic resource
alocation
SDN controller
Traffic prediction
Figure 3. SDN platform for dynamic resource allocation on the cloud 
 
Figure 6. University of Novi Sad 
 
Figure 7. Algorithm decides on the best path from starting to ending position  
 
Figure 4. Range of areas 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-644-6
INTERNET 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Evolving Internet

VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The usage of advanced ICT enables an easier integration 
of cyber-physical equipment in cars with the traffic cloud and 
provides enormous possibilities for the fast development of 
intelligent transport systems. In this article, the analysis is 
done, we provide a brief review of existing solutions in this 
field, and a new concept of an integrated platform for smart 
management of cars is proposed. We provide a detailed 
explanation that a basic concept consists of the applications 
for efficient management of cars, which are supported with 
the cloud, and we provide an explanation of the components, 
which affect the Quality of Service (QoS). In the end, in order 
to do a validation of suggested solutions, we have proposed an 
application scenario for the dynamic routing of traffic in cloud 
with a goal to avoid traffic congestions on the road in cases 
when accidents occur. Our belief is that SDN based traffic 
cloud will attract enormous attention from researchers in the 
near future, in order to ensure an efficient management of 
traffic, greater security and comfort for all the participants. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Qingxue and  L. Jiajun, „The modeling and simulation of 
vehicle distance control based on cyber-physical system“. 
Proceedings of 7th Joint International Information Technology and 
Artificial Intelligence Conference (ITAIC 2014); Dec. 20-21 2014; 
Chongqing, China. IEEE. 
[2] J.  Bradley and E. Atkins, „Optimization and Control of Cyber-
Physical Vehicle Systems“,  Sensors, vol.15, pp 23020-23049 , 
September  2015  
[3] J. Wan, J. Liu, Z. Shao, A. Vasilakos, M. Imran, and K. Zhou 
„Mobile Crowd Sensing for Traffic Prediction in Internet of 
Vehicles“, Sensors, vol.16, no.1, pp. 88-96,   2016 January,  
[4] J . Wan, D. Zhang, Y . Sun, K . Lin, C. Zou, and H. Cai 
„VCMIA: A Novel Architecture for Integrating Vehicular Cyber-
Physical Systems and Mobile Cloud Computing“ ACM/Springer 
Mobile Networks and Applications, vol. 19, pp 153-160, Apri 2014  
[5] Y. Xu and J. Yan, „A cloud-based design of smart car 
information services“, Journal of Internet Technology, vol.13, no. 2, 
pp. 317-326 January 2012 
[6] C. C. Chuang, W. L. Cheng, and K. S. Hsu, „A comprehensive 
composite digital services quality assurance application on intelligent 
transportation system“, Proceedings of 17th Asia-Pacific Network 
Operations and Management Symposium (APNOMS 2015); Aug 19-
21 2015; Busan, South Korea. IEEE.  
[7] M. Whaiduzzaman, M. Sookhaka, A. Gania, and R. Buyya, „A 
survey on vehicular cloud computing“, Journal of Network and 
Computer Applications, vol. 40, no.2, pp.325-344, November 2013. 
[8] R. Trivisonno, R. Guerzoni, I. Vaishnavi, and D. Soldani, 
„SDN-based 5G mobile networks: architecture, functions, procedures 
and 
backward 
compatibility“, 
Transactions 
on 
Emerging 
Telecommunications Technologies, vol. 26, no.1, pp. 82–92. 
December 2014. 
[9] S. Wibowo and S. Grandhi, “A Multicriteria Analysis Approach 
for Benchmarking Smart Transport Cities”, Science and Information 
Conference, pp. 94-101, July 2015. 
[10] Ear-IT, Available at: 
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/news/ear-it-using-
sound-picture-world-new-way 
[11] 
M. D. Marquez, A. Lara, and R. X. Gordillo, “A New 
Prototype of Smart Parking Using Wireless Sensor Networks”, IEEE 
Colombian Conference on Communications and Computing, pp. 1-6, 
June 2014.  
[12] Google Self-Driving Car Project, available at: 
https://static.googleusercontent.com/media/www.google.com/en//self
drivingcar/files/reports/report-0516.pdf 
[13] P. Pyykönen, J. Laitinen, J. Viitanen, P. Eloranta, and T. 
Korhonen, “IoT for Intelligent Traffic System”, IEEE International 
Conference on Intelligent Computer Communication and Processing, 
pp. 175 – 179, 2013. 
[14] M. Elkotob and E. Osipov, “iRide: A Cooperative Sensor and IP 
Multimedia Subsystem Based Architecture and Application for ITS 
Road Safety”, Proceedings of  EuropeComm, vol. 16, no.3, pp. 153-
162, 2009 
[15] P. A. Sumayya and P. S. Shefeena, “VANET Based Vehicle 
Tracking Module for Safe and Efficient Road Transportation 
System”, 
International 
Conference 
on 
Information 
and 
Communication Technologies, vol. 46, pp. 1173-1180, 2015. 
[16] J. Yu, K. H. Low, A. Oran, and P. Jaillet, “Hierarchical bayesian 
nonparametric approach to modeling and learning the wisdom of 
crowds of urban traffic route planning agents”, Inter. Conference on 
Intelligent Agent Technology, vol. 2, pp. 478–485, December 2012,  
[17] M. Chen, S. Mao, and Y. Liu. “Big data: A survey. Mobile 
Networks and Applications”, vol.19, no.2, pp. 171-209, April 2014. 
[18] M. Elkotob and E. Osipov, “iRide: A Cooperative Sensor and IP 
Multimedia Subsystem Based Architecture and Application for ITS 
Road Safety”,pp.153-162, 2009 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-644-6
INTERNET 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Evolving Internet

