Clinical Decision Support Based on  
Topic Maps and Virtual Medical Record 
 
Valentin-Sergiu Gomoi, Daniel Dragu, Vasile Stoicu-Tivadar  
Department of Automation and Applied Informatics, 
“Politehnica” University of Timisoara, 
 Timisoara, Romania 
e-mail: valentin.gomoi@aut.upt.ro, daniel.dragu@aut.upt.ro, vasile.stoicu-tivadar@aut.upt.ro  
 
 
Abstract— Clinical decision support (CDS) systems are limited 
by the lack of access to medical data. This paper presents a 
system that takes advantage of different standards (HL7 CDA, 
Arden Syntax) in order to have access to various data sources. 
The system consists of units used for retrieving, in a 
standardized format, medical data, an inference module and a 
data manager part, that connects all the systems components. 
Keywords – HL7 standards; clinical decision support; Topic 
Maps.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Using the medical decision support systems (CDSS) brought 
an improvement of healthcare act [1]. The outputs of these 
systems usually are free text recommendations, alarms and 
reminders for medical purposes. The first step in obtaining 
these is the interaction of two major types of actors: medical 
staff and IT specialists. In order to obtain computer 
interpretable “medical knowledge”, the results of the 
discussions between the two types of actors are then put in a 
computer interpretable format, followed by discussions, 
verifications, implementation and updates (as result of 
incompleteness, new research, and so on) [1] [2]. Based on 
patient medical data (e.g., patient data: blood pressure, heart 
rate, etc.) and taking the advantage of having the medical 
knowledge in a computer interpretable format, the use of an 
inference engine lead to new medical recommendations. 
The development and implementation of CDS “include 
members with different expertise, including medical 
informatics” [2]. 
Advantages of using CDS are: faster the implementation 
of new medical knowledge, integration of local databases, 
decrease of costs, view patient data in a graphic manner for 
each step which should be followed, to avoid reading a vast 
amount of data regarding each step of a narrative medical 
guideline [1]. Multiple CDS (clinical decision support) 
solutions have been developed: Asbru [3], GLARE [4], 
GASTON [5], Egadss [6], Gello [7], etc.  
Studies about statistical data in the establishment of 
these support systems in healthcare are presented in [2]. One 
of the statistics shows that the use of CDS increased 
physicians’ performances in 64% of the studies and 
regarding the patient outcomes 13% of studies established a 
benefit. In [8], it is stated that in over 90% randomized 
controlled, clinical practice improved, based on the use of 
CDS.  
There is a major challenge of these systems, the 
interoperability 
between 
them 
and 
other 
medical 
information systems (EHR, EMR or different medical local 
databases) [2]. New steps in solving this problem are made 
by HL7 group by developing a data model that wants to 
become a standard for the representation of medical 
knowledge for CDS (clinical decision support), the name of 
the data model is virtual Medial Record (vMR).  
During the time, those they work with data, information 
and knowledge were confronted with the need of a data 
model able to represent their real words into machine-
readable formats. There were developed a lot of data models 
claiming that they are the most eligible for some specific 
tasks, and they were, but they also have limits, and 
sometimes, the models were designed with a high machine-
readability, but they lack in human-readability. 
In this paper, we present a solution that implements the 
proposed vMR and other standards as: Topic Maps (used for 
the representation of the vMR), HL CDA (Health Level 7 
Clinical Document Architecture), Arden Syntax (formalism 
for the representation of medical rules). This project is 
focused on the development of an application that has to 
store data from different medical documents and to develop a 
connection with CDS based on documents in a vMR 
format/vocabulary to improve the healthcare act by allowing 
the access to more vast and relevant clinical information in 
order to generate more accurate clinical recommendations.  
This paper is structured as follows. System architecture 
and used technologies are reveled in section two. Different 
standards and the benefits they bring are presented in section 
three. Section four illustrates aspects of implementing the 
vMR with the help of Topic Maps and the connection of the 
vMR with an existing solution. Conclusion and future 
research directions are presented in section five. 
II. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
The project has as main components: Data manager, 
Interface, Inference engine, HL7 CDA Component and TM-
vMR (for the representation of medical information with the 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

 
help of Topic Maps technologies and implementing vMR 
data model). All these components are further presented in 
the next sections. A first model was presented in [9]; in this 
paper a more complex and detailed architecture is revealed 
(software technologies, implementation of various modules 
or the interaction between modules). In Figure 1, an 
overview of the system architecture is presented. In order to 
implement this architecture and the different standards, 
several tools are used:  
- 
.Net with C# for the development of the Interface, 
Database services and Data Manager, 
- 
Java for the inference part, using Arden Syntax 
formalism for the representation of medical rules 
- 
Topincs (PHP based) for the implementation of the 
vMR data model with the help of Topic Maps (TM) 
resulting the TM-vMR module 
Figure 1. System Arhitecture 
Concerning TM-vMR the domain which has to be 
represented was already sketched. The concepts and the 
relationships between them were defined in vMR DAM 
(Domain Analysis Model) [10]. They were further used to 
create a TM schema that allows populating the topic map in 
a schema-driven way. The software used to represent that 
domain is Topincs, “a software for rapid development of 
web databases” [11]. 
The implementation of this architecture will allow: 
• 
to create the basis for a further integration of 
medical knowledge sources that are encoded in 
various technologies, 
• 
the connection of any vMR compatible CDS to a 
medical web database, 
• 
extensibility for vMR DAM, given by the 
possibility to connect it to virtual any other 
electronic knowledge source, through the TMDM 
(Topic Maps Data Model)  
• 
capacity of representing “anything whatsoever”. 
TM can be viewed as an envelope for any other 
knowledge representation, and there are studies 
about how to represent the most important of these 
KM (Knowledge Representation) technologies with 
the help of TM technology [12], 
• 
to offer a package of services especially designed 
for CDS developers, 
• 
to create a tool that permits users to use a database 
without the need of knowledge about the 
technology that database stands on,  
• 
to bring a semantic technology, with unlimited 
applicability within the domain of information 
representation,  
• 
development of a collaborative solution for the 
capturing of medical information. 
III. 
USE OF DIFFERENT STANDARDS 
The reasons for developing a CDS that is implementing 
the different standards for the communication and 
knowledge representation are presented in the next 
paragraphs. 
A. vMR 
As stated in [2] [13] [14] [15], important reasons for 
limitation of implementing CDS in medical units are: the 
use of different models, the lack of a standard representation 
of clinical information and terminologies associated that are 
used in medical institutions. To meet these needs, the 
Working Group HL7 CDS vMR initiated the vMR project, 
which had as objective to support the development of 
scalable and interoperable CDS, by establishing a “standard 
model to represent clinical information inputs and outputs 
that can be transmitted between systems CDS and other 
medical systems.” [15]. This model contains 131 medical 
data elements. The vMR data model appeared as a necessity 
for the interoperability between different CDS and data 
sources. This data model allows the representation of a large 
range of information concerning the patient. In the 
development of the vMR model (the patient data and the 
requirements to be integrated in) 22 institutions from 4 
different countries, have been involved (representing 20 
CDS systems). vMR data model is in process of becoming a 
standard for the representation of medical knowledge used 
in different CDS systems in order to solve the problem of 
interoperability [16]. This model is not mandatory to be 
used as the unique data source for CDS but it can be used 
for the interoperability of the existing system. Other 
representations (e.g., HL CDA) of medical data can be used 
in order to make the CDS more adaptable to a local context. 
The vMR will be represented with the help of Topincs (a 
Topic Maps open source software) [11]. The access to 
medical data will be made (through the Data Manager) with 
the help of different service already existing in this software 
and new ones which are to be developed. 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

B. Topic Maps 
TMs deliver the right information in the right context to 
the right person at the right time [17]. A technology that can 
represent “anything whatsoever” [18]; such a technology is 
very useful as a response to one of the main requests of this 
project, to integrate many medical knowledge sources at the 
input of CDS systems. Topic Maps can “be applied to any 
application domain you can think of” [17]. 
One of the most important challenges in topic map 
authoring is to keep the level of “subjectivism” of the topic 
map as low as possible. That means that any topic map 
author leaves a personal “fingerprint” on the final 
representation, firstly depending on his/ her individual 
knowledge about the represented domain and his/her ability 
to view, conceptualize and represent subjects within the 
application domain. 
“Topic Maps is a technology for encoding knowledge 
and connecting this encoded knowledge to relevant 
information resources. Topic maps are organized around 
topics, which represent subjects of discourse; associations, 
representing relationships between the subjects; and 
occurrences, which connect the subjects to pertinent 
information resources.” [18]. Topic Maps has as attributes: 
semantic, semantic web, extensibility, flexibility, high 
representative 
power, 
envelope 
for 
any 
other 
KR 
(knowledge representation) technologies, human readability 
and computer readability, standard, XML-based syntax as 
interchange format, smart navigation, subject-centric 
approach for KR, rapid information retrieval, source 
integration, open vocabulary, possibility to get different 
views of the same assertion. A presentation of how the TM 
technology can interact with CDS can be found in [19], 
where is explained the way in which the use of such a 
technology can improve CDS. 
C. Other standards 
Semantic Web technologies are used to create data stores 
on the Web, build vocabularies, and write rules for data 
handling. XML (Extensible Markup Language) and 
ontology (e.g., Web Ontology Language) are two 
components of the Semantic Web. In our case the XML is a 
HL7 CDA message in XML format. The HL7 Clinical 
Document Architecture (CDA) is a document markup 
standard that specifies the structure and semantics of clinical 
documents for the purpose of exchange. A CDA document 
is a defined and complete information object that can 
include text, images, sounds, and other multimedia content. 
CDA documents are encoded in Extensible Markup 
Language (XML). The clinical content of CDA documents 
is defined in the RIM (Reference Information Model) [20] 
[21]. 
The Arden Syntax is a clinical guideline formalism 
accepted as an official standard by HL7 (textual language 
and intuitive). It is freely available, a mature and actively 
maintained open standard. This is the reason why Arden 
Syntax is used instead of other guideline formalisms as 
Proforma, GLIF (GELLO), Asbru, etc. [6] [22]. 
IV. 
SYSTEM COMPONENTS AND IMPLEMENTATION OF 
DIFFERENT STANDARDS 
An overview of the CDS systems shows a large number 
of approaches (Asbru, Proforma, GLARE). Almost all CDS 
allow medical guidelines and protocols to be generated, 
edited, verified, executed (reasoning based on medical rules 
and medical databases) and visualized. In order to represent 
the medical knowledge there are used different technologies:  
rule based technology (Arden Syntax) or task network 
(Asbru, Proforma, EON), unique for all of them [3]. The 
various CDS depend very much on the medical local 
databases sometimes they being developed around them 
(databases). All of these approaches are usually hard to be 
deployed in different medical units, as stated in section two. 
In order to overcome these gaps we propose a system which 
brings the advantage of using well known standards (as main 
inputs) and also implements a very powerful knowledge 
representation technology (Topic Maps). 
In this section, the main components of the system are 
presented. 
A. Existing CDS  
To obtain information from different database that can 
be a laboratory or radiology database and then represent the 
information in HL7 CDA (HL7 Clinical Document 
Architecture) format and send it to the decision system, the 
HL7 CDA Component has been developed. The HL7 CDA 
Component implementation is made in Visual Studio .Net 
2008, in C# language (as a web service). The databases for 
the current activity are on SQL Server 2008, but the solution 
is similar for Oracle or MySQL 
The inferring engine is based on Egadss open source 
solution [6] [22]. In order to have a standardized 
communication 
interface 
between 
databases 
and 
“recommendation generator” - Egadss has as inputs HL7 
CDA (Level 3) standard messages as XML files, where the 
patient data is represented (XML retrieved from the HL7 
CDA Component). Another standard used by Egadss is 
Arden Syntax, which is a clinical guideline formalism 
accepted as an official standard by HL7 group, being used 
for the representation of medical rules. The result of the 
inference is CDA Level 2 document, containing the medical 
recommendations [6] [22].  
The communication between all the components of the 
CDS is based on web services, representing de HL7 CDA 
Components, decision making system or the interface.  To 
manage the connection and the order in which the different 
web services are called, a Data Manager was developed. 
Data Manage has the roles to respond at different requests 
that come from the main components of the system 
(interface, medical data source, inference engine). In order 
to realize this, three communication channels are opened 
(see Figure 1), with: Interface, HL7 CDA Component and 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

 
the inference engine (Egadss).The interface allows the 
medical staff and the patients to visualize the steps of the 
protocols, medical information regarding a patient; different 
alarms and they can insert feedback concerning the 
recommendations. The interface is implemented using 
ASP.Net platform with C#. A more detailed description can 
be found in [23]. Beside the use of HL7 CDA documents 
other sources can be added to the system through the Data 
Manager. One of these sources can be a virtual Medical 
Record (vMR) that implements the specifications from [10]. 
The vMR is implemented with the help of Topic Maps.  
B. TM-vMR 
The implementation of this module is based on the vMR 
data model and Topic Maps technology. The representation 
of the data model is realized with the help of the Topincs 
open source software. 
Implementation steps: 
• 
the strategy used to convert vMR terms into the 
Topic Maps constructs is to create a topic type for 
every vMR class within the vMR DAM atomic 
terms; the attributes of a class become occurrence 
types for the topic type corresponding to that class 
(Figure 2).  
• 
to model all relationships within the vMR DAM 
• 
populating the topic map can be done manually, but 
a tool for automatic data integration into the topic 
map is being to be developed. 
• 
evaluate the results, by connecting the database 
with a CDS 
 
Figure 2. TM-vMR representation 
To achieve the possibility of custom development of the 
Topincs-based application, the author of the topic map 
schema has to define the serialization names for all terms 
within the schema. In this way, a programming interface is 
automatically provided by the software, allowing the topic 
map author to use the exposed methods, in order to program 
the behavior of the application in such a way to get a better 
response to the requests of the project. To ease the rapid 
discovery of a topic map construct that a serialization name 
represent, a notation convention for serialization names was 
used. The exact form of the name of any vMR data model 
term was used for naming topic map types within the 
schema. 
Serialization 
name 
keeps 
the 
name 
but 
normalization was required: 
- for topic types: all capital letters will be converted in 
lower-case, and the spaces between words will be replaced 
with minus sign “-”; 
- for any other topic map construct within the schema, 
the correspondent serialization name is created by adding a 
prefix which has the role to show what type it represents. 
(This convention was made for the further development of 
the project) 
C. CDS connection to TM-vMR module 
The connection between the existing system and the TM-
vMR represented with the help of Topincs open source is 
realized with the help of the web services. These services 
are consumed from the Data Manager. This is a client 
server architecture where the server is the TM-vMR and the 
client is the Data Manager.  
NuSOAP is the technology used for the development of 
web services in PHP for the access to the TM-vMR 
ontology. These services allow the work with the patient 
data that is represented in the TM-vMR ontology trough the 
help of a topic map objects which in “Topincs” is called 
“tobject”. The tobjects allow the insertion, deletion, 
modification and many other types of special functions to 
work with patient data from the TM-vMR. The web services 
allow the connection of the model with the existing CDS 
trough the Data Manager. The Data Manager calls the web 
services from the vMR, based on the data needed for a 
certain patient (based on patient ID) for a set of medical 
rules in order to generate new medical recommendations.  
Regarding privacy/integrity issues our system should 
achieve the HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and 
Account-ability Act) requirements; the first step was 
implementing the communication over HTTPS.  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Regarding the contribution the implementation of the 
different standards and the use of Topic Maps in the 
presented system lead to: integration of medical knowledge 
sources that are encoded in various technologies, 
extensibility for vMR data model and connection of any 
vMR compatible CDS to a medical web database.  
This implementation allows an easier integration of the 
system (compared with systems that do not implement HL7 
standards) in different medical units allowing the connection 
with various types of data sources. With the help of the 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

mentioned technologies the vMR was represented (Figure 
2). Different web services are developed in order to have 
access to the different elements of the TM-vMR.  
In this early stage of the development, the topic map can 
be used only for browsing through the elements of the 
schema (topic types, association types, constraint types).  
Further developments of the system consist in: the 
implementation of other web services for a better 
interrogation and manipulation of the medical knowledge 
from TM-vMR; the development of an automatic way to 
integrate the medical sources in the TM-vMR; use of smart 
cards for the authentication of different actors (for data 
privacy). 
The implementation of presented system will help the 
medical staff to increase the quality of medical care by: 
reducing the variation in medical practice, giving more 
efficient treatments and using new medical knowledge in 
current clinical practice. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partially supported by the strategic grant 
POSDRU 107/1.5/S/77265, inside POSDRU Romania 2007-
2013 co-financed by the European Social Fund – Investing in 
People and the strategic grant POSDRU/88/1.5/S/50783, 
Project ID50783 (2009), co-financed by the European Social 
Fund – Investing in People, within the Sectorial Operational 
Programme Human Resources Development 2007-2013. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Rosenbrand, J. van Croonenborg, and J. Wittenberg, 
”Guideline Development”, in Computer-based Medical 
Guidelines and Protocols: A Primer and Current Trend, A. ten 
Teije, S. Miksch, and P.J. Lucas, vol. 139, pp. 3 -21, 2008. 
[2] A. Latoszek-Berendsen, H. Tange, H.J. van den Herik, and A. 
Hasman, “From clinical practice guidelines to computer-
interpretable guidelines. A literature overview.”, in Methods 
of Information in Medicine (2010), vol. 49, Issue 6, pp. 550-
570, 2010. 
[3] P. Clercq, K. Kaiser, and A. Hasman, ”Computer-
Interpretable Guideline Formalisms”, in Computer-based 
Medical Guidelines and Protocols: A Primer and Current 
Trend, A. ten Teije, S. Miksch, and P.J. Lucas, vol. 139, pp. 
22-43, 2008. 
[4] P. Terenziani, S. Montani, A. Bottrighi, G. Molino, and M. 
Torchio,  “Applying Artificial Intelligence to Clinical 
Guidelines: The GLARE Approach”, in Computer-based 
Medical Guidelines and Protocols: A Primer and Current 
Trends, A. ten Teije, S. Miksch, and P.J. Lucas, vol. 139,  pp. 
121-139, 2008. 
[5] P.A Clercq, J. A. Blomb, A. Hasman,  and H.M. Korstenb,   
“GASTON: an architecture for the acquisition and execution 
of clinical guideline-application tasks”, in Med Inform 
Internet Med, pp. 247-63, 2000. 
[6] J. H. Weber-Jahnke and G. McCallum, “A light-weight 
component for adding decision support to electronic medical 
records”, in Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences,  Proceedings of the 41st Annual, ISBN: 978-0-
7695-3075-8,  pp. 251 - 251, 2008. 
[7] M. Sordo, A.A. Boxwala, O. Ogunyemi, and R.A. Greenes, 
“Description and status update on GELLO: a proposed 
standardized object-oriented expression language for clinical 
decision support.”, in Studies In Health Technology And 
Informatics, Volume: 107, Pages: 164-168, 2004. 
[8] K . Kawamoto, C.A. Houlihan, E.A. Balas, and D.F. Lobach, 
“Improving clinical practice using clinical decision support 
systems: a systematic review of trials to identify features 
critical to success” in BMJ, pp. 765-768, 2005. 
[9] D. Dragu, V. Gomoi, and V. Stoicu-Tivadar, “Automatic 
generation of medical recommendations using topic maps as 
knowledge source”, in 6th IEEE International Symposium on 
Applied Computational Intelligence and Informatics (SACI), 
SACI2011, ISBN: 978-1-4244-9108-7, pp. 593 – 597, 2011. 
[10] Virtual Medical Record (vMR) for Clinical Decision Support 
– 
Domain 
Analysis 
Model, 
http://wiki.hl7.org/images/archive/6/6b/20110729073300!HL
7vMR_vMR_Domain_Analysis_Model_2011_Sept_Ballot.pd
f, accessed in 05.12.2011. 
[11] R. Cerny, “Topincs: A software for rapid development of web 
databases”, 
http://www.cerny-
online.com/documents/Topincs%20-
%20A%20software%20for%20rapid%20development%20of
%20web%20databases.pdf, accessed in 21.12.2011 
[12] L. M.. Garshol, “Metadata? Thesauri? Taxonomies? Topic 
maps! Making sense of it all”, Journal of Information Science, 
Vol. 30, pp. 378-391, 2004. 
[13] J.A. Osheroff, J.M. Teich, and B. Middleton, E.B. Steen, A. 
Wright, D.E. Detmer, “A roadmap for national action on 
clinical decision support”, in J Am Med Inform Assoc., pp. 
141-145, 2007. 
[14] K. Kawamoto, “Integration of knowledge resources into 
applications to enable clinical decision support: architectural 
considerations.” in Greenes RA, Clinical Decision Support: 
the Road Ahead. Boston: Elsevier, pp. 503-538, 2007. 
[15] K. Kawamoto et al., “Multi-National, Multi-Institutional 
Analysis of Clinical Decision Support Data Needs to Inform 
Development of the HL7 Virtual Medical Record Standard”; 
in AMIA Annu Symp Proc. pp. 377–381, 2010. 
[16] Virtual 
medical 
record, 
http://wiki.hl7.org/index.php?title=Virtual_Medical_Record_
%28vMR%29, accessed in 23.11.2011. 
[17] H.H. 
Rath, 
White 
Paper 
–The 
TM 
Handbook, 
http://www.sts.tu-harburg.de/~r.f.moeller/lectures/anatomie-i-
und-k-system/empolistopicmapswhitepaper_eng.pdf, accessed 
21.12.2011 
[18] ISO/IEC 13250-2:2006 (the Topic Maps Data Model) – 
accessed in 23.11.2011. 
[19] D. Dragu, V. Gomoi, and V. Stoicu-Tivadar, “Topic Maps as 
knowledge 
base 
toautomatically 
generate 
medicalrecommendations”, in 2011 IEEE 9th International 
Symposium on Intelligent Systems and Informatics (SISY), 
ISBN: 978-1-4577-1975-2, pp. 459 - 464, 2011. 
[20] B. Blobel , K. Engel, and P. Pharow , “HL7 Version 3 
Compared to Advanced Architecture Standards”, Methods of 
Information in Medicine , pp. 343–353, 2006 
[21] HL7 Clinical Document Architecture, Release 2.0, HL7 
version 3 Interoperability Standards, Normative Edition 2009, 
Disk 1 – Standards Publication, 2009. 
[22] I. Bilykh, J. H. Jahnke, G. McCallum, and M. Price, “Using 
the clinical document architecture as open data exchange 
format for interfacing EMRs with clinical decision support 
systems”, in Proceedings of the 19th Symposium on 
Computer-Based Medical Systems (CBMS’06), pp 855-560, 
2006. 
[23] V. Gomoi and V. Stoicu-Tivadar, “A new visualization 
solution for medical computer based protocols”, in Proc. of 
9th International Conference on Information Comunication 
Technologies in Health 2011 (ICICTH-2011), pp. 82-89, 
2011. 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

