A Novel Component Carrier Selection Algorithm
for LTE-Advanced Heterogeneous Networks
Zanyu Chen, Tsungnan Lin
Graduate Institute of Communication Engineering,
National Taiwan University,
Taipei, Taiwan,
d98942025@ntu.edu.tw, tsungnan@ntu.edu.tw
Abstract—Carrier aggregation has been proposed in LTE-
advanced to support a wider bandwidth up to 100 MHz. The basic
aggregated unit is called component carrier (CC). CCs are shared
among different devices. Therefore it may cause performance
degradation due to severe interference. A good CC assignment
mechanism is desired to alleviate the interference problem. In this
article, we propose a CC selection algorithm called Interference
Management based Component Carrier (IMCC) scheduling to
tackle the problem in heterogeneous networking environments
of Femto Access Points (FAPs) and Macro-cell base stations.
IMCC assigns CCs according to the entire system information,
such as, location of FAPs, location of UEs (User Equipments),
and the channel quality based on an evolutionary approach. In
this way, IMCC mitigates the interference, and improves the
system throughput. We construct a simulation environment with
some stripes of apartments, which is often used to evaluate the
performance of FAPs in prior works. The simulation results
indicate the proposed approach outperforms other algorithms
and show the effectiveness of IMCC.
Keywords—component carrier; carrier aggregation; interference
management; LTE-advanced.
I. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, the total mobile trafﬁc of the whole world
is growing exponentially thanks to the number of mobile
users. Mobile users want higher throughput and lower latency
while using wireless communication. Long Term Evolution-
Advanced is developed to meet the increasing demand. It can
support the throughput of 100 Mbps for high mobility users
(such as user in the train) and 1 Gbps for low mobility users.
Carrier aggregation is proposed as a solution to support a wider
bandwidth up to 100 MHz for LTE-Advanced to deliver such
a high throughput.
In carrier aggregation, the basic aggregated unit is called
component carrier (CC). Carrier aggregation supports a wider
bandwidth by aggregating two or more CCs. However, LTE-
Advanced standard hasn’t speciﬁed the way of CC assignment.
Many issues remain to be answered in CC assignment. CCs
can not only be aggregated to support a wider bandwidth,
but also shared among many devices. It is inevitable to
produce interference in such a CC-sharing scheme. Despite
using carrier aggregation, to shrink the cell size is also a key
technique to improve the performance in cellular networks.
Shrinking the cell size may reduce coverage range of a
macro cell. On the other hand, users need high data rate and
a macro cell may not satisfy all users’ demand in the cell.
Therefore, femtocell would be a viable solution to handle
this situation. However, there are some challenges to deploy
femtocells, such as, massive deployment, uncoordinated de-
ployment, and high density [1]. These challenges cause the
interference between Femto Access Points (FAPs) [2] to be
severe and unpredictable. So, the interference is the main
factor affecting the system performance, and CC selection of
each FAP is an important topic to be explored.
In this paper, we consider the CC selection of each FAP
in a heterogeneous networking environment. The goal of the
proposed approach called ”IMCC” (Interference Management
based Component Carrier scheduling algorithm) is designed to
mitigate the interference and achieve the maximum through-
put. Since the determination of CC selection can not be solved
analytically, IMCC is an evolutionary computation approach
based on PSO (Particle Swarm Optimization) mechanism [3].
We devise a discrete computing approach, which is used in
IMCC to solve the CC selection problem. One advantage of
IMCC is the adaptive capability since IMCC takes the whole
system information into consideration, such as, the location
of FAPs, the location of UEs (User Equipments), and the
channel quality. Therefore, the interaction between deployed
FAPs is also considered in IMCC. When the CC selection is
determined, IMCC then assigns the appropriate power on each
used CC of each FAP.
We construct the simulation environment of a heterogeneous
networking environment which consists one marcocell and
many FAPs. FAP are deployed in an environment with some
stripes of apartments which is a commonly used scenario in
prior works to evaluate FAP performance. The performance
of IMCC is compared with several existing CC-selection algo-
rithms [1], [4], [5]. From our computer simulations, the results
indicate the proposed approach outperforms other algorithms.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section
II, we introduce some related work. The system model is
explored in Section III and in Section IV, we describe the
proposed algorithm. The simulation results are presented in
Section V, and Section VI is our conclusion.
II. RELATED WORK
The purpose of carrier aggregation is to aggregate multiple
CCs to get a wider bandwidth for transmission. LTE-advanced
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-285-1
INTERNET 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Evolving Internet

[2] is an intensive spectrum sharing environment, while many
cells aggregate the same CCs to form a wider bandwidth at
the same time, which leads to severe interference. Therefore,
the interference is an important factor to affect system per-
formance. Interference management inevitablely becomes an
important topic and many works focus on this issue. The
simplest strategy of CC selection is called universal reuse
or reuse of factor 1. Universal reuse allows each cell to
access each CC without any restriction. A. Simonsson [6]
shows us that universal reuse performs best for wideband
services. From another aspect, Y. Wang [7] tells us that an
appropriate reuse factor leads to an improvement in 5%-outage
user throughput in uncoordinated local area deployment. De-
centralized Intercell-Cell Interference Coordination (D-ICIC)
was proposed by Ellenbeck [8], which parametrized by the
amount of channels N that each femtocell can allocate. G.
Costa et al. [1] propose a dynamic channel selection algorithm
to increase system performance in a femtocell scenario. He
shows that dynamic channel selection is better than the static
amount of channels.
L. Garcia et al. [4] propose an algorithm called ”Au-
tonomous Component Carrier Selection” (AACS) which is
a fully distributed and slowly-adaptive algorithm. The CC
selection criterion is to estimate the carrier-to-interference ratio
to decide which CC can be chosen. The values of this ratio are
static in ACCS, so there are some drawbacks in using these
static values. Because of the nature of distributed properties,
the complexity of ACCS is low, but ACCS may not obtain
the optimal solution about CC selection in each cell. On the
other hand, ACCS only provides a method of CC selection, it
doesn’t take transmission power of each CC into consideration.
The author improves ACCS with power adaption on each CC
in his following work [5].
R. Menon et al. [9] use potential game to provide a work
about interference avoidance (IA). Similarly, K. Son et al.
[10] also use potential game to formulate distributed IA which
focuses on transmission over multiple channels in cellular net-
work scenario. G. Costa et al. [1] propose an algorithm called
”Timeout Based Reuse Selection” (TBRS). In his algorithm,
each FAP determines its own reuse factor to approach IA in the
whole system. He shows the performance of TBRS is better
than D-ICIC. Therefore, in this work, we compare IMCC with
ACCS, G-ACCS, and TBRS.
III. SYSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM FORMULATION
In this section, we present the system model, and formulate
the CC selection in a heterogeneous networking environment
with the system performance. In addition, we give a simple
analysis about the complexity of the problem at the end of
this section.
A. System Model
We consider an environment with a LTE-advanced macro
cell, several LTE-advanced FAPs, and several user equipments
(UEs). Suppose that the number of FAPs is N, and the number
of UEs is K. LTE-advanced adopts carrier aggregation, there-
fore the bandwidth of the communication system is aggregated
by L CCs. The macro cell always uses the whole bandwidth
to transmit data, and FAPs transmit data by using the selected
CCs, which is a subset of L CCs. We apply a full buffer trafﬁc
model with inﬁnite data packets in the queue for each FAP.
hfj denotes the channel gain between FAP f and user j, and
hbs,j is the channel gain between macro cell and user j. I
denotes the CC assignment matrix where an element of I, ifl,
equals to 1 if FAP f uses CC l.
Our work is ﬁrst to focus on component carriers scheduling
for each FAPs. Therefore, to simplify the problem, we suppose
the transmission power is ﬁxed and denoted by Pf and Pbs
for each FAP and macro cell respectively. We suppose FAPs
and macro cells allocate their power in each used component
carrier uniformly. Pfl and Pbs,l denote the transmission power
on component carrier l of FAP f and macro cell respectively.
Uf and Ubs denote the set of users associated with FAP f and
the macro cell. |Uf| and |Ubs| are the number of elements
of Uf and Ubs. An UE can only belong to a FAP or the
macro cell, so we can describe the situation using the following
equations:
PN
f=1 | Uf | + | Ubs |= K
and
Ui ∩ Uj = φ, ∀ i ̸= j
(1)
Suppose the transmission power of each FAP is P, and the
power is uniformly distributed on each selected CCs, therefore
Pfl can be computed as the follows:
Pfl =
Pf
PL
b=1 ifl
× ifl
(2)
The modiﬁed Shannon formula developed in [11] is used to
calculate the system performance. The formula can be depicted
as below:
S = BWefflog2(1 +
SINR
SINReff
)
(3)
where B
denotes the
system bandwidth. Weff
and
SINReff adjust the system bandwidth efﬁciency and the
Signal to Noise plus Interference Ratio (SINR) implementation
efﬁciency respectively.
Next, we denote Cfl be the capacity of FAP f on selected
CC l. We calculate the capacity of each user in FAP f, and
sum up all of the capacity of user in FAP f to get Cfl. The
equation is as the follows:
Cfl
=
P
u∈Uf
B
L|Uf |
(4)
×log2(1+
Pflhfu
BN0
L
+P
f′=1,f′̸=f Pf′lhf′u+Pbs,lhbs,u
)×ifl
where N0 is the noise power per hertz, and L is the number
of component carriers. Analogously, Cbs,l is the capacity of
the macro cell on CC l. We calculate the capacity of each user
in the macro cell, and sum up all of the capacity of users in
the macro cell to get Cbs,l. The equation is shown below:
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-285-1
INTERNET 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Evolving Internet

Cbs,l
=
X
u∈Ubs
B
L|Ubs|
(5)
×log2(1 +
Pbs,lhbs,u
BN0
L
+ PF
f ′=1 Pf ′lhf ′u
)
The total capacity Ctotal, the sum of capacity of FAPs and the
macro cell, can be depicted as the follows:
Ctotal =
L
X
l=1
(Cbs,l +
F
X
f=1
Cfl)
(6)
B. Problem Formulation
The binary assignment matrix I records the selected CC
used by each FAP. For a speciﬁc assignment matrix I, the
system performance will be calculated according to (6). The
goal of the proposed approach is to ﬁnd a suitable CC
assignment matrix I such that the maximum system throughput
can be achieved. Therefore, the problem is depicted as follows:
Maximize
I
Ctotal
(7)
Each FAP can choose a CC for transmission or not. The
number of CCs is L, so each FAP has 2L different ways to
choose CCs for transmission. The system has N FAPs, so the
complexity of this problem becomes O(2NL) if the exhausted
search mechanism is used to ﬁnd the optimal solution. The
complexity increases exponentially with respect to the number
of CCs and FAPs. When the parameter is large, it becomes
impractical to use such a mechanism.
IV. PROPOSED ALGORITHM
Our design is based on an evolutionary computation ap-
proach called particle swarm optimization to ﬁnd a suitable
CC assignment matrix I. The original PSO algorithm [3] is
used in continuous case, but our problem is a discrete case.
In this paper, we redeﬁne position and velocity in order to
determine the binary assignment matrix.
A. Particle Swarm Optimization
Particle Swarm Optimization is an optimization algorithm
developed by James Kennedy and Russell Eberhart in 1995 [3].
In PSO, each candidate solution is seen as a particle. The algo-
rithm is to randomly spread particles in the search space, and
assign the position and velocity of each particles. Each particle
would move in the search-space according to its position and
velocity, and each particle has its own performance. In this
way, local and global maximum performance can be deﬁned
since we know each particle’s performance. The movement of
each particle is inﬂuenced by these two maxima, namely the
particle would move approach to the particle with maximum
performance. The behavior of particles at time t is shown as
follows:
Vi(t)
=
W×Vi(t−1)+C1×rand×(Pbest(t−1)−Xi(t−1))
+C2×rand×(Gbest(t−1)−Xi(t−1))
Xi(t)
=
Xi(t−1)+Vi(t)
(8)
where Vi(t) is the velocity of particle i at time t, Xi is the
position of particle i at time t, and W is the inertial weight.
C1 and C2 are the positive constant parameters, rand is the
random function which takes value in range [0,1], Pbest is the
best position of the particle, and Gbest is the position of the
particle with best performance among all particles.
B. IMCC
In our problem, a particle represents a speciﬁc assignment
matrix which represents component carriers selected by femto
cells. Suppose that the communication environment has K
users, N FAPs, and L CCs. Each user links to the nearest
FAPs or macro cell, which means the user would receive
the largest signal power. Each particle is an N × L matrix
to represent an assignment method for FAPs. We suppose
there are P particles in the proposed algorithm, denoted by
{Particle1, Particle2, ..., Particlep}, and Partcilei(j, k) is
the element in row j and column k of the particle i.
Particlei(j, k) equals to 1 if FAP j use CC k in particle
i, otherwise, it equals to 0.
Then, the performance of each particle can be computed
according to 6. Reci is denoted as the best score of the
Particlei from the beginning to the current iteration and
recParticlei is the assignment matrix of this best score.
This best score is referred to the Pbest in the original PSO
algorithm. The initial values of Reci and the elements of
recParticlei are all zero for i ∈ {1, 2, ..., p}. New Ctotal of 6
is computed in each iteration, and Reci is updated accordingly.
Let Opt be the global maximum matrix among all Reci , and
Opt = arg max
i
{Reci}, i ∈ {1, 2, ..., p}
(9)
Recopt is referred to Gbest in the original PSO algorithm
and recParticleopt is its assignment matrix.
Before we deﬁne the movement operation of the assignment
matrix to approach closer to Pbest or Gbest, we need to deﬁne
the distance D(P1, P2) between two particles of P1 and P2.
The deﬁnition is shown below:
Deﬁnition: The distance between matrices A and B (A and
B are both N by M matrices) is
D(A, B) =
N
X
i=1
M
X
j=1
aij ⊕ bij
(10)
where aij and bij are the element of ith row and jth column of
matrix A and B respectively, and notation ⊕ represent XOR
operation.
The goal of the movement is to approach either the local
maximum or the global maximum, namely to decrease the
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-285-1
INTERNET 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Evolving Internet

distance between particle and Pbest or Gbest. The particle
usually can get a higher score with this movement. Two
moving operations are deﬁned as:
Deﬁnition:
The
move
operation
MoveG(P)
and
MoveL(P) are deﬁned as follows:
MoveG(P)
:
pt
i = gt
i, i = randi(1, M)
MoveL(P)
:
pt
i = lt
i, i = randi(1, M)
where P, G, L are M ×N matrix, and P = [pt
1pt
2...pt
M]t,G =
[gt
1gt
2...gt
M]t,L = [lt
1lt
2...lt
M]. randi(a, b) returns a random
integer between a and b. G is referred to the global maximum
assignment matrix recParticleopt, and L is referred to the
local maximum assignment matrix recParticlei mentioned
before. While doing MoveG(P) operation, we arbitrarily
change a row of particlei to the same row of recPartcilei
to move closer to Pbest, and MoveL(P) operation is similar.
Proposition: The action MoveG(P) and MoveL(P) can
decrease D(P, Gbest) and D(P, Pbest) respectively.
Proof: Let the ´P be the particle after particle P did
operation MoveG(P). Without loss of generality, we suppose
the kth row of P is chosen to be changed to the kth row
of Gbest. From Eq.10, we know the distance between P and
Gbest is:
D(P, Gbest)
=
N
X
i=1
M
X
j=1
pij ⊕ gij
(11)
=
N
X
i=1,i̸=k
M
X
j=1
pij ⊕ gij +
M
X
j=1
pkj ⊕ gkj
The only difference between P and ´P is the kth row, so we
have
N
X
i=1,i̸=k
M
X
j=1
´
pij ⊕ gij =
N
X
i=1,i̸=k
M
X
j=1
pij ⊕ gij
(12)
Since the kth row of ´P and Gbest are the same
M
X
j=1
´p ⊕ gkj =
M
X
j=1
gkj ⊕ gkj = 0 ≤
M
X
j=1
pij ⊕ gkj
(13)
Therefore, we have
PN
i=1
PM
j=1 ´pij ⊕ gij ≤ PN
i=1
PM
j=1 pij ⊕ gij
⇒
D(´P, Gbest) ≤ D(P, Gbest)
(14)
In our design, there is a probability that Particlei does
not get close to local maximum nor global maximum.
The purpose is letting particles ﬁnd more, possibly better
solutions, in the solution space. So, we deﬁne an operation
called ”Row-Addition” as below.
Random Movement: Row-Addition RA(P)
Algorithm 1 The procedure of CC selection in IMCC
Initialization: P (k), k = 1, ..., N, denote N particles, and the algorithm
runs i iterations.
repeat
repeat
temp = score of P (k)
if temp < rec(n) then
MoveG(P (k))
MoveL(P (k))
else if temp > rec(k) then
rec(k) ← temp
recP article(k) ← P (k)
else if temp > opt then
opt ← temp
recP articleopt ← P (k)
end if
if rand < δ then
P (k) ← RA(P (k))
end if
k ← k + 1
until k = N
k ← 1
i ← i − 1
until i = 0
RA(P) means to do row-addition on particle P. The row-
addition is operated in a random row of P. If row j of
particle P is chosen, we regards this row as a binary number
and add this row by 1 (mod F), where F is equal to 2L − 1.
Because the maximum value of each row is 2L − 1, the
mod operation is to be sure that this binary number wouldn’t
exceed this value. For example, the row j of Particlei is [0
1 0 1], which is 5 in binary, and it is changed to [0 1 1 0] by
adding 1 to it.
So, the movement of our algorithm is deﬁned. We would
repeat these operations, namely evaluation, record, and move-
ment, iteratively. For simplicity, each user chooses the FAP
with maximum channel gain for transmission. The ﬁnal solu-
tion to the problem is recParticleOpt. The pseudo code of
CC selection procedure in IMCC is shown in Algorithm 1.
After determining the binary assignment matrix, IMCC fur-
ther adjust power using the original PSO algorithm. Therefore,
IMCC can also perform power adaption on each FAP. The
procedure of IMCC is to determine the CC assignment matrix
at ﬁrst. The next step is to applied the original PSO to allocate
power on each selected CC of each FAP.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS
A. Simulation set-up
Several experiments are performed to evaluate the perfor-
mance of the proposed algorithms and other algorithms. In our
simulation environments, we set the maximum power of the
base station and FAPs to 43dBm and 13dBm, respectively.
The bandwidth of component carrier is 20MHz for each
CC. The deployment of carrier aggregation is that each CC
is on the same or little frequency separation spectrum. We
consider a layout of 1-tier 7 hexagonal cells with 3 identical
sectors in each cell. The simulation scenario and indoor path
loss modeling are the same as in the literature [12] for the
evaluation of femtocells. We suppose the temperature of the
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-285-1
INTERNET 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Evolving Internet

environment is 300K, therefore the noise of the system is -174
dBm/Hz. We compare the performance of IMCC, ACCS [4],
G-ACCS [5], and TBRS [1]. The PCC threshold is 10dB and
the SCC threshold is 8dB, which are the same as described
in [4]. The parameters of TBRS are TBRS(2,10) which lead
to the best average performance while the FAPs are crowded
[1]. δ in IMCC is set to 0.3. The number of iterations, i, is
set to 500, which can obtain a nearly optimal solution in our
experiments. Therefore, the computation time of IMCC is a
few seconds in a computer with Matlab R2009 and Intel(R)
Core(TM) i5 CPU k655.
(a) crowded
(b) sparse
Fig. 1.
The CC allocation of 4 FAPs. (a) is the crowded topology, and (b)
is the sparse topology. 5 different colors are used to denote different CCs.
B. Crowded and sparse environments
The design of the simulation is to evaluate how the se-
lected CCs are determined by the proposed IMCC algorithm.
Two simple topologies are considered: crowded and sparse
distribution of FAPs. When FAPs are placed in a crowded
environment, the selected CCs should show the orthogonal
characteristics to avoid severe interference between each other
in order to deliver the maximum system performance. On
the other hand, if FAPs are placed in a sparse environment,
they should use the whole bandwidth because the interference
between each other is negligible.
In both topologies, the BS is placed at location (0,0), and
there are 20 users. The users are randomly distributed in a
40m×40m square with center 800m far from the base station
which is on the cell edge. Four FAPs are distributed circularly
with the same center as users, the radius of crowded and sparse
topology are 5m and 20m respectively.
Figure 1 shows the selected CCs for the four FAPs in both
topologies. In Figure 1, there are ﬁve colors in each ﬁgure, and
each color stands for a CC. Subﬁgure (a) in Fugure 1 shows
the CC allocation of the crowded case. The interference is
serve among FAPs, so FAPs trend to using the different CCs
for transmission. The neighboring FAPs use different CCs,
and a CC is shared by FAP 1 and FAP 3. This is because
that the distance between FAP 1 and FAP 3 is far enough
such that the interference is light. Sharing the same CC can
improve the system performance. Subﬁgure (b) in Figure 1
shows each FAP has ﬁve colors. That means every FAP uses
the whole bandwidth for transmission. The interference is too
light to be ignored while the distance between FAPs is large. In
our intuition, using the whole bandwidth leads to the highest
aggregate throughput.
Fig. 2.
The topology of 5 FAPs in an apartment with two stripes.
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Distance (meters)
Aggregate Throughput (Mbps)
 
 
IMCC
ACCS
G−ACCS
TBRS
Fig. 3.
The throughput v.s. distance of all algorithms.
C. Two stripes of apartments
In this simulation, the scenario we apply is that a ﬂoor with
two stripes of apartments, each stripe having 5 apartments.
The size of each apartment is 10m×10m, and we set FAPs
in the center of this square. We suppose each FAP serves
two users which are randomly distributed in the apartment.
The distribution topology is shown in Figure 2, where D
is the distance between FAPs and BS. The purpose of this
scenario is to investigate performance in a LTE-advanced
cellular network. We change the distance between the stripes
and the BS from 100 meters to 1000 meters. The performance
results are shown in Figure 3 for different algorithms.
While the distance is short, the interference caused by BS
is very severe. In this condition, IMCC and G-ACCS is better
than other two algorithms as seen in Figure 3. The reason is
that G-ACCS and IMCC change the power allocation for each
CC while ACCS, and TBRS just use uniform power allocation
and use the maximum power on each used CC. Therefore,
the interference is more severe than G-ACCS and IMCC. The
severe interference makes the performance lower. However,
the gap between these algorithms becomes smaller while the
IMCC
ACCS
G−ACCS
TBRS
600
650
700
750
800
850
900
950
1000
Algorithms
Aggregate Throughput (Mbps)
Fig. 4.
The throughput of all algorithms when the distance between Marco
BS is large.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-285-1
INTERNET 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Evolving Internet

10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
5000
5500
6000
6500
Deployment Ratio
Aggregated Throughput (Mbps)
 
 
IMCC
ACCS
G−ACCS
TBRS
Fig. 5.
The aggregate throughput with different deployment ratio in all
algorithms.
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
50
100
150
200
250
300
Deployment Ratio
Average Throughput (Mbps)
 
 
IMCC
ACCS
G−ACCS
TBRS
Fig. 6.
The average throughput of FAPs with different deployment ratio in
all algorithms.
distance gets larger because the interference from BS becomes
smaller while D becomes larger.
If the distance is far enough, the interference caused by BS
can be ignored, which is the same as the situation where there
is no BS. Under such a circumstance, Figure 4 shows IMCC
is still the best among all algorithms. Although G-ACCS
performs power adaption and TBRS uses only uniform power
allocation, the performance of G-ACCS and TBRS are almost
the same. These results clearly indicate that an appropriate
CC allocation is more important than power adaption. While
managing interference among FAPs, the CC assignment is
important and should be determined ﬁrst.
D. Different Deployment Ratio
In this experiment, we construct a scenario with 100 apart-
ments in a square and the size of each apartment is 10m×10m.
If there is a FAP in an apartment, it would be put in the center
of the apartment, and two users are randomly distributed in
the apartment. We vary the FAP deployment ratio of each
apartment from 10% to 90%. The distance between these
apartments and the BS is very large. Therefore we can ignore
the interference caused by BS. We perform the experiment
several times, and average these results.
Figure 5 shows the aggregate throughput of FAPs and
Figure 6 is the average throughput of each FAP. Both ﬁgures
show that IMCC has the best performance no matter if the
deployment ratio is low or high. The results show that IMCC
can work efﬁciently whether in light or severe interference
environments. On the other hand, it can be shown that TBRS,
which only determines the CC assignment, has performance
better than G-ACCS. The results, again, show the appropriate
CC assignment can obtain more performance gain.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this article, we propose a CC selection algorithm called
IMCC (Interference Management based Component Carrier
scheduling) to tackle the problem in heterogeneous networking
environments of Femto Access Points (FAPs) and Macro-
cell base stations. IMCC assigns CCs according to the entire
system information, such as, location of FAPs, location of
UEs (User Equipments), and the channel quality based on an
evolutionary approach. The approach is based on a devised
discrete-type optimization mechanism. After the selected CCs
are determined, the power on each CC can be further adjusted
accordingly. Several simulation topologies are performed to
compare the performance with existing algorithms. The sim-
ulation results indicate the proposed approach outperforms
existing algorithms.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by the Taiwan National Science
Council under the Grants NSC99-2221-E-002-143-MY3 and
NSC100-2221-E-002-177-MY2.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Costa, A. Cattoni, I. Kovacs, and P. Mogensen, “A fully distributed
method for dynamic spectrum sharing in femtocells,” in IEEE Wireless
Communications and Networking Conference Workshops (WCNCW),
pp. 87 –92, April 2012.
[2] T. Zahir, K. Arshad, A. Nakata, and K. Moessner, “Interference man-
agement in femtocells,” Communications Surveys & Tutorials, IEEE,
vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 293–311, 2013.
[3] J. Kennedy and R. Eberhart, “Particle Swarm Optimization,” in IEEE
International Conference on Neural Networks, vol. 4, pp. 1942 – 1948,
1995.
[4] L. G. U. Garcia, K. I. Pedersen, and P. E. Mogensen, “Autonomous
Component Carrier Selection: Interference Management in Local Area
Environments for LTE-Advanced,” IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol. 47, pp. 110 – 116, September 2009.
[5] L. G. U. Garcia, I. Z. Kovacs, K. I. Pedersen, G. W. O. da Costa,
and P. E. Mogensen, “Autonomous Component Carrier Selection for
4G Femtocells - A fresh look at an old problem,” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 30, pp. 525 – 537, 2012.
[6] A. Simonsson, “Frequency
Reuse and Intercell
Interference
Co-
Ordination In E-UTRA,” in IEEE 65th Vehicular Technology Conference
(VTC Spring), pp. 3091 –3095, April 2007.
[7] Y. Wang, S. Kumar, L. Garcia, K. Pedersen, I. Kovacs, S. Frattasi,
N. Marchetti, and P. Mogensen, “Fixed Frequency Reuse for LTE-
Advanced Systems in Local Area Scenarios,” in IEEE 69th Vehicular
Technology Conference, pp. 1 –5, April 2009.
[8] J. Ellenbeck, C. Hartmann, and L. Berlemann, “Decentralized inter-cell
interference coordination by autonomous spectral reuse decisions,” in
14th European Wireless Conference, pp. 1 –7, June 2008.
[9] R. Menon, A. MacKenzie, R. Buehrer, and J. Reed, “A Game-Theoretic
Framework for Interference Avoidance in Ad hoc Networks,” in IEEE
Global Telecommunications Conference (GlobeCom), pp. pp.1 –6, De-
cember 2006.
[10] K. Son, S. Lee, Y. Yi, and S. Chong, “REFIM: A practical interference
management in heterogeneous wireless access networks,” IEEE Journal
on selected areas in communications, vol. 29, pp. 1260 – 1272, June
2011.
[11] P. Mogensen, W. Na, I. Kovacs, F. Frederiksen, A. Pokhariyal, K. Ped-
ersen, T. Kolding, K. Hugl, and M. Kuusela, “LTE Capacity Compared
to the Shannon Bound,” in IEEE 65th Vehicular Technology Conference
(VTC Spring), pp. 1234 –1238, April 2007.
[12] 3GPP TR 36.814, “Further Advancements for E-UTRA: Physical Layer
Aspects,” Technical Speciﬁcation Group Radio Access Network, June
2009.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-285-1
INTERNET 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Evolving Internet

