Detection of School Foundation Day Tweets
That Can Be Used to Distinguish Senders’ Schools
Yasuhiko Watanabe, Hiroaki Onishi, Ryo Nishimura, and Yoshihiro Okada
Ryukoku University
Seta, Otsu, Shiga, Japan
Email: watanabe@rins.ryukoku.ac.jp, t150458@mail.ryukoku.ac.jp, r nishimura@afc.ryukoku.ac.jp, okada@rins.ryukoku.ac.jp
Abstract—These days, many people use a Social Networking
Service (SNS). When we use SNSs, we carefully protect the
privacy of personal information: name, age, gender, address,
telephone number, birthday, etc. However, we sometimes submit
online messages that can threaten our privacy and security when
combined with other information. In this study, we investigated
tweets that can disclose senders’ afﬁliations, especially, high
schools to other people, including unwanted audiences, when
combined with other public information. We collected 1,000
tweets including word “school foundation day” and found 46%
of the collected tweets were ones disclosing foundation days of
senders’ schools. Furthermore, we found tweets including word
“school foundation day” can be used to distinguish senders’
schools when combined with event calendars in school web sites.
Finally, we obtained 74% accuracy when we applied Support
Vector Machine (SVM) to classify tweets including word “school
foundation day” into ones disclosing the foundation days of
senders’ schools.
Keywords–school foundation day; personal information; Twit-
ter; SNS; privacy risk.
I.
INTRODUCTION
These days, many people use a Social Networking Service
(SNS) to communicate with each other and try to enlarge their
circle of friends. SNS users are generally concerned about
potential privacy risks. To be speciﬁc, they are afraid that
unwanted audiences will obtain information about them or
their families, such as where they live, work, and play. As
a result, SNS users are generally careful in disclosing their
personal information. They disclose their personal information
only when they think the beneﬁts of doing it is greater than
the potential privacy risks. For example, students are generally
careful in disclosing which schools they go to. They are con-
cerned that once unwanted audiences know which schools they
go to, the unwanted audiences can obtain several kinds of their
personal information: how old they are, where they live and
study, who their friends and families are, and when they are
at home or away. However, they often submit online messages
that threaten their privacy and security when combined with
other information. In this paper, we focus on school event
messages submitted to Twitter. Student often submit tweets
concerning school events, such as sports festival, culture festi-
val, entrance ceremony, graduation ceremony, and foundation
day. School event tweets often give students opportunities
to start new communications on Twitter. However, they also
give anyone, including unwanted audiences, opportunities to
distinguish which schools they go to. Take a tweet concerning
a school foundation day for example. Figure 1 shows a school
foundation day tweet submitted by a high school student,
momone. We retouched her photos in Figure 1 for protecting
Figure 1. A school foundation day tweet submitted by
a high school student, momone, on 6th October 2018.
students’ privacy. (exp 1) is the text of her tweet.
(exp 1) Souritsu kinenbi ha 6 nin. Nodo ga itaku naru
kurai shabette waratta –
(Six of us on foundation day. We talked so much
and our throats were raspy –)
This tweet does not show which school momone went to.
It only shows when she enjoyed the foundation day of her
school. Momone might think that this tweet was not enough
to distinguish which school she went to. In other words,
there were too many schools and it was difﬁcult to ﬁnd
schools whose foundation days were the day or just before
she submitted this tweet. However, this tweet can threaten her
privacy and security more than she expected. In this paper, we
show that this tweet gave a chance to other people, including
unwanted audiences, to distinguish which school she went
to. In order to discuss the privacy risks caused by school
event tweets, we show how school event tweets are used to
distinguish which schools students go to. Furthermore, we
discuss whether unwanted audiences can collect school event
tweets by using machine learning techniques.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: In Section
II, we survey the related works. In Section III, we report
school events and how school event tweets, especially school
foundation day tweets, are used to distinguish which schools
students go to. In Section IV, we discuss whether unwanted
audiences can collect school foundation day tweets by using
machine learning techniques. Finally, in Section V, we present
our conclusions.
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-721-4
INTERNET 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Evolving Internet

II.
RELATED WORK
Personally identiﬁable information is deﬁned as informa-
tion which can be used to distinguish or trace an individual’s
identity such as social security number, biometric records,
etc. alone, or when combined with other information that
is linkable to a speciﬁc individual, such as date and place
of birth, mother’s maiden name, etc. [1] [2]. Internet users
are generally concerned about unwanted audiences obtaining
personal information. Fox et al. reported that 86% of Internet
users are concerned that unwanted audiences will obtain in-
formation about them or their families [3]. Also, Acquisti and
Gross reported that students expressed high levels of concern
for general privacy issues on Facebook, such as a stranger
ﬁnding out where they live and the location and schedule of
their classes, and a stranger learning their sexual orientation,
name of their current partner, and their political afﬁliations
[4]. However, Internet users, especially young users, tend to
disclose personal information on their proﬁles, for example,
real full name, gender, hometown and full date of birth, which
can potentially be used to identify details of their real life,
such as their social security numbers. As a result, many
researchers discussed the reasons why young users willingly
disclose personal information on their SNS proﬁles. Dwyer
concluded in her research that privacy is often not expected
or undeﬁned in SNSs [5]. Barnes argues that Internet users,
especially teenagers, are not aware of the nature of the Internet
and SNSs [6]. Hirai reported that many users had troubles in
SNSs because they did not mind that strangers observed their
communication with their friends [7]. Viseu et al. reported that
many online users believe the beneﬁts of disclosing personal
information in order to use an Internet site is greater than the
potential privacy risks [8]. On the other hand, Acquisti and
Gross explain this phenomenon as a disconnection between the
users’ desire to protect their privacy and their actual behavior
[4]. Also, Livingstone points out that teenagers’ conception of
privacy does not match the privacy settings of most SNSs [9].
Joinson et al. reported that trust and perceived privacy had a
strong affect on individuals’ willingness to disclose personal
information to a website [10]. Also, Tufekci found that concern
about unwanted audiences had an impact on whether or not
students revealed their real names and religious afﬁliation on
MySpace and Facebook [11]. The authors also think that most
of students are seriously concerned about their privacy and
security. However, they often underestimate the risk of their
online messages and submit them. For example, many stu-
dents submit online messages concerning school events. Most
students do not mind that these messages can threaten their
privacy and security. To be speciﬁc, these messages may give
a chance to other people, including unwanted audiences, to
distinguish which schools students go to. However, no studies
have been made on the risk of online messages concerning
school events.
III.
RISK OF SCHOOL EVENT TWEETS
SNS users want to start new communication and enjoy it.
As a result, they want good topics for starting new communi-
cation in SNS. For example, school events are good topics for
starting new communication in SNS. Actually, many students
submit tweets concerning school events. However, school event
tweets may threaten students’ privacy and security because
most of them are submitted during or just after school events.
Speciﬁcally, unwanted audiences can
•
imagine when students in the target school submit
school event tweets and
•
use the dates of school event tweets as clues to
distinguish which schools students go to.
Furthermore, it is easy to obtain school event calendars because
many schools show their school event calendars in their web
sites. In order to clarify the risks caused by school event tweets,
in this paper, we discuss
•
school events that are held every year and good topics
for tweets, and
•
how to distinguish which schools senders go to by
using school event tweets and event calendars.
A. Annual school events frequently reported in tweets
Several kinds of events are held in schools. In this section,
we discuss
•
school festivals,
•
school ceremonies, and
•
school memorial days.
This is because these events are held every year in most
schools in Japan and frequently reported in tweets by students.
Furthermore, many schools show the dates of these school
events in their web sites.
1) School festivals: We ﬁrst discuss two major school
festivals in Japan: sports festivals and culture festivals. In
Japan, school sports festivals are mainly held in spring (May
and June) or autumn (September and October). Many students
submit tweets concerning sports festivals in their schools.
Figure 2 shows a tweet concerning a sports festival submitted
by a high school student, ayane, on 29th September 2018.
On the other hand, in Japan, culture festivals are mainly held
from September to December. Culture festivals are chances
for students to show what they have learned in the year and
create a performance for their parents, teachers, and in some
cases, the public. As a result, many students submit tweets
concerning culture festivals in their schools. Figure 3 shows a
culture festival tweet. It was also submitted by ayane on 22nd
September 2018.
Students often attach pictures to their tweets concerning
sports festivals and culture festivals. As shown in Figure 2 and
Figure 3, ayane attached many pictures to her sports festival
tweet and culture festival tweet. Figure 4 shows pictures
attached to ayane’s sports festival tweet. In the pictures, there
were many students and we found a clue to distinguish which
school these students and ayane went to: a girl student in the
lower left picture wore an athletic uniform with the name of
their school. The web site of their school showed that the
sports festival and culture festival were held on 28th and 21st
October 2018, respectively. As a result, ayane submitted her
sports festival tweet and culture festival tweet on the next day
of the sports festival and culture festival, respectively.
Sports festivals and culture festivals are held every year,
however, the dates of them may change every year. For
example, culture festival in ayane’s school was held on 21st
October 2018 while it was held on 22nd October 2017.
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-721-4
INTERNET 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Evolving Internet

Figure 2. A sports festival tweet submitted by a high
school student, ayane, on 29th September 2018.
Figure 3. A culture festival tweet submitted by a high
school student, ayane, on 22nd September 2018.
2) School ceremonies: We discuss two major school cere-
monies in Japan: entrance ceremony and graduation ceremony.
In Japan, entrance ceremonies are generally held in the ﬁrst
half of April. For example, in 2018, all public high schools
in Kyoto held the entrance ceremonies on 9th or 10th April.
On the other hand, graduation ceremonies are generally held in
March. For example, in 2018, all public high schools in Kyoto
held the graduation ceremonies on 1st March. The dates of
entrance ceremonies and graduation ceremonies may change
Figure 4. Pictures attached to ayane’s sports festival tweet (Figure 2).
Figure 5. A graduation ceremony tweet submitted by a high
school student, nanae, on 7th March 2019.
every year.
Many students and their family members submit tweets
with pictures concerning these ceremonies. Pictures attached
to school ceremony tweets, just like those attached to school
festival tweets, often give chances for readers to obtain several
kinds of senders’ personal information. Figure 5 shows a
graduation ceremony tweet submitted by a high school student,
nanae, on 7th March 2019. Nanae took pictures concerning her
graduation ceremony and attached them to her tweet. In the
pictures, we found a clue to distinguish which schools nanae
went to: students were holding a signboard with the name of
her school. It shows nanae went to the same school as ayane.
Entrance ceremonies and graduation ceremonies are held
in short periods. Many schools hold these ceremonies on the
same day. For example, in 2018, all public high schools in
Kyoto held the graduation ceremonies on the same day. As a
result, it is difﬁcult to distinguish which schools senders go
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-721-4
INTERNET 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Evolving Internet

Figure 6. A foundation day tweet submitted by a high
school student, ayane, on 6th October 2018.
to by using the submission date of tweets concerning entrance
ceremonies and graduation ceremonies.
3) School memorial days: We discuss one major school
memorial day in Japan, school foundation day. School foun-
dation days are held all year around. Furthermore, school
foundation days are ﬁxed while the dates of school festivals
and ceremonies may change every year. The important point
is that many schools are closed on their foundation days. As
a result, many students submit school foundation day tweets
in order to show where they go, what they do, and who they
are with in the special day. Figure 6 shows a foundation day
tweet submitted by ayane on 6th October 2018. (exp 2) is a
text message in her school foundation day tweet.
(exp 2) Souritsu kinenbi ha suggoi shiawase na ichinichi
yatta. chotto hayame no tanjyoubi oiwai shite
kurete konna kawaii purezento moracchatta (; ;)
daiji ni tsukawasete itadaki masu.
(The foundation day was a very happy day. Thank
you for an early birthday party and beautiful
presents. I’ll treasure them.)
B. How to use school event tweets for distinguishing which
schools students go to
Many students submit their school event tweets. However,
most of them may think that their school event tweets are not
enough to distinguish which schools they go to. The reasons
are as follows:
•
There are many similar online messages. Their mes-
sages are not special. No one pays attention to them.
•
There are many schools. It is difﬁcult to ﬁnd schools
whose school events were held on the day or just
before they submitted their school event tweets.
Take the tweet shown in Figure 3 for example. This culture
festival tweet was submitted by ayane on 22nd September
2018. Most of students may think that it is hard to visit many
school web sites and check whether the culture festival was
Figure 7. It is easy to detect school event tweets submitted by students in
the target school on the day or just after the event was held.
held on 22nd September or just before. However, it is not
difﬁcult to detect school event tweets submitted by students
in a particular school. To be speciﬁc, it is easy to obtain the
event calendar from the web site of the target school and collect
school event tweets that were submitted on the day or just after
the target school held it. Figure 7 shows the overview of it.
In order to evaluate this method, take a high school in Kobe
for example. We visited the web site of the target school and
obtained the event calendar. According to the event calendar,
in 2018, this school held
•
the foundation day on 5th October,
•
the sports festival on 28th September, and
•
the culture festival on 21st September.
We think, the date of foundation day is more useful than those
of sports festival and culture festival to collect tweets submitted
by students of the target school. This is because the number
of schools that have the same foundation day is less than
those that have the same sport festival day or the same culture
festival day. School foundation days are held all year round
while sport festivals and culture festivals are not. As a result,
we planned to collect foundation day tweets submitted on 5th
October 2018, the foundation day of the target school, or just
after it. In this paper, we used Twitter search and obtained 45
tweets that were submitted on 5th October or 6th October 2018
and included kaiko kinenbi (school foundation day) or souritsu
kinenbi (foundation day). 15 tweets of them had pictures and
two of them had pictures of young persons. We focused on
these two tweets with pictures of young persons. One was
shown in Figure 1 and submitted by momone on 6th October.
The other was shown in Figure 6 and submitted by ayane on
6th October. Furthermore, momone submitted
•
her sports festival tweet on 29th September (one day
after the sports festival was held in the target school)
•
her culture festival tweet on 21st September (the day
when the culture festival was held in the target school)
Also, ayane submitted
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-721-4
INTERNET 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Evolving Internet

•
her sports festival tweet (Figure 2) on 29th September
(one day after the sports festival was held in the target
school)
•
her culture festival tweet (Figure 3) on 22nd Septem-
ber (one day after the culture festival was held in the
target school)
We think that it is not coincidence that the event dates of
the target school were matched with the submission dates of
these tweets. As a result, we concluded that ayane and momone
went to the target school. Furthermore, we found a girl student
wearing an athletic uniform with the name of the target school
in the pictures attached to ayane’s sports festival tweet (Figure
2), submitted on 29th September.
We found that ayane sent birthday tweets to momone on her
birthday. Ayane was momone’s friend. Furthermore, in 2018,
not only ayane but three other users sent birthday tweets to
momone. We could not detect these three users because they
did not submit foundation day tweets. However, they submitted
school festival tweets the dates of which were matched with
those of the school festivals in the target school. As a result, we
also concluded that they went to the same school as momone
and ayane. Actually, one of them was nanae. The pictures
attended to nanae’s graduation ceremony tweet (Figure 5) and
ayane’s sports festival tweet (Figure 2) show that nanae and
ayane went to the same school.
IV.
DETECTION OF FOUNDATION DAY TWEETS
In order to collect school event tweets efﬁciently, it is
important to detect them automatically. If school event tweets,
especially foundation day tweets, are detected automatically,
the detected tweets can be used for the following conﬂicting
purposes.
•
We can give warnings to users before they submit
their school event tweets that threaten their privacy
and security.
•
Unwanted audiences can collect school event tweets
and obtain several kinds of senders’ personal informa-
tion.
In this section, we discuss whether we can automatically detect
foundation day tweets by using machine learning techniques.
In this study, we used the Support Vector Machine (SVM)
for data training and classifying. Table I shows feature s1 ∼
s16 used in machine learning on experimental data. s1 ∼ s7
were obtained by using the results of morphological analysis
on experimental data. In the experiments, we used a Japanese
morphological analyzer, JUMAN, for word segmentation of
Japanese tweets [12]. s8 ∼ s10 and s12 ∼ s14 were obtained
by extracting character N-gram from experimental data. Odaka
et al. reported that character 3-gram is good for Japanese
processing [13]. s4 ∼ s7 and s12 ∼ s15 were obtained from
ﬁrst sentences of tweets. This is because, we thought, clue
expressions of school events are often found at ﬁrst sentences
of tweets.
In this study, we used 1,000 Japanese tweets including
“kaiko kinenbi (school foundation day)” for the experimental
data. We collected these tweets by Twitter search from July
to November 2018. These 1,000 tweets can be classiﬁed into
two types:
TABLE I. FEATURES USED IN SVM METHOD FOR DATA TRAINING AND
CLASSIFYING JAPANESE TWEETS INCLUDING WORD “kaiko kinenbi
(SCHOOL FOUNDATION DAY)”
s1
word unigrams of the tweet
s2
word bigrams of the tweet
s3
the number of words in the tweet
s4
word unigrams of the ﬁrst sentence of the tweet
s5
word bigrams of the ﬁrst sentence of the tweet
s6
the number of words in the ﬁrst sentence of the tweet
s7
the last word of the ﬁrst sentence of the tweet
s8
character unigrams of the tweet
s9
character bigrams of the tweet
s10
character 3-grams of the tweet
s11
the length of the tweet
s12
character unigrams of the ﬁrst sentence of the tweet
s13
character bigrams of the ﬁrst sentence of the tweet
s14
character 3-grams of the ﬁrst sentence of the tweet
s15
the length of the ﬁrst sentence of the tweet
s16
whether the tweet is a reply
TABLE II. THE DETAILS OF THE 1,000 JAPANESE TWEETS INCLUDING
“kaiko kinenbi (SCHOOL FOUNDATION DAY)” (FROM JULY TO NOVEMBER
2018).
FD tweet
others
total
normal tweet
393
309
702
reply
66
232
298
retweet
0
0
0
total
459
541
1,000
•
foundation day tweet
foundation day tweets show when the foundation days
of senders’ schools are.
•
others
others do not show when the foundation days of
senders’ schools are although they include word
“kaiko kinenbi (school foundation day)”.
Furthermore, tweets can be classiﬁed into three types [14]:
•
reply
A reply is submitted to a particular person. It contains
“@username” in the body of the tweet.
•
retweet
A retweet is a reply to a tweet that includes the original
tweet.
•
normal tweet
A normal tweet is neither reply nor retweet. Normal
tweets are generally submitted to general public.
Table II shows the numbers of normal tweets, replies, and
retweets in the 1,000 tweets. Also, it shows the numbers of
foundation day (FD) tweets and others in the 1,000 tweets.
As shown in Figure II, there were no retweets in the 1,000
tweets. We conducted this experiment using TinySVM [15].
Table III shows the experimental result of the 1,000 Japanese
tweets. The experimental result was obtained with 10-fold
cross-validation. In order to discuss our method in more detail,
we divided the experimental result of the 1,000 Japanese tweets
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-721-4
INTERNET 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Evolving Internet

TABLE III. THE SVM CLASSIFICATION RESULT OF THE 1,000 JAPANESE
TWEETS INCLUDING WORD “kaiko kinenbi (SCHOOL FOUNDATION DAY)”.
human expert
SVM result
result
FD tweet
others
recall
FD tweet
332
127
0.72
others
132
409
0.76
precision
0.72
0.76
TABLE IV. THE SVM CLASSIFICATION RESULT OF THE 702 JAPANESE
NORMAL TWEETS INCLUDING WORD “kaiko kinenbi (SCHOOL FOUNDATION
DAY)”.
human expert
SVM result
result
FD tweet
others
recall
FD tweet
308
85
0.78
others
123
186
0.60
precision
0.71
0.69
TABLE V. THE SVM CLASSIFICATION RESULT OF THE 298 JAPANESE
REPLIES INCLUDING WORD “kaiko kinenbi (SCHOOL FOUNDATION DAY)”.
human expert
SVM result
result
FD tweet
others
recall
FD tweet
24
42
0.36
others
9
223
0.96
precision
0.73
0.84
(Table III) into those of 702 normal tweets (Table IV) and 298
replies (Table V).
As shown in Table III, 741 Japanese tweets were classiﬁed
correctly and 259 tweets incorrectly in this experiment. 332
tweets out of the 741 correctly classiﬁed tweets were ones
where the foundation days of senders’ schools were disclosed.
As shown in Table III, both the recall and precision of tweets
disclosing the foundation days of senders’ schools were 72%.
Furthermore, as shown in Table IV and Table V, the precision
of normal tweets and replies disclosing the foundation days of
senders’ schools were 71% and 73%, respectively. Our method
is useful for collecting foundation day tweets precisely. As
a result, it is easy for unwanted audiences to collect tweets
disclosing the foundation days of senders’ schools by using
our method. On the other hand, the recall of replies disclosing
the foundation days of senders’ schools was 36%. Our method
could not detect many replies disclosing the foundation days of
senders’ schools. As a result, in order to give warnings to users
before they submit their school event tweets that threaten their
privacy and security, it is necessary to improve our method.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we investigated school event tweets, espe-
cially foundation day tweets and showed that they should
be treated carefully. This is because school event tweets can
threaten students’ privacy and security when combined with
event calendars. We showed that foundation day tweets can
be collected precisely by using machine learning techniques.
On the other hand, anyone, including unwanted audiences, can
obtain event calendars easily because they are often available
on schools’ web sites. In order to discuss how easy is it
to obtain school event calendars, we are investigating the
percentage of schools that let anyone obtain event calendars
through their web sites. Finally, we should note that we
retouched all the photos in this paper for protecting students’
privacy.
REFERENCES
[1]
C.
Johnson
III,
Safeguarding
against
and
responding
to
the
breach
of
personally
identiﬁable
information,
Ofﬁce
of
Management
and
Budget
Memorandum,
2007.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/memoranda/fy2007/m07-
16.pdf [accessed: 2016-10-04]
[2]
B. Krishnamurthy and C. E. Wills, “On the leakage of personally
identiﬁable
information
via
online
social
networks,”
Computer
Communication Review, vol. 40, no. 1, 2010, pp. 112–117. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/1672308.1672328 [accessed: 2019-
05-10]
[3]
S. Fox et al., Trust and Privacy Online: Why Americans Want to
Rewrite the Rules, The Pew Internet & American Life Project, 2000.
[Online]. Available: http://www.pewinternet.org/2000/08/20/trust-and-
privacy-online/ [accessed: 2019-05-10]
[4]
A. Acquisti and R. Gross, Imagined Communities: Awareness, Infor-
mation Sharing, and Privacy on the Facebook.
Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2006, pp. 36–58.
[5]
C. Dwyer, “Digital relationships in the ”myspace” generation: Results
from a qualitative study,” in Proceedings of the 40th Annual Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences, ser. HICSS ’07.
Wash-
ington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2007, p. 19.
[6]
S. B. Barnes, “A privacy paradox: Social networking in the united
states.” First Monday, vol. 11, no. 9, 2006. [Online]. Available:
http://ﬁrstmonday.org/article/view/1394/1312 [accessed: 2019-05-10]
[7]
T. Hirai, “Why does “Enjyo“ happen on the Web? : An Examination
based
on
Japanese
Web
Culture,”
Journal
of
Information
and
Communication Research, vol. 29, no. 4, mar 2012, pp. 61–71.
[Online].
Available:
http://doi.org/10.11430/jsicr.29.4 61
[accessed:
2019-05-10]
[8]
A. Viseu, A. Clement, and J. Aspinall, “Situating privacy online: Com-
plex perception and everyday practices,” Information, Communication
& Society, 2004, pp. 92–114.
[9]
S. Livingstone, “Taking risky opportunities in youthful content creation:
teenagers’ use of social networking sites for intimacy, privacy and self-
expression.” New Media & Society, vol. 10, no. 3, 2008, pp. 393–411.
[10]
A.
N.
Joinson,
U.-D.
Reips,
T.
Buchanan,
and
C.
B.
P.
Schoﬁeld, “Privacy, trust, and self-disclosure online.” Human-Computer
Interaction, vol. 25, no. 1, 2010, pp. 1–24. [Online]. Available:
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/07370020903586662 [ac-
cessed: 2019-05-10]
[11]
Z. Tufekci, “Can You See Me Now? Audience and Disclosure Regula-
tion in Online Social Network Sites,” Bulletin of Science, Technology
& Society, vol. 28, no. 1, 2008, pp. 20–36.
[12]
S. Kurohashi and D. Kawahara, JUMAN Manual version 5.1 (in
Japanese).
Kyoto University, 2005.
[13]
T. Odaka et al., “A proposal on student report scoring system using
n-gram text analysis method,” The transactions of the Institute of
Electronics, Information and Communication Engineers. D-I, vol. 86,
no. 9, sep 2003, pp. 702–705.
[14]
Y.
Watanabe,
K.
Nakajima,
H.
Morimoto,
R.
Nishimura,
and
Y. Okada, “An investigation of a factor that affects the usage of
unsounded code strings at the end of japanese and english tweets,”
in Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Evolving
Internet (INTERNET 2015), Oct 2015, pp. 50–55. [Online]. Available:
https://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=internet
2015 2 40 40038 [accessed: 2019-05-10]
[15]
T. Kudoh. TinySVM: Support Vector Machines. [Online]. Available:
http://chasen.org/˜taku/software/TinySVM/index.html [accessed: 2019-
05-10]
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-721-4
INTERNET 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Evolving Internet

