Multicast Routing for High-Quality Multimedia Environments:
Deployment and New Problems
Pavel Troubil, Hana Rudov´a
Faculty of Informatics
Masaryk University
Brno, Czech Republic
Email: pavel@ics.muni.cz, hanka@fi.muni.cz
Petr Holub
Institute of Computer Science
Masaryk University
Brno, Czech Republic
Email: hopet@ics.muni.cz
Abstract—Motivated by remote interactive collaboration over
high-quality multimedia, we solve the multigroup multicast rout-
ing problem under critical runtime limits and we focus on
realistic aspects crucial for deployment of advanced collaborative
environments. We developed solvers based on mixed integer
programming and ant colony optimization, which are integrated
in currently developed environments to support education of
deaf students at Czech universities. They are also deployed for
distributed media production for live broadcasting of sporting
and cultural events. The paper presents our ongoing research
and development aims in deployment of the environments and
new arising problems in multicast routing.
Keywords–multicast routing; planning; multimedia; interactive
collaboration
I.
INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION
The recent years have witnessed rapid performance growth
of commodity hardware and its multimedia processing capa-
bilities. The progress stimulated development of interactive
applications, which can use high-quality media for communi-
cation and remote collaboration. Cheaper deployment of such
applications brought remote work and cooperation into new
areas, like distributed musical performances [1], or distributed
media production in broadcasting. New opportunities arose
in other areas, e. g., telemedicine [2] and remote scientiﬁc
visualization. In the pursuit to create self-organized collab-
orative tools which will support these novel forms of remote
interactive communication, we develop methods for automated
planning of concurrent network transmissions. They are es-
sential for intelligent behaviour of the collaborative tools, as
they eliminate the need of manual setup. The most recent
solvers enable effective response to dynamics of computer
networks while scaling to medium-sized collaborating groups,
supporting 20 – 30 participants in a videoconference.
We target applications with extensive demands on qual-
ity of service provided by computer networks, particularly
capacity and end-to-end delay. The high-quality interactive
multimedia applications usually transmit video streams with
high image resolutions, either compressed by codecs with low
compression rates or uncompressed at all. Such videos in UHD
(Ultra High Deﬁnition) or 4K resolution need a network ca-
pacity between 2–24 Gb/s. In order to maintain image without
visible quality degradation for applications like telemedicine,
the transmitted bandwidths always remain relatively high in
comparison to available capacities, although networks may
enforce higher compression rates. For example, Digital Cinema
standard [3] speciﬁes JPEG2000 compressed formats with
up to 250 Mb/s bandwidth for 4K video resolution. Low
compression rates do not only increase image quality and
required bandwidth, but are also encoded faster than codecs
with high compression rates. In addition, compression latencies
contribute to the total transmission latency from source to
destination, which should be minimized for interactive appli-
cations. The International Telecommunication Union in their
recommendation G.114 [4] declares that end-to-end latencies
above 150 ms introduce negative impact on users’ perception
of interactivity in remote communication.
On top of the UltraGrid [5], a software for low-latency
transmissions of high-quality video, the CoUniverse middle-
ware [6] is used to orchestrate the collaborative environments,
i. e., conﬁgure multiple point-to-point transmissions to build
complex interactive applications. This paper aims to present
to the community our ongoing work on transmission planning
problems in the CoUniverse and methods which we proposed
and implemented to solve them. We will also describe the
current development of novel collaborative environments with
specialized applications, and new planning problems which
they introduce.
The CoUniverse is driven by a user-empowered approach,
i. e., any user can run the collaborative environment on her
own and has full control over all applications within. Running
the environment shall be available at any time, as simple as
a Skype call, and allow top-tier quality of multimedia. The
transmission planning is then similar to peer-to-peer videocon-
ferencing tools, e. g., Celerity [7]. The common denominator
is a need to operate without any administrative privileges to
computers nor network. As a result, knowledge of physical
topology of an underlying network is incomplete or missing at
all. Network administrators do not publish the topologies, since
they need to modify them anytime, usually in reaction to load
or failures. Only some experienced users might have partial
knowledge of the underlying topology, usually their local
network and its neighborhood. Planning of transmissions relies
often on knowledge of overlay topology, i. e., mutual visibility
among the collaborative tools similar to reachability by the
ICMP (Internet Control Message Protocol) ping. And since
native IP multicast is often unavailable across independently
administered networks [8], the user-empowered environments
also require user-empowered substitutes for multipoint com-
munication called Application level multicasts (ALM) [9].
The problem of planning network transmissions is known
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-437-4
INTELLI 2015 : he Fourth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

as multicast routing in literature on combinatorial optimiza-
tion [10]. The multicast routing is either single-group, i. e.,
with single data source which delivers data to a set of
destinations, or multigroup with multiple data sources and
an independent set of destinations for each of them. Mixed
integer programming methods were proposed for both single
and multiple groups [11]. But for scalability reasons, current
research is focused on heuristics, particularly approaches from
computational intelligence. For the single group, genetic al-
gorithms are repeatedly revisited, e. g., [12], and ant colony
optimization (ACO) techniques are also proposed often [13]
[14]. The multigroup problem is harder to solve and is also
less studied. Again, the genetic algorithms are the most suc-
cessful [15].
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section II,
we formulate the problems and mention methods applied to
solve them. Section III sketches two practical environments,
where we implement and deploy solvers proposed in Section II.
In Section IV, we analyze the modiﬁed routing problems which
arise from the deployment.
II.
PROBLEMS AND METHODS
We model the computer network by a directed weighted
multigraph G = (Vo ∪ Vu, Eo ∪ Eu). The graph covers
two layers of network representation. Overlay nodes Vo are
computers running the collaborative tools and overlay links Eo
represent mutual reachability of the tools. Knowledge of this
layer is always available, including latencies and (potentially
inaccurate) capacities of the overlay links. Yet, it is not
always sufﬁcient for reliable planning decisions. Overlay links
may share underlying physical network infrastructure, but the
sharing is not captured in the representation of the overlay
links, and may result in overloading of the physical infrastruc-
ture when several overlay links are incorrectly considered as
independent. The underlay nodes Vu and underlay links Eu
represent the underlying network where available — even
when it is only part of the topology. In such case, knowledge
of association between overlay and underlay links is required.
Capacities of some underlay links (but not necessarily all) can
be known.
For each data source s ∈ S (S ⊂ Vo), there is a set
of destinations D(s), which request transmission from the
source s. The overlay nodes, which are neither sources nor
destinations, are called ALM agents. The agents can receive
the data, forward them further, replicate them, and also process
contents of the data. They provide infrastructure for multipoint
communication by mimicking of native IP multicast in the
overlay network. Solution of the multigroup multicast routing
problem is a set of multicast trees, one tree per source. Each
multicast tree is a subgraph of the overlay network topology
graph (Vo, Eo). The tree is directed, rooted in the source s,
and set of its leaves equals to the set of destinations D(s).
For each link in all trees, we also have to decide the
multimedia format for transmission along the link. Multimedia
can be encoded in various formats. Video formats differ, among
others, in image resolution, framerate, compression algorithm,
and its parameters. For easier representation and simpler
solution, we abstract from these attributes and work with
a discrete set of formats, which are common in practice. The
attributes are expressed in bandwidth required for transmission
of the formats, subjective quality perceived by receiving users,
latency introduced by on-the-ﬂy encoding or decoding, and
amount of hardware resources for the encoding or decoding.
The ALM agents are able to transcode multimedia formats
on-the-ﬂy, i. e., decode them and encode in a different format.
Exploiting this capability, the planning can assign different
formats to each incident link of an ALM agent in a multicast
tree. Each destination in a multicast tree can receive data in
a different format, which shall provide as good quality as
possible and be adapted to destination’s network capacity.
Solutions have to respect capacities of network links, limits
of hardware resources (performance of processor and graphics
card or available memory) at overlay nodes, and sometimes
also (un)availability of features required for processing of some
formats at the nodes. We aim to optimize two components of
objective function: minimize total transmission latency, which
includes latency of data transmission as well as delay induced
by multimedia processing at overlay nodes, and maximize
subjective quality of multimedia received at destinations.
We solved the above mentioned problem by methods of
mixed integer programming (MIP). At ﬁrst, we analyzed
the problem without transcoding and knowledge of underlay
network topology [16], and evaluated suitability of several
cycle-avoidance methods adopted from the travelling salesman
problem. Later, we extended our MIP models with the underlay
knowledge and support of format selection [17]. The planning
of multimedia transcoding is the main distinction of our
methods from related work on multicast routing.
Next problem extension introduces uncertain network ca-
pacities. The user-empowered approach and inherent inaccu-
racy or absence of network knowledge can be partially over-
come with automated tools for network topology inference [18]
and bandwidth estimation [19]. In addition to uncertainty in
network parameters caused by continuously changing state of
the network, these automated tools provide results with only
limited reliability. In some of our tests, the tools misestimated
actual bandwidth by more than 50 % on 1 Gb/s links. Instead
of assuming that capacities of overlay network links are known
exactly, we model them by cumulative distributive functions as
is usually the case in network problems with uncertainty [20].
We solved the extended problem by a metaheuristic algorithm
based on ant colony optimization, which ﬁts well with the
uncertainty and allows sufﬁcient scalability [21].
The iterations of the algorithm adhere to the classical struc-
ture of iterations in the ACO. First, the solutions are generated
for all data sources in parallel. We adopt the tree-building
approach similar to single group algorithm from paper [13],
where ants construct the trees by moving in network topology
graph. In a next phase, the individual multicast trees are
gathered and their load on the network summed. The results
are used to set parameters for tree generation in subsequent
iterations. Finally, the pheromones are deposited on links used
by the trees in an amount proportional to the quality of the
solution.
The design of the algorithm also allowed its simple
application on the multicast routing problem with dynamic
reconﬁguration [22]. The dynamic reconﬁguration is needed
when a solution is deployed, a communication is underway,
and the input for planning changes as a result of change in
network state or source and destination sets. In such situations,
the problem needs to be solved again with ongoing aim to
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-437-4
INTELLI 2015 : he Fourth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

optimize latency and quality, but data transmission paths shall
be modiﬁed as little as possible. Every change of path from
source to a destination interrupts the communication for several
seconds and disturbs users. The algorithm in paper [22] is
designed to avoid the interruptions, but does not guarantee
path preservation.
Since our algorithms target area of interactive applications,
they also have to provide interactive response when the user is
waiting for establishment of the communication or a dynamic
reconﬁguration. The ACO algorithm can solve problems with
hundreds of overlay nodes within a second [21] [22].
III.
CURRENT PROGRESS IN DEPLOYMENT
We are currently working on future deployment of the
planning algorithms within the CoUniverse, focusing on two
application areas: distributed media production for live broad-
casting and education of deaf students at Czech universities.
A. Distributed Media Production for Live Broadcasting
Live broadcasting from sporting and cultural events re-
quires a lot of personnel and specialized technical equipment,
which is transported to venues by many production trucks (ve-
hicles equipped with production control rooms). Technology
usually used for live broadcasting requires live editing directly
at the venue. The director switches in real-time between avail-
able cameras, always selecting one source for transmission to
the broadcasting center via a satellite connection. High prices
of broadcasting transmission routes enforced the presence of
large teams and equipment at the venue, since their expensive
transport between the venues was still cheaper. These days,
computer networks with sufﬁcient capacity cover most of the
venues and will allow to substitute original broadcasting routes
via satellites with video transmissions over computer networks.
Still, many venues will be connected through low-capacity
network links in comparison to network core, but on-the-ﬂy
multimedia transcoding can overcome the limitations, and will
allow to reduce expenses on transport of personnel and the
equipment.
Media production in live broadcasts could follow the
scheme depicted in Figure 1. Two concurrent sporting events
are held at two venues. The director works from the broadcast-
ing control center. Content from all cameras at both venues is
delivered in preview quality to the broadcasting control (red
arrows). The preview quality requires much lower bandwidth,
but is sufﬁcient for video cutting decisions. Based on the
decisions (green arrows), video content from one source is
delivered to the distribution center in full quality. The editor
can switch in real-time among all the sources, and the distri-
bution center feeds the selected content to satellite distribution
or terrestrial broadcasting networks (blue dashed arrows). We
demonstrated a prototype of such live broadcasting system
at The 14th Annual LambdaGrid Workshop [23], where we
transmitted an ice hockey match captured by 5 cameras from
Czech Republic to New Zealand. Building upon experience
from the demonstration, another one will be prepared for
the 15th Annual LambdaGrid Workshop in autumn 2015.
The demonstration shall present multiple improvements of the
system, particularly features important for the broadcasting
practice. We expand on them in Section IV.
Figure 1. Scheme of live broadcasting infrastructure
B. Remote Interpreting of Sign Language for Education
Integrated education of deaf and hard-of-hearing students
poses a challenging problem for any educational facility,
but becomes especially difﬁcult at universities. The narrow
specialized ﬁelds of study use a lot of technical terms and
courses are often taught in a foreign language. Should the
deaf students have an option to visit lectures and seminars,
highly skilled interpreters of sign language are required, who
know the specialized vocabulary and/or are able to interpret the
foreign language. Since such skilled interpreters are scarce,
they are often required to inefﬁciently travel among univer-
sities. Videoconferencing can offer an effective and efﬁcient
alternative comfortable for students, interpreters, and teachers.
Better education could be provided to more deaf students with
lower costs.
The videoconference remote interpreting (VRI) has been
studied mainly for legal purposes at the police station, in court,
or healthcare. For example, see the Avidicus project [24]. Cur-
rent research is focused rather on psychological implications of
the remote interpreting than technological aspects. VRI usually
uses only a single video and audio channel, but deployment in
university lectures requires advanced solutions. The Support
Center for Students with Special Needs at Masaryk Univer-
sity (SCSSN) designed the CoUnSiL, a specialized environ-
ment for remote interpreting in lectures, where each student
has his own screen with picture of teacher, her presentation,
interpreter, and other students. Since students need to follow
and understand long lectures and seminars, the visual quality
of the videos has to be maximized. As illustrated by picture-in-
picture interpreting on TV, the sign language is comprehensible
even if the picture is low quality. Yet, the low quality is
not suitable for education, since it wears the deaf out very
quickly and diminishes their ability to comprehend and retain
information. Also due to a difﬁcult setup of the environment,
deployment of the CoUniverse is natural. In cooperation with
SCSSN, we are adapting the CoUniverse for the education of
deaf students. Testing of the prototype received a positive re-
sponse from future users, and deployment for regular teaching
across several Czech universities is expected during 2016.
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-437-4
INTELLI 2015 : he Fourth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

IV.
NEW PROBLEMS
The development of the environment for live broadcasting
brought to light several new extensions of the problem. The
camera switching feature requires a change of approach to
transition between two solutions during a dynamic recon-
ﬁguration. Until now, our algorithms did not support any
elaborate transition procedure. Yet, the live broadcasting has
special requirements on cuts when switching between two
sources. For good visual experience of spectators, the cut
has to take place exactly between two video frames. But on
the packet level, the frames cannot be so easily separated,
and borders between frames are not aligned among individual
sources. The problem of seamless switching can be solved
by concurrent transmission of data from both sources to
a specialized switching ALM agent. While receiving both data
sources, such ALM agent can decide the right moment to
stop transmission of the original stream and start the new
one, when the cut shall be visually clear. But the concurrent
reception doubles requirements on incoming network capacity
of the processing node. The capacity can be reserved for
two sources at a time during the entire broadcast, decreasing
quality of received media all the time. Another solution of
the problem could involve a multistep transition. First, the
original source would transmit lower bandwidth (and quality as
well) to the switching ALM agent. Second, transmission of the
new source to the agent would start. Third, the original source
would stop transmitting to the switching agent, and ﬁnally the
freed capacity would be ﬁlled by the new source. As a result,
spectators would see the lower quality picture only during
the transition phase, not all the time. From the routing point
of view, the multiphase transitions require not only switch
between original and new solution, but four solutions deployed
in relatively quick succession.
Visually clear cuts require concurrent reception of two
sources at a switching ALM agent. There could be also addi-
tional requirements on such node, e. g., a specialized hardware
or software equipment for video processing. For every source
and subset of its destinations, there can be a predeﬁned ALM
agent (or a set of agents), which have to lie on path between
the source and destination subset. Our ACO algorithm is open
to such modiﬁcation, as we only split tree construction in two
phases: one to search for the predeﬁned ALM agents, another
to build the rest of the paths down to destinations.
The cuts between cameras occur in reaction to user-induced
request. The dynamic reconﬁguration of multicast trees is not
caused by change of network topology, e. g., failure of a net-
work link. Therefore, the planning algorithm should certainly
guarantee preservation of transmission paths from a previous
solution where a user requires so. The path preservation would
not be only favoured by the objective function, but required
by problem constraints. Again, the ACO algorithm can be run
with the preserved path as an unmodiﬁable basis for further
growth of the multicast tree.
Although the previous problems are inspired by the appli-
cation in live broadcasting, their solution may ﬁnd future use
in other collaborative environments. The following problem
of planning under strong network uncertainty is common to
almost all our future applications. As mentioned in Section II,
our algorithms support two layers of network representation:
always available knowledge of overlay and optional (possibly
partial) knowledge of underlying physical topology. The ACO
algorithm is also designed for cooperation with tools for band-
width estimation and inference of underlying network topology
with uncertain results. Unfortunately, the tools are not ready for
deployment. According to our testing, their runtimes are often
high, and results on high-capacity networks unreliable beyond
admissibility. In order to partially overcome the issues, we
are searching for methods of partial topology inference from
information on data loss. Most often, our issues with network
congestion are linked to incorrect assumptions that overlay
links are independent while they actually share capacity of
underlay links. In contrast to the commonly proposed methods,
which are unobtrusive and aim to load the network as little as
possible, we can use the data about actual congestion when one
occurs. And once it occurs, we need to respond quickly and
establish or restore transmissions, no matter if we are able to
infer anything about the underlying network or not. Therefore,
we need to develop strategies for the responses in various
situations, like initialization of the collaborative environment,
arrival of a new participant, or sudden drop of delivery rates
without any user-induced cause. The strategies have to include
selection of links in multicast trees where rates should be
decreased, the decrease rate, and procedures for detection
and utilization of free network capacity. We assume that the
strategies will not modify the multicast routing algorithms, but
rather ﬁnd suitable parameters of the input network topologies
for their execution.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank the Czech Science Foundation for support by
project GAP202/12/0306. Work of Petr Holub is also supported
by CESNET Large Infrastructure project LM2010005.
REFERENCES
[1]
C. Drioli, C. Allocchio, and N. Buso, “Networked performances and
natural interaction via LOLA: Low latency high quality A/V streaming
system,” in Information Technologies for Performing Arts, Media
Access, and Entertainment.
Springer, 2013, pp. 240–250.
[2]
K. Zhang, W.-L. Liu, C. Locatis, and M. Ackerman, “Uncompressed
high-deﬁnition videoconferencing tools for telemedicine and distance
learning,” Telemedicine journal and e-health : the ofﬁcial journal of the
American Telemedicine Association, vol. 19, no. 8, 2013, pp. 579–584.
[3]
Digital
Cinema
Initiatives,
“Digital
Cinema
System
Speciﬁca-
tion v. 1.2,” http://dcimovies.com/speciﬁcation/DCI DCSS v12 with
errata 2012-1010.pdf, p. 155, 2012, accessed: 26/08/2015.
[4]
International Telecommunication Union, “One-way transmission time:
ITU-T recommendation G.114,” http://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-G.114/
en, p. 20, 2013, accessed: 26/08/2015.
[5]
“UltraGrid,” http://www.ultragrid.cz/en, accessed: 26/08/2015.
[6]
“CoUniverse,” http://couniverse.sitola.cz, accessed: 26/08/2015.
[7]
X. Chen, M. Chen, B. Li, Y. Zhao, Y. Wu, and J. Li, “Celerity: towards
low-delay multi-party conferencing over arbitrary network topologies,”
in Network and Operating System Support for Digital Audio and Video.
ACM, 2011, pp. 123–128.
[8]
C. Diot, B. N. Levine, B. Lyles, H. Kassem, and D. Balensiefen,
“Deployment issues for the IP multicast service and architecture,” IEEE
Network, vol. 14, no. 1, 2000, pp. 78–88.
[9]
C. Yeo, B. Lee, and M. Er, “A survey of application level multicast
techniques,” Computer Communications, vol. 27, no. 15, 2004, pp.
1547–1568.
[10]
C. A. S. Oliveira and P. M. Pardalos, “A survey of combinatorial
optimization problems in multicast routing,” Computers & Operations
Research, vol. 32, no. 8, 2005, pp. 1953–1981.
[11]
C. A. Noronha Jr. and F. A. Tobagi, “Optimum routing of multicast
streams,” in Proceedings of the IEEE INFOCOM, 1994, pp. 865–873.
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-437-4
INTELLI 2015 : he Fourth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

[12]
Y. Yen, H. Chao, R. Chang, and A. Vasilakos, “Flooding-limited and
multi-constrained QoS multicast routing based on the genetic algorithm
for MANETs,” Mathematical and Computer Modelling, vol. 53, no. 11-
12, 2011, pp. 2238–2250.
[13]
H. Wang, H. Xu, S. Yi, and Z. Shi, “A tree-growth based ant colony
algorithm for QoS multicast routing problem,” Expert Systems with
Applications, vol. 38, no. 9, 2011, pp. 11 787–11 795.
[14]
P.-Y. Yin, R.-I. Chang, C.-C. Chao, and Y.-T. Chu, “Niched ant colony
optimization with colony guides for QoS multicast routing,” Journal of
Network and Computer Applications, vol. 40, 2014, pp. 61–72.
[15]
L. Sanna Randaccio and L. Atzori, “Group multicast routing problem:
A genetic algorithms based approach,” Computer Networks, vol. 51,
2007, pp. 3989–4004.
[16]
P. Troubil and H. Rudov´a, “Integer linear programming models for
media streams planning,” in International Conference on Applied Op-
erational Research, 2011, pp. 509–522.
[17]
P. Troubil, H. Rudov´a, and P. Holub, “Media streams planning with
transcoding,” in IEEE Network Computing and Applications (NCA),
2013, pp. 41–48.
[18]
A. Malekzadeh and M. H. MacGregor, “Network topology inference
from end-to-end unicast measurements,” in Advanced Information Net-
working and Applications Workshops (WAINA), 2013, pp. 1101–1106.
[19]
F. Thouin, M. Coates, and M. Rabbat, “Large scale probabilistic
available bandwidth estimation,” Computer Networks, vol. 55, no. 9,
2011, pp. 2065–2078.
[20]
D. Lorenz and A. Orda, “QoS routing in networks with uncertain
parameters,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 6, no. 6,
1998, pp. 768–778.
[21]
P. Troubil, H. Rudov´a, and P. Holub, “Media streams planning with un-
certain link capacities,” in IEEE Network Computing and Applications
(NCA), 2014, pp. 197–204.
[22]
——, “Media streams planning with uncertain link capacities,” Net-
works: Special issue on metaheuristics in network optimization, 2014,
under review.
[23]
“14th annual global lambdagrid workshop,” http://www.glif.is/meetings/
2014/, accessed: 26/08/2015.
[24]
AVIDICUS
Project,
“Videoconference
interpreting,”
http://www.
videoconference-interpreting.net/, accessed: 26/08/2015.
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-437-4
INTELLI 2015 : he Fourth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

