A Professional Competency Development of Service Oriented Industry based SIA-
NRM Approach 
Chia-Li Lin  
Department of Recreation Management 
Shih Chien University 
Kaohsiung, Taiwan 
email:linchiali0704@yahoo.com.tw 
Yen-Yen Chen 
Department of Hospitality Management 
Tajen University 
Pingtung, Taiwan 
email:yc0611@tajen.edu.tw
Abstract—The development of service-oriented industries rely 
on not only the investment of equipments but also the large 
number 
of 
high-quality 
service 
personnel. 
Therefore, 
competition among service-oriented enterprises has gradually 
changed from facilities and store decoration investments to 
personnel training and education. This study attempts to 
analyze the competency need state for different job attributes 
in terms of "professional competence" and "working attitude" 
from the perspective of competency development and talent 
cultivation. This study also explores the relationship between 
the "professional competence" and "working attitude" for the 
practitioners 
in 
service-oriented 
industry. 
This 
study 
summarizes the two competency development aspects of 
“professional competence" and "working attitude" by 
literature review and expert interview and propose the 
competency development system of for service-oriented 
industry. This study proposes the concepts of professional 
competence and working attitude to evaluate the competency 
development needs and use the satisfaction-importance 
analysis (SIA) technique to determine the competency 
development state for service oriented industry. Besides, the 
study also analyzes the influence relation structure of 
competency development aspect based on the network relation 
map (NRM) technique. We hope that this research findings can 
aid decision makers understand competency development 
needs of different job attributes based on "professional 
competence" and "working attitude" for service-oriented 
industry. Therefore the study also propose the improvement 
strategies of competency development through the SIA-NRM 
(Network Relation Map), and aid decision maker to strengthen 
practitioners competency competitiveness by competency 
development and education and training.   
Keywords-Service-oriented 
industry; 
Professional 
competence; Working attitude; SIA (satisfaction-importance 
analysis); NRM(Network Relation Map). 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
In the tourism and hospitality industry, the service 
personals must satisfy different customers’ needs every day.
We need to explore and compare service levels with other 
industries. In the tourism industry, the employee turnover 
rate is of a high proportion so it is necessary to determine 
what kind of people remain in this industry, what incentives 
can let the industry to retain employees, and what skills must 
be acquired so that employees still keep a high standard of 
service and motivation. In the course of our practice, we see 
each class stratum exhibit a work ethos, knowledge and 
ability that are not the same. The responsibility to make the 
managerial-level decisions means that when one has more 
power, he/she must deal effectively with the lower echelons 
of his/her team. Managers should know how to address 
things according to each person's emotions and attitudes, and 
how to further explore the changes in multiple sectors of the 
industry. 
The staff who is working in different areas share a 
common responsibility to represent a positive work attitude. 
This demonstration tends to have great relevance within their 
work group, and some employees would like to advance and 
allow their work performance to improve. Many service staff 
does not mind staying in this so-called menial work for a 
long periods of time. This level will suffice due to a 
fundamental lack of ambition, educational opportunities, and 
minimal direction. Some may feel so good about their daily 
experience, there will be no consideration and no need to 
climb higher. Through this study, it will be possible to 
clearly know taxonomy of the various classes of personnel in 
the hotel and tourism industry. However, the need to find 
additional staff for the tourism and hotel industry keeps 
apace of the regular turn-over rate. The need to retain staff 
usually leads to an enhancement of their abilities to cultivate 
knowledge and to develop an attitude whereby a sense of 
accomplishment is engendered. As such, it is first important 
to understand the current state of corporate personnel career 
development and knowledge base used to develop an 
employee retention program that will address all levels, work 
attitudes, and industry knowledge. If staff and management 
are not aware of different changes, they may encounter 
people do not wish to continue to move forward. This makes 
work attitude frequently hostile and thus shows a poor 
quality of work leading to a declining service levels. When 
people become more motivated and possessing a positive 
attitude, the quality of finishing their work is greatly 
enhanced. In order to understand their own knowledge 
levels, service employees must learn to handle their own 
personal concerns in the face of customer appeals. The chief 
concern for employers is for such employees to give the best 
service response to make guests happy and to protect the 
corporate image. For the members of the workforce, there is 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-576-0
INTELLI 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt)

a correct way how to teach service capability to new team 
members. These lessons may also be applied to travel & 
hospitality students prior to their entry into the workplace.  
This study is divided into four sections: in the second 
section we discuss about the competency development of 
service oriented industry; the third part is research concept, 
in the fourth section we use service oriented industry as 
examples to evaluate; the fifth section is the conclusion. In 
the end, we would like to find the key success factor when 
developing competency. 
II.
LITTERATURE REVIEWS
McClelland [1] proposed the “iceberg model”, where 
the competency includes the explicit competence (seen 
above water) and implicit competence (under water). A 
clinical competence study of pre-graduate nursing students 
point out that skills enhancement program can improve the 
clinical competence for pre-graduate nursing students. This 
study use the three-part survey (the respondent's rooftop, the 
Skills Enhancement Program Questionnaire, and the 
Clinical Competence Questionnaire) based on the sample of 
245 pre-graduate nursing students. This study also adopts 
the Factor Analysis (FA) to explain the attributes of the 
skills enhancement program, and determine the network 
relation structure by the Structural Equation Modeling 
(SEM) and path analysis. The study proposed the clinical 
competency evaluation system which includes four aspects 
(supportive clinical instructor, comprehensive orientation, 
formative goals and objectives, and conductive learning 
environment) for pre-graduate nursing students. The 
research finding also point out that the aspect of supportive 
clinical instructor is the strongest aspect among the clinical 
competency aspects [2]. In order to develop the systematic 
competency evaluation system for operating room nurses 
(ORN), the study propose the competency evaluation 
system of operating room nurses based on the AHP 
approach. The proposed method integrated the three analytic 
techniques which include the in-depth interviews, the 
Delphi method and AHP (Analytic Hierarchy Process). The 
study explored ORN competencies and proposed the four 
aspects 
(specialized 
knowledge, 
professional 
ability, 
personality and self-motivation) and 32 criteria for ORN 
competency evaluation system. The research finding also 
point out that the aspects of specialized knowledge is the 
most important aspects and the aspect of self-motivation is 
the least important aspect in the ORN competency 
evaluation system [3]. 
III.
RESEARCH CONCEPT 
This section introduces the service improvement model 
based on SIA-NRM of online shopping. First, we need to 
define the critical decision problem of professional 
competency 
development 
and 
then 
identify 
the 
aspects/criteria that influence professional competency 
development of service oriented industry through literature 
review and expert interviews in the second stage. In the third 
stage, using SIA analysis, this study indicates that the 
aspects/ criteria that are still associated with low satisfaction 
and high importance are also linked to low professional 
competency 
development 
needs. 
The 
current 
study 
determines 
the 
relational 
structure 
of 
professional 
competency development system, and identifies the 
dominant aspects/criteria of the service system based on 
NRM analysis in the fourth stage. Finally, this study 
integrates the results of SIA analysis and NRM analysis to 
establish the improved strategy path and determine the 
effective service improvement strategy for professional 
competency development system. The analytic process 
includes five stages. (1) It clearly defines the critical decision 
problems of professional competency development system. 
(2) It establishes the aspects/ criteria of professional 
competency development system. (3) It measures the state of 
aspects/ criteria based on SIA analysis. (4) It measures the 
relational structure using network ration map (NRM). (5) It 
integrates the results of SIA analysis and NRM analysis to 
determine the improvement strategy and improvement path 
of professional competency development system. The 
analytic process uses the analytic techniques (SIA analysis, 
NRM analysis and SIA-NRM analysis) and five analytic 
stages as shown in Fig. 1.  
Figure 1. 
   The analysis process of SIA-NRM 
IV.
THE EMPIRICAL STUDY
The analysis processes of SIA-NRM include two 
stages. The first stage is the satisfied importance analysis 
(SIA) and the second stage is the analysis of the Network 
Ration Map (NRM). The SIA analysis determines the 
satisfaction and importance degree of aspects/criteria for 
professional competency development system; the SIA 
analysis can help decision marking find criteria that should 
improved while the standard satisfied degree is less than the 
average satisfied degree. The three improvement strategies 
are presented in Table I. Improvement strategy A, which 
requires no further improvement, can be applied to the 
aspects of Working attitude (WA) (SS > 0). Improvement 
strategy C, which requires indirect improvements, can be 
applied to the aspect of Professional competence (PC). The 
SIA-NRM approach determines the criteria which should be 
improved based on SIA 
analysis and the suited 
improvement path using the network ration map (NRM). As 
shown in Fig. 2, we can determine that the aspect of PC 
should be improved, and the WA is the aspect that is the 
major dimension with net influence. So we can improve the 
PC aspect by the aspect of WA as shown in TABLE I and 
Fig. 2.  
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-576-0
INTELLI 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt)

TABLE I. THE IMPROVEMENT STRATEGY TABLE OF SERVICE ORIENTED 
INDUSTRY
Aspects 
SIA 
NRM 
Strategies 
SS 
SI 
(SS, SI ) 
d+r 
d-r 
(R, D) 
PC 
-0.707 
-0.707 
▼ (L, L) 
282.714 
-1.000 
ID (+,-) 
C 
WA 
0.707 
0.707 
○ (H,H) 
282.714 
1.000 
D (+,+) 
A 
Notes: The improvement strategies include three types: Improvement 
Strategy A (which requires no further improvement), Improvement 
Strategy B (which requires direct improvements) and Improvement 
Strategy C (which requires indirect improvements) 
Figure 2. The improvement strategy map of service oriented industry 
REFERENCES
[1] D. C. McClelland, “Testing for competence rather than for 
"intelligence.",” American Psychologist, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 1-
14, 1973. 
[2] M. C. D. R. Rebueno, D. D. D. Tiongco, and J. R. B. Macindo, 
“A structural equation model on the attributes of a skills 
enhancement program affecting clinical competence of pre-
graduate nursing students,” Nurse Education Today, vol. 49, 
pp. 180-186, 2017. 
[3] Y. M. Wang, L. J. Xiong, Y. Ma, X. L. Gao, and W. F. Fu, 
“Construction of competency evaluation measures for 
operating room nurses,” Chinese Nursing Research, vol. 3, 
no. 4, pp. 181-184, 2016. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-576-0
INTELLI 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt)

