Manual Multi-Domain Routing for G´eant E2E Links with the I-SHARe Tool
Mark Yampolskiy1,2,3, Wolfgang Fritz1,2, Wolfgang Hommel2,3, Gloria Vuagnin4, Fulvio Galeazzi4
1 German Research Network (DFN), Alexanderplatz 1, 10170 Berlin, Germany
2 Leibniz Supercomputing Centre (LRZ), Boltzmannstraße 1, 85748 Garching, Germany
3 Munich Network Management (MNM) Team, Oettingenstraße 67, 80538 M¨unchen, Germany
4 Italian Research and Education Network (Consortium GARR), Via dei Tizii 6, I00186 Rome, Italy
{yampolskiy,fritz,hommel}@lrz.de, {gloria.vuagnin,fulvio.galeazzi}@garr.it
Abstract—The term routing is usually associated with the
fully automated routing in computer networks. Various routing
techniques, protocols, and strategies have been established in
LANs, WANs, Internet, and PSTN networks. However, all these
routing approaches rely on a pre-installed, pre-conﬁgured,
and well-maintained network infrastructure. The process of
planning the network infrastructure remains the stronghold
of manual planning. Whereas the planning within a single
provider domain is a very common task for all network service
providers (SPs), the planning of multi-domain backbone con-
nections introduces several additional challenges, such as the
coordination of connection options among multiple SPs’ plan-
ning teams. In this paper we present the I-SHARe (Information
Sharing across Heterogeneous Administrative Regions) tool,
which has been developed in the pan-European collaboration
G´eant in order to foster inter-provider collaboration during the
planning and operation of multi-domain backbone connections.
Keywords-manual routing; backbone connections; manage-
ment processes; tool-support
I. INTRODUCTION
G´eant is a collaboration of over 30 European National
Research and Education Networks (NRENs). Whereas the
purpose of every NREN is to provide network connections
for national research and education institutions, the purpose
of G´eant is to interconnect NRENs and consequently to
foster international research projects where participating or-
ganizations are connected to different NRENs. The portfolio
of G´eant includes various services among other conven-
tional IP connections. However, such services cannot always
fulﬁl all the challenging requirements of modern research
collaborations. The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) project
provides a very good example. Experiments performed in
the CERN center near Geneva produce over 15 petabytes
of raw data per year [1]. Mainly to store all this vast
amount of data, it has to be transferred to 11 so called
Tier-1 (T1) supercomputing centres spread across Europa
and North America [2]. The analysis of the data is then
performed in 160 T2 supercomputing centres spread around
the entire world. CERN backups all the data on tape but
has the local high speed storage capacity sufﬁcient only
to save experimental data of few days. Therefore, a bad
network quality or long term outages of network connections
between the T0 centre at CERN and the T1 centres might
lead to an inability to process real time the data taken, with
a negative impact on the analysis results. A bad quality
of connections between T1 and T2 centres is not that
critical, but nevertheless might lead as well to signiﬁcant
delays of the data analysis. Therefore, LHC needs permanent
high-bandwidth and high availability connections between
involved research organizations. Other good examples are
Grids, e.g., WLCG [3] or EGEE [4], where the involved
supercomputing centres require network connections as a
means for job-transfers between the collaborating partners.
Realizing high-quality high-bandwidth connections in
general purpose IP networks is very difﬁcult, as communica-
tion ﬂows can interfere with each other and therefore lead to
bad connection quality. In order to cope with the challenging
customer requirements, a novel service, End-to-End (E2E)
Links, has been introduced in G´eant. E2E Links are dedi-
cated optical point-to-point connections realized at ISO/OSI
levels 1 and 2, with connection segments provided by one
or more NRENs [5]. Regarding their quality requirements,
the used network technologies as well as the geographical
dimensions, E2E Links are nothing else but multi-domain
backbone connections, in which—in opposite to classical
backbones—multiple network providers are involved and
heterogeneous network technologies can be used.
The E2E Links service has been ﬁrst introduced mid 2005.
The speciality of the service is that a new connection can
be ordered regardless of whether the required infrastructure
is already installed or not. If new infrastructure is needed
to fulﬁl the customer’s request, it can be procured, installed,
and conﬁgured according to the requirements to the new E2E
Link. Consequently, all route planning procedures can only
be done manually and require intensive interactions between
the involved NRENs.
The experience made in the ﬁrst years of the E2E Links
service has revealed that information exchange and infor-
mation management are key factors determining the time
needed for manual connection planning and installation.
Information exchange via email and planning via Excel
sheets has proven to be error prone with a high probability
98
INTERNET 2011 : The Third International Conference on Evolving Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-141-0

of losing necessary information or missing various events,
e.g., the delivery of the procured infrastructure by neighbour
NRENs. This results in a high ﬂuctuation of the time needed
to plan and install new connections. In order to improve
the outlined situation, a tool supporting the information
exchange among participating NRENs should be introduced
for the E2E Links service.
The design and development of the I-SHARe (Information
Sharing across Heterogeneous Administrative Regions) tool
has been performed by an international team of researchers
working for different NRENs. The I-SHARe tool covers
information exchange for the whole life cycle of an E2E
Link service instance, from its planning through installation
and operation till decommissioning. In this paper, we focus
on the tool support for the planning of a new E2E Link.
We outline the most important challenges of such planning
procedures in Section II. The manual routing procedure with
I-SHARe is presented in Section III. In Section IV, we pro-
vide a brief history of the tool’s design and development. In
Section V we present our future plans. The presented paper
aims to promote the gained knowledge about the I-SHARe
tool, so that network operators facing similar challenges can
use it as well.
II. SPECIFIC CHALLENGES
Manual route planning has to overcome a combination
of technical and organizational challenges. Both types are
caused by the organizational independence of the involved
NRENs.
Due to various domain-internal reasons, it is typical for
organizations to have very restrictive information policies.
This means that the amount of information, which is allowed
to be shared with other project partners, is very limited.
For instance, it is typically prohibited to share detailed
information about the physical network topology or total
capacity available on the already installed infrastructure.
On the other hand, as NRENs have to collaborate with
each other on service instance planning and realization,
it is broadly acceptable to share service-instance-bound
information.
Further, independent organizations tend to have differ-
ent procurement policies and various preferences regarding
hardware vendors and technologies. This is often caused
by legal issues like procurement rules, by past experience,
and contractual conditions with various hardware vendors
as well as by the competence of organizational members
with particular technology. Consequently, this results in a
high level of heterogeneity of hardware and networking
technologies used by different NRENs. The interconnection
of different technologies is not an easy but very well under-
stood task. This, however, requires the consideration of the
compatibility of the used hardware, e.g., network interfaces,
and network parameters like the maximal supported frame
size. Sharing such information is essential in order to prevent
problems caused by incompatibility or misconﬁguration.
The planning of the network infrastructure is done manu-
ally in each NREN. It is inevitable that some infrastructure
might have to be procured and information about both
ﬁnancial conditions and hardware properties should be ﬁrst
requested from the hardware vendor(s). This introduces
unpredictable delays and an uncertainty of properties that
NRENs will be able to provide, as for instance some
hardware used in the past might become obsolete and
is not supplied anymore. As all NRENs are independent
organizations, changes of the planning conditions, e.g., the
ordered infrastructure should be delivered at a certain time,
are not automatically known to other involved partners. This
raises the necessity to notify other involved partners about
the completion of the own planning part and about the
properties available for the connection.
In conjunction with the information exchange, a reduction
of the information ﬂood is also needed. This is especially
important as the tool has to support manual processes.
The reduction of information means, for instance, that only
relevant partners should be involved and not all NRENs
involved in the collaboration and the necessary information
do not need to be resent many times. Furthermore, especially
for the planning of interconnecting interfaces it is important
to know the plans of the neighbour NREN for the particular
connection instance, in opposite to all interfaces planned for
all instances.
Last but not least, the coordination aspect has to be
mentioned. As network planning teams of all involved
NRENs operate independently, some sort of coordination is
needed in order to achieve the common goal—planning of
a new E2E Link. The lack of such information can result
in unresolved deadlocks, if, for example, two neighbour
NRENs have simultaneously planned incompatible infras-
tructure. Finally, the outlined information exchange has to
be embedded in multi-domain operational procedures.
III. PLANNING A NEW ROUTE WITH I-SHARE
If a project like LHC requires a new E2E Link, for exam-
ple, between CERN and Brookhaven National Laboratory
(BNL) in USA, a corresponding request can be submitted
to one of the NRENs to which end-points are connected.
The project has to specify two end-points and the required
properties of a new connection. If the contacted NREN
approves the request, network planning team(s) start to work
on the planning of a new connection and consequently on its
installation. The I-SHARe tool is dedicated to support this
work.
In this section we ﬁrst brieﬂy describe the system archi-
tecture of I-SHARe. After that, we outline the support of
the service instance life cycle. Finally, we present the usage
functionality of I-SHARe by planning and setting up a new
connection.
99
INTERNET 2011 : The Third International Conference on Evolving Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-141-0

A. Data separation in I-SHARe’s system architecture
The handling of single-domain and multi-domain in-
formation is clearly distinguished in the I-SHARe system
architecture (see Figure 1). Information such as operational
groups and group members, their responsibility areas and
contact data are handled in the domain part. This informa-
tion can be maintained in the I-SHARe domain part, or in
an NREN’s domestic management tool. In both cases the
single-domain information is propagated to I-SHARe via the
I-SHARe Domain Interface. The I-SHARe Central Server
stores the copy of the provided information, so that it can
be incorporated in the supported processes.
Figure 1.
System architecture of I-SHARe [6]
Multi-domain information like the route of an E2E Link
through NRENs, interfaces of the adjacent connection parts
provided by neighbor NRENs, and states of various opera-
tions are stored directly in the I-SHARe Central Server. This
information can be accessed and edited via a web-based GUI
(see Sections III-C and III-D for the detailed description).
All information stored in the I-SHARe Central Server can
be accessed from other applications through the I-SHARe
Multi-Domain Interface. This north-bound interface provides
the means for integrating I-SHARe with other tools, e.g., with
workﬂow management or analysis tools.
B. Life cycle coverage in I-SHARe
I-SHARe is designed to support the multi-domain manual
management processes during the whole life cycle of E2E
Links. According to the speciﬁcs of the E2E Links service,
one has to distinguish between four phases: (i) Ordering
of a new E2E Link, (ii) Setting up of the ordered E2E
Link, (iii) Operation of E2E Links in-service, and (iv) De-
commissioning of no longer needed E2E Links. E2E Links
in different phases can be accessed through different views
(top-level tabs in the GUI) of the I-SHARe Central Server.
The distinguishing between views is needed, as the tasks in
the corresponding phases require different knowledge, skills,
and competences, which generally are provided by different
teams. Furthermore, also the information needed in various
phases overlaps only partially.
The GUI views and the corresponding tasks are deﬁned
as follows:
• The Ordered view contains all links that have been
requested. During the ﬁrst phase the general feasi-
bility of the requested E2E Link with the speciﬁed
quality parameters is investigated. Among other tasks,
this includes the selection of NRENs, which should
participate in the realization of E2E Link segments.
• The Set Up view incorporates information about all
ordered E2E Links, whose general feasibility has been
approved. The purpose of this phase is to oversee and
coordinate all steps needed for the establishing of the
planned connection, i.e., the installation and conﬁgura-
tion of the needed equipment, the interconnection of all
adjacent connection segments, and the accomplishment
of all integration tests needed for the allowance for
service.
• The Operational view provides access to information
about all E2E Links, which are delivered as a service to
the end-customers. This view incorporates all plans and
details elaborated in the previous phases. The changes
in this phase can be used, e.g., in order to plan an
upgrade of used infrastructure.
• The Decommissioned view provides access to all for-
merly operational, now obsolete connections. This view
can be used, e.g., in order to reuse solutions elaborated
for E2E Links, which are not in service anymore.
In the remainder of this section we will present, how the
I-SHARe tool can support the manual work performed in the
ﬁrst two phases of the service instance life cycle.
C. The ordering process
After the contacted domain approved the request for a
new E2E Link, one of the domain’s experts needs to login
to I-SHARe and open a new link request. First, he speciﬁes
the end points given by the request and both connecting
domains (see Figure 2). The rectangles in the ﬁgure represent
organizational domains. If domains connecting the end-
points are not neighbors, one or more transit-domains can
be inserted by clicking the ”+”-button on the right hand of
the vertically arranged route. The acronyms of the domains
can be selected from a drop-down box in the middle of
the rectangle. Furthermore, for each domain the Point of
Presence (PoP) can be speciﬁed, at which it should be
connected to the neighbor domain. The connection at the
end-point site is not speciﬁed, as it is the end-customer’s
responsibility. In the GUI, the domain-speciﬁc PoP list is
represented as a drop-down box at the top or bottom edge
of the rectangle. The list is provided to the I-SHARe Central
Server by each domain via the I-SHARe Domain Interface
(see Section III-A).
100
INTERNET 2011 : The Third International Conference on Evolving Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-141-0

Figure 2.
Deﬁne end points and connecting domains [7]
At this stage, the I-SHARe tool also asks for further
relevant information, such as the assigned project’s name and
the customer requirements, e.g., the guaranteed bandwidth.
Other relevant entries, like the request date, are added
automatically. Besides the information already published by
the domain part, more contact details may be speciﬁed then
as well. Furthermore, already at this stage it is possible
to assign an Ordering Coordinator (OC)—a special role
responsible for coordinating the actual ordering process
among different steps, persons, and institutions. The OC
makes sure everyone takes the right actions and keeps
track of the overall progress. The OC is selected from
the list of all network specialists (reported via the domain
interface), whose domain designated him as qualiﬁed to take
the responsibility for this role. Usually, the OC is selected
from members of the connecting domain.
After a new link request is saved, it will appear in the
Ordered view (top-level tab in the GUI). This view is divided
into two parts—a link list showing the pending link requests
and a check list indicating the progress (see Figure 3).
By clicking at an ordered link, its detailed—alike
divided—view can be accessed (see Figure 4). The route part
shows all involved end sites and domains, whose detailed
(contact) information people can access by clicking at them.
The check list contains the state of all steps that the
experts have to take before the link may be ”promoted”
to the next life cycle phase. It covers the selection of an
ordering coordinator, route ﬁnding, UNI negotiation, NNI
negotiation, offer to the end site, acceptance, and selection of
set up coordinator. First, all involved domains need to agree
on an OC, which is the ﬁrst action. After that, they have to
work together to ﬁnd a feasible route from the requesting
customer to the destination. The OC and the experts are
supposed to set the individual states so that other people can
easily keep track of the link negotiation’s progress. During
both, UNI and NNI negotiation, the experts provide general
and technical information about their interfaces, such as its
Figure 3.
I-SHARe’s list of ordered links [7]
Figure 4.
Detailed view of an ordered link [7]
capacity, hardware, and interface type, where it is located,
transceiver and media types or even ﬁne grained parameters
such as the MTU size or the used wavelength. Figure 5
outlines a typical view during NNI negotiation. In this view,
a member of one domain can edit various parameters and at
the same time see the corresponding parameters its neighbor
speciﬁed.
In order to notify neighboring domains about different
events, I-SHARe provides user friendly email functionalities,
too. The tool supports the selection of recipients relevant
for the particular connection. Further, at any time notes and
documents can be stored in the system, for example, plans
for patch panel interconnection.
101
INTERNET 2011 : The Third International Conference on Evolving Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-141-0

Figure 5.
NNI negotiation page [7]
After all planning steps have been completed successfully
and the customer accepted the particular offer, the link may
be put to the next life cycle phase, the set-up phase. Prior
to that a Setup Coordinator (SC) has to be selected— a role
similar to OC, but responsible for the coordination of all
activities related to the link set up. If the domains could not
ﬁnd a feasible route for a particular link request, they will
reject it and inform the customer.
D. The set up process
Similar to the ordering phase, I-SHARe provides a sep-
arated list for each link that is currently in the process
of being established. By clicking at a link, the experts
can access a more detailed view that is alike divided. On
the one hand, there is a more detailed description of the
selected route—now not only containing sites, but also
interconnecting links. It is itself divided into two parts—
one with detailed check boxes, where the actual states can
be set depending on the type of the entry and a global section
that computes the overall states automatically, based on the
segments’ states (as indicated in Figure 6). The top part
presents a check list (containing E2E link ID assigned, set up
request sent, infrastructure ready, connection tested, ready
for monitoring, set up completed—see Figure 6). The ﬁrst
thing I-SHARe will ask for is a unique name for the link
(until now, the identiﬁer was just a number). After that, the
SC asks all involved domains to start the actual hardware
installation and conﬁguration (apply connectors, ﬁbres, etc.)
and indicate that by setting infrastructure ready properly
Figure 6.
Install and conﬁgure the network infrastructure [7]
(done, work in progress or delayed, see Figure 6). This step
can be done by various domains simultaneously to save time.
As soon as all involved NRENs have completed that step
successfully, they need to test the new connection. This may
not only include local test, but also tests in cooperation with
some or all of the other partners to guarantee the whole link
is working. Last but not least, the experts have to include
that new link in their local monitoring systems and export
information about it to the G´eant multi-domain monitoring
tool. This allows the experts to keep track of the link’s
current status. After all previous steps have been completed,
the SC marks the last step, set up completed, as done, and
then declares the link operational. That means the whole
process was successful and the customer’s request lead to a
new E2E link, which can be then used by the end users.
IV. SHORT HISTORY OF I-SHARE
As the I-SHARe tool had to be developed within and pro-
vided to an international collaboration of different NRENs,
the whole I-SHARe team has also been assembled from
members of the participating NRENs. In order to separate
responsibilities for key aspects and hereby avoid conﬂict of
interests, the I-SHARe team consisted of a designer and a
development team from the beginning.
The design of the I-SHARe tool has been led by the Italian
and the German NRENs (GARR and DFN respectively) with
a strong participation of the Swiss NREN (SWITCH). Dur-
ing different phases members of RENATER (French NREN)
and DANTE (operator of the G´eant network) have also
participated in the efforts of the designer team. Only NREN
102
INTERNET 2011 : The Third International Conference on Evolving Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-141-0

members with experience in requirements analysis, system
design and other key project management tasks have been
assigned to the designer team. The I-SHARe development
team consists of members of the Polish supercomputing
centre PSNC (working for the Polish NREN PIONIER), who
have proven to be experienced in the development of web-
based applications.
The major difﬁculty of I-SHARe’s design was to gather
and analyse the operations’ requirements. The interviews
with network planning and operational teams have begun
in the mid of 2008 and revealed different and sometimes
even controversial needs of these teams. The de-facto multi-
domain process was deﬁned by the I-SHARe designer team
in the G´eant deliverable DS3.16 [8]. After the NRENs
had approved it, this deliverable has been used to identify
necessary information that have to be exchanged during
the different steps planning, setting up, and operation of
E2E links. In order to evaluate gathered requirements, an
I-SHARe prototype with reduced functionality has been
designed. Implemented by the I-SHARe development team,
this prototype has been evaluated by the NRENs’ operational
teams. The received feedback has been used to improve
the I-SHARe system speciﬁcation, which has been ﬁnished
in summer 2009. The implementation of the ﬁrst fully
functional version of I-SHARe tool has been ﬁnished in
summer 2010.
After the quality assurance performed by the designer
team, I-SHARe v 1.0 was approved for the 6 month long pilot
phase. During this phase, the operations of selected NRENs
evaluate the suitability of the developed tool for their daily
work regarding the planning and the management of E2E
Links. For the pilot phase the I-SHARe installation is hosted
at Leibniz Supercomputing Centre (LRZ), a tight partner of
DFN. The pilot phase started at the end of 2010. NRENs
participating in the pilot phase are (in alphabetical order)
DANTE, DFN, GARR, PIONIER, REDIRIS and SWITCH.
In order to introduce I-SHARe, an online training course
has been delivered to the network operation teams of these
NRENs.
V. FIRST EXPERIENCES AND FURTHER STEPS
During the requirement analysis, system design, develop-
ment, and quality assurance stages only one team (either
designers or developers) was in charge of a particular task
at a time. Interactions with potential users and among
these teams took place with clear responsibilities and were
of rather simple nature. The start of the pilot phase has
introduced the necessity of communication not only among
these two teams, but also with end-users and the hosting
provider. In order to overcome possible misunderstandings
and deadlocks, the designer team is now in charge for
developing a proposal for operational procedures covering
the whole life cycle of I-SHARe. Among other, procedures
are about to be deﬁned for the treatment of user-feedback,
planning new releases, rollout by the hosting provider,
and Incident & Problem management during the I-SHARe
operation. These procedures will deﬁne roles, their rights and
responsibilities as well as the way of interaction in different
situations.
Another development is planned after the I-SHARe oper-
ation is settled and broadly used by NRENs. The main goal
of I-SHARe is to support the information exchange between
manually performed operational processes. In case these
processes become settled and may be even standardized, the
development of another tool for workﬂow management is
planned. This tool should reuse I-SHARe as an information
exchange platform and access it via the “north bound”
interface already implemented in the tool.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank all organizations par-
ticipating in the design, development and operation of I-
SHARe, especially DFN, GARR, PIONIER, SWITCH, LRZ
and PSNC. The authors also wish to thank the members
of the Munich Network Management (MNM) Team for
valuable comments on previous versions of this paper. The
MNM Team directed by Prof. Dr. Dieter Kranzlm¨uller and
Prof. Dr. Heinz-Gerd Hegering is a group of researchers
at Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit¨at M¨unchen (LMU), Tech-
nische Universit¨at M¨unchen (TUM), the University of the
Federal Armed Forces and the Leibniz Supercomputing
Centre (LRZ) of the Bavarian Academy of Science.
REFERENCES
[1] Knobloch, J. and Robertson, L., “LHC computing Grid, Tech-
nical design report,” CERN, http://lcg.web.cern.ch/LCG/tdr/,
Tech. Rep., 2006 (last accessed 2011/04/13).
[2] “LHC
website,”
http://public.web.cern.ch,
(last
ac-
cessed 2011/04/13).
[3] “WLCG website,” http://lcg.web.cern.ch/LCG/public/, (last ac-
cessed 2011/04/13).
[4] “EGEE
website,”
http://www.eu-egee.org/,
(last
ac-
cessed 2011/04/13).
[5] Schauerhammer, K. and Ullmann, K., “Operational Model for
E2E links in the NREN/G´EANT2 and NREN/Cross-Border-
Fibre supplied optical platform,” G´eant, Tech. Rep., 2006.
[6] Cesaroni, G. and Hamm, M. and Simon, F. and Vuagnin, G.
and Yampolskiy, M. and Labedzki, M. and Wolski, M., “I-
SHARe: Prototype speciﬁcation,” G´eant, Tech. Rep., 2008.
[7] “I-SHARe pilot installation,” cs.ishare.geant.net/, (last ac-
cessed 2011/04/13).
[8] De Marinis, E. and Hamm, M. and Hanemann, A. and Vuagnin,
G. and Yampolskiy, M. and Cesaroni, G. and Thomas, S.-M.,
“Deliverable DS3.16: Use Cases and Requirements Analysis
for I-SHARe,” G´eant, Tech. Rep., 2008.
103
INTERNET 2011 : The Third International Conference on Evolving Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-141-0

