Group Recommendation System for User-Centric Support in Virtual Logistic Hub 
Architecture and Major Components 
 
Alexander Smirnov, Nikolay Shilov 
St. Petersburg Institute for Informatics and Automation 
of the Russian Academy of Sciences 
St. Petersburg, Russia 
{smir; nick}@iias.spb.su 
 
 
Abstract—Currently, the society becomes more and more 
knowledge-intensive when a level of collaboration of different 
groups of people and institutes increases dramatically. One of 
the possible ways to assist to a group of users is collaborative 
recommendation systems. These systems have to recommend 
some solutions (related to products, technologies, tools, 
material and business models) based on user group 
requirements, preferences and willingness to compromise and 
to be pro-active. The paper proposes an approach to 
developing a group recommendation system for virtual logistic 
hub based on such technologies as user and group profiling, 
context management, decision mining. The system allows 
accumulation of knowledge about user actions and decisions 
and compromising between group and individual preferences. 
Proposed approach enables formulation of recommendations 
for users of the same group anticipating their possible further 
actions and decisions. 
Keywords-collaborative 
recommendation 
system; 
group 
profiling; context management; decision mining. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Small and Medium businesses (SMEs) and personal 
travel via cars, buses and trains is usually (and reasonably) 
done within the radius of 450-500 kilometers. The distance 
between St. Petersburg, Russia and Helsinki, Finland 
together with nearby cities (Imatra, Lappeenranta, Kotka, 
Vyborg) falls into this radius. Taking into account available 
airports in Helsinki, Lappeenranta, and St. Petersburg as well 
as ferries in Helsinki, Kotka, and St. Petersburg, this region 
constitutes a universal hub for travelling all around the 
world. 
In order for this hub to function, an efficient 
transportation system within the region has to be formed. 
However, today the travelling in the region is complicated 
due to a number of reasons, e.g., unpredictable situation at 
border crossing, unknown traffic condition on the roads, 
isolation of train, bus, and airplane schedules. The proposed 
approach is aimed at support of dynamic configuration of 
virtual multimodal logistics networks based on user 
requirements and preferences. The main idea is to develop 
models and methods that would enable ad-hoc configuration 
of resources for multimodal logistics. They are planned to be 
based on dynamic optimization of the route and 
transportation means as well as to take into account user 
preferences together with unexpected and unexpressed needs 
(on the basis of the profiling technology). 
The 
small 
business 
and 
personal 
travelling 
is 
characterized by the following features: non-regular, not 
expensive, and safe. As a result, the proposed approach 
assumes developing a group recommendation system for ad 
hoc generation of travel plans for the region (the South of 
Finland and St. Petersburg region) taking into account the 
current situation on the roads and border crossings, fuel 
management aspects, travel time and distance. The increase 
of travelling will be a significant step towards development 
of the integrated economic zone in the Region. 
Until recently, the most recommendation systems 
operated in the 2-dimentional space “user-product”. They did 
not take into account the context information, which, in most 
applications can be critical. As a result, there was a need in 
development of group recommendation systems based not 
only on previously made decisions but also on the contexts 
of situations in which the decisions were made. This gave a 
rise 
to development 
of 
context-driven 
collaborative 
algorithms of recommendation generation since their usage 
would significantly increase the quality and speed of 
decision making.  
Besides, the proposed general framework will be a 
channel for collecting user’s feedback, preferences and 
demands for new services that users cannot find in the 
Region or quality of which shall be improved. What is 
important is that not only the problem is identified, but in 
most cases immediate hints/suggestions can be provided 
regarding what shall be done to better serve users’ needs. 
The framework will also significantly benefit to the 
ecological situation in the region via reducing not necessary 
transportation and waiting time for border crossing. In 
accordance with Global GHG Abatement Cost Curve v 2.0 
[1] in the travelling sector the carbon emission can be 
significantly decreased via more efficient route planning, 
driving less, switching from car to rail, bus, cycle, etc. As a 
result, evolving of flexible energy and eco-efficient logistics 
systems can be considered as one of the significant steps 
towards the knowledge-based low carbon economy. 
The paper is structured as follows. The next section 
introduces the virtual logistic hub. It is followed by the 
description 
of 
the 
approach. 
Then, 
the 
group 
recommendation system architecture is proposed. The 
knowledge representation formalism used in the developed 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

approach is presented in sec. V. Sec. VI presents the user 
clustering algorithm, followed by the description of how the 
common preferences/interests are identified (sec. VII). The 
main results are summarized in the Conclusion. 
II. 
VIRTUAL LOGISTIC HUB 
The idea of virtual logistic hub has already been 
mentioned in the literature (though it could have a different 
name, e.g., “e-Hub” [2]), but it is still devoted very little 
attention in the research community. For example, [3] and 
[4] consider the virtual logistic hub from organizational and 
political points of view. Generally, virtual logistic hub 
represents a virtual collaboration space for two types of 
members: (i) transportation providers (who actually moves 
the passengers or cargo), and (ii) service providers (who 
provides additional services, e.g., sea port, border crossing 
authorities, etc.). These providers can potentially collaborate 
in order to increase the efficiency of the logistic network 
(solid lines in Figure 1), however, it is not always the case. 
The major idea of the virtual logistic hub is to arrange 
transportation based on the available schedules and 
capabilities of transportation and service providers, current 
and foreseen availability and occupancy of the transportation 
means and services (“dash-dot” lines in Figure 1). In this 
case, even though the schedules and actions of different 
members are not coordinated, the virtual logistic hub will be 
able to find the most feasible transportation schedule 
depending on the current situation and its likely future 
development. For the end-user (travelers or cargo owners), 
all this is hidden “under the hood”, and only the final 
transportation schedule is seen (solid lines in Figure 1). 
III. 
APPROACH 
Figure 2 represents the generic scheme of the approach. 
The main idea of the approach is to represent the logistics 
system members by sets of services provided by them. This 
makes it possible to replace the configuration of the logistics 
system with that of distributed services. For the purpose of 
semantic interoperability, the services are represented by 
Web-services using the common notation described by a 
common ontology. The agreement between the resources and 
the ontology is expressed through alignment of the 
descriptions of the services modeling the resource 
functionalities and the ontology. As a result of the alignment 
operation the services get provided with semantics. The 
operation of the alignment is supported by a tool that 
identifies semantically similar words in the Web-service 
descriptions and the ontology. In the proposed approach the 
formalism of Object-Oriented Constraint Networks (OOCN) 
is used (its detailed description can be found in [20]) for 
knowledge representation in the ontology (see sec. V). 
Depending on the problem considered, the relevant part 
of the ontology is selected forming an abstract context. The 
abstract context is an ontology-based model embedding the 
specification of problems to be solved. It is created by core 
services incorporated in the environment. When the abstract 
context is filled with values from the sources, an operational 
context (formalized description of the current situation) is 
built. The operational context is an instantiated abstract 
context and the real-time picture of the current situation. 
Producing the operational context is one of the purposes of 
resource configuration. Since the resources are represented 
by sets of services, the configuration of the resources is 
replaced with that between the appropriate services. Besides 
the operational context producing,  the services are purposed 
 
Figure 1. Generic scheme of the virtual logistic hub 
 
Figure 2. Generic scheme of the approach 
Logistics Network 
Model 
Service 
Web-service 
interface 
Ontology 
Abstract context 
Operational context 
Problem solving 
Organization of 
distributed services 
Relationship 
Correspondence 
Reference 
Information flow 
Service network 
Logistics network 
configuration 
Transportation 
providers 
Service 
providers 
Travelers / cargo 
Relationship 
Reference 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

 
Figure 3. Group recommendation system architecture 
to solve problems specified in the abstract context and to get 
the resources to take part in logistics plan. Due to the usage 
of the OOCN formalism the operational context represents 
the constraint satisfaction problem that is used during 
organisation of services for a particular task. 
It can be guessed that for each particular situation there 
can be a large amount of feasible solutions for the users to 
choose from (e.g., the fastest transportation, the least amount 
of transfers, sightseeing routes, etc.). As a result, the paper 
proposes to build such a system as a group recommendation 
system that learns user preferences and recommends 
solutions, which better meet those preferences. 
IV. 
GROUP RECOMMENDATION SYSTEM ARCHITECURE 
Generation of feasible transportation plans taking 
account explicit and tacit preferences requires strong IT-
based support of decision making so that the preferences 
from multiple users could be taken into account satisfying 
both 
the 
individual 
and 
the 
group 
[5]. 
Group 
recommendation systems are aimed to solve this problem.   
Recommendation / 
recommending / 
recommender 
systems have been widely used in the Internet for suggesting 
products, activities, etc. for a single user considering his/her 
interests and tastes [6], in various business applications (e.g., 
[7], [8]) as well as in product development (e.g., [9], [10]). 
Group recommendation is complicated by the necessity to 
take into account not only personal interests but to 
compromise between the group interests and interests of the 
individuals of this group.  
There are two major types of recommending systems: 
(i) content-based (recommendations are based on previous 
user 
choices), 
and 
(ii) collaborative 
filtering 
(recommendations are based on previous choices of users 
with similar interests). The second type is preferable for the 
domains with larger amounts of users and smaller activity 
histories of each user, which is the case for the logistics hub. 
In literature (e.g., [11], [12]) the architecture of the 
collaborative filtering recommending system is proposed 
based on three components: (i) profile feature extraction 
from individual profiles, (ii) classification engine for user 
clustering based on their preferences (e.g., [13]), and 
(iii) final recommendation based on the generated groups. 
The core of such system is a clustering algorithms capable to 
continuously improve group structure based on incoming 
information enables for self-organization of groups [14].  
The proposed group recommendation system architecture 
for logistics hub is presented in Figure 3. It is centralized 
around the user clustering algorithm [15] originating from 
the decision mining area [16]-[18]. The proposed clustering 
algorithm is based on the information from user profiles. The 
user profiles contain information about users including their 
preferences, interests and activity history (a detailed 
description of the profile can be found in [19]). Besides, in 
order for the clustering algorithm to be more precise, this 
information is supplied in the context of the current situation 
(including current user task, time pressure and other 
parameters). The semantic interoperability between the 
profile and the context is supported by the common 
ontology.  
The user profiles are considered to be dynamic and, 
hence, the updated information is supplied to the algorithm 
from time to time. As a result, the algorithm can run as 
updated information is received and update user groups. 
Hence, it can be said that the groups self-organize in 
accordance with the changes in the user profiles and context 
information. 
When groups are generated the common preferences / 
interests (e.g., the fastest transportation, the least amount of 
transfers, sightseeing routes, etc.) of the groups are identified 
based on the results of the clustering algorithm. These 
preferences are then generalized and analyzed in order to 
produce group recommendations. 
Usage of an appropriate knowledge representation 
formalism is one of the keys to development of an efficient 
clustering algorithm. 
V. 
KNOWLEDGE REPRESENTATION FORMALISM 
Since the user profiles and the current situation context 
are analyzed jointly, it is reasonable to use the same 
formalism and terminology for their representation. In the 
proposed approach the formalism of Object-Oriented 
Constraint Networks (OOCN) is used (its detailed 
Common ontology 
Self-organization 
 
Current situation 
described by 
context model 
 
 
Clustering 
algorithm 
User groups 
based on 
common 
preferences / 
interests 
 
Identification of 
common 
preferences / 
interests 
Group 
recommendation 
 
User profiles 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

description can be found in [20]) for knowledge 
representation in the ontology. It provides primitives for 
modelling classes, class hierarchies and other class 
structures, class attributes, attribute inheritance, attribute 
ranges, and functional dependencies.  
According to this formalism the ontology A is 
represented by sets of classes, class attributes, attribute 
domains, and constraints:  
A = <O, Q, D, C>, where 
O – a set of object classes (“classes”) 
Q – a set of class attributes (“attributes”); 
D – a set of attribute domains (“domains”);  
C – a set of constraints used to model relationships. 
The set of constraints includes six types of constraints for 
modelling different relationships:  
C1 – (class, attribute, domain) relation used to model 
triple of classes, attributes pertinent to them, and restrictions 
on the attribute value ranges; 
C2 – taxonomical (“is-a”) and hierarchical (“part-of”) 
relations used to model class taxonomy and class hierarchy 
respectively;  
C3 – classes compatibility used to model condition if two 
or more instances can be parts of the same class;  
C4 – associative relationships used to model any relations 
and axioms of external ontologies neglected by the internal 
formalism;  
C5 – class cardinality restriction used to define how many 
subclasses the class can have;  
C6 – functional relations used to model functions and 
equations.  
Such representation of knowledge can be interpreted as a 
constraint satisfaction task and used by a constraint 
satisfaction / propagation 
engines 
for 
reasoning 
and 
optimization.  
Below, some example constraints are given: 
• 
an attribute costs (q1) belongs to a class ride (o1): 
cI
1 = (o1, q1); 
• 
the attribute costs (q1) belonging to the class ride (o1) 
is a real number: cII
1 = (o1, q1, R); 
• 
a class cargo (o2) is compatible with a class truck 
(o3): cIII
1 = ({o2, o3}, True); 
• 
an instance of the class ride (o1) can be a part of an 
instance of a class travel (o4): cIV
1 = <o1, o4, 1>; 
• 
the truck (o3) is a resource (o5): cIV
1 = <o3, o5, 0>; 
• 
an instance of the class cargo (o2) can be connected 
to an instance of the class truck (o3): cV
1 = (o2, o3); 
• 
the value of the attribute cost (q1) of an instance of 
the class travel (o4) depends on the values of the 
attribute cost (q1) of instances of the class ride (o1) 
connected to that instance of the class travel and on 
the 
number 
of 
such 
instances: 
cVI
1 = f ({o1}, {(o4, q1), (o1, q1)}). 
VI. 
USER CLUSTERING ALGORITHM  
Due to the specific of the tasks in the considered domain 
the implemented algorithm (adapted from [15]) of user 
clustering is based on analysing user preferences and 
solutions selected by users and has the following steps:  
1. Preliminary linguistic analysis of preferences 
(tokenisation, spelling and stemming). 
2. Extract words/phrases from the preferences and 
solutions (text processing). 
3. Find ontology elements occurring in the extracted 
words and phrases. 
4. Construct weighted graph consisting of ontology 
classes and attributes, and users. Weights of arcs are 
calculated on the basis of (i) similarity metrics (i.e. 
they are different for different user solutions) and 
(ii) taxonomic relations in the ontology.  
5. Construct weighted graph consisting of users (when 
classes and attributes are removed, arcs’ weights are 
recalculated).  
6. Cluster users graph. 
Finding ontology elements occurring in the extracted 
words and phrases is done in two ways: (i) via syntactic 
similarity, and (ii) via semantic similarity.  
The syntactic similarity is calculated via the algorithm of 
fuzzy string comparison similar to the well-known Jaccard 
index [21]. It calculates occurrence of substrings of one 
string in the other string. For example, string “motor” has 5 
different substrings (m, o, t, r, mo) contained in the string 
“mortar”. The total number of different substrings in “motor” 
is 13 (m, o, t, r; mo, ot, to, or; mot, oto, tor; moto, otor). The 
resulting similarity of the string “motor” to the string 
“mortar” is 5/13 or 38%.  
The semantic similarity (or distance) is based on the 
machine-readable dictionary Wiktionary [22]. The ontology 
is represented as a semantic network where names of classes 
and properties constitute nodes of the network. The nodes 
corresponding to the ontology elements are linked to nodes 
representing their synonyms and associated words as this is 
given in the machine-readable dictionary. The links between 
the nodes are labelled by the weights of relations specified 
between the concepts represented by these nodes in the 
machine-readable dictionary. Weight w of a relation 
specified between two concepts ti and tj is assigned as 0,5 if ti 
and tj are synonyms; 0,3 if ti and tj are associated words; and 
∝ if ti and tj are the same words. The nodes representing 
extracted words and phrases are checked for their similarity 
to nodes representing ontology elements. As a measure of 
similarity semantic distance Dist is used: 
Dist(tj, tj) = 1 / ( ∑∏
S
k
k
w ),  
where S is a set of paths from ti to tj, formed by any number 
of links that connect ti and tj passing through any number of 
nodes (k). 
For example, let us suppose that the set of words came of 
parsing the profile comprises two words: trip and lorry. An 
illustrative piece of the semantic network built based on this 
table and is represented in Figure 4. The Figure illustrates 
three names for classes and attributes in the ontology 
corresponding to the extracted words: Trip, Ship, and Truck. 
The semantic distances are as follows:  
Dist(trip, trip) = 1 / ∝ = 0 
Dist(lorry, ship) = 1 / (0.5*0.3 + 0.3*0.5) = 3,33 
Dist(lorry, truck) = 1 / (0.5*0.3 + 0.3*0.3*0.3 + 0,5) = 1.48 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

 
Figure 4. A piece of semantic network relevant to WSDL-attribute 
"Accident point". 
 
Figure 5. Weighted user – ontology graph and user clustering procedure 
It can be seen that for the distance between the concepts 
lorry and truck is much shorter than between the concepts 
lorry and ship. So, the class truck is aligned to the concept 
lorry. 
For the clustering procedure, a weighted user – ontology 
graph is considered. It contains three types of nodes: C – 
classes from the ontology, A – their attributes, and U – users.  
The graph consists of two types of arcs. The first type of 
arcs I (СА, СС) is defined by the taxonomy of classes and 
attributes in the ontology. The second type of arcs II (CU, 
AU) is defined by relations between user solutions and 
classes/attributes (Figure 5a). 
Weights of arc between nodes corresponding to classes 
and users CUweight and corresponding to attributes and users 
AUweight are defined via the similarity CUsim and AUsim of the 
class or attribute (calculated via the fuzzy string comparison 
algorithm described above). The similarity is a property of 
relations between class – user/solution or attribute – 
user/solution. Weights of arcs are defined as follows: 
CUweignt = 1 - CUsim; AUweight = 1 – AUsim. 
Arcs CA and CC tying together classes and attributes via 
taxonomic relations (defined by ontology relations class-
class, class-attribute) have CAweight, CCweight ∈ (ε, 1) defined 
empirically. CCweight means arcs’ weight of linked classes in 
the ontology. CAweight – arcs’ weight of linked attributes and 
classes. 
Since users are represented by their solutions, based on this 
graph the solutions and weight consequently users are 
clustered on the basis of the lowest weights of connecting 
arcs. This is performed in the following sequence. First, the 
shortest routes between users are calculated (Figure 5b). E.g., 
weight of the arc U1U2 will be calculated as follows: U1U2 
weight = A1U1 weight + C1A1 weight + C1U2 weight; weight of the arc 
U2U3 can be calculated in 3 ways, it is considered in Figure 
2b that U2U3 weight = C1U2 weight + C1C3 weight + C3U3 weight is the 
shortest one; etc. Based on the calculated weights a new 
graph consisting of the users only is built (cf. Figure 2c). The 
value of the parameter Dmax is set empirically. Assuming that 
U1U2 weight > Dmax, U1U3 weight > Dmax, and U2U3 weight <Dmax, 
two clusters can be identified: the first cluster includes users 
U2 and U3, and the second one includes customer U1 (dashed 
circles in Figure 5c).  
The algorithm can run as updated information is received 
and update user groups thus providing for self-organizations 
of user groups in accordance with the changes in the user 
profiles and context information.  
The developed ontology-based clustering algorithm has 
the following advantages compared to other clustering 
techniques: (i) domain-specific knowledge filter using the 
ontology; 
(ii) natural 
language 
processing; 
(iii) term 
extraction, such as ontology classes and attributes, units of 
measures (e.g., “km” and “hrs”) can be extracted from the 
user preferences. 
VII. IDENTIFICATION OF COMMON 
PREFERENCES/INTERESTS AND GROUP RECOMMENDATIONS  
User preferences consist of attributes (properties) and/or 
their values, classes (problem types), relationships (problem 
structure) and/or optimization criteria that are usually 
preferred or avoided by the user. The preference revealing 
can be interpreted as identification of patterns of the solution 
selection (decision) by a user from a generated set of 
solutions. The ability to automatically identify patterns of the 
solution selection allows to sort the set of solutions, so that 
the most relevant (to user needs) solutions would be in the 
top of the list of solutions presented to the user.  
Currently, three major tasks of identification of user 
preferences can be selected: 
1. Identification of user preferences based on solutions 
generated for the same context. In this case, the 
problem structure is always the same, however its 
parameters may differ.  
2. Identification of user preferences based on solutions 
generated for different contexts. This task will be 
more complex then the first one since structures of 
the problem will be different.  
3. Identification of user preferences in terms of 
optimization parameters. This task will try to 
identify if a user tends to select solutions with 
Ontology 
Extracted words 
trip 
truck 
trip 
lorry 
rig 
0,3 
0,5 
∞ 
0,5 
transport 
tractor-trailer 
0,3 
0,3 
0,3 
0,3 
0,5 
ship 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

minimal or maximal values of certain parameters 
(e.g., time minimization) or their aggregation.  
Based on the clusters built, the user preferences can be 
identified as common preferences of the users grouped into 
the clusters.   
VIII. CONCLUSION  
The paper presents an approach to development of group 
recommendation system for virtual logistic hub. Virtual 
logistic hub performs ad-hoc transportation scheduling based 
on the available schedules, current and foreseen availability 
and occupancy of the transportation means and services even 
though they do not cooperate with each other. The approach 
is based on application of such technologies as user and 
group profiling, context management, decision mining. It 
enables for self-organization of user groups in accordance 
with changing user profiles and the current situation context.  
Presented research is at an early development stage. The 
future work is aimed at implementation of the proposed 
system in a limited domain for validation of its applicability 
and efficiency. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Some parts of the research were carried out under 
projects funded by grants # 11-07-00045-a, # 12-07-00298-a, 
# 12-07-00302-a of the Russian Foundation for Basic 
Research, project 2.2 of the Nano- & Information 
Technologies Branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences, 
and project of the research program “Information, control, 
and intelligent technologies & systems” of the Russian 
Academy of Sciences. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Global GHG Abatement Cost Curve v 2.0, 2009, 
https://solutions.mckinsey.com/ClimateDesk/default.aspx. 
Retrieved: June, 2011. 
[2] E. Chang, T. Dillon, W. Gardner, A. Talevski, R. Rajugan and 
T. Kapnoullas, “A Virtual Logistics Network and an E-hub as 
a Competitive Approach for Small to Medium Size 
Companies,” Web and Communication Technologies and 
Internet-Related Social Issues – HIS 2003, Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, vol. 2713, 2003, pp. 167-168. 
[3] Working Group on Logistics, “Developing Singapore into a 
Global 
Integrated 
Logistic 
Hub,” 
Report, 
2002. 
http://app.mti.gov.sg/data/pages/507/doc/ERC_SVS_LOG_M
ainReport.pdf. Retrieved: February, 2012. 
[4] E. Sweeney, “Supply Chain Management in Ireland:the 
Future,” Logistics Solutions, the Journal of the National 
Institute for Transport and Logistics, Vol. 5, No. 3, pp. 14-16, 
June 2002. 
[5] K. McCarthy, M. Salamo, L. Coyole, L. McGinty, B. Smyth, 
P. Nixon, “Group Recommender Systems: A Critiquing 
Based Approach,” IUI '06: Proceedings of the 11th 
international conference on Intelligent user interfaces, 2006, 
pp. 267-269.  
[6] I. Garcia, L. Sebastia, E. Onaindia, C. Guzman, “Group 
Recommender System for Tourist Activities,” EC-Web 2009: 
Proceedings of E-Commerce and Web Technologies, The 
10th International Conference (2009), Springer, LNCS 5692, 
2009, pp. 26-37.  
[7] T. Hornung, A. Koschmider, A. Oberweis, A. “A 
Recommender System for Business Process Models,” In 
WITS’09: Proceedings of the 17th Annual Workshop on 
Information Technologies & Systems, 2009. Electronic 
resource. 
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1328244. 
Retrieved: 
February, 2012. 
[8] L. Zhena, G. Q. Huangb, Z. Jiang, “Recommender system 
based on workflow,” Decision Support Systems, Elsevier, vol. 
48, no. 1, 2009, pp. 237-245.  
[9] S. K. Moon, T. W. Simpson, S. R. T. Kumara, “An agent-
based recommender system for developing customized 
families of products,” Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, 
Springer, vol. 20, no. 6, 2009, pp. 649-659.  
[10] Y.-J. 
Chen, 
Y.-M. 
Chen, 
M.-S. 
Wu, 
“'An 
expert 
recommendation system for product empirical knowledge 
consultation,” ICCSIT2010: The 3rd IEEE International 
Conference 
on 
Computer 
Science 
and 
Information 
Technology, IEEE, 2010, pp. 23-27.  
[11] E.-A. Baatarjav, S. Phithakkitnukoon, R. Dantu, R. “Group 
Recommendation System for Facebook,” OTM 2008: 
Proceedings of On the Move to Meaningful Internet Systems 
Workshop (2008), Springer, LNCS 5333, 2008, pp. 211-219.  
[12] S. E. Middleton, D. De Roure, N. R. Shadbolt, “Ontology-
Based Recommender Systems,” Handbook on Ontologies 
(Ed. By S. Staab, R. Studer), Springer, 2003, pp. 477-498. 
[13] H. C. Romesburg, “Cluster Analysis for Researchers,” Lulu 
Press, California, 2004, 344 p. 
[14] G. W. Flake, S. Lawrence, C. L. Giles, F. Coetzee, “Self-
Organization and identification of Web Communities,” IEEE 
Computer, vol. 35, no. 3, 2002, pp. 66-71. 
[15] A. Smirnov, M. Pashkin, N. Chilov, “Personalized Customer 
Service Management for Networked Enterprises,” ICE 2005: 
Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on 
Concurrent Enterprising, 2005, pp. 295-302.  
[16] A. Smirnov, M. Pashkin, T. Levashova, A. Kashevnik, N. 
Shilov, “Context-Driven Decision Mining,” Encyclopedia of 
Data Warehousing and Mining. Hershey (Ed. by J. Wang), 
New York, Information Science Preference, Second Edition. 
vol. 1., 2008, pp. 320 – 327.  
[17] A. Rozinat, W. M. P. van der Aalst, “Decision Mining in 
Business Processes,” BPM Center Report no. BPM-06-10, 
2006.  
[18] P. Petrusel, D. Mican, “Mining Decision Activity Logs,” 
BIS2010: Proceedings of Business Information Systems 
Workshops, Springer, LNBIP 57, 2010, pp. 67–79.  
[19] A. Smirnov, T. Levashova, A. Kashevnik, N. Shilov, “Profile-
based self-organization for PLM: approach and technological 
framework,” PLM 2009: Proceedings of the 6th International 
Conferecne on Product Lifecycle Management, Electronic 
proceedings, 2009.  
[20] A. Smirnov, T. Levashova, N. Shilov, “Semantic-oriented 
support of interoperability between production information 
systems,” International Journal of Product Development, 
Inderscience Enterprises Ltd., vol. 4, no. 3/4, 2007, pp. 225-
240.  
[21] P.-N. Tan, M. Steinbach, V. Kumar, “Introduction to Data 
Mining,” Addison Wesley, 2005, 769p.  
[22] Wiktionary, 2012. http://www.wiktionary.org. Retrieved: 
February, 2012. 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

