Measuring the Interoperability Degree of Interconnected Healthcare Information 
Systems Using the LISI Model 
 
Mihaela Vida*, Lăcrămioara Stoicu-Tivadar*, Elena Bernad**, 
*Faculty of Automatics and Computers, University “Politehnica” of Timişoara,  
Timişoara, Romania 
** Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Medicine and Pharmacy “Victor Babes” 
Timisoara, Romania 
 
Email: mihaela.vida@aut.upt.ro , lacramioara.stoicu-tivadar@aut.upt.ro, ebernad@yahoo.com
 
 
 
Abstract—Due to the diversity of information systems in 
healthcare and the need of accessing data in a ubiquitous and 
pervasive manner, the interoperability issue has grown in 
importance. This work presents how the Levels of Information 
System Interoperability model can be applied to study the 
interoperability degree in order to interconnect healthcare 
information systems. This work presents an algorithm adapted 
for healthcare information system, which can determine the 
message exchange rate between healthcare information 
systems. The analysis is done looking at a hospital department 
(obstetrics-gynecology), general practitioner offices, radiology 
departments and laboratories that work together and have 
different information systems. This algorithm computes the 
interoperability degree from the technical interoperability 
point of view. A tool which calculates automatically the 
technical interoperability of a healthcare information system, 
based on the proposed algorithm, is under development. The 
benefits resulting from the calculus of the interoperability 
degree are reflected in the assessment of the status of 
informatization and degree of intercommunication in a certain 
healthcare environment. Also, it is helpful for software 
developers to know what is expected from a good application 
for the domain. 
Keyword-LISI; HL7 CDA; CCD; interoperability; healthcare 
information system. 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
 
Increased life expectancy and the consequent increase in 
the prevalence of chronic illnesses pose serious challenges 
to the sustainability of the national health systems in 
Europe.  
Seamless care is the desirable continuity of care delivered 
to a patient in the healthcare system across the spectrum of 
caregivers and their environments. Healthcare services have 
to be continuous and carried out without interruption such 
that when one caregiver ceases to be responsible for the 
patient’s care, another one takes on the responsibility for the 
patient’s care. Such a paradigm poses serious problems 
regarding 
the 
interoperability 
between 
healthcare 
information systems. 
Interoperability is the ability of two or more systems or 
components to exchange information and use the 
information that has been exchanged [1].  
Interoperability might be provided at different levels. 
These interoperability levels can start from simple data 
exchange and meaningful data exchange with agreed 
vocabulary to functional interoperability with agreed 
communication application behavior, or finally, a service-
oriented interoperability [2]. 
Communication between different systems and their 
components in a complex and highly dynamic environment 
must fulfill some requirements: openness, scalability, 
flexibility, portability, distribution, standard conformance, 
service-oriented semantic interoperability and appropriate 
security and privacy services. This communication is based 
on a standard (e.g., HL7 version 3, HL7 Clinical Document 
Architecture). [3]  
The 
Electronic Healthcare 
Record (EHR) is a 
longitudinal electronic record of patient health information 
generated by one or more encounters in any care delivery 
setting, including information about: patient demographics, 
progress notes, problems, medications, vital signs, medical 
history, immunizations, laboratory data and radiology 
reports [4]. 
The paper presents a particular environment studying the 
communication level between healthcare information 
systems for hospitals, laboratory, radiology and general 
practitioner offices. The major problem is that the healthcare 
information systems do not communicate directly one with 
the other making it impossible to create an electronic 
medical record seamless and following a timeline. The work 
gives an image of the current situation for which the 
analysis is made. 
If the degree of interoperability between healthcare 
information systems can be evaluated, it will have benefits 
for assessing the status of informatization and degree of 
intercommunication in a certain healthcare environment and 
also for software developers to know what is expected from 
a good application for the domain. 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

Also, it is important to improve the interoperability of 
healthcare information systems and add more information to 
Electronic Health Record (EHR).  
In section two, is presented the standards used in 
healthcare information systems communication. Section 
three presents the interoperability study where is described 
the LISI model and it is measured the degree of technical 
interoperability and, Section four concludes the paper 
solutions. 
II. STANDARDS USED IN HEALTHCARE INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS COMMUNICATION 
 
One 
of 
the 
mandatory 
criteria 
to 
ensure 
the 
interoperability between the healthcare information systems 
is to use a standardized communication. In the next 
paragraphs, a system architecture and the standards used for 
communication between components is presented. 
A. System architecture using standards 
 
Figure 1 presents the system architecture using 
standardized communication. The system consists of three 
healthcare information systems for the  obstetrics-
gynecology, for radiology and for analysis laboratory 
communicating using the HL7 CDA and a healthcare 
information system for the general practitioner office which 
communicates with the hospital departments using the CCD 
(Continuity of Care Document) standard [5], [6]. 
 
Figure 1. System architecture 
 
The developed two Components, one for the CDA/CCD 
standard and the second for the CCD standard, give the 
possibility to extract data needed from the medical unit 
database (from obstetrics-gynecology, radiology, laboratory 
or general practitioner database). The two Components are 
developed in Visual Studio .NET 2008, using C# language. 
For the moment, the Components can extract data from a 
SQL Server database, but in the future will be generalized in 
order to extract data from different databases types. A 
connector was developed that extracts from XML in 
CDA/CCD format the data and inserts it into the proper 
fields and tables in database. 
 
 
B. Using HL7 CDA (Clinical Document Architecture) 
 
The HL7 CDA is a document markup standard that 
specifies the structure and semantics of clinical documents. 
The developed HL 7 CDA Component extracts the data 
from a local database and presents it as an HL7 CDA 
standard message. The CDA derives its content directly 
from the HL7 Reference Information Model (RIM) and 
therefore is specially design to integrate current HL7 
technologies. The common architecture can be adapted for 
progress notes, radiology reports, discharge summaries, 
transfer notes, medications, laboratory results and patient 
summaries. The CDA is an XML document that consists of 
a header and body [7].  
The HL7 CDA/CCD standard uses Logical Observation 
Identifiers Names and Codes (LOINC). This is a universal 
code system for identifying laboratory and clinical 
observations [8], adapted in this case for the Romanian 
healthcare system. 
An XML in CDA format, as an example of a message 
from a lab, is presented in Figure 2.  
 
 
Figure 2. CDA laboratory result 
 
The CDA contains LOINC codes, which are used for 
representation of the laboratory results (e.g., LOINC code 
19180-9 is used for beta-HCG analysis) and also the 
analysis value (in Figure 2 the beta-HCG value is presented 
- 15000 mUI/mL). All the LOINC codes used in this CDA 
message are adapted for Romanian healthcare systems. 
C. Using CCD (Continuity of Care Document) 
 
The Continuity of Care Document (CCD) is an 
electronic document exchange standard for sharing patient 
summary information among providers and within personal 
healthcare records. It summarizes the most commonly 
needed pertinent information about current and past health 
status in a form that can be shared by all computer 
applications, it respects a set of constrains on CDA that 
define how to use the HL7 CDA to communicate clinical 
summaries and it is built using HL7 CDA elements [9]. 
CCD is a combination between ASTM CCR (Continuity 
of Care Record) and HL7 CDA.  
The definition given for CCD by ASTM is: a core data 
set of the most relevant administrative, demographic and 
clinical information facts about a patient’s health care, 
covering one or more health care encounters [10]. 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

CCD templates include: header, purpose, problems, 
procedures, family history, social history, payers, advance 
directives, alerts, medications, immunizations, medical 
equipment, vital signs, functional states, results, encounters 
and plan of care [9]. 
In the current healthcare information system, the CCD 
standard for communication is used to support the 
communication between the hospital departments and the 
general practitioner’s office. The general practitioner sends 
a request in XML format containing the ID (personal 
numeric code – CNP, which in Romania is the unique ID for 
each person) to the hospital department application and the 
CDA/CCD Component extracts the data from the hospital 
department database and sends the information in CCD 
format to the general practitioner office. 
In Figure 3, an XML sequence in CCD format is 
presented containing lab results sent from one of the 
hospital departments to the general practitioner’s office and 
it is adapted for the Romanian health system. 
 
 
Figure 3. CCD example 
 
The XML in CCD format contains a laboratory result: 
erythrocytes, which are codified with LOINC code 11273-0, 
adapted for Romanian health system and the value of this 
test result. 
III. INTEROPERABILITY STUDY 
 
A. LISI model 
 
LISI (Levels of Information System Interoperability) is a 
complete, descriptive model of classification with levels of 
interoperability based on individual, unique project 
specifications [11]. 
LISI is a reference model for assessing information 
systems interoperability. It is used for defining, measuring, 
assessing, and certifying the degree of interoperability 
required or achieved between organizations or systems [11]. 
 
B. LISI Interoperability Maturity Model 
 
LISI Interoperability Maturity Model has 5 levels [11]. 
In this paper and previous work [12] these levels are 
adapted for healthcare informatics systems.   
The LISI levers are: 
- Level 0 named Isolated (Environment: Manual) 
- Level 1 named Connected (Environment: Peer-to-Peer) 
- Level 2 named Functional (Environment: Distributed) 
- Level 3 named Domain (Environment: Integrated) 
- Level 4 named Enterprise (Environment: Universal) 
To fit into a LISI level, we studied two types of 
interoperability: operational and technical. Two scores 
obtained from analyzing the two interoperability types will 
result representing the interoperability degree of the studied 
healthcare information system. A scale corresponding for 
each LISI level will be considered (e.g., if the scale is 0 the 
level is Level 0 - Isolated). 
 
C. LISI Scope of Analysis 
 
In Figure 4, the LISI scope of analysis for two HIS 
systems are presented. The operational interoperability has a 
semantic understanding. For each XML received in CDA or 
CCD format a tool will analyze the codes (LOINC or ICD-
10-AM) and if all the analyses corresponds to the evaluation 
criteria then the healthcare information system will receive a 
score (a scale to 1 – 100). A similar analysis is presented in 
[13], where SNOMED codes are analyzed. Scoring the 
technical interoperability it will be possible to appreciate on 
what LISI level the healthcare information system is 
situated. 
 
 
Figure 4. LISI Scope of analysis 
 
The technical interoperability is the condition achieved 
among electronic system communications when information 
or services can be exchanged directly and satisfactory 
between them and their users, includes aspects such as 
application interfaces, open standards and data integration. 
If two or more healthcare information systems are capable 
of communicating and exchanging data, they are technical 
interoperable. In general, XML or SQL standards provide 
syntactic interoperability. In this work, an algorithm that 
determines the technical interoperability is presented. 
D. Measuring the degree of technical interoperability 
 
In Figure 5, the studied healthcare system architecture is 
presented comprising the obstetrics-gynecology department, 
2 radiology (1 internal and 1 external) departments, 4 
analysis laboratories (1 internal and 3 external), and 1 
general practitioner office. The technical interoperability 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

degree for the obstetrics-gynecology healthcare information 
system is studied below. This healthcare information system 
communicates using standards, with the radiology and 
analysis laboratory using HL7 CDA, and with the general 
practitioner using CCD. 
A scale is proposed to evaluate systems interoperability 
potential for technical interoperability point of view: 
 
0 – 35 points the systems are not interoperable that 
means that the system is on LISI level 0 or level 1,  
 
36 – 65 points the systems are interoperable in some 
degree that means that the system is on LISI level 2 
or 3, 
 
66 – 100 points the systems are interoperable that 
means that the system is on LISI level 4.  
 
To study the interoperability degree an algorithm [11] is 
applied adapted for healthcare information systems. 
 
Figure 5. System architecture 
 
 
For each step of the testing process, points have been 
associated in order to reflect the interoperability score for 
the systems. For each steps, a score is allocated; it 
represents how well the system meets the requirements (e.g., 
if the system has the possibility to communicate using 
standards, and for how many system are interconnected).In 
the next lines, the testing steps are presented: 
Step 1 - Analyzing if the functionalities are the same 
In order to establish that the system functionalities are 
the same, the data workflow and management between 
obstetrics-gynecology, radiology, laboratory and general 
practitioner was monitored during a week at County 
Emergency Hospital Timisoara, Romania – Bega Clinic, 
obstetrics-gynecology department. The referrals were 
studied and the data sets were identified and based on these, 
the conclusion was that the system functionalities are the 
same. The scored obtained at this step is 7/10. 
Step 2. – Study the degree in which if the communication is 
based on the same standards.  
We assumed that the messages are transmitted with the 
help of HL7 CDA standard in laboratory analysis, radiology 
cases  and CCD for the general practitioner. For each case 
two Components were developed, one which extracts data 
for creating the CDA and the second to extract data for 
CCD. The score obtained in this step is 9/10. 
Step 3. Analyze if the message data elements are common. 
The data elements are common because the ob-gyn 
department sends referrals to the analysis laboratory, 
radiology, and the general practitioner office and receives 
back the same type of documents. All the communication 
between healthcare information systems presented here is 
based on CDA and CCD standards. The scores obtained at 
this step is 7/10. 
Step 4. Calculate the connectivity index with the formula: 
)1
*(


n
n
k
ci
 
where: ci = connectivity index for HIS;  
             k = number of connection (path between nodes), 
             n = number of nodes (participating units). 
k = 7; n = 8; ci = 0.16 
The scored obtained at this step is 2/10. 
Step 5. Monitoring the protocols and data flow in 
departments and analyzing the information exchange.  
The ob-gyn department sends an XML file in CDA format 
to the analysis laboratory, to radiology and in CCD format 
to the general practitioner office, and so the data flow 
between the medical units is standardized. The scored 
obtained at this step is 3/10. 
Step 6. Calculate the capacity of the ob-gyn department 
which is the rate at which data may be passed over time.   
)
)*(
(
max
p
f
oh
eff
t
t
Q
Q
Q



 
where,
Qeff
 = effective system capacity (data rate); 
Qmax
= maximum data rate; 
Qoh
 = system 
overhead data rate; 
ft
 = time slot duration (unit transmission);  
pt
= unit propagation time 
Another measure is the calculus of the department’s 
overload which occurs when more data must be exchanged 
than the system is able to transmit. The overload is placed in 
a queue and it is transmitted when capacity is available.  



rn
y
y
q
t
OL
M
n
M
1
)
(
*
 
where, 
MOL
= system message overload; 
tn    = number of transmitting nodes; 
M q
= messages 
in queue to be transmitted by node. 
The system underuse was calculated, occurring when the 
system data rate/message load is less than full capacity but 
messages are waiting in queues to be transmitted.  
OL
uu
M
Q

, for  
)
(
Q
Q
M
eff
OL


  
Q
Q
Q
eff
uu


 , for 
MOL
 >  
)
(
Qeff  Q
 
where, 
Quu
= system underutilization (data rate);  
Q = measured/observed data rate 
Another parameter calculated was the under capacity of 
the system, which occurs when messages remain in queues 
and the system data rate is at the maximum.  
eff
OL
uc
Q
M
Q
Q



)
(
 
where, 
Quc
 = system under capacity (data rate) 
For the laboratory a maximum number of 300 messages 
a week were estimated, supported by the system, for the 
radiology internal department 100 messages a week, for the 
external department of radiology 80 messages a week, 50 
messages for general practitioner. 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

In order to compute the interoperability score, 2 days 
were considered for the time of message transmission (Tf) 
and 4 days for the response time (Tp), because in Romanian 
health system the patient must wait minim 4 days to receive 
the laboratory results. 
 
- Ob-gyn->Laboratory  = 40 messages / day =>200 messages  / week 
- Ob-gyn->Radiology intern department  = 15 msg / day => 75 msg / 
week 
- Ob-gyn->Radiology extern  = 10 msg / day => 50 msg / week 
- Ob-gyn-> General practitioner = 10 msg/day => 50 msg/week 
- 
Tf  = 2 days 
- 
Tp = 4 days 
The results after applying the formulas are: 
 Qeff = 1804; MOL = 96; Quu = 96; Quc = - 1594 
The scored obtained at this step is 17/40. 
Step 7. Interpreting the result and analyzing the data 
elements in HIS. 
Analyzing all the steps, we concluded that: this type of 
system 
architecture 
benefits 
of 
a 
standardized 
communication; it is possible to add other healthcare 
information systems; the systems can be improved a lot; the 
healthcare information system can support more messages, 
because after computing the underuse capacity we 
concluded that more messages can be added without 
affecting the communication. The scored obtained at this 
step is 9/10. 
Table I represents a summary of the steps analysis. 
TABLE I.  
INTEROPERABILITY SCORE 
Steps 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
Ob-gyn points 
7/10 
9/10 
7/10 
2/10 
3/10 
17/40 
9/10 
Total 
54/100 points 
 
After applying these steps and computing the scores, the 
result was that the obstetrics-gynecology department has a 
score of 54 points, which represents a percentage of 54/100, 
regarding the interoperability potential with the analysis 
laboratory, radiology and general practitioner from the 
technical interoperability point of view. This score shows 
that the healthcare information system for ob-gyn 
department is ready to communicate to other healthcare 
information systems, but improvements have to be made. 
IV. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
The paper presents an algorithm adapted for healthcare 
information 
systems 
for 
assessing 
the 
technical 
interoperability degree of the ob-gyn department healthcare 
information system. After analyzing these two types 
interoperability, two scores will result which will show the 
interoperability degree of a healthcare information system, 
the degree in which it is ready to easy communicate with 
other similar ones. If the degree of interoperability between 
healthcare information systems can be evaluated, it will 
have benefits for assessing the status of informatization and 
degree of intercommunication in specific or general 
environments and the data available for the clinical staff and 
patients will be more consistent driving to better practice 
and patient healthcare status, and also will reduce medical 
errors. This study of interoperability degree will help the 
physicians to have more information about the patient, for 
software developer to develop more complex healthcare 
information systems and the most important is the patient 
that will benefit of a better treatment.  
In the future works, we will analyze the operational 
interoperability, it will be develop a smart tool using the 
current 
study 
results 
determining 
the 
technical 
interoperability in an automated way and also a tool for 
operational interoperability. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partially supported by the strategic grant 
POSDRU/88/1.5/S/50783, Project ID50783 (2009), cofinanced by the 
European Social Fund – Investing in People, within the Sectorial 
Operational Programme Human Resources Development 2007 -2013. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] “IEEE Standard Glossary of Software Engineering Terminology,” IEEE 
Std 610.12-1990. 
[2] B. Blobel and P. Pharow, “A Model-Driven Approach for the German 
Health Telematics Architectural Framework and the Related Security 
Infrastructure”, Studies in Health Technology and Informatics, Vol. 
116, IOS Press, 2005. 
[3] B. Blobel and P. Pharow, “A Model-Driven Approach for the German 
Health Telematics Architectural Framework and the Related 
Security”, Vol. 116, IOS Press, 2005. 
[4] Electronic Health Record (EHR), http://www.himss.org, Accessedin 
10.01.2012. 
[5] O. Lupșe, M. Vida, L. Stoicu-Tivadar and V. Stoicu-Tivadar, “Using 
HL7 CDA and CCD standards to improve communication between 
healthcare information systems”, Proc. 9th IEEE International 
Symposium on Intelligent Systems and Informatics, SISY 2011, 
Subotica, Serbia, ISBN: 978-1-4577-1973-8, pp. 453-457, 2011. 
[6] M. Vida, O. Lupșe, L. Stoicu-Tivadar and V. Stoicu-Tivadar, “ICT 
Solution Supporting Continuity of Care in Children Healthcare 
Services”, SACI, pp. 635-639, 2011.  
[7] HL7 Clinical Document Architecture, Release 2.0, HL7 version 3 
Interoperability Standards, Normative Edition 2009, Disk 1 – 
Standards Publication. 
[8] LOINC (Logical Observation Identifiers Names and Codes), 
www.loinc.org, Accessed in 10.01.2012. 
[9] Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society Electronic 
Health Record Vendor Association (EHRVA), Quick Start Guide, 
HL7 Implementation Guide: CDA Release 2 – Continuity of Care 
Document (CCD), 2007. 
[10] J. Ferranti, C. Musser, K. Kawamoto and E. Hammond, “The Clinical 
Document Architecture and the Continuity of Care Record: A Critical 
Analysis”, Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 
volume 13, no 3, 2006. 
[11] M. Kasunic and W.  Anderson, “Measuring Systems Interoperability: 
Challenges and Opportunities”, Technical Note CMU/SEI-2004-TN-
003, 2004. 
[12] M. Vida and L. Stoicu-Tivadar, “Measuring medical informatics 
systems interoperability using the LISI model”,  8th International 
Symposium on  Intelligent Systems and Informatics (SISY), pp. 33 – 
36, 2011. 
[13] F. Farfan, V. Hristidis, A. Ranganathan, and M. Weiner, “XOntoRank: 
Ontology – Aware Search of Electronic Medical Records”, ICDE '09, 
pp.820-831, 2009.
 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

