Physiological Signals and Classification for Happiness, Neural and Surprise 
Emotions 
Three emotion classification 
 
Byoung-Jun Park, Eun-Hye Jang, Sang-Hyeob Kim, 
Chul Huh 
IT Convergence Technology Research Laboratory 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute 
Daejeon, Republic of Korea 
{bj_park, cleta4u, shk1028, chuh}@etri.re.kr 
Myoung-Ae Chung 
IT Convergence Services Future Technology Research Dept. 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute 
Daejeon, Republic of Korea 
machung@etri.re.kr
 
 
Abstract—In this study, we discuss the comparative results of 
emotion classification by several algorithms, which classify 
three different emotional states (happiness, neutral, and 
surprise) 
using 
physiological 
features. 
300 
students 
participated in this experiment. While three kinds of emotional 
stimuli are presented to participants, physiological signal 
responses (EDA, SKT, ECG, RESP, and PPG) were measured. 
Participants rated their own feelings to emotional stimuli on 
emotional assessment scale after presentation of emotional 
stimuli. The emotional stimuli had 96% validity and 5.8 point 
efficiency on average. There were significant differences of 
autonomic nervous system responses among three emotions by 
statistical analysis. The classification of three differential 
emotions was carried out by Fisher's linear discriminant (FLD), 
Support Vector Machine (SVM), and Neural Networks (NN) 
using difference value, which subtracts baseline from 
emotional state. The result of FLD showed that the accuracy of 
classification in three different emotions was 77.3%. 72.3% 
and 42.3% have obtained as the accuracy of classification by 
SVM and NN, respectively. This study confirmed that the three 
emotions can be better classified by FLD using various 
physiological features than SVM and NN. Further study may 
need to get those results to obtain more stability and reliability, 
as comparing with the accuracy of emotions classification by 
using other algorithms. 
Keywords-emotion 
classification; 
physiological 
signals; 
machine learning 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Recent emotion recognition studies have tried to detect a 
human emotion by using physiological signals. It is 
important to detect emotions for applying on human-
computer interaction system. Various physiological signals 
have been widely used to recognize a human’s emotion and 
feeling because signal acquisition using non-invasive sensors 
is relatively simple and physiological responses are less 
sensitive in social and cultural difference [1]. Physiological 
signal may happen to artifact due to motion, and have 
difficulty mapping emotion-specific responses pattern, but 
this has some advantages, which are less affected by 
environment than any other modalities as well as possible to 
observe user’s state in real time. In addition, those can be 
acquired spontaneous emotional responses and not caused by 
responses to 
social 
masking 
or 
factitious 
emotion 
expressions. Finally, measurement of emotional responses by 
multi-channel physiological signals offers more information 
for emotion recognition, because physiological responses are 
related to emotional state [2]. Various physiological signals 
offer a great potential for the recognition of emotions in 
computer systems. In order to fully exploit the advantages of 
physiological measures, standardizations of experimental 
methods have to be established on the emotional model, 
stimulus used for the identification of physiological patterns, 
physiological measures, parameters for analysis, and model 
for pattern recognition and classification [3]. 
The objective of this study is to achieve emotion dataset 
including physiological signals for three emotions (happiness, 
neutral, and surprise) induced by emotional stimuli and to 
classify three differential emotions using physiological 
signals. Electrodermal activity, skin temperature, electrocar-
diac activity, respiration and photoplethysmography are 
recorded from 300 peaple; during they are exposed to visual-
acoustic emotional stimuli. And participants classified their 
present emotion and assessed its intensity on the emotion 
assessment scale. As the results of emotional stimulus 
evaluation, emotional stimuli were shown to mean 93.3% of 
appropriateness and 5.71 of effectiveness; this means that 
each emotional stimulus caused its own emotion quite 
effectively. In addition that, we used Fisher's linear 
discriminant, which is one of the linear models as a statistical 
method and Support Vector Machine and Neural Networks 
as a machine learning algorithm [4]-[7] for classifying three 
emotions. The comparative analysis results by those 
algorithms showed that the FLD exhibits higher accuracy.  
This paper is organized as follows. Section II describes 
emotion stimuli and physiological signals of emotions. 
Section III deals with the classification of emotions and 
presents the results of classification. Finally, some 
conclusions are contained in Section IV. 
II. 
PHYSIOLOGICAL SIGNALS OF EMOTIONS 
300 students (140 males, 160 females and 21.6±3.5 
years) have participated in this study. They reported that they 
have not any history of medical illness or psychotropic 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

medication and any kind of medication due to heart disease, 
respiration disorder, or central nervous system disorder. A 
written consent was obtained before the beginning of the 
study from the participants. 
The emotional stimuli, which are the 2-4 min long audio-
visual film clips captured originally from movies, 
documentary, and TV shows, were used to successfully 
induce emotions (happiness, neutral, and surprise) in this 
study as shown in Fig. 1. Audio-visual film clips have 
widely used because these have the desirable properties of 
being readily standardized, involving no deception, and 
being dynamic rather than static. [8]-[11]. 
The audio-visual film clips that had been tested their 
appropriateness and effectiveness were used to provoke 
emotion. The appropriateness of emotional stimuli means a 
consistency between the intended emotion by experimenter 
and the participants’ experienced emotion. The effectiveness 
is an intensity of emotions that participants rated on a 1 to 7 
point Likert-type scale, that is , 1 being “least boring” and 7 
being “most boring”. The appropriateness and effectiveness 
of these stimuli were as follows; appropriateness and 
effectiveness of happiness were 88.0% and 5.36±1.21, 97% 
appropriateness and 6.06±1.05 effectiveness in surprise. In 
Neutral has 94.8% appropriateness. 
 
 
(a) Surprise 
 
(b) Neutral 
Figure 1.  Example of a stimulus for inducing an emotion. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Analysis of physiological signals. 
Prior to the experiment, we introduced detail experiment 
procedure to participants. They had an adaptation time to feel 
comfortable in the laboratory’s environment and then an 
experimenter attached electrodes on the participants’ wrist, 
finger, and ankle for measurement of physiological signals. 
Physiological signals were measured for 60 sec prior to the 
presentation of emotional stimulus (baseline) and for 2 to 4 
min during the presentation of the stimulus (emotional state), 
then for 60 sec after presentation of the stimulus as recovery 
term. Participants rated the emotion that they experienced 
during presentation of the film clip on the emotion 
assessment scale. This procedure was repeated 3 times for 
elicitation of 3 differential emotions. To collect physiological 
signals for three emotions, the laboratory is a room with 5m 
x 2.5m size having a sound-proof (lower than 35dB) of the 
noise level where any outside noise are completely blocked.  
The dataset of physiological signals such as skin temerat-
ure (SKT), electrodermal activity (EDA), photoplethysmogr-
aphy (PPG), respiration (RESP), and electrocardiogram 
(ECG) are collected by MP150 Biopac system Inc. SKT 
electrodes are attached on the first joint of non-dominant ring 
finger and on the first joint of the non-dominant thumb for 
PPG. EDA is measured with the use of 8 mm AgCl 
electrodes placed on the volar surface of the distal phalanges 
of the index and middle fingers of the non-dominant hand. 
Electrodes are filled with a 0.05 molar isotonic NaCl paste to 
provide a continuous connection between the electrodes and 
the skin. ECG electrodes are placed on both wrists and one 
left ankle with two kinds of electrodes, sputtered and AgCl 
ones. The left-ankle electrode is used as a reference.  
The signals are acquired for 1 minute long baseline state 
prior to presentation of emotional stimuli and 1-2 minutes 
long emotional states during presentation of the stimuli as 
emotional state. To extract features, the obtained signals are 
analyzed for 30 seconds from the baseline and the emotional 
state by AcqKnowledge (Ver. 3.8.1) software (USA) as 
shown in Fig. 2. 10 features, namely, SCL and SCR features 
from EDA signal, meanSKT from SKT, HR and RRI from 
ECG, 
RESPrate, 
RESTamplitude, 
RESP_Rsd 
and 
RESP_Asd from RESP, and BVP from PPG are extracted 
from the obtained emotional physiological signals.  
III. 
CLASSIFICATION OF EMOTIONS 
In this study, we have used Fisher's linear discriminant 
(FLD), which is one of the linear models as a statistical 
method and Support Vector Machine (SVM) and Neural 
Networks (NN) for three emotion classifications.  
We have carried out the related research with the same 
emotions (happiness, neutral, and surprise) and the same 
methods (FLD, SVM and NN) as an earlier work [12]. In 
[12], the result of LDA (FLD) showed that the accuracy of 
classification was 83.4%. 75.5% and 55.6% have obtained as 
the accuracy of classification by SVM and MLP (NN), 
respectively. However, the results of the previous research 
were obtained by only training set. Namely, the methods 
used the whole emotional patterns in order to build a 
classifier model and measure the classification accuracy of 
those. This approach cannot have effectiveness because of 
realistic and overffiting problems. 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

For the effectiveness verification of the previous research, 
we embrace more participants, which have increased by 300 
people, and 10-fold cross-validation, which is a statistical 
method of evaluating models. In typical cross-validation, the 
training and validation sets must cross-over in successive 
rounds such that each data point has a chance of being 
validated against. The three algorithms were evaluated by 
10-fold cross validation and the results of this study are 
reported for those. These values will offer a criteria index for 
assessing how the results of a statistical analysis will 
generalize to an independent dataset.  
In addition those, we reduced the number of features. We 
used 10 features, removed LF, HF, and HRV, whereas 13 
features were used in the previous work [12].  
Firstly, FLD is a method used in statistics, pattern 
recognition and machine learning to find a linear 
combination of features, which characterizes or separates 
classes of objects or events. In FLD, the measurement space 
is transformed so that the separability between the emotional 
states is maximized. FLD finds the direction to project data 
on so that between-class variance (SB) in maximized and 
within-class variance (SW) in minimized, and then offers a 
linear transformation of predictor variables, which provides a 
more accurate discrimination [4]. SW is proportional to the 
sample covariance matrix for the pooled d-dimensional data. 
It is symmetric and positive semidefinite, and it is usually 
nonsigular if n>d. Likewise, SB is also symmetric and 
positive semidefinite, but because it is the outer product of 
two vector, its rank is at most one.  
In terms of SB and SW, the criterion function J is written  

J(w) = (wT SB w)/(wT SW w)

This expression is well known in mathematical physics 
and the generalized Rayleigh quotient. It is easy to show that 
a vector w that maximizes J must satisfy 

SB w =  SW w,

for some constant , which is a generalized eigenvalue. 
In analysis of FLD, accuracy of all emotions was 77.3 % and 
accuracy of each emotion had rage of 69% to 89%. 
Happiness was recognized by FLD with 69.1%, neutral 
88.6 % and Surprise 75.5% as shown in TABLE I. 
TABLE I.  
RESULT OF THREE EMOTION DISCRIMINANT BY FLD 
 
Happiness 
Neutral 
Surprise 
Total 
Happiness 
69.1 
30.3 
0.5 
100.0 
Neutral 
10.3 
88.6 
1.1 
100.0 
Surprise 
18.5 
6.0 
75.5 
100.0 
TABLE II.  
RESULT OF THREE EMOTION DISCRIMINANT BY SVM 
 
Happiness 
Neutral 
Surprise 
Total 
Happiness 
59.0 
29.8 
11.2 
100.0 
Neutral 
23.4 
73.7 
2.9 
100.0 
Surprise 
12.0 
6.0 
82.0 
100.0 
TABLE III.  
RESULT OF THREE EMOTION DISCRIMINANT BY NN 
 
Happiness 
Neutral 
Surprise 
Total 
Happiness 
0.5 
13.8 
85.6 
100.0 
Neutral 
0.6 
14.3 
85.1 
100.0 
Surprise 
0 
3.0 
97.0 
100.0 
 
SVM is non-linear model, which are used the well-
known emotion algorithms and support vector classifier 
separates the emotional states with a maximal margin. The 
advantage of support vector classifier is that it can be 
extended to nonlinear boundaries by the kernel trick. SVM 
supervised learning models with associated learning 
algorithms that analyze data and recognize patterns, used for 
classification and regression analysis. SVM is designed for 
two class classification by finding the optimal hyperplane 
where the expected classification error of test samples is 
minimized and has utilized as a pattern classifier to 
overcome the difficulty in pattern classification due to the 
large amount of within-class variation of features and the 
overlap between classes [13].  
SVM finds a hyperplane based on support vector to 
analyze data and recognize patterns. The complexity of the 
resulting classifier is characterized by the number of support 
vectors rather than the dimensionality of the transformed 
space. The goal in training SVM is to find the separating 
hyperplane with the largest margin [4]. We expect that the 
larger the margin, the better generalization of the classifier. 
The distance from any hyperplane to a pattern y is |g(y)|/||a||, 
and assuming that a positive margin b exists 

zk g(yk) / ||a|| 
b, k = 1, …, n;

The goal is to find the weight vector a that maximizes b. 
Here, zk is the class of k-th pattern, b is margin and g(y) is a 
linear discriminant in an augmented y space, 

g(y) = aT y

SVM provided accuracy of 72.3% when it classified all 
emotions. In happiness, accuracy of 59.0% was achieved 
with SVM, 73.7% in neutral, and 82.0% in surprise, refer to 
TABLE II. 
NN is a computational intelligence model inspired by the 
structure and functional aspects of biological neurons [4]. 
NN has been widely used to deal with pattern recognition 
problems. The generic topology of NN consists of three 
layers as shown in Fig. 3. A neuron in the input layer is 
connected to a layer of hidden neuron, which is connected to 
output neuron. The activity of the input neurons represents 
the raw information that is fed into the network, the activity 
of each hidden neuron is determined by the activities of the 
input neuron and the weights on the connections between the 
input and the hidden, and the behavior of the output depends 
on the activity of the hidden neurons and connection weights 
between the hidden and the output layer. 
It is realized by connecting neurons and each neuron 
processes information using activation function,  
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

i :
j :
i :
j :
wji
wji
Input
layer
Hidden
layer
Output 
layer
Input
netj
f(netj)
oi
netj
f(netj)
oj
Output
oi
 
Figure 3.  General structure of neural networks. 

fj(netj) = 1 / (1+e-net
j)

where, netj is input of j-th neuron and computed by, 

netj = i wji fi + j

where, wji is the connection weight between j-th and i-th 
neurons and adjusted by 

 wji (new) = wji (old) + wji

wji is calculated by back-propagation algorithm. 
In TABLE III, the result of emotion recognition using 
NN showed that accuracy to recognize all emotions was 
42.3%. NN have lower classification for happiness and 
neutral because of the overfitting problem for surprise. We 
need more research about advanced networks. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
This study was to identify the difference among 
happiness, neutral, and surprise emotions using physiological 
responses induced by these emotional stimuli and to find the 
optimal emotion recognition algorithm for classifying these 
three emotions. The emotion stimuli used to induce a 
participant’s emotion were evaluated for their suitability and 
effectiveness. The result showed that emotional stimuli have 
the appropriateness of 92.5% and the effectiveness of 5.4 
point (7 point Likert scale) on average. 
Our result showed that FLD is the best algorithm being 
able to classify three emotions. FLD provides extremely fast 
evaluations of unknown inputs performed by distance 
calculations between a new sample and mean of training data 
samples in each class weighed by their covariance matrices. 
The FLD shows a recognition ratio much higher chance 
probability, i.e. 77.3% for three emotion categories, when 
applied to physiological signal databases.  
The values of performance (criteria index) by 10-fold 
cross validation are good indicators of the generalization 
capabilities of the constructed models. As selecting a model, 
if the approximation capability of a trained model is 
considered only, the selected model has greatly recognition 
accuracy; however, it has deteriorated generalization 
(prediction) capability and cannot apply to a real system. 
Especially, this is conspicuous in nonlinear problem. This 
important question arises, too, as to the selection of the 
proper structure of the emotion recognition in this study. 
Although some algorithm showed lower accuracy of 
emotion classification for the criteria index, the results led to 
better chance to recognize human emotions and to identify 
the optimal emotion recognition algorithm by using 
physiological signals. For example, this will be applied to the 
realization of emotional interaction between man and 
machine and play an important role in several applications, 
e.g., the human-friendly personal robot or other devices. 
However, for more accurate and realistic applications, a 
novel method to identify not only basic emotions but also 
more various emotions such as boredom, frustration, and 
love, etc. must be devised before it is mentioned that emotion 
recognition based on physiological signals is a practicable 
and reliable way of enabling HCI with emotion-
understanding capability. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by the Converging Research 
Center Program funded by the Ministry of Education, 
Science and Technology (No. 2012K001330). 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Wagner, J. Kim, and E. Andre, “From physiological signals to 
emotions: Implementing and comparing selected methods for feature 
extraction and classification,” IEEE International Conference on 
Multimedia and Expo., vol. 7,  2005,  pp. 940-943. 
[2] P. D. Drummond, and S.-H. Quah, “The effect of expressing anger on 
cardiovascular reactivity and facial blood flow in Chinese and 
Caucasians,” Psychophysiology, vol. 38. 2001, pp.190-196. 
[3] R. W. Picard, E. Vyzas, and J. Healey, “Toward machine emotional 
intelligence: Analysis of affective physiological state,” IEEE 
Transaction on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 23, 
2001, pp. 1175-1191. 
[4] R. O. Duda, P. E. Hart, and D. G.  Stork, Pattern Classification, 2nd 
edn. 2000. 
[5] M. Murugappan, R. Nagarajan, and S. Yaacob, “Classification of 
human emotion from EEG using discrete wavelet transform,” Journal 
of Biomedical Science and Engineering, vol. 3, 2010, pp. 390-396. 
[6] K. Takahashi, “Remarks on emotion recognition from bio-potential 
signals,” 2nd International Conference on Autonomous Robots and 
Agents, 2004, pp. 186-191. 
[7] C. Lee, and M.-G. Jang. “A Prior Model of Structural SVMs for 
Domain Adaptation,” ETRI Journal, vol. 33, 2011, pp. 712-719. 
[8] J.J. Gross, and R.W. Levenson, “Emotion elicitation using films,” 
Cognition and Emotion, vol. 9, 1995, pp. 87-108. 
[9] R.S. Lazarus, J.C. Speisman, A.M. Mordkoff, and L.A. Davidson, “A 
Laboratory study of psychological stress produced by an emotion 
picture film,” Psychological Monographs, vol. 76, 1962, pp. 553. 
[10] M.H. Davis, J.G. Hull, R.D. Young, and G.G. Warren, “Emotional 
reactions to dramatic film stimuli: the influence of cognitive and 
emotional empathy,” Journal of personality and social psychology, 
vol. 52, 1987, pp. 126-133. 
[11] D. Palomba, M. Sarlo, A. Angrilli, A. Mini, and L. Stegagno, 
“Cardiac responses associated with affective processing of unpleasant 
film stimuli,” International Journal of Psychophysiology, vol. 36, 
2000, pp. 45-57. 
[12] B.-J. Park, E.-H. Jang, Sang-Hyeob Kim, C. Huh and J.-H. Sohn, 
“Three Differential Emotions and Classification Using Physiological 
Signals,” IPCSIT, vol. 25, 2012, pp. 55-59. 
[13] P.D. Wasserman, “Advanced Methods in Neural Computing,” New 
York, Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1993, pp. 35–55. 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

