European Data Protection Regulation and the Blockchain
Analysis of the Critical Issues and Possible Solution Proposals
Nicola Fabiano
Studio Legale Fabiano
Rome, Italy
Email: info@fabiano.law
Abstract—The blockchain represents an Internet revolution in
terms data usage, storage, anonymity, encryption, and so on.
The technical evolution of the blockchain also has an impact on
the Internet of Things (IoT) phenomena. However, we should
take into account the legal issues related to the data protection
and privacy law. Technological solutions are welcome, but it
is necessary, before developing applications, to consider the
risks to the fundamental rights and freedoms which we cannot
dismiss. Personal data is a value. It is important to evaluate
the European Regulation n. 2016/679, General Data Protection
Regulation (GDPR) that applies from May 25th 2018. The GDPR
introduces Data Protection by Design and by Default, Data
Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA), data breach notiﬁcation
and signiﬁcant administrative ﬁnes in respect of infringements
of the Regulation. It is fundamental to evaluate the blockchain
and its compliance with the GDPR principles. Regarding the data
protection and security risks, there are some issues with potential
consequences for data and liability. A correct law analysis allows
evaluating risks preventing the wrong use of personal data. The
contribution describes the main general principles according to
the GDPR and the aspects related to the blockchain.
Keywords–Data Protection; GDPR; Blockchain.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, the blockchain is a part of our life. More and
more often people use the blockchain, especially in trading
with crypto-currencies. We know that the blockchain is a
distributed ledger database where encrypted data are stored.
Several blockchain applications allow us to deﬁne this phe-
nomenon as ”blockchain as a service”. In this context, it is
important to consider the Regulation n. 2016/679 General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [4] about the protection
of personal data. It is quite clear that the blockchain has been
analysed only from a technical point of view, but there is
another side to be considered that is the data protection law.
In fact, the current blockchain framework considers technical
aspects related to each kind of node and to the security
measures adopted by avoiding disclosure of information. It is
crucial to develop the blockchain infrastructure and set up the
structure of the node. However, the developers pay attention
to the technical aspects always ignoring the way to design the
blockchain following the law obligations especially regarding
the protection of personal data. This aspect is becoming in-
creasingly relevant since the application of the GDPR starting
from May 25th 2018.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section II,
we describe the current European legislation on the processing
of personal data. In Section III, we describe the differences
between privacy and data protection. In Section IV, we analyse
the blockchain and the relationship among the principles pro-
vided by the European Regulation 2016/679, trying to address
possible solutions to be compliant with the law.
II.
THE EUROPEAN LAW ON THE PROCESSING OF
PERSONA DATA
In Europe, the protection of natural persons in relation
to the processing of personal data is a fundamental right. In
fact, Article 8 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the
European Union (the Charter) [1] is related to the protection
of natural persons in relation to the processing of personal data
[4] (Article 8 - Protection of personal data).
Furthermore, the Charter also considers the respect for
private and family life [1] (Article 7 - Respect for private and
family life) as a crucial aspect of privacy.
Moreover, the Treaty on the Functioning of the European
Union (TFEU) [2] considers the right to the protection of
personal data (Article 16(1) says: ”Everyone has the right to
the protection of personal data concerning them”).
This is the general legal framework, and the protection of
personal data is under the Directive the Directive 95/46/EC [3]
until May 25th 2018.
Nevertheless, in 2016, the European Regulation number
679/2016 has been published. It entered into force on May
25th, 2016, but it will be applied starting May 25th, 2018
[4]. According to Article 94, this Regulation will repeal the
Directive 95/46/EC [3] with effects from May 25th 2018.
Therefore, the Directive 95/46/CE will be applicable until May
25th, 2018.
The GDPR obviously mentions the Charter of Fundamental
Rights of the European Union in the ﬁrst Whereas (The
protection of natural persons in relation to the processing
of personal data is a fundamental right. Article 8(1) of the
Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (the
Charter) and Article 16(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning
of the European Union (TFEU) provide that everyone has the
right to the protection of personal data concerning him or her).
The primary goal is to harmonise the legislation of each
Member State: the GDPR will be directly applicable in each
European State, avoiding possible confusion among the do-
mestic law. The GDPR introduces numerous changes, such
as the Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA), the Data
Protection by Design and by Default (DPbDbD), the data
breach notiﬁcation, the Data Protection Ofﬁcer (DPO), the very
high administrative ﬁnes in respect of infringements of the
Regulation, and so on.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-644-6
INTERNET 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Evolving Internet

Regarding the protection of personal data, apart from
the before mentioned GDPR, there is also the Directive
2002/58/EC [5] concerning the processing of personal data and
the protection of privacy in the electronic communications. In
fact, according to Article 95 of the GDPR, there is a rela-
tionship with this Directive (Article 95 says: ”This Regulation
shall not impose additional obligations on natural or legal
persons in relation to processing in connection with the provi-
sion of publicly available electronic communications services
in public communication networks in the Union in relation to
matters for which they are subject to speciﬁc obligations with
the same objective set out in Directive 2002/58/EC”.).
Directive 2002/58/CE has the aim ”to ensure an equivalent
level of protection of fundamental rights and freedoms, and in
particular the right to privacy, with respect to the processing
of personal data in the electronic communication sector and
to ensure the free movement of such data and of electronic
communication equipment and services in the Community”
(Article 1).
In this legal panorama, it is clear that technology and law
are not at the same level because the ﬁrst one (technology) is
always ahead than the second one (law). The actions on the
part of the legislator always follow the technological solutions,
and so the rules have to be able to consider the technology
evolution.
GDPR applies on May 25th 2018, and it is crucial to
analyse it to comply with the new data protection Regulation.
In fact, GDPR represents an innovative data protection law
framework because of several legal purposes on which it is
based.
III.
DATA PROTECTION AND PRIVACY
Often, people erroneously consider ”privacy” and ”data
protection” as synonyms, confusing the real meaning indeed.
”Privacy” and ”data protection” are not the same because,
apart from the terminological deﬁnition, they are different
concepts. Both are fundamental rights in Europe, but there are
differences between them. On one hand privacy is related to
the personal life; on the other hand, data protection concerns
the personal information.
It is not possible to address data protection and privacy
issues adopting only technical solutions without any legal
reference. Apart from the highly technical solution, hence, we
cannot dismiss the law obligations, where they are applicable,
like in Europe, according to the GDPR [4]. In fact, in terms of
legal framework, ”security” is not equal to ”privacy”. A system
could be very secure but not in compliance with the data
protection law. On the contrary, a system could be compliant
with the data protection law and, hence, very secure (obviously
only by the adoption of security measures).
IV.
BLOCKCHAIN AND DATA PROTECTION
The IoT evolution realises an ecosystem and inside it
there is an emerging phenomenon, basically a technical sys-
tem, named blockchain [6]. The blockchain was imagined by
Satoshi Nakamoto [7] and, probably, it is well-known because
it is the technical structure used for the bitcoin (a crypto-
currency). The blockchain has been primarily used for the
crypto-currencies and it is a shared, immutable ledger for
recording the history of transactions; it is a ledger of records.
The blockchain can work as a distributed database, and its
structure guarantees any modiﬁcation or alteration due to the
strong link and timestamp among each block.
However, apart from the crypto-currencies, the blockchain
allowed to develop several applications in different ﬁelds
(i.e., smart contracts, electronic identity, keeping of digital
documents, e-Government, etc.). Hence, any interaction among
the several blockchain application is possible. In this con-
text, we can qualify the blockchain phenomenon in terms
of ”blockchain as a service” due to the potential to carry
out diverse services. In fact, this development denotes the
blockchain evolution from a technical structure under the
crypto-currencies to a proper IT infrastructure that can be used
to deliver services.
However, a distinction must be made.
Generally, there are:
1)
public blockchain
2)
private blockchain
3)
combined blockchain (consortium blockchain)
Now all the blockchains are based on systems of proof of
work or proof of stake. In the public blockchain, everyone can
access and make transactions. In the private blockchain, the
control is under the power of the organisation. In the combined
blockchain, the control is under some nodes.
This scenario is important to privacy and the protection
of personal data. In this general context, what about data
protection and privacy? Regarding privacy, Satoshi Nakamoto
[7] argues that privacy can still be maintained by breaking the
ﬂow of information in another place: by keeping public keys
anonymous. However, the author says also that The risk is
that if the owner of a key is revealed, linking could reveal
other transactions that belonged to the same owner. That
represents a signiﬁcant chink in the data protection and privacy
perspective. Ensuring privacy and data protection is one of the
main aims of any project which has to addressed by design,
not leaving any possibility to compromise personal data and/or
personal information. Given the structure of the blockchain,
it seems that any subject or person or owner (as deﬁned by
Nakamoto) should be a controller and consequently bound to
respect the privacy or data protection laws. From a business
perspective, probably, personal data or personal information
does not receive adequate protection, thinking also to grow the
security measures. To set up high-security measures is a good
solution but it is not the only one. Each organisation, before
designing a project, has to consider the principles provided by
the article 25 of the GDPR (data protection by design and by
default). According to these principles the controller, before
starting the processing of personal data, has to implement
appropriate technical and organisational measures. In this way,
the controller shall be compliant with the data protection by
design and by default”. It is wrong to address a compliance
process with the privacy or data protection law after the project
output because any evaluation must be during the design phase.
The security solution is always used by scientists and tech-
nicians to address data protection issues. However, it is crucial
to consider the Data Protection obligations provided for by law
and especially the GDPR. According to the EU Regulation n.
2016/679 from May 25th 2018 it will be mandatory to respect
principles and rules required by the GDPR. Among the several
principles provided by the GDPR, some general one do not
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-644-6
INTERNET 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Evolving Internet

seem to be applicable to the blockchain. In fact, according to
the article 5, paragraph 1, of the GDPR, there is the need to
respect the following principles:
1)
lawfulness, fairness and transparency
2)
purpose limitation
3)
data minimisation
4)
accuracy
5)
storage limitation
6)
integrity and conﬁdentiality
Paragraph 2 of the above mentioned article 5 states: ”The
controller shall be responsible for, and be able to demonstrate
compliance with, paragraph 1 (accountability)”. The principles
mentioned above are so relevant that, in case of infringement,
a hard administrative ﬁne up to 10.000.000 EUR shall be
applicable, or in the case of an undertaking, up to 2% of the
total worldwide annual turnover of the preceding ﬁnancial year.
Giving that, what about the blockchain?
In fact, in case of private blockchain or probably of the
combined blockchain, it is possible to respect the principles as
mentioned above, because there will be an identiﬁed controller.
In case of a public blockchain, instead, it will be impossible to
establish who is the controller. The identiﬁcation of a controller
is crucial for the ”accountability”, according to the article 5,
paragraph 2, of the GDPR. The essential identiﬁcation of the
controller is closely related to the six principles (lawfulness,
fairness and transparency, purpose limitation, data minimisa-
tion, accuracy, storage limitation, integrity and conﬁdentiality).
How is it possible to respect the principles as mentioned
earlier without a controller?
The consequences will be that a public blockchain will not
be in compliance with the data protection law (GDPR).
Another point is the respect of the ﬁrst principle (lawful-
ness, fairness and transparency) and especially regarding the
data subject’s consent.
According to the article 6, paragraph 1, of the GDPR
”Processing shall be lawful only if and to the extent that at
least one of the following applies: (a) the data subject has
given consent to the processing of his or her personal data
for one or more speciﬁc purposes; (b) processing is necessary
for the performance of a contract to which the data subject
is party or in order to take steps at the request of the data
subject prior to entering into a contract”.
In this scenario, there are some relevant questions, and the
answers will be useful to correctly address the legal issues
related to the compliance with the data protection law (GDPR).
In fact,
•
to whom the data subject gives the consent?
•
can the data subject withdraw the consent and how?
•
how and to whom the data subject can ask the erasure
of personal data or exercise the rights according to the
GDPR?
•
who
are
the
parties
and,
mainly,
who
is
the
blockchain’s representative party that is responsible
and considered as a controller?
As mentioned earlier, none of the questions mentioned
earlier have answers in compliance with the GDPR. It is not
possible to consider every single node of a public blockchain
based on a contract. If the data subject withdraws the consent,
the node continues existing, and it will not be erased and
removed. As there is no controller in the public blockchain, it
is impossible for the data subject to address a request to erase
personal data; the data subject will not be able to exercise the
rights according to the GDPR. A public blockchain, giving its
technical structure, is not conﬁgurable as a contract among the
node’s owners.
V.
APPLYING THE GDPR TO THE BLOCKCHAIN AND
POSSIBLE SOLUTIONS
As mentioned earlier, it is quite complicated to apply
the GDPR fully to the blockchain because of its technical
architecture. We want to highlight some critical issues related
to the application of the GDPR to the blockchain and the
possible solutions.
1)
The roles. It is relevant to identify all the roles played
in the processing of personal data and especially in
the blockchain. In the blockchain, we absolutely must
identify the controller and the processor(s), but this
is impossible in the public blockchain. Who is the
controller in a blockchain?
2)
The Data Protection Ofﬁcer (DPO). Moreover, by
virtue of its nature, its scope and/or its purposes,
the blockchain could imply regular and systematic
monitoring of data subjects on a large scale, accord-
ing to the article 37, paragraph 1 letter b) of the
GDPR. In this case, it is mandatory to designate a
data protection ofﬁcer (DPO). However, due to the
blockchain architecture and structure, it will not be
easy - especially in a public blockchain - to identify
the controller and consequently who is the subject
obligated to designate a data protection ofﬁcer. We
think that this is criticality of the blockchain structure
and it will be impossible to designate a data protec-
tion ofﬁcer. Differently, in a private blockchain, the
controller can and indeed must designate a data pro-
tection ofﬁcer according to the GDPR. Designating
a data protection ofﬁcer means that this subject has
to take at least the tasks mentioned in the article 39
of the GDPR. It is evident that the blockchain must
allow the DPO to make all the tasks to be compliant
with the GDPR.
3)
Transferring personal data to third countries. An-
other key-point is related to the transfers of personal
data to third countries or international organisations.
In fact, according to the blockchain architecture, it is
impossible to restrict its application to the European
member States. According to the article 3, paragraph
2, (Territorial scope) of the GDPR
”This Regulation applies to the processing of personal
data of data subjects who are in the Union by a
controller or processor not established in the Union,
where the processing activities are related to:
(a) the offering of goods or services, irrespective of
whether a payment of the data subject is required, to
such data subjects in the Union; or
(b) the monitoring of their behaviour as far as their
behaviour takes place within the Union”.
Hence, for example, if someone based outside the
European Union offers goods or services to such
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-644-6
INTERNET 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Evolving Internet

data subject in the Union, he must respect the GDPR
rules. In this context, it will be challenging to localise
a blockchain (better all the data) only inside the
European Union. Consequently, the GDPR will apply
to all over the world. The articles from 44 to 50
of the GDPR provide the rules for the transfer of
personal data outside Europe. It is quite impossible
to localise the data centre(s) where the blockchain
data are stored, because of its technical structure and
this can be a critical condition for the application of
the GDPR rules in this matter.
4)
The liability. Regarding liability, the article 82 states
that ”Any person who has suffered material or non-
material damage as a result of an infringement of
this Regulation shall have the right to receive com-
pensation from the controller or processor for the
damage suffered”. What kind of right is there to
receive compensation in a public blockchain where
there is no controller?
5)
Data breach. According to the article 34 of the
GDPR ”When the personal data breach is likely to
result in a high risk to the rights and freedoms of
natural persons, the controller shall communicate
the personal data breach to the data subject without
undue delay”. In a public blockchain how is the rule
applied? We must consider a data breach ﬁrstly and
understand its causes. Secondary, we must know who
is the controller according to the considerations as
mentioned above.
Hence, there are a lot of critical issues in the application
of the GDPR in the blockchain; in certain cases, it is possible
to comply with the GDPR rules using some legal instruments
as mentioned above, but, in other cases, it will be impossible.
However, although it is difﬁcult to consider a full application
of the GDPR to the blockchain, we think that through some
legal instruments, it is possible to be compliant with the data
protection law. In fact, we can address some issues - where
applicable - by policies and contractual solutions. It should be
clear that it is not ever possible to use all these legal solutions
because it depends on the kind of the blockchain. In a public
blockchain, for example, we can use only policies applicable
to all the participants (node owners’). Each policy should be
issued according to the GDPR rules. In this way, each node
owner’s will be informed about the processing of personal data
and eventually give the consent.
VI.
CONCLUSION
On May 25th 2018, the GDPR starts applying. It is crucial
to analyse now the GDPR to be ready and comply with the new
data protection Regulation. In fact, the GDPR represents an
innovative data protection law framework, because of several
purposes on which is based.
As we have shown, in the public blockchain there is no
supervisor and each subject working on the blockchain is
the owner of his node(s). In this case, indeed, there is no
controller because the node’s owner cannot be the controller
of himself. In this situation, apparently, could seem that the
privacy and data protection law is not applicable. However,
the node’s owner could perform activities in the blockchain
potentially harmful to the same blockchain and the other nodes.
Therefore, there is the liability for the node’s owner for any
possible damages. Designing and setting up blockchain means
that privacy and security policies should be created privacy
and security policies applicable to all the node’s owners. This
solution could mitigate the lack of the law where it is not
possible to apply it to the blockchain system.
In the private blockchain, instead, the privacy and data
protection law shall apply to the organization with the conse-
quence that it must respect all the legal obligations, including
the information to the data subject, his consent and rights.
However, it is highly recommended to set up privacy and
security policies.
In the combined blockchain, due to the fact that the control
is under some nodes, they could be considered controllers
and, hence, they are required to respect the privacy and data
protection law.
The adoption - by design - of data protection policies could
overcome some critical issues of the blockchain addressing, in
this way, the nodal points towards a true path of compliance
with the data protection and privacy laws.
REFERENCES
[1]
Charter
of
Fundamental
Rights
of
the
European
Union
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:
12012P/TXT&from=EN retrieved: June 2018
[2]
The
Treaty
on
the
functioning
of
the
European
Union
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:
12012E/TXT&from=EN retrieved: June 2018
[3]
Directive 95/46/ec of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard
to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of
such data, 1995 http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/
?uri=CELEX:31995L0046&from=EN retrieved: June 2018
[4]
Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural persons with
regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of
such data, and repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection
Regulation) - http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=
CELEX:32016R0679&from=EN retrieved: June 2018
[5]
Directive
2002/58/EC
of
the
European
Parliament
and
of
the
Council of 12 July 2002 concerning the processing of personal
data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communica-
tions, 2002 http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=
CELEX:32002L0058&from=en retrieved: June 2018
[6]
IBM, Understand the fundamentals of IBM Blockchain - https://www.
ibm.com/blockchain/what-is-blockchain.html retrieved: June 2018
[7]
S. Nakamoto, Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system - https:
//bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf retrieved: June 2018
[8]
AA.VV.: River Publishers, Digitising the Industry Internet of Things
Connecting the Physical, Digital and Virtual Worlds, 2016
[9]
L.
Axon,
University
of
Oxford
-
Privacy-awareness
in
Blockchain-based
PKI
(2015)
-
https://ora.ox.ac.uk/objects/uuid:
f8377b69-599b-4cae-8df0-f0cded53e63bretrieved: June 2018
[10]
K. Christidis and M. Devetsikiotis, Blockchains and Smart Contracts
for the Internet of Things - http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?
arnumber=7467408 retrieved: June 2018
[11]
M. Conoscenti, A. Vetr and J.C. De Martin - Peer to Peer for Privacy
and Decentralization in the Internet of Things - In: 39th International
Conference on Software Engineering, Buenos Aires (AR), May 20-
28, 2017. pp. 1-3 - http://porto.polito.it/2665723/1/peer to peer for
privacy and decentralization in the internet of things.pdf
retrieved:
June 2018
[12]
A. Kosba, A. Miller, E. Shi, Z. Wen and C. Papamanthou - Hawk:
The Blockchain Model of Cryptography and Privacy-Preserving Smart
Contracts (2016) - https://eprint.iacr.org/2015/675.pdf retrieved: June
2018
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-644-6
INTERNET 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Evolving Internet

[13]
G. Zyskind, O. Nathan and A. Sandy Pentland - Enigma: Decentralized
Computation Platform with Guaranteed Privacy (2015) - https://arxiv.
org/pdf/1506.03471.pdf retrieved: June 2018
[14]
European Convention on human rights - http://www.echr.coe.int/
Documents/Convention ENG.pdf retrieved: June 2018
[15]
Gartner: Gartner Says 6.4 Billion Connected ”Things” Will Be in Use
in 2016, Up 30 Percent From 2015 - http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/
id/3165317 retrieved: June 2018
[16]
Cyberhigiene
project
-
https://www.petrashub.org/portfolio-item/
cyberhygiene/ retrieved: June 2018
[17]
A. Cavoukian: Springer, Identity in the Information Society. Identity in
the Information Society, 2010
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-644-6
INTERNET 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Evolving Internet

