Direct Routing for Mobile Multicasting in Distributed Mobility Management 
Domain 
Yongwon Kim, Truong-Xuan Do, Younghan Kim 
School of Electronic Engineering, Soongsil University 
Seoul, Korea 
{crimson_88, xuan}@dcn.ssu.ac.kr, younghak@ssu.ac.kr 
 
 
Abstract— Distributed mobility management is the newly 
emerging research trend replacing the current centralized 
ones. So far, no complete solution has been found for 
integrating IP multicast into the DMM domain. In one recent 
research, some use cases for multicast support in the DMM 
environment 
showed 
some 
problems 
such 
as 
traffic 
duplication and non-optimal routing. In this paper, we 
propose a new scheme to support the multicast listener in the 
DMM domain, which overcomes the above mentioned 
problems. Our scheme uses a direct routing concept that 
makes use of the current multicast infrastructure. Each access 
router in our scheme has both mobility management and MLD 
proxy functions. Numerical analysis shows that our proposal 
improves the other schemes in terms of packet loss rate. 
Keywords-Mobile Multicast; Multicast Listener Support; 
Distributed Mobility Management; multimedia; handover. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Current centralized mobility management schemes 
suffer major issues such as single point of failure and sub-
optimal routing. To solve these issues, several Distributed 
Mobility Management (DMM) approaches are discussed in 
[1]. The popularity of live multimedia services makes IP 
multicast [o] a very important technique in reducing 
redundant traffic in the Internet network. The integration of 
IP multicast and mobility management brings new user 
experiences for delay-sensitive applications and optimizes 
network bandwidth. A base deployment for supporting 
mobile multicast listener in a PMIPv6 domain is 
standardized [2]. Additionally, some use cases for 
supporting multicast in DMM presented issues, such as 
duplicated traffic and non-optimal routing [3]. 
In our previous work [4], we discussed the concept of 
direct routing which utilizes the existing multicast 
infrastructure and separates multicast function from Local 
Mobility Anchor (LMA). This concept helps us avoid 
problems, such as duplicated traffic and tunnel convergence 
when combining multicast with mobility management. 
However, our work did not show the details of protocol 
operation. It only supported multicast in the centralized 
domain.  
In this paper, we apply this concept into a new 
environment, i.e., DMM environment. In our scheme, each 
access router has functions of mobility management and 
MLD proxy. Moreover, the central database is extended to 
store multicast context information with mobility session 
information. By numerical analysis, our proposal’s packet 
loss rate will be improved over the other schemes [2] [3]. 
The paper is organized as follows: Section II presents 
our scheme for multicast support in the DMM domain. 
Section III analyzes our scheme performance. Section IV 
shows a result of numerical analysis. The paper ends with 
conclusion and future researches. 
II. 
MULTICAST LISTENER SUPPORT IN DISTRIBUTED 
MOBILITY MANAGEMENT DOMAIN 
Figure 1 shows network architecture for multicast 
support in the DMM domain. Both mobility management 
functions of LMA (e.g., prefix allocation, location 
management) and Mobile Access Gateways (location update) 
are embedded in each distributed access router (DAR). 
Additionally, these DARs have MLD proxy function and are 
connected to the multicast infrastructure.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Architecture for multicast support in the  DMM domain 
 
Our scheme also introduces a new extension for the 
central database (CDB). Thus, the CDB will contain the 
multicast context information (e.g., multicast source, group 
address) beside the mobility session information of MN. The 
content of CDB is shown in Table I.  
TABLE I.  
BINGDIND TABLE  IN CDB 
MN-ID 
Prefix 
Anchor 
MC? 
S 
G 
MN1 
MN1-HNP1 
pDAR 
No 
- 
- 
MN2 
MN2-HNP1 
MN2-HNP2 
pDAR 
nDAR 
Yes 
S1 
G1 
 
Figure 2 shows the handover procedure of the MN. In 
this case, we consider that the MLD proxy function is 
installed in each DAR. When the MN attaches to the 
previous DAR (pDAR), it will send a MLD report to the 
pDAR to join the multicast channel.  
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-285-1
INTERNET 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Evolving Internet

 
Figure 2.  Initiated Attach and Handover Procedure 
 
This multicast context information of the MN will be 
registered in the central database through the DB Req/DB 
Ack process. Then, the pDAR sends the aggregated MLD 
report to join the multicast tree, so the multicast data will be 
routed to the pDAR, finally to the MN. When the MN 
performs handover to new DAR (nDAR), the MN performs 
an attachment procedure using RS/RA messages. The nDAR 
immediately queries to the CDB to get the mobility session 
information of the MN (previous anchor points) and the 
multicast context information of the MN (content source and 
multicast group address). Then, the MN performs a location 
update procedure to the pDAR via PBU/PBA messages and 
sends an aggregated MLD report to the multicast tree. From 
that point on, the multicast data can flow from the multicast 
tree to nDAR, finally to the MN. 
III. 
PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 
In this section, our scheme and three others: 1) Base 
deployment for multicast listener support in PMIPv6 domain 
scheme; 2) Tunnel-Based Reactive Scheme; and 3) Tunnel-
Based Proactive Scheme will be evaluated and compared in 
terms of packet loss rate. The analytical model is referred 
from [3], [5], [6]. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Reference Topology 
 
Figure 3 shows the network topology used for 
performance evaluation. Dscheme is defined as the total 
latency for completing all signaling procedures plus the 
time for sending the first multicast data packet to the MN. 
In our analysis, we only take into account the signaling 
procedures used for receiving the multicast data. The 
formula for calculating each component delay tentities is 
referred from [5]. 
 
· 
Base deployment for multicast listener support in 
PMIPv6 domain (BDMP) 
 = 4 + 3 
  (1) 
· 
Tunnel-Based Reactive Scheme (TBRS) [3] 
= 4 + 2 + 3 
 (2) 
· 
Tunnel-Based Proactive Scheme (TBPS) [3] 
 = 4 + 2 +  
    (3) 
· 
Our scheme without tunnel when deploying MLD-
Proxy (MPWT) 
  = 2 + 2 +  
     (4) 
 
We assume the coverage area of each DAR has the 
diameter l, the velocity of the MN is v, and the density of 
the MN in one coverage area . The subnet crossing rate is 
given as follows: 
 
 =  /  
 
             (5) 
 
We suppose the packet arrival rate follows the Poisson 
distribution and has the average value λ. Thus, the packet 
loss rate is calculated as:  
 
   =  ×  ×    
 
(6) 
 
IV. 
NUMERICAL RESULTS 
The numerical values for performance analysis are 
referred from [5] [6]. Figure 4 shows the multicast packet 
loss rate variation with the mobility rate of the MN. The 
multicast packet loss rate of our scheme increases at a much 
lower 
rate than two 
other 
tunnel-based 
schemes. 
Additionally, our scheme has a bit lower packet loss rate 
than the BDMP. This low packet loss rate is resulted from 
the low handover latency of our scheme. This low latency 
of our scheme is due to optimized signaling operation (one 
CDB query/response for getting both the mobility session 
and the multicast context information). By separating 
multicast and unicast routing, we can receive the multicast 
data without waiting for signaling procedures of   unicast 
traffic to finish. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Packet Loss rate 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we proposed a scheme to support 
multicast listener in the DMM domain.  Our scheme uses a 
direct routing concept which utilizes the existing multicast 
infrastructure and separates multicast function from LMA, 
so existing problems, such as traffic duplication and non-
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-285-1
INTERNET 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Evolving Internet

optimal routing, have been solved. By numerical analysis, 
our scheme achieves the lowest packet loss rate, when the 
handoff rate increases. Therefore, our scheme will provide a 
better user of experience. Our future work will include the 
simulation of our scheme to get the exact packet loss rate. 
In addition, we will extend to support multicast sender in 
DMM domain, in other words, the mobility of multicast 
content source. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by the MSIP(Ministry of 
Science, ICT & Future Planning), Korea, under the 
Convergence-ITRC(Convergence Information Technology 
Research Center) support program (NIPA-2013-H0401-13-
1004) supervised by the NIPA 
REFERENCES 
[1] IETF DMM WG, http://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/dmm/ [retrieved: 
April, 2013]. 
[2] T. Schmidt, M. Waehlisch, and S. Krishnan, “Base Deployment for 
Multicast Listener Support in PMIPv6 Domains,” IETF RFC 6224, 
April 2011. 
[3] S. Figueiredo, S. Jeon, and R. L. Aguiar, “Use-cases Analysis for 
Multicast Listener Support in Network-based Distributed Mobility 
Management,” Proc. IEEE Symp. Personal Indoor and Mobile Radio 
Communications (PIMRC 2012), Sep. 2012, pp. 1478-1483, doi: 
10.1109/PIMRC.2012.6362581. 
[4] S. Jeon, N. Kang, and Y. Kim, “Mobility Management Based on 
Proxy Mobile IPv6 for Multicasting Services in Home Networks,” 
IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics (TCE), vol. 55, no. 3, 
Aug. 2009, pp. 1227-1232. 
[5] C. Makaya and S. Pierre, “An Analytical Framework for 
Performance Evaluation of IPv6 based mobility management 
protocols,” IEEE Transaction on Wireless Communication (TWC), 
Vol. 7, No. 3, Mar. 2008, pp. 972-983. 
[6] S. Jeon, N. Kang, Y. Kim, and W. Yoon, “Enhanced PMIPv6 Route 
Optimization Handover,” IEICE Transactions on Communications 
vol. E91-B, no.11, Nov. 2008, pp. 3715-3718. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-285-1
INTERNET 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Evolving Internet

