eALIS1.1: The Toolbox of Generalized Intensional Truth Evaluation  
Gábor Alberti and László Nőthig 
University of Pécs, Department of Linguistics 
eALIS Theoretical, Computational and Cognitive Research Team, Pécs, Hungary 
emails: {alberti.gabor@pte.hu, nothig.laszlo@gmail.com} 
 
Abstract—Our software eALIS1.1 is primarily intended to 
supply linguists with a highly intelligent device to build frag-
ments of languages. Then (non-linguist) experts can elaborate a 
peculiarly “multiplied” database that offers, besides the model 
of the external world, hundreds of its (appropriately labeled) 
alternatives. According to the eALIS theoretical framework 
we use, these alternative models can all be linked to human 
agents represented in the world model as their pieces of 
knowledge, beliefs, desires, intentions, dreams. Finally, 
(further) users can select lexical items to build sentences, the 
(generalized) truth-conditional interpretation of which they 
will be given on the basis of the actual version of the above-
sketched “multiplied world model”. Our software serves not 
only the theoretical purpose of trying out the "pragma-
linguistics" theory (by implementing it), but also the practical 
purpose of collecting and systematizing data in the peculiar 
structure due to eALIS, intended to truly capture human 
intelligence.  
Keywords—dynamic discourse semantics; possible worlds; 
truth-conditional interpretation; presupposition. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
We are working on the implementation of a pragma-
linguistics theory, eALIS (Reciprocal and Lifelong 
Interpretation System), intended to truly capture human 
intelligence by means of a peculiarly multiplied world 
model. The implementation of this “intelligent” structure is 
our primary innovation. 
At the moment, it is very important to us that the 
software, which is permanently developed, has repercussions 
on the theory, due to the fact that the theory can be tested and 
sophisticated by means of the software. In a later period the 
practical purpose of collecting and systematizing data in the 
peculiar structure due to eALIS will stand out. 
The main difficulties lie with the fact that we are working 
on a completely general toolbox that utilizes the afore-
mentioned multiplied world model, that is, one which is 
underspecified in several respects but can be rapidly 
specified when it is designated for particular purposes. This 
also holds for the linguistic input; some difficult grammatical 
phenomena that should be captured in a demanding way are 
collected in Section VI. Due to the uniform and holistic 
approach of eALIS, we cannot afford to use parsers or 
other devices developed in other projects. 
Recursivity is another stubborn problem. Unlimited 
chains of linguistic expressions can be produced, the 
elaborated pragmatico-semantic analysis of which leads to 
proliferation problems. 
It is also difficult to register the copies of multiplied 
entities in almost identical alternative models. We should 
apply safe and effective but very rapid methods in copying 
huge databases in a way that makes it possible for us to carry 
out the relevant differences between them. 
Nevertheless, the most difficult task is the safe and 
systematic treatment of temporal entities, which come from 
the model of the external world as well as from the 
alternative models, and also come from the event structure of 
lexical items and from the discourse structure of sentences to 
be parsed. We have been led to the conclusion that the utter 
key to different kinds of systematization problems is utilizing 
points of time as special “stamps”. 
Let us then turn to the structure of the paper. Section II 
sketches the current version of eALIS. Then our software 
eALIS1.1 is demonstrated through discussing its different 
kinds of potential users (Section III) and its main use cases 
for the users we call internal users (Section IV) and for those 
we call external users (Section V). Section VI demonstrates 
the analysis of some linguistic examples with the purpose of 
elucidating our ambition to capture the highest possible level 
of human intelligence coded in language. We will conclude 
the paper (Section VII) with some remarks on the status of 
this “work in progress” among our previous works. 
II. 
THE CURRENT VERSION OF EALIS 
eALIS is a theory that immediately relies on Discourse 
Representation Theory (DRT) [1]. It can thus be introduced 
as belonging to the family of representational dynamic dis-
course semantics [1] [2]. Its (forty-page-long) definition is 
available at [23]. It is intended to reconcile the formal exact-
ness of generative syntaxes with the dynamic approach of 
optimality theories and DRT, bearing in mind the holistic 
stance of cognitive linguists [3] [4]. 
In the post-Montagovian world of formal semantics, 
Discourse Representation Theory (DRT) [1]―which has 
offered a revolutionary solution to the resolution problem of 
(“donkey”) anaphora and attractive visual representations 
for discourse meaning―is often criticized from “inside” as 
well as from “outside”, considerably weakening its 
legitimacy. The internal criticism comes from the world of 
the 
dynamic 
model-theoretic 
semantics, 
from 
the 
Amsterdam School [5], and pertains to the (mathematically 
unquestionable) eliminability of exactly this attractive visual 
representation, insisting on “Montague’s heritage” [6]. The 
external criticism comes from the Proof-Theoretic School 
[7], among others (Pollard [8]); they point at the dubious 
status and construction of possible worlds. 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-352-0
INTELLI 2014 : The Third International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

We claim that eALIS [3] [4] [9]―while considerably 
relying on the representationalism of DRT in the course of 
solving a wide range of linguistic problems in order to 
maximally exploit and develop the excellent facilities 
provided by this representationalism―offers exactly the 
radical ontological innovation which lies with the 
elimination of the above-mentioned two dubious levels of 
representation, referred to as I and III below in Fig. 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Components / levels of representation in DRT: I-IV; 
and their re-arranged ontology in eALIS: 
I. DRS: the semantic representation of sentences constituting coherent texts 
II. Model of the external world (for extensional interpretation) 
III. Possible worlds (for intensional interpretation) 
IV. Interlocutors’ information states 
eALIS embeds representational levels I and III―more 
exactly, their relevant content―in the representation of 
information states (IV), relying on the stance that, as 
interlocutors obtain information through discourses, their 
information states are worth regarding as gigantic, lifelong, 
DRSs. An information state has a double nature: it functions 
as a “representation” in the above regard while it is used as 
“what is to be represented” in the interpretation of, say, the 
intensional sentence types shown in (2b-d) below: it also 
depends on different persons’ information states if these 
sentences are true, in contrast to sentence (2a), the truth 
value of which only depends on facts of the external world. 
Note in passing about the aforementioned “double nature of 
information states” that modern set theory exactly relies on a 
similar idea: Sets and their elements must not be mixed up; 
this does not mean, however, that a set could not serve as an 
element of another set. 
a. “Ben is bald.” 
b. “Sue knows that/if [Ben is bald]” 
c. “Joe guesses that Sue definitely wants to convince him to take it for granted 
that [Ben is bald].” 
Figure 2.  Sentences to be interpreted in different world(let)s. 
We are going to illustrate the descriptive and explanatory 
power of eALIS by sketching the interpretation of sentence 
(3a) below, featuring realize, which is a factive verb. Hence, 
it is a precondition of interpreting the sentence as true (or 
rather, as “well-formed”) that the Evening Star should 
coincide with the Morning Star in (the model of) the external 
world. This means that the entity referred to as the Evening 
Star by the given astronomer should be the same entity he 
refers to as the Morning Star. In the approach of eALIS, 
this relation is captured formally as demonstrated in (3b) 
below: the internal entity rEveningStar should be anchored to the 
same external entity as the internal entity rMorningStar. 
 
 
Figure 3.  The interpretation of realize and the Venus-problem 
a. “An ancient astronomer realized that the Evening Star is the same as the 
Morning Star.” 
b. (rEvSt) is-the-same-as (rMoSt) (since uVenus is-the-same-as uVenus) 
c. It does not hold that rEveningStar is-the-same-as rMorningStar at  in the 
astronomer’s worldlet of astronomic hypotheses 
d. It holds that rEveningStar is-the-same-as rMorningStar at ', which is a later point 
of time in the astronomer’s worldlet of astronomic hypotheses 
The astronomer himself is not (necessarily) aware of the 
co-anchoring of the two internal entities at his disposal (in 
his appropriate worldlet); but the fact of co-anchoring is an 
external requirement due to the factive character of the verb. 
Two further requirements to be satisfied in order for sentence 
(3a) to qualify as true concern two information states of the 
astronomer at different points of time, independently of the 
external world: what is to be checked is whether there is a 
“same-as” relation between the internal entity rEveningStar and 
the internal entity rMorningStar in the one information state (3d) 
while they do not stand in the “same-as” relation in the other 
one (3c) 
All in all, three competing world(let) models should be 
considered simultaneously (“prism effect”), and three 
entities―an external one and two internal ones―should be 
inspected. As the three models are all parts of the one 
complete model of the history of the external world and all 
internal reflections associated with it (see Fig. 2 above), in 
this matrix model (3b-d) can all be checked. 
It must be noted that the analysis relies on the same 
facilities available in the cognitive linguistics framework; 
see, for instance, Pelyvás [10], who follows Langacker’s 
approach to nominal grounding [11]. The most important 
tenet of this view is that all nominals are grounded in the 
“reality” of the Idealized Conceptual Model(s) evoked in the 
discourse, which is relative to speaker and hearer, rather than 
directly in objective reality. From the point of view of 
linguistic analysis the reality that we could call “objective” 
 
uVenus 
 
rEvSt       rMoSt 
 
 
 
I. 
DRS 
III. 
PW 
 
IV. 
IS 
 
II. 
w0 
 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-352-0
INTELLI 2014 : The Third International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

(i.e., independent of speakers’ and hearers’ beliefs) is only of 
marginal importance... 
III. 
USERS AND USES 
A. Internal Users 
Our software eALIS1.1 is primarily intended to supply 
linguists with a device to build fragments of arbitrary 
languages of arbitrary morphological types. These frag-
ments can capture such specialties of human languages as, 
for instance, the compositional cumulation of meaning units 
[6]. The definable meanings are pragmatico-semantic des-
criptions that satisfy the relevant definitions of eALIS [3]. 
The group of users defined in Section I-A will be referred to 
as internal users.  
B. External Users 
Those using the developed language fragment will be 
referred to as external users. In the course of using the 
software, they can select lexical items to build sentences, the 
(generalized) truth-conditional interpretation of which they 
will be given on the basis of a “multiplied world model”, 
which they have themselves constructed or received from 
“internal” experts [12].  
Possible external users may be detectives or judges, for 
instance, who can have the truth of groups of propositions 
evaluated. In harmony with our “constructionist” stance, we 
mean by the aforementioned “generalized truth-conditional 
evaluation”, besides the final true/false value, the collection 
of all the information required to reach this truth value. Our 
software thus, among others, serves the purpose of 
collecting and systematizing data in the effective structure 
eALIS offers. 
IV. 
USE CASES PROVIDED FOR INTERNAL USERS 
A. Defining Relations 
Internal users can define an external world w0, over the 
universe of which (consisting of entities ui) they can define 
relations of different arities [6]. One argument of all these 
relations is to be a series of disjoint temporal intervals. The 
software is to “dictate” (through permanent queries) the 
development of the external world: it requests new and new 
relations, and in the case of a given relation it requests the 
provision of (the initial and final points of) temporal 
intervals (among others). 
Such relations can be defined in this way which are 
homogeneous in the sense that they qualify as true or false 
“momentarily”, i.e., at each internal point of the temporal 
intervals independently. In Hungarian, for instance, utazik 
‘travel’ and úszik ‘swim’ are homogeneous relations while 
hazautazik ‘travel home’ and átússza ‘swim across’ are 
heterogeneous. Further, each argument position of a relation 
can be associated with other relations of the group of 
relations defined earlier which provide us with restricting 
information. The agent argument of the Hungarian verb 
utazik ‘travel’, for instance, can be associated with the 
restricting relation ember ‘human’. 
B. Defining Label Strings of Worldlets 
 Relative to the set of “worldlets” (small partial models 
of alternative worlds) defined up to a certain point, the 
internal user can define (by simultaneous recursion) a new 
worldlet where the basis of this definition is the singleton 
consisting of the external world w0. Specifically, relative to 
a worldlet w', a worldlet w" can be determined through a 
quintuple of labels like the one shown in (4a) below. It 
defines the worldlet containing a human being’s (rSue) 
knowledge (“maximal” belief); see sentence (2b) in Section 
II. 
a. BEL,MAX,rSue,",+ 
b. – 
c. BEL,med,rJoe,,+INT,MAX,rSue,',+BEL,MAX,rJoe,",+ 
Figure 4.  Labeling worldlets. 
Alternatives to label BEL are labels INT (intention) and 
DES (desire), among others. Alternatives to label MAX are 
lower levels of intensity: e.g., aMX (almost maximal). The 
fourth member of the label quintuple is polarity; the values of 
this parameter are listed in (4b) above, but their interpretation 
is provided later. 
The software can show through what kind of defining 
steps one can reach a worldlet relative to the external world 
as a fixed starting point. The label string in (4c) above, for 
instance, defines a worldlet which is to be regarded as the 
collection of information the status of which can be captured 
by means of the linguistic expression shown in (2c) in 
Section II.  
C. Worldlets, Infons and Polarity Values 
Internal users can assign pieces of information to 
worldlets. This procedure is to be “dictated” by the software 
as follows. 
In the more general case, a point of time should be 
specified. As a reaction of the software, on the basis of the 
above-discussed temporal-interval series belonging to the 
relations, it is written which relations stand between which 
entities at the given point of time. If the user specifies, besides 
a point of time, a relation and some entities which occupy 
certain argument positions of the relation, the task of the 
software remains the writing of the lacking entities which 
stand in the given relation with the provided entities at the 
provided point of time. The unit of this writing process is the 
external infon [13]: an infon means the piece of information 
that certain entities stand in a certain relation at the given 
moment (e.g., Joe loves Sue, or Joe is just traveling). 
Internal users can assign an infon (produced in the way 
sketched above) to an arbitrary worldlet for an arbitrary 
interval of time. The application of this temporal interval 
serves the purpose of capturing such factors as the dwindling 
into oblivion or some re-categorization of pieces of 
information. 
Assigning a group E of infons to a worldlet standing with 
the external world in the relation provided in (4a) above can 
be interpreted as follows: Sue perceives information E from 
the external world and accepts as the current state of her 
environment. A similar interpretation in the case of the 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-352-0
INTELLI 2014 : The Third International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

complex relation provided in (1c) is as follows: Joe suspects 
that Sue wants to make him to be sure that information E is 
true (while Sue herself, for instance, does not necessarily 
believe in the truth of E; nor is E true in the external world). 
If the same infon is simultaneously assigned to 
someone’s positive belief-worldlet (see ‘+’ in (4b) above), 
negative desire-worldlet (‘–’ in (4b)) and neutral (‘0’ in (4b)) 
intention-worldlet, this complex “evaluation” captures this 
typical situation: the person in question perceives something 
and accepts its truth, but longs for its opposite without 
intending to change it (at least at that moment). 
It is worth noting in connection with the polarity values 
listed in (4b) above that if an entity does not stand in the 
relation ‘bald’ in the external world, then the infon declaring 
the given entity’s momentary baldness is to be assigned to the 
experiencer’s negative (‘–’) or ‘undefined’ (‘’) belief-
worldlets depending on the restricting relations, mentioned in 
Section II-A. Ben, for instance, can be thought by an 
experiencer to be “not bald” while in the case of the Eiffel 
Tower its baldness is undefined. 
As for the crossed zero in (4b) above, the sentence 
variants shown in (2b) above illustrate its interpretation and 
significance. The variant with that can be captured by 
assigning the infon e declaring Ben’s baldness to the worldlet 
(in the speaker’s information state, i.e., mind) which contains 
the information that the speaker assumes Sue to qualify as 
true. The variant with if, however, should be accounted for in 
a slightly different way: what this variant reveals about the 
speaker’ mind is that the speaker thinks that in Sue’s mind 
infon e does not belong to a neutral belief-worldlet (one with 
a ‘0’ polarity value). 
D. Information Not Coming from Outside 
Internal users can also assign information to worldlets 
indirectly, that is, not on the basis of (the relations of) the 
external world. This should be “dictated” by the software as 
follows. 
The software should ask for predicate names and 
argument numbers, and then produce argument places with 
inserted “new” entities, which the software should also urge 
the user to anchor to “old” (external or internal) entities (NB 
their anchoring to any entities is only a possibility). Section 
II-C, where we defined the procedure of creating infons 
assigned to worldlets in human minds on the basis of states of 
affairs in the external world, is worth completing with a short 
comment. An internal infon does not contain the same entity 
names as the corresponding external infon does. Instead of 
identifying them, the correspondence between external and 
internal entities should be accounted for by anchoring 
elements of the former group to those of the latter group. In 
this way, we can explain the cases of misunderstanding where 
the same external fact is linked to different participants in two 
experiencers’ minds. 
E. Building the Lexicon 
The internal user is given a core lexicon on the basis of 
the predicates the creation of which was described in II-C; 
and this core lexicon is enriched with the predicates created 
in the way described in II-D. Elements of the latter group of 
predicates should be associated with meaning postulates [6], 
by the help of queries of the software. 
Note that items of the core lexicon need not be associated 
with meaning postulates since their interpretation is trivial on 
the basis of their creation: as they have been created by 
copying certain “patterns” of the external world, the rule 
concerning the pattern matching their semantic evaluation is 
based on is automatic. True perception and pattern matching 
is the same process, considered from opposite directions. 
Let us return to the predicates whose forms are defined in 
II-D; they should be assigned meaning in the way to be 
defined in II-F. Before entering into details, it must be noted 
that this is the crucial innovation of eALIS1.1, because this 
is the toolbox which exploits the advantages and results of all 
the model-theoretic theories, the discourse-representational 
innovations and the proof-theoretic ideas, and the “diagnosis” 
of cognitive linguistics on the weaknesses and shortcomings 
of these three approaches. 
What comes from formal semantics [6]? The procedure 
of 
pattern 
matching. 
Further, 
the 
application 
of 
interpretational bases used as alternatives to each other 
(“possible worlds”  eALIS-worldlets). And the con-
sideration of the rate of successful instances of pattern 
matching compared to the entire set of possible instances of 
pattern matching. 
The idea of operation over the partially ordered system of 
worldlets is due to Discourse Representation Theory [1] [2]. 
The step-by-step execution of this operation, referred to as 
‘accommodation’ in DRT, coincides with the proof-theoretic 
processing of semantic information [7]. 
The modeling of the following linguistic elements is due 
to cognitive linguists [10] [11] [15]: me, you, (s)he, here, 
there, now, then, these here (in the context), those there 
(demonstration). 
F. How to Define Lexical Items 
The software should help the internal user (the formal 
linguist) in assigning (groups of alternative) phonetic forms 
and meaning postulates to predicate names, besides such 
straightforward information as (sub)categorization and 
argument number.  
Meaning postulates essentially consist of first-order 
formulas. The most peculiar element of our method is that 
each formula like this should be associated with a set of such 
chains of worldlet labels as the one shown in (1b) above and 
the information as to which worldlet(s) these chains to be 
linked to in the course of interpreting sentences (possibilities 
are the external worldlet, certain worldlets of the selected 
speaker, addressee, or participants referred to in the 
sentences, or worldlets which can be identified in the 
selected context or scope of demonstration (see the last 
paragraph in Section II-E). 
V. 
USE CASES FOR EXTERNAL USERS 
The external users―who can construct a sentence and 
specify the speaker, the addressee, the entities assumed to be 
present in the context (and possibly a subset of those in the 
scope of some demonstration), the speech time and the time 
of reference, among others―are given a generalized truth 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-352-0
INTELLI 2014 : The Third International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

evaluation. This means that they are given not only a truth 
value but also all the pragmatic well-formedness conditions 
of the sentence “performed” in the specified context. 
Thus, they can look “inside” all relevant participants’ 
minds (i.e., the current and possibly some previous 
information states). They can realize, for instance, if the 
definite noun phrases are suitable for unambiguously 
identifying the intended denotata. They can also receive 
information about the success of satisfying other kinds of 
presupposition. They can detect, through comparing the 
information provided by the sentence and the information 
found in the specified interlocutors’ appropriate worldlets, if 
there might emerge some misunderstanding, lie, bluff, 
deception [4]. 
VI. 
LINGUISTIC EXAMPLES 
A. Generalized Truth Evaluation 
External users are given a peculiarly multiplied data base 
which contains, besides a relational model of some fragment 
of (the history of) the external world, several of its 
alternatives. These alternatives essentially play the role of 
possible worlds, known from intensional model-theoretic 
semantics, but they are finite constructions appearing as such 
parts of information-state models of interlocutors that can be 
construed as their beliefs, desires, intentions, or any other 
kinds of fictions (II-B [1]). 
This arrangement of worldlets enables us to carry out 
truth evaluation not only on the basis of the external world, 
which is necessary and sufficient, for instance, in the case of 
sentences (5a-a') below, but also on the basis of internal 
worldlets, which is obviously necessary in the case of 
sentences like (5b). The truth of the variants shown in (5b) 
does not depend on any facts in the external world. It 
depends on nothing else but Joe’s knowledge, or the 
knowledge that Sue attributes to Joe. In this latter case, it 
requires more steps to reach the worldlet which can serve as 
the basis of truth evaluation (external world model  Sue’s 
belief  Sue’s hypotheses on Joe’s beliefs); cases like this 
make it necessary to localize worldlets in the recursive way 
illustrated in (4c) in II-B. Verbs expressing modal attitude 
(e.g., think, guess, conjecture, wish) and many other 
expressions (e.g., according to someone) can be associated 
with meaning postulates by means of the tool described in II-
F: the essence of their meanings lies with the “direction 
indicator” function. Such direction indicators help us with 
finding the worldlets which can serve as the basis of the truth 
evaluation of the proposition that appears in the appropriate 
argument positions of the modal verbs or other linguistic 
expressions in question. 
a. It was snowing.     a'. It has snowed. 
b. (Sue thinks that) Joe knows that it was snowing. 
c. Patty was traveling home. 
d. That tall Finnish woman is pretty. 
Figure 5.  Generalized truth evaluation relying on worldlets. 
B. Past Continuous and Present Perfect 
Internal users can work out exacting and sophisticated 
syntaxes and semantics by the help of the toolbox offered by 
eALIS1.1. 
The truth value of (5a) above, for instance, can be 
calculated in the following way: the software should query 
the values of then and there, and then it should localize the 
area of the temporal external world model where pattern 
matching should be attempted in order to decide if it is 
snowing “then” and “there” (III). 
The truth evaluation of (5a'), however, requires the 
values of here and now, and what is to be checked in the 
external world is whether the landscape is snowy. The 
meaning postulate of the verb snow, thus, contains the 
determination of the result state (snowy), too. Note in passing 
that (5a') pragmatically suggests that it is not snowing at the 
relevant moment while the land is snowy as a result of an 
earlier snowing. 
C. Progressive Aspect 
The truth evaluation of sentence (5c) above also requires 
a polished and exacting meaning postulation because not 
only facts of the external world should be taken into account. 
A progressive sentence like this is also to be evaluated to be 
true in a case in which Patty never got home but she proves 
to have been travelling at the moment of then, she proves to 
intend to come home, and the speaker proves to attribute a 
quite high likelihood to this arrival (II-F) [1]. Thus, the 
content of certain internal worldlets is to be checked, besides 
the partial satisfaction of a travelling event in the external-
world model. 
D. The Intensional Character of Nicknames 
A demanded pragmatico-semantic analysis of nicknames 
also requires the toolbox sketched in II-F. Who is Patty in 
(5c) above, for instance? Internal users can capture the 
essence of the task of finding denotata by construing 
nicknames as special predicates the “truth evaluation” of 
which involves not (only) the external control on the 
correspondence between official names and nicknames but 
(also) the worldlets concerned in the following questions: is 
Patty a possible nickname of the speaker for the given person, 
does the speaker think that the addressee may (also) call her 
Patty, do they know this about each other, and so on. Hence, 
internal worldlets are to be checked via pattern matching. 
E. (Partially) Subjective Predicates 
Example (5d) above illustrates further advantages in 
meaning postulation of the toolbox demonstrated in II-F. The 
adjective pretty, for instance, is worth regarding as a fully 
personal and subjective judgment, with no extension in the 
external world. Nevertheless, (5d) does mean exactly the 
same as the sentence I consider her pretty. The truth of this 
latter sentence exclusively depends on the speaker while it 
would be elegant to base the evaluation of sentence (5d) on a 
somewhat less speaker-dependent calculation. As follows, 
for instance: (5d) is considered true if most persons in the 
external-world model consider the given lady to be pretty. 
According to an even more elegant solution, instead of the 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-352-0
INTELLI 2014 : The Third International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

entire set of persons, only those respected by the speaker are 
considered. The extension of the verb respect is to be 
checked in the external-world model. 
F. Demonstration and Anchoring 
The demonstrative noun phrase in (5d) illustrates another 
instance of the necessity for “pragmatically conscious” truth 
evaluation. That asks for the value of the “those there” 
parameter from the external user. It is elegant to assume that 
this value is a set of entities, out of which the software should 
select a unique entity on the basis of the predicates tall, 
Finnish and woman. Their extensions count in the external 
world, at least primarily; it is an elegant facility, however, to 
inspect the speaker’s beliefs as well, or the speaker’s hypo-
thesis about the addressee’s beliefs: sentence (5d) can be 
evaluated as true but ill-formed if, for instance, the speaker 
intends to refer to a tall Swedish woman about whom they 
think, incorrectly, that she is Finnish. 
VII. CONCLUDING REMARKS 
The current implementation of eALIS1.1 is a client-
server Windows application that has been elaborated in a 
Delphi environment, which guarantees rapid and flexible 
development. Access to data is executed via standard SQL 
commands by means of a relational  data-base management 
system. For this purpose, we currently use Firebird 
Interbase. 
The Prolog basis, applied in the experimental phase of 
our research [16] [14] [17] [18] [19] [20] [21] [22], has been 
replaced with Delphi environment, which is more capable of 
managing 
large 
data-bases, 
developing 
user-friendly 
interfaces, and constructing more complex applications. 
This the radical difference between eALIS1.1 and the 
aforementioned works. 
The menu items correspond to the services sketched in 
Section IV. Particular menu items are available to the 
different kinds of users defined in Section III after checking 
their identity and authenticity. At some points, the program 
provides illustrations of the structures constructed by either 
the system or its users: for instance, parsing trees, systems of 
worldlets, anchoring relations of entities. Figure 6 below 
illustrates this last facility. 
The software is permanently developed and expanded, 
exploiting new scientific results; it has repercussions on the 
theory, due to the fact that the theory can be tested by means 
of the software. 
As our software inherently belongs to a radically new 
and holistic “pragmalinguistics” theory (Section II), it 
would be uneasy to compare to softwares based on some 
different theoretical foundation. We are working on 
developing tests to evaluate its effectivity. 
 
Figure 6.  Interpreting the sentence shown in Fig. 3. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We are grateful to SROP-4.2.2.C-11/1/KONV-2012-
0005 (Well-Being in the Information Society). 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Kamp, J. van Genabith, and U. Reyle, “Discourse 
Representation Theory,” in Handbook of Philosophical Logic, 
vol. 15, D. Gabbay and F. Guenthner, eds. Berlin: Springer,  
2011, pp. 125–394. 
[2] N. Asher and A. Lascarides, Logics of Conversation. 
Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2003. 
[3] G. Alberti and M. Károly, “Multiple Level of Referents in 
Information State,” LNCS7181, 2002, pp. 349–362. 
[4] G. Alberti, N. Vadász, and J. Kleiber, “Ideal and Deviant 
Interlocutors in a Formal Interpretation System,” to  appear in 
The communication of certainty and uncertainty, A. 
Zuczkowski, ed. Amsterdam: Benjamins, 2014. 
[5] J. Groenendijk, M. Stokhof, and F. Veltman, “Coreference and 
Modality,” in The Handbook of Contemporary Semantic 
Theory, Sh. Lappin, ed. Oxford: Blackwell, 1996, pp. 179–213. 
[6] D. R. Dowty, R. E. Wall, and S. Peters, Introduction to 
Montague Semantics. Dordrecht: Reidel, 1981. 
[7] F. Nissim and R. Dyckhoff, “Proof-theoretic semantics for a 
natural language fragment,” Linguistics and Philosophy, vol. 
33 (6), 2010, pp. 447–477. 
[8] C. Pollard, “Hyperintensions.” ESSLLI 2007, http://www. 
cs.tcd.ie/esslli2007, 2007. 
[9] J. Kleiber and G. Alberti, “Uncertainty in Polar Questions and 
Certainty in Answers?,” to appear in Certainty-uncertainty – 
and the attitudinal space in between, S. Cantarini, W. 
Abraham, and E. Leiss, eds. Amsterdam: Benjamins, 2014. 
[10] P. Pelyvás, “Relating Cognitive Models In Nominal 
Grounding. Referential, Attributive Use and Referential 
Opacity: A Case for a Blend?” in Metaphors of sixty. Papers 
presented on the occasion of the 60th birthday of Zoltán 
Kövecses, R. Benczés and Sz. Csábi, eds. Budapest: SEAS, 
ELTE, 2006, pp. 196–209. 
[11] R. W. Langacker, “Remarks on Nominal Grounding,” 
Functions of Language 11:1. 2004, pp. 77–113. 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-352-0
INTELLI 2014 : The Third International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

[12] I. Kilián and G. Alberti, “A Metamodel-Driven Architecture 
for Generating, Populating and Manipulating “Possible 
Worlds” 
to 
Answer 
Questions,” 
in 
ICSOFT 
2013 
Proceedings, July 2013, pp. 74-78. 
[13] J. Seligman, J. and L. S. Moss, “Situation Theory,” in 
Handbook of Logic and Language, J. van Benthem and A. ter 
Meulen, eds. Amsterdam: Elsevier, and Cambridge: MIT 
Press, pp. 239–309, 1997. 
[14] G. Alberti, J. Kleiber, and A. Viszket, “GeLexi Project: 
Sentence Parsing Based on a GEnerative LEXIcon,” Acta 
Cybernetica 16 (Hungary). 2004, pp. 587–600. 
[15] R. W. Langacker, “Cognitive Grammar,” in The Oxford 
Handbook of Cognitive Linguistics. Oxford: Oxford Univ. 
Press, 2007, pp. 421–462. 
[16] G. Alberti, K. Balogh, J. Kleiber, and A. Viszket, “Total 
Lexicalism and GASGrammars: A Direct Way to Semantics,” 
LNCS 2588, 2003, pp. 37–48. 
[17] G. Alberti, and J. Kleiber, “The GeLexi MT Project,” in 
Proceedings of EAMT 2004 Workshop (Malta), J. Hutchins, 
ed. Valletta: Univ. of Malta, 2004, pp. 1–10. 
[18] G. Alberti and J. Kleiber, “The Grammar of eALIS and the 
Implementation of its Dynamic Interpretation,” Informatica 
(Slovenia) 34/2, 2010, pp. 103–110 
[19] G. Alberti, M. Károly, and J. Kleiber, “From Sentences to 
Scope Relations and Backward,” in Natural Language 
Processing and Cognitive Science, Proceedings of NLPCS 
2010, B. Sharp and M. Zock, eds. Funchal: SciTePress, 2010, 
pp. 100-111. 
[20] G. Alberti, M. Károly, and J. Kleiber, “The eALIS Model of 
Human Interpreters and Its Application in Computational 
Linguistics,” in Software and Data Technologies: 5th 
International Conference, ICSOFT, J. Cordeiro, M. Virvou, 
and B. Shishkov, eds. Heidelberg: Springer, 2010, 468–474. 
[21] G. Alberti and M. Károly, “The Implemented Human 
Interpreter as a Database,” in Proc. of Int. Conf. on 
Knowledge Engineering and Ontology Development, J. L. G. 
Diets, ed., Funchal: SciTePress, 2011, pp. 379–385. 
[22] M. Károly and G. Alberti, “The Implementation of a 
eALIS-based Method of Static Intensional Interpretation,” 
in Proc. of 5th International Conference on Knowledge 
Engineering and Ontology Development, J. Filipe and J. G. L. 
Dietz, eds, 2013, pp. 393–398. 
[23] http://lingua.btk.pte.hu/realispapers 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-352-0
INTELLI 2014 : The Third International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

