Using Historical Social Media Retrieved Trust
Attributes to Help Distinguishing Trustworthy Users
Teng-Chieh Huang
The University of Texas at Austin
The Center for Identity
Austin, Texas, USA
e-mail: tengchieh@utexas.edu
K. Suzanne Barber
The University of Texas at Austin
The Center for Identity
Austin, Texas, USA
e-mail: sbarber@identity.utexas.edu
Abstract—With the penetration of social media across the
world, the information generated by the users has increased
exponentially. The wisdom of crowds can now be easily accessed
from the Internet. The problem is, how to correctly interpret
the true public opinion without distorting it? Considering the
spam or malicious users hidden in the social media spreading
misinformation and disinformation, the solution might not be
trivial. Some previous work uses quantity accumulation trying
to mitigate the influence of bad users. More recent works add
machine learning techniques to help with the correct judgment.
However, the importance of the individual user - the actual
person who is behind the screen, does not attract the attention it
deserves. In this work, focusing on the history of user behavior, we
provide a different angle to understand the connection between
the credibility of social media users and the trustworthiness of
their virtual representatives. By analyzing Twitter data from
November 2017 to November 2021 which contains three types of
users (typical, topic-related, and expert) on two target domains
(politics and finance), we can gain deeper insights on the social
media users and their trustworthiness.
Index Terms—social media, trust, trust attributes, time series
forecast, random forests classification.
I. INTRODUCTION
The invention of the Internet and the emergence of social
media has exponentially increased the quantity of sources
a person can contact, but some of these sources may not
provide high quality information. Social media data is noisy,
loaded with contaminated data, advertisements, and scams.
The presence of misinformation and disinformation on social
media is a rising concern. For those who rely on social media
for information, be it for personal use or modern-day analysis
of social media data, it is important to know who they can
trust. There exist users who abuse the capability of social
media by spreading spam, fake news, or biased information.
These malicious users not only fool their audience, but may
also distort the information retrieved from social media for
analytical or prediction purposes.
We aim to find trustworthy information on social media by
finding trustworthy users. Specifically, this research addresses
how to recommend trustworthy information from specific
information sources using an innovative method of combining
interpersonal trust on the Internet and classification algorithms
for various target domains. We improve the existing and
develop new trust filters–measurable properties of social media
user profile, behavior, connections, posts, etc.–used to identify
trustworthy users.
We take a comprehensive list of trust attributes (i.e., proper-
ties of a social media user account or posts such as the number
of tweets or the number of followers) as potential trust filters
from previous work. Further, we consider some established
trust filters from previous work.
Using these potential trust filters, we develop a novel,
domain-independent method to distinguish three types of
social media (specifically Twitter) users from one another:
typical users, domain-related users, and experts. We measure
trust filters and see how they can rate the three types of
users. The value of the trust filter for typical users is the
average value for all the users. Domain-related users (e.g.,
stock-related users) are those that tweet with a set of domain-
related handles (e.g., @a stock ticker). Experts are real world
experts of the field, who we extract from reputable journalistic
sources outside social media.
By (1) observing the distribution of the historical trust
filter values across user types and domains, and studying the
correlation between trust filters, (2) using random forest for
time series forecasting to predict new trust filter values, and
(3) applying the random forest classifier to compare their
performance in distinguishing the types of users, we identify
which trust attributes can best distinguish expert, domain-
related, and typical users from one another. Most importantly,
we keep our work independent of the subject domain by
performing the same set of experiments in the finance as well
as the politics domain. Moreover, this model can be applied
to other target domains, such as health and entertainment.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II
discusses the research that uses social media as a predicting
tool in the focus domains of finance and politics. Section III
describes how to categorize user groups, data retrieval, and the
implementation of the trustworthy users differentiation. Sec-
tion IV shows the effectiveness of the proposed method with
different combinations. Section V concludes the contribution
of this work and indicates possible future work.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
INTELLI 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

II. BACKGROUND
A. Social media predictions in the finance domain
There exists a body of research exploring the power of
crowd wisdom as an indicator or a predictor of certain phe-
nomena. In the finance domain, for instance, high social media
coverage at the stock level can predict high subsequent return
volatility and trading activity [1]. The extracted sentiments of
social media users may be used to predict the stock market [2].
Techniques such as text mining [3] and machine learning are
frequently used to enhance the predicting power of social
media.
For the sake of completeness, we cover some of the most
notable related work that seek to predict stock markets, our
example target domain, albeit with very different methods. A
widely cited work [4] demonstrated how the Twitter mood,
in general, predicts the stock market closing values with
high accuracy. Nassirtoussi et al. [5] tried to predict foreign
exchange markets based on the text of breaking financial
news headlines. Dimpfl et al. [6] studied the dynamics of
stock market volatility using Internet search queries and found
that high stock market volatility can follow high volumes of
Internet searches. Nguyen et al. [7] performed stock market
prediction based on social media analysis as well. Instead of
taking all sentiments into account, they considered only the
sentiments of specific topics of the company to predict stock
price movement to increase the forecast accuracy. Oliveira
et al. [8] sought to predict stock markets through Twitter
posts. Among all the factors, they found sentiment and posting
volume to be particularly important for the forecasting of the
Standard and Poor’s 500 (S&P 500) index.
B. Social media predictions in the politics domain
The politics domain, particularly elections, is another
hotspot for testing the prediction power of social media.
Ever since Twitter started becoming an essential online social
platform, researchers have been exploring its potential of
predicting the election outcome [9]. The 2016 presidential
election of the United States, in particular, brought Twitter
under the spotlight of public attention. Compared to the
Clinton campaign’s strategy, the Trump campaign’s style in
social media points towards de-professionalization and even
amateurism as a counter trend in political communication [10].
Moreover, fake news spreading on Twitter [11], social bots dis-
torting public opinion [12], and even Russian interference [13]
all played roles on Twitter during the 2016 presidential elec-
tion. Therefore, it is critical to distinguish real users from
fraudulent or malicious sources before utilizing social media
as a prediction tool.
The work in [14] showed the distinction among different
types of user groups: typical users, target domain-related users
and experts of specific domains based on the trust attributes.
This work presented the possibility of utilizing social media
as a tool to distinguish the more experienced and possibly
credible users. This work also suggested some tweet-derived
attributes could become promising candidates to differentiate
the trustworthy users in specific target domains.
III. METHODOLOGY
A. User group categorization
For both the finance and politics domain, the users are
categorized based on their level of expertise, involvement,
and reputation to the specific target domain. A more detailed
definition of the three groups of Twitter users for each target
domain is specified below.
1) Finance domain:
• Typical users: The 1% random sampling of all Twitter
users (Also known as the Spritzer version of tweets),
which stands for the baseline among all groups. In this
work, 3000 typical users were randomly selected from
the Spritzer version of tweets.
• Stock-related users: The users who posted at least one
tweet with a reference to the symbols of the stock
market companies, such as $AAPL or $TSLA, during
the sampling period. This user group represents the users
who might have interest in the stock market, while they
may or may not be financial experts. Among all stock-
related users collected in 2020-2021 tweet data, 1000 of
them were randomly selected for this work.
• Financial experts: This group of users is retrieved from
well-known online articles which recommended the top-
notch financial experts to follow on Twitter [15]–[17].
These lists are compiled by their authors or by Wall Street
analysts and journalists, who are traditionally considered
financial authorities. There are 180 recommended finan-
cial experts and all of them were included in this work.
2) Politics domain: To keep the consistency between differ-
ent target domains, the definitions of three groups of Twitter
users were similar to the ones defined in the finance domain,
which are shown below.
• Typical users: The same 3000 users set as the finance
domain.
• Politics-related users: The users who posted tweets with
hashtags of the candidates, during the sampling period.
1000 of them were selected in the same manner as stock-
related users.
• Political experts: Following the same concept as the
financial experts, the political experts were recommended
by online articles regarding the specific expertise [18]–
[24]. There are 119 recommended political experts and
all of them were included in this work.
B. Twitter data retrieval
The list of typical users was randomly selected from the
“Spritzer” version of tweets. The lists of two domain-related
(finance and politics) users were collected from the same
dataset with previous defined requirements. The lists for ex-
perts were recommended by the sources mentioned previously.
After the list was established, all tweets posted by the listed
users were then downloaded using a Python library named
“tweepy.” The sampling period was from November 1st 2017
to October 31st 2021. The tweets were then divided into 8
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
INTELLI 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

segments, each of which contains half-year-long tweets, and
trust attributes which will be introduced in the next section.
C. Tweet-retrieved trust attributes
We derive a set of trust attributes retrieved from tweets
for each user and use the trust attributes as indicators of
the trustworthiness of users. Here, an attribute refers to a
user, text, or social connection information of a single social
media user. 16 trust attributes (shown in Table I) are selected
based on the analysis of previous research [14] which include
tweets content, Twitter user information, and social network
structure. The trust attributes we chose are neutral, suitable for
universal purpose across all domains and do not require any
specialized retrieval technique to calculate the attribute for a
user. The expertise score is determined by the “keywords” of
the corresponding target domain. In the finance domain, the
keywords are defined as stock symbols, which is the same
as the definition to retrieve stock-related users. In the politics
domain, the keywords are sets of frequently used election-
related hashtags among political-related users. Those tweets
containing keywords are counted as domain-related tweets.
Trust attributes were calculated semiannually from each
user’s tweets. Therefore, at most 8 sets (2017∼2021 and twice
per year) of trust attributes could be possessed by a single
user from the time frame we sampled. The time series of trust
attributes represents the change of user behavior in time, which
means that by analyzing and understanding how trust attributes
change with time, we should be able to forecast the future
behavior of each user.
D. Time series analysis
To predict the future trust attributes based on historical
data, first we must identify the requirements. The forecast
model should be able to forecast multiple trust attributes from
multiple historical trust attributes. Here, we assumed trust
attributes could be influenced by other trust attributes, which
should be self-explanatory. Attributes like Avg len tweet and
Avg n word tweet are highly related to each other, as are
Len per word. Many other trust attributes may have implicit
influence on others, like Followers count and Retweet ratio.
However, it is extremely difficult for the classic time series
forecast to train a single model that can predict several targets.
Not to mention that the short length of data history and huge
quantity of users which will require gigantic computation
efforts, might provide only mediocre predicting accuracy.
Slicing more time frames to the same period of time might
be a solution, but since the sampling database was ”Spritzer”
version as explained in Section III-B, the tweets generated
from a single user in a short period of time could be sparse.
If the trust attributes were calculated quarterly or monthly, the
majority of users would have merely 1, 2, or even no tweets
in most of the time slots.
To mitigate the above-mentioned problems, instead of uti-
lizing traditional time series forecasting methods, this work
applied the Random Forests (RF) time series model. There
are several advantages for using the RF time series model
than other methods of time series forecasting.
• Handles non-linear time series data: many popular classic
time series forecasting models such as AutoRegressive
Integrated Moving Average (ARIMA) assume linear re-
lationships between variables [28]. However, in the real-
world case, many data sets are non-linear and hence
require complicated preprocessing of the data to guar-
antee linearity. This increases the overall complexity
of the computation, especially when more variables are
considered. On the other hand, RF can handle both linear
and non-linear variables well.
• Does not require long historical data: the RF model does
not require long continuous time series data, since it only
needs the length of predefined lag variables, which is
flexible. The lag was set to be 1 in the experiment.
• Decision trees are a great fit to simulate individual
user’s behavior: RF is an ensemble learning method. For
each individual user, it is not essential for the model
to perfectly forecast trust attributes. What we need is
the forecast of trust attributes to have high accuracy
macroscopically, i.e., the forecast attributes have high
accuracy in each user group.
• Generates multiple outputs with only one trained model:
Python sklearn library supports multiple-outputs fitting
in a single model. This is extremely beneficial to this
work because it is not just one variable, but 16 variables
are being predicted. By training only one model, the
computational efforts can be hugely decreased.
To train the RF time series forecasting model, we first
converted time series data into supervised learning data. Only
users with at least 4 recorded active postings out of 8 time slots
were included. There are 902 users in the finance domain ( 547
typical users, 260 stock-related users, and 95 financial experts)
and 967 users in the politics domain ( 547 typical users, 376
politics-related users, and 44 political experts). The last time
slot was used to test the overall prediction accuracy. Therefore,
with lag variable setting to be 1, each user could have at least
2 training sets. The number of estimators (decision trees) was
5000. The result will be shown in Section IV.
E. Random forests classification
Different from random forests time series forecast in the
previous section, the random forest classification here is used
to test the capability of the RF time series forecast to enhance
the classification accuracy. To avoid ambiguity, the following
section will use the acronym RF-T for random forests time
series model and will refer to random forests classification
model used to distinguish user groups as RF-C.
Trust attributes were tested having the capability to distin-
guish between user groups [14]. In this paper, we further tested
their capability by training RF-C with different combinations
of various historical data and the forecast data made by RF-T.
The RF-C models were trained by the following datasets.
• T−1: One time step before the latest set of trust attributes
T.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
INTELLI 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

TABLE I
THE DEFINITION OF TRUST ATTRIBUTES.
Trust attributes
Definition
From previous work
Expertise score
Ratio of tweets which is domain related
[25]
Statuses count
Total number of posted tweets in user history
[25], [26]
Followers count
Number of followers of a user
[25]–[27]
Friends count
Number of friends of a user
[26], [27], [27]
Avg len tweet
Average tweet length in characters per tweet
[26]
Avg n word tweet
Average number of words per tweet
[26]
Avg hashtag
Average number of hashtag symbols per tweet
[25]–[27]
Avg tweet URL
Proportion of tweets containing URLs
[25]–[27]
Avg tweet question
Proportion of tweets containing “?”
[26]
Avg tweet exclamation
Proportion of tweets containing “!”
[25], [26]
Avg tweet uppercase
Proportion of tweets composed by upper-case letters
[26]
Retweet ratio
Proportion of retweets in user’s posts
[26]
Len per word
Average length of words among all tweets
[25]
Avg retweet
Average number of retweets a user received per tweet
Favorite per retweet
Average number of favorites received per tweet
Len per word
Average length of characters per word
• T−1−→−3: 1, 2, and 3 time steps before the latest set of
trust attributes T.
• T−1 + TF orecast: T-1 and the forecast of T .
• T−1−→−3+TF orecast: 1, 2, and 3 time steps before T and
the forecast of T.
The latest set of trust attributes T were used as testing sets
to verify the accuracy of RF-C in each combination.
IV. EXPERIMENT RESULTS
A. Random forests time series forecast
Based on historical trust attributes, RF-T can forecast
the future trust attributes of users with great accuracy. For
trust attributes having high time-dependency, such as Follow-
ers count (Fig. 1), the forecast values are close to actual
values. As for trust attributes with lower time-dependency,
such as Avg len tweet (Fig. 2), the predicting error tends to
be more.
For a baseline comparison, we applied trust attributes one
time step before T, which is T−1, as a simplified guess of T.
Table II shows Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) of all trust
attributes when using T−1 and TF orecast as a comparison to
T. For both domains, TF orecast has a better RMSE than T−1.
This shows the probability of using RF-T to forecast trust
attributes.
B. Use time series forecast to enhance social media user
classification
Fig. 3 to Fig. 6 highlight the quality of trustworthiness
forecast predictions offered by the proposed RF-T method for
the finance and the political domains using four training sets.
These experimental results report on (1) accuracy measured
by the ratio of correct predictions to total predictions and
(2) “Area Under the receiver operating characteristic Curve”
(AUC), measuring the overall quality of the proposed trust
filters (attributes) in predicting classifications of user trustwor-
thiness. A number of decision trees (estimators) were tested
from 10 to 1000.
Considering the small difference in RMSEs in the finance
domain between T−1 and TF orecast, it is interesting to see
how TF orecast improved the RF-C model, especially regarding
AUC. It is also worth mentioning that no matter with or
without adding TF orecast, T−1−→−3 provides worse accuracy
and AUC than T−1. The reason might be that adding older data
to train RF-C ends up disrupting the model because outdated
data cannot correctly represent the latest trend.
Another observation is that for some cases, adding TF orecast
to the training sets did not increase accuracy and AUC. Our
explanation is that, when the accuracy or AUC is high enough,
adding TF orecast could not enhance the performance since it
is already saturated. If we change the classification targets to
a different set of users instead of the same set of users, the
potential of the enhancement might be better expressed.
Table III and Table IV provide the detailed values of
accuracy and AUC when the estimator is 500. We can see
that, once accuracy is over 0.95, there is no big difference
regarding the addition of TF orecast.
TABLE II
RMSE OF T−1 AND TF orecast.
T−1
TF orecast
Finance Domain
1391
1336
Politics Domain
11872
2848
TABLE III
ACCURACY AND AUC OF FOUR COMBINATIONS OF TRAINING SETS FOR
THE FINANCE DOMAIN WHERE THE NUMBER OF ESTIMATORS IS 500.
Accuracy
AUC
T−1
0.9688
0.9078
T−1 + TF orest
0.9673
0.9199
T−1−
→−3
0.9247
0.8543
T−1−
→−3 + TF orecast
0.9558
0.9089
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
INTELLI 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

Fig. 1. Comparison of T and TF orecast in Followers count in the finance
domain.
Fig. 2.
Comparison of T and TF orecast in Avg len tweet in the finance
domain.
Fig. 3. Accuracy of four combinations of training sets for the finance domain.
The number of estimators ranges from 10 to 1000.
Fig. 4.
AUC of four combinations of training sets for the finance domain.
The number of estimators ranges from 10 to 1000.
Fig. 5. Accuracy of four combinations of training sets for the politics domain.
The number of estimators ranges from 10 to 1000.
Fig. 6. AUC of four combinations of training sets for the politics domain.
The number of estimators ranges from 10 to 1000.
TABLE IV
ACCURACY AND AUC OF FOUR COMBINATIONS OF TRAINING SETS FOR
THE POLITICS DOMAIN WHERE THE NUMBER OF ESTIMATORS IS 500.
Accuracy
AUC
T−1
0.9848
0.9291
T−1 + TF orest
0.9865
0.9404
T−1−
→−3
0.9221
0.8383
T−1−
→−3 + TF orecast
0.9481
0.8970
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
INTELLI 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

V. CONCLUSION
This work concentrated on developing and evaluating trust
filters, measurable trust attributes of social media users that
may be able to predict their level of trustworthiness. In this
paper, we investigated two target domains, politics and finance,
on Twitter. We split social media users into three different
groups: typical, domain-related, and expert users. The list of
experts was distilled from reputable online sources outside
social media. A list of trust attributes was selected, shown
to be effective by previous work, as proposed trust filters.
We measured the value of these established and proposed
trust attributes for Twitter users and generated the distribution
of each trust attribute for each of the three user types. The
random forest regressor for time series forecast (RF-T) is
applied to provide better direction of distinguishing users. We
applied the random forests classification algorithm to gauge
the effectiveness of trust filters in classifying user types. The
results show that, with the addition of RF-T predicted trust
attribute values, there is a marked improvement in predic-
tion accuracy and the ability to predict the classification of
a user’s trustworthiness (Area under the receiver operating
characteristic curve, AUC). Our work paves the way for
improving the quality of information extracted from social
media by focusing on users’ trustworthiness and increasing the
reliability and utility of this data to explain phenomena, help
with decision making, and even predict trends. One possible
future work might be using the proposed method to find out
more trustworthy users, and extracting users’ opinions to make
a prediction on certain domains. By comparing the predicting
power with other user sets, we can appreciate the effectiveness
of this method.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Jiao, A. Veiga, and A. Walther, “Social media, news media
and
the
stock
market,”
Journal
of
Economic
Behavior
&
Organization,
vol.
176,
pp.
63–90,
2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167268120300676
[2] C. Liang, L. Tang, Y. Li, and Y. Wei, “Which sentiment index is more
informative to forecast stock market volatility? evidence from china,”
International Review of Financial Analysis, vol. 71, p. 101552, 2020.
[3] A. Sun, M. Lachanski, and F. J. Fabozzi, “Trade the tweet: Social media
text mining and sparse matrix factorization for stock market prediction,”
International Review of Financial Analysis, vol. 48, pp. 272–281, 2016.
[4] J. Bollen, H. Mao, and X. Zeng, “Twitter mood predicts the stock
market,” Journal of computational science, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 2011.
[5] A. K. Nassirtoussi, S. Aghabozorgi, T. Y. Wah, and D. C. L. Ngo, “Text
mining for market prediction: A systematic review,” Expert Systems with
Applications, vol. 41, no. 16, pp. 7653–7670, 2014.
[6] T. Dimpfl and S. Jank, “Can internet search queries help to predict stock
market volatility?” European Financial Management, vol. 22, no. 2, pp.
171–192, 2016.
[7] T. H. Nguyen, K. Shirai, and J. Velcin, “Sentiment analysis on social me-
dia for stock movement prediction,” Expert Systems with Applications,
vol. 42, no. 24, pp. 9603–9611, 2015.
[8] N. Oliveira, P. Cortez, and N. Areal, “The impact of microblogging data
for stock market prediction: using twitter to predict returns, volatility,
trading volume and survey sentiment indices,” Expert Systems with
Applications, vol. 73, pp. 125–144, 2017.
[9] A. Tumasjan, T. O. Sprenger, P. G. Sandner, and I. M. Welpe, “Predict-
ing elections with twitter: What 140 characters reveal about political
sentiment.” ICWSM, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 178–185, 2010.
[10] G. Enli, “Twitter as arena for the authentic outsider: exploring the
social media campaigns of trump and clinton in the 2016 us presidential
election,” European journal of communication, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 50–61,
2017.
[11] N. Grinberg, K. Joseph, L. Friedland, B. Swire-Thompson, and D. Lazer,
“Fake news on twitter during the 2016 us presidential election,” Science,
vol. 363, no. 6425, pp. 374–378, 2019.
[12] A. Bessi and E. Ferrara, “Social bots distort the 2016 us presidential
election online discussion,” First monday, vol. 21, no. 11-7, 2016.
[13] R. S. Mueller and M. W. A. Cat, “Report on the investigation into russian
interference in the 2016 presidential election,” 2019.
[14] T.-C. Huang, R. N. Zaeem, and K. S. Barber, “Identifying real-world
credible experts in the financial domain,” Digital Threats: Research and
Practice, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 1–14, 2021.
[15] S.
Constable.
(2015)
“must-follow”
twitter
feeds
on
markets
and
economics.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
https://www.forbes.com/sites/simonconstable/2015/08/14/must-
follow-twitter-feeds-on-markets-and-economics/
[16] J. Cummans. (2015) 100 insightful futures traders worth following
on
twitter.
[Online].
Available:
https://commodityhq.com/investor-
resources/100-insightful-futures-traders-worth-following-on-twitter/
[17] L. Lopez and L. Shen. (2015) The 129 finance people you have to follow
on twitter. [Online]. Available: https://www.businessinsider.com/117-
finance-people-to-follow-on-twitter-2014-9
[18] S. Emmrich. (2020) The 9 twitter accounts to follow on election
day. [Online]. Available: https://www.vogue.com/article/the-nine-best-
twitter-accounts-to-follow-on-election-day
[19] J.
J.
Roberts.
(2020)
14
twitter
and
instagram
accounts
you
should
follow
for
election
news
day.
[Online].
Available:
https://fortune.com/2020/11/03/election-night-2020-who-to-
follow-twitter-instagram-accounts-follow-updates-trump-biden/
[20] M. Cruz. (2020) 5 journalists to follow on twitter: Politics &
news edition. [Online]. Available: https://onepitch.co/blog/5-journalists-
to-follow-on-twitter-news-and-politics-edition/
[21] M. Hawkins. (2020) The top 15 conservatives to follow on twitter.
[Online]. Available: https://www.thoughtco.com/the-top-conservatives-
to-follow-on-twitter-3303615
[22] J.
Donatelli.
(2017)
The
25
must-follow
twitter
ac-
counts
for
the
anti-trump
resistance.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.lamag.com/culturefiles/social-media-twitter-resistance/
[23] R. Adams. (2020) Top 50 us politics twitter accounts to follow.
[Online]. Available: https://www.theguardian.com/world/richard-adams-
blog/2010/oct/05/top-50-twitter-accounts-us-politics-election
[24] D. Byers. (2015) Twitter’s most influential political journalists. [Online].
Available: https://www.politico.com/blogs/media/2015/04/twitters-most-
influential-political-journalists-205510
[25] M. Gupta, P. Zhao, and J. Han, “Evaluating event credibility on twitter,”
in Proceedings of the 2012 SIAM International Conference on Data
Mining.
SIAM, 2012, pp. 153–164.
[26] C. Castillo, M. Mendoza, and B. Poblete, “Information credibility on
twitter,” in Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on World
Wide Web, ser. WWW ’11. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2011, pp. 675–
684. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1963405.1963500
[27] E. J. Ruiz, V. Hristidis, C. Castillo, A. Gionis, and A. Jaimes,
“Correlating
financial
time
series
with
micro-blogging
activity,”
in
Proceedings
of
the
Fifth
ACM
International
Conference
on
Web
Search
and
Data
Mining,
ser.
WSDM
’12.
New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2012, pp. 513–522. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2124295.2124358
[28] M. J. Kane, N. Price, M. Scotch, and P. Rabinowitz, “Comparison of
arima and random forest time series models for prediction of avian
influenza h5n1 outbreaks,” BMC bioinformatics, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 1–9,
2014.
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
INTELLI 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

