Life-cycle Approach to Extend Equipment Re-use in Flexible Manufacturing
Susana Aguiar, Rui Pinto, Jo˜ao Reis, Gil Gonc¸alves
Institute for Systems and Robotics
Faculty of Engineering of University of Porto
Porto, Portugal
Email: {saguiar, rpinto, jpcreis, gil}@fe.up.pt
Abstract—Nowadays,
manufacturing
industry
has
to
adapt
quickly, with minimum effort, to constant changes on customer
demand. On the other hand, concerns regarding the environ-
mental and social impacts of industrial processes is growing.
These are ideas behind the project Innovative Reuse of modular
knowledge Based devices and technologies for Old, Renewed
and New factories (ReBORN). This paper presents the System
Assessment Tool, a software application developed in ReBORN,
which is used for assessing the sustainability of highly adaptive
production systems. The main objective of this evaluation tool
is to provide methods and algorithms for assessing the various
(re)conﬁguration possibilities and the corresponding effect on
the overall system cost, performance and status throughout the
entire life-cycle(s) of the manufacturing system. In order to help
the system designer to make more informed decisions, different
factors relating the life-long assessment of the concerned system
and device were taken into account. This results in the optimum
utilization of the manufacturing equipment throughout their life-
cycle.
Keywords–Smart factories; Life-cycle assessment; Re-use; Pro-
duction systems.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The ReBORN project - Innovative Reuse of modular
knowledge Based devices and technologies for Old, Renewed
and New factories - is a project co-funded by the European
Commission, which intends to demonstrate strategies and
technologies that enable the re-use of production equipment
in old, renewed and new factories. The idea is to save
valuable resources by re-cycling equipment and use it in a
different application, instead of discarding it after one way
use. Currently, there is a lack of versatile and modular, task-
driven plug&produce devices with built-in capabilities for self-
assessment and optimal re-use. This requires new concepts and
strategies for repair and upgrade of equipment, the (re-) design
of factory layouts and ﬂexible, adaptable and ready to plug-in
modules. Such new strategies will contribute to sustainable,
resource-friendly and greener manufacturing and, at the same
time, deliver economic and competitive advantages for the
manufacturing sector.
During its life-cycle, manufacturing equipment passes
throw several stages, starting at initial incorporation into the
production line, operation, maintenance/upgrade to end-of-use
and disassemble. Throughout these stages there are a number
of critical intersections, which can potentially cause costly
machine downtime or even downtime in the entire production
system. Usually, decisions regarding equipment operation are
made by engineers and shop-ﬂoor operators, which are most
of the times based on the experience of these individuals.
Sometimes the individuals know-how and gained knowledge
by experience is hard to be transferred to other individuals
and may be lost [1]. In order to tackle this problem, a
support to decision making must exist, combining simulations
with the process data history gathered on equipment level. A
System Assessment Tool (SAT) was implemented, allowing
the analysis and comparison of industrial equipment, based
on reliability metrics, Life Cycle Cost (LCC) and Life Cycle
Assessment (LCA).
This paper is organized in four more sections. In section II,
a brief overview of the ReBORN project is presented, along
with a discussion regarding the current state of the art of the
metrics used for equipment analysis. In section III, the System
Assessment Tool is analyzed and described, followed by a
demonstration scenario in Section IV. Section V concludes the
paper by exposing some ﬁnal remarks about the implemented
software and next steps for future work are identiﬁed.
II.
LIFE-CYCLE COST ASSESSMENT
The vision of ReBORN is to demonstrate strategies and
technologies that support a new paradigm for the re-use of pro-
duction equipment in factories. This re-use will give new life
to decommissioned production systems and equipment, helping
them to be reborn in new production lines. Such new strategies
will contribute to a more sustainable and resource-friendly and,
at the same time, deliver economic and competitive advantages
for the manufacturing sector.
ReBORN efforts are towards 100% re-use of equipment,
focusing its approaches on four main areas: 1) modular Plug
and Produce equipment, 2) in-line adaptive manufacturing,
3) innovative factory layout design techniques and adaptive
(re)conﬁguration, 4) ﬂexible and low-cost mechanical sys-
tems for fast and easy assembly and disassemble. All the
developments of the four areas together accumulate manu-
facturing knowledge for a 360 factory equipment life-cycle.
These developments will give rise to self-aware and knowledge
based equipment, with functionalities to collect and manage
information regarding their capabilities. Through its approach
and planned activities, ReBORN addresses industrial needs
hitherto neglected and contributes to unleash the full potential
of sustainable, green and smart factories, by empowering the
industry to produce components and assembly systems, which
can address fast changing requirements.
In ReBORN, several efforts are being done on the life-
cycle cost assessment for adaptive system reconﬁguration and
change. The system reconﬁguration and change is performed
through the assessment of various reconﬁguration possibilities,
such as change, upgrade, reuse, dismantle and disposal, and the
corresponding effect on the overall system cost, performance
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

and status throughout the life-cycle. This is accomplished by
what-if simulation scenarios on the virtual agents representa-
tion of the equipment in the virtual design environment, in
order to estimate the likely impact on the physical system
before making a change recommendation.
Over the years several models, tools, and standards have
been developed for reliability [2] [3], LCC [4]–[8], and LCA
[9]–[12]. These three areas are usually treated as separate
ﬁelds, where each one of them have their own metrics, tools,
and standards. Some attempts to bring them closer have
been made [13]–[15], where the relation between different
sustainability assessment tools is presented, and the central
concept is life cycle assessment for sustainability [16]. Several
surveys of existing the methodologies and tools on all the three
ﬁelds have been performed [7], [15]–[18].
Cerria, Taisch and Terzi on [19], proposed an integrated,
structured and robust model to support and help the activity
of designers and engineers to create and identify the optimal
life cycle oriented solution. This solution takes into account
some of the LCC, LCA, and technical constraints and/or per-
formances methodologies. This work presented some results of
the tests that were performed with an industrial case that look
promising. Unfortunately the metrics used were not described
and no further details were provided.
Although some steps have being made in order to correlate
reliability, LCC, and LCA, there is still work to be done. This
is what motivated us to develop our System Assessment tool.
III.
SYSTEM ASSESSMENT TOOL
The SAT integrates reliability and life cycle status informa-
tion during the early design phases. This tool is a web based
application that allows users to use it directly or through a
REST web service.
The life-long cost assessment of the system is accom-
plished through the collection of the system performances
data throughout its life cycle. Based on this performance data,
the SAT performs the life cycle cost assessment and analyses
the effect on the overall reconﬁgured system, by comparing
machines and production lines. According to the requirements
of the ReBORN consortium, this comparison is done based on
three different metrics: 1) reliability (Fig. 4), such as failure
rate, Mean Time Between Failure (MTBF), Mean Time To
Repair (MTTR), reliability, availability, performance, quality,
and Overall Equipment Effectiveness (OEE); 2) LCC (Fig. 6),
such as Future Value (FV), Present Value (PV), Net Present
Cost (NPC), and Net Present Value (NPV) with initial costs;
3) LCA (Fig. 7), such as life cycle emissions.
A. Architecture
The SAT is a tool that has two main objectives: 1) provide
an easy and intuitive way for the user to compare machines
or production lines through a web application; 2) provide a
web API service, able to receive requests and communicate
the results with other modules in the project, or other future
applications.
Both the web application and the web API service provide
the same functionalities, which are depicted, at a high level,
in Fig. 1.
The tool has four main groups, namely the Reliability
metrics, LCC metrics, LCA metrics, and Machine Label. These
functionalities are further described in the next sections.
Figure 1. System Assessment Tool Overall Architecture
B. Reliability Metrics Functionality
The SAT can calculate the following parameters related to
the reliability of operation of the machines or production lines:
•
Failure rate, which can be deﬁned as the frequency
which an engineered system or component fails, ex-
pressed in failures per unit of time.
Failurerate =
#failures per unit of time
Operating Hours per unit of time
(1)
•
MTBF is deﬁned as the predicted elapsed time be-
tween inherent failures of a system during operation.
MTBF = Operating Hours per unit of time
#failures per unit of time
(2)
•
MTTR is a basic measure of the maintainability of re-
pairable items. It represents the average time required
to repair a failed component or device.
MTTR =
P (breakdown times per unit of time)
#failures per unit of time
(3)
•
Reliability is the probability that the equipment will
complete a mission of length t without failure. It is an
exponential function.
Reliability = e-failureRate*time
(4)
•
Availability is deﬁned as the ratio between the actual
run time and the scheduled run time.
Availability =
Operating Hours Year
Planned Production Time
(5)
•
Performance is the ratio between the actual number
of units produced and the number of unit that theo-
retically can be produced. It is based on the standard
rate, which is the rate the equipment is designed for.
Performance = (Total Pieces * Ideal Cycle Time)
Operating Hours Year
(6)
•
Quality is the ratio between good units produced and
the total units that were produced.
Quality = Good Pieces
Total Pieces
(7)
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

•
OEE is the ratio between the theoretical maximum
good output during the loading time vs. the actual
good output.
OEE = Availability * Performance * Quality
(8)
C. LCC Metrics Functionality
In the area of LCC metrics, the following parameters are
calculated by the SAT:
•
Capital Cost Unit Over Service Life, which is the cost
of producing a unit over the machine expected service
life.
CC = (Hardware Acquisition + Software Acquisition
+ Service Contracts + Administrative
+ Set Up Installation + Other Inicial Costs)
+ ((Training Maintenance Support
+ Materials Costs + Equipment Upgrade
+ Other Operations Maintenance)
+ ((Default Annual Energy Consumption
* Eletricity Rate) * Machine Expected Service Life))
+ Disposition Cost
(9)
•
Capital Annualized Cost Unit is the cost of producing
a unit per year.
CA = Capital Cost Unit Over Service Life
Machine Expected Service Life
(10)
•
FV, which is the value of an asset or cash at a speciﬁed
date in the future that is equivalent in value to a
speciﬁed sum today. The idea is that an amount today
is worth a different amount at a future time (this is
based on the time value of money).
FV = (Hardware Acquisition + Software Acquisition
+ Service Contracts + Administrative
+ Set Up Installation + Other Inicial Costs)
* (1 + (Interest Rate
100
) * Years to be analysed)
(11)
•
PV is the present day value of an amount that is
received at a future date.
PV = Future Value Over Period Review
(1 + DiscountRate
100
)Years to be analysed
(12)
•
NPC is the sum of all costs, such as capital investment,
non-fuel operation and maintenance costs, replace-
ment costs, energy costs (fuel cost plus any associated
costs), any other costs, such as legal fees, etc. If
a number of options are being considered then the
option with the lowest NPC will be the most favorable
ﬁnancial option.
NPC = PV OverPeriodReview + ( Discount Rate
100
)
* (total Cash Flows)
(13)
•
NPV is used to determine the present value of an
investment by the discounted sum of all cash ﬂows
received from the project and discounting the initial
costs.
NPV =
X
(cash Flow *
1
1 + Discount Rate
100
Period Review
- Initial Costs
(14)
D. LCA Metrics Functionality
Life cycle assessment is a cradle-to-grave approach for
assessing industrial systems. Cradle-to-grave begins with the
gathering of raw materials from the earth to create the product
and ends at the point when all materials are returned to the
earth [10] [11].
According to [9] LCA had its beginnings in the 1960s
due to concerns over the limitations of raw materials and
energy resources. One of the ﬁrst publications of its kind
was done by Harold Smith, who reported his calculation of
cumulative energy requirements for the production of chemical
intermediates and products at the World Energy Conference in
1963.
The realization of an LCA study is a complex process
that needs a large amount of different data that usually is not
commonly available. Due to that fact, simpler metrics related
to the environmental impacts were considered. The following
commonly study impacts were considered: Global Warming,
Stratospheric Ozone Depletion, and Human Health. Each one
of these impacts has a characterization factor associated to it:
•
Global Warming factor has as characterization factor
the Global Warming Potential. To calculate this im-
pact, several types of ﬂows must be taken into account,
such as Carbon Dioxide (CO2), Nitrogen Dioxide
(NO2), Methane (CH4), Chloroﬂuorocarbons (CFCs),
Hydrochloroﬂuorocarbons (HCFCs), and Methyl Bro-
mide (CH3Br).
GWP = (CO2*1)+(CH4*25)+(CH3Br*5)
+(N2O*298)+(SF6*22800)*(NF3*17200)
(15)
•
Stratospheric Ozone Depletion has as characterization
factor the Ozone Depleting Potential. To calculate this
impact, several types of ﬂows must be taking into
account, such as: Chloroﬂuorocarbons (CFCs), Hy-
drochloroﬂuorocarbons (HCFCs), and Halons Methyl
Bromide (CH3Br).
ODP = (CCl3F(CFC11)*1)+(CCl2F (CFC12)*1)
+(C2Cl3F3(CFC113)*1.07)+(C2F4Cl (CFC114)*0.8)
+(C2ClF5(CFC115)*0.5)+(HClFC2 HCFC22)*0.055)
+(CH3CCl3(HC140a)*0.12)+(CF3Br(Halon1301)*16)
+(CF2BrCl(Halon1211)*4)
+(CCl4(Tetrachloromethane)*1.08)
(16)
•
Human Health has as characterization factor the LC50.
To calculate this impact, several types of ﬂows must
be taking into account, such as Carbon Monoxide
(CO), Oxides of Nitrogen (NOx), and Sulphur Dioxide
(SO2).
HH = (CO*0.012)+(NOx*0.78)+(SO2*1.2)
(17)
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

E. Machine Label
The Machine Label main objective is to attribute a grade
from A to F to the machines, based on the metrics calculated
and represented on Table I. The basic idea is to attribute
weights to selected metrics and determine the grade based on
these weights. The goal is to have an equipment label similar
to the European Union energy label [20].
TABLE I. LABEL SCALE
Grade
Range (%)
A
100-90
B
89-70
C
69-50
D
49-30
E
29-10
F
10-0
As a ﬁrst approach, this grade is deﬁned using (1), repre-
sented by a few metrics and identical weights. Label is the
grade, R and Rw are the reliability and reliability weight,
OEE and OEEw are the overall equipment effectiveness and
respective weight, Oc, Ic and DOc are the operational cost, the
initial cost and dispose off cost, EC and ECw are the energy
consumption and respective weight, PR and PRw are the
percentage reusable and the corresponding weight. Sensitivities
studies to determine a more robust metric to determine the
attribution of the machine label are ongoing.
Label = R*Rw + OEE*OEEw + ((Oc)/((Ic+DOc)*Weight) +
EC*ECw + PR*PRw
(18)
IV.
DEMONSTRATION SCENARIO
As mentioned before, the ReBORN aims to develop a gen-
eral design methodology for manufacturing systems, building
on the availability of great amounts of data and knowledge of
life and use of production equipment collected by the devices,
with the purpose of enabling new system design methods with
extensive re-use of production equipment.
The design methodology is based on the concept of
component-based agent representation of modular manufac-
turing equipment [21] [22], where every piece of equipment
is controlled through an intelligent agent that continuously
captures knowledge about the current status of the equipment.
This information about the task-related efforts, the prospective
lifetime, maintenance- and refurbishment-related needs as well
as enhancement-related needs allows for the formulation of an
overall cost function and for the optimum choice of new, re-
use, refurbished or enhanced production equipment.
In order to implement the deﬁned methodology, several
software applications where developed by the ReBORN con-
sortium, which are integrated in a workbench developed by
Critical Manufacturing company [23], as shown in Fig. 2. This
workbench application manages links to the set of tools that
will allow a user to build the best possible layout and conﬁg-
uration for a factory, given a set of requirements, constraints
and goals.
The SAT can be used inside of the ReBORN workbench
or it can be used as an independent software application.
The SAT web application main page is shown in Fig. 3.
Figure 2. ReBORN Workbench
Figure 3. System Assessment tool main web page
As shown on Fig. 3, SATs main tab presents the core
functionalities described in the previous sections, namely Re-
liability, LCC, LCA, Label, and Compare ﬁles.
Each
of
the
functionalities
has
two
main
sub-
functionalities: 1) Information, which deals with all the
operations related to adding a new machine or production
line, changing them or deleting them; 2) Study, which
performs
the
comparison
between
several
machines
or
production lines.
The following images show all the possible functionalities
and how the results of the studies are shown. As mentioned
before, the information can be introduced through the web
pages or through an XML ﬁle. This applies to both Information
and Study. After a Study is executed, the results can also be
stored in a XML ﬁle.
Fig. 4 presents the graphics view that represents the result
of comparing equipments or production lines.
In the LCC study, besides choosing the machines or
production lines to be compared, other information must be
selected or provided, such as review periods in years, country
to be considered, machines or production lines to be compared,
and ﬁnally the cash ﬂows values for the years, up to the
maximum review period, for the machines or production lines
under comparison. The LCC study steps are represented in
Fig. 5.
Fig. 6 presents the charts generated after the selected
equipment or production lines are compared.
Fig. 7 shows the result charts of the comparison of equip-
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

Figure 4. Reliability Study Views
Figure 5. LCC Study steps
Figure 6. LCC Study results Views
ment and production lines in terms of LCA metrics.
Fig. 8 presents the charts showing the result of calculating
the equipment label.
As mentioned before, the System Assessment tool can be
used through the upload of XML ﬁles or through the Web API
service, allowing ﬂexibility and easy collaboration with other
Figure 7. LCA Study Views
Figure 8. Label View
software tools, such as simulators. For example, a simulation
tool, such as the FlexSim [24], can be used to simulate the
production line, and collect different data. This data can be
exported and feed into the SAT.
As a practical example let us assume that a company, in
our case one of the industrial partners in the ReBorn project,
such as Fagor Automation, PARO, or Harms & Wende, needs
to change or acquire an equipment. Using the SAT, new and
used equipments can be easily compared. For example, if
the idea is to compare them in terms of ﬁnancial advantage,
the SAT allows to compare, for several periods of time, the
equipments (or production lines). The result is presented in a
straightforward way through the use of circular or bar charts,
as shown in Fig. 5. A visual comparison of the charts, allows
the industrial partners to realize that if the equipment that
they need is going to be used for a short period of time, it
makes sense to buy a used equipment. On the other hand if
the equipment is going to be used for a long period of time it
is reasonable to buy the new equipment.
This type of comparison can be performed considering
other aspects besides the ﬁnancial ones, such as operational
factors (reliability, MTTB, MTTR, OEE) or environmental
factors (Global Warming, Stratospheric Ozone Depletion, Hu-
man Health). The results are also presented visually as in the
ﬁnancial related case (Fig. 7).
As mentioned before, there are several tools that calculate
the metrics used in the SAT, but most of the tools concentrate
on a speciﬁc area, operational, ﬁnancial, or environmental. One
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

of the advantages of the SAT is the ability to have all these
metrics in just one tool. The SAT also proposes a way of easily
comparing equipments through the use of a Label, much like
the energy label used to classify other equipments, such as
refrigerators, TVs, etc.
Always keeping in mind the easy usability of the applica-
tion, all the information needed to perform the metrics can be
introduced through the web interface or through a ﬁle. Two
types of ﬁles are so far supported: XML or AutomationML
(AML). The SAT also has a compare ﬁles functionality. This
functionality purpose is to enable the user to compare several
machines or several production lines. This comparison will be
able to perform all the metrics of the SAT, namely reliability,
LCC, LCA, and Label. The information of the several ma-
chines or the several production lines to be compared will be
supplied in XML or AML ﬁles.
V.
CONCLUSION
A System Assessment tool was developed. This is a soft-
ware web application that allows the comparison of several
machines or several production lines in terms of different met-
rics, such as reliability, LCC and LCA. A System Assessment
Web API was also developed. This is a web service based
on REST, which can receive requests to calculate the metrics
speciﬁed in the previous sections.
The purpose of this System Assessment tool is to support
the decision making during the planning and running phase of
complex manufacturing systems.
As future work a sensitivity analysis on the metrics used
and of the parameters available, will be executed. This analysis
will provide a clear view of what metrics and parameters really
inﬂuence and are important when comparing machines.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was partially supported by the ReBORN
project (FoF.NMP.2013-2)
Innovative Reuse of modular
knowledge Based devices and technologies for Old, Renewed
and New factories funded by the European Commission under
the Seventh Framework Program for Research and Technolog-
ical Development. We would like to thank all partners for their
support and discussions that contributed to these results.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Oppelt, M. Barth, and L. Urbas, “The Role of Simulation within
the Life-Cycle of a Process Plant. Results of a global online survey,”
2014, URL: https://www.researchgate.net/ [accessed: 2016-06-01].
[2]
V. Cesarotti, A. Giuiusa, and V. Introna, Using Overall Equipment
Effectiveness for Manufacturing System Design.
INTECH Open
Access Publisher, 2013.
[3]
K. Muthiah and S. Huang, “Overall throughput effectiveness (ote) met-
ric for factory-level performance monitoring and bottleneck detection,”
International Journal of Production Research, vol. 45, no. 20, pp. 4753–
4769, 2007.
[4]
“Standard practice for measuring life-cycle costs of buildings and build-
ing systems,” 2002, URL: https://www.astm.org/Standards/E917.htm
[accessed: 2016-06-01].
[5]
F. Bromilow and M. Pawsey, “Life cycle cost of university buildings,”
Construction Management and Economics, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. S3–S22,
1987.
[6]
D. Elmakis and A. Lisnianski, “Life cycle cost analysis: actual problem
in industrial management,” Journal of Business Economics and Man-
agement, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 5–8, 2006.
[7]
D.
Langdon,
“Literature
review
of
life
cycle
costing
(lcc)
and
life
cycle
assessment
(lca),”
2006,
URL:
http://www.tmb.org.tr/arastirma yayinlar/
LCC Literature Review Report.pdf [accessed: 2016-06-01].
[8]
“Life
cycle
costing
guideline,”
2004,
URL:
https://www.astm.org/Standards/E917.htm [accessed: 2016-06-01].
[9]
M. A. Curran, “Life cycle assessment: Principles and practice,” 2006,
URL: http://19-659-fall-2011.wiki.uml.edu/ [accessed: 2016-06-01].
[10]
G. Rebitzer and et al., “Life cycle assessment: Part 1: Framework, goal
and scope deﬁnition, inventory analysis, and applications,” Environment
international, vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 701–720, 2004.
[11]
D. Pennington, J. Potting, G. Finnveden, E. Lindeijer, O. Jolliet,
T. Rydberg, and G. Rebitzer, “Life cycle assessment part 2: Current
impact assessment practice,” Environment international, vol. 30, no. 5,
pp. 721–739, 2004.
[12]
R. A. Filleti, D. A. Silva, E. J. Silva, and A. R. Ometto, “Dynamic
system for life cycle inventory and impact assessment of manufacturing
processes,” Procedia CIRP, vol. 15, pp. 531–536, 2014.
[13]
R. Hoogmartens, S. Van Passel, K. Van Acker, and M. Dubois, “Bridg-
ing the gap between lca, lcc and cba as sustainability assessment tools,”
Environmental Impact Assessment Review, vol. 48, pp. 27–33, 2014.
[14]
R. Heijungs, G. Huppes, and J. B. Guin´ee, “Life cycle assessment and
sustainability analysis of products, materials and technologies. toward
a scientiﬁc framework for sustainability life cycle analysis,” Polymer
degradation and stability, vol. 95, no. 3, pp. 422–428, 2010.
[15]
B. Ness, E. Urbel-Piirsalu, S. Anderberg, and L. Olsson, “Categorising
tools for sustainability assessment,” Ecological economics, vol. 60,
no. 3, pp. 498–508, 2007.
[16]
R. K. Singh, H. R. Murty, S. K. Gupta, and A. K. Dikshit, “An
overview of sustainability assessment methodologies,” Ecological in-
dicators, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 189–212, 2009.
[17]
C. B¨ohringer and P. E. Jochem, “Measuring the immeasurablea survey
of sustainability indices,” Ecological economics, vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 1–8,
2007.
[18]
I. T. Cameron and G. Ingram, “A survey of industrial process modelling
across the product and process lifecycle,” Computers & Chemical
Engineering, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 420–438, 2008.
[19]
D. Cerri, M. Taisch, and S. Terzi, “Proposal of a model for life cycle
optimization of industrial equipment,” Procedia CIRP, vol. 15, pp. 479–
483, 2014.
[20]
“Energy Efﬁcient,” URL: http://ec.europa.eu/energy/en/topics/energy-
efﬁciency/energy-efﬁcient-products [accessed: 2016-06-01].
[21]
M. Peschl, N. Link, M. Hoffmeister, G. Gonc¸alves, and F. L. Almeida,
“Designing and implementation of an intelligent manufacturing system,”
Journal of Industrial Engineering and Management, vol. 4, no. 4, pp.
718–745, 2011.
[22]
G. Gonc¸alves, J. Reis, R. Pinto, M. Alves, and J. Correia, “A step
forward on intelligent factories: A smart sensor-oriented approach,”
in Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE Emerging Technology and Factory
Automation (ETFA).
IEEE, pp. 1–8, 2014.
[23]
“Critical Manufacturing,” URL: http://www.criticalmanufacturing.com
[accessed: 2016-06-01].
[24]
“Flexsim,” URL: https://www.ﬂexsim.com/ [accessed: 2016-06-01].
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

