Agent-Based Modelling And Simulation Of Insulin-Glucose Subsystem 
 
Sebastian Meszyński 
Faculty of Physics, Astronomy and Informatics 
Nicolaus Copernicus University 
Toruń, Poland 
email: sebcio@fizyka.umk.pl 
Roger G. Nyberg, Siril Yella 
School of Technology and Business Studies 
Dalarna University 
Borlänge, Sweden 
email: {rny, sye}@du.se
 
 
Abstract— Mathematical analytical modeling and computer 
simulation of the physiological system is a complex problem 
with great number of variables and equations. The objective of 
this research is to describe the insulin-glucose subsystem using 
multi-agent modeling based on intelligence agents. Such an 
approach makes the modeling process easier and clearer to 
understand; moreover, new agents can be added or removed 
more easily to any investigations. The Stolwijk-Hardy 
mathematical model is used in two ways firstly by simulating 
the analytical model and secondly by dividing up the same 
model into several agents in a multiagent system. In the 
proposed approach a multi-agent system was used to build a 
model for glycemic homeostasis. Agents were used to represent 
the selected elements of the human body that play an active 
part in this process. The experiments conducted show that the 
multi-agent model has good temporal stability with the 
implemented behaviors, and good reproducibility and stability 
of the results. It has also shown that no matter what the order 
of communication between agents, the value of the result of the 
simulation was not affected. The results obtained from using 
the framework of multi-agent system actions were consistent 
with the results obtained with insulin-glucose models using 
analytical modeling.  
Keywords: 
multi-agent 
system; 
normoglycemia; 
diabetes 
mellitus; Stolwijk-Hardy model. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The purpose of modeling is to obtain an understanding of 
the actual functioning of biological systems using 
mathematical models that describe and simulate all or some 
of the essential features of the biological object. Models may 
be a useful tool in the structuring of research or for the 
investigation of relationships between the different parts of 
biological systems in silico. System models are used to 
identify key elements in a biological system and to integrate 
different types of information. In addition, hypotheses about 
a system can be tested in order to afford a better 
understanding. The human body can be modelled as an open 
(biological) system. In the perceived model in this work, we 
have used differential equations and various methods taken 
from the artificial intelligence (AI) domain (e.g., fuzzy 
logic). The ultimate goal is to understand how this system 
works. We can focus on some of the subsystems or just one 
of them (see Figure 1.   Not only are we looking for a model 
that helps us to understand how the human body works, but 
this study also allows us to carry out different virtual 
experiments. 
The main objective of this paper is to show how 
biological systems can be modeled and analyzed at different 
levels of complexity with the use of multi-agent systems. We 
also used a compartment model description in which the 
agent could be understood as a compartment (i.e., a separate 
area of the body)[1]. In this paper, we compare the Stolwijk-
Hardy model by simulating the analytical model and by 
dividing the same model into parts in where each part is 
implemented into an agent as its behavior. The authors are 
inclined to believe that the multi-agent systems presented in 
this paper are easier to use and better illustrate the processes 
that occur in the phenomenon of glucose homeostasis. In 
addition, the proposed solution enables a comparison of a 
model description using different simulation environment, in 
this case by using MATLAB and implemented as a multi-
agent system. Furthermore, they provide an easy way to 
deduce which element of the model represents the body and 
how it affects the studied process. The authors are aware that 
this work and the presented model does not reflect all the 
processes that are actively involved in the metabolism of 
carbohydrates. It should also be noted that the presented 
approach largely reflects the processes in a qualitative rather 
than a quantitative way. Section 2 is devoted to the 
multiagents systems in medicine. In Section 3 will introduce 
the main concept of agent-based modelling and briefly 
describes an implementation of this concept. Section 4 
 
Figure 1.   Subsystems of human body. 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

describes results between differential model and our model. 
The last one, Section 5, describes conclusion of this work.  
II. 
MULTIAGENT SYSTEMS IN MEDICINE. 
In computer science, an intelligent agent (IA) is a 
software agent that exhibits some form of artificial 
intelligence to assist the user; it acts on their behalf in 
performing repetitive computer-related tasks. Some scientists 
characterize agents as initiative and reactive objects, whilst 
others 
emphasize, 
for 
example, 
self-learning 
and 
communication abilities. In our opinion, the most unifying 
property of agent models is their decentralization. A good 
discussion on multi-agent systems can be found in [2][3][4]. 
The use of multi-agent systems in medicine is related to 
the resolution of problems of a diagnostic and therapeutic 
nature.  In particular, they feature a large knowledge base 
and a broad spectrum of cause-and-effect relationships 
between different states of health in patients and the 
interaction between treatments [5][6][7], which should 
simultaneously be taken into account when treating these 
patients. This rather specific branch of science, which is 
based on expert knowledge (i.e., the physician) is a good 
candidate for the use of artificial intelligence systems. These 
systems would be in addition to traditional methods used to 
gain a correct disease diagnosis. Likewise, they would be 
used to carry out the treatment process in order to overcome 
the disease or reduce complications arising from the disease 
and for the treatment of advanced stages of disease by many 
physicians at the same time. For further details, see the 
following studies [8][9][10][11].  
Past study in the area has presented a multi-agent system 
designed to simulate the tissue at a cellular level [12]. This 
simulation is designed to help in the understanding of the 
mechanisms that operate within the cell, and is expected to 
contribute to our understanding of the development of cancer 
cells. In this work, the authors have assumed that the most 
faithful reproduction of biological mechanisms rest in the 
cell and that by taking this into account, we can assess the 
impact of external factors on its operations. Another study 
has described physiological process, namely glucose 
homeostasis using a multi-agent system [13]. This approach 
uses a negotiation mechanism between two member 
regulators: the first portion represents glucose-monitoring for 
providing nutrition from outside – in this case, in an attempt 
to reduce the level of glucose in the blood. The second part 
of his act regulates glucose levels based on the information 
associated with physical activity - that is to say, its purpose is 
to maintain glucose levels by lowering insulin levels. Multi-
agent systems are also used for the extraction of data from 
the genotype, even when the data are incomplete [14]. The 
system also allows data to be managed from different 
"computing places" and for decisions to be generated that 
relate to the progression analysis. 
 
III. 
THE OVERALL CONCEPT OF A MULTI-AGENT MODEL 
Below, we describe the concept of a multi-agent system 
in which the aim is to restore glucose homeostasis. The 
amount of glucose supplied from the gastrointestinal tract 
into the blood depends on the amount, composition and 
frequency of meals. On the other hand, the energy demand 
by tissues and organs is variable. The concentration of 
glucose in the blood of a healthy man is maintained within 
relatively narrow limits of about 4.5 - 9.0 mmol/1 (81 - 162 
mg/dl). Mechanisms to prevent the lowering of glucose 
concentration in the blood as well as its excessive growth are 
extremely important for the proper functioning of the body.  
One kind of control mechanism is the hormonal control 
patch. This mechanism should take into account the most 
important hormone that lowers blood glucose: insulin. The 
effect of insulin in the liver mainly involves the stimulation 
of glycogen synthesis and the inhibition of gluconeogenesis. 
Muscle and fat insulin affect the glucose transporter proteins 
across cell membranes, stimulating the uptake of glucose by 
these tissues, as well as stimulating glucose oxidation and 
glycogen synthesis [15]. An indirect effect of insulin uptake, 
oxidation and size of glycogen is the rate it inhibits the 
effects of lipolysis and the oxidation of fats.  
The proposed model consists of three layers: 
 
Layer 1 - base layer, where agents represent the cell. 
This layer reflects the basic building blocks of the 
individual cell structure of the body's organs. This 
layer also scales the processes of the cell. Layer 1 
can be called the cell’s layer. 
 
Layer 2 - layer organ, which enables communication 
between the layers through biochemical signals. This 
is the layer at which the actual process of 
normoglycemia takes place. Layer 2 can also be 
called the physiological layer. 
 
Layer 3 - layer representing the selected areas of the 
brain that are directly involved in the process of the 
stabilization of nerve glucose. This layer simulates 
the processes related to the information flow control 
dynamics of glucose and insulin in the blood and 
makes it possible to simulate the psychological 
stimuli that affect blood sugar levels. Layer 3 can be 
called a psychological layer. 
A multi-agent environment is built using the JAVA 
Agent Development Framework (JADE) [17]. Agents act as 
the appropriate organ (i.e., pancreas, liver, adipose tissue, the 
gastrointestinal tract as a source of food, and the kidney as a 
simple mechanism for glucose utilization). Each agent is 
assigned its own task in the form of the behavior described 
by using the tool or knowledge base. The first description 
applies to a situation in which the agent is the source 
medium, i.e., food in the form of glucose. This is then treated 
as an agent that produces its own interior medium, which 
feeds into the environment that is common to all agents. The 
second situation applies when the agent mediates a medium; 
for example, the agent represents the circulatory system, 
which flows from one side (glucose) to another agent. 
Specific interactions between agents are shown (in Figure 2). 
This approach allowed us to carry out a more complex and 
sophisticated analysis than would have been the case with a 
model based on differential equations [17]. 
The use of this type of multi-agent model has many 
advantages over analytical methods: 
 
The interactions in the model are clearly described. 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

 
Rules can be easily modified.  
 
The objective function and the definitions of 
limitations may be more complex. 
 
The attributes of individual organs/agents can be 
more easily defined. 
 
There are more opportunities to analyze simulation 
results. 
We can also benefit from a new description of glucose 
metabolism, where each agent represents one organ (see 
Figure 2). Agents 1 to 5 ask agent 6 for the level of glucose 
in the blood and check their own knowledge base of what the 
answer should be. Agent 7 represents an insulin infusion 
dose. Each of the agents is from a child class and are 
developed to be able to simulate each vital organ. In the body 
of each of the agents are coded functions that describe how 
the authority operates, based on equations formulated by 
Stolwijk-Hardy (see Figure 3); thus, each of the agents is 
part of the above equation. This model is characterized by 
relatively simple mathematical form and however, can 
generate 
the 
results 
reflecting 
several 
important 
physiological processes occurring during changes in blood  
Figure 2.   A schema connection between agent and organ. 
glucose. Firstly, the increase in postprandial glucose levels is 
fast - until it reaches a maximum in 30-60 minutes. 
Secondly, the function of the violence changes after approx.  
3 h after eating a meal appears reactive hypoglycemia. This  
Figure 3.   The Stolwijk-Hardy model. 
model takes into account the additional ways of glucose 
utilization, and its internal production from a glucagon is 
given constant function ω (endogenous glucose flux). Using 
a description of the agent, without the need for the 
formulation of formal numerical coefficients, it is possible to 
formulate a solid adaptation of a mathematical model to 
identify actual changes in glucose-insulin levels. 
We can describe five types of agents (see Figure 4): 
1. The first type (AK) - blood agent (agent 6). This 
agent is of a higher order, and affects the behavior of 
other agents. It stores information related to the 
value of the levels of glucose and insulin, and 
provides updated information about the level of the 
individual agents, i.e., bodies. In this paper, this 
agent is also the environment in which other agents 
exist. Because of its function, only this agent has the 
ability to send information to other agents. 
2. The second type (AO) – body agent (agents 2, 3, 4, 
and 5). This type of agent performs specialized 
functions that depend on the type of body to which it 
responds. Once implemented, this agent simulates 
the behavior of the dynamic processes that occur in 
the real organ. Through two-way communication 
with a blood agent, this type of agent is able to 
interpret process and generate feedback, which is 
then sent to the blood agent. 
3. The third type (AKO) - cell agent (agent that exists 
inside of agent 2). This agent is the lowest type in 
the described solution. Its function is solely to 
generate information relevant to the cell. This agent 
is the simplest of them all: it exhibits two types of 
behavior, one of which is to be purely reactive. More 
specifically, it is responsible for generating a value, 
which is then sent to the master agent. The cell agent 
is only compatible with the master agent, and only 
interacts with this type of agent. The cell agent is 
questioned by an agent of the parent and its reaction 
to this question is to send the relevant information. 
4. The fourth type - dosing agent (agent 1, 7). In this 
example, there are two agents in this category. The 
first represents the dosage of insulin infusion in an 
extravascular and active form. In terms of a 
simulation model, it is only used for the modeling of 
a person suffering from diabetes type one. The 
second type of dosing agent is one that simulates the 
supply of glucose from the gastrointestinal tract. It 
can therefore be concluded that this agent represents 
the entire digestive system through its provision of 
blood glucose. 
5. The fifth type - GUI agent. This is a special agent, 
which has been developed exclusively for the 
visualization of the internal states of agents of the 
first and second type. It is represented by a user 
interface that allows specific, essential parameters to 
be set for the simulation. 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

Figure 4.  The Stolwijk-Hardy model. 
The blood agent, which is a parent agent, representing 
authority, sends information about the current value of 
glucose and insulin to agents via an approximate circulation 
loop. This is characterized by the passing of blood through 
the capillary network of the stomach, duodenum, and small 
intestine and colon, followed by the pancreas, before 
dropping into the portal vein and the liver. Thus, the flow of 
information between the agents is based on this circulation 
loop. The blood agent sends information to other agents in 
the following order: digestive agent, pancreas agent, liver 
agent, kidneys agent, and finally, the muscle agent. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
We designed a series of four experiments aimed at 
gaining knowledge about the temporal stability of the model, 
and the stability of the generated results. We also sought to 
determine the convergence of the results with the results of 
the method of analysis of differential equations carried out 
using MATLAB in experiment 4. The analytical model for 
multi-agent model was used as a reference and results were 
compared with it. 
A. Experiment 1 
The first experiment was carried out to determine the 
temporal stability of the performance of individual agent’s 
behavior for the different numbers of behaviors implemented 
and the number of agents that communicate with each other. 
The purpose of this experiment was to determine the 
temporal stability of a different number of agents’ behaviors. 
Several variants of the experiment were designed: 
 
One agent 
 
Simulation of one behavior. 
 
Simulation of two behaviors. 
 
Simulation of three behaviors. 
 
Simulation of four behaviors. 
 
Implementation of two agents and, for each one, the 
agents used to carry out communication with a 
second agent. 
 
Implementation of three agents and, for each one, the 
behaviors used for communicating with other agents. 
Each of the experiments was carried out using a specific 
run-time behavior (jade.core.behaviours.TickerBehaviour) - 
values were taken from the set [10ms, 20ms, 50ms, 100ms, 
250ms, 500ms, 1000ms, 1500ms]. Each of the experiments 
was performed through 100 cycles. The experiment showed 
that the best stability was obtained by implementing each of 
the behaviors of an agent in a separate thread. Particularly 
good stability was preserved for the following times: 10ms, 
20ms and 50ms. 
B. Experiment 2 
The second experiment was designed to check the influence 
of the communication sequence between the blood agent and 
other agents on the generated simulation results. This 
experiment aimed to examine whether or not the sequence of 
communication between the agent and other blood agents 
was significant. Simulations were performed for three types 
of simulated “patient” properties: a healthy patient (i.e., 
classed as normal), with type 2 diabetes (DM2) and type 1 
diabetes with insulin dose (DM1). The simulation was 
carried out with a dose of glucose measuring 75g and an 
absorption time of 15 min. For DM1, the simulation used an 
infusion of Regular insulin. The simulation time for a healthy 
person and DM2 amounted to four hours, and for a person 
with DM1, 12 hours. For the purposes of this experiment the 
following defined order of communication was used: 
 
K1: digestive, pancreas, liver, muscle, kidneys, 
insulin. 
 
K2: digestive, liver, pancreas, muscle, kidneys, 
insulin. 
 
K3: muscle, kidneys, liver, pancreas, digestive, 
insulin. 
 
K4: pancreas, kidneys, liver, muscle, digestive, 
insulin. 
Figure 5.   Definition of measurement points. 
In order to determine the repeatability of solutions, we 
performed an experiment that simulated each of these 
instances in strictly defined points in time. Three 
characteristic points of comparison are given in (see Figure 
5): 
 
Point A (upper left) - Its coordinates determine the 
occurrence of the maximum value for a specific time 
moment 
 
Point B (middle) - shows the value of the test 
function at a time of two hours 
 
Point C (lower left) - represents the value of the 
function under examination at the end of the 
simulation time. 
The results are shown on Table I. The experiment shows 
that the order of communication between agents does not 
affect the results. 
 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

 
 
 
 
 
A 
B 
C 
Normal 
370,6 ± 1,55 
53,7 ± 0,24 
59,0 ± 0,18  
DM2 
493,6 ± 1,51  
201,5 ± 0,46  
110,4 ± 0,18  
DM1 
460, 9± 1,53 
141,4 ± 0,53 
122,1 ± 0,01 
 
TABLE I.  
ORDERING OF AGENTS. 
C. Experiment 3 
The third experiment was carried out in order to check the 
repeatability of the generated simulation results. In other 
words, we want to check whether or not our simulation will 
always generate the same results. The test points are the 
same as those used in experiment 2. This experiment was 
conducted using three cases (i.e., a normal, DM2, and DM1 
person). In all, ten simulations were generated for each case 
and, in each case, they were subjected to a statistical analysis 
in order to determine the mean value and standard deviation. 
As Table II shows, the results are very stable; they have a 
small standard deviation. 
 
TABLE II.  
RESULTS OF EXPERIMENT. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D. Experiment 4 
The fourth experiment was based on a comparison of the 
results obtained from the analytical model (see Figure 3) 
and our proposed multi-agent model. The experiment was 
performed for the same dose of glucose (75g), and in the 
case of a patient with type 1 diabetes, using the same dose 
and type of insulin (Regular).  Curves were obtained for 
each of the cases: normal, DM1, and DM2. These were 
obtained from a simulation of the analytical model using 
MATLAB and the proposed multi-agent system (see Figure 
6). The same three points (A, B, C) were used to compare 
the results from the analytical model in MATLAB and the 
proposed multi-agent system. In this comparison, the results 
show that they are similar to each other (see Table III). 
 
TABLE III.  
RESULTS OF MODELING. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The main objective of the research is to show, in what way, 
biological systems can be modelled and analysed in various 
scales 
of 
complexity, 
with 
the 
use of 
advanced 
programming tools such as multiagent systems. Moreover, 
the following paper presents the way of transformation from 
the compartmental description to the description of 
physiological subsystem, using the multiagent description. 
According to the authors, the description presented in this 
paper is easier to use, better illustrates processes taking 
place 
in 
homeostatic 
phenomena 
of 
glucose 
and 
furthermore, it allows for an easy deduction which element 
of a model represents given organ and how it influences 
examined process. The authors are fully aware that the 
following research and presented model do not reflect all the 
processes 
actively 
participating 
in 
the 
process 
of 
carbohydrate metabolism. It should be mentioned here that 
presented approach reflects processes in mainly qualitative, 
not quantitative way. This paper presents a model of glucose 
homeostasis, which is based on a multi-agent programming 
paradigm. Using the Stolwijk-Hardy model, a model of 
multi-agent was used to develop a new tool that allowed us 
to simulate and analyze the phenomena associated with the 
regulation of sugar levels in the blood. The experiments 
carried out show that the multi-agent model has good 
temporal stability, especially in the short term. In addition, 
the results are highly reproducible. Our study has also 
shown that the order of communication between agents does 
not affect the value of the result of the simulation. The final 
 
Healthy person 
K1 
370,6 ± 1,55  
53,7 ± 0,24 
59,0 ± 0,18 
K2 
370,9 ± 1,77 
53,7 ± 0,12 
59,0 ± 0,18 
K3 
366,9 ± 0,15 
53,5 ± 0,36 
58,9 ± 0,13 
K4 
366,8 ± 0,02 
53,7 ± 0,09 
58,9 ± 0,01 
 
DM2 
K1 
493,6 ± 1,51  
201,5 ± 0,46  
110,4 ± 0,18  
K2 
493,6 ± 1,44 
201,9 ± 0,29 
110,5 ± 0,25 
K3 
491,6 ± 0,01 
201,6 ± 0,35 
110,2 ± 0,27 
K4 
491,6 ± 0,01 
201,5 ± 0,53 
110,4 ± 0,00 
 
DM1 
K1 
460,9 ± 1,53 
141,4 ± 0,53  
122,1 ± 0,01  
K2 
461,1 ± 1,92 
141,7 ± 0,27 
122,2 ± 0,18 
K3 
457,9 ± 1,23 
140,9 ± 0,55 
122,1 ± 0,17 
K4 
458,2 ± 0,43 
141,3 ± 0,41 
122,1 ± 0,00 
(Multi-agent system) 
A 
B 
C 
Normal 
370,6 
53,7 
59,0  
DM2 
493,6  
201,5  
110,4  
DM1 
460,9 
141,4 
122,1 
 
 
 
 
(MATLAB) 
A 
B 
C 
Normal 
382,2 
52,6 
57,4 
DM2 
572,3 
265,0 
102,5 
DM1 
531,3 
223,4 
129,1 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

 
Figure 6.   Solutions – validated data from the Multi-agent System  
and MATLAB. 
 
 
experiment confirmed the equivalence of the results 
obtained from the analytical model and the multi-agent 
model. A discrepancy is visible at some points; we believe 
that  this is a result of the different modes of the model’s 
operation. Thus, during this period of time, there are 
different dynamics for changes in glucose levels. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. Meszyński, and O. Sokolov, "Modeling the Dynamics of Insulin-
Glucose Subsystem Using a Multi-agent Approach Based on 
Knowledge Communication." 
[2] 
G. Weiss, “Multiagent systems: a modern approach to distributed 
artificial intelligence.”,  MIT press, 1999. 
[3] 
M. Wooldridge, “An introduction to multiagent systems.”, John Wiley 
& Sons, 2009. 
[4] 
P. Stone, and M. Veloso, "Multiagent systems: A survey from a 
machine learning perspective.", Autonomous Robots 8.3: pp. 345-383, 
2000. 
[5] 
B. Iantovics, "A Novel Mobile Agent Architecture.", Proceedings of 
the 4-th International Conference on Theory and Applications in 
Mathematics and Informatics, Acta Universitatis Apulensis, Alba 
Iulia. Vol. 11. 2005. 
[6] 
B. Iantovics, "Cooperative Medical Diagnosis Elaboration by 
Physicians and Artificial Agents.", From System Complexity to 
Emergent Properties, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 315-339, 2009. 
[7] 
R. Unland, "A holonic multi-agent system for robust, flexible, and 
reliable medical diagnosis.", OTM Confederated International 
Conferences" On the Move to Meaningful Internet Systems", Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, 2003. 
[8] 
A. I. Vesnenko, A. A. Popov, and M. I. Pronenko, "Topo-typology of 
the structure of full-scaled clinical diagnoses in modern medical 
information systems and technologies.", Cybernetics and Systems 
Analysis, 38.6: pp. 911-920, 2002. 
[9] 
B. Iantovics, "A novel diagnosis system specialized in difficult 
medical diagnosis problems solving.", Emergent Properties in 
Natural 
and Artificial Dynamical 
Systems, 
Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, pp. 185-195, 2006. 
[10] S. Kirn, "Ubiquitous healthcare: The onkonet mobile agents 
architecture.", Net. ObjectDays: International Conference on Object-
Oriented 
and 
Internet-Based 
Technologies, 
Concepts, 
and 
Applications for a Networked World, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
2002. 
[11] J. Huang, N. R. Jennings, and J. Fox, "Agent-based approach to 
health care management.", Applied Artificial Intelligence an 
International Journal 9.4, pp. 401-420, 1995. 
[12] E. E. Santos, D. Guo, E. Santos Jr, and W. Onesty, “A Multi-Agent 
System Environment for Modelling”, Cell and Tissue Biology. In 
PDPTA, pp. 3-9, 2004. 
[13] F. Amigoni, M. Dini, N. Gatti, and M. Somalvico, “Anthropic 
agency: a multiagent system for physiological processes.”, Artificial 
Intelligence in Medicine 27(3), pp. 305-334, 2003. 
[14] J. W. Keele, and J. E. Wray, "Software agents in molecular 
computational biology.", Briefings in bioinformatics 6.4 pp. 370-379, 
2005. 
[15] D. Kelley, et al., “Skeletal muscle glycolysis, oxidation, and storage 
of an oral glucose load.”, Journal of Clinical Investigation, 81(5), 
1563, 1988. 
[16] P. J. Randle, P. B. Garland, C. N. Hales, and E. A. Newsholme,  “The 
glucose fatty-acid cycle its role in insulin sensitivity and the 
metabolic disturbances of diabetes mellitus.”, The Lancet, 281(7285), 
pp. 785-789, 1963. 
[17] JAVA 
Agent 
DEvelopment 
Framework 
(JADE). 
Internet. 
http://jade.tilab.com/ [retrieved: 09, 2016] 
 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

