Automatic Trigger Speed for Vehicle Activated Signs using Adaptive Neuro fuzzy 
system and ClassificationRegression Trees 
Diala Jomaa, Siril Yella, Mark Dougherty  
Department of Computer Engineering, Dalarna University 
78170 Borlänge, Sweden 
 Email: djo@du.se, sye@du.se, mdo@du.se 
 
 
Abstract—Vehicle activated signs (VAS) are speed warning 
signs activated by radar when driver speed exceeds a pre-set 
threshold, i.e., the trigger speed.  In order to be able to operate 
the sign more efficiently, it is proposed that the sign be 
appropriately triggered by taking into account the prevalent 
road and traffic conditions. This study presents the use of 
adaptive 
neuro-fuzzy 
inference 
systems 
(ANFIS) 
and 
classification and regression trees (CART) to predict the 
trigger speed of the VAS by using a historical speed data. The 
speed data is first explored and clustered by using a self-
organizing map (SOM). Input vectors for simulation composed 
of time of day, traffic flow and standard deviation of mean 
vehicle speeds whereas the output vector consists only of 
vehicle speeds in the 85th percentile. The two models examined 
in this study were tested with historical speed data collected in 
Sweden during a period of one week and their performance 
was compared with Multi-layer perceptron (MLP). The results 
show that CART is reliable for predicting trigger speed for 
vehicle activated signs. However, compared to MLP and 
ANFIS, CART has superior performance than the other 
algorithms in terms of accuracy and complexity.  
Keywords- vehicle activated signs; adaptive neuro-fuzzy 
inference systems; classification and regression tree; self-
organizing maps; trigger speed.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Vehicle activated signs (VAS) are road warning signs 
that measure the speed of passing vehicles and when a driver 
exceeds a particular threshold, display a warning message, 
e.g., ‘Slow down’ in combination with the current speed 
limit [1]. The threshold, which triggers the message to the 
driver, is commonly based on a vehicle’s speed, and 
accordingly, is called a trigger speed. At present, the trigger 
speed activating the VAS sign is usually set to a constant 
value that is relative to the static speed limit for the particular 
road segment. At the same time, static signs fail to provide 
the appropriate speed during dynamic traffic conditions [2]. 
To cope with the real time traffic management and time lags, 
a self-learning algorithm based on historical traffic speed 
data is proposed in this study. The proposed algorithm will 
be able to control the appropriate threshold, i.e., trigger 
speed for the VAS according to traffic situations. However, a 
large number of input factors, which impact the current 
traffic situations, need to be considered. These input factors 
include time/day, traffic flow, speeds, and type of vehicle. 
Several statistical approaches and artificial intelligence 
algorithms have been developed and implemented among 
road traffic management and control applications. Examples 
of statistical methods are the auto-regressive integrated 
moving average (ARIMA) [3] and several non-parametric 
regression models. Several artificial intelligence approaches 
have been properly explored and developed.  Among these 
neural networks (ANN) [4, 5], fuzzy logic [6], and further 
hybrid neuro-fuzzy intelligent systems [7] have been 
properly explored and developed. Given this background, the 
first objective of this study is to analyse the traffic speed data 
using a Self-organising map (SOM). SOM will further 
partition the data into separate clusters that have similar 
traffic patterns without the need of prior determination of the 
output. The second objective is the comparison of adaptive 
neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS) with classification 
and regression trees (CART) for predicting the trigger speed 
for a VAS within each cluster obtained by the SOM.  
The paper is organised as follows. Section II describes 
the automatic algorithm for triggering VAS. Section III 
presents the data collection and the experimental results 
obtained in this study and the paper is concluded in Section 
IV.  
II. 
AUTOMATIC ALGORITHM FOR TRIGERRING VAS 
A. Traffic pattern clustering  
In the first step, SOM is initially used to visualize and 
explore the speed characteristics of the traffic data that has 
been collected. A SOM is further used to group traffic 
patterns into clusters that have similar speed characteristics. 
Based on the SOM algorithm described in the previous 
section, the SOM network is trained with 4 input factors 
based on the historical data: speed, time of the day, day of 
the week and type of vehicle. In this study, the type of the 
vehicles is mainly based on the length of vehicle detected by 
the radar. Speed characteristics for cars may be different than 
speed characteristics for trucks/trailers. Moreover, they may 
change or may repeat over time of the day and day of the 
week such as morning and evening hours or rush hours and 
non-rush hours during the weekday and weekend.  
B. Trigger speed prediction  
After exploring and grouping the traffic speed data into 
an appropriate number of clusters, a prediction algorithm is 
then developed for each cluster, which predicts the 85th 
percentile speed for each hour on the day. The prediction 
algorithm will be based on ANFIS and CART methods, 
which are powerful algorithms for traffic prediction based on 
a learning process. Time of the day, traffic flow and standard 
deviation are used as inputs traffic features whereas the 85th 
percentile is considered as the output of the two algorithms.   
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-437-4
INTELLI 2015 : he Fourth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

III. 
DATA COLLECTION AND EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS  
All reported analyses were conducted with speed data 
collected at a roadway in Borlänge Sweden restricted with 
speed limit 40km/hr. A VAS was installed and was equipped 
with radar and a data logger to record the speed of passing 
vehicles 100m before the location of the VAS. The data 
comprised the vehicle speed, length of vehicle and date and 
time the vehicle passed the VAS.  
In order to analyse and find similar traffic patterns, a 
SOM was further applied to the original speed data. Figure 1 
shows a clear partitioning of the speed data respective to the 
length of vehicles and to the time of the day (night/day). 
Based on the clustering results, the speed data was grouped 
into major clusters, cars/vans (cluster 1) and trucks/trucks 
with trailers (cluster 2). Motorcycles are excluded from this 
study. Besides, the analysis showed that the day of the week 
has no effect on driver behaviour.  
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 1.Analysis of speed of vechiles passing on Wednesday and Sunday 
respective to (a) type of the vehicles and (b) time of the day  
Although, in the case of the trigger speed prediction, 
traffic flow, standard deviation and time of the day are 
utilized to alter the trigger speed of the VAS; various trigger 
speeds of the VAS come into service by assigning a different 
85th percentile speed to each hour of the day. Following the 
practical rule of thumb, for each cluster dataset, ½ is used for 
training set and ½ used for testing set. Correspondingly, in 
order to illustrate the accuracy of the predicted trigger speed 
data set models the real output data set, the root mean 
squared error (RMSE) and the coefficient of determination 
(R2) will be used as a performance index of the ANFIS and 
the CART. Better performance of the two algorithms 
requires a low value for RMSE and a high value of R2. Note 
that RMSE and R2 are the average value of the two sets.   
Table 1 summarized the results of the trigger speed 
prediction for each of the two clusters investigated in this 
study. The results obtained by the CART and the ANFIS are 
also compared to a multilayer perceptron (MLP). These 
results 
clearly 
demonstrate 
the 
superior 
predictive 
performance of the CART when compared to ANFIS and to 
the static MLP. Since, the RMSE for CART are lower to 
those of ANFIS within the two clusters but similar to the 
MLP within cluster 2. Furthermore, the learning duration of 
the CART is much lower than the duration of MLP and 
ANFIS. This also implies that when using a huge data set, 
the performance of CART to predict the speed would be 
more useful to overcome faster the complexity of the 
problem.  
TABLE I.  
PERFORMANCE FOR ANFIS , CART COMPARED TO THE 
PERFORMANCE OF MLP WITHIN CLUSTER1 AND CLUSTER2  
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The results from this study clearly demonstrate that first 
SOM can group the speed data into two majors clusters, the 
first one is for all cars/vans and the second one trucks/trucks 
with trailers. Second, the results show that CART is reliable 
and could be used for predicting the trigger speed for vehicle 
activated signs in order to construct adaptive decision 
support systems. However, compared to MLP and CART are 
capable of predicting trigger speed with a high degree of 
performance. The performance is measured by a low value 
of RMSE and a high value of R2. In terms of computational 
complexity, CART is more efficient since regression trees 
use one pass and offer a fast learning approach when 
compared to the other learning approaches.  
REFERENCES 
[1] L. K Walter and J. Knowles, “ Effectiveness of Speed 
Indicator Devices on reducing vehicle speeds in London”, 
TRL report TRL 314, Transport Research Laboratory, 2008. 
[2] V. Sisiopiku, A. Sullivan, and G. Fadel, “Implementing active 
traffic management strategies in the U.S.”, Management and 
safety of transportation, UTCA, 08206, Birmingham,2009. 
[3] M. M. Hamed, H. R. Al-Masaeid, and Z. M. Bani Said, 
“Short-term prediction of traffic volume in urban arterials”, 
Journal of Transportation Engineering, vol. 121 (3), 1995, pp. 
249–254. 
[4] J. Park, D. Li, Y. Murphey, J. Kristinsson, R. McGee, M. 
Kuang, and T. Phillips, “Real time vehicle speed prediction 
using a neural network traffic model”, The 2011 International 
Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), San Jose, 
2011, pp.2991–2996.  
[5] M. Dougherty, “A review of neural networks applied to 
transport”, Transportation Research Part C: Emerging 
Technologies, vol 3 (4), 1995, pp.247–260.  
[6] Y. Zhang, Z. Ye, “Short-term traffic flow forecasting using 
fuzzy logic system methods”, Journal of Intelligent 
Transportation Systems, 12 (3), 2008, pp. 102–112. 
[7] L. Dimitriou, T. Tsekeris, and A. Stathopoulos, ”Adaptive 
hybrid fuzzy rule-based system approach for modeling and 
predicting urban traffic flow”, Transportation Research Part 
C: Emerging Technologies, vol 16 (5), 2008,  pp. 554–573.  
Cluster 1- cars and vans 
 
CART 
MLP 
ANFIS 
R-squared 
0.60 
0.55 
0.46 
RMSE 
0.15 
0.19 
0.18 
Time(s) 
0.13 
22.54 
0.27 
Cluster 2- Trucks and trucks with trailer 
 
CART 
MLP 
ANFIS 
R-squared 
0.59 
0.60 
0.46 
RMSE 
0.08 
0.08 
0.09 
Time(s) 
0.16 
13.81 
0.24 
125
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-437-4
INTELLI 2015 : he Fourth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

