Advances in Mobile Medium Ad Hoc Network Research 
John DeDourek, Przemyslaw Pochec  
Faculty of Computer Science 
University of New Brunswick 
Fredericton, Canada 
e-mail: {dedourek, pochec}@unb.ca 
 
 
Abstract—Mobile Medium Ad Hoc Network (M2ANET) is the 
network model that can replace the Mobile Ad Hoc Network 
(MANET) model. New features of the simulation environment 
for experimenting with Mobile Medium are presented:  random 
motion generation with no border effect, a technique for 
transforming motion paths and extensions of 2D simulation to 
3D. Factors impacting Mobile Medium performance are 
reviewed, including node density and node mobility patterns.  
 
Keywords-MANET; Mobile Medium; simulation; movement 
generators 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Ten years have passed since the introduction of Mobile 
Medium: a new model of a mobile ad hoc network [1]. Since 
then, in collaboration with 10 graduate students, we 
developed simulation tools for evaluating new models and 
investigated 
numerous 
scenarios 
and 
configurations 
demonstrating the power of the new model. The purpose of 
this paper is to provide a summary of our findings and give a 
single go-to resource for referencing the body of our research. 
In Section II, we compare the new Mobile Medium model 
to a standard MANET. In Section III, we present selected 
contributions to wireless network simulation that were 
developed when investigating M2ANETs.  In Section IV, the 
highlights of the developed network configurations and their 
performance are summarized. Finally, Section V presents the 
ideas about the future of Mobile Medium. 
II. 
MANET VS M2ANET 
A Mobile Ad hoc Network is created from a group of 
mobile wireless nodes exchanging messages with one 
another [2]. Mobile devices are linked together through 
wireless connections without infrastructure and can change 
locations and reconfigure network connections. During the 
lifetime of the network, nodes are free to move around within 
the network and node mobility plays an important role in 
determining mobile ad hoc network performance [2]. A 
Mobile Medium Ad Hoc Network, proposed in [1], is a 
particular configuration of a typical MANET where mobile 
nodes are divided into two categories: (i) the forwarding only 
nodes forming the so called Mobile Medium, and (ii) the 
communicating nodes, mobile or otherwise, that send data 
and use this Mobile Medium for communication. The 
advantage of this M2ANET model is that the performance of 
such a network is based on how well the Mobile Medium can 
carry the messages between the communicating nodes and 
not based on whether all mobile nodes form a fully connected 
network (Figure 1, note that the path between two 
communicating nodes marked in red exists, while some of the 
forwarding nodes in blue remain out of range).  
 
 
Figure 1. Sample M2ANET with two communicating nodes [1]. 
 
Multi-hop transmissions are possible when routing is used 
to forward packets to more distant nodes. An example of an 
implementation of a M2ANET is a cloud of drones equipped 
with routers released over an area of interest to facilitate 
communication in this area. A deployment of a MANET is 
characterized by the physical parameters of transceivers at 
each node, the number of nodes used, their movement pattern 
and the routing and transmission protocols used. They all 
impact the performance of the network. Given a MANET 
with its many complicated deployment characteristics, 
simulation can be applied to evaluate its performance.  
III. 
ADVANCES IN MOBILE NETWORK SIMULATION 
Mobile Medium can be viewed as a cloud of nodes 
buzzing in space and ready to carry a message between any 
nodes trying to communicate through it. Standard simulation 
tools used for MANET research can be used for 
experimenting with such a network. In our work, we 
addressed two particular features of the modelling 
environment: modelling motion and modelling in 3D. 
 
A. Avoiding the border effect 
Random mobility model is commonly used as a reference 
scenario in mobile network investigations. The model 
available in a popular open source simulator ns2 is the 
Random Way Point (RWP) model [3]. In RWP, nodes are 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-880-8
INTERNET 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Evolving Internet

moved in a piecewise linear fashion, with each linear segment 
pointing to a randomly selected destination and the node 
moving at a constant, but randomly selected speed. RWP 
models suffer from what is called the border effect, which is 
a non uniformity in node density along the edges of the region 
where the mobile nodes are confined to stay. To create 
models of Mobile Medium with uniform density of nodes, we 
modified the RWP movement generator and created a new 
movement generator for the ns2 simulator that does not suffer 
form the border effect [4]. 
 
B. Transforming movement paths 
A typical RWP movement generator directs the node to move 
along a straight path. Aiming at a new modelling 
environment with movements along curves, we created a new 
tool, which uses the RWP generated paths as input and then 
generates new movements with each straight line replaced by 
a fractal curve [5]. 
 
C. Modelling mobile networks in 3D 
A typical mobile network simulation environment, like ns2, 
models mobile nodes moving on a 2D plane. We modified 
the open source ns2 simulator [3] to allow for modelling 
Mobile Medium with nodes moving in 3D [6]. This work 
included developing an RWP movement generator for the 3D 
environment.  
IV. 
FOCUS ON DENSITY AND NODE MOVEMENT IN 
M2ANETS 
Mobile Medium is a structure (medium) through which 
data is transmitted. The quality of communication depends on 
the properties of individual nodes (range, data rate, protocol) 
and the placement of the nodes in the network. The topology 
of the network and the movement of the nodes was the main 
focus of our research on Mobile Medium.  
 
 
Figure 2. A typical relation between node density and user connectivity 
in a M2ANET [1]. 
 
The early work demonstrated a strong relation between 
the node density and the quality of the channel (measured as 
user connectivity, Figure 2) [1]. Using the RWP movement 
as the base scenario, we researched the Mobile Medium 
behavior with the node movement constrained. Either the 
allowed paths were constrained, like in a simulated city grid 
where the nodes travel in the predetermined corridors only 
[7], or the individual node movement was controlled by an 
algorithm. Two controlled movement scenarios were used: 
nodes moving in formations with the leader node moving at 
random and a number of follower nodes tracing behind at a 
distance [8], and all nodes still moving along random paths 
but exercising autonomous control ever their speed [9]. In the 
latter scenario the nodes would slow down when placed in a 
location with lots of network traffic. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Mobile Medium proved itself as an interesting way to 
model ad hoc networks. In the course of investigating Mobile 
Medium, a number of generic simulation tools were created. 
These include novel traffic generators, a novel tool for 
transforming movement directions used in simulation and a 
3D version of a popular open source simulator. The 
experiments showed Mobile Medium works best when there 
are enough nodes in the medium (high density) to form 
reliable paths for communication and when nodes are able to 
stay in the areas where most traffic occurs.     
The model may form the basis of future infrastructureless 
autonomous and adaptable ad hoc networks.   
REFERENCES 
[1] J. DeDourek and P. Pochec, "M2ANET: a Mobile Medium Ad hoc 
Network", Wireless Sensor Networks: Theory and Practice, WSN 2011, 
Paris, France, Feb. 2011, pp. 1-4. 
[2] S. K. Sarkar, T. G. Basavaraju, and C. Puttamadappa,  Ad hoc Mobile 
Wireless Networks, Principles, Protocols, and Applications, Auerbach 
Publications Taylor & Francis Group, 2007. 
[3] H. Ekram and T. Issariyakul, Introduction to Network Simulator ns2, 
Springer, 2009 
[4] R. Alghamdi, J. DeDourek, and P. Pochec, "Avoiding Border Effect in 
Mobile Network Simulation", The Twelfth International Conference on 
Networks ICN 2013, Seville, Spain, Jan 27 -  Feb 1, 2013, pp. 184-189. 
[5] H. Alseef, J. DeDourek, and P. Pochec, "A Method for Transforming 
Movement Paths in Wireless Mobile Network Simulation", the International 
Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, 2016, Vol. 9, No. 1 & 2, pp. 
11-19. 
[6] N. Mahmood, J. DeDourek, and P. Pochec, "M2ANET simulation in 3D 
in ns2", The Sixth International Conference on Advances in System 
Simulation SIMUL 2014, Nice, France, Oct. 12-16, pp. 24-28. 
[7] M. Alzaylaee, J. DeDourek, and P. Pochec, "Linear Node Movement 
Patterns in MANETS", The Ninth International Conference on Wireless and 
Mobile Communications ICWMC 2013, Nice, France, July 21-26, 2013, pp. 
162-166. 
[8] A. Alshehri, J. DeDourek, and P. Pochec, "The Advantage of Moving 
Nodes in Formations in MANETs and M2ANETs", The Ninth International 
Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications ICWMC 2013, Nice, 
France, July 21-26, 2013, pp. 228-232. 
[9] H. Almutairi, J. DeDourek and P. Pochec, "Dynamic Node Movement 
Control in a Mobile Medium Ad hoc Network", The Seventh International 
Conference on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence, EMERGING 
2015, July 19 - 24, 2015, Nice, France, pp. 50-54. 
 
 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-880-8
INTERNET 2021 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Evolving Internet

