Considering Future Internet on the Basis of Smart Urban Cities 
A Client-City Architecture for Viable Smart Cities 
Leonidas Anthopoulos and Panos Fitsilis 
Project Management Department  
Technological Education Institute (TEI) of Larissa 
Larissa, Greece 
e-mail: lanthopo@teilar.gr, fitsilis@teilar.gr 
 
 
Abstract - The Internet has been experienced as the means for 
deliberation, for free social expression, for knowledge 
exchange, for enabling entrepreneurship. etc., while it has been 
capitalized by communities around the world for applications’ 
development and for e-service deployment. In this paper 
Internet is considered as a supporting tool for communities’ 
growth and wealth, and in this context the local history and 
experiences are viewed as the basis to focus on the future. 
Communities grow in organized spaces called cities. Cities did 
and do not emerge to the same levels, since geographic, 
financial, political and other variants influence this evolution. 
However, some cities show significant growth without meeting 
some of the abovementioned criteria, mainly due to the fact 
that some civilians present particular intelligence and 
enthusiasm. Various exemplars of isolated spaces were evolved 
due to the intelligence of some habitants, which were followed 
by their future generations. In this paper, this particularity 
structures a hypothesis, considering that the Future Internet 
can be based on the Smart Cities, where intelligence and 
experiences can be created, stored and accessed faster at a 
metropolitan level, limit data traffic to local areas and free 
significant resources of the Internet. The novel client-city 
architecture is proposed to support this hypothesis.   
Keywords - future Internet; smart city; internet challenges; 
knowledge city; networks of knowledge; smart city viability. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
 
The Internet has been dramatically evolved during the 
last 30 years and its evolution does not concern only 
technology, but all social activities. Innovative digital 
products that strengthen entrepreneurship, e-business, e-
Government and even Internet Governance were only some 
of the Internet’s implications. Future Internet seeks to 
capture Internet further evolution in more than technological 
aspects.  
Smart cities on the other hand, appeared in late 80s and 
visualized urban context, while today they enhance digital 
content and services in urban areas, they offer sophisticated 
digital services, they capitalize pervasive computing and they 
face environmental challenges. The Smart City has an 
intelligent dimension [5], [7], which concerns  “smart 
people”, “smart environment”, “smart economy”, “smart 
governance”, “smart mobility” and at a total “smart living”. 
In this context, intelligence is the basis for Smart City 
evolution and it is measured in various ways, while 
commercial solutions are being offered [6] for its 
implementation.  
This work in progress paper tries to conceptualize an 
architectural and algorithmic framework for the Internet of 
the future, which will be based on the Smart Cities for 
Internet future operation. More specifically, the Smart City is 
considered as the basis for knowledge engineering processes 
during e-service execution and during simple Internet 
processes. The produced knowledge could be captured 
locally and capitalized with forms similar to historical 
knowledge cities.  
The concept of this paper is based on the following 
observation: cities used to evolve according to their 
competitive advantages and variants (e.g., habitants, physical 
landscape, position, facilities, access to transportation 
networks etc.). Knowledge cities [4] emerged as the 
necessity to enable urban space in order to produce and 
support knowledge in various ways. However, some isolated 
cities performed significantly in their past, growing and 
producing knowledge without meeting the above parameters, 
but due to the enthusiasm, the conceptual ability and the 
experiences of some habitants. Greek islands -i.e., Aegina, 
Spetses and Simi- and highland villages -i.e., Ferres- are 
representative cases, which grew impressively due to some 
individuals who were followed by their and by future 
generations.  
Since isolated spaces produced knowledge that was 
accessed by only the local communities and supported local 
growth, our hypothesis concerns whether “Smart Cities 
could generate and store local knowledge being produced by 
the local digital activities (i.e. the navigation, the discussion 
and the crawling of habitants) and this knowledge could be 
accessed at a metropolitan level by the citizens before their 
Internet navigation goes beyond the urban physical 
boundaries”. According to this hypothesis, a Smart City 
becomes a knowledge node –not just a proxy server-, which 
limits knowledge access to the civilians. Local internet users 
do not have to access digital resources beyond their Smart 
City’s, and thus Internet traffic could be delimited in some 
scale. This conceptual model is shortly described in this 
paper, and this novel architecture is entitled “client-city”.  
Section II of this paper describes the notions of 
Knowledge and Smart City and determines our hypothesis. 
Section III describes the idea about the client-city 
architecture together with the potential advantages for the 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-204-2
INTERNET 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Evolving Internet

Internet, while Section IV contains our results and future 
thoughts.  
II. KNOWLEDGE AND SMART CITY 
The city contributes to a inhabitant’s everyday life in 
many different ways, concerning facilities and opportunities 
that enable citizens to live, to educate, to work, to have 
family, to socialize, and to perform amusing activities etc. 
The city provides the citizens with experiences and 
representations, which are influenced by the space and the 
place offered by the local capacity and perspectives [9]. The 
city offers opportunities according to its growth, and variants 
i.e., the position, the landscape, the population, the distance 
from and the position of the sea and of rivers, the 
accessibility to transportation networks play significant role 
in local growth.  
Moreover, in the knowledge economy the knowledge 
capacity and the opportunities for knowledge production in a 
city matter. Various knowledge drivers have been underlined 
[4] such as the existence of university, the local 
entrepreneurship, meeting places, diversity, Information and 
Communications Technologies (ICT) and media. In this 
context, the Knowledge City could be defined as the ability 
of a city to enhance knowledge.  
On the other hand, according to [5], the Smart City 
concerns the local intelligence [5], [7], which concern  
“smart people”, “smart environment”, “smart economy”, 
“smart governance”, “smart mobility” and at a total “smart 
living”. 
The term was originally met in Australian cases of 
Brisbane and Blacksbourg [2] where the ICT supported the 
social participation, the close of the digital divide, and the 
accessibility to public information and services. The Smart 
City was later evolved to (a) an urban space for business 
opportunities, which was followed by the network of Malta, 
Dubai and Kochi (India) (www.smartcity.ae); and to (b) 
ubiquitous technologies installed across the city, which are 
integrated into everyday objects and activities. 
The notion of Smart City has been also approached as 
part of the broader term of Digital City by [1], where a 
generic multi-tier common architecture for digital cities was 
introduced, and assigned Smart City to the software and 
services layer. This generic architecture (Figure 4) contains 
the following layers: 
• 
User layer that concerns all e-service end-users and 
the stakeholders of a Smart City. This layer appears 
both at the top and at the bottom of the generic 
architecture because it concerns both the local 
stakeholders –who supervise the Smart City, and 
design and offer e-services- and the end-users –who 
“consume” the Smart City’s services and participate 
in dialoguing and in decision making-. 
• 
Service layer, which incorporates all the particular e-
services being offered by the Smart City.  
• 
Infrastructure 
layer 
that 
contains 
network, 
information systems and other facilities, which 
contribute to e-Service deployment. 
• 
Data layer that presents all the information, which is 
required, produced and collected in the Smart City. 
III. THE CLIENT-CITY ARCHITECTURE 
It is widely understood that most metropolis can be 
considered as Knowledge cities, while many important cities 
[2] are being transformed to Smart Cities. However, many 
small and isolated urban spaces showed crucial emergence in 
the past, although they did not meet some of the 
abovementioned 
drivers 
and 
characteristics 
of 
the 
Knowledge and Smart cities. Instead, the enthusiasm, the 
personality and the skills of some civilians lead to particular 
economic and cultural local growth, which was followed by 
next generations. Some representative cases come from 
Greece i.e., the small islands of Aegina and Simi and 
highland villages i.e., the village of Ferres. 
This particular behavior of the urban spaces could play 
significant role in today’s trends and in Future Internet. More 
specifically, the existence of a Smart City is a key driver to 
transform the urban space to a knowledge city. In this 
context, an interrelation between Smart City’s architecture 
and knowledge city can be observed:  
a) knowledge is produced on the user layer,  
b) knoweledge is engineered via users’ interraction 
with the service layer,  
c) knowledge and experiences are stored in city’s 
local resources on the data layer,  
d) a knowledge mining solution could analyze these 
knowledge and experiences and provide them to 
the users in forms of organized knowledge, with a 
behavior much similar to knowledge cities.  
Much knowledge is also produced via simple user 
processes (i.e. browser navigation, crawling and chatting), 
which enhance users’ experiences. This knowledge could be 
also “captured” by the Smart City and stored locally, with 
means similar to a Proxy Server (Muller et al, 2004), but 
with more sophisticated mechanisms that could be called a 
“Smart Proxy Server”. The architecture of this server is 
beyond the purposes of this paper.  
According to this paper’s approach, the entire ICT 
environment of the Smart City would play the role of a 
service provider for the local users –located at the users’ 
architecture layer- (citizens, businesses, stakeholders). 
However, service provision would not be limited to the e-
services -contained in the service architecture layer-, but also 
for trivial internet services such as Internet access, proxy 
services, security services (i.e., antivirus, anti-spamming, 
firewalls etc.), cloud services etc. In this context, the Smart 
City could be seen as a “metropolitan intranet”. 
A novel architecture can be considered, which capitalizes 
the Smart City’s infrastructure for the execution of the 
previously presented knowledge management processes and 
for the provision of trivial Internet services. This novel 
architecture goes beyond cloud computing, it is entitled 
client-city architecture (Figure 1) and limits local internet 
activity and Internet traffic inside the city’s physical 
boundaries. The determination of this architecture is beyond 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-204-2
INTERNET 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Evolving Internet

the purposes of this paper and requires deeper technical 
analysis.  
Moreover, Smart city’s infrastructure could semantically 
describe and give logical notion to these Internet activities 
performed by Smart City’s users, and store these “digital 
experiences” being gained by the civilians. For instance, 
consider a user who crawls for a specific issue about “where 
was Alice born?” Crawlers return various results about 
Alice, about her CV, about her historic profile etc., which 
were combined at a logical set of steps by the user, until he 
reaches the answer to the question. This chain of logical 
actions/steps that were followed by the user reflects the 
gained experience, while the outcome represents the gained 
knowledge i.e. “Alice is born in Atlanta” (Figure 2). Of 
course, alternative paths generate alternative experiences, 
some of which are useful, while others are meaningless.  
 
 
 
Figure 1.  An initial approach to the client-city architecture: simple 
Internet transactions are performed via the Smart City 
The Smart City could assign the successful paths to the 
gained answer (i.e. where the user stopped the crawling for 
this question), and create collections of experiences and of 
knowledge, in similar means such the ones that are discussed 
in meeting places. Consider the same procedure in a meeting 
place: the smart person would describe his experiences about 
Alice like “Let me tell you about Alice. Alice is born in 
Atlanta, but … her family lives … etc.” and a story would be 
created. These stories concern the local knowledge, and 
could be stored in the Smart City and displayed to the Smart 
City users automatically (Chen et al., 1995).  
 
 
Figure 2.  Experience is the path, knowledge is the reached answer 
For instance, someone could read on a digital wall daily 
stories –like the above- created by the civilians. Furthermore, 
a user that would seek to answer the same question “where 
was Alice born?” would be guided by the Smart City to the 
locally stored answer and paths, without letting the user 
leave the physical boundaries of the city and charge 
Internet’s traffic. 
So the hypothesis that was defined in the beginning of this 
paper leads to the following potential answer: Smart Cities 
can become nodes of dynamic experience and knowledge 
creation and storing. Moreover, many of local users’ 
activities could be limited inside the Smart City, and lot of 
traffic can be avoided in the rest Internet. Finally, the client-
city architecture does not influence Internet’s freedom and 
its opportunities, since the locally stored knowledge in the 
Smart City can be available to all other Internet users. 
According to our hypothesis, Future Internet could be based 
on connected Smart Cities (Figure 3).  
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Future Internet can be seen as interconnected Smart Cities 
IV. RESULTS AND FUTURE THOUGHTS 
Smart cities are being widely emerged around the world, 
and they enhance everyday life with the contribution of the 
ICT to the local needs. Various approaches to the Smart City 
can be faced, but all can follow the generic multi-tier 
architecture (Figure 4) (Anthopoulos et al., 2006). The Smart 
City can be seen as a driver of the Knowledge City and 
supports the production and storage of knowledge by its 
habitants.  
In this paper, the capitalization of the Smart City by the 
Future Internet challenges is questioned. More specifically, 
the Smart City is considered as an isolated digital space, 
where knowledge is produced by the enthusiasm and by the 
intelligence of its civilians/end-users, with means similar to 
the ones observed in isolated historical villages and islands 
which present crucial growth.  
It is hypothesized that the Smart City could support 
Future Internet by limiting digital traffic locally –as a 
metropolitan intranet-, and by lowering Internet traffic and 
freeing resources beyond the city area. Moreover, the Smart 
City can enhance knowledge production via capturing 
Internet 
Smart City
Internet 
Not urban users
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-204-2
INTERNET 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Evolving Internet

citizens’ digital activities and by transforming them to digital 
experiences and knowledge. These experiences and 
knowledge could be available online –e.g., in a digital wall 
of the Smart City-, but it could also be provided to local 
users who seek for similar information via local crawlers, 
without leaving the Smart City’s resources and access the 
Internet.  
In order for the Smart City to perform these operations it 
must offer typical network services –beyond its e-services-, 
i.e. proxy, antivirus and anti-spam, and advanced smart-
proxy services. These enhanced services could also support 
the viability of the Smart-City, which is widely questioned 
and argued [2].  
This paper is a work in progress, and a lot of questions 
need to be answered by future work. The client-city 
architecture must be determined in detail at a lower level, 
and the “smart proxy” operation needs to be specified via 
sophisticated algorithms. A case study would be useful and 
will be investigated for further research.  Moreover, the 
transformation of the crawling process to experiences is a 
research challenge for the text-crawling and for the semantic 
web areas (i.e., the Google Knowledge Graph) and could be 
achieved and incorporated in a Smart City.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper is supported by the “Enterprise Architecture for 
Digital Cities (EADIC)” research project, which is being 
developed between 2012 and 2014, and funded by the Greek 
General 
Secretary 
for 
Research 
and 
Development 
(ARCHIMEDES III program). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Anthopoulos, L. and Tsoukalas, I. A., “The implementation model of 
a Digital City. The case study of the first Digital City in Greece: e-
Trikala”. Journal of e-Government (Haworth Press, Inc.), Vol.2, Issue 
2, 2006. 
[2] 
Anthopoulos, L. and Tougoutzoglou, T., “A Viability Model for 
Digital Cities: Economic and Acceptability Factors”. In Reddick Ch. 
and Aikins St. (Ed) Web 2.0 Technologies and Democratic 
Governance: Political, Policy and Management Implications, 
Springer, Forth-coming, 2012. 
[3] 
Chen, H. and Ng, T. “An Algorithmic Approach to Concept 
Exploration in a Large Knowledge Network (Automatic Thesaurus 
Consultation): Symbolic Branch-and-Bound Search vs. Connectionist 
Hopfield Net Activation”. Journal Of The American Society For 
Information Science 46(5):348-369, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 1995.  
[4] 
Edvinsson, L., “Aspects on the city as a knowledge tool”, Journal Of 
Knowledge Management, Vol. 10 No. 5, 2006, pp. 6-13, Emerald 
Group Publishing. 
[5] 
Giffinger, R., Fertner, C., Kramar, H., Meijers, E., and Pichler-
Milanovic, N., “Smart Cities: Ranking of European medium-sized 
cities”, 2007. Retrieved, June 2012 from  http://www.smart-
cities.eu/download/ smartcitiesfinalreport.pdf 
[6] IBM, “How Smart is your city? Helping cities measure 
progress”, 2009. Retrieved, June 2012 from  http://www-
935.ibm.com/services/us/gbs/bus/html/ibv-smarter-cities-
assessment.html  
[7] Komninos, N., “Intelligent Cities: Innovation, Knowledge 
Systems and Digital Spaces”, 1st. ed. London: Routledge  
2002. 
[8] 
Muller, J., Fischer, S., Gorlatch, S., and Mauve, M., “A Proxy 
Server-Network 
for 
Real-time 
Computer 
Games”. 
In 
proceedings of Euro-Par 2004 Parallel Processing, LNCS 3149, 
Springer- Verlag 2004. 
[9] Tuan, Yi-Fu, “Space and Place: The Perspective of 
Experience”, 
1977, 
University 
of 
Minnesota 
Press, 
Minneapolis, London.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  The multi-tier architecture of a digital city [1]. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-204-2
INTERNET 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Evolving Internet

