A Feedback System on Institutional Repository
Kensuke Baba
Library
Kyushu University
Fukuoka, Japan
baba@lib.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Masao Mori
Institutional Research Ofﬁce
Kyushu University
Fukuoka, Japan
mori@ir.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Eisuke Ito, Sachio Hirokawa
Research Institute for Information Technology
Kyushu University
Fukuoka, Japan
{itou, hirokawa}@cc.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Abstract—Repositories are playing an important role in the
idea of open access to scholarly information. To increase the
number of repositories and the contents in each repository,
the effectiveness of repositories should be clear for researchers,
that is, providers of the contents. This paper proposes a system
which analyzes the access log to the contents in an institutional
repository and returns the result to the authors as a feedback
from readers. However, the results of detailed analyses with
respect to a particular researcher tend to include a kind of
individual data, therefore the accesses to the results must
be controlled. The proposed system solves the problem by
connecting with the researcher database in the institution.
Keywords-Institutional repository; Web database; access log;
co-occurrence; visualization.
I. INTRODUCTION
“Open access [20]” to scholarly information provides free
availability of research outputs such as scholarly papers. Ac-
cording to Registry of Open Access Repository (ROAR) [8],
the number of research institutions who give the researchers
a mandate to provide open access to their research outputs
is increasing. Especially, for researchers funded by a public
institution, the obligation seems to be the general situation.
For example, in 2008 the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
showed their policy which requires researchers funded by
NIH to open their research outputs [9]. One of the vehicles
for delivering open access is “self archiving” [16], and
then a repository is a system to archive and open research
outputs. A repository for outputs in an institution is called
an institutional repository (IR) and one for outputs on a
particular research area (for example, arXiv [1]) a subject
repository.
According to ROAR, the number of the IRs in the world
is about 2,000 as of January 2011. Since the number of
the higher education institutions considered in Ranking Web
of World Universities [7] is more than 20,000, there is yet
room for increasing the number of IRs. Additionally, the
number of the research outputs archived in the repositories
is estimated to be small compared to the total number. For
example, the ratio in the IR of Kyushu University [5] is at
most about 30% [12], although the number of the items in
the IR ranks 76th in Ranking Web of World Repositories [6]
as of January 2011. Namely, most institutions are considered
to have a large number of research outputs potentially.
To encourage researchers to register their buried outputs
(and prevent burying current outputs), we should show the
effectiveness of IR for the researchers.
The distinguishing trait of repository is that the detailed
situation of usage of the contents can be observed as its
access log. For authors, that is, researchers who provide the
contents in IR, some kinds of information obtained from
the access log can be an incentive to register their research
outputs to IR. Actually, some kinds of correlation between
the simple total of the access to a paper and the number of
the citations to the paper were shown, for some open access
journals [18], [17], [21], and for a subject repository [14],
[15]. As for IRs, there exist some researches of basic
analysis [13], [19]. In addition to the basic analyses, more
detailed analyses are required to squeeze useful information
for authors from the access log. Some simple analyses (for
example, counting the number of the access with respect
to each item, author, and region of the referrer) can be
operated by a standard function of DSpace [3] or Google
Analytics [4]. However, as for advanced analyses, it is not
clear what kind of analysis is suitable for authors.
We are developing a feedback system on the IR of Kyushu
University. In addition to simple statistics, we analyzed co-
occurrence on the access of the same reader [10]. In this
paper, we introduce a system which returns the result of the
analyses as a feedback from readers into the authors. One
of the problems in the implementation is that some authors
do not want the result of the analyses to be carried in a
conspicuous place. Some IRs display the total number of
the access to each item in the IR as a ranking. However, if
we display a detailed ranking about authors, some authors
may criticize the system (even if the access log is open).
The feedback system solves the problem by connecting
with the researcher database of Kyushu University [2]. The
researcher database has an interface for any researcher in
Kyushu University to register their research outputs, and
the interface requires an identiﬁcation to login. Therefore,
we can control the access to the result of the analyses by
displaying the result on the researcher database instead of
the IR.
The main idea of the system is to increase the number
37
INTENSIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Resource Intensive Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-135-9

of the items in an IR by showing the result of access log
analyses to authors. This paper is regarded as
• a case study of advanced analysis for access log and
• a case study of implementation of the feedback system.
As to the former, this work is the ﬁrst step to study what kind
of analysis is useful for authors. Based on this study, various
kinds of analysis can be veriﬁed from the viewpoint of the
incentive for authors to register their research outputs. As to
the latter, this study solves the problem of access control to
the result of log analyses by connecting an IR to a researcher
database. Since most research institutions have its researcher
database, the main idea can be applied to other institutions.
The rest of this paper is constructed as follows. Section II
describes the basic information of the IR and the researcher
database in Kyushu University to make the problem clear.
Section III explains the purpose and the outline of the system
we are developing. Section IV concludes this paper and
introduce our future work.
II. DATABASES
This section describes the basic information of QIR,
Kyu(Q)shu University Institutional Repository and DHJS,
Academic
Staff
Educational
and
Research
Activities
Database in Kyushu University (“Daigaku Hyoka Joho Sys-
tem” in Japanese) to make clear the problems we tackle.
A. QIR
QIR is the IR based on DSpace and operated by Kyushu
University Library. Generally, IR archives the full-text of
each item in addition to its metadata such as the title and
the author(s). The total number of the items in QIR is
about 16,000 as of January 2011. Ranking Web of World
Repositories is taking account of the number of the full-
text ﬁles as an element of the ranking, then the number of
QIR ranks 76th as of January 2011. Since the scope of the
ranking is about 2,000 IRs, in most of the IRs the items are
less than the number.
Figure 1 shows the number of access and the number
of downloads on QIR from July 2008 to December 2009.
There exists a month in which the number of the access is
more than 200,000. We considered that the number of the
access is enough for analyses to obtain some kinds of useful
knowledge.
B. DHJS
DHJS is the researcher database of Kyushu University.
DHJS has various kinds of data of the researchers in the
university, for example, the posts, their research interests,
and the scholarly papers they produced. The number of the
researchers in the university is about 3,000 as of October
2010. DHJS consists of the two subsystems, the data-entry
system and the viewer system. The data-entry system sup-
ports researchers to register their research activities to DHJS
and equips a user (that is, a researcher) identiﬁcation by a
Figure 1.
The number of the access and the number of the downloads on
QIR from July 2008 to December 2009.
password. The viewer system shows the research activities
registered in DHJS by the data-entry system.
In Kyushu University, any researcher has a duty to register
their research activities includes the metadata of scholarly
papers into DHJS. Therefore, DHJS has the metadata of
most research outputs which were produced in the university
in recent years. The number of the “metadata” of scholarly
papers registered in DHJS is about 70,000 as of January
2011. The ratio of duplicate data (that is, metadata for the
same paper) is estimated at most about 20% [12]. On the
other hand, QIR has only 16,000 “full-texts” as mentioned
in the previous subsection. That is, potentially, there exists
a large number of research outputs which are produced in
Kyushu University but are not archived in QIR. Moreover,
since the number of the items in QIR ranks 76th in the
world, it is estimated that there exists a lot of buried papers
in most of research institutions.
We already developed a system which links the metadata
of each research output in DHJS to the full-text in QIR [11].
By the linking system, researchers can register the metadata
and the full-text of their research outputs into QIR from
the data-entry system of DHJS. Since the registration of
metadata to DHJS is a duty for the researchers in Kyushu
University, the linking system can reduce some efforts to
register full-texts to QIR. Therefore, the linking system is
another solution of the problem we tackle in this paper.
III. FEEDBACK SYSTEM
We are developing a feedback system on QIR connected
with DHJS. This section explains the purpose and the outline
of the system, and shows the interface of the system we
developed.
A. Overview
According to the basic information in Section II, it is
estimated that there exist a large number of unregistered
38
INTENSIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Resource Intensive Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-135-9

research outputs in Kyushu University, and most research
institutions are in the same situation. A reason of the
previous situation is that researchers have no incentive to
register their research outputs to IR. Our solution is to
analyze the access log of an IR and return the result to
researchers as a feedback from the readers of their research
outputs. Then, the researchers can obtain the knowledge of
reader’s interests, which is instructive for spotting a research
trend.
Some basic analyses of access log can be applied by
DSpace, Google Analytics, and so on. For example, we can
count the total number of the access for each item and show
the ranking on the IR by some basic functions on DSpace.
Google Analytics can collect statistics about the region of
the referrers of access, and the keywords if the access comes
from the result of a search engine. In addition to the basic
analyses, we focused on co-occurrence of access [10].
A problem of implementation of the feedback system is
that some analyses related to the authors make a kind of
individual information. (Note that this problem is different
from one for individual data of reader which can be obtained
from the access log such as the IP-address.) For example,
as to the ranking of the access and the keywords at the
referrers for each researcher, some researchers do not want
be open. Especially for the ranking, some researchers are
worrying that the ranking would be used for assessment
of the researchers, rather than the typical privacy problem.
Actually, the simple total of the access in IR is not suitable
as a criterion for papers or researchers at present, although
there seems to be a correlation between the number of access
and the number of citations.
To solve the problem, the access to the result of the
analyses should be controlled. The system we are developing
utilizes the identiﬁcation function of DHJS. Although QIR
also has an identiﬁcation function of users, the number of
the users who have the account of QIR is small. On the other
hand, the registration to DHJS is a duty of any researcher
in the university. Figure 2 is the outline of the system. As
mentioned in Subsection II-B, we have already developed
the system to register the metadata and full-text of research
outputs to QIR from DHJS [11]. The system introduced in
this paper is realizing the other arrow in Figure 2, that is, a
feedback from readers of QIR to researchers.
B. Interface
The system applies basic analyses and a co-occurrence
analysis to the access log of QIR. The target data is the log
from June 2008 to December 2009 and the total number of
the access is 23,847,393. We ﬁltered noises by internet bots,
and then the amount decreased to be 14,870,045.
1) Basic Analysis: The factors of the basic analyses are
• the total number of the access with respect to each
author, and
• its ranks in the department and in Kyushu University.
Figure 2.
The outline of the feedback system of QIR connecting with
DHJS.
Although the total number and the ranking are obtained
by simple calculations, they are suitable examples that
encourage researchers to register their papers but cause the
problem mentioned in previous subsection.
Figure. 3 is an example of the Web image which shows
the result of the basic analyses. As we mentioned in the
previous subsection, this Web image is shown for a particular
user only. The graph describes the number of the access to
the items of the user and the top 10 user in the university.
The horizontal axis shows the months and the vertical axis
the number of the access. The user cannot know who the
authors of the top 10 are but which line is for the user. The
table is the ranks of the number in the department of the
user and in the university for each month.
By the total number of the access, it is expected that the
user can know the interest of readers. However, actually, the
number depends on some unessential factors, hence it cannot
be regarded as a criterion of a research trend or a quality
of the paper. This situation is considered to improve by an
increase of the number of access and a strict ﬁltering of the
noises by bots. We are going to extend the analysis to more
detailed results, for example, classiﬁcations with respect to
each item, the region of the referrer, and so on.
2) Co-occurrence Analysis: We consider “the combina-
tion of items which the same user accessed” in addition
to “the number of the access” to obtain more meaningful
knowledge from the access log.
For the co-occurrence analysis, we adapted a hypothesis
that the access form the same address in the same day
represents one reader. On the hypothesis, 88,464 readers
were regarded to access to more than two items for the
access log of QIR. Figure 4 is an example of the result
of the co-occurrence analysis. In the graph, a node shows
an item, and the two integers in a node the number of the
access and the identiﬁer of the item, respectively. An arrow
means that the item which corresponds to the end node is
accessed with the item of the start node by the same reader.
For example, the sub-graph of the top in Figure 4
(19 ∗2961) → (2 10851)
means that the number of the access to the item 2961 is 19,
and two readers who read the item 2961 also read the item
10851. The initial nodes to construct the graph are decided
39
INTENSIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Resource Intensive Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-135-9

Figure 3.
The result of the total number of the access to the items of an author and the ranking.
as the result of a search by a query, and the initial nodes
have “∗” in the node.
By choosing some papers related to a research area as
the initial papers for construction of the graph, this analysis
might be able to ﬁnd other papers of the area or a nontrivial
relation between the area and other areas. As a consideration
of the graph, we found that the shape of the graph tends to
be classiﬁed roughly in two types: one is spreading to some
nodes from an initial node (as the left-hand in Figure 5), and
the other is making a line by some nodes (as the right-hand
in Figure 5). Compared with the former, the latter is expected
to be indicating a kind of typical papers in a research topic.
On the other hand, the former is considered to be a result
of access from results of search engines.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we introduced a system which analyzes
the access log of an institutional repository and returns
the result to the authors as a feedback from the readers
of their research outputs. The feedback system realizes an
access control to the result of the analyses by connecting
a researcher database. The main idea of the system, to
Figure 5.
Two types of the shape of graphs for the co-occurrence analysis.
connect a researcher database, is applicable to other research
institutions.
One of our future work is the improvement of the user
interface. In addition to the selection of the factors of the
analysis, the layout shall be reﬁned. Another one is the
veriﬁcation of the effectiveness of the feedback system. We
are going to observe the number of the registration and
access in the period from the implementation of the system
to verify the effect of the system.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank the anonymous referees for their helpful com-
ments to improve this work.
40
INTENSIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Resource Intensive Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-135-9

Figure 4.
An example of the result of the co-occurrence analysis.
REFERENCES
[1] arXiv. http://arxiv.org/, [accessed 11 Mar, 2011].
[2] DHJS: Kyushu University Academic Staff Educational and
Research
Activities
Database.
http://hyoka.ofc.kyushu-
u.ac.jp/search/index e.html, [accessed 11 Mar, 2011].
[3] DSpace. http://www.dspace.org/, [accessed 11 Mar, 2011].
[4] Google Analytics. http://www.google.com/intl/en/analytics/,
[accessed 11 Mar, 2011].
[5] QIR:
Kyushu
University
Institutional
Repository.
https://qir.kyushu-u.ac.jp/dspace/, [accessed 11 Mar, 2011].
[6] Ranking Web of World Repositories.
http://repositories.
webometrics.info/, [accessed 11 Mar, 2011].
[7] Ranking
Web
of
World
Universities.
http://www.webometrics.info/, [accessed 11 Mar, 2011].
[8] ROAR:
Registry
of
Open
Access
Repositories.
http://roar.eprints.org/, [accessed 11 Mar, 2011].
[9] Analysis of comments and implementation of the NIH
public access policy. The National Institutes of Health, 2008.
http://publicaccess.nih.gov/analysis of comments nih public
access policy.pdf, [accessed 11 Mar, 2011].
[10] K. Baba, E. Ito, and S. Hirokawa. Co-occurrence analysis
of access log of institutional repository. In Proceedings of
Japan-Cambodia Joint Symposium on Information Systems
and Communication Technology (JCAICT 2011), pages 25–
29, 2011.
[11] K. Baba, M. Mori, and E. Ito. A synergistic system of institu-
tional repository and researcher database. In Proceedings of
the Second International Conferences on Advanced Service
Computing (SERVICE COMPUTATION 2010), pages 184–
188. IARIA, 2010.
[12] K. Baba, M. Mori, and E. Ito.
Identiﬁcation of scholarly
papers and authors. In Proceedings of the Third International
Conference on ’Networked Digital Technologies’ (NDT 2011),
2011.
[13] A. I. Bonilla-Calero. Scientometric analysis of a sample of
physics-related research output held in the institutional repos-
itory strathprints (2000–2005). Library Review, 57(9):700–
721, 2008.
[14] T. Brody, S. Harnad, and L. Carr. Earlier web usage statistics
as predictors of later citation impact. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science and Technology, 57(8):1060–
1072, 2006.
41
INTENSIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Resource Intensive Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-135-9

[15] P. M. Davis and M. J. Fromerth. Does the arXiv lead to higher
citations and reduced publisher downloads for mathematics
articles? Scientometrics, 71(2):6203–215, 2007.
[16] S. Harnad, T. Brody, F. Vallieres, L. Carr, S. Hitchcock,
Y. Gingras, C. Oppenheim, H. Stamerjohanns, and E. Hilf.
The access/impact problem and the green and gold roads to
open access. Serials Review, 30(4):310–314, 2004.
[17] D. E. O’Leary. The relationship between citations and number
of downloads in decision support systems. Decision Support
Systems, 45(4):972–980, 2008.
[18] T. V. Perneger.
Relation between online “hit counts” and
subsequent citations: Prospective study of research papers in
the BMJ. BMJ, 329:546–547, 2004.
[19] P. Royster.
Publishing original content in an institutional
repository. Serials Review, 34(1):27–30, 2008.
[20] P. Suber.
Open access overview.
Open Access News,
2007. http://www.earlham.edu/˜peters/fos/overview.htm, [ac-
cessed 11 Mar, 2011].
[21] B. A. Watson.
Comparing citations and downloads for
individual articles. Journal of scientiﬁc research on biological
vision, 9(4):1–4, 2009.
42
INTENSIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Resource Intensive Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-135-9

