A Cooperative Game for Distributed Wavelength Assignment in WDM Networks
Horacio Caniza Vierci∗, Alexander Wich Vollrath∗, Benjam´ın Bar´an∗ †
∗ Universidad Cat´olica Nuestra Se˜nora de la Asunci´on, Asunci´on, Paraguay
horacio@tejupy.info, aw@tejupy.info
†Universidad Nacional de Asunci´on, San Lorenzo, Paraguay
bbaran@pol.una.py
Abstract—The use of game theory in networking problems
is becoming more popular given its potential to model real
commercial situations where different agents try to optimize
their proﬁt. In this context, this paper proposes a novel
cooperative game theory based distributed wavelength assign-
ment method for
WDM (Wavelength Division Multiplexing)
networks. Experimental results show a clear improvement of
the proposed method over a well recognized state of the art
distributed wavelength assignment algorithm known as DIR
(Destination Initiated Reservation). Thus, this new approach
inspired in game theory, provides a ﬁrst baseline for future
work considering cooperation among competing long haul
providers that may beneﬁt from collaboration.
Keywords-Game Theory; Nash Bargaining Problem; dis-
tributed RWA.
I. INTRODUCTION
At the very core of modern telecommunications resides a
very complex: the growing user base requires a solution to
provide everyone with enough transmission capacity. Every
solution provided to accommodate this ever growing user
base, must satisfy contrasting (and in some cases contra-
dictory) objectives: simply supplying bandwidth is not a
desirable solution, one must ﬁnd a way to use the bandwidth
in an efﬁcient way.
Emerging optical systems are deployed using
WDM
(Wavelength Division Multiplexing) [1]. In WDM systems,
connection requests are satisﬁed by establishing all-optical
channels between source and destination. Given a set of con-
nection requests between two nodes and the paths connect-
ing them, the RWA (Routing and Wavelength Assignment)
problem models, as an ILP (Integer Linear Programming)
[1], the assignment of every connection request between
the two nodes to a free channel in a path joining them.
Every resulting pair is known as a lightpath. The wavelength
continuity constraint imposes a restriction on the lightpaths:
the lightpath must be established using the same wavelength
along the entire path [2]. Wavelength converters could be
placed at the nodes to weaken this restriction; however, this
is a very expensive alternative [1].
The prohibitively high computational cost of an ILP (NP
(Non-Deterministic Polynomial)-complete) [3] discourages
its use in large networks, as well as in networks with bursty
trafﬁc patterns. This non-trivial problem drives, in some
sense, the research in distributed RWA schemes.
These distributed RWA schemes are, usually, based on
message passing, allowing the nodes to establish the needed
wavelengths by themselves, thus rendering the existence
of a central node unnecessary. There are several proposed
distributed RWA schemes: DIR (Destination Initiated Reser-
vation) [4], SIR (Source Initiated Reservation) [4], among
other’s. The following sections present a very brief descrip-
tion of these schemes.
In the DIR method, the source node sends a reservation
request message that will travel to the destination node;
this message gathers information on the availability of
wavelengths along the way. Once this message arrives at the
destination node, an available wavelength will be chosen,
and a reservation message will be sent. This reservation
message traverses the reverse path of the reservation request,
reserving the selected wavelength [4]. One inherent problem
of DIR is that, due to the fact that information gathering and
wavelength reservation are decoupled, outdated information
could result in trying to reserve a wavelength that is no
longer available, thus resulting in a blocked connection
request.
The differences between DIR and SIR are subtle but
important. The SIR method follows a somewhat more ag-
gressive approach. There is no information gathering stage
per se. A reservation message is sent to the destination node
reserving the available wavelengths on the way. Once it
reaches the destination, one of the previously reserved wave-
lengths is selected. This selection is announced to the source
of the connection request in a message, which traverses the
reverse path of the reservation message, announcing the
selection and releasing the unused reserved wavelengths.
The number of wavelengths reserved by the reservation
message varies depending on whether a greedy or moderate
approach is used. In the greedy case, every single available
wavelength is going to be reserved. In the case a more
moderate approach is chosen, a single wavelength is going
to be reserved.
The greedy approach improves the chances for the re-
quested connection to be established, while imposing a
higher blocking risk for competing connection requests.
A more moderate approach, where a single wavelength
is reserved, reduces the effect on competing connection
requests.
92
INTERNET 2011 : The Third International Conference on Evolving Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-141-0

Game Theory constitutes one of the ﬁrst attempts at for-
malizing Economic Science. Presented as an integral work
for the ﬁrst time by Von Neumann and Morgenstern [5], it
provides a formal framework for describing the behavior
of rational and intelligent individuals. Cooperative Game
Theory studies voluntary coalitions and negotiations within
the Game Theoretical Framework [6].
Considering Metcalfe’s law [7], one can envision a non-
distant future, where coalitions among competing telecom-
munication companies are the norm. Pushing the idea even
further, one could envision occasional negotiations, resulting
in ad-hoc agreements between different companies to relay
each others trafﬁc. This convergence of once-competitors
is by no means a simple task. Cooperative Game Theory
provides a rich set of tools that could be used to prescribe
the behavior in this ideal environment.
This paper presents a novel distributed wavelength as-
signment scheme based in the Cooperative aspects of Game
Theory, particularly the NBP (Nash Bargaining Problem)
[8].
This work is organized as follows: a brief introduction
to the elements of Game Theory is presented in Section II,
Section III maps the Distributed RWA problem to a coop-
erative game, Section IV presents an illustrative example
and in Section V the experimental results are shown. The
conlusions and further reaserch section can be found at the
end.
II. GAME THEORY
Game Theory can be deﬁned as the study of mathematical
models of conﬂict and cooperation among intelligent rational
decision-makers [9].
Despite the fact that the NBP belongs to a cooperative
game theory approach, it is built upon a non-cooperative
game. Therefore a distinction between both approaches is
relevant. Non-cooperative game theory explores situations
where players do not take into account the possibility to
coordinate with each other, thus making communication
between players of no beneﬁt at all. On the other hand,
cooperative Game Theory analyzes situations where players
could beneﬁt from communicating and establishing coali-
tions among themselves [9].
We now brieﬂy introduce essential concepts required by
the model, as presented by Myerson in [9]. A game is
deﬁned as a 3-tuple
Γ =

N, (Ci)i∈N , (fi)i∈N

where:
• N is the set of players,
• Ci represents the set of strategies with i ∈ N,
• fi denotes the utility function with i ∈ N.
In a game (denoted by Γ), each player i ∈ N has a
utility function (denoted by fi) that represents their own
preferences, and a set of strategies (denoted by Ci) from
which to choose.
A general behavioral archetype is assumed by all models
presented by Von Neumann and Morgestern: every player in
a game is going to act in a way as to maximize his utility
function [5]. In this context, a strategy is a complete plan of
action considering every possible situation that might arise
during the course of a game [5].
A. Nash Bargaining Problem
In his work, Nash presents the bargaining solution for a
situation in which all players are: i. rational, ii. intelligent,
iii. free to choose among the various possible agreements,
iv. are not going to repudiate any choice made, and, v. are
perfectly informed, i.e. every player knows everything about
the game in question [8].
Nash deﬁned the bargaining procedure for a two-player
interaction explicitly. He described the negotiation as a two
step game: the TG (Threat Game) and the DG (Demand
Game). The ﬁrst is a non-cooperative game, while the second
depends on the ﬁrst games and is played cooperatively as
described next.
The Threat Game (TG):
Each player values all jointly achievable plans of actions,
while expecting a non-cooperative behavior of each other.
From a players perspective, a threat is a strategy he is forced
to choose in case the negotiation is not favorable [8].
Among various possible solution concepts for a non-
cooperative game the NE (Nash Equilibrium) is perhaps the
most widely used [6]. Nash’s Equilibrium captures the stable
state of a situation, considering the actions that the players
take when they act rationally [10].
Formally, according to Osborne and Rubinstein [6]:
fi

both players choose their demands according to [8]:
argmax(n1;n2)≤(b1;b2) (b1 − n1) (b2 − n2)
(2)
The solution obtained by solving (1), and then (2), is
known as the NBS (Nash Bargaining Solution). It has the
following interesting properties: i. it is unique, ii. it is Pareto
efﬁcient, iii. it is based on Von Neumann and Morgenstern
utilities, iv. it is symmetric, in the sense that it does not
matter which of the players is known as 1 or 2, and, v.
is independent of irrelevant alternatives, that is, it is not
affected by alternatives that would not have been chosen [9],
[8]. For a more detailed exposition, the reader may refer to
[11], [8].
III. RWA AS A COOPERATIVE GAME
The NBP allows different network operators to cooperate
with each other without neglecting their own interest. In
order to produce a “game” the description below is going to
establish analogies between the various elements of Game
Theory and those pertaining the RWA problem. After these
analogies are described, the NBS is going to be determined.
We start the construction of the model by deﬁning the
following elements: i. The set N of players, ii. the set C of
strategies and, iii. the Von Neumann and Morgenstern utility
function f.
In this paper, the set of players is mapped to the set of
optical nodes in the network, considering that each node may
be operated by a different company interested in its own
beneﬁt. Of course, when cooperation is good for a company
it will be willing to cooperate. This is clearly a case suited
for the NBP.
Deﬁnition 1 – The set N of players:
Let V be the set of vertices and E the set of links in an
optical network represented by G = (V, E). An enumeration
of the set V is produced: every v ∈ V is assigned an index
i such that 1 ≤ i ≤ |V |, where i represents a player in the
game.
T
The bargaining process proposed by Nash in [8] is based
in a barter scheme i.e., in an exchange of goods between
the players. For the purposes of this work, one can derive
the set of objects by closely observing the way an optical
WDM network operates. In the proposed model, the players
are two adjacent nodes in the network which have cross-ﬂow
trafﬁc to be serviced.
Deﬁnition 2 – The set C of strategies.:
Let vk, vk′ ∈ V represent two nodes of an optical network
G = (V, E). Let e = ⟨vk, vk′⟩ be a link between adjacent
nodes, and let λ ∈ Λe be a free wavelength on link e.
T
Given a connection request to that involves vk and vk′,
the available lightwaves λ ∈ Λe shared by link e constitute
the strategies for player vk and vk′. This establishes a
correspondence between λ and a barter object. Each player
will accept as his own the objects received, and (possibly)
trade with them in a later instance. Thus, each player must
decide if he is interested in taking an object in exchange.
The chosen utility function must represent, in a reasonable
manner, the interests of the players in the game. Since the
the problem at hand requires the minimization of the used
wavelengths (min-RWA), the behavior of the players should
reﬂect this objective. In order to achieve this behavior from
the players, a non-negative cost is assigned to every available
wavelength in the network. This non-negative cost, motivates
each user to use the set of wavelengths representing the
lowest possible cost, thus maximizing his utility.
Deﬁnition 3 – Cost function:
Given a set Λej of wavelengths for a link ej ∈ E in the
network represented by G, the cost function is deﬁned as:
ηej : Λej 7→ N
(3)
This function deﬁnes a mapping between every wavelength
and its position in the radioelectric spectrum for the L
window (1565 nm to 1625 nm) deﬁned in ITU-T G.696.1.
T
The link load, represents the common cost incurred by
the players in sharing a particular link. This is similar to the
concept of tolls in public roads: the cost is shared between
the drivers. The link load is deﬁned as the number of paths
that, given a set of pending connection requests, share a
particular link. Formally:
Deﬁnition 4 – Link load:
given a set of paths P in the network represented by G, the
load ξej of a link ej ∈ E is deﬁned as the number of paths
pm ∈ P using link ej
ξej = |{pm ∈ P | ej ∈ pm}|
(4)
T
The concept of neighborhood, which is deﬁned as the
set of links in a path joining the origin and destination of
the connection request, represents the concept of bounded
rationality [9].
Deﬁnition 5 – Neighborhood:
Let pm ∈ P be a path joining nodes vk, vk′ ∈ V . The
neighborhood for node vk is deﬁned as a subset ωpm ⊆ pm.
T
The utility presented below is adapted for our work from
the one presented by Bil`o, Moscardelli and Flammini in
[12]:
Deﬁnition 6 – Utility function:
The utility function is deﬁned as ft0 : Tvk 7→ N, where:
fto =
X
ej∈ωpm
ηej (λ)
ξej
(5)
where: to represents a pending connection request, ej repre-
sents a link in the network G, ωpm represents the neighbor-
hood, ηej (λ) represents the cost function for wavelength λ
and ξej denotes the load of link ej
T
94
INTERNET 2011 : The Third International Conference on Evolving Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-141-0

The correspondence between the NBP and an optical
network is now complete. However, merely deﬁning the
game between a pair of nodes is not enough. In order to
complete the proposed model, it is necessary to deﬁne which
of all possible nodes in G will have the opportunity to barter.
For the purposes of this work, the matching of two players
that conforms a game is based on Dijkstra’s shortest path
algorithm [13].
Deﬁnition 7 – Matching technology:
Let the nodes v1, v2, v3, . . . , vq
∈ V be in graph G, and
given a connection request t0 = ⟨v1, vq⟩ with v1 and vq
as origin and destination nodes respectively. The shortest
path pm = < v1, v2, v3, . . . , vq > ∈ P joining the nodes v1
and vq produces a “game” confronting v1 and v2. After this
game is played, v2 is paired with v3, and so on. Thus, given
a connection request, a sequence of barter games is created.
T
Once a player is matched, the bargaining process follows
the one deﬁned by Nash in [8]. Once the solution for the
TG is calculated, the NBS gives the solution for the DG, and
based upon it, the bartered wavelength are assigned.
In summary, when a node belonging to a company (a
player of the game) has trafﬁc to be serviced, it will look
for a path (using Dijkstra’s shortest path algorithm). Once
the player found a path (and therefore, its neighbor), he will
negotiate the needed wavelengths.
IV. ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE
The following example was extracted from a particular
simulation run, which was chosen with the speciﬁc intent to
reveal some details of the proposed model. In particular, the
initial instance corresponds to a simulation of the network
represented in Figure 1, with 120 Erlangs of uniformly-
distributed trafﬁc, under the assumption that the trafﬁc does
not end during the entire simulation run. In order to simplify
the following example, the capacity of the ﬁber links was
increased until 0% blocking probability was reached.
According to the proposed matching technology, two
adjacent nodes in the network can interact if at least one
of them has cross-ﬂow trafﬁc to be serviced, as illustrated
in Figure 2.
0
1
3
7
2
4
8
9
5
6
11
10
14
13
12
Figure 1.
Paciﬁc Internet.
Since nodes 5 and 6 share a link (Figure 1), one needs
to analyze the set of pending lightpaths requests for both
nodes, represented by multisets T5 and T6 respectively, and
the set of paths in the network. Multisets are required, since
multiple connection requests to the same destination may
coexist in the same node; however, the establishment of one
such connections, is of no relevance to the others.
T5 = {6, 9, 13, 4, 9}
(6)
T6 = {3, 0, 3, 1, 0, 3, 4, 4, 8, 13, 8}
(7)
Each request is represented by the intended destination
node of the pending connection request (see Figure 2).
The set of paths (calculated using Dijkstra’s algorithm as
shown in [13]) for each node (P5 and P6 for nodes 5 and
6, respectively) is a set of ordered n-tuples representing the
nodes a lightpath will have to traverse on its way to its
destination. The paths needed by nodes 5 and 6 to satisfy
their respective outstanding connection requests (T5, T6) are
shown in (8) and (9). The only paths required are those
that connect the source node with the destination of every
pending lightpath request.
P5 = {⟨5, 6⟩ , ⟨5, 4, 9⟩ , ⟨5, 6, 11, 14, 13⟩ , ⟨5, 4⟩}
(8)
P6 =
{⟨6, 5, 4, 3⟩ , ⟨6, 5, 4, 3, 0⟩ , ⟨6, 5, 4, 2, 1⟩ ,
(9)
⟨6, 5, 4⟩ , ⟨6, 5, 4, 3, 8⟩ , ⟨6, 11, 14, 13⟩}
The set of barter objects in the game is deﬁned consider-
ing sets T5, T6, P5, P6. In this case, for example, node 6
has three pending connection requests to node 3 (shown
in T6), each requiring one individual lightwave. According
to the paths in set P6, these pending requests need to go
through node 5. Thus, node 6 requires three lightwaves
passing through node 5 in order to fulﬁll all three requests
to node 3. Node 5 takes advantage of this need, and uses
the required lightwaves as object of barter. The full set of
barter objects for node 5 and 6 are shown in (10) and (11).
Objects5 = {λ1, λ2, λ3, λ4, λ5, λ6, λ7, λ8}
(10)
Objects6 = {λ1, λ2}
(11)
The strategies are based in these barter objects, as deﬁned
in the previous section.
The size of the neighborhood was deﬁned as 1 for this
example, which means that for set P5, the neighborhood
includes only the ﬁrst link of every path used by node 5.
For example, for path p1 = ⟨5, 6⟩ ∈ P5, ωp1 = {⟨5, 6⟩},
for path p2 = ⟨5, 4, 9⟩ ∈ P5, ωp2 = {⟨5, 4⟩}. The other
neighborhoods, as well as those for node 6, are obtained
following a similar reasoning.
Since the only links that are going to be included when
calculating the utility function are those in the neighborhood
of each path the connection traverses, only the load of the
links in the neighborhood are going to be considered. In this
95
INTERNET 2011 : The Third International Conference on Evolving Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-141-0

particular example (according to set T5), link ⟨5, 6⟩ has to
carry the trafﬁc destined to nodes 6 and 13 (see Figure 2).
This would result in a link load of 2 (i.e. ξ⟨5,6⟩ = 2).
13
6
9 4
3
3
0
3
13
5
Traﬃc originating in Node 6
Traﬃc originating in Node 5
Traﬃc ending in Node i
i
6
0
4
4
8
9
8
Figure 2.
Trafﬁc example.
There is one item left in the model, in order to have the
full data needed to compute the utility function: costs have to
be assigned to every object of barter for every player. As an
example, the costs for both lightwaves needed by node 5 (i.e.
node’s 6 objects of barter) are: η⟨5,6⟩ (λ1) = 1, η(5,6⟩ (λ2) =
2, according to the deﬁnition of η previously introduced in
(3).
The utility function for a connection request of node 5,
t1 = 6 ∈ T5, is:
ft1 =
X
⟨5,6⟩
η⟨5,6⟩
ξ⟨5,6⟩
= η⟨5,6⟩
ξ⟨5,6⟩
= 1
2
The corresponding utilities for the pending connection re-
quests for node 6 are calculated in a similar way. It is
important to notice, that a player may choose to barter one or
more items simultaneously; therefore, if player 5 exchanges
the lightwaves needed for two connection requests (i.e. to
nodes 6 and 13) in one encounter, the resulting utility is the
sum of the individual utilities.
-100
-90
-80
-70
-60
-50
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Set B
Threat
Agreement
Player 5 Utility
Player 6 Utility
Figure 3.
Agreement.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Blocking probability
Traffic
DIR
Proposed Model
Figure 4.
Comparison between DIR and the proposed model - PACnet.
Figure 3 shows the feasible set B, obtained by calculating
all pairs of utilities for every pending connection request
of both players in the Game. The green and blue points
represent the threat point and the achieved agreement, re-
spectively.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Given that we could not ﬁnd in the literature, any work
presenting a scenario where networks from different oper-
ators coexist, the comparisons were made using a single
network. This does not introduce any bias in the possible
extension of the presented model. The following simulation
results where obtained by simulating lightpath establishment
using the PACnet (Paciﬁc Internet) network. This network
is shown in Figure 1 and was extracted from [14].
The following simulation results where obtained by sim-
ulating lightpath establishment using the PACnet network.
Connection request pairs (origin and destination nodes)
where chosen using a uniform probability distribution.
The problem solved corresponds to the well-known static-
RWA problem, where all requests are known in advance
and they are assumed to exist for the whole duration of
a particular simulation. Trafﬁc sets range from 0 to 120
Erlangs in 20 Erlangs step increment. For every step, 10
uniformly distributed trafﬁc sets where generated, i.e 10 sets
of 20 Erlangs, 10 sets of 40, and so on. Figure 4 shows the
average of the blocking probability obtained by simulating
the network with each of the 10 sets of connection requests
for every trafﬁc increment in the network.
Comparison with DIR Figure 4 presents a comparison
between the proposed method and state of the art algorithm
DIR, as presented by Lu, Xiao and Chlamtac in [4] and
According to the results presented in [15], DIR outperforms
SIR, making it necessary only to compare the performance
of the proposed model with DIR.
The parameters used for the comparison presented in
Figure 4 are the same as those used by Lu, Xiao and
Chlamtac in [4], i.e.: i. each link is composed of two opposed
96
INTERNET 2011 : The Third International Conference on Evolving Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-141-0

0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Blocking probability
Erlangs
Fixed shortest path. No conversion
Fixed shortest path. Partial conversion
DIR
Figure 5.
Comparison between DIR and the proposed model. Wavelength
conversion - PACnet.
unidirectional ﬁbers, with 8 lightwaves per ﬁber, ii. static
trafﬁc, and, iii. ﬁxed shortest path routing.
As shown in Figure 4, the proposed model presents a clear
improvement, in terms of blocking probability, over SIR and
DIR for non-bursty trafﬁc. As an informal model validation,
one can observe in Figure 5, the improvement when using
wavelength conversion, under the same simulation instance
as that of Figure 4.
VI. CONCLUSION
A novel model, which is based upon the principles of
Cooperative Game Theory, has been presented for the ﬁrst
time to our knowledge.
By comparing simulation results with the performance
obtained from DIR, a non-trivial improvement was found.
However, the most important contribution obtained from
this work does not necessarily lie on quantitative blocking
probability improvement, but rather on the model itself.
The distributed RWA problem, where nodes from competing
companies can beneﬁt from cooperation, can clearly be
modeled as a cooperative game, particulary a NBP.
Most state of the art Distributed Wavelength Assignment
algorithms account for some sort of good faith from other
nodes in the network for assigning lightpaths. It is the case of
both DIR and DRCLS (Distributed Relative Capacity Loss),
proposed by Zang, Jue and Mukherjee in [16]. In a strictly
interconnected scenario, this assumption would delay, and
in some cases even impede, the detection of ill-intentioned
nodes in the network.
One has to keep in mind that this work is a ﬁrst attempt
at introducing Game Theory concepts, not only to solve
the current problem of Wavelength Assignment, but also
to account for the inevitable evolution of the deployed
networks. A plethora of work lies ahead to obtain a fully
tested procedure, to cite a few:
• Exploring utility functions using genetic algorithms.
• Extending simulations with nodes using different utility
functions.
• Exploring non-symmetric solutions.
• Considering topologies formed by interconnected long
haul providers.
• Analyzing the dynamics and complexity of the pro-
posed method and comparing it to state of the art
distributed wavelength assignment methods.
REFERENCES
[1] B. Mukherjee: Optical WDM Networks. Springer Verlag
(2006).
[2] B. Jaumard, C. Meyer ,and B. Thiongane: Comparison of
ILP formulations for the RWA problem. Optical Switching
and Networking. 4, 157-172 (2007).
[3] M. Sipser: Introduction to the Theory of Computation. Course
Technology. 2. Edition (2006).
[4] K. Lu, G. Xiao, and I. Chlamtac: Analysis of blocking
probability for distributed lightpath establishment in WDM
optical networks. IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. , 13, 187–197.
(2005).
[5] J. von Neumann and O. Morgenstern: Theory of Games and
Economic Behavior. Princeton University Press (2004).
[6] M. J. Osborne and A. Rubinstein: A course in Game Theory.
The MIT Press (1994).
[7] J. A. Hendler, J. Golbeck: Metcalfe’s law, Web 2.0, and the
Semantic Web. J. Web Semantics.1, 14–20 (2008).
[8] J. F. Nash, Jr. : Two-Person Cooperative Games. Economet-
rica. 21, 128-140 (1953).
[9] R. B. Myerson: Game Theory: Analysis of Conﬂict. Harvard
University Press (1997).
[10] J. F. Nash, Jr. : Non-Cooperative Games. The Annals of
Mathematics. 54, 286-295 (1951).
[11] J. F. Nash, Jr. : The Bargaining Problem. Econometrica. 33,
155-162 (1950).
[12] V. Bil`o, M. Flammini, and L. Moscardelli: On Nash Equilib-
ria in Non-cooperative All-Optical Networks. STACS 2005
LNCS 3404 (2005).
[13] E. W. Dijkstra: A note on two problems in connexion with
graphs. Numerische Mathematik. 1, 269–271 (1959).
[14] J. P. Jue and G. Xiao: An Adaptive Routing Algorithm
for Wavelength-Routed Optical Networks with a Distributed
Control Scheme. Proc. Ninth International Conference on
Computer Communications and Networks. 192–197. (2000).
[15] X. Yuan, R. Melhem, R. Gupta, Y. Mei, and C. Qiao:
Distributed Control Protocols For Wavelength Reservation
and Their Performance Evaluation. Photonic Network Com-
munications. 1, 207-218 (1998).
[16] H. Zang, J. P. Jue, and B. Mukherjee: A review of routing
and wavelength assignment approaches for wavelength-routed
optical WDM networks. Optical Networks Magazine. 1, 47-
60 (2000).
97
INTERNET 2011 : The Third International Conference on Evolving Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-141-0

