An Efficient Query Scheme for Semantic Web on Mobile P2P Network 
 
 
 
 
Jun-Li Kuo, Chen-Hua Shih and Yaw-Chung Chen 
Department of Computer Science  
National Chiao Tung University 
Hsinchu, Taiwan  
estar.cs95g@nctu.edu.tw, shihch@nctu.edu.tw, ycchen@cs.nctu.edu.tw 
 
 
 
Abstract—Service orientation and decentralization are 
characteristics in both semantic web and peer-to-peer (P2P) 
networks. In P2P networks, we can take the advantages of 
scalability and flexibility to improve semantic web services 
with lower cost. With IPv6, the P2P network can be extended 
to mobile network to support anycast delivery. This article 
proposes a novel semantic web service (SWS) integrated with 
mobile P2P network, called Mobile P2P Semantic Web, which 
combines extensibility of SWS, scalability of P2P, mobility of 
mobile network to enhance interactivity and interoperability of 
query service for semantic web. The simulation results 
demonstrated that our proposed scheme shortens the query 
response delay and reduces the number of duplications of 
query significantly. 
Index Terms—Semantic web; peer-to-peer; mobile network; IPv6; 
anycast. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
Semantic 
web 
has 
been 
proposed 
to 
provide 
comprehensive and triple-play web data. It enables users to 
create and share web content that features awareness and 
definition for computers or devices. Semantic Web Service 
(SWS) is gradually evolving into a worldwide network of 
semantic and statistical information, which can be accessed 
by users via hyperlink operations or database management 
[1]. SWS maintains the associations of meaningful content, 
which can be located and retrieved from any site of the 
Internet. SWS is also integrated with Service-Oriented 
Architectures (SOA) to create the web systems with high 
interactivity and interoperability. The meaningful content 
with high interoperability can be available via informative 
query that includes the queries of reasoning semantics, 
sentence parser, and string prefix. 
SWS should be constructed with the decentralized 
scheme due to the high dynamics of information explosion 
and the high scalability of Internet development. Peer-to-peer 
(P2P) is a solution to cope with the characteristics of SWS. 
P2P systems can minimize server load and reduce bandwidth 
requirement of the servers by using forwarding query 
without flooding. A P2P system not only features the 
service-oriented 
cooperation 
but 
also 
utilizes 
the 
decentralized overlay. The integration of SWS and P2P 
provides the diversified sharing and querying solutions [2]. 
A P2P overlay can support a SWS framework, which allows 
data to be shared and reused across multiple applications. 
With the development of Web 2.0 [27] and evolution of 
Web 3.0 [28], the novel vision of SWS has been created in 
the mobile network. An online semantic web not only needs 
the real-time management of rich semantic information about 
all digital resources (i.e., machine readability or content 
awareness), but also extends the management of dynamic 
location information (i.e., overlay locality and proximity) [3]. 
Both SWS and P2P have been developed in wired networks, 
so there are several challenges in the mobility extension. 
In summary, SWS provides high flexibility, P2P offers 
high scalability, and mobile network supports high mobility. 
The mobile P2P environment can extend the applications of 
SWS for high accessibility and availability surely. Although 
P2P and mobile issues have been addressed in SWS 
individually, the combination of mobile network and P2P 
cooperative network has never been applied in SWS so far. 
The successful semantic query across mobile P2P network 
must bring rich and useful information and the importance of 
extended SWS, but the issue has never been discussed yet. 
In this paper, we propose an extended query for semantic 
web and it can be applied to P2P and wireless mobile 
networks. The proposed Mobile P2P Semantic Web 
(MP2PSW) uses an informative query across IPv6-based 
network[22] to retrieve data from P2P system. The 
informative query is delivered via anycast forwarding. Due 
to the advantages of anycast and P2P, it can be shown that 
MP2PSW significantly reduces the traffic overhead and the 
response delay of query in the semantic web service. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
addresses the related works. In Section III, we discuss the 
proposed scheme. In Section IV, the simulation experiment 
and results are illustrated. Section V concludes the work. 
 
II. RELATED WORKS 
 
Since MP2PSW involves P2P overlay, mobile network, 
and anycast scheme, we discuss the terms one by one and 
survey the existed works. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-285-1
INTERNET 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Evolving Internet

A. P2P 
P2P [23] network is a popular and interesting 
development, it is widely used for file sharing, voice 
communications and video streaming nowadays. Distributed 
Hash Table (DHT) is commonly used in P2P network to 
hasten the query process and heighten the content availability. 
For example, Chord [4] uses DHT as its core algorithm that 
has been used successfully in P2P networks; such method 
has been proven to be an efficient overlay for a variety of 
scalable and robust distributed applications. 
Chord uses a ring-based DHT to index files and peers. 
Every peer has a unique identification with n bits, so there 
are 2n peers on Chord overlay with scalability. Every file can 
be identified and mapped via the hash key, which is derived 
from DHT to bind some peer. Every peer only maintains a 
finger table to forward any message or data to its successor, 
so the one-dimensional lookup in Chord is hop-by-hop and 
its complexity is O(n). Other popular P2P systems can be 
found in [19 – 21]. 
B. Mobile Network 
Wireless network provides Internet accessibility for 
mobile devices. Nowadays, popular WiFi [29], WiMax [30], 
3G [31] and LTE [32] can support network access with or 
without infrastructure. Both WiFi and WiMax have access-
point mode with infrastructure and ad-hoc mode without 
infrastructure, and the latter mode is generally known as 
Mobile Ad hoc NETwork (MANET). The performance of ad 
hoc routing protocols is similar with P2P forwarding process; 
so, the integration of MANET and P2P is efficient for mobile 
SWS [5]. 
There is a large amount of personal information and 
potential knowledge, including geographical features, 
topological information, and social relationships, in WiFi 
and MANET. Through informative query, the personal and 
potential knowledge is searchable via SWS, and knowledge 
data such as files and streams is available via P2P content 
sharing.  
C. Anycast 
Anycast is an addressing/routing mechanism based on IP 
network [6]. In essence, data or packets can be delivered 
through any network via one-to-one unicast, one-to-all 
broadcast, or one-to-many multicast. In unicast, a sender 
clearly queries or sends data to only one receiver; in 
broadcast, a sender floods data to all nodes, and some nodes 
drop such data that is not interested by the node; in multicast, 
a sender queries or sends data to multiple receivers, which 
forms a multicast group in advance. However, anycast is a 
new concept; it adopts the one-to-one-of-many delivery. A 
sender queries or sends data to an unspecified receiver, 
which forwards such data to other receivers in the anycast 
group. 
Anycast originates from IPv6 [22] for service-orientated 
applications to reduce the network traffic and shorten the 
response delay. An anycast address can be assigned to an 
anycast group, in which the receivers with the same anycast 
address should receive the same packets. For example, 
MP2PSW sends an informative query through anycast to a 
group providing service-oriented application in semantic 
web, such that the nodes in the group should receive the 
same query. 
Although the source should send a query to the nearest 
destination among an anycast group of multiple receivers, 
the nearest destination is not consistent with different routing 
principles and arbitrary routing paths. Therefore, anycast is 
suitable for connectionless protocols, generally built on UDP 
[24]. 
D. Query Service 
The query service is a function of SWS; it provides a 
solution to the search engine or social network. The 
combination of Web Service Description Language (WSDL) 
[25] and Web Ontology Language (OWL) [26] provides a 
standard to develop the query service. The query can be 
developed from the string manipulation to the informative 
query with reasoning ontology. The informative query can 
integrate 
with 
SOA 
to 
improve 
interactivity 
and 
interoperability, Figure 1 illustrates the general module of 
informative query and the components of semantic web 
query service. 
Enhanced-Chord Web Service [7] also uses P2P overlay 
with Chord to efficiently discover web services in a fully 
decentralized network. Chord is modified to a two-level 
hierarchy overlay, which is built by single super ring and 
multiple sub rings. Enhanced-Chord Web Service uses 
WSDL and OWL in semantic web, and it uses the super-peer 
solution in P2P overlay. A convergence of semantic web also 
uses the super-peer solution to achieve the P2P groupware 
[8], and the hierarchical overlay uses the computational 
model and distributed replication model to manage P2P 
framework. P2P Model for Semantic Web Service 
(PM4SWS) [9] is based on P2P network to discover SWS for 
the high scalability and avoid single point of failure. 
PM4SWS clearly defines the maintenance of P2P network 
and the process of WSDL and OWL. Semantic Overlay 
Network (SON) [10] presents a distributed and semantic 
matching-based approach for SWS publication and discovery 
by leveraging P2P technology. SON not only sorts the 
relevant concepts for service matching but also publishes 
ontology mapping on P2P network. 
Context-Aware 
Semantic-Based 
Access 
Control 
(CASBAC) [11] follows OWL to build a model for mobile 
web services. Semantic COntext-aware Ubiquitous scouT 
(SCOUT) [12] is a mobile application framework, which 
supports online semantic sources to improve personalization. 
It not only provides the mobile query but also manages the 
detection and location of user profile. Semantic Mobile 
Service Discovery (SeMoSD) [13] is a mechanism to 
discover mobile web services. It can query, reason, and make 
result for the accurate search. Semantic Web mobile 
Learning Object Repository (SWmLOR) [14] develops a 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-285-1
INTERNET 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Evolving Internet

mobile e-learning repository via semantic web technology 
and ontology. 
Although P2P issues [7 – 10] or mobility issues [11 – 14] 
have been taken account in SWS, we must emphasize again 
that, to our best knowledge, there is no functional 
combination of SWS with P2P and mobile networks so far; 
MP2PSW is the first trial to integrate SWS with P2P and 
mobile networks. 
 
III. PROPOSED SCHEME 
 
The proposed MP2PSW focuses on informative query 
rather than semantic design or analysis. The proposed design 
focuses on network performance rather than web or database 
design. We focus on the promotion of P2P scheme for SWS, 
and the anycast delivery is adopted for mobility 
improvement. 
A. System Overview 
A user may use a wired personal computer or a wireless 
handheld device to request or access the SWS by initiating 
an informative query, which should be forwarded to a 
semantic agent through the Internet. The agent handles the 
basic ontology extraction, data mining, or reasoning 
management to parse the query to the semantic web site, or a 
P2P overlay which can be formed either on a social network 
or on a mobile network. The query arrives at the semantic 
web site or P2P overlay and the returned result contains the 
information that is very likely a list of hyperlinks for real 
data. If the query is matched, the real data will be 
downloaded or responded via P2P file sharing or live 
streaming. The query process is summarized and illustrated 
in Figure 2 (a). 
1. A user sends a query for a file. 
2. The query is parsed by a semantic agent. 
3. The query is sent to web site, which may be a search 
engine. 
4. The query is sent to P2P network and mobile 
network simultaneously. 
5. The query is forwarded via DHT lookup in P2P 
network. 
6. The query is forwarded via anycast in mobile 
network. 
7. The semantic agent receives the results of query 
from multiple networks as Figure 2 (b) illustrated. 
8. The semantic agent ranks the results and sends them 
back to the user. 
9. The result indicates a document or multimedia 
content, and the user can download it via P2P 
network. 
The system overview is illustrated in Figure 3. Compared 
to Figure 1, besides the general query service, MP2PSW 
proposes two special modules, P2P module and mobility 
module. 
In P2P module, DHT locates the peers and indexes the 
files. An informative query is looked up via Chord protocol. 
If a lookup is matched with returned content, which then can 
be available for file sharing or live streaming. For example, a 
movie on PPLive [15, 19] is responded, such that it can be 
delivered via live streaming on demand through P2P network. 
 
Figure 3. The proposed system modules. 
 
(a) The network architecture and query process. 
 
(b) Informative query 
Figure 2. The system overview and query process. 
 
Figure 1. The components of semantic web query service. 
Query 
module
Ontology 
module
P2P 
module
Result
P2P module
Chord DHT lookup
File sharing
Live streaming
Mobility module
Anycast
Grouping
IPv6
Search 
module
Mobility 
module
WWW
web site
@
@
@
@
user
P2P
MANET
Internet
1
2
4
4
5
6
7
7
7
8
9
semantic agent
3
User request 
Web search
P2P lookup
Anycst query
Information
Data
Response
Query 
request
Query 
analyzer
Query 
engine
Search and
extraction
Result 
response
Ontology 
parser
Ontology
database
Ontology manager
Query module
Ontology module
Search module
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-285-1
INTERNET 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Evolving Internet

In MP2PSW, Chord not only indexes peers, but also 
forwards informative query for P2P overlay (called P2P 
query). Therefore, Chord is modified to forward query 
efficiently. Every P2P network owns an individual P2P ID, 
which is linked to a unique ring-based DHT inherited from 
Chord. Every peer is identified by a peer ID, which is 
ranging from 0 to 2n – 1 like Chord, but a peer can own 
multiple peer IDs unlike Chord due to the consideration for 
multidimensional query. When a peer has higher availability 
and its files have higher level of ontology, its peer ID will be 
smaller to reduce the forward steps. 
In mobility module, anycast protocol is used to deliver an 
informative query. The anycast address of IPv6 is defined as 
the ID of P2P group to integrate P2P solution, such that 
every mobile node is seen as a peer in WLAN or MANET. 
We adopt IPv6 to implement anycast delivery, because IPv6 
features higher extensibility, scalability, and mobility than 
that in IPv4 . 
Since the cooperative network is formed in WLAN or 
MANET, the communication between mobile nodes is 
similar to the communication between peers. However, 
anycast delivery is forwarded in IP layer, while P2P delivery 
is forwarded in application layer. In order to allow 
informative queries for mobile network, anycast address in 
IPv6 is set to a P2P ID. Therefore, an informative query can 
be translated to a P2P query and mobility query for an 
integration of P2P and mobile network. 
B. Algorithm 
In MP2PSW, SWS must handle the messages of query 
process, as illustrated in Figure 4. Every informative query 
should be parsed to generate multiple data queries via either 
the query module or ontology module. Such data query is 
translated to P2P query or mobility query, which is 
forwarded via Chord forwarding or anycast routing, 
respectively. Through P2P and mobile network, the results 
are responded with hyperlinks. We discuss the steps 
necessary to implement MP2PSW as followings: 
1. The query module is implemented in the semantic 
agent, which supports the network socket. 
2. The socket may need multiple network interfaces to 
support some relay nodes. 
3. The relay node is bound to single or multiple P2P 
network or mobile network to handle query. 
4. The result of query may be generic. The ontology 
principle let the result specific. 
5. Because every mobile node need a public IP to route 
informative query through Internet and supports 
anycast query, IPv6 is required. 
 
C. Advantages 
First, MP2PSW can avoid the single-point-of-failure 
problem because MP2PSW is based on P2P scheme. 
Although the semantic agent is used in MP2PSW, it is still 
while an informative query is received do 
let q = informative query; 
let req = getRequest(q); 
let sem[ ] = parseSemantics(req); 
while sem[ ] ≠ Φ do 
sends sem as a data query; 
delete sem; 
end while 
end while 
while a data query is received do 
let q = data query; 
let meta = extractData(q); 
sends meta as a web query; 
sends meta as a P2P query; 
end while 
while a web query is received do 
let result[ ] = searchResult(web 
query); 
let link[ ] = getHyperlink(result); 
sends link; 
end while 
while a link is received do 
let response = shareP2P(link); 
sends response; 
end while 
while a P2P query is received do 
let key = hashChord(P2P query); 
let peer = forwardChord(key); 
let result[ ] = Φ; 
while peer ≠ null do 
if peer is a mobile node then 
sends such P2P query as a mobility 
query to peer; 
else 
result[ ] = result[ ] + searchResult(peer); 
peer = peer  next; 
end while 
let link[ ] = getHyperlink(result); 
sends link; 
end while 
while a mobility query is received do 
let peer = anycastDelivery(mobile query); 
let result[ ] = Φ; 
while peer ≠ null do 
result[ ] = result[ ] + searchResult(peer); 
peer = peer  next; 
end while 
let link[ ] = getHyperlink(result); 
sends link; 
end while 
Figure 4. The algorithm of MP2PSW. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-285-1
INTERNET 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Evolving Internet

workable even if a semantic agent is failed. An information 
query is still forwarded to P2P and mobile network without a 
semantic agent, but the query results will be multifarious and 
the response delay will be long due to the lack of ontology 
parser and extraction. 
Second, the combination of P2P and wireless mobile 
network heightens the interoperability of SWS, because such 
combination extends the scalability and heterogeneity of the 
network. The advantage of interoperability brings the rich 
information. In addition, P2P solution provides file 
streaming and video streaming services, and mobility 
solution provides geographic information in SWS. 
Third, the network overhead can be reduced. P2P 
minimizes server load and anycast reduces traffic load when 
processing informative query. P2P solution also balances 
network overhead when downloading or sharing content. 
 
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
 
We focus on the network performance of MP2PSW, 
which is evaluated through system simulation. We use 
OMNet++ [16] to construct a simulation environment as Fig. 
2 illustrates. Under OMNet++, OverSim [17] is used for P2P 
core, i.e., Chord, and INET/ xMIPV6 [18] is used for anycast 
delivery. The simulation is based on IPv6, with 10000 peers 
given in a P2P network, in which there are 20 WLANs, with 
100 mobile nodes in each WiFi. We compare MP2PSW with 
the traditional scheme, which adopts the server-client model. 
Every user as a client sends the query to the server, and waits 
for the response from server. The server uses the flooding 
query to all network nodes. The experiment repeats 20 
simulations and the result represents an average. 
During a given interval, a user continuously sends a large 
number of informative queries to the semantic agent. More 
queries lead to longer response delay and higher overhead. 
As Figure 5 illustrated, MP2PSW outperforms the traditional 
scheme. Based on the DHT query of Chord, the response 
delay is slightly long with the increasing queries. Since 
MP2PSW handles the variants of informative query (i.e., 
web query, P2P query, and mobile query) in parallel, the 
search process can be fastened. Via the proposed P2P 
module and mobility module, the modified Chord can 
perform query for the peers with high level of ontology, so 
the steps can be reduced with hop-by-hop query. 
The number of duplications is used to measure the 
network overhead. The more the duplications are, the higher 
the overhead will be. As Figure 6 illustrated, MP2PSW 
adopts DHT-based P2P search to forward informative query 
in P2P network, such that the number of duplications of 
MP2PSW is much smaller than that of the server-client 
model. Although the number of duplications increases 
exponentially, unlike the traditional scheme, the network 
overhead is limited within a reasonable bound in MP2PSW. 
Since the anycast delivery is more efficient than the flooding 
delivery, the query duplications are not only reduced in 
wired P2P network but also minimized in wireless mobile 
network. However, the admission of multiple peer IDs for 
multidimensional query cannot alleviate the duplicated load. 
 
V. CONCLUSIONS 
 
In this paper, we proposed a novel scheme, which not 
only enables the informative query across P2P and mobile 
networks for SWS, but also retrieves the responded context 
via P2P file sharing or live streaming. The proposed 
MP2PSW orientates SWS to the cooperative and wireless 
network to obtain the potential demand and information. The 
proposed P2P module and mobility module parallelize the 
informative query via Chord and anycast protocols 
individually. We modified Chord and anycast to support 
SWS. MP2PSW not only accomplishes the pioneer and 
practicable design, but also considers the network 
performance. Therefore, MP2PSW can be demonstrated to 
achieve the high interoperability, scalability, and flexibility. 
Although MP2PSW must work in IPv6 with low popularity 
now, MP2PSW follows the current trend and takes 
advantage of P2P socialization and mobile personalization. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] V. Ermolayev, N. Keberle, S. Plaksin, O. Kononenko, and V. 
Terziyan, “Towards a framework for agent-enabled semantic 
web service composition,” International Journal of Web 
Services Research, vol. 1, iss. 3, July–September 2004, pp. 
63-87. 
[2] D. Skoutas, D. Sacharidis, V. Kantere, and T. Sellis, 
“Efficient semantic web service discovery in centralized and 
 
Figure 5. The response delay of informative query. 
 
Figure 6. The duplications of informative query. 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
0
1
2
4
8
16
32
64
128
256 512 1024
The number of informative queries
The response delay (seconds)
The traditional scheme
The proposed MP2PSW 
1
10
100
1000
10000
100000
1000000
10000000
0
1
2
4
8
16
32
64
128 256
512 1024
The number of informative queries
The number of duplications
The traditional scheme
The proposed MP2PSW 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-285-1
INTERNET 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Evolving Internet

P2P environments,” ISWC '08 Proceedings of the 7th 
International Conference on the Semantic Web, October 2008,  
pp. 583-598. 
[3] J. Veijalainen, S. Nikitin, and V. Tormala, “Ontology-based 
semantic web service platform in mobile environments,” Proc. 
7th International Conference on Mobile Data Management, 
Nara, Japan, May  2006. 
[4] I. Stoica, R. Morris, D. Karger, M.F. Kaashoek, and H. 
Balakrishnan, “Chord: A scalable peer-to-peer lookup service 
for internet applications,” ACM Conference on Applications, 
Technologies, Architectures, and Protocols for Computer 
Communications, August 2001, pp. 149-160. 
[5] J. L. Kuo, C. H. Shih, C. Y. Ho, and Y. C. Chen, “A cross-
layer approach for real-time multimedia streaming on wireless 
peer-to-peer ad hoc network,” Ad Hoc Networks, vol. 11, iss. 
1, January 2013, pp. 339-354. 
[6] S. Weber and L. Cheng, “A survey of anycast in IPv6 
networks,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 42, iss. 1, 
August 2004, pp. 127-142. 
[7] A. Adala and N. Tabbane, “Discovery of semantic Web 
Services with an enhanced-Chord-based P2P network,” 
International Journal of Communication Systems, vol. 23, iss. 
11, November 2010, pp. 1353-1365. 
[8] F. Xhafa and A. Poulovassilis, “Awareness in P2P groupware 
systems: a convergence of contextual computing, social media 
and semantic web,” Proc. International Conference on 
Emerging Intelligent Data and Web Technologies, September 
2011, pp. 14-21. 
[9] M. Gharzouli and M. Boufaida. “PM4SWS: a P2P model for 
semantic web services discovery and composition,” Journal of 
Advances in Information Technology, vol. 2, no. 1, February 
2011, pp. 15-26. 
[10] H. Si, Z. Chen, Y. Deng, and L. Yu, “Semantic web services 
publication and OCT-based discovery in structured P2P 
network,” Service Oriented Computing and Applications, 
January 2012,  DOI 10.1007/s11761-011-0097-4. 
[11] H. B. Shen and Y. Cheng, “A context-aware semantic-based 
access control model for mobile web services,” Advanced 
Research on Computer Science and Information Engineering, 
2011, pp. 132-139. 
[12] W. V. Woensel, S. Casteleyn, E. Paret, and O.D. Troyer, 
“Mobile querying of online semantic web data for context-
aware applications,”  IEEE Internet Computing, vol. 15, iss. 6, 
November–December 2011, pp. 32-39. 
[13] R. Besen and F. Siqueira, “A mechanism for semantic web 
services discovery in mobile environments,” Proc. 10th 
International Conference on Networks, January 2011, pp. 
329-334. 
[14] R. Pathmeswaran and V. Ahmed, “SWmLOR: technologies 
for developing Semantic Web based mobile Learning Object 
Repository,” The Built & Human Environment Review, vol. 2, 
special iss. 1, 2009. 
[15] X. Hei, C. Liang, J. Liang, Y. Liu, and K. W. Ross, “A 
measurement study of a large-scale P2P IPTV system,”  IEEE 
Transaction on Multimedia, vol. 9, iss. 8, December 2007, pp. 
1672-1687. 
[16] A. Varga, “Using the OMNeT++ discrete event simulation 
system in education,”  IEEE Transactions on Education, vol. 
42, iss. 4, November 1999. 
[17] I. Baumgart, B. Heep, and S. Krause, “OverSim: a flexible 
overlay network simulation framework,” Proc. IEEE Global 
Internet Symposium, May 2007, pp. 79-84. 
[18] F. Z. Yousaf, C. Bauer, and C. Wietfeld, “An accurate and 
extensible mobile IPv6 (xMIPV6) simulation model for 
OMNeT++,” Proc. International Conference on Simulation 
Tools and Techniques for Communications, Networks and 
Systems & Workshops, March 2008, Article No. 88. 
[19] “PPLive,” http://www.pplive.com/ [Retrieved: April, 2013] 
[20] “PPStream,”http://www.ppstream.com/[Retrieved:April, 2013] 
[21] “BitTorrent,”http://www.bittorrent.com/[Retrieved:May, 2013] 
[22] http://ipv6.com/articles/general/Next-Generation-Networking. 
Htm[Retrived: May, 2013] 
[23] https://www.hpl.hp.com/techreports/2002/HPL- 2002-
57R1.pdf [Retrieved: March, 2013] 
[24] http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc768.txt [Retrieved: March, 2013] 
[25] http://www.w3.org/TR/wsdl [Retrieved: March, 2013] 
[26] G. Antoniou and F. van Harmelen, “Web Ontology Language: 
OWL,” International Handbooks on Information Systems 
2004, pp. 67-92. 
[27] http://oreilly.com/web2/archive/what-is-web-20.html 
[Retrieved: May, 2013] 
[28] Victoria Shannon, “A 'more revolutionary' Web,” 
International Herald Tribune [Retrieved: May, 2013] 
[29] http://www.wi-fi.org/ [Retrieved: May, 2013] 
[30] http://www.wimaxforum.org/[Retrieved: May, 2013] 
[31] ITU (4 July 2002), "IMT-2000 Project - ITU" [Retrieved: 
April, 2013] 
[32] E. Dahlman, H. Ekström, A. Furuskär, J. Karlsson, M. Meyer, 
S. Parkvall, J. Torsner and M. Wahlqvist, “The long-term 
evolution of 3G,” Ericsson Review, no. 02, 2005.
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-285-1
INTERNET 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Evolving Internet

