Veriﬁcation and Conﬁguration of an Intelligent Lighting System Using BACnet
Daichi Terai, Mitsunori Miki, Ryohei Jonan and Hiroto Aida
Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Doshisha University, Kyoto, Japan
email: dterai@mikilab.doshisha.ac.jp, mmiki@mail.doshisha.ac.jp, rjonan@mikilab.doshisha.ac.jp, haida@mail.doshisha.ac.jp
Abstract—We have been engaged in the development and research
of an intelligent lighting system, which allows both improving
comfort of ofﬁce workers and reducing power consumption.
The results of our demonstration experiments in a real ofﬁce
environment showed that an intelligent lighting system is effective.
Consequently, it is required to consider the introduction and
operation of an intelligent lighting system. In a current intelligent
lighting system, it has to be constructed for each ofﬁce as it
needs to be conﬁgured by creating a unique network. In addition,
lighting control methods differ by vendors and a system needs
to be conﬁgured differently for each vendor. For these reasons,
there are problems in introducing and operating an intelligent
lighting system in a large-scale environment. We thus propose
an intelligent lighting system conﬁgured by using the BACnet
communication protocol, which has increasingly spread in recent
years, for the purpose of making it easier to introduce and operate
an intelligent lighting system. Our veriﬁcation experiments and
simulation showed that an intelligent lighting system conﬁgura-
tion using BACnet was effective.
Keywords–ofﬁce lighting; lighting control; BACnet.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, many researches have been conducted
about the effects of the lighting of the ofﬁce building on ofﬁce
workers [2]. It is expected that ofﬁce worker’s intellectual
productivity, creativity and comfort are improved by working
in their preferred light brightness[1].
In addition, energy conservation of ofﬁce buildings have
been promoted. However, in many cases, the lighting is
brighter than what the ofﬁce workers prefer, or unnecessary
places are lit. It is possible to reduce the power consumption by
improving the lighting environment. Against such a backdrop,
we have focused on ofﬁce lighting environment and proposed
an intelligent lighting system that provides illuminance to
individual ofﬁce workers which they request, in minimal power
consumption [4]. An intelligent lighting system is recognized
as being useful and demonstration experiments have been
carried out at 10 locations in Japanese ofﬁce [3]. When an
intelligent lighting system has been introduced, we conﬁrmed
that the power consumption is reduced by about 50% compared
to the nomal ofﬁce. In the future, we need to consider the
spread of an intelligent lighting system and the operation and
deployment in large-scale environment. A current intelligent
lighting system is connecting to the dimmable lighting ﬁxtures
and a control computer in the network of each ofﬁce.
Further, the control method of the lighting is different for
each vendor. It is necessary to conﬁgure the suitable system of
lighting control method for each vendor. In addition, with such
a system conﬁguration, a control computer is required for each
ofﬁce in which the system is installed. From these things, a
current intelligent lighting system has issues in its diffusion to
common ofﬁces, as well as in its implementation and operation
in a large-scale environment. In order to solve these issues, we
propose an intelligent lighting system using BACnet, which has
been spreading increasingly to ofﬁce buildings in recent years.
BACnet is a network protocol for ofﬁce buildings. BACnet
provides mechanisms for computerized building automation
devices to exchange information, regardless of the particular
building service they perform. Constructing an intelligent
lighting system via BACnet enables centralized control without
dependance on lighting control methods of different vendors.
As it eliminates the necessity to install and individually control
a control computer in each ofﬁce, it makes the implementation
and operation of an intelligent lighting system easy. Also,
BACnet has already been used to control lighting in advanced
ofﬁce buildings. Therefore, it is possible to utilize the lighting
apparatus in the ofﬁce. For that reason, it is not necessary to do
the improvement work when when we introduce an intelligent
lighting system. This study thus constructed an intelligent
lighting system using BACnet that can be implemented in
an ofﬁce building already controlling lighting by BACnet and
examined its effectiveness and issues.
In Section 2, we describe an intelligent lighting system that
we have proposed. In Section 3, we describe an intelligent
lighting system using BACnet. In Section 4, we describes the
issues of BACnet type intelligent lighting system. In Section
5, we build the BACnet type intelligent lighting system and
perform an operation experiment. In Section 6, we perform
a simulation assuming the large scale ofﬁce environment to
solve the issues shows in Section 4.
II.
INTELLIGENT LIGHTING SYSTEM
In this section, we describe an intelligent lighting system
that we have proposed. First, we describes the outline of an
intelligent lighting system. Second, we describes the algorithm
of an intelligent lighting system. Finally, we describe the
issues of an intelligent lighting system in a large scal ofﬁce
environment.
A. Outline and Conﬁguration of an Intelligent LIghting System
An intelligent lighting system realizes illuminance desired
by each worker while minimizing energy consumption by
changing the luminous intensity of lighting ﬁxtures. An intel-
ligent lighting system, as indicated in Fig. 1, is composed of
a control computer, illuminance sensors, and electrical power
meter, with each element connected via a IP network. A
Control computer varies the luminance of each lighting ﬁxture
using an optimization method on the basis of the illuminance
information and the power consumption information. It is
thereby possible to achieve the illuminance desired by each
worker with low power consumption.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

Illuminance Sensor
Lighting Fixture
Power Meter
Network
Control PC  
Figure 1. Conﬁguration of The Intelligent Lighting System
B. Control Algorithm of Intelligent Lighting System
In an intelligent lighting system, the ANA/RC(Adaptive
Neighborhood Algorithm using Regression Coefﬁcient) which
is improved algorithm of SA(Simulated Annealing) for lighting
control is used to control luminance intensity for each lighting
ﬁxture [5].
It is possible with ANA/RC to provide the target illumi-
nance with minimum power consumption by making lumi-
nance intensity for lighting ﬁxtures the design variable and
by using the difference between the current illuminance and
target illuminance as well as power consumption as objective
functions. Furthermore, by learning the inﬂuence of each
lighting ﬁxture on each illuminance sensor using the regression
analysis and by changing the luminance intensity depending
on the results, rtly change to the optimal luminance intensity.
This algorithm is effective to solve the problem, which the
objective function is near monomodal function and changes in
real time. The objective function is indicated in the (1).
As indicated in (1), the objective function f consists of
power consumption and illuminance constraint. Also, changing
weighting factor w enables changes in the order of priority for
electrical energy and illuminance constraint. The illuminance
constraint brings current illuminance to target illuminance or
greater, as indicated by formula.
fi
=
P + ω ×
n
∑
j=1
gij
(1)
gij
=
{
0
(Icj − Itj) ≥ 0
Rij × (Icj − Itj)2
(Icj − Itj) < 0
Rij
=
{
rij
rij ≥ T
0
rij < T
i:lighting ID , j:illuminance sensor ID, P:power
consumption [W], ω:weight[W/lx2]
Ic:current illuminance [lx], It:target illuminance [lx],
r:regression coefﬁcient, T:threshold
C. Issues in Introducing the System in a Large Scale Environ-
ment
While the effectiveness of an intelligent lighting system
has been demonstrated in an actual ofﬁce, its veriﬁcation
experiments have been all conducted in a small environment
(a single ofﬁce) and following three issues remain in a large-
scale environment. The ﬁrst issue is that lighting control
methods in ofﬁce buildings differ by vendors. For this reason,
it is necessary to consider the optimal conﬁguration of an
intelligent lighting system for each vendor in implementing it.
The second issue is that due to the conﬁguration of a current
intelligent lighting system, a control computer is required
for each ofﬁce in which it is implemented and each vendor.
Namely, in a large-scale environment, there are problems with
the installation cost, installation area, and operating cost of
control computer for an intelligent lighting system. The third
issue is that improvement work for enabling the individual
control of lightings in each vendor’s lighting system by using
the control computers of an intelligent lighting system is
executed for each vendor. This makes the implementation
cost of an intelligent lighting system high. Assuming that the
number of an intelligent lighting system to be implemented
and its scale are expected to expand, it is necessary to solve
these issues.
III.
AN INTELLIGENT LIGHTING SYSTEM USING BACNET
In this section, we describe an intelligent lighting system
using BACnet. First, we describe the outline of BACnet. Sec-
ond, we described the conﬁguration of an intelligent lighting
system using BACnet. Finally, we described the advantage of
an intelligent lighting system using BACnet.
A. Outline of BACnet
BACnet is a communication protocol for networks which
is equipped in buildings, and it is a standard protocol spec-
iﬁed by ASHRAE, ANSI, ISO, etc. Unlike with common
communication protocols, BACnet standardizes control devices
connected to it as a set of objects. This method ensures
interconnectivity between systems, various vendor’s system
is able to interconnect the systems which are constructed
by different vendors. In recent years, BACnet has been used
in an increasing number of ofﬁce buildings to manage and
control centrally systems in those buildings as doing so enables
streamlined building management.
B. Outline and Conﬁguration of an Intelligent LIghting System
Using BACnet
As noted in Section 2, an intelligent lighting system, as it is
has problems in implementing and operating it in a large-scale
environment. In order to solve those problems, we propose
a new intelligent lighting system using BACnet (hereinafter
referred to as ”BACnet-type intelligent lighting system”).
In recent years, BACnet has been used in an increasing
number of ofﬁce buildings to control lighting in ofﬁces cen-
trally. In those buildings, however, individual lighting is not
centrally controlled by using BACnet, and lighting in each
vendor’s system is controlled only by turning them on or off
at once. Furthermore, the individual control of lighting in each
vendor’s system is performed by the method unique to each
vendor by using ceiling illuminance sensors or infrared sen-
sors, apart from the central control via BACnet. On the other
hand, under the conﬁguration of the new intelligent lighting
system proposed by authors, lighting in each vendor’s system
is individually controlled by the central control computer via
BACnet.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

Figure 2. BACnet Type Intelligent Lighting System Conﬁguration
Fig. 2 is the system conﬁguration diagram for the proposed
system. The system composed by connecting the control
computer of an intelligent lighting system (central control
computer) and illuminance sensors to the IP network inside
an ofﬁce building. The control computer controls the lighting
individually in each vendor’s system in ofﬁces on the basis of
illuminance values obtained from vendor’s systems in ofﬁces.
As illuminance sensors that can communicate over an IP
network are installed, they need not be controlled via BACnet.
C. Advantages of an Intelligent Lighting System
There are two advantages to the BACnet-type intelligent
lighting system. The ﬁrst one is that it makes the design,
implementation, and operation of an intelligent lighting system
easy. From the system conﬁguration diagram given in Fig. 2,
by using BACnet to construct the system, an intelligent lighting
system can be implemented and managed just by connecting
the central control computer and illuminance sensors to the IP
network in a building. Furthermore, as control is performed
from outside vendors’ systems using a standard protocol, it
does not depend on the lighting control system in each vendor’s
system. In addition, as centralized control is possible, there is
no need to install a control computer in each ofﬁce, which able
to reduce cost.
The second advantage is that the proposed system enables
realizing the further optimization of an ofﬁce space by con-
trolling lighting in coordination with air-conditioning and blind
instead of controlling it alone. This is because, as the integrated
protocol makes different systems interconnectable with each
other, various systems can be controlled in coordination with
each other. There are, however, two issues with the BACnet-
type intelligent lighting system, which are described in the
following section.
IV.
ISSUES OF AN INTELLIGENT LIGHTING SYSTEM
USING BACNET
In this section, we describe the two issues of intelligent
lighting system using BACnet.
A. Limit of the number of possible dimming levels
In controlling a dimmable lighting ﬁxtures, the number of
possible dimming levels varies by how lighting is controlled.
The lighting control method in an existing intelligent lighting
system had 256 dimming levels by 8-bit PWM control or
1000 dimming levels by digital control. On the other hand,
lighting control via BACnet has from 0 to 100 dimming
levels in accordance with the BACnet protocol. Namely, the
Figure 3. The Time of Sending Control Signal to Starting All Lighting’s
Luminous Intensity Increase
BACnet-type intelligent lighting system has 100 dimming
levels irrespective of the lighting control methods of vendors.
For this reason, the BACnet-type intelligent lighting system
offers a smaller number of dimming levels compared with
an existing intelligent lighting system. This difference in the
number of dimming levels, however, only means the difference
in luminance between adjacent levels of approximately 6 cd
(for existing 256 levels) and approximately 15 cd (for 100
levels under BACnet) even if with a lighting whose maximum
luminance is 1,500 cd. In other words, even on a desktop
directly under a lighting, the illuminance value corresponding
to one level only differs by approximately 2 lx. Therefore, the
same control as exercisable by an existing intelligent lighting
system (256 levels) is considered to be possible by 100-level
lighting control using BACnet. For the operation veriﬁcation
of the BACnet-type intelligent lighting system, which has a
smaller number of dimming levels, it is necessary to construct
the BACnet-type intelligent lighting system actually, verify its
operation, and compare its operation with that of an existing
intelligent lighting system. The veriﬁcation experiment is de-
scribed in Section 5.
B. Delay of Lighting Control
As it takes time from transmitting control signals to starting
to boost all lightings under lighting control via BACnet, an
impact of the delay needs to be examined. AN intelligent
lighting system controls lighting at a certain interval (1 or
2 seconds) in consideration of the time required for lighting
luminance to stabilize after a sharp change in the lighting
environment and a change in lighting luminance. If, however,
the lighting control interval becomes longer due to a delay
in lighting control, it takes more time for illuminance to
converge to the target illuminance. Therefore, it is required to
maintain the current lighting control interval (1 or 2 seconds).
In consideration of this, the BACnet-type intelligent lighting
system sets the lighting control interval to 2 seconds. That
is, in order to ensure time for lighting luminance to stabilize
(1 second per step), the boosting of all lightings needs to be
completed within 1 second. Thus we measured time required
to start boosting all lightings by individual lighting control
using BACnet. In this measurement, lighting luminance was
changed from 40% to 50%.
Fig. 3 shows a graph indicating time from transmitting
control signals to lighting ﬁxtures via BACnet to starting
to boost all lighting ﬁxtures. The vertical axis denotes time
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

required to boost all lighting ﬁxtures and the horizontal axis
denotes the number of lighting ﬁxtures controlled. Fig. 3 shows
that individual lighting control using BACnet can only control
approximately 20 lighting ﬁxtures per second. In other words,
in order to maintain the same convergence time to the target
illuminance as the existing intelligent lighting system has,
the BACnet-type intelligent lighting system is limited to an
ofﬁce with 20 or less lighting ﬁxtures. This delay in control
is considered to be caused by the fact that control signals
transmitted by the central control computer control lighting
ﬁxtures via various equipments including the IP network
(media for BACnet communication), BACnet gateways located
on each ﬂoor or in each ofﬁce, and lighting control equipments
in each vendor’s system.
Groups of 20 lighting ﬁxtures individually controlled per
second can be controlled in parallel if they are on different
ﬂoors or in different ofﬁces supporting a BACnet gateway.
Time required for controlling this number of lighting ﬁxtures
is considered to differ somewhat by the performance of the
control PC and BACnet supporting equipments. If all lighting
ﬁxtures are controlled at the same luminance instead of being
individually controlled, as an effective instruction is sent once
to all lighting ﬁxtures then, lighting control via BACnet does
not take time in controlling. On the other hand, in an ofﬁce
where the number of lighting ﬁxtures is more than 20, the
number of lighting ﬁxtures to be controlled simultaneously
needs to be 20 or less in order to control them without a delay.
This is covered in Section 6.
V.
VERIFICATION EXPERIMENT OF AN INTELLIGENT
LIGHTING SYSTEM USING BACNET
In this section, we build the BACnet type intelligent
lighting system and perform an operation experiment. First, we
describe the outline and environment of experiment. Second,
we describe the result of the experiment.
A. Outline of Experiment
This section examines the limitation of dimming levels of
lighting ﬁxtures mentioned in Section 4.1. This veriﬁcation ex-
periment veriﬁes the operation of the BACnet-type intelligent
lighting system with a smaller number of dimming levels and
examines the difference in performance between this type of
system and an existing intelligent lighting system. A BACnet-
type intelligent lighting system was constructed to perform
veriﬁcation. This experiment used a BACnet-ready transceiver,
gateways, and lighting equipment made by Mitsubishi Electric
Corporation as a lighting system inside a vendor’s system.
Fig. 4 shows a part of system constructed. The gateway is
connected to IP network (BACnet communication media) and
further to the central control computer.
This experiment was conducted in a small room with
20 or less lighting ﬁxtures (the number of lighting ﬁxtures
was 9) in order to verify the operation of a BACnet-type
intelligent lighting system. That is, the delay time in lighting
control via BACnet does not affect the control time of an
intelligent lighting system. This experiment was intended to
verify that an intelligent lighting system can operate normally
by lighting control via BACnet with a smaller number of
dimming levels and to compare its operation with that of
an existing intelligent lighting system. An experiment was
thus conducted on convergence to the target illuminance to
Inverter Unit
Lighting Fixture
Lighting Gateway
Area Controller
Communications Unit
Power
Figure 4. BACnet Corresponding Signal Transceiver of Mitsubishi Electric
Corporation
Figure 5. Illuminance Sensor Layout Plan and LED Lighting
verify the operation of the BACnet-type intelligent lighting
system and compare the results of control by an existing
intelligent lighting system and the BACnet-type intelligent
lighting system.
The
experimental
environment
was
composed
of
9
dimmable LED lighting ﬁxtures and 3 illuminance sensors
made by Mitsubishi Electric Corporation. Fig. 5 gives the
layout of illuminance sensors relative to LED lighting ﬁxtures
and the target illuminance of each illuminance sensor. As
shown in Fig. 5, the target illuminance of Illuminance Sensors
A, B, and C is, respectively, 300 lx, 500 lx, and700 lx.
B. Result of Experiment
As stated above, this section shows the result of the
target illuminance convergence experiment of the BACnet-type
intelligent lighting system and the comparison experiment with
an existing intelligent lighting system. First, we indicate the
result of the target illuminance convergence experiment.
Fig. 6 shows the result of convergence to the target
illuminance by the BACnet-type intelligent lighting system.
The horizontal axis denotes the number of steps taken by
the BACnet-type intelligent lighting system, and the vertical
axis denotes illuminance obtained from illuminance sensors.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

Time [ sec]
400         800         1200       1600       2000       2400
Figure 6. Illumination Convergence of BACnet Type Intelligent Lighting
System
As Fig. 6 shows, in approximately 100 steps (approximately
400 seconds) after an intelligent lighting system started up, the
illuminance obtained by every illuminance sensors converged
to the respective target illuminance.
In this case, approximately 100 steps (approximately 400
seconds) were required to reach convergence. This is because
an intelligent lighting system changes the luminance of lighting
so slightly as to be not perceived by workers in order not
to disturb their work. Furthermore, an intelligent lighting
system performs a regression analysis to obtain the positional
relationship between lighting ﬁxtures and illuminance sensors
during the ﬁrst 50 steps from its start-up. For this reason, since
luminance cannot be efﬁciently changed during the regression
analysis, convergence to the target illuminance takes time.
As this regression analysis, however, needs to be performed
only at the start-up of the system, convergence to the target
illuminance in about 50 steps (approximately 200 seconds) is
possible purely in terms of illuminance convergence.
Next, the target illuminance of illuminance sensor A was
changed from 300 lx to 700 lx at around 200th step. It is shown
that, as a result, the illuminance of the illuminance sensor A
converged to 700 lx while the target illuminance of each of
other two illuminance sensors was satisﬁed. It is shown that
illuminance convergence in several steps was possible as this
was illuminance convergence to greater illuminance and the
regression analysis had been completed.
Next, the light of a task light was cast on illuminance
sensor A in order to simulate natural light. A sharp rise in
the illuminance of illuminance sensor A in approximately 300
steps was due to the light from a task light. As desktops near
Illuminance Sensor A became brighter than necessary, an intel-
ligent lighting system lowered the luminance of ceiling lighting
ﬁxtures around the illuminance sensor to make illuminance
converge to the target illuminance. As a result, illuminance
converged to the target illuminance again as shown in Fig.
6. As described above, it was conﬁrmed that an intelligent
lighting system was able to operate normally even if lightings
were individually controlled by the BACnet-type intelligent
lighting system.
Next, in order to verify the performance of the BACnet-
type intelligent lighting system, the convergence results of
the BACnet-type intelligent lighting system and an existing
intelligent lighting system were compared by focusing on
illuminance sensor B. Fig 7 shows the graph comparing the
histories of target illuminance convergence for both systems.
The result of comparison shown in Fig 7 indicates that there
Figure 7. Comparison of Convergence History in The Sensor B
was no difference in the convergence time of illuminance
between standard type and BACnet type of an intelligent
lighting system. The veriﬁcation results show that an intelligent
lighting system can be normally controlled by individually
controlling lighting ﬁxtures via BACnet.
It also turned out that there were hardly any differences
between the BACnet-type intelligent lighting system and an
existing intelligent lighting system in terms of convergence
time and error. It follows from this that the BACnet-type
intelligent lighting system can have the same performance
as an existing intelligent lighting system and that it is an
effective system for making the development, implementation,
and operation of an intelligent lighting system easier.
It is, however, necessary to conceive a method to deliver
the same performance as an existing intelligent lighting system
even if the number of lightings in each ofﬁce is greater
than the number of controllable lightings (20). A method
is thus proposed to prioritize lightings in controlling them
instead of controlling them in an equal manner. This method
is considered to enable controlling the BACnet-type intelligent
lighting system without delay in an ofﬁce in which the number
of lighting ﬁxtures is more than 20. This is described in the
next section.
VI.
VERIFICATION OF AN INTELLIGENT LIGHTING
SYSTEM USING BACNET IN AN LARGE SCALE
ENVIRONMENT
In this section, we perform a simulation assuming the large
scale ofﬁce environment to solve the issues shows in Section
4. First, we describe the outline of simulation. Second, we
describe the result of simulation.
A. Outline of Simulation
In this section, we veriﬁed using simulation whether an
intelligent lighting system to work conventional equivalent
without delay in the number of lighting ﬁxtures more than
20 room described in section 4.2. In Fig. 8 shows the simu-
lation environment. The number of dimmable lighting ﬁxtures
without delay at the same time in the lighting control using
a BACnet is 20 units. Therefore, it is necessary to operate an
inttelijent lighting system to control lighting ﬁxtures to below
20 units in an ofﬁce in which the number of lighting ﬁxtures
is more than 20. In this simulation, it compares the realization
rate of the target illuminance in a conventional intelligent
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

Lighting Fixture
Illuminance Sensor
18.0 m
18.0 m
Desk
Chair
Lighting Fixture
Illuminance Sensor
18.0 m
18.0 m
Desk
Chair
1.8 m
1.8 m
1.2 m
0.7m
1.8 m
1.2 m
0.6m
0.6m
Figure 8. Simulation environment
lighting system without using BACnet (conventional method)
and proposed method using BACnet.
Fig 9 shows the simulation environment. Simulation will
assume the day from 7:00 to 22:00 and workers come to the
ofﬁce from 7:00 to 8:30 and leave the ofﬁce from 17: 30
to 22:00 and that number of workers increases and decreases
linearly during those periods of time. In addition, workers leave
their seat for 1 hour once a day. The target illuminance of each
worker is random and ranges from 300 lx to 700 lx.
B. Result of Simulation
In this section, we verify the realization rate of the target
illuminance in the proposed method. Realization rate of the
target illuminance shall be realization if the illuminance in
the range ± 10 % of the realizable illuminance. Realizable
illuminance represents a value that illuminance is converged
using the conventional method. This is to verify whether even
if the target illuminance can not be achieved by physical
factors, there is no difference in illuminance to provide the
conventional method.
Fig 9 shows the result of simulation. The average of
the illuminance realization rate was 91.5 % in the proposed
method. As shown Fig 9, even when using the proposed
method, it was possible to realize the illuminance as in the
conventional method.
In the control algorithm of an intelligent lighting system,
each lighting is linked to extract the illuminance sensor is
greatly affected by the luminance changes. The number of
lighting each illuminance sensor is linked depend on the
location, and the illuminance sensor is linked to the lighting
of the 4 or 5 lights. Lighting that is linked to the illumi-
nance sensor is luminance change amount increases when
the illuminance sensor is signiﬁcantly different value as the
target illuminance. Therefore, If the illuminance sensor doesn’t
converge to the target illuminance, the target illuminance is
achieved by controlling the lighting of 4 or 5 lights near the
illuminance sensor. Thus by preferentially control the lighting
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
7:00 
10:00 
13:00 
16:00 
19:00 
22:00 
the Number of Occupied Seats
Illuminance convergence rate[%]
Time
Illuminance 
Convergence Rate 
the number of 
Occupied Seats 
Figure 9. Simulation result
which the luminance changes greately, the proposed method
can exhibit conventional method the same performance.
VII.
CONCLUSION
A current intelligent lighting system has issues in its
diffusion to common ofﬁces as well as in its implementation
and operation in a large-scale environment. In order to solve
these issues, we proposed an intelligent lighting system using
BACnet. The result of veriﬁcation experiment showed the
BACnet-type intelligent lighting system can have the same
performance as an existing intelligent lighting system and that
it is an effective system for making the development, imple-
mentation, and operation of the Intelligent Lighting System
easier.
REFERENCES
[1]
P. R. Boyce, N. H. Eklund and S. N. Simpson, “Individual Lighting
Control: Task Performance, Mood and Illuminance”, Journal of the
Illuminating Engineering Society, vol.29, pp.131-142, 2000
[2]
O. Seppanen and W.J. Fisk, “A model to estimate the cost effectiveness
of indoor environment improvements in ofﬁce work”, ASHRAE Trans-
actions, vol.111, pp.663-679, 2005
[3]
F. Kaku, et al., “Construction of Intelligent Lighting System Providing
Desired Illuminance Distributions in Actual Ofﬁce Environment”, Artif-
ical Intelligence and Soft Computing, vol.6114, pp.451-460, 2010
[4]
M. Miki, T. Hiroyasu and K. Imazato, “Proposal for an Intelligent Light-
ing System and veriﬁcation of control method effectiveness”, Cybernetics
and Intelligent Systems, 2004 IEEE Conference on, vol.1, pp.520-525,
2004
[5]
S. Tanaka, M. Miki, T. Hiroyasu, M. Yoshikata, “An Evolutional Opti-
mization Algorithm to Provide Individual Illuminance in Workplaces”,
Systems, Man and Cybernetics, 2009. SMC 2009. IEEE International
Conference on, vol.1, pp.941-947, 2009
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

