Human-Centric Internet of Things. Problems and Challenges 
Ekaterina D. Kazimirova 
AO Kaspersky Lab  
Moscow, Russia 
e-mail: Ekaterina.Kazimirova@kaspersky.com 
Abstract — The paper analyzes the Internet of Things from 
the perspective of designing a new ecosystem for humans. Both 
the opportunities and the threats are analyzed. It is concluded 
that Internet of Things platforms will eventually integrate all 
aspects of human life, creating a new information environment 
that will help people to achieve maximum self-fulfillment and 
significantly greater life expectancy. 
Keywords - Internet of Things; Industrial Internet of Things; 
neuromorphic computing; affective computing. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Technology is rapidly changing our lives. The 
evolvement of the Internet of Things (IoT) is a major new 
technology trend that is changing the principles on which 
the relationship between people and things has been based 
for hundreds of years. It is creating a new environment, 
where people are surrounded by “living” things. Like any 
radically new environment, it has both opportunities and 
dangers in store for us. Naturally, we cannot identify all the 
benefits and risks of the various development scenarios 
from the current observation point, but we should certainly 
try, because this will help to crystalize the principles on 
which the Internet of Things platforms that are now 
emerging should be based. Tomorrow, these platforms will 
be our new habitat. In this paper, we look at some of the 
problems and issues associated with the Internet of Things 
as a new ecosystem.  
Our idea is that, in order for a secure and truly useful 
human-centric Internet of Things to be built, IoT platforms 
should from the outset be developed to integrate the most 
important areas of human life, to include a comprehensive 
set of features related to caring for people’s health and 
supporting them in their self-development and leisure, rather 
than simply resolving individual problems (that is, making it 
more convenient to control specific sets of things). 
In this paper, we look at the current state of the Internet of 
Things, as well as its development prospects, from different 
viewpoints, including that of security. This is an extensive 
subject area and we do not undertake to address all the 
issues. This article is an attempt to outline the problem and 
the main approaches for addressing it. 
The paper is structured as follows. In Section II, we 
discuss the Internet of Things as a new environment, and in 
Section III, briefly discuss IoT and IIoT security. 
Conclusions and future work are indicated in Section IV.  
II. INTERNET OF THINGS AS A NEW ENVIRONMENT
A.
Internet of Things Today 
Although the Internet of Things is a universally 
recognized global trend, it has not yet evolved as a generally 
accepted practice, nor as a unified set of technologies, 
methods and approaches, nor as a new environment for 
people to live in. Humanity may be able to break through the 
new technological barrier but is as yet unable to see what is 
beyond the line of the horizon. 
For now, it is clear that: 
•
Things will have built-in microchips or RFID tags.  
•
Things will connect to humans via the Internet. 
•
People will use mobile apps to control things 
remotely, such as turning off a forgotten iron from the 
office. 
•
Hopefully, things will be able to adapt to people’s 
needs [1]. 
The first multifunctional personal assistants have the 
potential to evolve into fully-fledged advisors to humans, to 
the point of playing a role in forming their life strategies 
(existing intelligent personal electronic assistants include 
Amazon Echo [2], Google Assistant [3], and Azuma Hikari 
produced by Vinclu Inc [4]).  These are only the first signs 
of global changes in the information environment. 
B.
 Internet of Things as a Dream 
Many amazing phenomena that people only used to 
dream about and describe in tales have come to pass – such 
as the magic bowl of water or crystal ball reflecting things 
that are happening far away, which has come to life as 
television and the Internet; the magic flying carpet from 
oriental stories, which has become the airplane, etc. Note that 
in fairy tales, things could talk and interact with people in 
various other ways, helping them or interfering with their 
plans. It is possible that we have now approached one of the 
last “fairy-tale” technological barriers – that is, lifelike things 
that can speak and understand speech, and interact with 
people in other ways. The right conditions for breaking 
through that barrier will soon be in place, including the 
emerging Internet of Things, speech recognition and 
affective computing. 
C.
Internet of Things as a New Ecosystem  
Such gadgets as smart power outlets, irons, backpacks, 
etc. are already available on the market. However, it is no 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-576-0
INTELLI 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt)

coincidence that the European Commission’s strategy is 
based on the human-centric Internet of Things [5]: things 
should not just have some attributes of intelligence and 
remote monitoring support (e.g., checking from the office 
whether the TV set at home is off) – they should eventually 
make up a new ecosystem centered around humans, who are 
surrounded by “living”, self-aware and context-oriented 
things. We believe that the role of things in such an 
ecosystem will go beyond satisfying the simple needs of 
humans – intelligent things will also become people’s 
advisers, monitor their physiological condition, suggest 
solutions and scenarios of successful actions (which reminds 
us of Ariadne’s thread from the Ancient Greek myth). 
Importantly, things and robots, which are also a form of 
things (i.e., various artificial personal assistants), are already 
becoming capable of displaying emotions themselves and, in 
the near future, will be able to detect emotions in humans – 
based on their tone of voice, facial expressions, skin 
reactions, etc. While so far people have been the only 
sentient and cognizant creatures around, in the future the 
very environment in which they live will be cognitive and 
capable of making decisions on its own. We believe that this 
functionality will be implemented gradually in the process of 
building IoT platforms.  
Note 
that 
monitoring 
the 
psycho-emotional 
and 
physiological status of people has the potential to extend 
human life: by avoiding functional overload, we can 
optimize the activity of our organisms and reduce their wear 
and health risks.  
Creating a friendly environment can also be seen as an 
independent task: imagine walking along the platform 
waiting for your train, with the pillars smiling at you as you 
pass them. 
D.
Changing the Technological Landscape 
From the technology viewpoint, there are several major 
objectives, the primary of which is to create a technological 
platform that would enable a human-centric Internet of 
Things to be built. 
Consumer IoT platforms should integrate various facets 
of life – people’s need for comfort, emotional support, 
finding a work and leisure balance, caring for their health. 
With the help of smart personal assistants, people may be 
able to optimize not only their everyday affairs, but also their 
life strategies. Cognitive technologies involved in the dialog 
between people and machines will help individuals to 
compensate their cognitive shortcomings and achieve 
maximum self-fulfillment. 
Neuromorphic computing [6][7] is seen as an important 
element of the computing base for such platforms, since a) it 
is the intelligence implemented in a thing that makes it truly 
intelligent, and b) the digitization of everything will result in 
skyrocketing volumes of data that will need to be handled, 
and it is best to process part of the data locally (using 
embedded microchips), rather than in the cloud.  
Naturally, information security will be of crucial 
importance for such systems.   
III. SECURITY
The problem of protecting information in IoT must be 
addressed in an entirely new way, since this is about creating 
and protecting an ecosystem that will accumulate all kinds of 
diverse information about people. 
In fact, it would be fair to say that people themselves will 
be integrated into information flows. Clearly, it is essential to 
maintain the security of data on their health, behavior, future 
plans and emotional state. Even today, experts emphasize the 
importance of safeguarding information stored and processed 
by IoT devices – such as medical data [8]. As technology 
evolves, 
such 
information 
sometimes 
becomes 
too 
accessible. The new IoT reality and new technologies that 
provide protection for that reality should develop hand-in-
hand. 
For Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), on the contrary, 
the nearly complete absence of people from industrial 
processes (humanless technologies) will be an important 
factor. It remains to be determined in what measure and form 
humans should be involved in automated industrial processes 
and the control of their safety and security. 
IV. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The Internet of Things is not simply a range of comforts 
but a new ecosystem that should be centered around people. 
Going forward, different categories of the Internet of 
Things will be increasingly connected, shaping an integral 
environment, the essence of which will be in creating a 
living and thinking space around humans. It should be 
designed to ensure that people do not simply live in comfort 
but reach maximum self-fulfillment and the longest lifespan 
possible. 
In the process of building this living and thinking space 
we are going to face new challenges: 
•
How can people avoid being lost in the world of 
things: if the environment becomes more intelligent 
than its users, how can they keep it under their 
control? 
•
How will things interact with each other - what 
should be the main principles of device-to-device 
communication? 
•
How autonomous will those smart things be in 
making decisions? Should they be allowed to make 
decisions proactively? How can we make sure that 
they will behave the way they should?  
We believe that further research should be focused on 
finding answers to these fundamental questions. 
Problems associated with protecting the IoT and IIoT 
ecosystems are different in some essential ways. While in the 
former case, protection is needed for extremely personalized 
information flows, in the latter, it is humanless industrial 
zones that will need to be protected. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author is grateful to Andrey Lavrentyev, Michael 
Gusev and Evgeny Volovich for fruitful discussions. 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-576-0
INTELLI 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt)

REFERENCES
[1]
N. Gershenfeld, R. Krikorian, and D. Cohen, “The Internet of 
Things,” Scientific American, vol. 291, Issue 4, pp. 76–81, 
Oct. 2004.  
[2]
What 
is 
Amazon 
Alexa? 
Available 
from: 
https://developer.amazon.com/alexa  2017.06.28 
[3]
Meet 
your 
Google 
Assistant. 
Available 
from:  
https://assistant.google.com/  2017.06.28  
[4]
Azuma 
Hikari. 
Official 
Site. 
Available 
from:   
http://gatebox.ai/hikari/en/  2017.06.28 
[5]
Public Report from the Workshop on the Exploitation of 
Neuromorphic Computing Technologies, Brussels, Feb 2017. 
Available 
from: 
http://ec.europa.eu/newsroom/document.cfm?doc_id=43537  
p. 13 2017.06.19 
[6]
The issues of the “Workshop on the Exploitation of 
Neuromorphic Computing Technologies” of European 
Commission. Available from: https://ec.europa.eu/digital-
single-market/en/news/workshop-exploitation-neuromorphic-
computing-technologies 2017.06.24 
[7]
S. Furber and K. Meier “Neuromorphic Computing in the 
Human Brain Project”, The issues of Innovation Workshop 
Exploitation of Neuromorphic Computing Technologies Feb. 
2017, Brussels. Available from: 
http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/newsroom/image/doc
ument/2017-
8/1_furber_steve_and_meier_karlheinz_CDA4E45F-EF31-
6FBF-1642BB9BAB97CEF4_43088.pdf  2017.06.19 
[8]
S. Lozhkin “Hospitals are under attack in 2016” Available 
from: 
https://securelist.com/hospitals-are-under-attack-in-
2016/74249/  2017.06.19
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-576-0
INTELLI 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt)

