A Robust Data Hiding Process Contributing to the Development of a Semantic Web
Jacques M. Bahi, Jean-François Couchot, Nicolas Friot, and Christophe Guyeux
FEMTO-ST Institute, UMR 6174 CNRS
Computer Science Laboratory DISC
University of Franche-Comté
Besançon, France
{jacques.bahi, jean-francois.couchot, nicolas.friot, christophe.guyeux}@femto-st.fr
Abstract—In this paper, a novel steganographic scheme
based on chaotic iterations is proposed. This research work
takes place into the information hiding framework, and focus
more speciﬁcally on robust steganography. Steganographic al-
gorithms can participate in the development of a semantic web:
medias being on the Internet can be enriched by information
related to their contents, authors, etc., leading to better results
for the search engines that can deal with such tags. As media
can be modiﬁed by users for various reasons, it is preferable
that these embedding tags can resist to changes resulting
from some classical transformations as for example cropping,
rotation, image conversion, and so on. This is why a new
robust watermarking scheme for semantic search engines is
proposed in this document. For the sake of completeness,
the robustness of this scheme is ﬁnally compared to existing
established algorithms.
Keywords-Semantic Web; Information Hiding; Steganography;
Robustness; Chaotic Iterations.
I. INTRODUCTION
Social search engines are frequently presented as a next
generation approach to query the world wide web. In this
conception, contents like pictures or movies are tagged
with descriptive labels by contributors, and search results
are enriched with these descriptions. These collaborative
taggings, used for example in Flickr [2] and Delicious [1]
websites, can participate to the development of a Semantic
Web, in which every Web page contains machine-readable
metadata that describe its content. To achieve this goal by
embedding such metadata, information hiding technologies
can be useful. Indeed, the interest to use such technologies
lays on the possibility to realize social search without
websites and databases: descriptions are directly embedded
into media, whatever their formats.
In the context of this article, the problem consists in
embedding tags into internet medias, such that these tags
persist even after user transformations. Robustness of the
chosen watermarking scheme is thus required in this sit-
uation, as descriptions should resist to user modiﬁcations
like resizing, compression, and format conversion or other
classical user transformations in the ﬁeld. Indeed, quoting
Kalker in [11], “Robust watermarking is a mechanism to
create a communication channel that is multiplexed into
original content [...] It is required that, ﬁrstly, the perceptual
degradation of the marked content [...] is minimal and, sec-
ondly, that the capacity of the watermark channel degrades as
a smooth function of the degradation of the marked content”.
The development of social web search engines can thus
be strengthened by the design of robust information hiding
schemes. Having this goal in mind, we explain in this article
how to set up a secret communication channel using a new
robust steganographic process called DI3. This new scheme
has been theoretically presented in [4] with an evaluation of
its security. So, the main objective of this work is to focus
on robustness aspects presenting ﬁrstly other known schemes
in the literature, and presenting secondly this new scheme
and and evaluate its robustness. This article is thus a ﬁrst
work on the subject, and the comparison with other schemes
concerning the robustness will be realized in future work.
The remainder of this document is organized as follows.
In Section II, some basic reminders concerning the notion
of Most and Least Signiﬁcant Coefﬁcients are given. In
Section III, some well-known steganographic schemes are
recalled, namely the YASS [17], nsF5 [8], MMx [12], and
HUGO [15] algorithms. In the next section the implemen-
tation of the steganographic process DI3 is detailed, and
its robustness study is exposed in Section V. This research
work ends by a conclusion section, where our contribution
is summarized and intended future researches are presented.
II. MOST AND LEAST SIGNIFICANT COEFFICIENTS
We ﬁrst notice that terms of the original content x that
may be replaced by terms issued from the watermark y are
less important than others: they could be changed without be
perceived as such. More generally, a signiﬁcation function
attaches a weight to each term deﬁning a digital media,
depending on its position t.
Deﬁnition 1: A signiﬁcation function is a real sequence
(uk)k∈N.
□
Example 1: Let us consider a set of grayscale images
stored into portable graymap format (P3-PGM): each pixel
ranges between 256 gray levels, i.e., is memorized with eight
bits. In that context, we consider uk = 8−(k mod 8) to be
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-204-2
INTERNET 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Evolving Internet

the k-th term of a signiﬁcation function (uk)k∈N. Intuitively,
in each group of eight bits (i.e., for each pixel) the ﬁrst bit
has an importance equal to 8, whereas the last bit has an
importance equal to 1. This is compliant with the idea that
changing the ﬁrst bit affects more the image than changing
the last one.
□
Deﬁnition 2: Let (uk)k∈N be a signiﬁcation function, m
and M be two reals s.t. m < M.
• The most signiﬁcant coefﬁcients (MSCs) of x is the
ﬁnite vector
uM =

which is expressed as a vector :
δ =


δ1
δ2
δ3

 where δi is 0 if mi = Hxi and 1 otherwise.
Let us thus consider the jth column of H which is equal
to δ. We denote by xj the vector we obtain by switching
the jth component of x, that is, xj = (x1, . . . , xj, . . . , xn).
It is not hard to see that if y is xj, then m = Hy. It is
then possible to embed 3 bits in only 7 LSB of pixels by
modifying on average 1 − 23 changes. More generally, the
F5 embedding efﬁciency should theoretically be
p
1−2p .
However, the event when the coefﬁcient resulting from
this LSB switch becomes zero (usually referred to as shrink-
age) may occur. In that case, the recipient cannot determine
whether the coefﬁcient was -1, +1 and has changed to 0 due
to the algorithm or was initially 0. The F5 scheme solves
this problem ﬁrst by deﬁning a LSB with the following (not
even) function:
LSB(x) =
 1 − x
mod 2 if x < 0
x
mod 2 otherwise.
.
Next, if the coefﬁcient has to be changed to 0, the same bit
message is re-embedded in the next group of x coefﬁcient
LSB.
The scheme nsF5 focuses on steps of Hamming coding
and ad’hoc shrinkage removing. It replaces them with a
wet paper code approach that is based on a random binary
matrix. More precisely, let D be a random binary matrix
of size x × n without replicate nor null columns: consider
for instance a subset of {1, 2x} of cardinality n and write
them as binary numbers. The subset is generated thanks to
a PRNG seeded with a shared key. In this block of size
x, one choose to embed only k elements of the message
m. By abuse, the restriction of the message is again called
m. It thus remains x − k (wet) indexes/places where the
information shouldn’t be stored. Such indexes are generated
too with the keyed PRNG. Let v be deﬁned by the following
equation:
Dv = δ(m, Dx).
(1)
This equation may be solved by Gaussian reduction or other
more efﬁcient algorithms. If there is a solution, one have the
list of indexes to modify into the cover. The nsF5 scheme
implements such a optimized algorithm that is to say the LT
codes.
C. MMx
Basically, the MMx algorithm [12] embeds message in a
selected set of LSB cover coefﬁcients using Hamming codes
as the F5 scheme. However, instead of reducing as many as
possible the number of modiﬁed elements, this scheme aims
at reducing the embedding impact. To achieve this it allows
to modify more than one element if this leads to decrease
distortion.
Let us start again with an example with a [7, 4] Hamming
codes, i.e, let us embed 3 bits into 7 DCT coefﬁcients,
D1, . . . , D7. Without details, let ρ1, . . . , ρ7 be the em-
bedding impact whilst modifying coefﬁcients D1, . . . , D7
(see [12] for a formal deﬁnition of ρ). Modifying element at
index j leads to a distortion equal to ρj. However, instead of
switching the value at index j, one should consider to ﬁnd
all other columns of H, j1, j2 for instances, s.t. the sum
of them is equal to the jth column and to compare ρj with
ρj1 + ρj2. If one of these sums is less than ρj, the sender
has to change these coefﬁcients instead of the j one. The
number of searched indexes (2 for the previous example)
gives the name of the algorithm. For instance in MM3, one
check whether the message can be embedded by modifying
3 pixel or less each time.
D. HUGO
The HUGO [15] steganographic scheme is mainly de-
signed to minimize distortion caused by embedding. To
achieve this, it is ﬁrstly based on an image model given
as SPAM [14] features and next integrates image correction
to reduce much more distortion. What follows refers to these
two steps.
The former ﬁrst computes the SPAM features. Such
calculi synthesize the probabilities that the difference be-
tween consecutive horizontal (resp. vertical, diagonal) pixels
belongs in a set of pixel values which are closed to the
current pixel value and whose radius is a parameter of the
approach. Thus, a ﬁsher linear discriminant method deﬁnes
the radius and chooses between directions (horizontal, ver-
tical, etc.) of analyzed pixels that gives the best separator
for detecting embedding changes. With such instantiated
coefﬁcients, HUGO can synthesize the embedding cost as
a function D(X, Y ) that evaluates distortions between X
and Y . Then HUGO computes the matrices of ρi,j
=
max(D(X, X(i,j)+)i,j, D(X, X(i,j)−)i,j) such that X(i,j)+
(resp. X(i,j)− ) is the cover image X where the the (i, j)th
pixel has been increased (resp. has been decreased) of 1.
The order of modifying pixel is critical: HUGO surpris-
ingly modiﬁes pixels in decreasing order of ρi,j. Starting
with Y = X, it increases or decreases its (i, j)th pixel to get
the minimal value of D(Y, Y (i,j)+)i,j and D(Y, Y (i,j)−)i,j.
The matrix Y is thus updated at each round.
IV. THE NEW STEGANOGRAPHIC PROCESS DI3
A. Implementation
In this section, a new algorithm which is inspired from
the schemes CIW1 and CIS2 respectively described in [9]
and [10] is presented. Compare to the ﬁrst one, it is a
steganographic scheme, not just a watermarking technique.
Unlike CIS2 which require embedding keys with three
strategies, only one is required for DI3. So compare to
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-204-2
INTERNET 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Evolving Internet

CIS2 which is also a steganographic process, it is easier
to implement for Internet applications especially in order
to contribute to a semantic web. Moreover, since DI3 is a
particular instance of CIS2, it is clearly faster than this one
because in DI3 there is no operation to mix the message
on the contrary on the initial scheme. The fast execution of
such an algorithm is critical for internet applications.
In the following algorithms, the following notations are
used:
Notation 1: S denotes the embedding and extraction strat-
egy, H the host content or the stego-content depending of
the context. LSC denotes the old or new LSCs of the host or
stego-content H depending of the context too. N denotes the
number of LSCs, λ the number of iterations to realize, M
the secret message, and P the width of the message (number
of bits).
□
Our new scheme theoretically presented in [4] is here
described by three main algorithms:
1) The ﬁrst one, detailed in Algorithm 1 allows to gen-
erate the embedding strategy of the system which is a
part of the embedding key in addition with the choice
of the LSCs and the number of iterations to realize.
2) The second one, detailed in Algorithm 2 allows to
embed the message into the LSCs of the cover media
using the strategy. The strategy has been generated by
the ﬁrst algorithm and the same number of iterations
is used.
3) The last one, detailed in Algorithm 3 allows to extract
the secret message from the LSCs of the media (the
stego-content) using the strategy wich is a part of
the extraction key in addition with the width of the
message.
In adjunction of these three functions, two other comple-
mentary functions have to be used:
1) The ﬁrst one, detailed in Algorithm 4, allow to extract
MSCs, LSCs, and passive coefﬁcients from the host
content. Its implementation is based on the concept of
signiﬁcation function described in Deﬁnition 2.
2) The last one, detailed in Algorithm 5, allow to rebuild
the new host content (the stego-content) from the
corresponding MSCs, LSCs, and passive coefﬁcients.
Its implementation is also based on the concept of
signiﬁcation function described in Deﬁnition 2. This
function realize the invert operation of the previous
one.
Remark 2: The two previous algorithms have to be imple-
mented by the user depending on each application context
should be adjusted accordingly: either in spatial description,
in frequency description, or in other description. They cor-
respond to the theoretical concept described in Deﬁnition 2.
Their implementation depends on the application context.□
Example 3: For example the algorithm 4 in spatial domain
can correspond to the extraction of the 3 last bits of each
pixel as LSCs, the 3 ﬁrst bits as MSCs, and the 2 center bits
as passive coefﬁcients.
□
Algorithm 1: strategy(N, P, λ)
/* S is a sequence of integers into
J0, P − 1K, such that (Sn0, . . . , Sn0+P −1)
is injective on J0, P − 1K.
*/
Result: S: The strategy, integer sequence (S0, S1, . . .).
begin
n0 ←− L − P + 1;
if P > N OR n0 < 0 then
return ERROR
S ←− Array of width λ, all values initialized to 0;
cpt ←− 0;
while cpt < n0 do
Scpt ←−Random integer in J0, P − 1K.;
cpt ←− cpt + 1;
A ←− We generate an arrangement of J0, P − 1K;
for k ∈ J0, P − 1K do
Sn0+k ←− Ak;
return S
end
Algorithm 2: embed(LSC, M, S, λ)
Result: New LSCs with embedded message.
begin
N ←− Number of LSCs in LSC;
P ←− Width of the message M;
for k ∈ J0, λK do
i ←− Sk;
LSCi ←− Mi;
return LSC
end
Algorithm 3: extract(LSC, S, λ, P)
Result: The message to extract from LSC.
begin
RS ←− The strategy S written in reverse order.;
M ←− Array of width P, all values initialized to 0;
for k ∈ J0, λK do
i ←− RSk;
Mi ←− LSCi;
return M
end
B. Discussion
We ﬁrst notice that our DI3 scheme embeds the message
in LSB as all the other approaches. Furthermore, among all
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-204-2
INTERNET 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Evolving Internet

Algorithm 4: significationFunction(H)
Data: H: The original host content.
Result: MSC: MSCs of the host content H.
Result: PC: Passive coefﬁcients of the host content H.
Result: LSC: LSCs of the host content H.
begin
/* Implemented by the user.
*/
return (MSC, PC, LSC)
end
Algorithm 5: buildFunction(MSC, PC, LSC) )
Result: H: The new rebuilt host content.
begin
/* Implemented by the user.
*/
return (MSC, PC, LSC)
end
the LSB, the choice of those which are modiﬁed according
to the message is based on a secured PRNG whereas F5,
and thus nsF5 only require a PRNG. Finally in this scheme,
we have postponed the optimization of considering again a
subset of them according to the distortion their modiﬁcation
may induce. According to us, further theoretical study are
necessary to take this feature into consideration. In future
work, it is planed to compare the robustness and efﬁciency
of all the schemes in the context of semantic web. To initiate
this study in this ﬁrst article, the robustness of DI3 is
detailled in the next section.
V. ROBUSTNESS STUDY
This section evaluates the robustness of our approach [5].
Each experiment is build on a set of 50 images which are
randomly selected among database taken from the BOSS
contest [6]. Each cover is a 512 × 512 greyscale digital
image. The relative payload is always set with 0.1 bit per
pixel. Under that constrain, the embedded message m is a
sequence of 26214 randomly generated bits.
Following the same model of robustness studies in pre-
vious similar work in the ﬁeld of information hiding, we
choose some classical attacks like cropping, compression,
and rotation studied in this research work. Other attacks
and geometric transformations will be explore in a com-
plementary study. Testing the robustness of the approach is
achieved by successively applying on stego content images
attacks. Differences between the message that is extracted
from the attacked image and the original one are computed
and expressed as percentage.
To deal with cropping attack, different percentage of
cropping (from 1% to 81%) are applied on the stego content
image. Fig. 2 (c) presents effects of such an attack.
We address robustness against JPEG an JPEG 2000 com-
pression. Results are respectively presented in Fig. 2 (a) and
in Fig. 2 (b).
Attacked based on geometric transformations are ad-
dressed through rotation attacks: two opposite rotations of
angle θ are successively applied around the center of the
image. In these geometric transformations, angles range
from 2 to 20 degrees. Results effects of such an attack are
also presented in Fig. 2 (d).
From all these experiments, one ﬁrstly can conclude
that the steganographic scheme does not present obvious
drawback and resists to all the attacks: all the percentage
differences are so far less than 50%.
The comparison with robustness of other steganographic
schemes exposed in the work will be realize in a comple-
mentary study, and the best utilization of each one in several
context will be discuss.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this research work, a new information hiding algorithm
has been introduced to contribute to the semantic web. We
have focused our work on the robustness aspect. The security
has been studied in an other work [4]. Even if this new
scheme DI3 does not possess topological properties (unlike
the CIS2 [9]), its level of security seems to be sufﬁcient for
Internet applications. Particularly in the framework of the
semantic web it is required to have robust steganographic
processes. The security aspects is less important in this
context. Indeed, it is important that the enrichment infor-
mation persist after an attack. Especially for JPEG 2000
attacks, which are the two major attacks used in an internet
framework. Additionally, this new scheme is faster than
CIS2. This is a major advantage for an utilization through
the Internet, to respect response times of web sites.
In a future work we intend to prove rigorously that DI3
is not topologically secure. The tests of robustness will
be realized on a larger set of images of different types
and sizes, using resources of the Mésocentre de calcul
de Franche-Comté [13] (an High-Performance Computing
(HPC) center) and using Jace environment [3], to take
beneﬁts of parallelism. So, the robustness and efﬁciency of
our scheme DI3 will be compared to other schemes in order
to show the best utilization in several contexts. Other kinds
of attacks will be explored to evaluate more completely the
robustness of the proposed scheme. For instance, robustness
of the DI3 against Gaussian blur, rotation, contrast, and
zeroing attacks will be regarded, and compared with a larger
set of existing steganographic schemes as those described
in this article. Unfortunately these academic algorithms
are mainly designed to show their ability in embedding.
Decoding aspect is rarely treated, and rarely implemented
at all. Finally, a ﬁrst web search engine compatible with the
proposed robust watermarking scheme will be written, and
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-204-2
INTERNET 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Evolving Internet

50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
JPEG Compression Ratio
36
38
40
42
44
46
48
50
Percentage Difference
(a) JPEG effect.
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
JPEG 2000 Compression Ratio
0
10
20
30
40
50
Percentage Difference
(b) JPEG 2000 effect.
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Percentage of Cropping
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Percentage Difference
(c) Cropping attack.
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Rotation Angle (degree)
0
5
10
15
20
25
Percentage Difference
(d) Rotation attack.
Figure 2.
Robustness of DI3 scheme facing several attacks (50 images from the BOSS repository)
automatic tagging of materials found on the Internet will be
realized, to show the effectiveness of the approach.
REFERENCES
[1] Delicious social bookmarking, http://delicious.com/.
Re-
trieved June, 2012 from http://delicious.com/.
[2] The frick collection, http://www.frick.org/. Retrieved June,
2012 from http://www.frick.org/.
[3] Jacques Bahi, Mourad Hakem, and Kamel Mazouzi. Reliable
parallel programming model for distributed computing envi-
ronments.
In HeteroPar’09, volume 6043 of LNCS, pages
162–171, Delft, Netherlands, 2009. Springer.
[4] Jacques M. Bahi, François Couchot, Nicolas Friot, and
Christophe Guyeux.
Application of steganography for
anonymity through the internet. In IHTIAP’2012, The First
Workshop on Information Hiding Techniques for Internet
Anonymity and Privacy, pages ***–***, Venice, Italy, June
2012. To appear.
[5] Jacques M. Bahi, Jean-François Couchot, and Christophe
Guyeux.
Steganography: A class of secure and robust
algorithms. The Computer Journal, 55(6):653–666, 2012.
[6] P. Bas, T. Filler, and T. Pevný.
Break our steganographic
system — the ins and outs of organizing boss. In T. Filler,
editor, Information Hiding, 13th International Workshop, Lec-
ture Notes in Computer Science, Prague, Czech Republic,
May 18–20, 2011. Springer-Verlag, New York.
[7] Jessica Fridrich. Steganography in Digital Media: Principles,
Algorithms, and Applications. Cambridge University Press,
New York, NY, USA, 1st edition, 2009.
[8] Jessica J. Fridrich, Tomás Pevný, and Jan Kodovský. Sta-
tistically undetectable jpeg steganography: dead ends chal-
lenges, and opportunities.
In Deepa Kundur, Balakrishnan
Prabhakaran, Jana Dittmann, and Jessica J. Fridrich, editors,
MM&Sec, pages 3–14. ACM, 2007.
[9] Nicolas Friot, Christophe Guyeux, and Jacques M. Bahi.
Chaotic iterations for steganography - stego-security and
chaos-security.
In Javier Lopez and Pierangela Samarati,
editors, SECRYPT, pages 218–227. SciTePress, 2011.
[10] Christophe Guyeux, Nicolas Friot, and Jacques Bahi. Chaotic
iterations versus spread-spectrum: chaos and stego security.
In IIH-MSP’10, 6-th Int. Conf. on Intelligent Information
Hiding and Multimedia Signal Processing, pages 208–211,
Darmstadt, Germany, October 2010.
[11] T. Kalker.
Considerations on watermarking security.
In
Multimedia Signal Processing, 2001 IEEE Fourth Workshop
on, pages 201–206, 2001.
[12] Younhee Kim, Zoran Duric, and Dana Richards. Modiﬁed
matrix encoding technique for minimal distortion steganogra-
phy. In Jan Camenisch, Christian S. Collberg, Neil F. Johnson,
and Phil Sallee, editors, Information Hiding, volume 4437 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 314–327. Springer,
2006.
[13] University of Franche-Comté. Le mésocentre de calcul de
franche-comté, an high-performance computing (hpc) center.
Retrieved June, 2012 from http://meso.univ-fcomte.fr/, 2012.
[14] Tomás Pevný, Patrick Bas, and Jessica J. Fridrich. Steganaly-
sis by subtractive pixel adjacency matrix. IEEE Transactions
on Information Forensics and Security, 5(2):215–224, 2010.
[15] Tomás Pevný, Tomás Filler, and Patrick Bas. Using high-
dimensional image models to perform highly undetectable
steganography.
In Rainer Böhme, Philip W. L. Fong, and
Reihaneh Safavi-Naini, editors, Information Hiding, volume
6387 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 161–177.
Springer, 2010.
[16] Anindya Sarkar, Kaushal Solanki, and B. S. Manjunath.
Further study on yass: Steganography based on randomized
embedding to resist blind steganalysis. In Security, forensics,
steganography, and watermarking of multimedia contents X,
San Jose CA , USA, pages 1–11, 2008.
[17] Kaushal Solanki, Anindya Sarkar, and B. S. Manjunath.
Yass: Yet another steganographic scheme that resists blind
steganalysis.
In Teddy Furon, François Cayre, Gwenaël J.
Doërr, and Patrick Bas, editors, Information Hiding, volume
4567 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 16–31.
Springer, 2007.
[18] Andreas Westfeld. F5-a steganographic algorithm. In Ira S.
Moskowitz, editor, Information Hiding, volume 2137 of Lec-
ture Notes in Computer Science, pages 289–302. Springer,
2001.
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-204-2
INTERNET 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Evolving Internet

