Low-level Automation as a Pathway to appropriate Trust in an Intelligent PED 
Enterprise: Design of a Collaborative Work Environment 
Michael P. Jenkins, Arthur Wollocko, Martin Voshell, & Mike Farry 
Charles River Analytics, Inc. 
Cambridge, MA USA 
Email: mjenkins@cra.com 
 
Abstract—In Military Intelligence, Processing, Exploitation, 
and Dissemination (PED) functions are critical to success. 
These functions provide an array of capabilities that support 
the entire lifecycles of intelligence requests. Advanced PED 
capabilities are becoming increasingly available to smaller, 
more-centralized 
teams 
supporting 
multiple 
battlespace 
operators. As the PED domain evolves and more distributed 
information requests are made relying on an increasing volume 
of Multiple-Intelligence (MultiINT) information, automation 
support has become critical to success. However, automated 
support 
and 
cognitive 
incongruence 
between 
existing 
automated solutions and the support required by analysts, 
resulting in a lack of trust in these “black box” capabilities. To 
overcome this and other current and future PED challenges, 
we present a Collaborative Work Environment, serving as a 
central software platform providing communication channels 
and tailored workflow support tools for PED operations. 
Integrated within these capabilities is automation support in 
the form of decision-centered analytics, that carry out low-level 
tasks in a transparent manner, reducing workloads and 
establishing the intelligent human-machine dialogues required 
to form appropriate attitudes of trust towards the system (e.g., 
avoiding overreliance). This approach has shown promise in 
supporting trust in the overall joint human-automation system, 
enabling the PED enterprise to roll out higher-level, planned 
automation capabilities to further offload PED tasks. 
Keywords- PED; miliatry intelligence; intelligence analysis; 
automation; intelligent HCI; trust in automation . 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Maintaining military superiority in the 21st century is of 
utmost importance to the United States armed forces, but this 
preservation does not come without cost and significant 
changes to doctrine, ideology, and process. In order to 
dominate the 21st century battlefield, the Army has the need 
to transform from the premier land force of the past, and 
enhance itself for the evolving conflicts ahead. Warfare and 
battlefield operations are evolving at a previously unseen 
rate, causing an increased emphasis on decision dominance 
and speed. This emphasis is appropriate, because it drives 
and informs the decision making process at every echelon. 
Decision management is enabled by information superiority, 
which can be defined as the speedy generation, collection, 
and effective use of information to inform Commander’s 
battlefield intent. The battle rhythm is shaped by this intent, 
which is passed through various echelons and different units 
through “information requirements” (IRs) about the 
environment [1].  
For system developers looking to provide technology-
based support in the form of automated capabilities, it is still 
unclear how this information collection is conducted, how it 
is converted into useful and manageable intelligence, and 
how it is distributed throughout the tiers of military 
command. Processing, Exploitation, and Dissemination 
(PED) is collectively defined as the conversion of collected 
information into forms suitable for the production of 
intelligence [1]. Overall, it is the process where analysts 
receive Commander’s intent from IRs, and set about 
collecting and analyzing raw intelligence, converting it into 
usable and command-actionable forms.  
PED has been conducted for decades in continually 
evolving formats, but its key functional components are 
getting increasingly difficult to define as new technologies 
and missions continue to outpace force structure changes and 
blur the lines between individual roles, responsibilities, and 
authorities [2]. System designers looking to provide relief for 
PED operations with shrinking manpower and rapidly 
expanding volumes of MultiINT data need guidance to 
ensure developed capabilities will succeed. This guidance 
must be grounded in a robust and deep understanding of the 
PED force structure, capability gaps, existing tactics, 
techniques and procedures, and where PED is evolving to 
ensure novel systems and capabilities succeed within the 
challenge PED landscape.   
Section II of this paper presents a brief overview of the 
current state of PED and where the domain is trending, based 
on a series of knowledge elicitation interactions that our 
team has had with the PED community. Section III then 
covers the need for providing automated support capabilities 
to meet the challenges of current and future PED. Section IV 
provides a set of guidelines for establishing and maintaining 
trust in automation as a critical requirement for successful 
system design and deployment within the PED domain. 
Finally, Section V presents a brief overview of our ongoing 
efforts to design, evaluate, and deploy a collaborative work 
environment to meet a number of challenges facing current 
and future PED, referred to as PEDX. 
II. 
PROCESSING, EXPLOITATION, & DISSEMINATION 
PED (see Figure 1) is one of the most essential pillars of 
intelligence collection today, with the Army’s focus 
currently being aimed towards developing ISR capabilities in 
support of PED. As MultiINT and multi-payload platforms 
have become increasingly utilized in current operations, they 
have not automatically reduced sensor operator workload or 
reduced manpower requirements. Instead these technologies 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-437-4
INTELLI 2015 : he Fourth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

have led to both a growth of personnel requirements for their 
operation and, because they require operators to work at new 
intensities and new tempos of activity, they have created new 
complexities across military intelligence (MI) systems. 
While the Army is investing in novel sensors and automation 
capabilities in an attempt to reduce the burden placed on 
operators, acceptance of novel capabilities has been slow, 
delaying any significant enhancements to efficiency or 
performance at the forefront of the PED process. This results 
in analysts wedged between increased demands and reliance 
on antiquated technologies to perform their tasks.  
The challenge for designers looking to provide new 
automated capabilities is that automation typically extracts 
humans from core processes that help them to better 
understand the context of a situation or analysis. In the case 
of multiple distributed operators (which is becoming 
commonplace as the Army transitions forward-deployed 
PED nodes connected to a centralized reachback PED center 
of excellence), if automation contributes to some small piece 
of a single contributor or cell of contributors workflow – the 
resulting impact on shared situational awareness can rapidly 
propagate to other collaborators as well. If this has 
significant impacts on collaborators productivity, the 
automated capabilities are likely to fail. This is evident by 
the many systems developed to aid PED analysts, which 
have fallen by the wayside in favor of antiquated, but proven 
technologies that are heavily relied upon throughout the PED 
community. While there is no doubt that automation has a 
significant role in both current and future PED workflows, 
introducing automation to those workflows in a way that will 
be adopted and enhance mission efficiencies is a challenging 
task that requires a strategic approach to planning, design, 
development, and deployment of system capabilities. 
III. PED AUTOMATION BENEFITS 
Ever increasing amounts of data are being generated by 
newly developed MultiINT sensor platforms, and demands 
for analysis of this data are increasing, all while the PED 
personnel footprint has remained stagnant and even reduced 
in many situations. In order for PED to continue to be 
successful in generating valuable and timely intelligence 
information with any sort of analytical rigor, automation is 
necessary to assist overburdened and overtasked analysts. 
For example, the vast majority of collaboration across PED 
stakeholders takes place via online chat. As a result, part of 
dissemination activities often involves generation of a 
communication log. This requires analysts to manual 
compile chat logs that typically involve 20+ individual and 
group conversations that take place over the course of an 
analysis. It is not hard to envision an automated capability to 
log and compile these chat dialogues. In fact, many 
procedural and analytical tasks throughout the PED cycle 
lend themselves towards automation, if capabilities are 
employed and integrated into existing workflows correctly.  
While there is a clear need for automation in the PED 
process, even in cases where automated capabilities exist 
there is failure to adopt and rely on them by analysts. Often it 
is the case where more seasoned analysts who have a reliable 
workflow simply do not trust automated processes enough to 
learn or rely on them. This is in part because the majority of 
existing capabilities fail to integrate with existing workflows, 
requiring time-stressed and overloaded analysts to blindly 
abandon their proven methods and rely on a new workflow. 
PED analysts suffer from the same problems of introducing 
new automation that common across domains, including lack 
of understanding of the automated techniques that have 
already been developed, the availability and usability of 
automated software to help with simple or repeated tasks, 
and their lack of faith in these capabilities leading to a 
mistrust and lack of familiarity with the tools with potential 
to increase operating efficiencies and thereby increase the 
robustness of PED analyses and artifacts. 
IV. 
TRUST IN AUTOMATION 
For any automated capability to succeed in the PED 
environment, it must encourage analysts to trust the 
capability to improve their performance and to consistently 
meet their expectations with respect to what it can provide. 
While many system attributes (e.g., reliability, performance, 
predictability, availability, explication of intentions) are 
known to influence trust in automation, it is important to 
note that it is not the actual state of these attributes that 
influences attitudes of trust, but rather the perceived state of 
these attributes (which may not align with the true 
automation capabilities). However, a prerequisite for any 
change in analyst trust to occur is the decision of the analyst 
 
Figure 1. High-level PED workflow overview 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-437-4
INTELLI 2015 : he Fourth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

to rely on the automated capability.  
The decision to rely on any automated capability will 
result from situations where the analyst’s reliance threshold 
(i.e., the point at which they decide to rely on an automated 
capability based on their system perception, workload, 
perceived risks, etc.) for the automated system is exceeded 
by the combination of changes in their trust in the system, 
self-confidence, 
and 
trust 
in 
alternative 
options. 
Consequently, any circumstances that result in decreases in 
the analyst’s self-confidence or their trust in alternative 
options will create the potential for this prerequisite to be 
met and in turn for trust in the system of interest to evolve. 
As previously discussed, the real-world dynamics of the PED 
domain can create these circumstances based on changes to 
the overall task uncertainty, resulting from changes to data 
sets, problem structure and/or organizational uncertainty, or 
changes in the availability of the alternative options. Another 
set of circumstances that can result in the shifting of analyst 
trust based on differences in perceived capabilities would be 
situations where the analyst relies on the automated system 
and it meets/exceeds expected capabilities or fails to meet its 
expected capabilities (which would require a system 
feedback mechanism) causing the analyst to update the 
perceived state of the various automated capability attributes. 
While there is a vast collection of existing literature on trust 
in automation (see [3-5]), the implication for system 
designers is the need to design automated capabilities that 
facilitate initially establishing trust, while also providing 
system feedback elements that can help maintain it over time 
through an appropriate man-machine dialogue. 
A. Designing for Successful Automation 
One of the most critical characteristic of an automated 
system that will facilitate appropriate attitudes of trust is the 
ability of that system to effectively communicate its ability 
to perform as designed and expected [3,5]. While this may 
seem a simple requirement to system designers, effectively 
building out a system that can proactively recognize system 
shifts and effectively communicate self-health in a timely 
manner so as to calibrate operator expectations is a 
significant challenge. For the PED domain, this issue is 
compounded by the reluctance of PED operators to deviate 
from existing proven workflows and technologies given 
minimal resources to dedicate to learning nuances of new 
systems and adapting their procedures on mission critical 
operations. For this reason, we have established a series of 
TABLE 1. GUIDELINES FOR SUCCESSFUL PED AUTOMATION SUPPORT DEVELOPMENT 
Guideline 
Justification 
Integrate with 
existing 
workflows and 
workflow support 
systems 
The engrained reliance on existing tools and systems is unlikely to be severed given fast tempos and constrained resources for 
PED analysts. Without buffers to enable analysts to experiment with new tools and augmented workflows to justify changing 
practices, it is unlikely new technologies will succeed over existing, proven systems and practices. By integrating with existing 
systems and workflows, analysts will have the ability to rely on novel automation capabilities to start calibrating their expectations 
of how those capabilities can enhance their productivity leading to the establishment of an initial attitude of trust. 
Focus initial 
system 
capabilities on 
low-level 
automation 
The performance variability of an automated capability is most often dependent on the variability of the inputs it must act upon. If 
available inputs are consistently changing or are of questionable pedigree, there is an increased potential for system performance 
to suffer. For new systems being deployed to the PED domain, if performance is highly variable, then it will be more challenging 
for analysts to appropriate calibrate expectations for a given system interaction. This creates the potential for inappropriate 
attitudes of trust that can lead to further mismatches in system performance and expectations, or simply analysts deciding to not 
rely on the capabilities at all.  Instead, novel systems should deploy a set of low-level automated capabilities that do not require 
inputs with varying degrees of reliability. These types of capabilities often target highly redundant tasks. The benefit of this 
approach is that it facilitates appropriate calibration of performance expectations (given that performance is unlikely to significantly 
change) and fosters initial establishment and ongoing maintenance of positive attitudes of trust in the system.  This initial 
calibrated attitude of trust then serves as a foundation for deploying more volatile automation capabilities such that system 
designers will be able to leverage the existing trust to encourage reliance on new system features to in turn foster appropriately 
calibrated expectations – without resulting in a significant enough decrement of trust in cases where expectations are not met to 
lead to abandonment of system reliance altogether. 
Maintain 
transparency in 
automation  
This is a standard piece of guidance for any automated system, and it applies to PED automation as well. For analysts trying to 
maintain context of multiple parallel analyses, processing data or allocating workflow tasks to automated capabilities will create a 
degree of separation for analysts and degrade their frame of reference unless automated processes are made transparent. 
Utilize an 
ongoing dialogue 
to calibrate 
expectations 
Similar to the third recommendation, automated capabilities should maintain an ongoing man-machine dialogue to foster 
appropriately calibrated expectations of system performance – this will ensure that attitudes of trust do not degrade when analysts 
make the decision to rely on automated capabilities.  
Do not force 
reliance 
Related to the first recommendation, integrating any new capability into the PED workflow and forcing reliance is likely to result in 
an extreme prejudice towards the system if it fails in any way to meet analyst expectations. Forcing analysts to rely on automation, 
and abandon their already proven and trusted systems will create potential for analysts to enter into system reliance with a 
negative view of the system and a significant desire to validate the system as faulty or not meeting requirements as justification for 
reverting to their trusted systems. Instead, novel capabilities should be provided that the analyst can optionally rely upon, enabling 
them to depend on capabilities when they see the benefit so they enter into the interaction with positive expectations for 
capabilities that will benefit their own effectiveness. This will remove the bias from situations of reliance and improve (with properly 
calibrated expectations) the likelihood of the analyst’s attitude of trust towards the system improving based on the interaction. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-437-4
INTELLI 2015 : he Fourth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

guidelines (see Table 1) for system developers seeking to 
design successful automated capabilities to assist analysts in 
the PED or other similarly characterized domains. 
The underlying assumption with these guidelines is that 
successfully 
deployment 
of 
novel 
technology-driven 
capabilities relies on the establishment and maintenance of 
an appropriately calibrated attitude of trust and pre-existing 
faith towards the introduced system’s true capabilities. In 
order to establish and maintain this attitude of trust, it 
requires operators to make the decision to rely on the 
capabilities so they can benefit from the various feedback 
elements afforded by supporting the guidelines provided in 
Table 1. Therefore, these guidelines are intended to be 
applied in a stepwise manner, initially motivating decisions 
to rely on the automated capabilities to establish an initial 
attitude of trust and then incorporating the feedback dialogue 
layers to foster appropriate calibration and maintenance of 
this trust to motivate continued reliance on system 
capabilities when appropriate. This approach is beneficial as 
it encourages rapid deployment of relatively simplistic 
automated capabilities prior to their creation of more 
complex capabilities that may have a greater degree of 
performance variance (based on factors such as the quality of 
inputs made available to the system). 
V. 
PEDX COLLABORATIVE WORK ENVIRONMENT 
Through our numerous Knowledge Elicitation sessions 
with both reachback analysts and PED training experts, we 
have identified the central pillar of the PED cycle to be based 
around the efficient communications needed to support 
distributed (temporally and geographically) collaboration, 
with a particular focus on chat based collaboration. To this 
end we have begun prototyping an asynchronous chat client 
(PEDX; see Figure 2), modeled after a standard email client 
to increase familiarity and communication robustness by 
allowing for multiple concurrent conversational threads and 
in-line responses among other features. Chat is the main 
medium by which IRs are communicated, requirements for 
collection and exploitation are updated, and different 
stakeholders are informed of analysis. However, there is a 
severe lack of automation or utilization of new technologies 
employed today, with PED personnel continuing to rely on 
antiquated chat clients that become overwhelming as the 
number of conversations occurring at once increases. 
 
Figure 2. PEDX asynchronous thin-client chat 
Following the guidelines presented in the previous 
section, we are developing and integrating automated 
capabilities (e.g., alerting and attention direction systems) 
that maintain transparency and do not force reliance, we 
hope to raise awareness, acceptance, and reliance of these 
tools as a pathway to support higher level automated 
features. Currently, the list of low-level automated 
capabilities that PEDX supports includes the following, and 
while they may seem simplistic, they offer significant 
enhancements to the PED process by offloading mental 
workload and providing added support for shared awareness 
between 
geographically 
and 
temporally 
distributed 
collaborators: 
 Message date and time stamping 
 Multi-thread chat log compiling / output generation 
 New or revised information and content alerting 
 Information prioritization and organization 
 Acronym definition 
 Platform asset capabilities and availability indexing 
 Automated chat agents (e.g., weather request bots) 
 Integrated file sharing 
 Asynchronous multiple user geospatial layout editing 
 Automated database queries 
 Thread / chat log search 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This paper provided an overview of our attempts to 
integrate novel automated capabilities into existing and 
evolving PED workflows. We present guidelines for 
successfully deploying new technology to PED (and 
similarly characterized domains) centered on the idea of 
facilitating initial establishment and ongoing maintenance of 
trust to motivate appropriate decisions to rely on new 
capabilities. Our strategy focuses on building initial trust 
through low-level automation that integrates with existing 
workflows and systems, and without a dependence on highly 
variable system inputs to ensure consistent performance. 
This reduces the need for analysts to frequently calibrate 
system performance expectations, helping the system to meet 
expectations. Once initial trust is established, it can be 
leveraged to support deployment of more complex 
automation with a higher degree of performance variability. 
The initial attitude of trust serves as a buffer that will 
encourage decisions to rely on the automated capabilities so 
expectations can be properly calibrated and appropriate 
decisions to rely can be made.  
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Voshell et al., “Application of emerging technologies to support 
Army Processing Exploitation and Dissemination (TAPED),” Charles 
River Analytics, Cambridge, MA, USA, Tech. Rep. R0901542, 2013. 
[2] J. Kraiman, B. Kingston, and J. Muccio. "Modeling and simulation of 
the ISR tasking, processing, exploitation, and dissemination (TPED) 
process." AeroSense 2000. Int. Soc. for Optics and Photonics, 2000. 
[3] J. D. Lee, and K. A. See, "Trust in automation: Designing for 
appropriate reliance." Human Factors: The Journal of the Human 
Factors and Ergonomics Society, vol. 46.1, pp 50-80, 2004. 
[4] R.R. Hoffman, M. Johnson, J.M. Bradshaw, and A. Underbrink, “Trust 
in automation,” Intelligent Systems, IEEE, vol. 28(1), pp 84-88, 2013. 
[5] R. Parasuraman, Raja, and V. Riley. "Humans and automation: Use, 
misuse, disuse, abuse." Human Factors, 39.2 (1997): 230-253. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-437-4
INTELLI 2015 : he Fourth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

