SMARTLAM - A Modular, Flexible, Scalable, and Reconﬁgurable System for
Manufacturing of Microsystems
Steffen Scholz∗, Tobias Mueller∗, Matthias Plasch†, Hannes Limbeck†, Tobias Iseringhausen‡,
Markus Dickerhof∗, Andreas Schmidt∗§ , and Christian Woegerer†
∗ Institute for Applied Computer Science
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology
Karlsruhe, Germany
Email: {steffen.scholz, tobias.mueller2, markus.dickerhof, andreas.schmidt}@kit.edu
† Machine Vision Profactor GmbH
Steyr, Austria
Email: {matthias.plasch, hannes.limbeck, christian.woegerer}@profactor.at
‡ Fraunhofer Institute for Manufacturing Engineering and Automation (IPA)
Stuttgart, Germany
Email: tobias.iseringhausen@ipa.fraunhofer.de
§ Department of Computer Science and Business Information Systems,
Karlsruhe University of Applied Sciences
Karlsruhe, Germany
Abstract—Digital manufacturing technologies are gaining more
and more importance as key enabling technologies in future man-
ufacturing, in particular when ﬂexible and scalable production
of small and medium lot sizes of customized parts is demanded.
This paper describes a new approach to design manufacturing
of complex three-dimensional components building on a combi-
nation of digital manufacturing technologies such as laminated
objects manufacturing, laser, and e-printing technologies. The
manufacturing platform is based on a highly ﬂexible and modular
approach, which enables manufacturing of different small-sized
batches without tool or mask making within a short time. A
number of manufacturing modules can be combined by deﬁned
hardware and software interfaces. The control system is designed
to integrate all processes as well as the base platform with
features far beyond ordinary Programmable Logic Controller
(PLC) systems.
Keywords–Additive manufacturing; microsystems; ﬂexible scal-
able system
I.
INTRODUCTION
The development of the markets in micro system technol-
ogy shows that many new and innovative developments in the
ﬁeld of hybrid microsystems do not achieve a satisfactory
success.This can be attributed to the high complexity of
micro-technical products and processes, a lack of interdisci-
plinary knowledge in process development, limited ﬂexibility
of the applied manufacturing and assembly systems and the
high investment risk due to uncertain forecasts of growth.
SMARTLAM (Smart production of Microsystems based on
laminated polymer ﬁlms) addresses these issues by introducing
a ﬂexible, modular manufacturing approach similar to the
Agile Assembly Architecture by Rizzi et al [1]. It is based
on a large collection of mechanically, computationally and
algorithmically distributed robotic modules, which enables the
user to build a production system out of modules in a Lego
block manner. The concept of SMARTLAM also features
a highly ﬂexible transport system, which allows a free and
multiple access to process stations.
II.
SMARTLAM CONCEPTS
Digital manufacturing platforms [2] need to meet the chal-
lenge of staying competitive with traditional manufacturing
systems [3]. Important key factors are extra costs, which
emerge from complex hardware and software interfaces, as
well as potentially rising idle processing times of single
functional modules. A major goal of the SMARTLAM project
is to improve competitiveness by designing products in an opti-
mized manner, tailored to the used manufacturing technologies.
In SMARTLAM, each iteration loop can be seen as a
workﬂow consisting of four phases:
•
Plan (product speciﬁcation and design)
•
Develop (design support tool)
•
Make (process chain selection and process chain con-
ﬁguration)
•
Analyze (inspection and process optimization loop)
Figure 1 depicts a scheme of the workﬂow supported
by a 3D-I manufacturing approach, leading from a given
product speciﬁcation to production and product optimization.
The corresponding order planning approach is realized through
a seamlessly integrated toolchain, which can be sorted along
the layer model introduced by the International Standards for
Automation (ISA). ISA S95 is an international standard for de-
veloping an automated interface between enterprise and control
systems as an inherent part of the SMARTLAM project. Four
main tools have been realized:
•
A capability database, providing information on man-
ufacturing competences (MinaBase),
•
a feature-based design tool that enables product design
within the systems capabilities,
•
a process planning system, which constructs a manu-
facturing process chain,
•
and a conﬁguration tool that enables to set up manu-
facturing simulation and execution.
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-437-4
INTELLI 2015 : he Fourth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

Figure 1. Schematic overview of the 3D-I manufacturing approach
According to Gleadall et al. [4], the feature-based design
tool constrains the design engineer in developing a product
design that is suitable to be manufactured using integrated
SMARTLAM technologies. Therefore, the SMARTLAM 3D-I
manufacturing approach supports the development of a mi-
crosystem product by using a product concept as the input,
which provides a certain degree of ﬂexibility in order to be
adaptable to given manufacturing constraints. The manufac-
turing chain is then developed starting from specifying the
technical design of the product design through to conﬁguring
and monitoring the actual fabrication process. Also, resulting
from its continuously modular design, the system is easily
extendable/scalable to cover new manufacturing technologies.
Adding a new production technology to the SMARTLAM
system requires the following steps to be taken:
•
Add a data set of the new manufacturing competence
to the database, to make it available to the guided
design tool, the process planning system, and the
conﬁguration tool.
•
Create a component model of the added process
module and make it available to the control system.
The main controller extracts relevant information, e.g.
a protocol and connection description, to establish a
link to the new process module.
As the control system’s architecture is based on the in-
dustrial standard IEC 61499 [3], it is suitable to realize
coordination of functional independent modules in order to
achieve a given result [5], [6]. Moreover, the openness and
interoperability attempts of IEC 61499 reduce development
effort that is required for the integration of heterogeneous
system components. SMARTLAM supports seamless data
integration, as its aim is to create an integrated approach
to supporting product developers within the scope of the
platform in making profound decisions more rapidly. At the
core of this is the requirement for a methodology to describe
the capabilities and parameters of participating manufacturing
technologies and materials. To achieve this, existing knowl-
edge management tools - the Process Capability Database
MinaBase - will be adapted and enhanced for storage and
retrieval of SMARTLAM-related process parameters based
on a SMARTLAM-speciﬁc process knowledge ontology. The
customers use a design tool, which is developed in the
SMARTLAM project, to design their product for manufacture
by a SMARTLAM system. The design tool outputs the design
to a process chain selection tool, which predicts the key
performance indicators (KPIs) for the customer to review. The
process capability database plays a central role in this product
development process. In detail, the modules for the current
application case include:
•
Aerosoljet printing module: printing electronics func-
tionality (circuits, interconnects, sensors)
•
Laser structuring module: laser milling and surface
modiﬁcation for structuring or changing polymer sur-
face properties
•
Laser welding module: bonding of polymer sheets
•
Lamination module: positioning and stacking of poly-
mer ﬁlms
•
Inspection module: inspection of top layer of func-
tional elements in-line and at end of the process
•
Assembly module: integration of discrete components
into sheet stacks
Based on this approach, different modules for the manufac-
turing of microsystems are currently being developed within
SMARTLAM, which will be connected to the manufacturing
databases and back-end processes and ﬁnally results in a highly
sophisticated and ﬂexible digital fabrication cell. Currently,
all modules are being prepared for the assembly of the ﬁnal
production cell. A central control unit to operate the over-
all manufacturing process including all fabrication, assembly,
inspection and transportation steps is being set up. Finally,
the overall concept of the D-I-approach has been proved on a
laboratory scale by producing a demonstrator specimen.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
SMARTLAM is funded by the European Commission
under FP7 Cooperation Program Grant No. 314580.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Rizzi, J. Gowdy, and R. Hollis, “Agile assembly architecture: an agent
based approach to modular precision assembly systems,” in Proceedings
of the 1997 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation,
Albuquerque, USA, April 20-25, 1997, pp. 1511–1516.
[2]
G. Chryssolouris, D. Mavrikios, N. Papakostas, G. Michalos, and
K. Georgoulias, “Digital manufacturing: history, perspectives, and out-
look,” Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers. Part B,
Journal of Engineering Manufacture, vol. 223, no. 5, 2009, pp. 451–462.
[3]
“International Standard IEC 61499-1: Function Blocks – Part 1: Architec-
ture, 1st Ed. International Electrotechnical Commission,” Geneva, 2005.
[4]
Gleadall et al., “A design framework for micro devices manufactured by a
modular multi-process platform,” in Proceedings of the 9th International
Workshop of Microfactories, Honolulu, USA, 2014, pp. 16–222.
[5]
D. Ivanova, I. Batchkova, S. Panjaitan, F. Wagner, and G. Frey, “Com-
bining IEC 61499 and ISA S88 for Batch Control,” in Proceedings
of the 13th IFAC Symposium on Information Control Problems in
Manufacturing (INCOM’09), 2009, pp. 187–192.
[6]
G. Ebenhofer et al., “A system integration approach for service-oriented
robotics,” in Proceedings of 2013 IEEE 18th Conference on Emerg-
ing Technologies & Factory Automation, ETFA 2013, Cagliari, Italy,
September 10-13, 2013, 2013, pp. 1–8.
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-437-4
INTELLI 2015 : he Fourth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

