Network Resources Allocation in  
Content-Aware Networks for Multimedia Applications 
 
Eugen Borcoci 
Telecommunication Dept. 
University POLITEHNICA of 
Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
eugen.borcoci@elcom.pub.ro 
Radu Dinel Miruta 
Telecommunication Dept. 
University POLITEHNICA of 
Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
radu.miruta@elcom.pub.ro 
Serban Georgica Obreja 
Telecommunication Dept. 
University POLITEHNICA of 
Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
serban.obreja@elcom.pub.ro 
 
 
Abstract — Virtual Content Aware Networks (VCAN) 
constructed as overlays over IP networks, are currently of high 
interest in the context of Future Internet multimedia 
distribution.  The VCANs mapping onto real topologies while 
meeting some QoS properties is still an open issue and 
constitutes the objective of many studies. This paper continues 
a previous work which defined the management framework of 
a complex multi-domain networked media oriented system. 
Here it is proposed a combined set of algorithms and protocols 
to perform VCAN mapping on real network infrastructures 
both for intra and inter-domain, while meeting QoS 
constraints for multi-domain VCANs.  
Keywords — Content-Aware Networking; Network Aware 
Applications; 
Multi-domain; 
Inter-domain 
peering; 
Management;  Resource allocation; Future Internet. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Many research efforts are spent today to find the best 
solutions (evolutionary, middle-way or revolutionary) for so 
called Future Internet (FI), [1-5]. Content orientation of the 
FI is largely recognized and new solutions towards this  
make have been proposed,  [2][6][7][8],  to create virtualized 
Content Aware Networks (VCAN) and Network Aware 
Applications (NAA) on top of the IP level. Novel network 
nodes (routers) will process and forward  the data, based on 
content type recognition or, even more, treating the data 
objects based on their name and not based on location 
address, [6][7]. The paper [6], analyses new solutions based 
on Content Oriented Networking (CON) with decoupling of 
contents from hosts at networking level. The VCANS can be 
constructed based on virtualization techniques, agreed to be 
used to overcome the ossification of the current Internet [3-
5].   
The European FP7 ICT research project, “Media 
Ecosystem Deployment Through Ubiquitous Content-Aware 
Network Environments”, ALICANTE, [9-13],  adopted the 
NAA/CAN approach.  It targets to define an architecture, 
and then to fully specify, design and implements a Media 
Ecosystem, on top of multi-domain IP  networks, to offer 
services for different business actors playing roles of 
consumers and/or providers. It adopted content-type 
recognition at network level and light virtualization (VCANs 
separation in the Data Plane but a single management and 
control – M&C plane). This approach offers seamless 
deployment perspectives and tries to avoid the scalability 
problems (still open research issues) of the full CON 
approaches. 
The ALICANTE business entities/actors belong to 
Several cooperating environments: User Environment (UE), 
containing 
the 
End-Users 
(EU) 
terminal; 
Service 
Environment (SE), containing High Level Service Providers 
(SP) and Content Providers (CP); Network Environment 
(NE), where a new CAN Provider exists (CANP) to  manage 
and offer Virtual Content Aware Networks - VCANs);  
traditional Network Providers (NP/ISP) - managing the 
network  at IP level. The   “environment”, is here a generic 
grouping of functions cooperating for a common goal. 
The CANP offers to the upper layers enhanced VCAN-
based connectivity services, unicast and multicast (QoS 
enabled) over multi-domain, multi-provider IP networks. 
The novel CAN routers are called Media-Aware Network 
Elements (MANE) to emphasize their additional capabilities: 
content and context – awareness. The VCAN resources are 
managed 
quasi-statically 
by 
provisioning 
and 
also 
dynamically by using adaptation procedures for media flows. 
The management is based on vertical and horizontal Service 
Level Agreements (SLAs) negotiated and concluded 
between providers (e.g., SP-CANP). In the Data Plane, 
content/service description information (metadata) can also 
be inserted in the media flow packets by the Content Servers 
and treated appropriately by the intelligent routers of the 
VCAN.  
In [12], [13] the general framework is developed, to 
manage connectivity services offered by the VCANs to the 
upper layers. This paper elaborates the mapping of the 
overlay VCANs (as requested by an SP) onto real network 
resources in a multi-domain context, while satisfying 
topological QoS constraints, is a challenging issue and is the 
main subject of this paper, thus continuing the initial work 
on VCAN presented in [12][13]. During this mapping the 
VCAN resources are logically reserved; later when the 
VCAN installation is requested by the SP, they will be really 
allocated in routers. Note that the content awareness 
processing is not directly discussed in this paper, but is 
specified in  [11-13]. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-204-2
INTERNET 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Evolving Internet

Section II presents samples of related work. Section III 
summarizes the overall ALICANTE architecture and VCAN 
general Management. Section IV describes the inter-domain 
peering solution. Section V is the paper core, presenting the 
proposal of an architecture and a joint algorithm which uses 
the overlay topology information and combines constrained 
routing and resource reservation aiming to assure the 
optimum VCAN virtual links mapping onto network paths. 
Section VI contains some conclusions and future work 
outline. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The fundamental problem for virtual networks is their 
instantiation and finding an optimal allocation of resources 
offered by a physical IP Network. In order to solve this NP-
hard problem, several heuristics have been proposed in 
literature [4][5][24]. 
Our specific objective is to develop management 
solutions to map the QoS capable VCANs, over several 
independent network domains, in a scalable way to finally 
assure efficient transport of real-time and media traffic. The 
approach must take into account the ALICANTE partially 
decentralized architecture [9-12] :  CAN Managers and 
Intra-domain Network Resources Managers exist – each of 
them being aware on the status of their resources. Therefore 
we should consider also the inter-domain QoS enabled 
domain peering problem. Basically there are two solutions: 
find some inter-domain paths (without checking the QoS 
properties mandatory), or find QoS enabled paths. Any 
solution applied, after paths finding, a negotiation protocol 
should be run, [9-11] [18][19][21], between domain 
managers, to establish inter-domains Service Level 
Specification (SLS) agreements (SLS is the SLA technical 
part) containing clauses for QoS guarantees. If no QoS 
constraints are used during routing, there are significant 
chances that the SLS negotiation will fail. So, it is a better 
solution to search for QoS enabled paths, [14][15][18][19]. 
In [18][19], QoS enhancements for the Border Gateway 
Protocol (BGP) are proposed to add  QoS related information 
to BGP advertisements between network domains. However, 
the notion of parallel planes (in our case content aware) at 
domains level is absent there and all process are running at 
routing level. 
Better fitted to ALICANTE needs are the solutions for 
inter-domain QoS peering and routing based on the overlay 
network idea, [14-16]. An overlay network is defined, which 
first, abstracts each domain with a node, represented by the 
domain resource manager, or more detailed with several 
nodes represented by the egress routers from that domain. 
Protocols are needed to transport QoS and other information 
between nodes and, based on this information, QoS routing 
algorithms can choose QoS capable paths. In [20] a Virtual 
Topology (VT) is defined by a set of virtual links that map 
the current link state of the domain without showing internal 
details of the physical network topology.  
Related to management signaling for inter-domain, 
several solutions are examined and compared (cascade, hub, 
mixed-mode), [18][19][21][22]. However, neither solution 
considers the content awareness capabilities of the multiple 
domain infrastructure, nor the virtualization aspects. 
ALICANTE architecture realizes parallel Internet planes as 
in [22], but mapped onto VCANs, and additionally achieves 
cooperation between the network layer and applications and 
services layers, thus realizing a traffic optimization loop. 
The solution adopted in this paper is a combined one, 
applicable both to inter-domain and intra-domain context: 
QoS enabled (constrained) routing based on overlay 
topology, the VCAN virtual links assignment to virtual 
paths, after admission control check, first at inter-domain 
level and then negotiation between domain mangers and 
running similar algorithms at intra-domain level. 
 
III. 
ALICANTE SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE AND VCAN 
MANAGEMENT 
The general ALICANTE concepts and architecture are 
defined in [9-11]. Figure 1 shows a mixed, simplified 
picture, emphasizing the actors and interactions and a multi-
domain VCAN.  
The network contains several Core Network Domains 
(CND), belonging to NPs (can be Autonomous Systems - 
AS) and access networks (AN). The ANs are out of scope of 
VCANs. The CAN layer M&C is partially distributed: one 
CAN Manager (CANMgr) belonging to CANP exists for 
each IP domain, doing  VCAN planning, provisioning, 
advertisement, 
offering, 
negotiation 
installation 
and 
exploitation. Each domain has an Intra-domain Network 
Resource Manager (Intra-NRM), as the ultimate authority 
configuring the MANE and other network nodes. The EU 
terminals are connected to the network through Home Boxes, 
playing the roles of Residential Gateways. A HB can also act 
as a CP/SP for other HBs, on behalf of the EUs. The CAN 
layer cooperates with HB and SE by offering them CAN 
services. 
The VCAN Management framework has been already 
defined in [12][13]. Here only a short summary is recalled 
for sake of clarity. A functional block at Service Manager 
SM@SP, performs all actions needed for VCAN support on 
behalf of SP (planning, provisioning, negotiation with 
CANP, 
VCAN 
exploitation). 
The 
CAN 
Manager 
(CANMgr@CANP) performs, at the CAN layer, VCAN 
provisioning and operation. The two entities interact based 
on the SLA/SLS contract initiated by the SP. The interface 
implementation for management is based on Simple Object 
Access Protocol (SOAP)/Web Services.  
The main interactions in the Figure 1 are: SP-CANP(1): 
the SP requests to CANP to provision/ modify/ terminate  
VCANs while CANP says yes/no; also CANP might 
advertise existent VCANs to SP; CANP-CANP(2) – 
negotiations are needed to extend a VCAN upon several NP 
domains; CANP-NP(3) : CANP negotiates resources with 
NP; Network Interconnection Agreements (NIA) (4) between 
the NPs or between NPs and CANPs; (necessary for NP 
cooperation). After the SP negotiates a desired VCAN with 
CANP, SP will issue the installation commands to CANP, 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-204-2
INTERNET 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Evolving Internet

which in turn configures, via Intra-NRM (action 4), the 
MANE functional blocks. 
The content awareness (CA) is realized in three ways, 
[11]:  
(i) by concluding a SP - CANP SLA concerning different 
VCAN construction. The content servers are instructed by 
the SP to insert some special Content Aware Transport 
Information (CATI) in the data packets. This simplifies the 
media flow classification and treatment by the MANE; (ii) 
SLA is concluded, but no CATI is inserted in the data 
packets (legacy CSs). The MANE applies packet inspection 
for data flow classification and assignment to VCANs. The 
flows treatment is still based on VCANs characteristics 
defined in the SLA; (iii) no SP–CANP SLA exists and  no 
CATI. The flows treatment can still be CA, but conforming 
to the local policy at CANP and IntraNRM.  
 
 
Access 
Network 
CND3 
Intra-NRM 
@NP 
CANMgr3 
SrvMgr@SP 
3 
CAN layer 
Management 
(@CANP) 
 
Multi-domain VCAN 
NIA 
 
NIA 
 
HB + SP Environment 
 
EU 
host 
PHY 
connection 
 
Contract (SLA/SLS) or 
interaction in M&C Plane  
Control 
connections  
Network elements 
config. commands 
 
MANE 
 
CND1 
Intra-NRM 
@NP 
CANMgr1 
2.1 
1 
4 
CND2 
Intra-NRM 
@NP 
CANMgr2 
4 
 
HB1 
2.2 
3 
3 
4 
Centent 
Server 
Media flow 
1 
3 
2 
Inter-domain 
M&C Plane 
topology 
1 
3 
2 
Inter-domain 
Data Plane 
topology 
 
 Figure 1 Example of a multi-domain VCAN. Data Plane topology  and management interactions 
In the CNDs DiffServ and/or MPLS  technologies can 
support splitting the sets of flows in QoS classes (QC), with 
a mapping between the VCANs and the QCs with  several 
levels of QoS granularities, [18][19]. The QoS behavior of 
each VCAN (seen as one of the parallel Internet planes) is 
established by the SP-CANP. 
IV. CAN  MULTI-DOMAIN PEERING 
In a multi-domain context, one should distinguish 
between two topologies (in terms of how the domains are 
linked with each others): Data plane topology and M&C 
topology.  The first can be of any kind (including the 
domains spanned by a given VCAN- see Figure 1- triangle). 
The M&C topology defines how the CANMgrs associated to 
CNDs inter-communicate for  multi-domain VCANs 
construction. The VCAN initiating CANMgr has to negotiate 
with other CAN Managers. There exist two main models: 
hub model  and cascade model, [19][21][22]. 
The hub model was selected; it has the advantage  that 
initiating CANMgr knows, each VCAN component 
(network)  and its status, but it must also know the inter-
domain topology. Given the tiered hierarchy of the Internet, 
the number of CNDs involved in an E2E chain is not too 
high (actually is  lower than 10, [8]), so, scalability problem 
is not so stringent. Two functional components are needed: 
(1) inter-domain topology discovery protocol;  (2) overlay 
negotiation protocol for SLA/SLS negotiations between 
CAN Managers. The cascade model, [19][21] is better for a 
chain of domains topologies than for arbitrary ones. 
 Figure 1 shows an example of a multi-domain VCAN 
composed of parts of CND1, 2, 3. This VCAN is constructed 
in the following way. An inter-domain discovery protocol 
[11], has informed each CANMgr about the inter-domain 
graph where each CND is abstracted as a node (the inter-
domain links capacities are also learned, supposing that each 
CANMgr knows its neighborhood). The SP asks for a 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-204-2
INTERNET 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Evolving Internet

VCAN to a CANMgr (Initiator) – see action 1. The SP knew 
the edge points of this VCAN, i.e., the MANEs IDs where 
different sets of HB currently are, or they will be connected. 
The initiator CANMgr_n determines all CNDs involved 
(from the SP information and its inter-domain knowledge) 
and then negotiates in parallel with all other CAN Managers 
(actions 2.1, 2.2) to agree and reserve resources for the 
VCAN. The split of the SLS parameters (if it is the case) 
should be done at the initiator (e.g., for delay). In a 
successful scenario, the multi-domain VCAN is agreed and 
then it will be later instantiated in the network. 
Each CND has complete autonomy w.r.t its network 
resources including network dimensioning, off-line traffic 
engineering (TE), and also dynamic routing. The CANMgr 
and Intra-NRM have together an abstract view of its CND 
and output links towards neighbor domains in a form of a set 
of virtual links (called Traffic Trunks). A set of such links 
can belong to a given QoS class. A multiple domain VCANs 
should also belong to some QoS class and therefore inter-
domain QoS aware routing information is necessary in order 
to increase the chances of successful SLS establishment, 
between CANMgrs. The multi-domain VCANs deployment 
needs knowledge on a virtual multi-domain topology. 
Acquisition of this information is performed by an inter-
domain protocol, which offers to CANMgrs an Overlay 
Network Topology Discovery Service (ONTS) similar to that 
described in [20]. Therefore in the following sections we 
suppose that this information is known by each CANMgr. 
Details on the protocol performing the ONTS for the benefit 
of given CAN managers are out of scope for this paper. 
V. 
VCAN MAPPING AND RESOURCE RESERVATION 
A. CAN Provisioning at SP 
The functional block at SP for this is the CAN 
Provisioning Manager at SM@SP. It performs the SP-CANP 
SLS processing - subscription (unicast/multicast mode) in 
order to assure the CAN transport infrastructure for the SP. 
After some VCAN planning the SP requests to the CAN 
Manager associated with its home domain, to subscribe for a 
new VCAN. It negotiates the subscription and concludes an 
SLS denoted by: SP-CAN_SLS-uni_sub for unicast, or SP-
CAN_SLS-mc_sub for  multicast. The results of the contract 
are stored in the CAN repository. Note that CAN 
subscription only means a logical resource reservation at the 
CAN layer, not real resource allocation and network node 
configuration. The CAN subscription action may or may not 
be successful, depending on the amount of resources 
demanded by the SP and the available resources in the 
network. Note that at its turn the CAN Manager has to 
negotiate the CAN subscription with Intra-NRM, and 
overbooking is an option, depending on the SP policy. 
B. CAN Negotiation 
A negotiation protocol (SP-CANP-SLS-P) has been 
developed in ALICANTE (not detailed here) to support the 
negotiation process between several pairs of managers like 
CANProvMng@SM as a client and CAN Manager as a 
server. The main usage of this protocol is for establishing 
SLS contracts, but it should have all the necessary properties 
of a general negotiation protocol, and could be adapted/used 
to serve CAN invocation. The SP-CANP-SLS-P supports 
one of several negotiation actions:  establishment/ 
modifications/ termination of SLS contracts. 
C. Inter-domain CAN Planning and Resource 
Management 
The CAN Planning first task is to perform the inter-
domain resource management and then prepare the intra-
domain similar actions. QoS capable VCANs are envisaged 
here. The idea of this paper is to combine the constrained 
QoS routing with admission control and VCAN mapping, on 
two levels: inter-domain and then intra-domain. This split 
solves partially the scalability and also administrative 
problems of a multi-domain environment.  The planning 
objectives are: using the ONT information and SP request to 
determine the domains participating to a given VCAN 
requested by SP; apply a constrained routing algorithm 
admission control and VCAN mapping; based on routing 
information the SLS splitting between domains is computed. 
To make the functional steps more readable, consider the 
Figure 2 example, containing several network domains 
CND1, CND2, … CND8. SP has requested a VCAN-0 
construction, whose parameters are embedded in an SLS 
request. The CND1 is supposed to have its CAN Manager as 
initiator of the VCAN. The required VCAN should assure 
guaranteed services in a given QoS class, services, i.e. 
guaranteed traffic trunks (TTs) starting from the Content 
Servers CS1, CS2 up to different client HBs, denoted as 
HBc1…HBc7. SP requests the VCAN-0 and a delivers a 
Traffic Matrix (TM)  associated to it, containing (at 
minimum) the requested bandwidth of the TTs. 
The following actions are performed:  
1. SP issues a VCAN-0 request to initiator CANMgr1 (at 
CND1) i.e. an SLS request (topology, traffic matrix, 
QoS guarantees, …etc.). 
2. The CANMgr1 obtains from ONTS the inter-domain 
level ONT (topology graph, inter-domain link 
capacities, etc.). The ONT is sufficiently rich to cover 
the required VCAN. 
3. The  CANMgr1 determines the involved domains in 
VCAN-0 by using the border ingress-egress point’s 
knowledge (actually MANE addresses) indicated in 
the SLS parameters (Figure 2.a). 
4. The initiator CANMgr determines a contiguous inter-
domain connectivity graph (each CND is abstracted 
as a node) resulting in an extended VCAN-1 (in 
Figure 2.a this new VCAN is represented by dotted 
line). In VCAN-1 graph, some new additional transit 
core network domains need be included, e.g., CND4, 
CND5  (it is supposed in the most simple version that 
these new core network domains added are also 
VCAN capable). Therefore a contiguous new VCAN-
1 is defined. Optimisation techniques can be applied 
in this phase. 
5. The initiator CAN Manager should make the first split 
the initial SLS among core network domains. This 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-204-2
INTERNET 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Evolving Internet

means to produce the set of SLS parameters valid to 
be requested to each individual CND. The inputs are: 
ONT graph, abstracting each CND by a node; QoS 
characteristics of the inter-domain links (bandwidth, 
delay); Traffic Matrix (and other QoS information) of 
the SLS proposed by SP. The ouputs are the  Traffic 
matrices for each CND composing the VCAN. 
To do this, the CANMgr1 will run a constrained routing 
algorithm. A combined metric is proposed here for a link, 
similar to [14], considering the bandwidth request and  the 
bandwidth available, targeting to choose the widest path.  
 
 
HBc4 
CND1 
HBc1 
CS1 
CND3 
CND5 
CND4 
CND6 
CND2 
CND8 
CND7 
CS2 
HBc3 
HBc2 
HBc5 
HBc6 
HBc7 
VCAN-1 
Transit 
domain 
Contiguous 
VCAN 
(a) 
VCAN-0 
CS1 
CS2 
VCAN-1 
HBc1 
HBc2, HBc3 
HBc5, HBc6 
HBC7 
HBc4 
SP Required 
Traffic Matrix 
(b) 
 
 Figure 2.   Example of a multi-domain requested VCAN (VCAN-
0 is requested by SP). 
Note that the final solution will also contain delay- 
constrained routing and introduce delay in the metric. This 
is possible, given that ALICANTE system has a powerful  
monitoring plane capable to perform delay measurements 
and compute averages both intra and inter-domain. In the 
example below we only consider bandwidth only in the 
metric defined. 
The cost of a inter-domain link (i,j) in the ONT can be 
C(i,j) = Breq/Bij= Breq/Bavail, where Bij  is the available 
bandwidth on this link and Breq is the bandwidth requested 
for that link. Another useful interpretation of this ratio is as 
link utilization factor ; that is we the alternative notations 
will be used: C(i,j) = Ulink_ij. The metric should be ≤1, this 
representing the bandwidth constraint applied to the 
algorithm. The metric is additive, so one can apply modified 
Dijkstra algorithm to compute the Shortest Path Trees (SPT)  
for each ingress node where the traffic flows will enter. 
Given that Breq is different for each branch of the tree the 
additive metric used for SPT computation is 1/Bij. The 
mapping is to be done jointly with the routing process.  
The summary pseudo-code of the combined routing, 
admission control (AC) and mapping algorithm (not yet 
optimized) is described below. The notation ;/text after 
pseudo-code lines represents explanatory comments. 
  
1. Split the requested TM in several trees, one for each 
ingress node ( I1, I2, …In);/See the Figure 2.b having two 
trees 
2. On the current graph, repeat for 1 to n: 
        {2.1. Compute the DJ_SPT (root_I1) where DJ means 
Dijkstra algorithm;/Routing 
         2.2. Select the TM branches that can be satisfied ( i.e., 
Bij > Breq for that direction);/Mapping and AC 
         2.3 Reserve capacities for these branches by 
subtracting the respective capacities from the graph;/ thus 
obtaining a reduced graph 
         2.4. Compute the overall utilization for each path 
reserved as Upath= Sumlinks (Breq/Bavail) * NHF(path); 
         2.4 List the unsatisfied branches; /it may happen to 
not be able to satisfy all requests of TM 
          } 
3. Aggregate the results for all inputs, for satisfied and not 
satisfied branches and compute the overall VCAN 
utilization by summing over all paths mapped onto the real 
graph; 
 
Notes: 
1.The cost of a full path could be Sum (link costs) * 
NHF(path) where Number of Hops Factor NHF(path) is a 
weight factor approximately proportional with the number of 
CNDs crossed by this path. This cost will optimize the 
solution by reducing the number of transited domains 
2.AS shown above, the  ratio Breq/Bavail computed on a 
link can be interpreted as the link utilization factor Ulink= 
Breq/Bavail of that link. Summing for all links we can get 
the path utilization.  Summing the utilizations for all paths 
one gets the overall network utilization UVCAN for that 
VCAN.  
3. We assume that only bandwidth is considered in the 
above metric and the procedure is: select the widest path ; 
however this will usually also assure the smallest transfer 
delay, [14]. 
4. In the simplest form the algorithm keeps only the best 
path satisfying the constraint. In an advanced version, several 
inter-domain paths satisfying the constraint may be retained. 
Knowledge of the path allows that the domains involved in 
this TT are determined. This solution could be useful for 
load balancing and it  will be analysed in a future work. 
5. If priorities are assigned to the TTS in the traffic 
matrix by SP, then these will be considered in the order of 
computations done in Step 2.  
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-204-2
INTERNET 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Evolving Internet

D. VCAN Mapping Optimisation and Scalability 
The optimal mapping of overlay virtual networks onto 
real network substrate resources is shown to be a NP-hard 
problem, [24]. We try here to find a pragmatic solution, 
based on the fact VCAN construction actions have no strong 
real time constraints for computations. The solicitation of a 
CANP to construct VCANs is rather not frequent (intervals 
of days, weeks, etc.). 
Normally the NP would like that for a given traffic 
matrix associated to a VCAN, the best mapping would be 
that one having the least overall utilization. Therefore a 
straightforward optimization method is to compute the step 2 
of the algorithm several times, for other order of inputs  
given by the bijective function f( I1, ..In) -> {Ik1, Ik2, ..Ikn} 
which creates actually permutations of the set {I1, ..In}. The 
function is random. The best allocation is that one having the 
least overall utilization. Note that for large n, the solution is 
not scalable (we would need n!) computations. Therefore in 
practical cases one can stop repetitions of the step 2 after 
some computations if the overall utilization fulfill some 
enough good thresholds fixed by local CANP policy. 
Other optimization procedure is possible  if the CANP 
policy looks for an optimal mapping that leaves the greatest 
amount of resources available. Then the same algorithm can 
be applied, while the metric for a link will be not U but 1/(1-
U).  
Scalability of the solution is assured by: splitting the 
problem hierarchically in inter-domain and intra-domain 
similar problems; grouping the requests in sets of trees and 
avoiding of individual mapping; exploiting Internet tiered 
hierarchy in order to minimize the number of transit domains 
in a VCAN.  
E. Numerical Example 
Figure 3 presents a numerical example of inter-domain 
path computation, in order to finally determine the splitting 
of the overall SLS into parameters sets, each one associated 
to a different domain. The links are denoted with values 
representing the available bandwidth. Note that, depending 
on the policies, these bandwidth values can be used for any 
QoS class, based on FIFO policy of resolving the SLS 
requests, or might be assigned offline for given planned QoS 
classes. 
The paths utilizations  in the Figure 3 example are: 
U(path_1) = (1/5 + 1/3 + 1/4) *4  =  0.78*4 = 3.12 
U(path_2) = (1/2 + 1/6 + 1/3) *4  = 1.0 *4 = 4,  
therefore the path_1 is better, given that it has a lower 
path utilization factor. 
Given the resource reservation assured by provisioning in 
the M&C plane (accompanied by policing in the data plane), 
the value of the bandwidth already booked is subtracted from 
the available one, on each link, before analysing other TT 
paths. The SLS splitting results of this computation step are: 
  TT( CND1) : Input_CS1---> Output_CND2,    Breq= 1; 
  TT( CND2) : Input_CND1---> Output_CND4, Breq= 1; 
  TT( CND4) : Input_CND2---> Output_CND8, Breq= 1; 
  TT( CND8) : Input_CND4---> Output_HBc4,  Breq= 1; 
After splitting in this way the overall SLS, a set of 
parameters are available for each domain. Then, separate 
negotiations can be done by CANMgr1 with each other 
CAN Manager involved in the VCAN for that SLS.  
 
 
HBc4 
CND1 
HBc1 
CS1 
CND5 
CND4 
CND2 
CND8 
CND7 
CS2 
HBc3 
HBc2 
HBc5 
HBc6 
HBc7 
VCAN-1 
B12=5 
4 
5 
2 
6 
B24=3 
3 
2 
Path_1 
Path_2 
TT ( CS1-> HBC4), Breq= 1 
CND1 
HBc1 
CND5 
CND4 
CND2 
CND8 
CND7 
CS2 
HBc3 
HBc2 
HBc5 
HBc6 
HBc7 
VCAN-1 
B12=4 
3 
5 
2 
6 
B24=2 
3 
2 
Path_1 
Residual  available  
bandwidth after 
reservation for path_1 
(a) 
(b) 
 
Figure 3. Connectivity graph of the extended VCAN 
(requested by SP SLS domains and the transit ones) 
a. Inter-domain path computation (constrained routing) and 
implicit inter-domain resource reservation  
b. Adjustment of the ONT graph after selecting path_1 as 
good. 
The algorithm has been  preliminary implemented using 
Visual Studio C++ Express Edition as development 
environment. The hardware platform was equipped with 
Intel(R) Core(TM)2 CPU T5600@1.83GHz processor and 
2,00 GB installed memory (RAM) on a 32-bit OS. The 
preliminary results have shown computation times between 
10-100 ms for network graphs having 5-80 nodes. It was 
also observed a dependency between the number of solved 
requests and the number of edges in a graph with the same 
number of vertices. Further results will be reported in a 
future work. 
F. Intra-domain CAN Planning and Resource 
Management 
In ALICANTE a two level hierarchy has been selected 
for VCAN mapping: inter and intra-domain. Essentially, to 
map a VCAN portion onto a given CND network graph for 
the intra-domain case, the same algorithm can be applied by 
the CAN Manager in cooperation with Intra-NRM. The 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-204-2
INTERNET 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Evolving Internet

knowledge of the intra-domain graph is obtained by 
Intra_NRM in the link-state style (similar to Open Shortest 
Path protocol- OSPF). The details will be studied in a future 
work. The actual placement of functions inside CAN 
Manager or Intra-NRM depends on policies and degree of 
trust between these two entities. Actual locations of 
mapping functions depends on relationship between 
CANMgr and Intra-NRM with respect to: (1) the style for 
Intra-NRM to upload information to CANMgr about its 
available resources: on demand (OD) or in proactive (P) 
style (at Intra-NRM initiative); (2) amount and depth of 
information uploaded by Intra-NRM on network resources 
(graph, capacities, etc.). Note that for every variant, and 
depending on monitoring information at network level the 
Resource Availability Matrix (RAM) uploaded to the 
CANMgr can be adjusted by Intra-NRM to improve the 
traffic engineering performances.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This work proposed the architecture and a combined set 
of algorithms and protocols to manage network resources, in 
order to solve the mapping of a Virtual Content Aware 
Network overlay plane, onto network infrastructure 
resources, while respecting the QoS requirements issued by 
the Service Provider which is exploiting VCANs. The inter-
domain part of the problem has been treated in more details, 
by combining an overlay topology approach with an inter-
domain 
constrained 
routing 
and 
admission 
control. 
Scalability and optimization aspects have been discussed. 
Note that the solution discussed is currently in the phase of 
detailed  design, evaluation and implementation inside the 
FP7 ALICANTE project. Consequently in the near future, 
complete evaluation results both formal and experimental of 
this solution will be published. 
 
Acknowledgments 
This work was supported partially by the EC in the 
context of the ALICANTE project (FP7-ICT-248652) and 
partially by the projects POSDRU/89/1.5/S/62557 together 
with  POSDRU/88/1.5/S/61178. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Schönwälder, M. Fouquet, G .Dreo Rodosek,  and I.C 
Hochstatter,  “Future Internet = Content + Services + 
Management”, IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 47, no. 
7, Jul. 2009, pp. 27-33.  
[2] C. 
Baladrón, 
“User-Centric 
Future 
Internet 
and 
Telecommunication Services”,  in: G. Tselentis, et. al. (eds.), 
Towards the Future Internet, IOS Press, 2009, pp. 217-226.  
[3] J. Turner and D. Taylor, “Diversifying the Internet,” Proc. 
GLOBECOM ‘05, vol. 2, St. Louis, USA, Nov./Dec. 2005, 
pp. 760-765. 
[4] T. Anderson, L. Peterson, S. Shenker, and J. Turner, 
“Overcoming the Internet Impasse through Virtualization”, 
Computer, vol. 38, no. 4, Apr. 2005, pp. 34–41.  
[5] 4WARD, “A clean-slate approach for Future Internet”, 
http://www.4ward-project.eu/ (last access May 2012). 
[6] J. Choi, J. Han, E. Cho, T. Kwon, and Y. Choi, A Survey on 
Content-Oriented Networking for Efficient Content Delivery, 
IEEE Communications Magazine, March 2011. 
[7] V. 
Jacobson 
et 
al., 
“Networking 
Named 
Content,” 
CoNEXT ’09, New York, NY, 2009, pp. 1–12. 
[8] W.K. Chai, et.al., CURLING: Content-Ubiquitous Resolution 
and Delivery Infrastructure for Next-Generation Services , 
IEEE Communications Magazine, March 2011. 
[9] FP7 ICT project, “MediA Ecosystem Deployment Through 
Ubiquitous 
 
Content-Aware 
Network 
Environments”, 
ALICANTE, No248652, http://www.ict-alicante.eu/  (last 
access May 2012) 
[10] E. Borcoci, D. Negru, and C. Timmerer, “A Novel 
Architecture for Multimedia Distribution based on Content-
Aware Networking” Proc. of. CTRQ 2010, Athens, June 
2010, pp. 162-168.  
[11] ALICANTE, Deliverable D2.1, ALICANTE Overall System 
and 
Components 
Definition 
and 
Specifications, 
http://www.ict-alicante.eu, Sept. 2011. 
[12] E. Borcoci, M. Stanciu, D. Niculescu, D.Negru, G. Xilouris, 
“Connectivity 
Services 
Management 
in 
Multi-domain 
Content-Aware Networks for Multimedia Applications ” , 
Proc. of. INTERNET 2011, Luxembourg, June 2011. 
[13] E. Borcoci,   and R. Iorga,    “A Management Architecture for 
a Multi-domain Content-Aware Network” TEMU 2010, July 
2010, Crete. 
[14] Zhi Li, P. Mohapatra, “QRON: QoS-Aware Routing in 
Overlay Networks”, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in 
Communications, VOL. 22, NO. 1, January  2004, pp.29-39. 
[15] Z. Wang,  J. Crowcroft, “Quality-of-service routing for 
supporting multimedia applications”, IEEE Journal on 
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 1228—
1234, 1996. 
[16] J. Galán-Jiménez and A. Gazo-Cervero, “Overview and 
Challenges of Overlay Networks”, International Journal of 
Computer Science & Engineering Survey (IJCSES) Vol.2, 
No.1, Feb 2011, DOI : 10.5121/ijcses.2011.2102 19 
[17] Z. Li, P. Mohapatra, and C. Chuah, Virtual Multi-Homing: 
On the Feasibility of Combining Overlay Routing with BGP 
Routing, University of California at DavisTechnical Report: 
CSE-2005-2, 2005. 
[18] P. Levis, M. Boucadair, P. Morrand, and P. Trimitzios,  “The 
Meta-QoS-Class Concept: a Step Towards Global QoS 
Interdomain Services”, Proc. of IEEE SoftCOM, Oct. 2004. 
[19] M.P. Howarth, et. al., “Provisioning for Interdomain Quality 
of Service: the MESCAL Approach”, IEEE Communications 
Magazine, June 2005, pp. 129-137. 
[20] L. FabioVerdi, and F. Magalhaes “Using Virtualization to 
Provide Interdomain QoS-enabled Routing”, Journal of 
Networks, April 2007, pp. 23-32. 
[21] ENTHRONE, 
End-to-End 
QoS 
through 
Integrated 
Management of Content, Networks and Terminals, FP6 
project, www.ist-enthrone.org/ (last access May 2012). 
[22] M. Boucadair, et al., “A Framework for End-to-End Service 
Differentiation: Network Planes and Parallel Internets”, IEEE 
Communications Magazine, Sept. 2007, pp. 134-143. 
[23] Z. Wang,  J. Crowcroft, “Quality-of-service routing for 
supporting multimedia applications”, IEEE Journal on 
Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 1228—
1234, 1996. 
[24] A. Haider, Richard Potter and A. Nakao, “Challenges in 
Resource Allocation in Network Virtualization”, 20th ITC 
Specialist Seminar, 18.-20. May 2009, Hoi An, Vietnam, 
http://www.itcspecialistseminar.com/paper/itcss09Haider.pdf. 
                                                           
 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-204-2
INTERNET 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Evolving Internet

