Collective Intelligent Management of Freight Trains' Flow  
Boris Davydov  
Institute of Natural Science  
Far Eastern State Transport University 
Khabarovsk, Russian Federation 
e-mail: dbi@rambler.ru  
 
Abstract—The paper describes method and criteria for 
assessing the quality of freight trains’ traffic dispatching. The 
main idea is to make the maximum profit for the rail operator 
through 
the 
compromising 
decisions 
between 
regional 
(commercial) and local traffic dispatchers. We use results of 
the game theory and the operations research method (AHP) to 
find optimal trains’ traffic adjustments. The game model of 
joint decision making is used to overcome the internal conflict 
between dispatchers. It is helpful to use the increment of local 
profit as a criterion for assessing the quality of traffic 
controller’s decisions. We also describe the modified AHP 
method oriented for the efficient on-line management. We 
present an example of the hierarchy model and results of the 
decisions efficiency assessment for the typical situation of 
freight trains traffic. Rational use of computing abilities of the 
decision support tools together with collective intelligence 
allow to increase quality of decisions on settlement difficult 
conflicts between trains. 
Keywords-Trains’ traffic; real-time management; railway 
dispatching; optimal decision making; transportation economics 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The main function of the operative train traffic 
management is solving two problems. The first problem is 
how to organize the best transportation service for consumers 
(passengers, cargo owners). First of all, the management 
provides high passenger trains’ punctuality. The second 
condition is meeting the requirements of railroad operator in 
getting profit from the transportation process realization. 
This is mainly attained by the rational organization of the 
freight trains stream passing. 
The need for operational management arises owing to 
disturbances which are caused by repair breaks, technical 
failures and errors of operational personnel. Failures are 
characterized by a high variety of variants and there are 
many ways of their elimination. Besides, it is known that 
information about railroad situation is often incomplete. This 
leads to the adoption of the optimum decision whose result is 
overcoming of an arising problem.. 
The analysis of the researches and developments in the 
related field allows us to make the following conclusion: 
nowadays it is impossible to make the full automation in real 
time for train traffic. The effective way to solve the problem 
is to take the decision through the man-machine dialogue. 
Numerous researches all over the world are devoted to 
the optimization problem and to effective management of 
railway traffic. The present work carries out the analysis of 
the joint passenger/freight traffic effective management with 
the use of intelligent computer support. 
We formulate an optimization problem in which at least 
two agents – regional and section traffic manager – control 
trains movement. Regional dispatcher (RD) objective is to 
maximize the line productivity, sometimes without taking 
the local section effectiveness into account. Regional 
dispatcher is given the authority to control the trains set 
repositioning.  Section dispatcher (SD) has the opportunity to 
improve the operations by prescribing the rational headways 
and by solving the local conflicts. There are many cases 
when infrastructure managers are involved into the decision 
making process.   
The developed model of the interacting parties gives the 
opportunity to provide the cooperative way to resolve the 
working conflict between RD and SD and to take the optimal 
decisions by using the analytic hierarchy process (AHP). 
 
The paper is structured as follows: Section II presents the 
specificity of trains’ traffic operative management on the 
main railways.  In Section III, we present the overview of the 
methods of conflicts resolution to the trains’ movement in 
the railway section. Section IV describes the modes of 
operation and economic performance criteria of the railway. 
We also show the conflict solution algorithm that uses the 
game theoretic approach. In Section V, we present the trains’ 
control model, based on the analytical hierarchy process 
(AHP-approach). Algorithm, based on AHP, delivers agreed 
decisions of rail managers. An example of using AHP-model 
are presented in Section VI, show the effectiveness of the 
proposed approach. The paper ends with conclusions, the 
main one being the following. The hierarchy model and 
man-machine dialogue promotes adoption of effective 
decisions and the subsequent fine adjustments. 
II. 
BACKGROUND  
Many 
of 
conventional 
main 
railways 
(Russian, 
American, Chinese etc.) are characterized by intensive joint 
passenger and freight traffic with prevalence of a freight 
segment. The basis of freight traffic is heavy trains. Dense 
railway system with the intensive passenger flows, similar to 
European railroads, is available only in nearest areas of the 
large cities. All the above define the specificity of trains’ 
traffic operative management on the main railways. There 
are many differences in the passenger and freight rail line 
traffic dispatching. First of all, passenger traffic requires high 
micro-punctuality. It is not true for the conventional freight 
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

trains traffic. Railway operative planners often do not take 
these differences into consideration. Nonoptimal adjustments 
and economical losses are the consequences of this 
incomprehension.   
III. 
OVERVIEW OF THE RELATED LITERATURE 
Many authors consider the problem of conflict resolution 
in real-time on the railroads [1-4]. Most of them use the 
determined modeling of the railway traffic. This approach 
allows accurate predicting of the future evolution of the 
traffic on the basis of the actual train positions and speeds, 
signaling and safety system constraints. Computerized 
supporting system operates with accurate input data. If input 
data is incomplete or indistinct, it is unlikely that the 
solutions provided by the DSS will be effective. It is known 
that the additional real-world constraints such as commercial 
interests and human behaviors are not taken into attention by 
the support tools. It is necessary to remove this fundamental 
disadvantage by the use of professionals’ experience and 
intuition. 
Criteria of a freight trains’ traffic control is different from 
the passenger one. There are a few works devoted to this 
topic [5-8]. The works mentioned do not demonstrate the 
adequate formulation of economic quality indicator of 
dispatching. This paper gives a novel economic model and 
indicator which enables to make effective freight traffic 
adjustments.     
There are many works in the field of collective decisions 
making [9, 10]. Most of them describe the approaches which 
demand much time for the problem analysis. Up to now, 
there a few works devoted to the collective decision-making 
whose purpose is intellectual 
support of real-time 
transportations management. These researches show that it is 
effective to resort to the possibilities of the analytical 
hierarchy process (AHP) for operative personnel viewpoints 
coordination. A wide range of AHP problems and 
applications has been described in edited volumes and books 
(e.g., [11-13]). Some of them [14-18] are devoted to 
aggregating individual judgments. But a fast coordination 
approach is not known to be effective in wide practice. This 
work contributes to ﬁll the gap between theory and practice 
of train operative management by the human and machine 
intelligent interaction. 
IV. 
TRAINS’ TRAFFIC OPTIMIZING CRITERIA 
Trains’ traffic on conventional rail lines - from the point 
of view of operative management - is divided into two 
segments. Trains of the passenger segment are defined by the 
highest priority. Their passing through the railway section is 
carried out by using any resources (free ways, additional 
fuel, etc.) when failure occurs. Unlike passenger trains the 
stream of the freight trains can move more economically. 
Therefore the first stage of formulating the optimization 
problem for the traffic control area is to set the specific 
criteria: punctuality of trains’ movement, section throughput 
or local economic efficiency. 
The failures sharply change movement conditions of the 
rail section. In these cases the dispatching personnel ought to 
repair the schedule to provide minimum losses of the 
throughput and the expenses. Modified operative train 
schedule for a section movement is under construction in a 
real time. The choice of the best variant from a number of 
possible decisions is being represented as the optimization 
problem. The losses of the throughput and expenses may 
serve as the criteria for optimization. 
The provision of rational modes of trains’ traffic on a 
railway section is an important component of an operative 
management. On the one hand, the management should 
"construct" a chain of train-units to minimize conflicts 
between trains. This purpose is reached by transmitting 
commands to locomotives. These commands correspond to 
the developed dispatching plan. On the other hand, each train 
may be regarded as an independent unit and its movement 
should be optimal. Both degree of safety and power 
efficiency may be used here as criteria for a traffic 
optimality. 
Cost-effective traffic management is the choice of 
adjusting actions that is aimed at providing the minimum 
economic losses caused by train delays. The optimization 
criterion is needed in order to solve the problem of searching 
the ways of effective process management. In this case the 
most efficient development of the process is expected. 
Economical indexes and reliability rate are usually used as 
criteria of the industrial processes flow and systems 
operating. 
Fundamental criteria of the railway functioning quality 
are the following: 
-  operational safety; 
-  railway section capacity;  
- economic effectiveness of handling trains along the 
section. 
First of all, the capacity criterion is used in those sections 
which are characterized by the large volume of passenger 
and freight traffic. There are few possibilities for an 
operating cost saving under the heavy traffic. 
The quality of movement of the passenger trains or group 
of trains is determined by the degree of correspondence of 
the real timetable (stations arrival and departure times) to the 
normative (scheduled) timetable. Assessment of passenger 
timetable is given by the train operating reliability index 
[17]. 
Punctuality as the requirement to the freight services 
movement recedes into the background. The main issue is 
prevention of unplanned stops, slowdowns of trains and 
therefore the loss of time and energy. The trains’ trajectories 
on a railroad section can be chosen rather arbitrarily. This 
flexibility is particularly important in situations where you 
need to prevent future failure of movement or propagation of 
an already existing fault in the chain of trains. The 
optimization problem solution allows assigning such 
schedule to each train that will minimize the losses of time 
and energy on the entire packet of trains. 
 
The following optimization criteria are appropriate for 
adjusting the timetable of freight traffic: 
- best utilization of train operating productivity – 
ensuring maximum volume of freight and empty cars traffic; 
-  cost-effective operating  in the period of weak traffic. 
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

 
     a)            
b) 
     c) 
Figure 1.  Schedule’s fragments: a) normative; b) sparse timetable; c) 
enhanced travel times 
The first criterion is used when traffic volume is 
approaching to the theoretical capacity of the railway as a 
limit. Cost minimization comes to the background during 
these periods. This operation mode of the railroad is called 
extensive. 
Economical mode is established when the flow density 
of freight trains falls. During this period traffic controllers 
can use non-standard (decelerated) schedules for one or more 
trains which allow large energy savings. Variants of the train 
timing for the above mentioned section operations are shown 
on Figure 1. Regional traffic operator specifies one of these 
modes for every up-coming hour. 
Regional traffic operator organizes and controls the 
functioning of extensive segment of trains’ stream. Local 
dispatcher controls the efficient trains’ movement. It is a 
basis for the collective management paradigm. 
Best economic effect can be obtained using a rational 
combination of trains Next that represents an extensive 
segment and trains Necon with economy movement. The train 
traffic separation into two segments can be viewed as a game 
problem the aim of which is to mitigate the conflict between 
the managers [18]. 
We suggest a new economic efficiency criterion, which is 
used to find a decision for trains’ traffic regulation. It is 
helpful to use the increment of local profit ΔB  as a criterion 
for assessing the quality of traffic controller’s decisions who 
regulates the freight trains flow on the section [19]: 
 
ΔE
ΔI
ΔB


, 
 
where ΔI  is the change of an operator company's 
income because of the realized adjustment; 
ΔE
 is the additional expenses for making the 
adjustment. 
The optimal variant is chosen from the range of feasible 
decisions according to the maximum of efficiency function: 
ΔB  max
 . 
The area of the solutions for the ratio choice of Next and 
Necon in the flow of freight trains is shown on the Edgeworth-
Bowley diagram (Figure 2). The diagram includes all 
possible combinations of the decisions in the game – i. e. 
shares of economical (Necon ) and fast (Next ) freight trains in 
the aggregate flow. Coordinates (
a10
, 
b10
) are valid for the 
strategy of the fast (extensive) segment. 
A
B
a10
b11
O0
Fast trains 
isoquanta
Economical 
trains 
isoquanta
Agreement curve
a11
b10
O1
 
Figure 2.  Edgeworth-Bowley diagram for the variants of the train traffic 
management strategy 
The method of choosing a compromising decision which 
meets the condition of maximum corporation gain is given 
by Kolemaev [20]. It is shown that the optimal decisions 
according to Pareto principle are located on the contractual 
curve. This curve (AB line) is shown on the Edgeworth-
Bowley diagram. 
The choice of a decision lying on the AB is accompanied 
by severe competition between the parties. More mild 
interaction and cooperation between the players occur when 
the source point is chosen beyond this curve. The moving 
from this point along the line of equal output (isoquantum) 
provides way of increasing the second player gain without 
influence on the interests of the first player. Figure 2 shows 
the isoquanta which is corresponded with the game tactics of 
the each game participant. 
We should note that this feature allows dispatchers to 
find the optimal decision without the players’ participation. 
This means that the dispatchers elaborate compromising 
decision on defining the structure of the trains flow in the 
majority of typical situations.  
The sizes of the extensive and economical segments 
obtained through the game analysis are used further as the 
local priorities of the second level when calculating the 
resultant vector of the optimizing problem. 
V. 
MODEL OF THE FREIGHT TRAINS’ MANAGEMENT  
We formulate an optimization problem in which two 
agents control the trains’ movement. The objective of one of 
them (regional traffic dispatcher - RD) is to maximize the 
line productivity, at the same time without taking the local 
section effectiveness into account. RD is given the authority 
to control the trains pool repositioning.  Another one (section 
dispatcher - SD) has the possibility to improve the operations 
by the rational headways prescriptions and passing trains 
over a section. This means that trains can travel on less than 
maximum velocity to minimize fuel consumption. The 
suggested approach in comparison with the traditional 
dispatching approach is a potentially cost-effective technique 
for the control of trains’ movement in a real environment.  
Operation decisions on traffic management are often 
made under the conditions of shortage of information and 
time. In complicated and non-standard situations two or 
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

more dispatchers participate in the decision making. The 
majority of factors involved in the optimization task are 
defined indistinctly and there is a discrepancy in how 
different people evaluate their influence on the traffic. 
Operation decisions on traffic management are often 
made under the conditions of shortage of information and 
time. In complicated and non-standard situations two or 
more dispatchers participate in the decision making. The 
majority of factors involved in the optimization task are 
defined indistinctly and there is a discrepancy in how 
different people evaluate their influence on the traffic. 
The choice of priority resolution among a row of 
alternative variants given poorly formalized or insufficient 
information about the subject is made through employing the 
analytical hierarchy process (AHP by T. Saaty [12]). The 
basic framework is a benefit/cost analysis. The last 
mentioned is used as a priorities-determining method in 
relation to the operational constraints, specialties, actors and 
their preferences. 
This paper presents an attempt to employ the AHP 
method in the problem of taking rational decisions on-line 
which are adopting in current conditions. The dispatcher who 
operates 
the 
freight 
trains 
traffic 
resolves 
several 
heterogeneous optimization tasks simultaneously. Не has 
little time to think out each decision thoroughly. Therefore 
the algorithm of his dialogue with the computer system 
which prompts the variants of adjusting actions and evaluates 
their efficiency must be maximally simplified.   
Analytical hierarchy process formulates a problem which 
should be decomposed into elements belonging to different 
hierarchical levels. Level I present the general goal (the 
choice of an optimal variant) and it is called the focus of the 
problem. Level II (the subgoal level) comprises the row of 
the scenarios which includes both extensive (fast) and 
economy segments of train movement.  The lower level (the 
level of politics) – covers the variants of the resolutions 
which are compared with each other.   
The hierarchy of the operating process of freight trains 
focuses either on volume of the traffic passed or on profits of 
shipping operations (Figure 3). The weights of the variants 
are defined on the basis of judgments of persons (or group of 
people) when using АНР method. They make a decision by 
the way of determination the mutual priorities of the 
elements of the hierarchy.  
Process effectiveness
Economic
freight trains
Fast 
freight trains
Crew’s 
working time
Train 
conditions
Train 
priority
Stations 
condition
Intertrain 
influence
Level I
Focus
Level II
Scenario
Level III
Restrictions
Level IV
Politics
Train №1
Train №2
  
Figure 3.  Hierarchy of the freight train traffic management 
These people (experts) make use of their knowledge, 
experience and intuition to define the weights of the 
elements of the lower level with respect to the criteria of 
higher level. They employ the method of pair comparison 
which provides the numerical evaluations of the judgments. 
The priority of each policy, i.e., choice of the decision 
variant, is determined through employing the procedure of 
synthesis of multiple judgments. This procedure is based on  
the  weighing formula which gives relative weights 
iY   
of each variant: 
k
n
jk
i
x
x
Y



 , 
where n – number of criteria; 
        
xik
 - local priority of  j policy (lower level); 
         
kx  - local priority of k criterion (upper level). 
Hierarchy analysis allows us to outline the ways of 
relieving of the internal conflict within the system. In order 
to achieve this, the degree of influence of each actor on the 
process is determined according to the AHP technique. The 
results of modeling and the outcomes of real situations are 
also compared. This helps to substantiate compromise 
resolutions of the problem.   
When process deviates the standard condition there is a 
need of intervention of the dispatcher. These regulations may 
be an unplanned stopping of a freight train or its new 
scheduled departure from the station. It also may be a 
passing priority change of consecutive freight trains.    
Selection of a specific train which would provide the best 
result is more complicated problem. It is reasonable to 
resolve this optimization problem with the help of modified 
hierarchy model.    
The analysis shows that the hierarchy of the train traffic 
management coincides with the inverse AHP. Such process 
models the desirable future; this allows us to define the 
priorities of the policies – operations decisions which lead to 
the achievement of the desired resolution.   
The type of criterion for the forthcoming period is set by 
the Chief (regional) dispatcher. This period may comprise 3 
or 6 hours; in certain cases it may be diminished to 1 hour. 
The scenario of the train passing process (Level II) implies 
rational combination of freight trains which are let through at 
an accelerated pace and the trains of economic (standard, 
decelerated) movement. The schedule of the latter trains is 
established in the way to obtain maximum saving of 
electricity or fuel. It is obvious that the mode of economical 
passing is reasonable during the slump in the intensity of the 
traffic.  
Revenues from shipping operations decrease due to little 
number of trains when the saving regime is employed. 
Nevertheless additional profit can be obtained at this period 
due to significant decrease in operational costs.  
The trains, one of which requires such a regulation, are 
considered as the variants of decision (Level IV). Train 
dispatcher chooses the criterion for evaluation of the weight 
of each decision (Level III) in every specific situation. If the 
problem is connected with the need for stop at the station the 
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

priority will be given to the train whose service is the most 
urgent. Dispatcher expresses his understanding through 
filling the table of pair comparison.  
Standard АНР consider the structure of the hierarchy 
unchanged during the whole period of analysis. The number 
of criteria for each level of hierarchy is representative to 
cover all the variants of situations which can occur on the 
section. The size of pairwise matrix proves to be large which 
leads to substantial expenditures of experts’ time and effort.  
The suggested specialized model differs from the 
traditional model in the following way. The structure of the 
hierarchy is not fixed. It changes depending on the situation 
in the section under operation. These changes are caused by 
rapid and uncontrolled restrictions. The choice of the suitable 
criterion corresponding to a situation is made. Commercial 
priority may be of the most importance for one train and 
technical condition is suited to others. Dispatcher has the 
information about the restrictions which take place. 
Therefore it is reasonable to charge them with the selection 
of the type of problem (restriction) which is taken into 
consideration in each specific situation. The dispatcher 
makes the choice through entering the corresponding 
indication in the adviser-program. The chosen restriction is 
used then as a criterion for comparison of trains. This 
algorithm corresponds with the logic usually employed by 
dispatcher. The volume of man-computer interactions is 
minimal.  
VI. 
EXAMPLE OF THE DISPATCHING HIERARCHY MODEL 
UTILIZATION 
As an example of the modified AHP method, we show 
one of typical problems on decision-making on a overcome 
of an unplanned obstacle to movement of a stream of trains. 
The restriction makes the train dispatcher stop one of the 
freight trains at a station. Rational decision is to select the 
train whose stop will cause minimal losses.  
The choice is made among three freight trains. Train 1 is 
a container train with low weight but an extremely large 
length (100 cars). Two other trains have small length; one of 
them is a heavy haul train (6,000 tones), the other is of 
medium weight. The restriction is the length of the tracks at 
the some stations. Station M is the only station where the 
length of the tracks allows stopping the long train.  
Table 1 shows the source data used in decision making 
and the results of analysis for the situations with intensive 
and weak train traffic. The first rational decision (weak flow) 
is to stop the train №3; the opposite adjustment (intensive 
flow) is to stop the train №1.  
TABLE I.  
SOURCE DATA AND RESULTS OF ANALYSIS FOR THE 
DECISION ABOUT AN UNPLANNED STOP OF THE FREIGHT TRAIN 
Trains 
Com-
mercial 
value 
Length 
of 
train 
Additional 
expenses 
for stop 
Priority 
Intensive 
flow 
Weak 
flow 
№1 
1.0 
1.0 
30 
3 
1 
№2 
0.5 
0.7 
100 
2 
3 
№3 
0.9 
0.7 
60 
1 
2 
 
In the latter case the commercial interest to deliver 
containers in time will not be breached. Expenditures on 
passing the trains through will also be lower.  
Real testing of the presented methodology was carrying 
out on the Transsiberian main rail line. It is shown the 10 
percent reduction of unplanned freight trains stops and up to 
8 percent energy economy. 
CONCLUSIONS  
We presented a new technique of realization of traffic 
control of freight trains’ operative management which is 
based on economic basis. The criterion of economic 
efficiency to make optimum adjustments into trains’ traffic 
was formulated. 
We also offered game approach for selection of the 
compromise dispatching decision. It will be effective for the 
short time traffic planning. The hierarchy model and man-
machine dialogue promote adoption of effective decisions 
and the subsequent fine adjustments. 
The developed modification of AHP allows making a 
compromise decisions on regulation of a freight stream 
through dialogue between heads of control center. Dialogue 
is implemented rationally with attraction of computer 
abilities and hierarchy model. 
The number of interactions of train dispatcher with the 
computerized "adviser" is minimized due to game approach. 
In ordinary cases dispatcher need to execute only two choice 
operations for each pair of trains: type of problem and local 
priority of trains. 
Real testing of the economical supported dispatching on 
the Russian main rail lines show the 10 percent reduction of 
unplanned freight trains stops and great energy economy.  
The reported study was partially supported by RFBR, 
research project № 12-08-98513-р_vostok_а. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. D'Ariano, F. Corman, D. Pacciarelli, and M. Pranzo, 
Reordering and Local Rerouting Strategies to Manage Train 
Traffic in Real Time, Transportation Science, Vol. 42, No. 4, 
November 2008, pp. 405-419 
[2] M. J. Dorfman and J. Medanic, Scheduling trains on a railway 
network using a discrete event model of railway traffic, 
Transportation Research, Part B, 2004, 38, pp. 81–98 
[3] X. Delorme, Modelisation et resolution de problemes lies a 
lexploitation 
d’infrastructures 
ferroviaires, 
PhD 
thesis, 
University of Valenciennes et du Hainaut Cambresis, 2003 
[4] V. A. Ivnitskiy and A. A. Poplavskiy, The problem of 
transition to the informational-managing regime in the system 
of the transportation process operational managment, Vestnik 
VNIIZhT, vol.1, 2007, pp. 15-21 (in russian).  
[5] T. Richter, Systematic analysis of transit freight train 
Performance, / 4th Int. seminar on Railway Operations 
Modeling and Analysis, Book of abstracts, Rome,  Feb. 2011, 
p. 35 
[6] M. Carey, and I. Crawford, Scheduling trains on a network of 
busy complex stations, Transportation Research, Part B, 41 
(2): 2007, pp.159–178 
[7] B. D.Nikiforof, E. M.Tishkin, V. M.Makarov, and V. 
S.Klimanov,  Trains’ traffic management on the railway 
direction of transportation, Railway transport, vol.2, 1982, pp. 
17-24 (in russian). 
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

[8] V. A. Ivnitskiy, Speed outstanding risk of freight trains due to 
technical failures, Vestnik VNIIZhT, vol.1, 2012, pp.33-37 
(in russian). 
[9] O. Meixner, Fuzzy AHP Group Decision Analysis and its 
Application 
for 
the 
Evaluation 
of 
Energy 
Sources, 
Proceedings of the International Symposium on the Analytic 
Hierarchy Process, 2010, pp. 114-119. 
[10] L. Mikhailov, Group prioritization in the AHP by fuzzy 
preference programming method, Computers & Operations 
Research, 31., 2004, pp. 293–301. 
[11] G. S. Maltugueva and A.U. Yurin,  The algorithm of 
collective choice on the basis of the generalized rankings for 
decision-making 
support,Modern 
technologies. 
System 
analysis. The simulation, vol.3, 2009, pp.57-62 (in russian). 
[12] T. L. Saaty and L. Vargas, Models, Methods, Concepts and 
Applications of the Analytic Hierarchy Process, Kluwer, 
Boston, MA., 2000, 381 p. 
[13] E. Forman and S. Gass, The analytic hierarchy process: an 
exposition, Operations Research, Vol. 49, 2001,  pp. 469-486. 
[14] E. Forman and K. Paniwati, Aggregating individual 
judgments and priorities with the analytical hierarchy process, 
European Journal of Operational Research, Vol. 108., 1998, 
pp. 165-169. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[15] A. Shahin and M. A. Mahbod, Prioritization of key 
performance indicators. An integration of analytical hierarchy 
process and goal setting, International Journal of Productivity 
and Performance Management, Vol. 56 No. 3, 2007, pp. 226-
240. 
[16] K. Suryadi, Empirical Experience on Combining AHP with 
Non-ANP Decision Models in Managing Cross Functional 
Conflict, Proceedings of the International Symposium on the 
Analytic Hierarchy Process, 2007. pp. 183-191. 
[17] A. P. Kovalev, The timetable reliability and passenger trains 
speed volume estimation, Railway Transport, Russia, 2006, 
№5, pp. 42-45 (in russian). 
[18] B. I. Davydov, V. I. Chebotarev, The gaming solving of the 
problem of trains’ traffic dispatching, Transport Bulletin, 
Russia, 2007, №10, pp. 37-39 (in russian). 
[19] B. I. Davydov, Economically effective trains traffic 
managment, Railway Economic, Russia, 2012, №3, pp. 28-37 
(in russian). 
[20] Mathematical methods and models of the operations research, 
ed. by V. Kolemaev, UNITI-DANA, Moscow, 2008, 350 p. 
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

