Trust on the Internet: How the French ccTLD .FR Went From a Remarkable to 
a Speculative System
Clement Genty, Henri Samier, Simon Richir 
Arts et Métiers ParisTech, LAMPA, 
Angers, France 
email: clement.genty@ensam.eu
Abstract—The Domain Name System (DNS), was 
invented in 1983 because it was too hard for the human 
brain to memorize IP addresses. The DNS works as a phone 
directory, setting a link between letters, the domain name, 
and an IP address. Layered and structured since its creation, 
the domain name made it possible to identify the linked 
resource and to have confidence in its content. However, this 
classification system was quickly replaced a big bang of 
naming possibilities, where the first comer is the first and   
sole served. This survey aims to study the repercussing of the 
naming rules of the French ccTLD, the .FR. As an 
introduction and in section I, we will see how an area of trust 
has been created through the “.FR”. Then, through the 
section III and IV, how the easing of registration and use 
rules initiated confusion over the identification and trust by 
the domain name. Finally, we propose three ways to create 
the identification-trust link. 
Domain Name System – Internet Trust – ccTLD – Internet 
Economics – Web Privacy – Semantic Web 
I.
INTRODUCTION
In 1984, J. Postel and J. Reynolds wrote the RFC920 
[1], establishing the first domain names extensions. At the 
time, the idea was to read this sequence of alphanumeric 
characters from right to left, the extensions hierarchizing 
the domain names. COM, ORG, NET, EDU, MIL and 
ARPA became the first [2]. They will remain for posterity 
as generic constituents, called  Generic Top Level Domain 
(gTLD). 
Figure 1. Architectures of domain names MAIL.EXAMPLE.COM, 
WWW.EXAMPLE.NET and NICE.FR 
 
Two years later, Jon Postel created the first 
geographical Top Level Domain, grouped by countries and 
territories. This will be the ccTLD, Country-Code Top 
Level Domain. Using the ISO3166 postal standard [3], he 
picked the two-character country codes to create 243 
extensions. This amount evolved after that, following the 
geopolitic situation. The fall of the Soviet Union and 
Yugoslavia has partially affected this list. Figure 1 gives 
an example of tree structure of the DNS. 
II.
FRENCH SITUATION
 
Regarding the .FR, a contact will be made between 
Postel and the INRIA, a French research institute 
speacialized in Computer Science and Automation, to 
delegate the French ccTLD. 
 
Annie Renard and Jean-Yves Babonneau managed the 
.FR since September 2, 1986. Not being guided by any 
mimicry, the two researchers chose a hierarchical 
organization made of sub-domains and “le droit au nom”, 
the entitlement to a domain name. Thus, the major part of 
professions, associations and governmental organizations 
will have their own private sub-domain name space. This 
structuring led them to contact the National Lawyer Union, 
representing the lawyer, the order of Geomatics 
Engineering Union, INPI, the French WIPO, etc. 
 
These rules of registration were listed in a naming 
charter where the “droit au nom” prevailed. Each entity 
had to respect the structure of the .FR ccTLD. Some users, 
however, preferred the use of a .COM domain name, less 
expensive and offering less restrictive registration 
conditions than the .FR, and unexposed to such 
administrative procedures. 
 
Faced with these criticisms, the INRIA decided to take 
actions: in 1997, its value fell by 23% and in 1998 by 22%. 
This situation made the registration of .FR domain names 
cheaper than .COM. 
 
To register a .FR domain name, the applicants had to 
be legal entities, to file a request by fax, which was 
individually checked before the registration. This 
administrative burden made the .FR domain name space 
less used, compared to European ones, less structured. The 
German ccTLD, .DE, allowed any registration since its 
delegation by Jon Postel, in November, 1986. Any 
applicants could have a domain name at the second level 
domain, i.e., directly in .DE. 
 
Despite the administrative load that it generated, the 
French system of the .FR avoided the problem of 
cybersquatting, which was in the interest of  domain names 
owners [4]. Indeed, the feeling of the trust in the .FR 
naming space was established. Similarly, numerous 
surveys highlighted the benefits of the French ccTLD. 
 
Pressures, whether administrative or mercantile made 
the AFNIC, the newly formed association managing the 
.FR, to abandon the old registration rules: deletion of the 
“droit au nom” in 2004, opening to private individuals in 
2006, deletion of most of the sub-domains in 2007 and 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-574-6
INTERNET 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Evolving Internet

allowance of one and two-characters domain names 
registration in 2014 [5]. 
 
The number of .FR domain names registrations became 
a Key Point Indicator for the AFNIC, as evidenced on its 
chief executive’s resume [6]. 
 
The liberalization of the French ccTLD, .FR, had an 
important influence on the strategy of deposits. Once a 
flagship and application of French research, the .FR is 
managed by a semi-state associated structure that cannot 
act against the loss of confidence in domain names. If 
everybody can register anything, the legitimacy has given 
way to speculation. 
 
The merchandising of computing resources, such as IP 
addresses [7] and now domain names, involves risks for 
the functioning of Internet [8]. 
 
Today, 3 million domain names are registered in .FR: 
60% by organizations, 40% by individuals. While the 
deposits are supposed to be only opened to European 
citizens, Australia and China represent respectively the 
eleventh and fourteenth place of the countries of 
registration [9]. 
 
The number of registrations in .FR naming space is 
similar to the Italian’s ccTLD. These figures, although 
apparently high, are considerably lower than those of 
Germany (.DE), 16 millions [10], and the Netherlands 
(.NL), 5.7 millions [11]. This situation has an important 
consequence on the identification-trust link, as showen in 
Figure 2. 
Figure 2. Identification-Trust link [12] 
 
Originally, the French extension .FR had two goals: 
•
Identification: people are able to know the 
associated content by reading the domain name; 
•
Trust: registration rules exist before each deposit. 
People can trust the authority of the registrant; 
III. IMPACT ON IDENTIFICATION
 
The absence of a naming charter defined for French 
administrative entities, apart from the .GOUV.FR sub-
domain, prevents the identification function of the domain 
name. Under the former AFNIC charter, French embassies 
were supposed to be named under the form AMBA-
YYY.FR, YYY being the name of the city or the country.  
Nowadays, embassies use the address AMBAFRANCE-
XX.ORG, where XX is the ISO3166 country code. 
•
Of the 209 domain names beginning with 
"AMBAFRANCE", only 149 are official; 
•
Of the 150 official websites of the Embassies, 
only 138 comply with the AMBAFRANCE-
XX.ORG charter; 
 
The registration under .ORG being open to all, the 
preventive filing of domain names is thus necessary, as 
France has done for North Korea, where it does not have 
an embassy. AMBAFRANCE-KP.ORG was registered on 
December, 19. 2000 by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  
In this case of French embassies, it is simply not 
possible to identify with certainty a website on the basis 
of its domain name. This situation exists since the 
liberalization of the French ccTLD .FR for commercial 
intent. 
France overseas, represented by ISO3166 codes, is 
also impacted by the lack of numerical coherence. 
•
Saint Pierre et Miquelon, Réunion, TAAF, 
Wallis-Futuna and Mayotte inherit of an open 
naming charter similar to that of the .FR; 
•
Guadeloupe, Martinique and French Guyana
have ccTLDs which are not managed by AFNIC 
despite the Postal and Telecommunications code 
provisions [13]; 
•
Saint-Barthelemy (.BL) and Saint-Martin (.MF) 
have non-delegated extension, despite the stated 
will of Saint-Barthelemy [14]; 
•
Clipperton (.CP) has a non-delegated ccTLD; 
NB: French Polynesia (.PF) and New Caledonia 
(.NC) are managed by other public bodies in agreement 
with the competent territorial authorities [15].
IV. IMPACT ON TRUST
      An Internet address can both inspire implicit 
confidence and be a lure that can disturb consumer 
information. Let us take the recent case of addresses on 
the subject of abortion. The voluntary termination of 
pregnancy, commonly written and called IVG in France, 
has been authorized in the country since 1975. Many 
Internet websites, using the government's communication 
codes, act as official information websites. This situation 
is an issue given that 80% of young women aged 15-30 
find the obtained information on the Internet credible. 
57% get information on health issues via the Internet [16]. 
It is thus essential to give them a technical tool to identify 
reliable information on the Internet, as search engines do 
not include the veracity of the words in the search results. 
As we can see in Figure 3, subdomains work. 
Conditions of the questionnaire: answer by form. 137 
students with an average age of 18 years: 90 women, 47 
men. 129 had their baccalaureate in 2016, 8 in 2015. 10 
passed their C2I, a French IT and Internet certificate., 127 
did not. One can thus define that it is a predominantly 
female population, being 18 years old and not being 
trained to the bases of the good understanding of the 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-574-6
INTERNET 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Evolving Internet

Internet. Task: Rank these websites according to the 
confidence level: 0-1-2-3 (0 for the website you trust the 
less, 3 the more). Respondents are not allowed to click on 
the links, only identification by the domain name is 
possible.
Domain name
Ranking
IVG.SOCIAL-SANTE.GOUV.FR 
2,27 
IVG.FR 
1,51 
ECOUTEIVG.ORG 
1,49 
IVG.NET 
1,07 
Figure 3. Ranking 
It can thus be noted that trust via the sub-domain 
“.GOUV.FR” is a reality. So-called "reserved" space, 
registration of domain names with this extension is only 
possible for the French Government. It is thus possible to 
develop and encourage the creation of spaces of trust.  
 
Confronted with AFNIC's encouraging press releases 
on the ".FR's confidence", it can be noted that this 
extension has a classification similar to the extension 
.ORG considered "open", although enjoying an apparent 
image of confidence. .NET, considered as an alternative to 
.COM, occupies the last place. 
V.
PROPOSALS
 
1. Creation of a French trust area
 
Faced 
with 
the 
difficulties 
generated 
by 
the 
liberalization of the .FR zone, which has become a 
commercial area, we now suggest using the .FX extension 
as a closed zone. The .FX extension, unused until now by 
France, originally represents metropolitan France. It is thus 
possible to use it as a hierarchical space with a right to the 
name for any holder of any right. Thus, through a logical 
hierarchy, it will be easy to define the legitimacy of 
depositors. 
Therefore, 
by 
creating 
and 
assigning 
namespaces for any user, France would become the first 
country to provide a domain name to its nationals: 
•
Free of a domain name and associated email 
address for any French entity or individual; 
•
Creation of a space of confidence, .FX, in 
addition to a commercial space, .FR; 
•
Strengthening of certain digital sovereignty in the 
face of confidentiality gaps (Yahoo, PRISM 
program, etc.); 
 
As the .FX extension is part of the ISO 3166 code, 
France does not have to pay fees to the ICANN as it would 
be if the country intended to generate a new gTLD. This 
new space could be funded by delegating another unused 
extension, .CP (originally meant to stand for the 
Clipperton atoll) to an interested organization or company, 
just as Norway allowed the Netherlands to manage the 
extension .BV (corresponding to the Bouvet island, BV 
meaning  besloten vennootschap, Ltd, in Dutch).  
  
Formerly, the length of hierarchical domain names   
appeared as redhibitory, at a time when users often had to 
manually type domain names into their browsers. 
However, in 2017, the access to the major part of the 
information on the Internet is carried out through a search 
engine, the domain name being mainly used to identify the 
source. This will make it easier to index and archive. 
 
As a conclusion, a major advertising campaign carried 
out by the APIE, could require depositors to use .FX 
instead of .FR. The rules of identification via the .FX space 
would be explained through the B2I and C2I, French IT 
and Internet Certificates [17].  
2. Fighting speculation in the area.
 
In order to strengthen the .FR zone, it is suggested to 
propose the registration of domain names in .FR for a 
decennial period, similar to trademarks functionment, 
instead of annual fees. The financial curb would reduce the 
number of speculative registrations, motivated by an 
attractive rate. The fact of having to spend ten times as 
much, admittedly for ten times more temporal coverage, 
will generate a financial mechanism of restraint. The 
commitment contracted for every ten years, may be paid in 
annual installments. 
 
A second step will be the regularization of domain 
name registrants, including the phasing out of domain 
names 
registered 
by 
non-European 
registrants. 
Alternatives, proposed by the registrars, exist, called local 
presences. The follow-up of the exit of Great Britain from 
the European Union will have to be carried out. 
 
3. Delegation of overseas extensions
 
With a view to territorial homogeneity, it is advisable 
to encourage the French Government to have the 
extensions of Guadeloupe, Martinique and French Guyana 
delegated by AFNIC. Similarly, Saint-Barthelemy and 
Saint-Martin will have to be represented by a TLD subject 
to the possibility of registrations. 
VI. CONCLUSION
These three proposals will serve to reinforce the French 
zones in the digital namespace. The proposed French 
system will be able to operate in the same way as the 
USA's system, which uses closed extensions (.GOV, .MIL, 
.EDU) and public (.COM, .BIZ, .US). It is essential today, 
in the face of the development of foreign solutions, to 
ensure digital sovereignty for France and its fellow 
citizens, through coherent and representative charters of 
qualifications and titles. 
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Postel and J. Reynolds, “Domain Requirements”, RFC920, 
October 1984 
[2]
J. Postel and J. Reynolds, ibid. 
[3]
ISO 3166 standard 
[4]
AFNIC, “Contrefaçon de marques et usurpation de noms de 
domaine, où en est la jurisprudence ?”, February 2001, available on 
http://www.afnic.fr/data/actu/public/2001/conference-marques-
noms-domaine-02-02-01.pdf [retrieved: June, 2017] 
[5]
AFNIC, “All about AFNIC Press kit”, April 2015, available on 
www.afnic.fr/medias/documents/dossiers_de_presse/afnic-press-
kit-2015-04.pdf [retrieved: June, 2017] 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-574-6
INTERNET 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Evolving Internet

[6]
AFNIC, 
“Mathieu 
Weill”, 
2014, 
available 
on 
www.afnic.fr/medias/documents/resume-mathieu-weill-ceo-
afnic.pdf [retrieved: June, 2017] 
[7]
P. Barbet, “Epuisement et marchandisation d’une ressource 
commune dans l’Internet: le cas des adresses IP”,Séminaire 
International Propriété et Communs, April 2013, available on 
www.mshparisnord.fr/ANR-PROPICE/25-
26_avril/barbet_adresses-IP.pdf [retrieved: June, 2017] 
[8]
P. Barbet, “Les conséquences de la marchandisation croissante des 
ressources essentielles au fonctionnement du réseau Internet”, 
Revue internationale de droit économique, tXXVII, pp. 301-323, 
2013 
[9]
AFNIC, “Open data AFNIC”, January 2017, available on 
opendata.afnic.fr/fr/produits-et-services/le-fr/opendata-fr.html 
[retrieved: June, 2017] 
[10] DENIC, “DENIC eG: Wir sind .de”, January 2017, available on 
www.denic.de/ [retrieved: June, 2017] 
[11] SIDN, “SIDN : Jouw wereld. Ons Domein”, January 2017, 
available on www.sidn.nl/ 
[12] C. Genty, H. Samier and ‘S. Richir’, “Noms de domaine et 
marques d'entreprise : de la disruption des politiques de nommage 
à celle des usages”, Colloque international de la Conception et 
Innovation (Confere; 23), Czech Republic, July 2016 
[13] “Ordonnance n° 2014-329 du 12 mars 2014 relative à l'économie 
numérique“, 
March 
2014, 
available 
on 
www.legifrance.gouv.fr/eli/ordonnance/2014/3/12/PMEX1402812
R/jo/texte [retrieved: June, 2017] 
[14] Collectivité de Saint-Barthélémy, “Délibération du Conseil 
territorial”, 
2012-031CT, 
May 
2012, 
available 
on 
www.comstbarth.fr/iso_album/2012-031_ct.pdf [retrieved: June, 
2017] 
[15] ITU, “Document pour l’atelier ccTLD, France”, March 2003, 
available 
on 
www.itu.int/itudoc/itu-t/workshop/cctld/cctld034-
fr.pdf [retrieved: June, 2017] 
[16] HCEfh, “ Rapport n°2013-0912-HCE-008 relatif à l’accès à 
l’IVG_Volet 1-Information sur l’avortement sur Internet”, 2013, 
available 
on 
www.haut-conseil-egalite.gouv.fr/IMG/pdf/hce-
rapport_ivg_et_internet_20130912_version_adoptee-3.pdf 
[retrieved: June, 2017] 
[17] Ministère de l’éducation nationale, de l’enseignement supérieur et 
de la recherche, “L’évaluation des compétences numériques”, 
available 
on 
www.education.gouv.fr/cid2553/le-brevet-
informatique-et-internet-b2i.html 
 
[retrieved: 
June, 
2017]
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-574-6
INTERNET 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Evolving Internet

