Friction Invariant Object Reconstruction Using a
Vibrissa-inspired Tactile Sensor Concept
Lukas Merker
Dept. of Mechanical Engineering
Technische Universit¨at Ilmenau
Ilmenau, Germany
e-mail: lukas.merker@tu-ilmenau.de
Joachim Steigenberger†
Institute of Mathematics
Technische Universit¨at Ilmenau
Ilmenau, Germany
Carsten Behn
Dept. of Mechanical Engineering
Schmalkalden University of Applied Sciences
Schmalkalden, Germany
†In memory of Univ.-Prof. em. Dr. rer. nat. habil. Joachim Steigenberger (1933–2021).
We miss his brilliant mind, his warm and humorous manner, his inspiring and constructive personality.
Abstract—Vibrissae-inspired sensor concepts hold potential of
complementing conventional sensors due to their collision ro-
bustness and increased near-ﬁeld scanning range. In general,
they consist of a slender elongated probe, one-sided attached to
some kind of measuring device. Making contact with an object,
the probe gets bent and transduces (mechanical) signals to its
support/the measuring device. Modeling this process analytically,
most approaches in literature are based on the assumption of an
ideal contact (no stiction or friction). Within the present paper,
we extend an existing tactile sensor model for object contour
scanning and reconstruction taking ﬁrst steps to implement fric-
tional effects (Coulomb’s law of friction). The probe is modeled
as a rod, which is one-sided clamped. Shifting the clamping
position relatively to the object of interest, represented by a
plane and strictly convex object contour, the rod sweeps along
the contour quasi-statically. This process is analyzed in two steps:
(1) simulating scanning sweeps in order to generate the support
reactions (observables) at the base of the rod theoretically,
assuming the object contour and the coefﬁcient of friction to
be known, (2) using the generated support reactions from the
previous step in order to reconstruct a sequence of contact points,
ﬁnally approximating the original object contour. Our simulations
suggest, that friction affects the observables but (surprisingly)
not the actual reconstruction error. Finally, we present a novel
approach for reconstructing friction parameters based on the
support reactions.
Keywords–Vibrissa; tactile sensor; object scanning; object re-
construction; friction invariance
I.
INTRODUCTION
Obstacle avoidance and object identiﬁcation is a key topic
in mobile robotics. Solving these tasks in our everyday life,
we humans beneﬁt from our sense of touch complementing
visual information. In the same way, robots could beneﬁt
from advanced tactile sensors complementing their optical
sensors. Beyond the human skin, another prominent natural
example functioning as tactile sensors are vibrissae (whiskers)
of rodents in animal kingdom. For instance, rats and mice are
capable of localizing objects in space based on few vibrissal
contacts [1]. As the vibrissal hair-shafts themselves consist of
dead tissue, the animals solely rely on the signals sensed by
receptors inside the support of each vibrissa, the Follicle-Sinus
Complex (FSC) [2]. This biological principle has frequently
been transferred to technical sensor concepts [3][4], which
basically all share a common structure: a more or less ﬂexible
probe, mimicking the vibrissal hair-shaft, one-sided attached to
some kind of measuring device, representing the FSC. Making
contact with an object of interest, the probe gets bent to varying
degrees. Measuring the support reactions (observables) at the
base of the rod, conclusions can be drawn about the contact po-
sition in space. Ultimately, a whole sequence of contact points
can be used to approximate the object’s shape [5]. Instead of
repeatedly tapping the object of interest with the probe as, e.g.,
in [6]–[10], one promising scanning strategy is to continuously
sweep the probe along the object. The advantage of the
sweeping procedure is its passive feasibility [11][12], e.g.,
using the robot movement as an actuation. Scanning objects via
sweeping typically includes large deformations of the probe,
whose analysis require nonlinear mechanical models. As such
models rarely have solutions expressible in analytical terms,
modeling approaches in literature frequently rely on numerics
right from the beginning, e.g., [10][12]–[14]. However, these
purely numerical approaches share the drawback of missing
some important insights and analytical relations of the scan-
ning and reconstruction process. In contrast to these largely
numerical models, the authors of [15] presented a continuum
model, consisting of a nonlinear Euler-Bernoulli bending rod,
whose deformation equations were derived analytically. Using
the measured support reactions at the base of the rod, the
authors formulated an Initial-Value Problem (IVP). Only at the
very end, numerical methods were used to integrate this IVP.
In doing so, the contact position along the rod (and ﬁnally in
space) was determined using a termination condition, that the
bending moment at the contact point is zero. A similar model
was used in [16] to analyze the problem of object scanning
and reconstruction fully analytically in two (inverse) steps:
•
step 1 – simulating scanning sweeps in order to
generate the support reactions (observables) at the base
of the rod theoretically, assuming the object contour
to be known, and
•
step 2 – using the generated support reactions from
the previous step in order to reconstruct a sequence
of contact points, ﬁnally approximating the original
object contour.
Step 2 shows strong similarity to the approach in [15] but
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-882-2
INTELLI 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

differs by solving the problem fully analytically. Without any
demonstration, the author of [16] claimed that the analytical
procedure provides the same reconstruction quality as the
numerical one used in [15]. However, as [16] is based on
the assumption of ideal contacts (no stiction or friction), this
statement should be viewed critically and veriﬁed using a
more realistic contact model. This is where the paper at hand
steps in, presenting a preliminary simulation-based study in the
development of a more complex analytical vibrissa-inspired
sensor model that allows to reconstruct friction and object
shape information simultaneously.
The remainder of the paper at hand is structured as follows:
In Section II, we present the vibrissa-inspired sensor model
deriving the deformation equations of the probe in contact
with an object. Following the procedure of [16], we separately
analyze the above-mentioned steps 1 and 2 in Section II-A
and Section II-B, respectively. Finally, Section III-C presents
a novel approach of reconstructing friction parameters during
object scanning. In Section III, simulation results are presented
and analyzed with the overall goal of verifying some analytical
key conditions of [16] in the presence of friction presenting a
reconstruction benchmark between [15] and [16]. Finally, the
results of the present paper are summed up and some future
research subjects are identiﬁed in Section IV.
II.
MODELING
A single highly ﬂexible probe is modeled as a slender
Euler-Bernoulli bending rod of length L consisting of a
homogeneous and isotropic material. Its mechanical behavior
is basically determined by a constant second moment of area
Iz and a constant Young’s modulus E. According to [16],
we introduce the following units of measure to use only
dimensionless system parameters:
[length] := L,
[force] := EIz
L2 ,
[moment] := EIz
L
(1)
Considering the rod in a ﬁxed (x, y)-coordinate system, we
suppose the lower end of the rod (“foot, base”) to be clamped
at some point (x0, 0), see Figure 1. The process of object
scanning is considered quasi-statically. It is realized by in-
crementally shifting the clamping position x0 (input variable)
relative to the object. Consequently, sweeping along the object
contour, the rod gets bent and transmits mechanical signals to
the clamping. The resulting support reactions f0x, f0y and
m0z at the clamping are considered as the observables. The
object is assumed as a rigid body with a strictly convex
contour function g : x 7→ g(x). Strict convexity is required
for two reasons: Firstly, it prevents simultaneous multi-point
contacts between the rod and the object [17]. Secondly, it
allows to express the contour function in dependence on its
slope angle ˜α ∈ [− π
2 , π
2 ] and, thus, we come up with the handy
parametrization: (x, g(x)) 7→ (ξ(˜α), η(˜α)) [16]. In contrast to
[16], where the resulting contact force ⃗f is assumed to be
perpendicular to the proﬁle contour tangent, we do not assume
such an ideal contact here. Instead, we consider the contact
force ⃗f = ⃗fn + ⃗ft as composed of a normal component ⃗fn
and a tangential component ⃗ft with the coefﬁcient of friction
µ = |⃗ft|
|⃗fn| = tan(ζ), where ζ denotes the friction angle. Then,
inspired by Figure 2, the contact force writes:
⃗f = ⃗fn + ⃗ft = f[sin(α)⃗ex − cos(α)⃗ey]
(2)
with α = ˜α + ζ.
Figure 1. Mechanical model of a rod sweeping along a strictly convex object
contour function.
Apart from this, the derivation of the modeling equations
describing the elastic line of the rod is fully analogue with [16].
Therefore, it is roughly outlined here: Firstly, the elastic line is
parameterized by means of its slope angle ϕ in dependence on
its natural coordinate arc-length s ∈ [0, 1]. Using (2) in order
to determine the bending moment m(s), we take advantage of
Euler’s constitutive law to express the curvature κ(s) = m(s)
of the elastic line. Finally, introducing an additional differential
equation for the curvature, we end up in a system of nonlinear
Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs) of ﬁrst order:
(a) x′(s) = cos(ϕ(s))
(b) y′(s) = sin(ϕ(s))
(c) ϕ′(s) = κ(s)
(d) κ′(s) = f cos(ϕ(s) − α)
(3)
Remark 1: It is important to understand, that, although (2)
and (3) have the same appearence as in [16], the angle α ≥ ˜α
is deﬁned in a completely different way, no longer representing
the slope angle ˜α of the proﬁle contour.
A. Step 1: generating the support reactions theoretically
For generating the support reactions theoretically, we as-
sume the object contour function as well as the coefﬁcient
of friction µ to be known. Within the present paper, we
exemplarily consider an object contour function represented
by the semi-circle
g : x 7→ g(x) = yc −
p
r2 − (x − xc)2
(4)
with radius r and center coordinates xc and yc. During
the scanning sweep, a distinction is made between tip and
tangential contacts, see Figure 2:
(a)
(b)
Figure 2. Comparison between (a) tip contact (s = 1), and (b) tangential
contact (s = s1) with angular relationships.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-882-2
INTELLI 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

•
For tip contacts, the position of contact along the rod
s1 = 1 is known, but the angle ϕ1 = ϕ(1) > ˜α is
unknown
•
In turn, for tangential contacts, the position of contact
along the rod s1 is unknown, but instead, we have the
angular relationship ϕ = ˜α.
Finally, these observations result in the following Boundary-
Conditions (BCs) at the clamping (5), for tip (6) and tangential
contacts (7):
(a) x(0) = x0
(b) y(0) = 0
(c) ϕ(0) = π
2
(d) κ(0) = κ0
(5)
(a) x(1) = ξ(˜α)
(b) y(1) = η(˜α)
(c) κ(1) = 0
(6)
(a) x(s1) = ξ(˜α)
(b) y(s1) = η(˜α)
(c) ϕ(s1) = ˜α
(d) κ(s1) = 0
(7)
Remark 2: It is important to note, that (via α) ζ does affect
the ODE system (3), but not the BCs (6) and (7), see Figure 2.
Instead, the BCs solely depend on the object slope ˜α.
The process of generating the observables is realized by simu-
lating scanning sweeps in Matlab 2019a. In doing so, the two-
point boundary-value problems (3)&(5)&(6) and (3)&(5)&(7)
are solved using shooting methods to determine the unknown
parameters f1, α, κ0 and s1. Finally, having the mentioned
parameters at hand, the support reactions are determined in
the following way:
f0x = −f sin(α),
f0y = f cos(α),
m0z = −κ0 (8)
B. Step 2: Reconstructing contact points
For reconstructing a sequence of contact points, we assume
the support reactions f0x, f0y, m0z and the clamping position
x0 to be known in advance, either from step 1 or from
measurements using a real experimental setup. Consequently,
the unknown parameters f, α and κ0 are determined evaluating
(8) in the following way:
f =
q
f 2
0x + f 2
0y,
α = −arctan
f0x
f0y

,
κ0 = −m0z (9)
Note, as α is not necessarily restricted to the domain [− π
2 , π
2 ]
as in [16], the four-quadrant inverse tangent atan2 must be used
in (9). Now, having all parameters of (5) at hand, we consider
the IVP (3)&(5). As mentioned in Section I, the integration of
this IVP can be realized numerically as in [15] or analytically
as in [16]:
•
In [15], a termination condition is used which cancels
the numerical integration, if κ(s1) = m(s1) = 0 is
fulﬁlled.
•
In [16], the position s1 is determined by solving the
analytic expression using elliptic integrals
s1 = −
1
√2f
Z ˜α
π
2
1
p
sin(t − ˜α)
dt
(10)
Both procedures (even the analytical derivation of (10)) are
based on the fact, that the curvature at s1 is zero. Therefore, it
can be expected, that both procedures lead to the same results
(except for minor numerical deviations). In fact, this hypothesis
was made in [16], but without any proof or demonstration.
Within the present paper, we take advantage of both recon-
struction procedures comparing their results in a benchmark
with a surprising result in Section III.
C. Reconstructing friction parameters
Assuming an ideal contact (ζ = 0 ⇒ α = ˜α) in [16], the
problem of reconstructing the object slope ˜α was trivial, as
it was simply determined by the support reactions using (9).
In the same way we are able to determine the orientation α
of the contact force ⃗f. However, here we face the problem
that α = ˜α + ζ includes two components – the object slope
˜α and the friction angle ζ, see Figure 2. Without knowing
the friction coefﬁcient, it seems impossible, to separate α in
its components. Adressing this problem, we use the curvature
ODE (3)(d) together with (7)(d) to formulate the ﬁrst integral
1
2κ(s)2 = f(ϕ(s) − α) − f(ϕ1 − α)
(11)
where ϕ(s1) = ϕ1. Now, substituting s = 0 and solving for
ϕ1 yields
ϕ1 = α − arcsin
m2
0z − 2f0y
2f

(12)
= ˜α + ζ − β
(13)
with β
:= arcsin

m2
0z−2f0y
2f

. Analyzing (13), we again
distinguish between tip and tangential contacts, see Figure 2:
•
For tip contacts (ϕ1 > ˜α), it can merely be concluded
that β < ζ.
•
In contrast, for tangential contacts (ϕ1 = ˜α), (13) can
be rewritten in the following way:
ζ = β = arcsin
m2
0z − 2f0y
2f

(14)
Thus, in case of tangential contact, both the friction angle ζ and
the coefﬁcient of friction µ = tan(ζ) are determinable based
on the support reactions. Then, the object slope is ˜α = α − ζ
and ⃗f decomposes into
⃗fn = f cos(ζ) [sin(˜α)⃗ex − cos(˜α)⃗ey]
⃗ft = f sin(ζ) [cos(˜α)⃗ex + sin(˜α)⃗ey]
(15)
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Generating the support reactions
Figure 3a shows an exemplary simulated scanning sweep
of the rod along the circular object contour (4) with r = 0.9,
xc = 0 and yc = 1.3 from right to left (negative x-direction).
The sweep is represented by a sequence of elastic lines
(equilibrium states), where tip contacts are colored in blue and
tangential ones in red for s ∈ (0, s1) and black for s ∈ (s1, 1).
The scanning sweep aborts at some point, where the rod would
detatch from the object (snap-off). In general, the appearance
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-882-2
INTELLI 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

of Figure 3a does not change signiﬁcantly with varying µ.
Therefore, in Figure 3a we limit ourselves to only one example
with µ = 0. In Figs. 3b-3d, the support reactions f0x, f0y and
m0z for scanning sweeps with different friction coefﬁcients
µ = 0.0 : 0.2 : 0.6 are plotted against the clamping position
x0. Additionally, the gray curve in each ﬁgure represents the
support reactions resulting from a scanning sweep with a
uniformly distributed random friction coefﬁcient. In doing so,
a random value µ ∈ [0, 0.4] was generated for each clamping
position x0 in order to model friction parameter uncertainty. In
Figs. 3b-3d, the transitions between tip and tangential contacts
(see Figure 3a) and vice versa are marked with a small circle.
Note, that all Figs. 3a-3d are to be read from right to left, due
to the scanning direction.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 3. Object scanning: (a) sequence of equilibrium states during a
scanning sweep (from right to left) along a circular object contour; (b)-(d)
support reactions (observables) f0x, f0y and m0z in dependence on
different friction coefﬁcients µ including a uniformly distributed random
µ ∈ [0, 0.4] (gray line).
Based on Figure 3, we highlight the following observations:
•
All support reactions are affected by the friction
coefﬁcient µ. For instance, the clamping moment m0z
consistently increases with increasing µ.
•
Moreover, an increasing coefﬁcient µ results in a
longer overall contact phase, which is apparent com-
paring the values of x0 at the end of each scanning
sweep (left side of each curve).
•
The friction coefﬁcient µ has little impact on the
transitions between tip and tangential contacts.
Summarizing, the simulation of step 1 allows for the
generation of the support reactions in dependence on a pre-set
(known) friction coefﬁcient. Note that adjusting the friction
coefﬁcient to a deﬁned value (as in the simulation) would
be difﬁcult to realize in an experiment. This highlights the
actual importance of simulation step 1. Now, having the
support reactions based on different friction coefﬁcients µ at
hand, this enables a comprehensive investigation of step 2.
In the following, a comparison is made for the reconstruction
procedures of [15] and [16] (see Section II-B) based on the
support reactions in Figure 3b-3d.
B. Benchmark: Reconstructing contact points
As discussed in Section II, the basis for reconstructing
contact points in space is the determination of the contact
location s1 along the rod. Here, we compare the approaches
of [15] and [16] (see Section II), starting with an evaluation
of s1 in Figs. 4a and 4b. In Figure 4a, s1 is determined based
on [15] using an event-function, which cancels the numerical
integration, when the curvature of the rod is zero for the ﬁrst
time. It is obvious, that all curves s1(x0) are quite close to
each other, and therefore, the friction coefﬁcient seems to
have little impact on s1 during object scanning: the enlarged
section shows, that an increasing friction coefﬁcient generally
results in a slightly larger s1. By analogy with Figs. 3b-3c, the
gray curve of s1, resulting from a random friction coefﬁcient,
oscillates between the orange and the black one.
In Figure 4b, s1 is determined based on [16]. Evaluating
the support reactions using (10), two main observations were
made:
•
Considering the case µ = 0 (black curve), the fact that
(10) returns values larger than 1 in the presense of tip
contacts, as stated in [16], is correct for a large extend
of the scanning sweep. Note that all values exceeding
1 are replaced by the value s1 = 1 (tip of the rod) in
Figure 4b. However, one exception, where (10) returns
values lower than 1, even though the rod is in tip
contact, is observed at the very end of the scanning
sweep (see black curve in Figure 4b). Hence, using
(10) as a decision criterion between tip and tangential
contact is not adequate.
•
For µ > 0, (10) does no longer provide any infor-
mation about the contact phase at all, see Figure 4b.
Moreover, from a certain threshold (in our case µ ≥
0.4), the arguments exceed the deﬁnition range of
(10) for some clamping positions x0. For instance, the
orange and red curves are not deﬁned at the beginning
of the scanning sweep, see Figure 4b.
Comparing Figs. 4a and 4b it is obvious, that, in the absence
of friction (black curves), the reconstructed contact positions
s1 along the rod are almost identical. However, there seems to
be a huge difference in the reconstruction procedures of [15]
and [16], which only becomes noticeable in the presense of
friction. The origin of this difference lies in the derivation of
the analytical condition (10). There, the condition ϕ = α is
used assuming an ideal, tangential contact. And exactly that
is the problem: The condition ϕ = ˜α = α is indeed valid
for the case µ = 0 (ideal contact), but results in increasing
errors with increasing µ: ϕ = ˜α = α − µ. In contrast, the
reconstruction procedure of [15] dispenses with the mentioned
geometric condition. Therefore, it is not affected by increasing
friction coefﬁcients. Note that the slight deviations in Figure 4a
are not caused by any reconstruction error, but instead they
reﬂect the actual change of s1 caused the change of µ. Beyond
the contact position s1, the actual reconstructed sequences of
contact points are shown in Figs. 4c and 4d. Again, Figure 4c is
based on the reconstruction procedure presented in [15] while
Figure 4d is based on [16]. In both cases, the reconstructed
sequences of contact points are superimposed by the original
object contour (gray line). The corresponding reconstruction
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-882-2
INTELLI 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

errors, which are deﬁned as the smallest (perpendicular) dis-
tance to the original object contour, are indicated in Figs. 4e
and 4f.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 4. Object reconstruction using the support reactions (observables)
from Figs. 3b–3d: (a) reconstruction of s1 based on [15]; (b) reconstruction
of s1 using (10) based on [16]; (c) reconstructed contact points based on
[15]; (d) reconstructed contact points based on [16]; (e) reconstruction error
corresponding to (c); (f) reconstruction error corresponding to (d).
The following two observations must be highlighted:
•
Most noteworthy, independently on µ, the recon-
structed contact points using the procedure of [15] lie
exactly on the original object contour, see enlarged
section of Figure 4c. This fact reﬂects in Figure 4e,
where the reconstruction errors are within numerical
boundaries for all friction coefﬁcients µ, including the
randomly generated one. This is probably the most
important observation of the presented paper. With
increasing µ, the reconstructed contact points shift
along the object contour while the reconstruction error
remains unchanged. This is what we refer to as friction
invariant reconstruction.
•
In contrast, the reconstructed points in Figure 4d
are characterized by larger errors. For µ = 0, the
reconstruction error in Figure 4d (black line) is in
the same order of magnitude as those in Figure 4c,
except for the end of the scanning sweep. In gen-
eral, the reconstruction error increases with increasing
friction coefﬁcient µ. The reconstruction based on
the randomly generated µ is characterized by many
outliers. Summarizing, being not friction invariant, the
reconstruction error of s1, see Figure 4b, reappears in
the reconstruction of the contact points in Figure 4d.
C. Reconstructing friction parameters
Besides the reconstructed contact points, it can be advanta-
geous in many ways to know the normal direction of an object
– on the one hand, normal directions might assist in ﬁtting
a curve through he reconstructed contact points, improving
the reconstruction quality. On the other hand, they might
be evaluated for object manipulation, e.g., grasping. In the
following, we use the observables from Figs. 3b–3d in order to
verify the analytical condition (14). The angle β = α−ϕ1, see
(12), is plotted against the clamping position x0 in Figure 5a,
where the phase transitions are indicated by circular markers.
According to Section II, the condition β = ζ holds in case of
tangential contact, i.e., in the interval enclosed by the markers
in Fig. 5a, where the angle β is constant. In order to evaluate
the data, the coefﬁcient of friction µ = tan(ζ) is determined
based on the reconstructed friction angle ζ. For the tangential
contact phase, µ(x0) is shown in Fig. 5b.
(a)
(b)
Figure 5. Reconstructing friction parameters: (a) angle β = α − ϕ1 plotted
against the clamping position x0 (phase transitions marked with circles); (b)
friction coefﬁcient µ = tan(ζ) for tangential contacts.
It can be seen that the reconstructed friction coefﬁcients are
consistent with the values originally assumed for µ. Even the
noisy function for µ ∈ [0, 0.4] matches the pre-set one in sim-
ulation step 1. The observation conﬁrms the hypothesis that,
for tangential contacts, the contact force ⃗f can be decomposed
into its normal and tangential components by means of (15),
see Section II.
IV.
CONCLUSION
The paper at hand presented a mechanical model of a
vibrissa-inspired tactile sensor for object contour scanning and
reconstruction in the presence of Coulomb friction. In doing
so, two different processes were analyzed separately: Firstly,
scanning sweeps along a known object contour assuming a pre-
set friction coefﬁcient were simulated in order to generate the
support reactions (observables) theoretically. Afterwards, these
support reactions were used in order to reconstruct a sequence
of contact points. In doing so, the reconstruction approaches
of [15] and [16] were compared in a benchmark test. Finally, a
novel approach of determining friction parameters based on the
support reactions was presented, resulting in a handy analytical
expression. Summarizing the results of the paper at hand, we
highlight the following observations: During object scanning,
dry friction affects the support reactions. It turned out that the
reconstruction approach presented in [15] is friction invariant,
i.e., friction does not affect the reconstruction error. In contrast,
the approach presented in [16] is applicable just as well as
the one presented in [15] in the absence of friction, but
results in large reconstruction errors in the presence of friction.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-882-2
INTELLI 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

However, even though the approach in [16] is not friction
invariant, it laid an important foundation for all investigations
of the present paper. By identifying the essential differences
between the mentioned two approaches, it is expected that the
analytical conditions from [16] can be adapted in future work
to be friction invariant as well. Finally, the novel approach of
detecting friction parameters based on the support reactions
was veriﬁed by simulations.
The mentioned ﬁndings suggest that the presented measur-
ing principle is highly suitable to complement optical sensors
in robot exploration and path planning tasks. For instance,
a robot equipped with one (or multiple) vibrissa-like sensors
might move through the environment, passively dragging the
highly ﬂexible probe. After accidentally making a soft contact
between some point of the probe and an object/obstacle
in the environment, the probe would get bent, causing the
support reactions to exceed a certain activation threshold.
Subsequently, the measured signals might be used to draw
further conclusions about the object’s shape and ultimately
to assist in path-planning algorithms, tracking a prescribed
value of the support reactions to achieve an optimal scanning
movement of the robot, relative to the object.
The research conducted in this paper is particularly limited
by the use of a quasi-static model. Against this background,
only static friction but no dynamical effects, e.g., stick-slip
effects can be discussed. However, the fact that even a ran-
domly generated (noisy) friction coefﬁcient did not invalidate
the investigations suggests, that the results in the paper at
hand also apply to practical scenarios. Finally, it remains to
verify the theoretical results on practical examples by using
an experimental setup which has already been attacked in the
ﬁrst steps.
REFERENCES
[1]
T. J. Prescott, B. Mitchinson, and R. A. Grant, “Vibrissal behavior and
function,” Scholarpedia, vol. 6, pp. 6642, 2011.
[2]
S. Ebara, T. Furuta, and K. Kumamoto, “Vibrissal mechanoreceptors,”
Scholarpedia, vol. 12, pp. 32372, 2017.
[3]
F. A. Lucianna, A. L. Albarrac´ın, S. M. Vrech, F. D. Farf´an, and C. J.
Felice, “The mathematical whisker: A review of numerical models of
the rat’s vibrissa biomechanics,” J. Biomech., vol. 49, pp. 2007–2014,
2016.
[4]
C. Behn, “Mathematical Modeling and Control of Biologically Inspired
Uncertain Motion Systems with Adaptive Features,” Habilitation, Tech-
nische Universit¨at Ilmenau, Germany, 2013.
[5]
C. L. Schroeder and M. J. Z. Hartmann, “Sensory prediction on
a whiskered robot: a tactile analogy to optical ﬂow,” Frontiers in
Neurorobotics, vol. 6, 2012. DOI: 10.3389/fnbot.2012.00009.
[6]
T. Tsujimura and T. Yabuta, “Object detection by tactile sensing method
employing force/torque information,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom., vol.
5, pp. 444–450, 1989.
[7]
M. Kaneko, N. Kanayama, and T. Tsuji, “Active antenna for contact
sensing,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom., vol. 14, pp. 278–291, 1998.
[8]
J. H. Solomon and M. J. Z. Hartmann, “Artiﬁcial whiskers suitable for
array implementation: Accounting for lateral slip and surface friction,”
IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 24, pp. 1157–1167, 2008.
[9]
J. A. Birdwell et al., “Biomechanical models for radial distance de-
termination by the rat vibrissal system,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 98, pp.
2439–2455, 2007.
[10]
D. Kim and R. M¨oller, “Biomimetic whiskers for shape recognition,”
Robot. Auton. Syst., vol. 55, pp. 229–243, 2007.
[11]
L. Merker, J. Steigenberger, R. Marangoni, and C. Behn, “A vibrissa-
inspired highly ﬂexible tactile sensor: scanning 3D object surfaces pro-
viding tactile images,” Sensors, vol. 21, 2021. DOI: 10.3390/s21051572.
[12]
J. H. Solomon and M. J. Z. Hartmann, “Extracting object contours with
the sweep of a robotic whisker using torque information,” Int. J. Robot
Res., vol. 29, pp. 1233–1245, 2010.
[13]
B. W. Quist, R. A. Faruqi, and M. J. Z. Hartmann, “Variation in Young’s
modulus along the length of a rat vibrissa,” Journal of Biomechanics,
vol. 44, pp. 2775–2781, 2011.
[14]
L. A. Huet, J. W. Rudnicki, and M. J. Z. Hartmann, “Tactile sensing with
whiskers of various shapes: determining the three-dimensional location
of object contact based on mechanical signals at the whisker base,” Soft
Robotics, vol. 4, pp. 88–102, 2017.
[15]
G. R. Scholz and C. D. Rahn, “Proﬁle sensing with an actuated
whisker,” IEEE Trans. Rob. Autom., vol. 20, pp. 124–127, 2004.
[16]
C. Will, “Continuum Models for Biologically Inspired Tactile Sensors:
Theory, Numerics and Experiments,” Ph.D. Thesis, Technische Univer-
sit¨at Ilmenau, Germany, 2018.
[17]
L. Merker, S. J. Fischer Calderon, M. Scharff, J. H. A. Miranda, and C.
Behn, “Effects of Multi-Point Contacts during Object Contour Scanning
Using a Biologically-Inspired Tactile Sensor,” Sensors, vol. 20, 2020.
DOI: 10.3390/s20072077.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-882-2
INTELLI 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

