Connectivity Services Management in  
Multi-domain Content-Aware Networks for 
Multimedia Applications 
 
Eugen Borcoci, Mihai Stanciu, Dragoş Niculescu 
Telecommunications Dept. 
University POLITEHNICA of Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
e-mails: {eugenbo, ms, dniculescu}@elcom.pub.ro 
 
 
 
 
 
Daniel Negru  
CNRS-LaBRI Lab. 
University of Bordeaux, France 
e-mail:daniel.negru@labri.fr 
George Xilouris 
NCSR Demokritos 
 Institute of Informatics and Telecommunications 
Athens, Greece 
e-mail: xilouris@iit.demokritos.gr
 
Abstract—This paper proposes a new framework, for 
connectivity services management in overlay Virtual Content 
Aware Networks (VCAN) built over multi-domain, multi-
provider IP networks. The framework is part of a   Future 
Internet-oriented 
Multimedia 
networked 
architecture 
developed inside a FP7 European ICT research project, 
ALICANTE. The VCAN new concept is a stronger coupling 
between network and applications. The VCANs are managed 
by CAN Providers, and the high level services by Service 
Providers (SP). The CANP offers to SPs enhanced connectivity 
services, including unicast, multicast, in a multi-domain 
networking context. The management framework is based on 
vertical and horizontal Service Level Agreements(SLA) 
negotiated and concluded between providers and possibly also 
on content/service description information (metadata) inserted 
in the media flow packets by the servers. 
Keywords—Content-Aware Networking; Network Aware 
Applications; Connectivity services; Management; Multimedia 
distribution; Future Internet 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The Future Internet has a strong orientation towards 
services and content, [1][2][3]. A new solution to make the 
Future Internet more content oriented [3][4][5][6], is to 
create virtualized Content Aware Networks (CAN) and 
Network Aware Applications (NAA) on top of the flexible 
IP. Additionally to routing, the CAN routers are optimized 
for filtering, forwarding, and transforming inter-application 
messages on the basis of their content and context.  
The work of this paper is part of an activity performed in 
the framework of a new European FP7 ICT research project, 
“Media 
Ecosystem 
Deployment 
Through 
Ubiquitous  
Content-Aware Network Environments”, ALICANTE [7] 
[8][9]. 
The 
following 
inter-working 
multi-actor 
environments are defined: User Environment (UE), to which 
some end users belong; Service Environment (SE), to which 
Service Providers (SP) and Content Providers (CP) belong; 
Network Environment (NE), to which the Network Providers 
(NP) belong. Environment is a generic name for a grouping 
of functions defined around the same common goal and 
which possibly vertically span one or more several 
architectural layers.  
We propose a new framework, for connectivity services 
management in overlay VCANs built over multi-domain, 
multi-provider IP networks. The VCANs are managed by a 
CAN Provider (CANP), and the high level services by SPs. 
The CANP offers to SPs enhanced connectivity services 
including unicast and multicast. The management framework 
is based on vertical and horizontal SLAs negotiated and 
concluded between providers and possibly also on 
content/service description information (metadata) inserted 
in the media flow packets by the servers. 
The paper continues the starting work on VCAN 
management presented in [8][10]. It is organized as follows. 
Section II presents samples of related work. Section III 
summarizes the overall ALICANTE architecture. Section IV 
presents the content awareness features of the system and 
QoS assurance solutions. Section V describes the peering 
approach to extend a VCAN over several domains. The 
proposed CAN management architecture and functionalities 
is presented in Section VI. Section VII contains some 
conclusions and future work outline. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
A higher coupling between the Application and Network 
layers was recently proposed in order to make the IP network 
more adapted to content and services. In the framework of 
rethinking the architecture of the Future Internet, the 
concepts of CAN and NAA are proposed. CAN adjusts 
network layer processing based on limited examination of 
66
INTERNET 2011 : The Third International Conference on Evolving Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-141-0

the nature of the content, and NAA implies processing the 
content based on limited understanding of the network 
conditions. The work presented in [1] emphasizes the strong 
orientation of the FI towards content and services and shows 
the importance of management. CAN/ NAA can offer a way 
of evolution of networks beyond IP, as presented in [6]. The 
implementation of such an approach can be supported by 
virtualization as a strong method to overcome the 
ossification of the current Internet [2][3][4][5]. 
The work in [11] discusses the content adaptation issues 
in the FI as a component of CAN/NAA approach. The 
CAN/NAA approach can also offer QoE (Quality of 
Experience) and QoS capabilities of the future networks, 
[6][12]. Context awareness is added to content awareness in 
[13]. However, the CAN approach requires a higher amount 
of packet header processing, similar to deep packet 
inspection techniques. The CAN/NAA approach can also 
help to solve the current networking problems related to the 
P2P traffic overload of the global Internet [14]. The 
Application Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO) problem 
studied by IETF can be solved by the cooperation between 
the CAN layer and the upper layer. The management 
architecture of the CAN/NAA oriented networks is still an 
open research issue.  
III. 
ALICANTE SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
The main concepts and general ALICANTE architecture 
are defined in [7][8][9]. The business model is defined, 
composed of traditional SP, CP, NP - Providers and End-
Users (EU). A new actor is the CAN Provider (CANP) 
offering virtual layer connectivity services.  A new entity is 
also defined: Home-Box (HB)- partially managed by the SP, 
the NP, and the end-user,  located at end-user's premises and 
gathering 
content/context-aware 
and 
network-aware 
information. The HB can also act as a CP/SP for other HBs, 
on behalf of the EUs. Two novel virtual layers exist: the 
CAN layer for network level packet processing and the HB 
layer for the actual content delivery, working on top of IP.  
The virtual CAN routers are called Media-Aware Network 
Elements (MANE) to emphasize their additional capabilities: 
content and context - awareness, controlled QoS/QoE, 
security and monitoring features, etc. 
The SE [8] uses information from the CAN layer to 
enforce NAA procedures, in addition to user context-aware 
ones. Apart from VCANs provisioning, per flow adaptation 
can be deployed at both HB and CAN layers, as additional 
means for QoS, by making use of scalable media resources.  
The management and control of the CAN layer is 
partially distributed; it supports CAN customization as to 
respond to the upper layer needs, including 1:1, 1:n, and n:m 
communications, and also allow efficient network resource 
exploitation. The rich interface between CAN and the upper 
layer allows cross-layer optimizations interactions, e.g., 
including offering distance information to HBs to help 
collaboration in P2P style. At all levels, monitoring is 
performed in several points of the service distribution chain 
and feeds the adaptation subsystems with appropriate 
information, at the HB and CAN Layers. Fig. 1 presents a 
partial view on the ALICANTE architecture, with emphasis 
on the CAN layer and  management interaction. The network 
contains several NP domains (Autonomous Systems - AS) 
and access networks (AN). Each domain has an Intra-domain 
Network Resource Manager (IntraNRM), as the authority 
configuring the network nodes. The CAN layer cooperates 
with HB and SE by offering them CAN services. One CAN 
Manager (CANMgr) exists for each IP domain to assure the 
consistency of CAN planning, provisioning, advertisement, 
offering, negotiation installation and exploitation. However, 
autonomous CAN-like behavior of the MANE nodes can be 
also offered in a distributed way by processing individual 
flows. 
The following contracts/interactions of SLA/SLS types 
performed in the Management and Control Plane and the 
appropriate interfaces are shown in Fig. 1: 
SP-CANP(1): the SP requests to CANP to provision/ 
modify/ terminate  new VCANs and the  CANP to inform SP 
about its capabilities; CANP-NP(2) - through which the NP 
offers or commits to offer resources to CANP (this data is 
topological and capacity-related); CANP-CANP(3) - to 
extend a VCAN upon several NP domains; - Network 
Interconnection Agreements (NIA) (4) between the NPs or 
between NPs and ANPs; these are not new ALICANTE 
functionalities but are necessary for NP cooperation. 
After the SP negotiates a desired VCAN with CANP, it 
will issue the installation commands to CANP, which in turn 
configures via IntraNRM (5) the MANE functional blocks 
(input and output).  
IV. CONTENT AWARENESS AND QOS ASSURANCE AT CAN 
LAYER 
The content awareness (CA) is realized in three ways:  
(i) by concluding an SLA between SP and CANP, 
concerning different VCAN construction. The content 
servers are instructed by the SP to insert some special 
Content Aware Transport Information (CATI). This 
simplifies the media flow classification and treatment by the 
MANE. 
(ii) the SLA is concluded, but no CATI information is 
inserted in the data packets. The MANE applies deep packet 
inspection for data flow classification and assignment to 
VCANs. The treatment of the flows is based on VCANs 
characteristics defined in the SLA. 
(iii) no SLA exists between SP and CANP. No CATI is 
inserted in the data packets. The treatment of the data flows 
can still be CA, but conforming to the local policy 
established at CANP and IntraNRM. 
An important issue related to multimedia flow 
transportation is the QoS assurance. The DiffServ 
philosophy can be applied to split the sets of flows in QoS 
classes (QC), with a mapping between the VCANs and the 
QCs.
67
INTERNET 2011 : The Third International Conference on Evolving Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-141-0

 
Access 
Network 
AS1 
NRM@NP 
HB1 
 
AS2 
NRMr@NP 
MANE 
CANMgr 
CANMgr 
Service 
Manager@SP
2 
3 
NRM@ANP 
1 
CAN layer 
Management 
NIA
4 
Multi-domain VCAN 
HB-SW 
NIA
 
NIA 
 
HB + SP Environment 
EU 
host 
PHY 
connection 
Contract(SLA/SLS) or 
interaction in Mng. Plane or  
Control Plane 
Logical 
relationship 
Data and signaling connections 
(PHY and/or logical) 
Network elements 
config. commands 
MANE 
MANE 
MANE 
AR 
Service  Provider 
Media flow 
Input 
Output 
5 
 
Figure 1.  ALICANTE architecture:  CAN management interactions 
Several levels of QoS granularity can be established 
when defining VCANs.  The QoS behavior of each VCAN is 
established inside the SLA between SP and CANP. 
Actually, the CAN layer may offer to the SP, several 
parallel internets (PI) [15], specialized in different types of 
application content. We adopt the PI concept, enriching it 
with content awareness. A PI enables end-to-end service 
differentiation across multiple administrative domains. The 
PIs can coexist, as parallel logical networks composed of 
interconnected, per-domain, Network Planes. A given plane  
is defined to transport traffic flows from services with 
common connectivity requirements. The traffic delivered 
within each plane receives differentiated treatment, so that 
service differentiation across planes is enabled in terms of 
edge-to-edge QoS, availability and also resilience. 
In ALICANTE, generally a one-to-one mapping between 
a VCAN and a network plane will exist. Specialization of 
CANs may exist in terms of QoS level of guarantees (weak 
or strong), QoS granularity, content adaptation procedures, 
degree of security, etc. A given network plane or VCAN can 
be realized by the CANP, by combining several processes, 
while being possible to choose different solutions concerning 
some 
dimensions: 
route 
determination, 
data 
plane 
forwarding, packet processing, and resource management. 
The definitions of local QoS classes (QC) and extended 
QCs were adopted, to allow us to capture the notion of QoS 
capabilities across several domains [16][17][18]. For a 
simplified design, we also used the concept of Meta-QoS-
Class [16]. A meta QC captures a common set of QoS ranges 
of parameters spanning several domains. It relies on a 
worldwide common understanding of application QoS needs. 
Foir example, VoD service flows need similar QoS 
characteristics whatever AS they transit. The meta QC 
concept offers the advantage that the existence of  well 
known classes greatly simplifies the inter-domain signaling 
in the sequence of actions needed to establish domain 
peering in the multi-domain context. This concept simplifies 
the peering of different domains inside the same VCAN. 
The types of VCANs for different QoS granularities 
based on QCs are described in [9]. In short, the following use 
cases have been defined for multi-domain VCANs:  VCANs 
based on meta-QC, VCANs based on local QC composition, 
hierarchical CANs based on local QC composition.  
The last case is the most efficient but also the most 
complex. Each domain may have its local QoS classes. 
Several local QCs can be combined to form an extended QC. 
Inside each CAN, several QCs are defined corresponding to 
platinum, gold, silver, etc. In such a case, the mapping 
between service flows at SP level and CANs can be done per 
type of the service: VoD, VoIP, Video-conference, etc.  
V. CAN  MULTI-DOMAIN PEERING 
A given CAN may span one or several IP domains. Thus 
a peering problem appears: how to determine the 
intermediate and terminal domains to be chained in the 
resultant VCAN. The hub model is proposed, in which a 
CAN Manager is communicating with other managers in 
order to establish the multi-domain CANs.  
A drawback is that each CAN Manager should know the 
complete graph of AS candidates to participate in every 
possible VCAN (overhead). However, given that the number 
of ASes involved in a VCAN communication cannot be 
high, and that they can be localized in an Internet region, the 
scalability 
problem 
is 
not 
so 
stringent.
68
INTERNET 2011 : The Third International Conference on Evolving Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-141-0

 
MANE 
CANMgr 
n 
ASm 
ASn 
MANE 
CANMgr 
m 
SP 
1.Initial VCAN request 
2.1.VCAN negotiation 
2.2.CAN negotiation 
ANm1 
ANm2 
ANn1 
 
HB 
 
HB 
 
HB 
ASk 
CANMgr 
k 
ANk2 
ANk1 
 
HB 
 
HB 
Resulting
VCAN
CS1 
CS2 
Traffic 
Trunks 
 
 
Figure 2.  Example of a multi-domain CAN (hub model) 
The initiator CAN Manager should discuss/negotiate 
with all other CAN Managers in order to establish the 
“international” VCAN = {CAN1 U CAN2 U CAN3 …}. 
The split of the SLS parameters should be done at the 
initiator (e.g. for delay).  
Fig. 2 shows an example of a multi-domain VCAN. The 
infrastructure is composed of three domains ASn, ASk, ASm, 
each having a CAN Manager. Several Access Networks are 
connected to these domains, containing Home-Boxes or/and 
Content Servers (CS). The latter are controlled by the SP. 
The SP is requesting a CANMng n to construct a CAN, 
spanning several domains, i.e. ASn, ASk and ASm. It is 
supposed that the SP knows the edge points of this CAN, the 
MANEs where different sets of HB currently are, or they 
will be connected. Based on its inter-domain routing 
information, 
the 
CANMng_n 
determines 
that 
the 
components of the VCANs are ASn, ASk, ASm. Therefore, it 
negotiates in actions 2.1 and 2.2 the appropriate VCAN 
capabilities with CANMng_k and respectively CANMng_m. 
In a successful scenario, the multi-domain CAN is agreed 
and then it is instantiated in the network. 
VI. 
CAN RESOURCE MANAGER ARCHITECTURE AT 
SERVICE PROVIDER AND CAN PROVIDER 
Fig. 3 presents the proposed architecture for CAN 
Management. This is a continuation and development of the 
one presented in [10]. At the Service Manager SM@SP 
level, the CAN Network Resources Manager (CAN_RMgr) 
component performs all the actions needed to assure the 
CAN support to the SP, in order to deploy its high level 
services in unicast or multicast mode. It is responsible to 
negotiate with CANP on behalf of the SP and perform all 
actions necessary for VCAN planning, VCAN provisioning 
and VCAN operation.  
CNMgr@CANP performs at the CAN layer all actions 
related to VCAN provisioning and operation. The two 
entities interact based on the SLA contract initiated by the 
SP. The technical part of these contracts is the Service Level 
Specification (SLS).  
Several points of view should be considered when 
defining/planning the services, planning the CAN and 
respectively when defining CAN_RMgr functionalities: the 
commercial optimization needs of the SP, CANP resources, 
CAN network engineering and implementation.  
The CAN_RMgr interacts with the following modules 
supposed to exist and belonging to the SM: 
Service Forecast and Planning - an offline process 
performing service predictions and their associated plans of 
deployment, considering the business as input.  
Service Deployment Policy - can contain (in a data base) 
predefined rules for service planning. This information is 
derived from the high-level business interests of the SP and 
significantly influences the planning. 
CAN_RMgr@SM contains the following functional 
blocks: CAN Planning, CAN Provisioning and CAN 
Operation and Maintenance, as main functional blocks. A 
CAN Repository data base keeps all data related to VCAN 
provisioning, installation and current status. Policies can 
intervene to guide the other blocks through the module CAN 
Deployment and Operation Policies.  
Fig. 3 also shows the interfaces, defined below. Where 
possible, the interface implementation for data transport will 
be based on SOAP/Web Services interfaces, used for SOAP 
requests and responses. 
 1. CAN Planning at CAN-RMgr@SM - to - Service 
Forecast and Planning@SM at Service Life Cycle block. 
This input interface to CAN_RMgr delivers information 
from the service forecast module and from the policy block, 
to allow the high level CAN Planning.  
2. CAN Operation and Maintenance at CAN-RMgr@SM 
- to - Service Life Cycle block. This interface delivers the 
current status data on active CANs to the Service Life Cycle 
block.  
69
INTERNET 2011 : The Third International Conference on Evolving Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-141-0

 
CAN  Provisioning 
 
sp_CANpSLS 
CANM2SP I/F 
 
Service Life cycle management
CAN Network Resource Manager 
Service Forecast and 
Planning 
CAN Manager 
@CANP  
CAN 
 Planning 
 
CAN 
Planning 
CAN  
Planning 
(Unicast) 
CAN Provisioning  
Manager (unicast) 
Service Manager @SP 
CAN  
Planning 
(Mcast) 
CAN Provisioning  
Manager (Mcast) 
Service Deployment
Policies 
CAN 
repository 
CAN
Deployment and 
Operation Policies 
CAN 
Operation 
and 
 Maintenance 
 
CAN Negotiation  
CAN 
 Layer 
 Mon  
CAN 
Advertising  
CAN 
Provisioning 
CAN 
Advertisement 
                                                              SP2CANM I/F 
 
Intra domain Network Resource Manager 
CAN DB
CAN
Operation 
and Maintenance 
CAN Coordinator  
To/from other 
CAN Managers 
 
Figure 3.  Architecture of the CAN Network Resource Manager at SP and CAN Manager at CAN layer 
3. CAN-RMgr@SM – to – CAN Manager. This is a 
multiple interface necessary for CAN_RMgr at SM@SP to 
perform the following:  
• 
request the CAN Manager to negotiate VCANs and 
perform 
negotiation 
(SLS 
contracts 
will 
be 
concluded for VCAN subscription, based on a 
negotiation protocol);  
• 
command VCAN installation (invocation)  
• 
receive advertisement information about available 
CANs constructed at the CANP’s initiative 
• 
request modification and/or termination of a CAN:  
according to the current situation and the evolution 
of the forecast, the SP can re-negotiate the network 
resources with CANP, which will imply to 
add/modify/delete VCANs;  
• 
receive status and monitoring information about the 
active VCANs. 
A. CAN Provisioning 
The functional block for this is the CAN Provisioning 
Manager at SM@SP. The CANProvMng@SM has several 
main functions shortly presented below. 
It performs all sp_CANpSLS processing - subscription 
(unicast/multicast mode) in order to assure the CAN 
transport infrastructure for the SP. For CAN subscription, the 
CANProvMng@SM receives requests for a sp_CANpSLS 
contract dedicated to a given CAN from CAN Planning. 
Then, it requests to the CAN Manager associated with its 
home domain, to subscribe for a new CAN. It negotiates the 
subscription and concludes an SLS denoted by: SP-
70
INTERNET 2011 : The Third International Conference on Evolving Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-141-0

CAN_SLS-uni_sub for unicast, or SP-CAN_SLS-mc_sub for  
multicast. The results of the contract are stored in the CAN 
repository. Note that CAN subscription only means a logical 
resource reservation at the CAN layer, not real resource 
allocation and network node configuration.  
The CAN subscription action may or may not be 
successful, depending on the amount of resources demanded 
by the SP and the available resources in the network. Note 
that at its turn the CAN Manager has to negotiate the CAN 
subscription with IntraNRM, and overbooking is an option, 
depending on the SP policy. 
B. CAN Negotiation 
The basic version of this negotiation protocol (SP-
CANP-SLS-P) can support the negotiation process between 
several pairs of managers like CANProvMng@SM as a client 
and CAN Manager as a server. The main usage of this 
protocol is for establishing sp_CANpSLSs contracts, but it 
should have all the necessary properties of a general 
negotiation protocol, and could be adapted/used to serve 
CAN invocation.  
The SP-CANP-SLS-P protocol is a client-server, 1-to-1 
protocol, where the client initiates the negotiation sessions. 
In order to be able to serve the c/pSLS negotiations, it is 
completely distinct from the negotiation logic, which is 
located a layer above the protocol and acts as a user of the 
protocol. For SLS negotiation between SP/CANP, the logic 
is represented by the combined roles of: Service 
Provisioning and an SLS Request blocks at the client-side; 
SLS Request Handler and SLS Subscription Admission 
Control blocks as the server-side. The SP-CANP-SLS-P 
supports one of several negotiation actions:  establishment/ 
modifications/ termination of SLS contracts.  
The management system described is currently in the 
design phase in ALICANTE project. Validation and 
implementation results will be published in the near future. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The paper proposed an architectural solution for 
connectivity services management, in Content Aware 
Networks 
for 
a 
multi-domain 
and 
multi-provider 
environment. The management is based on vertical and 
horizontal SLAs negotiated and concluded between 
providers (SP, CANP, NP), the result being a set of parallel 
VCANs offering different classes of services to multimedia 
flows, based on CAN/NAA concepts. The approach is to 
map the QoS classes on virtual data CANs, thus obtaining 
several parallel QoS planes. The system can be incrementally 
built by enhancing the edge routers functionalities with 
content awareness features. Further work is going on to 
design and implement the system in the framework of the 
FP7 
research 
project 
ALICANTE. 
A 
preliminary 
implementation and performance evaluation will appear in 
[19]. 
Acknowledgments 
This work was supported partially by the EC in the 
context of the ALICANTE project (FP7-ICT-248652) and 
partially by the project POSDRU/89/1.5/S/62557. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Schönwälder, J., Fouquet, M., Dreo Rodosek,  G., and Hochstatter, 
I.C.,  “Future Internet = Content + Services + Management”, IEEE 
Communications Magazine, vol. 47, no. 7, Jul. 2009, pp. 27-33. 
[2] 
Baladrón, C., “User-Centric Future Internet and Telecommunication 
Services”,  in: G. Tselentis, et. al. (eds.), Towards the Future Internet, 
IOS Press, 2009, pp. 217-226. 
[3] 
Turner, J. and Taylor, D., “Diversifying the Internet,” Proc. 
GLOBECOM ‘05, vol. 2, St. Louis, USA, Nov./Dec. 2005, pp. 760-
765 
[4] 
Anderson, T., Peterson, L., Shenker, S., and Turner, J., “Overcoming 
the Internet Impasse through Virtualization”, Computer, vol. 38, no. 
4, Apr. 2005, pp. 34–41. 
[5] 
Chowdhury, N. M. and Boutaba, R., “Network Virtualization: State 
of the Art and Research Challenges”, IEEE Communications 
Magazine, vol. 47, no.7,  Jul. 2009, pp. 20-26. 
[6] 
Kourlas, T., “The Evolution of Networks beyond IP”, IEC 
Newsletter, 
vol. 
1, 
Mar. 
2007. 
Available 
at 
http://www.iec.org/newsletter/march07_1/broadband_1.html 
(last 
accessed: Mar. 2010). 
[7] 
FP7 ICT project, “MediA Ecosystem Deployment Through 
Ubiquitous  Content-Aware Network Environments”, ALICANTE, 
No248652, http://www.ict-alicante.eu/ (last accessed: Dec. 2010). 
[8] 
Borcoci, E., Negru, D. and Timmerer, C., “A Novel Architecture for 
Multimedia Distribution based on Content-Aware Networking” Proc. 
of. CTRQ 2010, Athens, June 2010, pp. 162-168  
[9] 
ALICANTE, Deliverable D2.1, ALICANTE Overall System and 
Components 
Definition 
and 
Specifications, 
http://www.ict-
alicante.eu, Sept. 2010 
[10] Borcoci, E.  and Iorga, R.,    “A Management Architecture for a 
Multi-domain Content-Aware Network” TEMU 2010, July 2010, 
Crete. 
[11] Zahariadis, T., Lamy-Bergot, C., Schierl, T., Grüneberg, K., Celetto, 
L., and Timmerer, C., “Content Adaptation Issues in the Future 
Internet”, in: G. Tselentis, et al. (eds.), Towards the Future Internet, 
IOS Press, 2009, pp. 283-292. 
[12] Liberal, F., Fajardo, J.O., and Koumaras, H., “QoE and *-awareness 
in the Future Internet”, in: G. Tselentis, et al. (eds.), Towards the 
Future Internet, IOS Press, 2009, pp. 293-302. 
[13] Baker, N., “Context-Aware Systems and Implications for Future 
Internet”, in: G. Tselentis et. al. (eds.), Towards the Future Internet, 
IOS Press, 2009, pp. 335-344. 
[14] Aggarwal, V., Feldmann, A.,  “Can ISPs and P2P Users Cooperate 
for 
Improved 
Performance?”, 
ACM 
SIGCOMM 
Computer 
Communication Review, vol. 37, no. 3, Jul. 2007, pp. 29-40.  
[15] Boucadair, M. et al., “A Framework for End-to-End Service 
Differentiation: Network Planes and Parallel Internets”, IEEE 
Communications Magazine, Sept. 2007, pp. 134-143 
[16] Levis, P., Boucadair, M., Morrand, P., and Trimitzios, P., “The Meta-
QoS-Class Concept: a Step Towards Global QoS Interdomain 
Services”, Proc. of IEEE SoftCOM, Oct. 2004. 
[17] Howarth, M.P. et al., “Provisioning for Interdomain Quality of 
Service: the MESCAL Approach”, IEEE Communications Magazine, 
June 2005, pp. 129-137 
[18] MESCAL D1.2: “Initial Specification of Protocols and Algorithms 
for Inter-domain SLS Management and Traffic Engineering for QoS-
based IP Service Delivery and their Test Requirements”, January 
2004, www.mescal.org (last accessed: Dec 2010)  
[19] Dragoş S. Niculescu, Mihai Stanciu, Marius Vochin, Eugen Borcoci, 
Nikolaos Zotos, Implementation of a Media Aware Network Element 
for Content Aware Networks, CTRQ 2011, to appear.  
 
                                                           
 
71
INTERNET 2011 : The Third International Conference on Evolving Internet
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-141-0

