Triggering Solar-Powered Vehicle Activated Signs using Self Organising Maps with 
K-means 
Diala Jomaa, Siril Yella, Mark Dougherty  
Department of Computer Engineering, Dalarna University 
78170 Borlänge, Sweden 
djo@du.se, sye@du.se, mdo@du.se
Abstract— Solar-powered vehicle activated signs (VAS) 
are speed warning signs powered by batteries that are 
recharged by solar panels. These signs are more desirable than 
other active warning signs due to the low cost of installation 
and the minimal maintenance requirements. However, one 
problem that can affect a solar-powered VAS is the limited 
power capacity available to keep the sign operational. In order 
to be able to operate the sign more efficiently, it is proposed 
that the sign be appropriately triggered by taking into account 
the prevalent conditions. Triggering the sign depends on many 
factors such as the prevailing speed limit, road geometry, 
traffic behaviour, the weather and the number of hours of 
daylight. The main goal of this paper is therefore to develop an 
intelligent algorithm that would help optimize the trigger point 
to achieve the best compromise between speed reduction and 
power consumption. Data have been systematically collected 
whereby vehicle speed data were gathered whilst varying the 
value of the trigger speed threshold. A two stage algorithm is 
then utilized to extract the trigger speed value. Initially the 
algorithm employs a Self-Organising Map (SOM), to 
effectively visualize and explore the properties of the data that 
is then clustered in the second stage using K-means clustering 
method. Preliminary results achieved in the study indicate that 
using a SOM in conjunction with K-means method is found to 
perform well as opposed to direct clustering of the data by K-
means alone. Using a SOM in the current case helped the 
algorithm determine the number of clusters in the data set, 
which is a frequent problem in data clustering. 
Keywords: Solar-powered vehicle activated signs; Self 
Organising Maps; K-means clustering; Trigger speed  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 An excessive or inappropriate speed is often a reason for 
traffic fatalities. Therefore an important consideration for 
traffic municipalities is to reduce speeding by either 
modifying the roadway infrastructure or introducing 
additional and more effective signage. Modifying road 
infrastructure is more costly than deploying additional signs. 
Therefore, a range of road safety signs has been developed 
and deployed to encourage drivers to adapt to the speed limit 
or to warn drivers when they are approaching a hazard. Solar 
vehicle activated signs (VAS) are one type of signs that are 
widely used on roadways. Typically, solar VAS are speed 
warning sign powered by batteries that are recharged by 
solar panels. These signs are more desirable than other 
simple battery driven VAS due to their low cost of 
installation. A main source of the reduction in cost is due to 
the fact that no external power supply is needed. These signs 
usually consist of radar that is mounted inside the sign in 
order to detect vehicles and measure their speed. The sign 
displays a message when vehicle speed exceeds a pre-set 
threshold, which is called the trigger speed. The trigger 
speed is usually set to a constant value, which is often equal, 
or relative, to the speed limit on a particular segment of 
road. Earlier studies reviewing the effectiveness of variable 
message signs or vehicle activated signs have been reported 
by [1]. Such studies have reviewed relevant work published 
between 2000 and 2005 and have mainly investigated the 
influence of VMS on human behaviour. This study is an 
update to the earlier studies in that this study includes data 
from 2006-2009 [2]. The prior studies showed that these 
signs have a significant impact on driver behaviour, traffic 
safety and traffic efficiency. In most cases, the signs have 
yielded reductions in the mean speed and in speed variation 
as well as in longer headway. However, most of the 
experiments were performed with the signs set to a certain 
static configuration under specific conditions. Since some of 
the aforementioned factors are dynamic in nature, it is felt 
that the earlier researchers did not consider the aspects of 
sign configuration carefully enough.  The previous studies 
lack a clear statement describing the relationship between 
the trigger value and its consequences under different 
conditions [3]. Efficiently setting up the radar speed 
threshold helps prevent the battery from running out of 
power. Previous authors have reported different strategies 
for calculating the appropriate trigger speed.  In one reported 
experiment the trigger speed was set at  10% over the speed 
limit plus an additional 2mph, i.e., in a 30mph speed limit 
the trigger speed would be set at 35mph) [4]. The trigger 
speed was set at the 50th percentile of the speed that was 
detected prior to the installation of the VAS. This was 
intended to target half of the drivers. In other previous 
studies, the trigger speeds were set at between the 75th and 
81th percentile speeds [5]. In Mattox et al., the 
predetermined trigger speed was set to the posted speed limit 
with a 3- mph buffer [6]. The method that is used 
predominantly in the United Kingdom is one in which the 
trigger speed is set to the 85th percentile of the average 
speed that is measured before installation.  
However, solar VAS are often challenged by a limitation 
is the capacity of the power supply that is required for the 
sign to remain operational.  In order to be able to operate the 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-352-0
INTELLI 2014 : The Third International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

sign more efficiently, it is proposed that the sign trigger 
should take into account the prevalent conditions. Triggering 
the sign depends on many factors such as the prevailing 
speed limit, road geometry, traffic behaviour and number of 
hours of daylight (more daylight implies more solar power 
available, but on the other hand the sign needs to shine 
brighter during daylight, which implies higher power 
consumption). As a consequence of the lack of power 
capacity, the sign may be triggered with a high value but it 
should preserve the impact of the sign on vehicle speed 
reduction. To determine the optimal trigger speed in order to 
minimize 
power 
consumption 
while 
simultaneously 
maximizing vehicle speed reduction is a nontrivial problem. 
Thus, the optimal trigger speed will be accomplished by first 
collecting traffic data using various trigger speeds, pre-
process the data and extract the trigger speeds that reveal the 
information and relationship hidden in these data for 
example, the relationship between the time of day and the 
traffic conditions. The objective of this paper is to therefore 
develop an intelligent algorithm that searches for the optimal 
trigger speed, which yields the best compromise between 
reducing both vehicle speeds and the power consumption of 
the sign. The algorithm is mainly done by combining two 
clustering techniques, Self-Organising Map (SOM) and K-
means. In this algorithm, traffic data will be first clustered 
by a SOM in order to effectively visualize, explore the 
properties of the data and determine the preliminary number 
of clusters as well as determine the centre of each cluster. 
After using the SOM, the clusters are refined by using K-
means. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 details the experimental design and discusses data 
acquisition. Section 3 presents issues relevant to solar power 
consumption for the sign. The developed algorithm and its 
trigger speed are described extensively in sections 4 and 5. 
The results and discussion are reported in section 6. Lastly 
concluding remarks will be presented. 
 
II. 
SOLAR POWER CONSUMPTION 
Solar powered signs are allow for signs to be easily 
installed in locations that are far away from the power grid. 
They are designed to run all year round, particularly running 
more in the winter when there is less light. The radar is 
always on and this draws somewhere in the region of 40-
50mA. However, the only other power draw is the controller 
and 3 LEDs on the rear of the sign, which require about 
20mA in total. The total current from the 12V battery is then 
around 70mA. When the sign faced is active and at full 
brightness, the current consumption is 1.8A. This reduces in 
steps as the ambient light reduces right down to under 0.5A. 
The modem that is fitted to this unit is also drawing current 
all of the time this is in the region of 50mA and has an 
impact on battery life. The current taken by the unit depends 
on the quality of the network signal that is available at the 
site and the amount of data that is being moved, so it is not 
an easy sum to calculate. Therefore there is a need to 
consume the energy efficiently in order to ensure that the 
VAS has an adequate amount of power. The established 
sign runs on 40W solar panels with 35 Ah batteries. In this 
study, the energy consumption is calculated as follows. If 
the vehicle speeds exceed the proposed threshold speed 
then: 
- 
Calculate the length of flash  f  for each vehicle 
speed 
- 
Sum all flashes 
- 
Calculate energy consumption at full brightness in 
Ah 
 
III. 
EXPERIMENT DESIGN AND DATA ACQUISITION 
Solar Traffic agencies have a specific policy for the use 
of interactive signs such as VAS.  These policies stipulate 
where the sign can be placed and the possible roadways for 
which they are suitable. Such signs are mostly placed at or 
near speed limit changes or at sites where a high collision 
rate exists. Sites near junctions and pedestrian crossings are 
normally avoided, as vehicle speeds are generally reduced in 
these areas [7]. In this study, two test sites were selected in 
Borlänge, Sweden. The first site is referred to as the 
Korsgård test site. The Korsgård test site is located between 
the Tuna and Hugo Hedström roadways. The second site is 
referred to as the Mjälga test site. Note that traffic flows in 
both directions and the posted speed limit at the test sites is 
40 km/hr. Furthermore both sites are located in rural area 
and are notorious for speeding.  At both sites, two radars 
(radar 1 and radar 2) were used in order to study the 
reduction of vehicle speed before and after triggering the 
sign. Radar 1 was positioned 100 meters before the VAS 
and radar 2 was positioned in line with the VAS. The VAS 
is triggered at 100 m in distance before the location of the 
sign. The sign used in the current study is a typical solar 
powered vehicle activated sign (VAS). The sign displays 
two warning messages in succession. The first is a reminder 
of the posted speed limit, which is 40km/hr, which is 
followed by a “SÄNK FARTEN” (reduce speed) message. 
Typically the messages are displayed only when the vehicle 
speed exceeds the trigger speed. The sign is equipped with 
radar and a data logger to detect and record vehicle speed. 
The sign is also equipped with a general packet radio 
service (GPRS) modem to facilitate communication to the 
radar and for authorized users to download and upload data. 
Note that it has been possible to alter the radar settings 
remotely. Such a setup has facilitated alteration of the 
trigger speed, thereby permitting the study to investigate the 
effect of different trigger speeds on various driving speeds. 
Upon request the data stored in the collection module is 
uploaded to a web server for the user to download. 
At both sites, the data were collected 24-hours a day. At 
the Korsgård test site, data collection were done  from 1 
September 2012 through 31 December 2012 and at the 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-352-0
INTELLI 2014 : The Third International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

Mjälga test site, data collection were established between 
from 1 May 2013 and 1 August 2013. The data collected 
consists of records about vehicle speed, the direction the 
vehicle is traveling, the length of vehicle, a time stamp and a 
time gap and the date. Only the vehicle speed, direction and 
the time of day were used in this study.  
 
IV. 
A TWO STAGE CLUSTERING APPROACH USING SELF-
ORGANISING MAP WITH K-MEANS CLUSTERING  
Clustering 
is 
an 
unsupervised 
classification 
of 
observations, data items, or objects into different groups or 
clusters so that the data in each cluster share the same 
properties [8]. Grouping is usually done on the basis of 
similarities 
or 
distances 
without 
any 
assumptions 
concerning the number of groups that should be pertained to 
the data. There are various methods that are used for cluster 
analysis. Self-Organising Maps (SOM) and K-means are 
two methods that are commonly applied in several fields 
such as marketing, pattern recognition and traffic analysis. 
However, the performance of these methods can differ 
depending of the characteristics of the data, for example the 
size of the data, the number of clusters, and the type of data. 
Nevertheless, none of these methods outperforms the others 
in all data conditions. For instance, SOM is sensitive to the 
size of the data set; its speed of convergence is slower than 
K-means [9]. K-means is a simple and fast algorithm but it 
is very sensitive to the selection of the initial number of 
clusters [10]. In this paper, a Self-Organizing Map (SOM) 
was initially used to visualize, and understand data 
properties such as the number of prevalent clusters. 
Preliminary identification of the number of clusters is 
deemed useful because it enables the researcher to decide 
the number of clusters (K) while implementing the K-means 
algorithm [11]. 
A. 
Khohonen self-organising maps  
The Self-organising map (SOM) is an artificial neural 
network that learns the properties of data via an 
unsupervised learning algorithm [12]. It consists of two 
layers of artificial neurons; an input layer and an output 
layer. Every input neuron is connected to every output 
neuron by a weighting value. The Euclidian distance is 
calculated between the input vector and the incoming 
weighted vector for each output. The output neuron with the 
smallest distance is declared as the winner and its weights 
modified to be closer to the input vector. In fact SOM is an 
iterative process where the connections’ weights are 
modified according to the following equations (1) and (2) 
[13, 14]. 
 
 (   )   ( )   ( )( ( )   ( )) 
(1) 
 ( )     
 
  
   ( ) 
            (2) 
Where w(t) is the connection weight at time t, 
x(t) is the input vector 
h(t) is the neighbourhood function,  
α is the learning rate,  
d is the Euclidian distance between the winning unit and  the 
current unit, 
σ is the neighbourhood width parameter 
B. 
K-means clustering 
The k-means clustering is an optimization clustering 
algorithm where clusters are formed by optimizing some 
measure of cluster goodness. The centre of the cluster k is 
the mean of the data items within the cluster. The K-means 
algorithm proceeds by first randomly selecting k of the 
items where each selection is done by partitioning data 
items into k initial clusters. Each item is assigned to the 
cluster to which it is the most similar, based on the distance 
between the item and the cluster mean. It then computes the 
new mean for each cluster and assigns the new mean as the 
new cluster centre. This process iterates until a stopping 
condition is reached.  
In this paper a two stage clustering algorithm is applied 
as follows:  
a) Data pre-processing: The data is initially pre-
processed by simple filtering. In this case the 
filtering consists based on the direction the vehicles 
are traveling. Vehicles traveling in the same 
direction are filtered into the same group. Later, the 
data is grouped into two classes: cars and trucks. 
Motorcycles and long trucks are excluded from this 
study by assuming that their speed is low. 
b) Feature extraction: The main features considered in 
this study are: time mean speed  , traffic flow q 
and the standard deviation of speed  .   Assuming 
that all of the vehicles are moving with v km/hr. 
The number of vehicles counted at a certain point 
in one hour is the traffic flow q. Time mean speed 
is the average of spot speed    or simply the 
average of n vehicles passing a point during a 
certain period of time [15]. Time mean speed   is 
given by equation (3):  
            
⁄ ∑
  
 
   
 
(3) 
 
Speed standard deviation is approximately the 
square root of the sum of the squares for   the 
difference between each vehicle speed    and the 
mean speed   [16]. 
Speed standard deviation is given by equation (4): 
    √   
⁄
∑
(    )
 
   
 
(4) 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-352-0
INTELLI 2014 : The Third International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

c) The SOM clustering stage: Obtain the initial 
number of clusters by SOM. The input vectors 
assigned to the SOM input neurons consist of 3 
dimensions; time mean speed, traffic flow and 
standard deviation. In this experiment, a 24 by 3 
layer of neurons is used to classify the input into 3 
clusters. This means a layer of 72 neurons spread 
out in a 24 by 3 grid.  After training the network 
with 100 iterations, the map is well distributed with 
regard to the input space.  
d) The K-means clustering stage: Refine the cluster 
centroid by K-means. The number of clusters and 
the cluster centres obtained from SOM can be used 
as the initial input of the K-means algorithm. 
e) Trigger speed setting: According to the clustering 
results obtained from the K-means, the trigger 
speed is considered as the median speed of the 
cluster.  
 
V. 
RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
The two-stage clustering algorithm was applied to the 
experimental data obtained from both test sites; Korsgård 
and Mjälga. A choice of K=3 is based on the initial 
clustering done by SOM. Figure 1 (a) and (b) show how the 
K-means partitioned the traffic flow into 3 clusters at both 
the Korsgård and Mjälga test sites, respectively. This means 
grouping the time of day into three clusters that correspond 
to the number of vehicles passing the sign. At the Korsgård 
test site, the traffic flow is low in cluster 1, average in 
cluster 3, high in cluster 2, however at the Mjälga test site 
the traffic flow is low in cluster 3, average in cluster 2, and 
high in cluster 1. In fact, the partition of the time of day for 
the traffic flow is not the same in both sites.  
 
 
Figure 1. Clustering traffic flow respective to time; (a) at the Korsgård test 
site; (b) at the Mjälga test site 
The main idea in using K-means clustering is to retrieve 
the median speed centroid, which is the expected trigger 
speed threshold. Fig. 2 (a) and (b) shows a box plot of the 
median speed for the three clusters at the Korsgård test site 
and at the Mjälga test site, respectively. The central mark in 
this box plot is the median, the edges of the box are the 25th 
and 75th percentiles and outliers are plotted individually. 
The whiskers in Cluster 2 at the Korsgård site and in cluster 
3 at the Mjälga site are more extended than other clusters 
due to a larger deviation between median speeds. In fact 
when the traffic flow is high at the Korsgård test site, the 
median speed is high (cluster 2) but when the traffic is low 
at the Mjälga site, the median speed is high (cluster 3). Bear 
in mind, that both test sites have a speed limit of 40 km/hr. 
Figure 2. Box plot of median speed for the three clusters; (a) at the 
Korsgård test site; (b) at the Mjälga test site 
 
For the purpose for this study, the 24 hours of the day 
were grouped into three time period clusters. The time 
periods obtained from the clustering algorithm ensured that 
the trigger speed is applied to the entire clusters, rather to 
the individual hours. The trigger speeds are considered as 
the centroid median speeds for the clusters obtained from 
the experiment. Tables 1 and 2 present the centroid median 
speed and the corresponding standard deviation of all of the 
clusters from the mean speed at the Korsgård and Mjälga 
test sites, respectively.   
 
TABLE 1. THE TIME PERIOD RANGE, THE CENTROID’S MEDIAN SPEED AND 
THE CENTROID STANDARD DEVIATION FOR EACH CLUSTER AT THE 
KORSGÅRD TEST SITE 
Clusters 
number 
(K) 
Cluster’s time period range 
Centroid 
median 
speed 
Centroid 
Standard 
deviation  
1 
{07,09,10,11,12,19,20,21} 
49 
09 
2 
{00,01,02,03,04,05,06,22,23} 
51 
13 
3 
{08,13,14,15,16,17,18} 
49 
08 
 
 
 
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-352-0
INTELLI 2014 : The Third International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

TABLE 2. THE TIME PERIOD RANGE, THE CENTROID’S MEDIAN SPEED AND 
THE CENTROID STANDARD DEVIATION FOR EACH CLUSTER AT THE MJÄLGA 
TEST SITE 
Clusters 
number 
(K) 
Cluster’s time period range 
Centroid 
median 
speed 
Centroid 
standard 
deviation  
1 
{00,01,02,03,04,05,06,22,23} 
51 
13 
2 
{07,09,10,20,21} 
49 
10 
3 
{08,11,12,13,14,15,16,17,18,19} 
48 
09 
 
Both sites provide nearly identical results for the centroid 
median speed and the centroid standard deviation. However, 
the partitioning of the day is not the same in all clusters. The 
partitions are the same at night-time but it differs during the 
daytime.  
 
VI. 
VALIDATION AND ENERGY CONSUMPTION 
 Validating the data is not a straightforward process. 
There are several cluster validation techniques. One of these 
techniques which were initially proposed by Hauser and 
Schere, is to break down the data into subsets and then try to 
reach the same clusters from the original data [17]. In this 
study, the validation is done by comparing the effect of the 
sign that was triggered with the clustering model to the 
effect of the sign that was triggered with other static trigger 
speeds. The static trigger speeds are obtained from the 15th, 
50th and 85th percentiles of the vehicle speeds. The 15th 
percentile speed is the speed up to which 15% of vehicles 
travel. For example if the 15th percentile speed was 100 
km/hr then 15% of the traffic would travel at 100 km/hr or 
lower. The same definition applies to the 50th and 85th 
percentile speeds respectively. Bear in mind that 15th, 50th 
and 85th percentiles are reflecting a vehicle’s speed at the 
specific test sites (as measured before the experiment 
began). To limit the effect to only weekdays, the evaluations 
were based only on the data that were collected on three 
Mondays. Table 3 shows the various trigger speeds applied 
at both test sites.  
TABLE 3. THE VARIOUS TRIGGER SPEED (KM/H) AT THE TEST SITES 
Korsgård test 
site 
 
Mjälga test site 
 
Trigger speed 
basis 
Trigger speed 
(TS) 
Trigger speed 
basis 
Trigger speed 
(TS) 
15th percentile  
42 
15th percentile  
46 
50th percentile  
47 
50th percentile  
49 
85th percentile 
52 
85th percentile  
50 
Clustering 
model 
52-47 
Clustering 
model 
52-49 
The effect of the sign is done by calculating: 
- 
The variation in the mean speed of a vehicle 
travelling before triggering the sign as well as after 
triggering the sign.  
- 
Energy consumption  
 
Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 show the energy consumed on the 
clustering model is actually near the 50th percentile and 
larger than the 85th percentile at both test sites. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Figure 3. Energy consumption in Ah for the clustering model compared to 
the models based on the 15th , 50th  and 85th  percentiles at Korsgård test 
site 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Energy consumption in Ah for the clustering model compared to 
the models based on the 15th , 50th  and 85th  percentiles at Mjälga test site 
Fig. 5 and fig. 6 shows the effect of the clustering model on 
speed reduction compared to 15th, 50th and 85th 
percentiles. The speed reduction was based on the speed 
variation 100 meters before and 100 meters after triggering 
the sign. As seen in the figure, over the cause of one day, 
data were entered into three clusters according to the 
clustering algorithm. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-352-0
INTELLI 2014 : The Third International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

The clustering model performed better at the Mjälga test 
site than at the Korsgård test site. At Korsgård, the greatest 
reduction in speed was in cluster one (nighttime) that had a 
trigger speed in the 15th percentile.  At Mjälga, the greatest 
reduction that occurred at night was with a trigger speed that 
was in the 85th percentile.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Speed reduction for the clustering model compared to the models 
based on 15th, 50th and 85th percentiles at korsgård test site  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Speed reduction for the clustering model compared to the models 
based on 15th, 50th and 85th percentiles at Mjälga test site  
 
In fact, the results obtained from both test sites were not 
similar where both sites have the same speed limit (40 
km/hr). Note that. VAS should be individually configured 
and adapted to the location and its traffic conditions in order 
to result in optimal effectiveness. 
 
VII. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH  
This paper presents an intelligent algorithm that would 
help optimise the trigger point at which the sign should be 
operative. A self-organizing map helps the algorithm find 
the number of cluster and extract the right input dataset that 
is required to perform K-means clustering. K-means 
clustering divides the 24 hours of the day into 3 clusters. K-
means clustering provides the algorithm to determine the 
trigger speed threshold simply by extracting the centroid 
median of the clusters. The comparison in energy 
consumption and speed reduction between the algorithm and 
other models shows that the algorithm is able maintain a 
reasonable level of energy consumption while also 
positively affecting driver behaviour. The algorithm was 
applied to the data set using traffic flow, median speed and 
standard deviation as the main features to categorize the 
time of day. To better assess the usefulness of this 
algorithm, the data set can be extended with more features. 
The data were collected by varying the trigger speed 
threshold value at each site. This data can be also extended 
by altering both the trigger speed threshold and the trigger 
distance threshold. Thus, it is beneficial to configure the 
sign in a way that reflects the actual traffic situation and 
provides optimal energy consumption.  
Future research should also include a comparison between 
the effectiveness of the VAS during the day and at night as 
well as a comparison of the effectiveness of the VAS during 
the week and on the weekend. Meanwhile, the traffic data 
shall further be integrated with weather data sources. The 
results differ between the test sites. This means that the 
location of the sign can have an impact on the study. 
Obviously in order to optimise the effect of the trigger speed 
on a driver’s speed, the VAS should be further adapted to a 
greater diversity of traffic and road conditions. In the long 
term the goal is to develop an “intelligent” VAS which self-
adapts to traffic conditions on site in order to automatically 
operate at the optimum trigger speed. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Nygårdhs and G. Helmers, ‘VMS - Variable Message Signs. 
A Literature Review’, Swedish National Road and Transport 
Research Institue VTI rapport 570A, Linköping, 2007.  
[2] S. Nygårdhs, ‘Literature Review on Variable Message Sign 
2006- 2009’, Swedish National Road and Transport Research 
Institue VTI rapport 15A, Linköping, 2011. 
[3] D. Jomaa, S. Yella, and M. Dougherty, ‘Review of the 
effectiveness of vehicle activated signs’, Journal of 
Transportation Technologies, Vol.3 No.2, 2013. 
[4] Department for transport, ‘Vehicle-Activated Signs’, Traffic 
advisory unit, London, 2003. 
[5] M. A. Winnett and A. H. Wheeler, ‘Vehicle Activated Signs – 
a Large Scale Evaluation’ TRL Report TRL 548, TRL 
Limited, UK, 2002. 
[6] J. Mattox, W. Sarasua, J. Ogle, R. Eckenrode, and A. Dunning, 
‘Development and Evaluation of a Speed-Activated Sign to 
Reduce Speeds in Work Zones’, Transportation Research, 
Record of the National Academies, Washington, 2007, pp. 3-
11. 
[7] L. K. Walter and J. Knowles, ‘Effectiveness of Speed Indicator 
Devices on reducing vehicle speeds in London’, Transport 
Research Laboratory TRL 314, Transport for London, 
London Road Safety Unit, 2008. 
[8]   U. A. Kumar and Y. Dhamija, ‘Comparative Analysis of SOM 
Neural Network with K-means Clustering Algorithm’, 2010 
IEEE International Conference on Management of Innovation 
and Technology (ICMIT), Singapore, June 2010, pp .55-59.  
[9] W. Huai-bin, Y. Hong-liang, X. Zhi-jian, and Y. Zheng, ‘A 
Clustering Algorithm Use SOM and K-Means in Intrusion 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-352-0
INTELLI 2014 : The Third International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

Detection’, 2010 International Conference on E-Business and 
E-Government (ICEE), Guangzhou, May 2010, pp. 1281 - 
1284. 
[10] X. Wang, W. Cottrell, and S. Mu,  ‘Using K-Means 
Clustering to Identify Time-of-Day Break Points for Traffic 
Signal Timing Plans’, Proceedings of the 8th International  
IEEE Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 
Vienna, Austria, September 2005, pp. 13-16. 
[11] J. Vesanto, J. and E. Alhoniemi, E., ‘Clustering of the Self-
Organizing Map’, IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 
vol. 11, no. 3, May 2000, pp. 586-600. 
[12] Y. Chen, J. Hu, Y. Zhang, and X. Li, ‘Traffic Data Analysis 
Using Kernel PCA and Self-Organizing Map’, Proceedings of 
the 2006 IEEE on Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, Tokyo, 
Japan, June. 2006, pp. 472 – 477. 
[13] M. J. Watts and S. P. Worner, ‘Estimating the risk of insect 
species invasion: Kohonen self-organising maps versus k-
means clustering’, Ecological Modelling, Vol. 220, Issue 6, 
2009, pp. 821–829. 
[14] S. K. Shukla, S. Rungta, S., and L. K. Sharma, ‘Self-
Organizing Map based Clustering Approach for Trajectory 
Data’, International Journal of Computer Trends and 
Technology, Vol. 3, No.3, 2012, pp. 321-324.  
[15] T. V. Mathew, ‘Fundamental Relations of Traffic Flow. 
Traffic Engineering and Management’, IIT Bombay, 2012. 
[16] G. J. Kerns, ‘Introduction to Probability and Statistics Using 
R’, First Edition, 2011. 
[17] Hauser, T.A. & Scherer, W.T.‚ ‘Data Mining Tools for Real-
Time Traffic Signal Decision Support and Maintenance’, 
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on 
Systems, Man and Cybernetics, Tucson, AZ, Vol. 3, 2001, pp. 
1471-1477. 
 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-352-0
INTELLI 2014 : The Third International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

