An Intelligent Energy-driven System
for Mobile Health Management
Jialing Wu, Yingxuan Zhu, Lifeng Liu, Han Su, Yizhuo Chen and Jian Li
Email: jialing.wu@live.com, {Yingxuan.zhu, hsu, ychen8, jian.li}@futurewei.com, lifeng.lifengliu@gmail.com,
Futurewei Technologies Inc.
Framingham, Massachusetts 01701
Abstract—Pets have difﬁculties in communicating with their
owners or veterinarians on healthcare problems. Mobile sensing
can consistently detect their health problems and deliver the
problems to their owners, so the owners can help them out.
Data transferring and battery usage are two major challenges in
mobile sensing, especially when continuous and long-term data
transmission are needed if pets get lost. In this paper, we develop
an intelligent energy-driven system for conditional data analysis
and transferring, so sensing devices can work longer and more
efﬁciently without recharging. Our system can be applied to the
sensing devices used in other agents, such as babies, animals, and
patients.
Keywords–Mobile
sensing;
Healthcare
monitoring;
Energy
aware system; Feature embedding.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In mobile sensing ﬁeld, data transferring and battery
consumption are major issues to continuous data tracking
and uploading [1] [2], especially when devices are in the
wild without charge stations. That is why most of mobile
sensing-based health data tracking are mainly operated under
experimental environment where humans intensively control
the sensing devices [3]. The sensing data transmitted to the
cloud are usually raw data, which can consume large amount
of transmission resources with low efﬁciency. However, unlike
human beings who can manually adjust sensor devices and
watch out for battery usage [4] [5] [6], pets (and monitored
animals) are agents who have communication difﬁculty and
cannot operate devices, especially when they get lost in the
wild without power charge stations.
Most of people can communicate with families, friends and
doctors when they are not feeling well. But pets cannot directly
tell their owners when they are sick or in danger. In some
situations, pet owners cannot stay with their pets all day long
because they have to work or travel to other places. However,
pet owners want to make sure the safety of their pets when
they are not around.
As far as we known, there is limited work on developing an
intelligent energy aware system to efﬁciently transfer sensing
data based on real time battery level and help ﬁnd the lost
pets in the wild [7]. In this paper, we use pet as the agent
example, but our methods can be applied to any agents that
have communication difﬁculties, including but not limited to
babies, wild animals, patients, etc.
After this introductory section, in Section II, we explain a
framework to help ﬁnd lost pets using energy aware mobile
sensing. In Section III, we introduce an energy-driven mobile
sensing system for pets.In Section IV, we further go through
how the model is automatically trained and optimized through
feature embedding on the cloud end and then be applied to the
agent device.
II.
FINDME: A MODEL TO FIND LOST PETS BY ENERGY
AWARE MOBILE SENSING
With the prevalence of mobile devices using worldwide,
mobile sensing are widely applied in different areas varying
from GPS tracking [8], activity recognition [5], sleep quality
measuring [9], daily social media usage [10] to personality
traits [6], working performance evaluation [11], and mental
health detection including depression [12] [13], anxiety [14]
[15], and schizophrenia [4] [16]. Sensor equipped devices
are also applied to monitor the health of pets, such as dogs
and cats [17]. But all sensing based devices can not avoid
one essential issue on saving battery and dealing with large
raw data uploading and computing, which is a challenge to
continuous data tracking and recording. This issue will be even
more profound when the pets get lost without power charger.
Once battery is out, there are limited ways to help owners
ﬁnd their pets. Based on real situations, we want to answer
the question: How to prioritize battery consumption and data
processing of mobile sensors in the wild?
1) Sensors applied in the system: Sensors in our system can
be put into two groups: personal sensors embedded in a device
and environmental sensors equipped at home. Personal sensors
refer to thermometer, pulsimeter, sphygmomanometergravity
sensor, GPS, Bluetooth, photoplethysmography, electrocardio-
gram, etc. Environmental sensors include beacon, camera,
microphone ambient light detector, etc. With these two kinds
of sensors, we can record and track agent behaviors both at
home and in the wild, when the agent carries the device.
2) FindMe function applied in different situations: Figure
1 shows the functions of a FindMe model applied in different
situations, at home and in the wild. A wearable device with
integrated sensors will capture pets GPS locations and record
their sound and environment features as well as their health
conditions. When pets are at home, environmental sensors,
such as beacon and camera are also included. When a beacon
detects that a pet is getting into danger, such as standing beside
an open window, it will send an alarm directly to the owner’s
phone. When a camera combined with health sensors detects
that a pet’s health is at risk, such as bleeding or in pains at
home, it will also send warning to the owner. In the wild, if
the sensors in a pet’s device detect that the pet is getting lost
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-796-2
INTERNET 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Evolving Internet

Figure 1. The FindMe model applied in the sensing system
or reported lost, the device will report to the owner about the
pet’s location and provide timely updates of the pet’s safety.
III.
AN ENERGY-DRIVEN MOBILE SENSING SYSTEM FOR
PETS
Regarding the FindMe model discussed in Section II,
energy consumption is a challenge especially when the agents
are in places without power chargers nearby. Unlike human-
beings who can speak with each other and ask for help, pets
cannot speak human languages or ask for help as easily as us.
Instead, they are very dependent and not able to control the
devices manually. A system with energy-driven adaptive data
analysis and upload that can improve battery life of mobile
sensing devices is essential to help these agents get back home
safely.
A. The battery level
Different batteries have different voltage decreasing rates.
They have different discharge curves for real battery test [18].
To develop an energy aware system to save battery intelligently
and automatically, we need to ﬁrst understand their voltage
rate during consumption by time. And what we can do here
is that the battery level can be deﬁned into a lookup table in
the device ROM. We can use lookup table to know battery
consumption and control sensors according to battery levels.
Taking the battery consumption into consideration, the battery
usage is not likely to be decreasing in a linear trend but a sharp
drop after it reaches a certain level. However, with the lookup
table written in the device ROM, a system will get timely
updates about its battery usage rate and make adjustment to
current working sensors.
B. An energy-driven system design and development
In order to prioritize tasks, when the battery level de-
creased, a system should reduce data processing to save power,
i.e., the lower the battery, the less unimportant conditions
should be processed. Let ai be a parameter showing if data of
sensor i can be processed, i.e., ai = 1, depending on battery
level. Assuming a device has m battery levels, the higher the
level, the more power left. Let bi = 1, ..., m be the cutoff
battery level of a sensor, which is predeﬁned for each sensor.
Note that the higher the cutoff level, the less chance a sensor
will work when battery level is low, i.e., a sensor will only
work when the battery level is higher than its cutoff level. Let
bt be the battery level at time t, H be the Heaviside function,
and
ai = H(m − bi) =

1,
if bi < bt
0,
if bi >= bt
Note that ai will be normalized based on the available
sensors in the integration process, the green rectangle in the
ﬁgure. The goal of using ai is to only process the important
conditions when battery level is low, Figure 2.
In Figure 3, another innovation of this system design is
about using Long Short-term Memory (LSTM) to automati-
cally learn the time-series data continuously from the multiple
sensors. Facilitated by the deep learning model of LSTM, this
system can intelligently react to the battery level by opening or
shut down certain sensors to save energy and make the device
working longer. Usually, some less important sensors with high
data transferring demands will be shut down or decreased
usage when the battery is running out in the wild. Not like
the manually controlling and decision making of which sensor
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-796-2
INTERNET 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Evolving Internet

Figure 2. An energy-driven system for adaptive data proﬁle and upload
should be ﬁrst shut down or decrease usage frequency to what
extent, our system aims to automatically learn from the data
and making intelligent decision from the sensors, environment
and battery level. This could be very helpful and essential for
lost pets or agents to get more support and protection in the
wild.
In our model, LSTM network is applied to track the
changes in sensor data. Other machine learning methods can
be applied to this modal too. Because each agent is different,
so not only the values but the value changes are important
features to tell how an agent’s conditions change. Thus, a
machine learning method that can track changes will help track
the conditions of an agent.
IV.
FEATURE EMBEDDING ON THE CLOUD-END
How could our system automatically learn when to lower
the frequency or shut down certain sensors? On the agent’s
device, we utilized feature embedding trained on the cloud
service and then applied to local end (agent’s device) after a
ﬁne-tuned model is achieved. Feature embedding [19] is an
emerging research area which intends to transform features
from the original space into a new space to support effective
learning. A generalized feature embedding algorithm (GEL)
can learn feature embedding from any type of data or data
with mixed feature types [20]. Speciﬁcally, multi-modal sensor
data (i.e., time-series data from various sensors) are uploaded
to the cloud where a feature embedding encoder can be trained
based on the data from all devices. Note this step can be
unsupervised that does not require any user input. Eventually,
we obtain feature embedding algorithms for each sensor (or
a combination of several related sensors), where a time series
data can be represented as a special point in a multidimensional
space. Similar time series (that most probably have similar
semantics) will be mapped to close areas in the space. Such
embedding algorithm are updated online and synced to the
portable devices regularly.
Once the edge has downloaded the embedding algorithm
from the cloud, it can generate features for its own sensor data
using the model. In this way, it utilizes the patterns learned
from the cloud. Locally on the edge, a customized decision
tree model is trained using the embedded features and user
labels. The owners or doctors can label some period as risky,
so that the model can learn local thresholds for sensor data to
classify risky behavior in the future.
V.
CONCLUSION
Mobile sensing is important in health management. The
FindMe model facilitates timely monitoring and health warn-
ing to owners when agents are in danger or get lost. To
extend battery life and achieve intelligent sensing in the
wild, we design an energy-driven system for conditional data
analysis and transferring, so sensor device can work longer
and more efﬁciently. This system can be utilized in devices for
agents with communication difﬁculty. Agents, such as infants,
toddlers, seniors or patients with dementia and Alzheimer’s
disease are vulnerable and dependent to caregivers and med-
ical devices. Our model will make sure that these devices
provide seamless cares to agents. In addition, our system and
methods can extended to IoT scenarios, such as machine-to-
machine(M2M) communications as well as edges and cloud
nodes with communication challenges.
REFERENCES
[1]
Y. Kim, J. Sa, Y. Chung, D. Park, and S. Lee, “Resource-efﬁcient
pet dog sound events classiﬁcation using lstm-fcn based on time-series
data,” Sensors, vol. 18, no. 11, 2018, p. 4019.
[2]
G. M. Harari, W. Wang, S. R. M¨uller, R. Wang, and A. T. Campbell,
“Participants’ compliance and experiences with self-tracking using a
smartphone sensing app,” in Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Interna-
tional Joint Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing and
Proceedings of the 2017 ACM International Symposium on Wearable
Computers, 2017, pp. 57–60.
[3]
B. Belda, M. Enomoto, B. Case, and B. Lascelles, “Initial evaluation of
petpace activity monitor,” The Veterinary Journal, vol. 237, 2018, pp.
63–68.
[4]
W. Wang, S. Mirjafari, G. Harari, D. Ben-Zeev, R. Brian, T. Choudhury,
M. Hauser, J. Kane, K. Masaba, S. Nepal et al., “Social sensing:
Assessing social functioning of patients living with schizophrenia using
mobile phone sensing,” in Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2020, pp. 1–15.
[5]
R. Wang, W. Wang, A. DaSilva, J. F. Huckins, W. M. Kelley, T. F.
Heatherton, and A. T. Campbell, “Tracking depression dynamics in
college students using mobile phone and wearable sensing,” Proceedings
of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technolo-
gies, vol. 2, no. 1, 2018, pp. 1–26.
[6]
W. Wang, G. M. Harari, R. Wang, S. R. M¨uller, S. Mirjafari, K. Masaba,
and A. T. Campbell, “Sensing behavioral change over time: Using
within-person variability features from mobile sensing to predict person-
ality traits,” Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable
and Ubiquitous Technologies, vol. 2, no. 3, 2018, pp. 1–21.
[7]
D. Ben-Zeev, R. Brian, R. Wang, W. Wang, A. T. Campbell, M. S. Aung,
M. Merrill, V. W. Tseng, T. Choudhury, M. Hauser et al., “Crosscheck:
Integrating self-report, behavioral sensing, and smartphone use to iden-
tify digital indicators of psychotic relapse.” Psychiatric rehabilitation
journal, vol. 40, no. 3, 2017, p. 266.
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-796-2
INTERNET 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Evolving Internet

[8]
S. Van der Spek, J. Van Schaick, P. De Bois, and R. De Haan, “Sensing
human activity: Gps tracking,” Sensors, vol. 9, no. 4, 2009, pp. 3033–
3055.
[9]
N. D. Lane, M. Lin, M. Mohammod, X. Yang, H. Lu, G. Cardone,
S. Ali, A. Doryab, E. Berke, A. T. Campbell et al., “Bewell: Sensing
sleep, physical activities and social interactions to promote wellbeing,”
Mobile Networks and Applications, vol. 19, no. 3, 2014, pp. 345–359.
[10]
J. F. Huckins, A. W. DaSilva, W. Wang, E. Hedlund, C. Rogers,
S. K. Nepal, J. Wu, M. Obuchi, E. I. Murphy, M. L. Meyer et al.,
“Mental health and behavior of college students during the early phases
of the covid-19 pandemic: Longitudinal smartphone and ecological
momentary assessment study,” Journal of Medical Internet Research,
vol. 22, no. 6, 2020, p. e20185.
[11]
S. Mirjafari, K. Masaba, T. Grover, W. Wang, P. Audia, A. T. Campbell,
N. V. Chawla, V. D. Swain, M. D. Choudhury, A. K. Dey et al.,
“Differentiating higher and lower job performers in the workplace
using mobile sensing,” Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile,
Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, vol. 3, no. 2, 2019, pp. 1–24.
[12]
R. Wang, W. Wang, M. S. Aung, D. Ben-Zeev, R. Brian, A. T. Campbell,
T. Choudhury, M. Hauser, J. Kane, E. A. Scherer et al., “Predicting
symptom trajectories of schizophrenia using mobile sensing,” Proceed-
ings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous
Technologies, vol. 1, no. 3, 2017, pp. 1–24.
[13]
J. F. Huckins, A. W. DaSilva, R. Wang, W. Wang, E. L. Hedlund, E. I.
Murphy, R. B. Lopez, C. Rogers, P. E. Holtzheimer, W. M. Kelley et al.,
“Fusing mobile phone sensing and brain imaging to assess depression
in college students,” Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol. 13, 2019, p. 248.
[14]
P. I. Chow, K. Fua, Y. Huang, W. Bonelli, H. Xiong, L. E. Barnes,
and B. A. Teachman, “Using mobile sensing to test clinical models
of depression, social anxiety, state affect, and social isolation among
college students,” Journal of medical Internet research, vol. 19, no. 3,
2017, p. e62.
[15]
A. W. DaSilva, J. F. Huckins, R. Wang, W. Wang, D. D. Wagner, and
A. T. Campbell, “Correlates of stress in the college environment uncov-
ered by the application of penalized generalized estimating equations to
mobile sensing data,” JMIR mHealth and uHealth, vol. 7, no. 3, 2019,
p. e12084.
[16]
B. Buck, E. Scherer, R. Brian, R. Wang, W. Wang, A. Campbell,
T. Choudhury, M. Hauser, J. M. Kane, and D. Ben-Zeev, “Relationships
between smartphone social behavior and relapse in schizophrenia: a
preliminary report,” Schizophrenia research, vol. 208, 2019, pp. 167–
172.
[17]
M. Zakharov, A. Dagan, M. Bukchin, and A. Menkes, “Non-invasive
automatic monitoring of pet animal’s core temperature,” Nov. 21 2017,
uS Patent 9,823,138.
[18]
P. Vyroubal, T. Kazda, J. Maxa, J. Vondr´ak, M. Sedlaˇr´ıkov´a, J. Tich`y,
and R. Cip´ın, “3d modelling and study of electrochemical character-
istics and thermal stability of commercial accumulator by simulation
methods,” Int. J. Electrochem. Sci, vol. 11, 2016, pp. 1938–1950.
[19]
Y. Jia, E. Shelhamer, J. Donahue, S. Karayev, J. Long, R. Girshick,
S. Guadarrama, and T. Darrell, “Caffe: Convolutional architecture for
fast feature embedding,” in Proceedings of the 22nd ACM international
conference on Multimedia, 2014, pp. 675–678.
[20]
E. Golinko and X. Zhu, “Generalized feature embedding for supervised,
unsupervised, and online learning tasks,” Information Systems Frontiers,
vol. 21, no. 1, 2019, pp. 125–142.
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-796-2
INTERNET 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Evolving Internet

