Loop Users in: The Key to Cross-Platform Data Interoperability
Han Su, Jialing Wu, Lifeng Liu,
Yingxuan Zhu, Jian Li
Futurewei Technologies
Boston, Massachusetts
Email: (hsu, jwu3,
lifeng.liu, yingxuan.zhu,
jian.li)@futurewei.com
Liyang Zhu, Boyan Xu
New York University
New York, USA
Email: (bx376, tomzhu)@nyu.edu
Abstract—The lack of data interoperability on today’s Internet
platforms has led to data ownership problems, which further lead
to the deprivation of netizen participation and representation
in the data economy. In this paper, we conclude that user-
oriented data interoperability is the key to change the siloed
app ecosystem toward a more decentralized direction. This paper
examines the various attempts made by the industry to increase
interoperability at different levels: software level, platform level,
and infrastructure level. Web 1.0 granted netizens the right to
view online content and Web 2.0 (Apps) has given netizens the
right to publish in a participatory manner. In this paper, we
envision that the next-generation Internet platforms will enable
netizens to access personal storage and computation, which can
recuperate netizens’ right for data ownership and representation
in the data economy.
Keywords–Data Interoperability; Web 3.0; Data Ownership; App
Ecosystem; Data Economy; Privacy.
I.
INTRODUCTION
With the rise of Internet companies, Internet platforms have
become more centralized in terms of data storage, which has
led to myriad problems including data ownership [1]-[3] and
privacy issues [4]-[6]. The rise of apps and the decline of the
World Wide Web exacerbate the problem [7], [8]. A major
drawback of the app ecosystem where Internet companies
control most resources is the lack of data interoperability
between platforms [9], making the current app ecosystem de
facto app silos. Data interoperability [10], [11] not only means
different platforms sharing data between each other, but also
addresses the ability of users, platforms and other agencies
who create, exchange and consume data to have clear, shared
expectations for the usage, context, and meaning of the data
[12].
App silos (see Figure 1) depict the ill status quo of different
apps practicing their own data standards while leaving users
out of the loop. The lack of data interoperability has led to
two major issues. First, Internet companies have made the
data generated on their platforms as private properties and
make proﬁts through which, e.g., by enhancing ads with data-
driven micro-targeting means, or directly selling user data.
Second, netizen online data are shattered on different platforms
with different accounts. The popular narrative of big data is
that platforms may learn your preferences to provide better-
personalized services. However, the app silo status quo thwarts
the ideal, since an app can only learn about a limited part of
the user. None of them can see the whole picture, nor could
the user themselves, which makes it less possible to maximize
the potential value from user data.
Moreover, the lack of data interoperability also exacerbates
the unvirtuous deeds and competitions in the internet industry,
for big companies will always be in an advantageous, if not
hegemonic position in data collections and data trades. Since
users are left out of the loop of the sales and future usages
of their data, these kinds of data sales and analysis deeds
in the capitalism market will ultimately commodify personal
information and let corporations prey back on users.
Figure 1. App Silo.
Dissatisﬁed with the status quo, innovators in the Internet
ﬁeld have been developing new forms of protocols or technolo-
gies to increase interoperability between different agents, e.g.,
the decentralized web movement and linked-data platforms in
the Web ﬁeld [13], [14], and the burgeoning use of Application
Program Interface (API) [15] in the Internet industry.
The purpose of this paper is to introduce an ongoing
project. Our aim is to protect user privacy, facilitate data
management online and enhance data interoperability among
web apps. This paper will cover the theories, methods and
products of our project.
The paper is structured as follows: Section II describes the
three levels of data interoperability with real-world examples.
Section III illustrates the architecture and characteristics of our
end-user customizable platform design proposed in the Alora
project and incorporated in its web based portal app called
Alora.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-796-2
INTERNET 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Evolving Internet

TABLE I. THREE MAJOR ISSUES ON TODAY’S INTERNET
Issue
Description
Online Privacy
Without resorting to third party
services, netizens cannot tell if a
website is collecting certain cookies or
using trackers, nor could netizens
disable them.
Data Storage
Online activities only enrich the
databases of Internet companies, rather
than the power of netizens to control
what they want to see. Moreover, the
databases of different apps are not
interoperable.
Micro-targeting Advertising
Although most of the Internet is free to
browse for netizens, yet we are paying
with our attention to the free services,
which may eventually cost more due to
the asymmetric information in the
market.
II.
THREE LEVELS OF DATA INTEROPERABILITY AND
EXISTING EXAMPLES
The prevailing data ownership issues stem from when
Internet companies make it a norm to collect and privatize
user data, which has led to the rise of advertising-supported
business models. As scrutinized by Wu [16], Internet platforms
provide user free diversion in exchange for user attention,
which is monetized through advertising, and the efﬁciency of
which is enhanced by micro-targeting and recommendation
systems based on the data collected by internet companies.
Internet companies play the role of “attention merchants”, a
term coined by Wu to describe the role played by Internet
companies in the advertising model [16]. We have listed three
major problems faced by today’s Internet users due to the lack
of data interoperability in today’s Internet platforms, as shown
in Table 1.
A. Software Level Interoperability
Software level interoperability refers to the scenario that
the owner of the software designs data interoperability protocol
and deﬁnes how their data will be accessed by outside parties.
The app ecosystem has been constantly making progress
towards software level data interoperability. We are seeing an
ever-growing API ecosystem. With API, outside developers
can access data in the API providers’ servers with the pro-
vided calls and requests. For example, team collaboration app
Slack [17] has integrated more than 2000 frequently used
services into their platform, including Ofﬁce 365 R⃝, GitHub,
and Google Drive.
Emerging products like Zapier and IFTTT, whose slogan
is “get all your apps and devices talking to each other”, are de
facto a combination of APIs. There are plenty of explorations
to improve the interoperability between apps, and API is the
best representative of which, yet software level interoperability
also has the app itself as the limit–making things beyond the
app out of reach.
B. Platform Level Interoperability
Platform level interoperability denotes a parent platform
that deﬁnes the data interoperability protocol adopted by
agencies residing on the platform.
In platform level interoperability, the parent platform pro-
motes platform level interoperability in a top-down manner
by enforcing standardized developing languages, data formats,
and user interaction components. One recent popular instance
is the Mini Program inside a platform. The Chinese social
media platform WeChat [18], [19] ﬁrst published its Mini
Program platform in 2017, followed by Baidu and Alipay.
The parent platform provides a slew of developing standards
and functioning modules, so that all functions are accessible
to developers and there is no need to reproduce existing
solutions: authentication and authorization, QR code scanning,
augmented reality modules, online payment, map and location
service, etc. Moreover, data storage is also partially interop-
erable between Mini Programs and the parent platform. With
the help of various interoperable functions, Mini Programs can
stay light in size and focus on functions the main platform does
not provide. According to the 2019 year-end report, WeChat
has more than 3 million Mini Programs on its platform with
330 million daily active users. Moreover, users on average have
used 60 different Mini Programs in 2019.
C. Infrastructure Level Interoperability
Infrastructure level interoperability refers to a thorough set
of protocols from the front-end interface to back-end comput-
ing and storage, which all agents need to have a consensus on
the use of the data.
One and probably the only prevailing Internet platform
that meets infrastructure level interoperability is the World
Wide Web. Backed by W3C standards, the web is an immense
platform where netizens read data and write data. However,
the interoperability of the web has been declining with the
prevalence of platforms with private databases when most of
the data collecting actions are underwater.
In this section, we analyze three projects aiming at pro-
viding infrastructure level interoperability to internet services:
SoLiD, Brave, and Blockstack.
Social Linked Data (SoLiD) [20], [21] is the new project
proposed by Sir Tim Berners-Lee, the inventor of the World
Wide Web. SoLiD targets at improving data interoperability in
the infrastructure level by granting users access to their data
storage with the Personal Data Pod, which gives read/write
permissions to different apps. Social linked data also guar-
antees social connections to be a secured property linked
with users’ WebID [22], [23], which makes authentication and
social connection infrastructures on the web. SoLiD aims to
rejuvenate the web through solving problems, which we have
concluded below: privacy, storage, and advertising.
Brave is an open-sourced browser known for its novel
solutions to privacy and advertising issues. Brave aims to build
the infrastructure for online content production and consump-
tion business model. As Brave points out on its website, the
foremost problem on today’s Internet for Brave to solve is:
“[a]s a user, access to your web activity and data is sold to
the highest bidder. Internet giants grow rich, while publishers
go out of business. And the entire system is rife with ad fraud
[24].” Brave helps its users to block data-grabbing ads and
trackers [25]. Moreover, Brave introduces the Brave Attention
Token, a cryptocurrency issued by Brave that allows users to
earn frequent ﬂier-like tokens for browsing and support web
creators with the tokens. In this way, contents on the Internet
will get matched with economic values without resorting to the
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-796-2
INTERNET 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Evolving Internet

advertisement. Brave envisions Brave Attention Token as a new
infrastructure for linking valuable content with user attention
and money.
Blockstack is a platform with the overarching mission
of giving users direct ownership of their internet assets and
protecting user privacy [26]. Blockstack is trying to achieve
the goal of infrastructure level interoperability for dApps by
providing a suite of developer tools and protocols intended to
lower the start-up barriers of dApp development [27]. The most
important feature is its enforcement of universal login with
Blockstack ID. Blockstack keeps a record of user identity on
a blockchain database and then asks its user to set up accounts
with apps built on Blockstack [28].
III.
ARCHITECTURE AND CHARACTERISTICS OF OUR
END-USER CUSTOMIZABLE PLATFORM–ALORA
As discussed, Alora is a web-based platform being devel-
oped by our team [29]. Alora addresses the three problems
aforementioned, i.e., data privacy, personal storage, and adver-
tising, in a user-friendly way with existing web technologies.
Figure 2 is a screenshot of the current version of Alora
extension. The code is open-sourced [30].
Figure 2. Alora Privacy Extension.
A. Data Privacy
Alora provides a digital footprint management system in
the form of a browser extension, as shown in Fig. 3. Based
on EFF’s privacy badger project [31], the extension can detect
third party trackers and automatically block it for the users.
Moreover, Alora also automates users’ preference on managing
privacy-related data on chosen sites including cache, cookies,
history, etc. For example, if a user does not want to save
history nor cookies on www.amazon.com, the user can switch
on the button on Alora, and the extension will delete cookies
and history data related to the selected URL automatically.
Alora also provides an email for every user to do account
management.
Figure 3. Alora’s Customizable Personal Portal User Interface.
B. Personal Data Management.
Alora provides a personal portal page that serves as the
homepage of our users, where frequently visited websites will
be prioritized into a cluster of lists, as shown in the left
column in Figure 4. Furthermore, with the help of APIs of the
Figure 4. Alora’s Automation for User Private Data Management.
frequently used services of the user, users are able to maintain
a customizable portal–e.g, email notiﬁcations, Twitter feeds,
messages, etc. In this way, the features of different services
are interoperable with the user’s Alora homepage. Moreover,
Alora affords users the function to add User Generated Paratext
upon resources (see Fig. 4), which means users can save, like,
comment, annotate the resources they have browsed online. In
this way, user data and metadata are guarded inside the user’s
personal data zone at the local storage or user’s Alora personal
cloud, which is analogous to the Personal Data Pod in SoLiD,
rather than Internet companies’ servers. In future work, Alora
also plans to generate user embedding with locally stored user
data, or lets users allow third-party services to run federated
learning models on certain local user data [32]. The strength of
Alora is that the data structure is a thorough one that contains
all aspects of the user’s online activities, rather than a biased
one restricted to a single service. What’s more, users have full
knowledge and control of the data collecting and management
process.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-796-2
INTERNET 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Evolving Internet

Figure 5. Alora’s Customizable Personal Portal User Interface.
As shown in Figure 5, Internet resources generated through
Alora include the User Generated Paratext and the User
Embedding with a user manageable data proﬁle, which are
controlled by the user and accessible by third parties through
Alora APIs–which users have the right to decide the read/write
accessibility of their resources. Therefore, with the help of
Alora, user online data is at the ﬁngertips of users in their
personal data storage rather than in custody by cloud service
vendors. Such an in-app approach elevates the visibility of
privacy control and grants the user convenient control of their
personal data management.
C. Data Proﬁle Management (Work in progress)
Based on the user metadata including browsing history,
user action data, and the user-generated paratext including
likes, comments, and annotations, Alora will be able to train a
user embedding, and generate a user-readable and -manageable
data proﬁle. The proﬁle will include different tags as in
Figure 6. User embedding is a popular method used in today’s
TABLE II. USER DATA PROFILE EXAMPLE
Key
Value
Age
18-24 years old
Gender
Male
Interests
Fitness, Adventure Games
Work
Internet Industry
recommendation systems, yet most labels are latent [33]. The
goal of Alora’s user data proﬁle design above is to make the
latent labels transparent to the users, and users will also have
the right to manage their data proﬁle and assign accessibilities
to their proﬁle and metadata. Furthermore, third party services
will no longer need to resort to trackers to collect user data,
which is hard to be comprehensive especially for small and
medium businesses. We believe the impacts of Alora on the
next-generation Internet are huge by looping users back in the
game. Data economy and the advertising business model of
Internet companies will be fundamentally changed by looping
users in the data mining process. The data monopoly by giant
Internet companies will get destroyed by granting users the
right to maintain a more comprehensive user data proﬁle. Last
but not least, the realization of data ownership and willingness
to pay for content online will go hand in hand–if users
are willing to pay for better data ownership, they will also
appreciate the value of information and will be willing to get
information as a service.
IV.
CONCLUSION
This paper scrutinized the compelling problems faced by
Internet users today: the privatization of user data has led to the
ill status quo of today’s Internet–lack of data interoperability
between platforms and users, myriad data breaches, and vari-
ous data ownership issues. The quintessential problem is not
technical bottlenecks, but a lack of user-oriented infrastructure
that protects the data ownership of Internet users, the sources
of data that are ironically left out of today’s data economy.
Alore aims to provide open-sourced, transparent, secure, user-
oriented personal cloud computing solutions. By looping users
in the data collection and mining process, the latent data
collection and data mining process will become transparent
to users, resulting in better data interoperability between users
and services.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was partially supported by Futurewei Tech-
nologies. We thank our team members from MIT, NYU, CMU
who contribute to the Alora project with their expertise, and
the global contributors of Alora.
REFERENCES
[1]
H. Kopka and P. W. Daly, A Guide to LATEX, 3rd ed.
Harlow, England:
Addison-Wesley, 1999.
[2]
S. Bertram and C.-P. Georg, “A privacy-preserving system for data
ownership using blockchain and distributed databases,” arXiv preprint-
arXiv:1810.11655, 2018
[3]
S. M. Khan and K. W. Hamlen, “Anonymous cloud: A data ownership
privacy provider framework in cloud computing,” in 2012 IEEE 11thIn-
ternational Conference on Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and
Communications. IEEE, 2012, pp. 170–176.
[4]
S. Zuboff, “Big other: surveillance capitalism and the prospects of an
information civilization,” Journal of Information Technology, vol. 30,no.
1, 2015, pp. 75–89.
[5]
D. Kifer and A. Machanavajjhala, “No free lunch in data privacy,”
inProceedings of the 2011 ACM SIGMOD International Conference
onManagement of data, 2011, pp. 193–204.
[6]
M. S. Ali, K. Dolui, and F. Antonelli, “Iot data privacy via block chains
and ipfs,” in Proceedings of the seventh international conference on the
internet of things, 2017, pp. 1–7.
[7]
Pentina, L. Zhang, H. Bata, and Y. Chen, “Exploring privacy paradox in
information-sensitive mobile app adoption: A cross-cultural comparison,”
Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 65, 2016, pp. 409–419.
[8]
V. M. Wottrich, E. A. van Reijmersdal, and E. G. Smit, “The pri-
vacy trade-off for mobile app downloads: The roles of app value,
intrusive-ness, and privacy concerns,” Decision Support Systems, vol.
106, 2018,pp. 44–52.
[9]
A. Kadadi, R. Agrawal, C. Nyamful, and R. Atiq, “Challenges of data
integration and interoperability in big data,” in 2014 IEEE international
conference on big data (big data). IEEE, 2014, pp. 38–40.
[10]
J. Buck, S. J. Bainbridge, E. F. Burger, A. C. Kraberg, M. Casari,K. S.
Casey, L. Darroch, J. D. Rio, K. Metﬁes, E. Delory et al.,“Ocean data
product integration through innovation-the next level of data interoper-
ability,” Frontiers in Marine Science, vol. 6, 2019, p. 32.
[11]
R. Nawaratne, D. Alahakoon, D. De Silva, P. Chhetri, and N. Chil-
amkurti, “Self-evolving intelligent algorithms for facilitating data inter-
operability in iot environments,” Future Generation Computer Sys-
tems,vol. 86, 2018, pp. 421–432.
[12]
“What Is ‘Data Interoperability?”.” [cited 12 July 2020] The Data
Interoperability Standards Consortium , datainteroperability.org/.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-796-2
INTERNET 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Evolving Internet

[13]
N. Vogel, “The great decentralization: How web 3.0 will weaken
copyrights,” J. Marshall Rev. Intell. Prop. L., vol. 15, 2015, p. 136.
[14]
Zuboff,
Shoshana.
”Google
as
a
Fortune
Teller:
The
Secrets
of
Surveillance
Capitalism.”
FAZ.NET.
[cited
12
July
2020]
https://www.faz.net/aktuell/feuilleton/debatten/the-
digitaldebate/
shoshana-zuboff-secrets-of-surveillance-capitalism
-
14103616.html?printPagedArticle=true.
[15]
A. W. Smith, A. J. Moore, D. S. Ebbo, E. B. Christensen, E. B. Olson,F.
A. Yeon, J. V. Rajan, K. W. Ballinger, M. Vasandani, M. T. Anderset al.,
“Application program interface that enables communication for a network
software platform,” Oct. 3 2006, US Patent 7,117,504.
[16]
T. Wu, The attention merchants: The epic scramble to get inside our
heads. Vintage, 2017.
[17]
J. Hill, R. LaFollette, R. Grosso, D. Axelson, K. Hart, and E. Mc-
Donough, “Using slack to facilitate virtual small groups for individual-
ized interactive instruction,” AEM education and training, vol. 3, no.
1,2019, pp. 92–95.
[18]
Lin, J. Qiu, and P. Chen, “Exploration and practice on intelligent teach-
ing patterns based on wechat mini program,” in Proceedings of the 2020
9th International Conference on Educational and InformationTechnology,
2020, pp. 153–157.
[19]
L. Hao, F. Wan, N. Ma, and Y. Wang, “Analysis of the development of
wechat mini program,” in J. Phys.: Conf. Ser, vol. 1087, 2018, p.062040..
[20]
A. V. Sambra, E. Mansour, S. Hawke, M. Zereba, N. Greco, A.
Ghanem,D. Zagidulin, A. Aboulnaga, and T. Berners-Lee, “Solid: a
platform for decentralized social applications based on linked data,”
TechnicalReport, MIT CSAIL
Qatar Computing Research Institute,
Tech. Rep.,2016.
[21]
J. Werbrouck, P. Pauwels, J. Beetz, and L. van Berlo, “Towards
a decentralised common data environment using linked building data
andthe solid ecosystem,” in 36th CIB W78 2019 Conference, 2019,
pp.113–123..
[22]
G. Huang and K. Mak, “Webid: A web-based framework to support
early supplier involvement in new product development,” Robotics
andComputer-Integrated Manufacturing, vol. 16, no. 2-3, 2000, pp.
169–179.
[23]
P. Mainini and A. Laube-Rosenpﬂanzer, “Access control in linked data
using webid,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.03019, 2016.
[24]
Secure, Fast Private Web Browser with Adblocker — Brave Browser
[Internet]. Brave Browser. 2020 [cited 12 July 2020]. Available from:
https://brave.com/?ref=soc369.
[25]
Tung, Liam. ”Brave deﬁes Google’s moves to cripple ad-blocking with
new 69x faster Rust engine”. ZDNet. Retrieved 1 July 2020.
[26]
About [Internet]. Blockstack.org. 2020 [cited 12 July 2020]. Available
from: https://blockstack.org/about.
[27]
Popper N. Tech Thinks It Has a Fix for the Problems It Created:
Blockchain [Internet]. Nytimes.com. 2020 [cited 12 July 2020]. Avail-
able from: https://www.nytimes.com/2018/04/01/technology/blockch ain-
uses.html
[28]
Buchko S. What Is Blockstack (STX)? — The First SEC-Qualiﬁed
Token Offering [Internet]. CoinCentral. 2020 [cited 12 July 2020].
Available from: https://coincentral.com/blockstack-stx/
[29]
The Privoce Project [Internet]. Privoce.com. 2020 [cited 12 July 2020].
Available from: http://privoce.com.
[30]
The Privoce Project [Internet]. . 2020 [cited 7 Oct 2020]. Available
from: https://github.com/privoce
[31]
Privacy Badger [Internet]. Electronic Frontier Foundation. 2020 [cited
12 July 2020]. Available from: https://privacybadger.org
[32]
D. Zhang, J. Yin, X. Zhu, and C. Zhang, “User proﬁle preserving
social network embedding,” in IJCAI International Joint Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2017.
[33]
X. He, L. Liao, H. Zhang, L. Nie, X. Hu, and T.-S. Chua, “Neural col-
laborative ﬁltering,” in Proceedings of the 26th international conference
on world wide web, 2017, pp. 173–182.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-796-2
INTERNET 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Evolving Internet

