 
  
 
 
An Efficient Search Scheme Based on Perfect Difference Graph for P2P Networks 
 
 
Chen-Wei Wang and Yaw-Chung Chen  
Department of Computer Science  
National Chiao Tung University 
Hsinchu, Taiwan 
{iverson2220@yahoo.com.tw, ycchen@cs.nctu.edu.tw} 
 
 
Abstract - We propose an efficient search scheme for multi-layer 
unstructured P2P systems, and show that it is not only reliable, 
but also scalable. To the best of our knowledge, there are few 
researches focusing on the reliable and scalable search 
mechanism for unstructured P2P systems. The broadcasting 
performance of the P2P system is enhanced through the use of a 
Multi-hop Index Replication with Perfect Difference Graph 
(PDG) forwarding algorithm, which makes certain that each 
super-peer receives just one copy of the broadcast message. 
Furthermore, by using the Multi-hop Index, a super-peer has 
extra information to know whether the queried file is available 
or not. The experimental results show that our proposed scheme 
improves existing unstructured P2P systems in terms of a higher 
query success ratio, fewer query flooding messages and shorter 
average delays. In other words, our proposed scheme achieves 
high scalability, low communication overhead and improved 
performance of query responses. 
 
Keywords: Perfect Difference Graph; P2P systems; Multihop-
index 
 
I.    INTRODUCTION 
 
Structured P2P overlay networks can provide efficient 
and accurate query service but it needs a large overhead to 
maintain the distributed hash table (DHT) and suffers peer 
churn. Measurement studies of deployed P2P overlays 
[19][20] show a high rate of churn. Unstructured P2P 
overlays use flooding or random walks to look up data items. 
It is resilient to churn, but its queries may generate a large 
volume of traffic and cause systems un-scalable. Although 
queries by using random walk reduce the traffic volume, huge 
traffic overhead still occurs when the requested resource does 
not exist. Unfortunately, this situation happens often. In [7] 
authors observed that roughly a half of the queries cannot be 
matched. A solution to reduce the query traffic is setting the 
time-to-live (TTL) of query packets to a small value. 
However, this approach will search only a small portion of 
the peers in the system and queries are very likely failed even 
if the requested resource does exist. Measurement studies on 
actual unstructured P2P networks observed that the ratio of 
successful query is typically around 10% [21].  
In this paper, we propose Multi-hop Index Replication 
that can improve search performance for rare objects. Index 
replication features not only much lower overhead compared 
with data replication, but also more effective for improving 
the scalability of unstructured networks [6][11][20]. Our 
Multi-hop Index Replication with PDG forwarding algorithm 
eliminates the impacts of redundant query flooding messages 
and reduces the traffic in searching unavailable files. We use 
a so-called bootstrap peer (BSP) to maintain a super-peer 
table, a peer joining the P2P network and wishing to become 
a super-peer must first send a request to the BSP. After 
examining the requesting peer’s bandwidth conditions, the 
BSP may select the peer as a super-peer, and send it the 
corresponding connection information or register the peer as 
a redundant super-peer.  
When the overlay topology is established, a pure PDG 
[8][9] forwarding algorithm can be used to transport the 
query messages from the originating super-peer to other 
super-peers in such a way that each super-peer receives just 
one copy of the message. In addition, each super-peer has to 
maintain an AVL tree-based index that is constructed with a 
randomly generated key. The average-case complexity of 
search, insert, and delete operations is O(log n), where n is 
the number of shared files in the overlay network. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 
II we present the background related to both structured P2P 
and unstructured P2P systems. In Section III, we discuss the 
proposed hybrid P2P system with analytic models. In Section 
IV, we evaluate the effectiveness of our methods and discuss 
the performance of the system. We conclude the work and 
address the future issues in Section V. 
 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
 
Peer-to-peer (P2P) architecture is an alternative to the 
traditional client/server architecture. P2P makes it possible 
for users to organize themselves into ad hoc groups that can 
efficiently and securely handle requests, share resources, 
collaborate, and communicate. As P2P systems evolve, we 
can anticipate the emergence of a wide variety of online 
communities [18]. 
 
A. P2P File Sharing Applications 
Many P2P systems have been proposed for different 
applications [1]-[6], [10]-[14]. In this paper, we focus on P2P 
overlays for efficient data (file) sharing among peers. The 
Content Addressable Network (CAN) [15] was proposed for 
file sharing and the entire space is partitioned to distinct 
zones such that each peer is in charge of one zone. Every peer 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-349-0
INTERNET 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Evolving Internet

 
  
 
 
maintains a routing table which holds the IP address of its 
neighbors in the coordinate space. The data is stored into and 
retrieved from the peer that owns the zone. CAN takes 
advantage of the ordering of the Cartesian coordinate space 
in the routing protocol.  
Chord [10] organizes the node keys into a so–called chord 
ring, where each peer is assigned an ID. Peers are inserted 
into the ring according to the order of their IDs. Each peer has 
a successor and a predecessor. To accelerate the search, each 
peer maintains a finger table, in which each finger points to a 
peer with a certain distance from the current peer. Compared 
to CAN, Chord is simpler as the key is hashed into a one 
dimensional space. 
Gnutella [12] is a decentralized unstructured peer-to-peer 
overlay, in which peers join the system based on loose rules. 
To look up a data item, a peer sends a flooding search request 
to all neighbors within certain radius. In Gnutella, flooding 
method consumes a lot of network bandwidth and hence the 
system is not scalable. Also, it is usually hard to find a rare 
data item because it is unlikely to flood the search request to 
all peers. The study in [18] improved the efficiency while 
looking up a rare data item.  
BitTorrent[13] is a centralized unstructured P2P network. 
It uses a central server called tracker to keep track of peers in 
which files are stored. The tracker records the network 
location of each client either uploading or downloading the 
file associated with a torrent. Each file has a corresponding 
torrent file stored in the tracker. Upon receiving a download 
request, the tracker sends back a random list of peers which 
with the same file. BitTorrent suffers single point of failure 
problem at the central server.  
YAPPERS 
[15] 
combines 
both 
structured 
and 
unstructured P2P overlays to provide a scalable search 
service over an arbitrary topology. It is designed for efficient 
partial search which only returns partial values of data. For a 
complete search, YAPPERS still needs to flood the query to 
all peers which are in the same color as the data. Compared 
to YAPPERS, our proposed multi-layer unstructured P2P 
system can further improve the accuracy of the lookups in a 
more efficient way. 
In [16], the structured overlay was used to support 
unsuccessful flooding data search, however, its structured 
overlay is responsible for connecting all the unstructured 
overlays and transferring query requests between them. 
 
B. The P2P Lookup Problem 
In addition to single point of failure and poor scalability, 
a drawback of centralized approach is the vulnerability to 
malicious attacks and legality issue. These shortcomings led 
to the adoption of decentralized solutions, which make it 
difficult to ensure high performance and availability, so a 
high degree of redundancy is required. 
 
 
 
III. 
 PROPOSED APPROACHES 
 
Neither structured P2P nor unstructured P2P networks 
alone can fulfill the requirements of efficiency, scalability, 
and reliability of services. The motivation of this study is to 
combine both types of P2P networks to provide a hybrid 
approach which can offer better efficiency and scalability.  
 
A. Super-Peer Overlays and Forwarding Protocols   
The super-peers overlay topology can be constructed as a 
graph, in which vertices represent individual super-peers 
while undirected edges stand for connections between super-
peers. As shown in Table I, each peer in perfect difference 
graph (PDG) [8] has a degree O (√𝑛), thus the topology is 
more flexible than O(n) in the complete graph. Furthermore, 
the search range of a PDG-based topology is similar to that 
in the complete graph-based topology. Table I shows that 
other graph topologies have both a lower peer connection 
degree and a larger diameter (i.e. no. of hops along the path) 
than the PDG approach. Thus, the PDG-based overlay 
topology is a better choice for the hybrid P2P system 
presented in this paper. 
 
1) Perfect difference graph:  
According to the definition of perfect difference sets 
(PDSs), PDG provides the mathematical knowledge for 
achieving this optimum number of peers to construct the 
framework of perfect difference networks or PDNs as defined 
bellow:  
Definition 1: Perfect Difference Network (PDN) — there 
are 𝑛 = 𝛿2 + 𝛿 + 1 nodes, numbered 0 to n-1. Node i is 
connected to node 𝑖 ± 1 and 𝑖 ± 𝑠𝑗(𝑚𝑜𝑑 𝑛), for 2 ≤ 𝑗 ≤ 𝛿, 
where 𝑠𝑗 is an element of the PDS {s0, s1, … , sδ} of order 𝛿. 
Table II illustrates the number of peers, the number of 
elements and the order in the first ten PDSs. Fig. 1 shows a 
PDG overlay based on the PDS {1, 3}. Since there are two 
elements in the PDS, the graph has seven (22 + 2 + 1 = 7) 
peers. For example, peer 0 has edges connecting to peers 
(0±1) mod 7 and (0±3) mod 7, which are peer 1, 3, 4 and 6.  
For example, in Fig. 1, we present a brief description of 
the forward edges of peer 0, which are the edges connecting 
peer 0 to peer 1 and 3, respectively, and the backward edges 
are the edges connecting peer 0 to peer 4 and 6, respectively. 
 
TABLE I. COMPARISON OF VERTEX DEGREE AND GRAPH 
DIAMETER. 
 
 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-349-0
INTERNET 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Evolving Internet

 
  
 
 
TABLE II. RELATION BETWEEN NUMBER OF SUPER-PEERS N, 
ORDER Δ AND PDS 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  An example of PDG-based forwarding algorithm. 
 
2) Broadcasting over a Super-peer Overlay 
We deploy a PDG-based forwarding algorithm [9] in 
which the query requests are delivered to all super-peers in 
the overlay via the forward and backward edges of the perfect 
difference network. Each super-peer will send the search 
requests by using the PDG forwarding algorithm so that each 
super-peer receives only one copy of the search requests. The 
PDG forward query message in two steps:  
- 
Step 1: Super-peer i sends a request message with 
TTL=2 to all of its forward partners and sends a request 
message with TTL=1 to all of its backward partners. 
- 
Step 2: If an intermediate super-peer receives the request 
message, it duplicates the message to all of its backward 
partners other than the partner from which it received the 
original query message. 
Fig. 1 illustrates the PDG-based forwarding algorithm for 
a super-peer overlay forming a PDG with an order of δ = 2. 
Here super-peer 0 wants to send a query to all other super-
peers. According to the above two steps, super-peer 0 sends 
a query request with TTL=1 and 2 by its forward and 
backward edges to partners {1, 3} and {4, 6}, respectively. 
In the case of TTL=2, the TTL value is reduced to 1, and 
partners {1, 3} forward a copy of the query request to all their 
backward peers other than the edge from which they received 
the query message. In the case of TTL=1, since the TTL value 
is reduced to zero, partners 4 and 6 take no further action. 
 
3) Multi-hop Index Replication 
Since each super-peer maintains the index replication in 
AVL tree, so that lookup, insertion, and deletion all take 
O(log n) time in both the average and worst cases, where n is 
the number of shared files in the overlay.  
To ease the discussion, we explore two-hop index 
replication strategy in which each ordinary peer sends the 
name of shared files to all of its one-hop super-peer, which 
maintains the index replication in AVL tree. The index is 
constructed with a randomly generated key that is the name 
of shared files published by the ordinary peers through the 
SHA1-like algorithm. These hashed keys are inserted to the 
AVL tree-based index. Each super-peer broadcasts the 
available resource names by using PDG algorithm. In order 
to further reducing the broadcast messages, each super-peer 
uses 1-bit to record the status of the shared files. If the bit 
were set, the shared file would come from ordinary peers it 
controlled. Otherwise the file would be in other super-peers. 
By this way, only when the bit is set, does a super-peer sends 
the query messages to its ordinary peers. Otherwise, the 
super-peer will forward the lookup messages to other super-
peers directly by PDG-based algorithm. Each super-peer can 
search the AVL tree to decide whether to broadcast messages 
to its ordinary peers or not. If we can’t find any records in the 
AVL tree-based index, it means that there is no resource 
published by peers.  
 
B.  System Construction and Architecture 
The bootstrap peer (BSP) uses a super-peer table to 
maintain the super-peer overlay structure. For convenience, 
we discuss only one bootstrap peer attached to the overlay 
network. 
 
1) System Construction 
In our example system, the ordinary peer can connect to 
two super-peers. Thus when one of the super-peers leaves or 
crashes, the other can still hold the records. When a new peer 
enters the overlay as an ordinary peer, it sends a request to 
the bootstrap peer. Upon receiving the joining request, BSP 
acknowledges the peer with a list containing the IP addresses 
of randomly selected super-peers. The peer then chooses a 
less loaded super-peer to establish a connection. Once the 
new peer connects to the super-peer, it becomes one of 
ordinary peers of that super-peer and super-peer sends it a 
peer list which contains the part of the ordinary peers in the 
same overlay. When the ordinary peer wants to leave the 
system, it simply sends a message to inform its super-peer, 
which then updates the corresponding AVL tree-based index 
to show that the shared files in the leaving peer no longer exist 
in the tree. Fig. 2 shows the overlay configuration in which a 
new peer is joining the P2P overlay. By multi-layer and 
multi-hop architecture, our system can serve as much 
powerful super-peer (MSP) with large storage space, 
computational capability and higher bandwidth to manage 
the whole PDN cluster, as shown in Fig. 3. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-349-0
INTERNET 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Evolving Internet

 
  
 
 
 
Figure 2. Configuration of a new peer joining the super-peer. 
 
2) New Super-peer Joining 
Any peer with high bandwidth entering the P2P overlay 
network sends a joining request with its bandwidth and IP 
information to the BSP. After checking the bandwidth quality, 
the BSP may accept the peer as a super-peer. When the 
number of super-peers is larger than the value (𝛿2 + 𝛿 + 1), 
a newly joining peer that fulfills the bandwidth requirement 
will be marked by BSP as a redundant super-peer. When the 
total 
number 
of 
super-peers 
increases 
to 
a 
threshold, 1 2
⁄ [(𝛿2 + 𝛿) + (𝑙2 + 𝑙)], the current PDS will 
be extended to the successor PDS order and the super-peer 
overlay will be extended accordingly. 
In the initial set-up phase, the BSP utilizes a min-order 
PDS with order 2 to construct a basic super-peer overlay 
network for a maximum of 7 super-peers. Assume that 9 new 
peers fulfill the bandwidth requirements as a super-peer, 
since the number of new peers exceeds the number of 
available spaces in the overlay, the former 7 peers are 
assigned as super-peers, while the remaining peers are 
appointed as redundant peers. Later, when a newly coming 
peer wants to become a super-peer, it will result in the total 
number of super-peers, including active, new incoming, and 
redundant super-peer, exceeding the threshold 9(= (6+12)/2). 
The BSP then extends the super-peer overlay topology using 
a PDS with an order of 3, thus allowing for super-peers up to 
13, including 10 active super peers in the newly extended 
configuration. 
 
3) Super-peer Leaveing 
When a super-peer is leaving the system, it sends a leave 
message to both the BSP and all of its ordinary children peers. 
The BSP selects one of the redundant super-peers to take 
place the leaving one. Then BSP sets the active state of the 
redundant peer and informs other active peers to update their 
partner records correspondingly. 
Having received a leave message from a super-peer that 
tries to disconnect from the P2P overlay, each ordinary peers 
re-enter to the overlay by choosing one of the super-peers 
with the shortest response time in its super-peer list. When 
the number of super-peers is below the threshold (𝛿2 + 𝛿 +
1), there will be no enough super-peers to take over the 
leaving peers in the overlay network, some of the super-peers 
lose their forward or backward partners. As a result, some of 
the super-peers may fail to receive the messages delivered by 
other super-peers in the overlay. To overcome this effect, 
when the number of super-peers decreases to the 
threshold,  1 2
⁄ [(𝛿2 + 𝛿) + (𝑙2 + 𝑙)] , the order of the 
current PDS will be reduced to the predecessor of the PDS, 
and the super-peer overlay topology will be reduced 
consequently. Then BSP computes and updates new forward 
and backward partners based on the new order 𝛿 in its super-
peer table and sets the status of those redundant super-peers 
to 1. Finally, the BSP notifies active super-peers of the 
forward and backward partners and redundant super-peers.  
Assuming 10 active super-peers in a super-peer overlay 
use a PDS with an order of 3. If one active super-peer sends 
a leaving message, the BSP reduces the topology because the 
number of super-peers equals the threshold 9(= (6+12)/2). 
The BSP appoints a min-order PDS (an order of 2) to reduce 
the current super-peer overlay, thus allowing up to 7 super-
peers. It assigns new peer ID to the remaining super-peers. 
The super-peers with peer ID less than 7 are appointed as 
active super-peers in the reduced topology. The rest are 
appointed as redundant super-peers. As a result, 7 active 
super-peers and 2 redundant super-peers exist in the system. 
 
C. Quantitive Evaluation 
We evaluated the existing mechanisms in terms of the 
query success ratio, number of flooded lookup query 
messages and average delay. All the results are the average 
of 10 simulation runs. Let  𝑝𝑎  be the probability of the 
resource recorded in the AVL tree and τ  the connection 
degree. For a two-layer unstructured P2P system, the super-
peer layer is in mesh-based structure, the location of a data 
item is arbitrary, and it uses flooding to do a best-effort search. 
With pure-PDG structure, whether the resources exist or not, 
it always sends the query messages,  
𝑝𝑎 × τ + (1 − 𝑝𝑎) × (1 + τ + τ2)                            (1) 
For super-peer layer with AVL-PDG structure, we want 
to further reduce the number of lookup messages between 
super-peers. The range of the flooding is 
a
2
1     , if the resource can't be matched 
      p
  , if the resource is in the same local area
(1
)(1
) , if the resource is in other overlay
ap












      (2) 
 
IV. 
SIMULATION AND NUMERICAL RESULTS 
 
We present the simulation results to evaluate the 
performance of the random mesh-based, hierarchical 
unstructured P2P system and our proposed scheme. From 
various aspects of performance, we show that our proposed 
approach is practical and works well.  
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-349-0
INTERNET 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Evolving Internet

 
  
 
 
 
Figure 3. Multi-layer architecture for storage system. 
 
A.  Simulation Environment and Simulation Setup 
 
We perform simulation with NS-2 (version 2.27) 
simulation tool [14] with GnutellaSim to evaluate our 
proposed method. We adopt Gnutella as our basic 
architecture in the simulation and add our proposed approach 
to the basic scheme. We validate the performance and 
improvement through the simulation result. 
 
1) Simulation Environment 
The topology used for simulation is presented in Fig. 2. It 
consists of a bootstrap peer (BSP), super-peers and ordinary 
peers. A new peer entering the overlay will send a request to 
the BSP, which then acknowledges the peer with a list 
containing the addresses of randomly selected super-peers. 
Then the joining peer starts to query the resources it needs. 
The general parameters are presented in Table III. 
 
2) Simulation Setup 
Each network topology is composed of 1,000 nodes, and 
each node is assigned as either a super-peer or an ordinary 
peer randomly. The ratio between the number of super-peers 
and the total number of peers is set to 10%. We set super-
peer’s download bandwidth to at least 2 Mbps and upload 
bandwidth at least 1.5 Mbps. The ordinary peer’s download 
bandwidth is no more than 1.5 Mbps and connection degree 
is 2. We set the peers with heterogeneous link capacities such 
that 10% of the peers have the link capacity greater than 
2Mbps, 30% of them have the link capacity less than 
1.5Mbps, and 60% of them have the link capacity between 
these two values. Each connection’s link delay is randomly 
set between 1 and 10 ms. We run the simulation 10 times to 
get its average and the duration is 1000 seconds each time. 
 
TABLE III. EXPERIMENTAL ENVIRONMENT. 
 
Parameter 
Value 
Peer Number 
5,000 
Simulation Time 
1,000(sec) 
Number of files 
100,000 
Query frequency 
5 per sec 
Super-peer Download Bandwidth 
> 2 Mbps 
Super-peer Upload Bandwidth 
> 1.5 Mbps 
Peer Max degree 
2 
Connection link delay 
1~10(ms) 
B. Numerical Results 
For our simulations, we modified an implementation of 
Gnutella [12].  
 
1) Aerage Traffic 
Fig. 4 shows that the AVL-list with PDG overlay has the 
lightest broadcast overhead. In Fig. 5, the results clearly 
demonstrate the success rate of the AVL-list with PDG 
overlay significantly higher than mesh-based overlay and 
pure PDG overlay. The AVL-list improves about 40% and 
50% of query success ratio compared to the pure-PDG and 
mesh-based overlay, respectively as shown in Table IV. 
 
2) Performance of the Network Traffic 
Fig. 6 shows the comparison of network traffic between 
mesh-based overlay and PDG-based overlay. In the former, 
queries for unavailable files can generate an unbounded 
traffic load. While the traffic load with AVL-list is bounded.  
 
3) Performance of the Response Time 
Fig. 7 shows that PDG forwarding can help resolve the 
queries in the super-peer overlay, which has smaller diameter 
than the entire P2P network. The average response time is 
kept between 1.5 and 2 hops with 5000 peers in the system. 
The simulation result shows that the average response time 
decreases from 4.3 hops to 1.7 hops. The overall user 
perceived response time can be reduced by 60%. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
 
We propose a novel and efficient search scheme for 
multi-layer P2P systems using a Multi-hop Index Replication 
with PDG forwarding algorithm. We show that our scheme is 
not only reliable but also scalable. Our work shows that 
unstructured P2P systems can achieve excellent scalability 
and reliability. The performance of the proposed scheme has 
been benchmarked against a super-peer overlay topology 
based on a mesh graph using the flooding with TTL value 7. 
The theoretical results showed that the Multi-hop Index 
Replication with PDG-based construction scheme yield a 
higher query success ratio, a reduced number of search 
messages, and a lower average hop-count delay. It would be 
interesting for our future work to investigate how the 
heterogeneity affects our proposal. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Comparison of number of broadcast search messages 
in mesh-based and PDG overlay networks 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-349-0
INTERNET 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Evolving Internet

 
  
 
 
 
Figure 5. Comparison of query successful ratio in mesh-based and 
PDG overlay networks. 
 
TABLE IV. AVERAGE VALUE COMPARISON 
Scheme 
Volume of Traffic 
Success Ratio 
Mesh-Based 
100% 
45.6% 
Pure-PDG 
18.15% 
62.5% 
AVL-PDG 
11.09% 
96.6% 
 
 
Figure 6. Normalized Network Traffic in mesh-based and PDG 
overlay networks. 
 
 
Figure 7. Average response time incurred in mesh-based and PDG 
overlay networks. 
 
References 
 
[1] 
S. Banerjee, C. Kommareddy, K. Kar, S. Bhattacharjee, and 
S. Khuller, “Construction of an Efficient Overlay Multicast 
Infrastructure for Real-Time Applications,” Proc. IEEE 
INFOCOM ’03, pp. 1521-1531, Mar. 2003. 
[2] 
S. Sen and J. Wang, “Analyzing Peer-to-Peer Traffic Across 
Large Networks,” Proc. Internet Measurement Workshop, 
Nov. 2002. 
[3] 
Y. Chu, S. Rao, and H. Zhang, “A Case for End System 
Multicast,” Proc. ACM SIGMETRICS’00, pp. 1-12, June 
2000. 
[4] 
E. Brosh and Y. Shavitt, “Approximation and Heuristic 
Algorithms for Minimum Delay Application-Layer Multicast 
Trees,” Proc. IEEE INFOCOM ’04, Mar. 2004. 
[5] 
M. Freedman and R. Morris, “Tarzan: A Peer-to-Peer 
Anonymizing Network Layer,” Proc. ACM Conference on 
Computer and Communications Security, Nov. 2002. 
[6] 
S. Tewari and L. Kleinrock,“Proportional replication in 
peer-to-peer networks,” Proc. IEEE INFOCOM ’06, pp. 1-
11, Apr. 2006. 
[7] 
W. Acosta and S. Chandra, “Understanding the practical 
limits of the Gnutella p2p system: An analysis of query 
terms and object name distributions,” in MMCN, 2008. 
[8] 
B. Parhami and M. Rakov, “Perfect Difference Networks 
and Related Interconnection Structures for Parallel and 
Distributed Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Parallel and 
Distributed Systems, VOL. 16, NO. 8, pp. 714-724, Aug. 
2005. 
[9] 
B. Parhami and M. Rakov, “Performance, Algorithmic, and 
Robustness Attributes of Perfect Difference Networks,” 
IEEE Trans. Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 16, no. 8, 
pp. 725-736, Aug. 2005. 
[10] I. Stoica, R. Morris, D. Karger, M.F. Kaashoek, and H. 
Balakrishnan, “Chord: A Scalable Peer-to-Peer Lookup 
Protocol for Internet Applications,” IEEE/ACM 
Transactions on Networking (TON), VOL. 11, NO. 1, pp. 
17-32, Feb. 2003. 
[11] C. Gkantisdis, M. Mihail, and A. Saberi, “Random walks in 
peer-to-peer networks,” Proc. IEEE INFOCOM ‘04, pp. 7-
11, Mar. 2004. 
[12] The Gnutella v0.6 Protocol, http://rfc-gnutella. 
sourceforge.net/src/rfc-0_6-draft.html, May 2014 
[13] BitTorrent, http://www.bittorrent.com/, May 2014. 
[14] The Network Simulator - ns-2, 
http://www.isi.edu/nsnam/ns/, May 2014 
[15] P. Ganesan, Q. Sun, and H. Garcia-Molina, “YAPPERS: A 
Peer-to-Peer Lookup Service over Arbitrary Topology,” 
Proc. IEEE INFOCOM ’03, pp. 1250-1260, Apr. 2003. 
[16] S. Ratnasamy, P. Francis, M. Handley, R. Karp, and S. 
Shenker, “A Scalable Content Addressable Network,” Proc. 
ACM SIGCOMM ’01, pp. 161-172, Oct. 2001. 
[17] B.T. Loo, R. Huebsch, I. Stoica, and J.M. Hellerstein, “The 
Case for a Hybrid p2p Search Infrastructure,” Proc. 
Workshop Peer-to-Peer Systems (IPTPS ’04), pp. 141-150, 
Feb. 2004. 
[18] http://Iwayan.info/Research/PeerToPeer/Papers_Research/P
2P_Architecture/it02012.pdf, May 2014 
[19] F. Wang, Y. Xiongand, and J. Liu, “mtreebone: A hybrid 
tree/mesh overlay for application-layer live video 
multicast.” In The 27th IEEE International Conference on 
Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS'07), Toronto, 
Canada, June 2007. 
[20] Y. Chawathe, S. Ratnasamy, L. Breslau, N. Lanham, and S. 
Shenker,  “Making Gnutella-like P2P systems scalable,” 
Proc. ACM SIGCOMM ’03, pp. 407-418,  Jan. 2003. 
[21] S. Ioannidis, and P. Marbach, “Absence of Evidence as 
Evidence of Absence: A Simple Mechanism for Scalable P2P 
Search,” Proc. IEEE INFOCOM ’09, pp. 576-584, Apr. 
2009. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-349-0
INTERNET 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Evolving Internet

