Modelling Communicative Space 
From human communication to conversational agents 
 
Mare Koit 
Institute of Computer Science 
University of Tartu 
Tartu, Estonia 
email: mare.koit@ut.ee 
Haldur Õim 
Institute of Estonian and General Linguistics 
University of Tartu 
Tartu, Estonia 
e-mail: haldur.oim@ut.ee 
 
 
Abstract—The paper introduces a work in progress on modelling 
one aspect of natural human communication – communicative 
space. Participants of a communication event place themselves at 
certain points of communicative space which characterizes such 
relevant features of their relations in the event as communicative 
distance, dominance, politeness, personal relatedness, etc. 
Examples 
of 
human-human 
dialogues 
demonstrate 
how 
participants pass different points in communicative space during 
an event. Our aim is to include such a model of communicative 
space in our experimental system for modelling conversational 
agents in order to make interaction with the system more 
human-like. 
Keywords-dialogue; communicative space; human-human 
communication, human-computer interaction, conversational 
agents. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Communication between people can take various forms 
depending on a lot of circumstances – participants’ individual 
characteristics, their social roles, subject of conversation, etc. 
When a human talks with other people, (s)he evaluates them 
not only from their words but also from their facial expression, 
body movement, and gestures. These nonverbal aspects help to 
convey the ‘tone’ of the conversation [9]. The lessons learnt 
from the study of human-human communication can be used 
when modelling interaction with the computer. Different 
features have to be taken into account in order to make it 
possible for a user to interact with the computer in a natural 
way, i.e., in a natural language and following norms and 
regulations of human-human communication.  
There is one relevant aspect of human communication, 
which we will center on – communicative space [10]. For a 
general description see the work in [3]. 
Healey et al. [6] declare that “there are important 
differences in the quality of human interaction – in degrees of 
interpersonal, as opposed to physical, closeness – that are 
important for the organization of human activities and, 
consequently, for design”. The concept of communicative 
space provides a useful approach to thinking about the basic 
organization of human interaction. 
Communicative space is a mental space where a 
communication participant places himself/herself with respect 
to other ones and where (s)he is ‘moving’ during a 
communication 
event. 
Communicative 
space 
can 
be 
characterized by different features, e.g., (social) closeness of a 
communication participant with the partner, collaboration, 
politeness, etc. These features of communication can be 
conveyed by language use as well as by different nonverbal 
means (body movement, facial expressions, etc.). Still, in this 
paper we limit ourselves with considering interaction in 
natural language, without taking into account nonverbal 
means. In order to model communicative space, we analyze 
transcripts of human-human spoken dialogues.  
The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 introduces a 
model of communicative space. Section 3 analyzes some 
dialogue examples, which demonstrate different points in 
communicative space. Section 4 discusses how communicative 
space can be used when developing a dialogue system and 
Section 5 draws conclusions. 
II. 
DIMENSIONS OF COMMUNICATIVE SPACE 
Communicative space can be specified by a number of 
dimensions that characterize the relationships of participants in 
a 
communicative 
encounter. 
Communication 
can 
be 
collaborative or confrontational, personal or impersonal; it can 
also be characterized by the social distance of participants 
(near, far), by the modality of communication (friendly, 
hostile), by the intensity (peaceful, vehement), etc. [10]. 
Together, these dimensions bring the social aspect of 
communication into the model [2]. They represent a subsystem 
of human communicative competence with deep evolutionary 
roots, the basic function of which is to regulate the 
communication process. People have an intuitive, ‘naïve’ 
theory of these coordinates; the values of the coordinates can 
be expressed by specific words [11]. Instead, at present we use 
numerical values as approximations in our model. 
We determine communicative space as an n-dimensional 
(n > 0) space with the following coordinates:  
 communicative distance to the partner (on the scale 
from familiar to remote)  
 cooperation (on the scale from collaborative to 
confrontational) 
 politeness (from polite to impolite) 
 personality (from personal to impersonal) 
 modality (from friendly to hostile) 
 intensity (from peaceful to vehement). 
The concept of communicative space is thus related to 
approaches where the concept of social attitude or 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-437-4
INTELLI 2015 : he Fourth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

interpersonal stance in interaction (e.g., being polite, distant, 
cold, warm, supportive, contemptuous) are dealt with [4], or 
where the interaction space is represented by two dimensions – 
dominance and liking [17]. 
The social role of a communication participant (e.g., boss 
vs subordinate, salesman vs customer, etc.) influences the 
choice of a point in communicative space. For example, we 
usually expect that a salesman politely, impersonally and 
peacefully interacts with a customer at the same time when 
some customers are impolite, hostile and vehement. A 
communicative distance is small between friends but it is big 
between adversaries, etc.  
We use the numbers +1, 0 and -1 for the values of the 
coordinates of communicative space. For example, the value 
+1 on the scale of intensity means peaceful and the value -1 
means vehement interaction. Communicative distance is +1 if 
a person is close to his or her communication partner and -1 if 
(s)he is far from the partner. 0 is the neutral value on any scale. 
Still, it would be possible to consider a bigger number of 
values on every scale.  
It is especially important to stress two moments related to 
the location(s) of participants in the communicative space 
during a communication event. First, the participants can be 
located at different points of communicative space. For 
example, 
a 
good 
clerk 
remains 
polite 
also 
when 
communicating 
with 
an 
impolite 
customer; 
one 
communication participant can feel closeness to his/her partner 
whereas the partner has different feeling, etc. Secondly, the 
participants can also ‘move’ from one point to another during 
the encounter. For instance, conversation, which started 
peacefully can become vehement, or vice versa; participants 
who were on confrontational positions at the outset can reach 
the collaborative one at the end (and also vice versa), etc. It is 
just this latter moment where the function of communicative 
space as a regulator and reflector of the dynamics of 
communication encounters as social events reveals itself (see 
Section 3, comments to Figure 1). 
III. 
PEOPLE IN COMMUNICATIVE SPACE: EXAMPLES 
With the aim to model human-computer interaction we 
start with considering human-human communication. Where 
do people place themselves in communicative space when 
communicating and how do they ‘move’ there? We are 
especially interested in linguistic means, which help us to 
recognize the points of communicative space on the basis of 
texts of communication participants in a natural language. Let 
us consider some examples from the Estonian dialogue corpus 
[7]. The corpus includes mainly audio recordings of human-
human dialogues in authentic situations, which are transcribed 
by using a transcription of Conversation Analysis [8]. Each 
transcription is provided with a header that lists situational 
factors, which affect language use, e.g., participants names, 
social characteristics, relations between participants in the 
situation, specification of situation (private/public place, 
private/institutional conversation), etc. We will present 
examples of two types of conversations: institutional (more 
concretely, conversations with an information clerk) and 
everyday conversations between acquaintances.  
A. Institutional Conversation 
Let us start with considering transcripts of directory 
inquiries. Customers call an answering service and request 
some information (phone numbers, addresses, institution 
names, etc.). A clerk (answerer) is an official person and she 
has to place herself at a certain point in communicative space: 
to keep a neutral communicative distance, to be polite (or 
neutral but not impolite), collaborative (or neutral but not 
antagonistic), etc. Customers have more freedom. In the 
following examples, A is a customer and B is a clerk. 
Transcription marks used in the examples can be found in 
[7]. Let us only point out that a number in parentheses marks 
duration of a pause, e.g., (3.5) marks a break for 3.5 seconds; 
(.) marks a micro-pause with duration of 0.2 seconds or less. 
Comments are given in double parentheses. 
When annotating the points of communicative space we 
present the values of the coordinates in the following order: 1) 
communicative distance, 2) cooperation, 3) politeness, 4) 
personality, 5) modality, 6) intensity. All the values can be +1, 
0 or -1. 
In the first example (1), a customer requests a phone 
number and a clerk gives it him. Both the customer and the 
clerk have chosen the same communication point (0,0,0,0,0,0) 
– the values of all coordinates are 0 (neutral). 
(1) 
A: 
paluks 
Asa 
`kindlustuse 
`Tartu 
`osakonda 
telefoni`numbrit.     
I’d like to get a phone number of Asa insurance in Tartu 
(0,0,0,0,0,0) 
(3.5) 
B: neli kolm `kaks (.) `seitse kuus `üks.    
Four three two seven six one (0,0,0,0,0,0) 
 
In the case if a clerk does not have the requested 
information in her data base, she can express her emotion 
(regret) when answering like in example 2. The value on the 
scale of cooperation is +1. 
(2) 
B: sellist `baari ei ole `antud meie andmebaasi kahjuks. 
Sorry, we don’t have such bar in our data base (0,+1,0,0,0,0) 
 
Still, we can concentrate also on one single dimension. 
Example 3 demonstrates, how the values are changing during a 
conversation on the scale of collaboration (the second 
coordinate). The comments start with ’//’. Adjacency pairs of 
utterances [8] are numerated. 
 
(3) 
/---/ 
1 
A: ma paluks `Maarjamõisa `kööki 
May I get the kitchen in Maarjamõisa? // a neutral 
information request; communication point (0,0,0,0,0,0) 
(2.2) 
B: `haigla juures või poli`kliinikus. 
In the hospital or outpatients’ office? // the clerk 
expresses cooperation by asking an adjusting question; 
(0,+1,0,0,0,0) 
2 
A: `haigla. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-437-4
INTELLI 2015 : he Fourth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

The hospital // the customer similarly expresses 
cooperation by giving information; (0,+1,0,0,0,0) 
(0.5) 
B: e `köögi numbrit ei ole meil `antud.  
We don’t have the phone number of the kitchen // the 
clerk refuses to give information; (0,-1,0,0,0,0) 
(0.5) 
3 
A: sääl neil `on telefon peal.  
But they have a phone there // the client expresses 
protest; (0,-1,0,0,0,0) 
B: jah nendel võib `olla, aga meil ei ole `antud köögi 
`numbrit. 
Yes they may have but we don’t have the phone number 
of the kitchen // the clerk again refuses, and she is excited; 
(0,-1,0,0,0,-1) 
(0.5 
4 
B: ma saan teile `anda `üldinfo `numbri.  
I can give you the information number // the clerk 
expresses cooperation, proposing information; (0,+1,0,0,0,0) 
(1.0) 
5 
A: (1.0) jah, (.) `olge pai, `andke.  
Yes, be so kind as to give it // the client accepts 
cooperation, 
he 
answers 
friendly 
and 
personally; 
(0,+1,+1,0,+1,0) 
B: neli neli kaheksa,  
Four four eight // the clerk gives information; 
(0,+1,0,0,0,0) 
/---/ 
 
In example 3, the clerk is moving from one communication 
point to another when answering. Plural form of the pronoun 
‘you’ (in Estonian teile/you [plural] vs sulle/you [singular]) 
indicates politeness (value +1). 
When analyzing the dialogues with the same clerk we can 
draw her ‘portrait’ taking into account the communication 
points she passes in communicative space. We evaluate an 
information provider as a good clerk if she keeps neutral 
values of coordinates or at least avoids negative values and she 
is collaborative in the sense that if she doesn’t have the data 
requested by a customer then she attempts to offer substituting 
information like in example 3.  
Similarly, we can draw the ‘portrait(s)’ of a participant (or 
both participants) of a dialogue regarding any coordinate of 
communicative space. Figure 1 represents the ‘portraits’ of A 
and B in relation to collaboration in conversation (Example 3). 
In the same way, it is possible to analyze and compare the 
changes of values of more than one (selected) dimensions, 
during a certain dialogue encounter or in some interaction type 
in general, e.g., in order to investigate possible ‘dependency 
patterns’ between different dimensions in different kinds of 
interaction types. That is, it is possible not only to fix general 
(static) relationships between dimensions but also to establish 
dynamic patterns of changes of the values of certain 
dimensions  in the development of communicative encounters 
we are interested in (e.g., formal negotiations vs buying-selling 
situations vs quarrels about personal matters). 
 
 
Figure 1. The ‘portraits’ of A and B on the scale of collaboration (Example 
3; the values on the scale are -1, 0 or +1). 
 
B. Everyday Conversation 
Everyday conversation is different as compared with 
institutional conversation. The participants are not obliged to 
stay in a certain communication point predetermined by their 
role in the communication event but the values of coordinates 
may vary in a wide range.  
In the following examples, the participants are friends (the 
value of communicative distance is fixed as +1).  
In example 4, A makes a proposal but B doesn’t agree and 
answers angrily as indicated by a comment (in double 
parentheses). The value on the personality scale is +1 because 
singular imperative is used (helista/call [singular imperative] 
vs helistage/call [plural imperative]). 
(4) 
A: ´helista ´talle.   
Call [singular] him (+1,0,0,+1,0,0) 
(.) 
B: helista ´ise. ((angrily)) 
Call [singular] yourself  (+1,0,-1,+1,-1,-1) 
 
In example 5, A expresses protest. The value on the 
personality scale is +1 because singular is used (sa käisid 
kolamas/you have nosed [singular] vs te käisite kolamas/you 
have nosed [plural]). The values are -1 on the modality and 
intensity scales. 
(5) 
A: se=tändab ´seda et sa käisid minu ´sahtlites ´kolamas. 
It means that you have nosed [singular] around my lockers 
(+1,0,0,+1,-1,-1) 
 
In example 6, A is surprisingly calling his girlfriend B. The 
comments (in double parentheses) help to follow the ‘tone’ of 
the conversation. 
(6) 
B: ´tsau musi. ((surprised)) 
Ciao darling   (+1,0,0,+1,+1,0) 
(0.6) 
A: tsau ((dearly)) 
Ciao   (+1,0,0,+1,+1,+1) 
/---/ 
tuled mulle ´külla=vä.   
Do you [singular] come to me   (+1,0,0,0,+1,+1) 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-437-4
INTELLI 2015 : he Fourth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

B: mmmmmmm=> ma=i ´saa {praegult} ´tulla. < 
((apologizing))  
I can’t come at the moment  (+1,-1,0,0,+1,0) 
 
After presenting these examples, which represent typical 
data we are working with, and before proceeding to the 
discussion of specific aspects and problems of our model, let 
us make here a general comment concerning the model. The 
properties of communicative space make it possible to 
represent agent’s intellectual states, by changing the values of 
dimensions during a communication event. 
In order to control these properties when modelling real 
interaction, one needs to take into account also the emotional 
aspect of communication, i.e., to relate the model of 
communicative space somehow to the emotional models. This 
need is especially clear in the case of everyday informal 
interactions (as one can see also in the case of above 
examples). There exist some approaches using emotional 
models. Thus, communication-driven models select an 
emotional display for its communicative effect. Simulation-
based approaches simulate aspects of emotion processes, 
essentially giving the agent true emotions [5]. But in trying to 
incorporate such emotional models into a general model of 
communicative space (in our sense) several critical problems 
arise, first of all, the problem of delimiting the concept of 
‘emotional aspect’ in this context. In human communication, it 
includes not only ‘pure’ feelings and moods, but also  
attitudes, opinions, (psychological/social) dispositions and 
stances, which involve also intellectual component in the sense 
that they can be debated about by using rational arguments. In 
our present model of communicative space these ‘emotional 
aspects’ are implicitly accounted for by different dimensions 
(modality, politeness, intensity); see also the next Section. But 
making their role and interdependencies explicit in different 
types of communicative interaction needs more investigations 
into deeper levels of human motivational sphere.  
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
We are using the values +1, 0, and -1 for the coordinates in 
communicative space. Actually, all scales could be divided 
into a bigger number of values and – as said before – a word in 
a natural language can be used for every value. For example, 
modality of communication can be friendly, ironic, hostile, etc. 
Still, the words can be substituted with numbers in the model 
as we do. 
The dimensions that we are using for characterization of 
communicative space are not fully independent on each other. 
For example, the length of communicative distance is related 
to personality – a shorter distance implies a bigger value on the 
personality scale; the impoliteness implies small values of the 
modality and intensity, etc. Further research is needed in order 
to elaborate the list of dimensions (some dimensions could be 
removed and new dimensions added) and the borderlines 
between different dimensions and different values. 
Of course, there are other possible approaches than the one 
offered by our model, which operates with a predefined system 
of dimensions and their values (even when not independent). 
For instance, the reasoning methods in fuzzy rule-based 
classification systems have been studied by Mesiarová-
Zemánková [13][14]. Such systems deal with noisy, imprecise, 
or incomplete information while keeping a satisfactory level of 
approximation and a good interpretability of the system. It is 
shown that reasoning methods and derivation of fuzzy rule 
consequents are based on multipolar aggregation operators. 
Nevertheless, such an approach hardly suits for interpreting 
dialogical texts with the aim of recognizing the covert 
intentions of the interacting agents and explaining the choice 
of current turns and their verbal realizations made in a concrete 
communication situation. 
There are some linguistic keys, which help to recognize 
some parameters of communicative space. For example, if a 
person uses singular form of a verb or of a pronoun (in 
Estonian sa/you [singular] vs te/you [plural]) in his/ 
her utterance addressed to the partner then it indicates a 
short communicative distance (value +1) and a big personality 
(value +1) like in Examples 4 to 6. When communicating with 
an unfamiliar person Estonians usually use the plural form 
(Example 3). Still, young people are discarding this tradition.  
Feeling words can signal some values, e.g., please and 
thank indicate politeness. Some research has been done for 
detection of emotions in Estonian texts using both lexicon-
based and statistical methods [1][15]. 
Comments in transcripts of spoken recordings can help to 
determine the ‘tone’ of conversation like in Example (6). 
In order to do automatic recognition of values of 
coordinates of communicative space, opinion (or sentiment) 
analysis can be used, which allows to determine the contextual 
polarity of a text [16]. However, this line of investigations 
remains for the further research. 
Our examples demonstrated that people behave differently 
in different situations. Dialogue participants have different 
expectations when communicating, e.g., with a near friend or 
with an official person. The path covered by a communication 
participant in communicative space characterizes his/her 
attitudes regarding the partner. 
How to use the notion of communicative space when 
developing human-computer dialogue systems? A number of 
possible applications could be offered but here we will simply 
point at two general directions of research where the need for 
some kind of such conceptual mechanism should be obvious. 
First, the systems can be created, which analyze the 
protocols of certain interaction sessions and ‘reconstruct’ the 
placements of participants and the changes of the locations 
during a session. The second direction (chosen also by us) is 
more interesting for research. It is related to intelligent agents 
with two constraints. First, such agents are interacting with 
human users in a natural language, and secondly, they are 
planned to play a certain ‘social role’ in interaction. Such 
interaction systems have been created for a long time but the 
aspect of their social role has usually not been explicated. The 
conversational agents [12] and especially, the conversational 
characters, which have recently become popular, take into 
account only the features of a limited field (e.g., a virtual guide 
of an art exhibition). At the same time, the agents can be 
created, which could be ‘tuned’ to behave according to certain 
locations in communicative space depending on the user. For 
example, a travel agent gives information about a trip but it 
can also add various advices being neutral, advertising or even 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-437-4
INTELLI 2015 : he Fourth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

intrusive. An advisor system in negotiation can take in the 
coordinates of the location of the user in communicative space 
related to his/her partner and then recommend suitable data to 
use (facts, arguments).  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK 
We analyze human-human dialogues with the aim to 
develop a dialogue system, which interacts with a user in a 
natural language following norms and rules of human 
communication. 
This 
paper 
considers 
a 
model 
of 
communicative space – a mental space where conversation 
participants are situated and where they are ‘moving’ during a 
conversation. We are modelling communicative space as an n-
dimensional space with such dimensions as communicative 
distance of a participant to his/her partner, cooperation, 
politeness, personality, modality, and intensity. We assign the 
values +1, 0, or -1 to the coordinates. The analysis of human-
human dialogues demonstrates how different points in 
communicative space are visited during conversation. Using 
the path covered by a communication participant in 
communicative space we can create his/her ‘portrait’ and 
implement it in a dialogue system.  
We have implemented an experimental conversational 
agent, which argues for doing an action interacting with the 
user in written Estonian. We believe that including the model 
of communicative space into the system will make the 
interaction more natural. This remains for the further work.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by the European Regional 
Development Fund through the Estonian Centre of Excellence 
in Computer Science (EXCS) and the Estonian Research 
Council (grant IUT20-56). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
R. 
Altrov, 
“Aspects 
of 
cultural 
communication 
in 
recognizing emotions,” Trames: Journal of the Humanities and 
Social Sciences, 2013, 17(67/62), pp. 159–174. 
[2] 
G. Boella and L. van der Torre, “BDI and BOID 
argumentation,” Proc. of CMNA-03. The 3rd workshop on 
computational models of natural argument at IJCAI-2003, 
Acapulco, 2003, 4p. Available from www.cmna.info [retrieved: 
August, 2015] 
[3] 
P. Brown and S. Levinson, “Universals in language usage: 
Politeness phenomena,” E. Goody (Ed.), Questions and politeness: 
Strategies in social interaction, pp. 56–289, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2008. 
[4] 
V. Carofiglio, B. De Carolis, I. Mazzotta, N. Novielli, and S. 
Pizzutilo, “Towards a Socially Intelligent ECA,” IxD&A, 2009, 5-
6, pp. 99-106. 
[5] 
J. Gratch and S. Marsella, “Some Lessons from Emotion 
Psychology for the Design of Lifelike Characters”, Applied 
Artificial Intelligence, 2005, 19, 35 pp. 
[6] 
P. G. T. Healey, G. White, A. Eshghi, A. J. Reeves, and A. 
Light, “Communication spaces,” Computer Supported Cooperative 
Work, 2008, 17, pp.169–193, Springer. doi: 10.1007/s10606-007-
9061-4 
[7] 
T. Hennoste, O. Gerassimenko, R. Kasterpalu, M. Koit, A.  
Rääbis, and K. Strandson, “From human communication to 
intelligent user interfaces: Corpora of spoken Estonian,” Proc. of 
the sixth international language resources and evaluation 
(LREC’08), European Language Resources Association (ELRA), 
Marrakech, Morocco, 2008, pp. 2025–2032. Available from 
www.lrec-conf.org/proceedings/lrec2008 [retrieved: August, 2015] 
[8] 
I. Hutchby and R. Wooffitt, Conversation Analysis, Polity 
Press, Cambridge, 2008.  
[9] 
M. Knapp and J.A. Hall, Nonverbal Communication in 
Human Interaction. (5th ed.) Wadsworth: Thomas Learning, 2007. 
ISBN 0-15-506372-3 
[10] M. Koit, “Communicative strategy in a formal model of 
dispute,” Proc. of the International Conference on Agents and 
Artificial Intelligence: 7th International Conference on Agents and 
Artificial Intelligence (ICAART), 2015, pp. 489–496. Lisbon, 
Portugal, SciTePress.  
[11] M. Koit and H Õim, “A computational model of 
argumentation in agreement negotiation processes,” Argument & 
Computation, 2014, 5 (2-3), pp. 209–236. Taylor & Francis 
Online. doi: 10.1080/19462166.2014.915233 
[12] J. Lester, K. Branting, and B. Mott, “Conversational 
Agents”, The Practical Handbook of Internet Computing, 
Chapman & Hall, 2004. 
[13] A. Mesiarová-Zemánková, “Sensitivity analysis of fuzzy 
rule-based classification systems by means of the Lipschitz 
condition”, Soft Comput, 2015, 9 pp. Published Online 20 June 
2015, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. doi: 10.1007/s00500-
015-1744-z 
[14] A. 
Mesiarová-Zemánková, 
“Multipolar 
Aggregation 
Operators 
in 
Reasoning 
Methods 
for 
Fuzzy 
Rule-Based 
Classification Systems”, IEEE Transactions On Fuzzy Systems, 
2014, 
vol. 
22, 
No 
6, 
pp. 
1569-1584. 
doi: 
10.1109/TFUZZ.2014.2298878 
[15] H. Pajupuu, K. Kerge, and R. Altrov, “Lexicon-based 
detection of emotion in different types of texts: preliminary 
remarks,” Eesti Rakenduslingvistika Ühingu aastaraamat = 
Estonian Papers in Applied Linguistics, 2012, 8, pp. 171–184.  
[16] B. Pang and L. Lee, “Opinion mining and sentiment 
analysis,” Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval, 2008, 
vol. 2, No 1-2, pp. 1–135.  
[17] B. Ravenet, M. Ochs, and C. Pelachaud, “A computational 
model of social attitude effects on the nonverbal behavior for a 
relational agent,” Proc. of WACAI, Grenoble, France, 2012, pp. 
94–101. 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-437-4
INTELLI 2015 : he Fourth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

