Intelligent LED Lighting System with Route Prediction Algorithm for Parking 
Garage 
 
Insung Hong, Jisung Byun, and Sehyun Park 
School of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Chung-Ang University 
Seoul, South Korea 
axlrose11421@wm.cau.ac.kr, jinsung@wm.cau.ac.kr, shpark@cau.ac.kr  
 
 
Abstract—Various LED applications have been developed and 
implemented in diverse spots because of LED’s characteristic. 
However, some specific places such as a parking lot are 
required to be studied to increase energy efficiency. In this 
paper, the proposed LED lighting systems for a parking lot 
provides energy efficient management by turning on and off 
LED lights according to vehicle’s movement through a route 
prediction algorithm.  
Keywords-LED, ZigBee, Route prediction, Energy efficiency, 
Parking lot 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, usage of LED lights has been increasing. 
As interest of energy saving broadens, light power 
consumption, which are one of the highest power 
consumption, becomes a big issue. At this point, LED lights 
will be the most practical answer to decrease power 
consumption in a home or building. Moreover, LED 
technology has been researched by many companies and 
research centers with advanced countries as the center, and 
now it can be substituted for the existing lights. There are 
various types from low power to power LED, and it is 
expected that it will influence lighting markets seriously. 
LED has a variety of advantages compared with the 
existing lights. First of all, it is easy to interwork with other 
electronic modules such as sensors and communication 
module to provide new services, and can be controlled more 
elaborately because LED is a kind of electronic components. 
For example, fluorescent lights are difficult to control their 
brightness. Even though it is available to control, an 
additional control module is needed. However, LED can be 
handled by PWM (Pulse Width Modulation) or current 
control to change its brightness easily. Furthermore, it has a 
low power characteristic, whose power consumption is much 
lower than the existing lights, and a heating problem has 
been improved compared to the past.  
By using the characteristics of LED, various LED 
applications are now developed. LED lighting systems now 
provide a lighting function and are united with ICT 
(information 
and 
communications 
technology). 
The 
intelligent lighting control system [1] provides improved 
user-oriented services based on wireless sensor networks, 
and pattern recognition about user activities and profiles. In 
reference [2] and [3], it shows similar services by using 
location-based living patterns. These researches decrease 
power consumption in a lighting system and service response 
time. 
Usage of LED lighting systems has been spread 
gradually from normal lights in a building to parking lot. 
According to the characteristics of a parking lot, although 
movement of people is less than other places, lighting 
systems are always needed in this place. A parking garage 
requires more lights than other places, and a certain level of 
brightness should be maintained. In even an outdoor parking 
lot, lights are needed at night. Although lights are required 
for most of the day, frequency of the light usage is very low 
so this causes inefficient power consumption. By replacing 
the existing light with LED light, it is assumed to save power 
consumption as described before. Therefore, we use the 
route prediction algorithm to save power consumption.  
There are various route prediction algorithms [4] – [6] but 
we design the route prediction algorithm by using motion 
detection sensors which are included in the light controller. 
In this paper, we design an intelligent LED lighting 
system which is suitable for a parking lot and implement it to 
verify its energy efficiency compared with the existing lights. 
Moreover, this system includes two types of sensors, 
illumination 
and 
motion 
detection, 
and 
ZigBee 
communication, and analyzes vehicle movement to turn on 
and off the minimum number of LED lights.  
In Section II, we describe the hardware structure and 
middleware of this system are described. Section III presents 
the energy efficiency of this system, and it is compared with 
other light systems. Section IV describes the analysis of the 
experimental result and concludes this paper. 
II. 
DESIGN OF INTELLIGENT LED LIGHTING SYSTEM 
For the intelligent LED lighting system, the proposed 
system in this paper is composed as follows. Each light in a 
parking lot has a lighting controller in ZigBee-based sensor 
network. Each lighting node includes an illumination sensor 
and motion detection sensors. Based on the two sensor 
information, the lighting system decides to turn on or off the 
lights in the expected route where a car will enter to save 
needless power consumption. 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

A. Overrall of the LED Lighting Controller 
The overall structure of this controller is similar to the 
Light Enabler [2]. Basically, the controller consists of five 
parts, MCU module, LED control module, power module, 
sensor module, and ZigBee module. 
 
Figure 1.  (A) Hardware Composition of Lighting Controller (B) LED 
Lighting Controller and Motion Detection Sensor 
The basic hardware structure of this controller consists 
of the five parts, and each part is controlled by the MCU 
module. In particular, the sensor module is designed to 
change the types of the sensors in this system, and the 
system performs its function according to the values of the 
two sensors, the illumination and motion detection sensor. 
B. ZigBee-based Sensor Network Structure 
Based on the ZigBee network, each node sends and 
receives data. The basic idea is that sensed data in the sensor 
module, illumination and motion detection, are transmitted 
to the neighbor or entire nodes. Each node decides to 
process the sensed data after analyzing the packets based on 
an allocated address. Each node is included in the assigned 
group, and this group can be changed according to the 
structure of a parking lot like figure 2. There is the Group 
Router node in the group including the certain number of 
nodes like figure 2, and the only two types of nodes, the 
Group Router and Coordinator node, are able to 
communicate with each other to minimize  collision in the 
ZigBee network. The normal nodes can communicate with 
the Group Router node in the same group, not in different 
groups or the coordinator node. 
In a network initialization time, the Coordinator node 
checks status of every node in each group by receiving 
initialization packets from each Group Router node. The 
most important role of the Coordinator node is to collect 
sensed data and the status of nodes and control each group 
based on the data. 
The Group Router node performs similar functions like 
the Coordinator node but the functions are limited in the 
single group. For example, if a normal node in the same 
group detects a motion, the Router Node receives this data 
from that node, and transmits control packets to other nodes 
in the same group. That is, the Router Node collects the 
sensed data in the same group, and decides to send the data 
to the Coordinator Node based on the internal policy. 
Types of controls by the Coordinator and Router Node 
are as in the following. There are the two controls, the in-
group-control and group-unit-control, and the Coordinator 
decides one between the controls according to kinds of 
sensed information and internal policy in the middleware. 
 
Figure 2.  ZigBee Network of the proposed system 
C. Middleware Structure 
As described above, there are the two control types of 
the LED lighting node by the Coordinator and Router nodes.  
 
In-group-control: the control which is performed in a 
group based on the collected sensed data 
 
Group-unit-control: the control which can affect 
multiple groups by the Coordinator node 
The most difference between the two types of the 
controls is the scope to affect group units. For example, if 
there are nine LED lighting nodes including one Group 
Router node, the eight nodes can communicate with only the 
Group Router Node. Therefore, if one node detects a motion, 
it sends motion detection data to the Router node, and the 
Router node determines to process the data and send this 
event to the Coordinator node. The algorithm of the in-
group-control is relatively simple. Based on the critical 
value which can be set initially or changed by the 
Coordinator node, if the sensor value of motion detection 
.] 
 
(A) 
 
 
(B) 
 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

exceeds the critical value, the Router node performs the in-
group-control to turn on or change brightness of lights in the 
same group. The designed sensor modules are an 
illumination sensor and motion detection sensor, but the 
critical value affects only the motion detection sensor. A 
PIR (Passive Infrared) sensor is used to detect movement, 
and the MCU module reads an analog value changed by the 
sensor module. The illumination sensor influences a 
brightness of the LED light. This sensor cannot turn on or 
off the light but the maximum or minimum brightness of the 
light is changed according to the illumination sensor. 
Figure 3 (A) shows the essential structure of the 
middleware. The illumination manager and motion detection 
manager collect sensed data from the sensor module, and 
the two types of data are sent to the sensor value manager 
and the LED brightness control manager respectively. The 
LED brightness control manager changes the minimum and 
maximum brightness of the light based on the illumination 
sensor, and the sensor value manager determines to control 
the light by comparing the critical value with the sensed 
data. Through this process, the Router node decides to 
perform the in-group-control. 
 
Figure 3.  (A) Middleware of the LED Lighting System (B) Brightness 
Control in day time (C) Brightness Control in night time 
D. Route Prediction 
We described the middleware structure about the simple 
operation based on collected data. However, in an actual 
environment such as a parking lot, this simple operation 
could decrease energy efficiency and make functional 
problems. Therefore, we design the LED lighting system 
with the LED controller in consideration of the floor plan of 
a test bed, interworking with each LED light group, and a 
pattern recognition by a motion detection to maximize 
system efficiency.  
Figure 4 (A) shows the test bed floor plan of this system. 
We implement the total 48 LED light nodes in the test bed, 
and a red line box in figure 4 (A) means one group. 
Moreover, each group is assigned according to drive routes. 
If the LED lighting node cannot detect any motion, it 
controls its brightness at the minimum level considering the 
illumination sensor, and changes to the maximum level if 
detecting a motion. The red circle points are motion sensing 
modules including the sensor module and ZigBee module so 
that the system can notice going in and out of vehicles by 
using the sensing modules. The green circle points are the 
Coordinator nodes which manage 24 nodes respectively. 
As described above, the in-group-control is used when 
the light node detects unexpected motion mostly but the 
group-unit-control is used to control the brightness of a 
drive route according to the vehicle's movement when a 
vehicle enters a parking lot. For example, if a vehicle enters 
a parking lot, the Coordinator node notices the movement of 
the vehicle and turns on lights near the vehicle. This passive 
LED light operation is widely used in commercialized 
systems. In this paper, we propose the more advanced 
system with better energy efficiency based on pattern 
recognition. 
In figure 4 (B), a vehicle is in the route A, and it could 
choose the router B or C after passing the route A. The 
normal lighting operation generally turns on both route B 
and C while the vehicle is in the route A, or turns on one of 
them after it enters the route. The former causes inefficient 
energy consumption because one path is not used, and in the 
latter a driver is difficult to secure a clear view. In this paper, 
we develop the algorithm with the LED lighting node to 
improve energy efficiency. Comparing figure 4 (A) with (B), 
the route A has the total six LED lighting nodes with a 
motion detection sensor. Each node sends a motion 
detection data to the Router node when it senses movement. 
By collecting this data, the Router node can infer a velocity 
of a vehicle. 
)
_
_
(
tan
_
1


n
n
Node
Time
Node
Time
ce
Dis
Velocity
Inst
 
 (1) 
n
Inst Velocity
Velocity
Avg
n
n /
_
_
 
 
 
 (2) 
Equation (1) and (2) describe the instantaneous and average 
velocity, and the first one is the instantaneous velocity 
between two nodes. The Router node checks the time when 
receiving a motion detection data and figures out the 
 
(A) 
 
(B) 
 (C) 
 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

velocity if having two successive motion detection data like 
equation (1). The distance factor in equation (1) is set 5 
meters in this test bed but it can be changed according to 
different environment. The instantaneous velocity is sent to 
the Coordinator node, and equation (2) is generated in the 
Coordinator node by using the collected data. 
 
Figure 4.  (A) The floor plan of the tes bed (B) Description of the route 
prediction 
Through the two velocity information, the Coordinator 
node predicts whether the vehicle enters route B or C. If the 
velocity of the vehicle is constant and over the certain value 
which is set in the route A, the Coordinator node turns on 
the LED lights in the route C. However, if the velocity is 
constant under the value, it turns on the lights in the route B. 
Because it is difficult to drive at a high speed in a parking 
lot, this system can save inefficient energy consumption. 
To improve this algorithm to predict drive path, the 
system uses the two velocity information as follows. For 
example, the Coordinator node uses the three velocity 
information, the initial, final instantaneous and average 
velocity. Therefore, if the final instantaneous value is larger 
than the initial one, the Coordinator node regards this 
movement as a direct drive. As described above, in case of 
maintaining constant velocity, it is considered as a direct 
one. On the other hands, if the initial velocity is larger than 
the final one, it is regarded as a turning drive. However, 
according to driving habits of drivers, some vehicles would 
maintain constant and slow velocity under the certain value, 
and it is hard to predict which route a driver chooses. In the 
case, the Coordinator node turns on both routes’ lights 
which the driver can choose to handle the exception case. 
Furthermore, there are the two motion sensing modules 
in the entrance so the system can recognize the situation a 
vehicle enters or gets out a parking lot. If the vehicle enters 
and no movement is detected during 30 seconds, the system 
recognizes it as a completion of parking and turns on all the 
lights at the half brightness to help a driver to find and move 
to an entrance. However, in case of getting out, the system 
does not turn on the lights. 
III. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
We implement the proposed system in the test bed like 
figure 4 (A) and figure 6, and verify the energy efficiency 
and accuracy of the drive route prediction. The following 
table shows the conditions of the test bed. 
In this test bed, the average number of vehicles using the 
parking lot is approximately thirty, and we limit the number 
of driving vehicles to only one at the same time.  
TABLE I.  
EXPERIMENTAL CONDITION 
Unit 
Specification 
Number of Used LED lights 
48 
Area of the test bed 
1800 ㎡ 
Number of available parking rooms 
40 
Cars per day 
25~30 
 
 
Figure 5.   (A) Accuracy of route prediction (B) Comparison of energy 
efficiency in the three types of the lighting system 
The first experiment is about the accuracy of the 
prediction. We choose four types of driving patterns, and 
each driving way is repeated 20 times. 
1) Drive to stay constant 20km/h 
 
(A) 
 
(B) 
 
 
(A)  
 
 
(B) 
 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

2) Drive to accelerate velocity from 20 to 25km/h 
3) Drive to stay constant 20km/h and slow down speed 
near a corner 
4) Drive to stay constant 15km/h 
5) Practical test for a day 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Implementation in the test bed 
 
Each driving way is repeated 20 times, and, in addition, we 
test the proposed system for practical users. As a result of 
this, the practical test shows higher rates of exceptional 
events than the other tests. 
In the second experiment, we compare the energy 
efficiency of this system with others. To do this, we 
measure three types of power consumption by using a 
wattmeter in the test bed for a week, the fluorescent lights, 
LED lights with simple operation, and the proposed system. 
The figure 5 (B) shows that the proposed system saves 10 
percent power consumption beside the simple operation. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we design and implement the intelligent 
LED lighting system for a basement garage having specific 
characteristics different to other places. By implementing 
the system, the LED lighting system with the route 
prediction 
saves 
approximately 
60 
percent 
power 
consumption compared to the existing fluorescent lights and 
13 percent consumption beside the LED lighting system 
with the simple operation. 
However, in the first experiment for the practical users, 
the system could not predict a driver's route and considers it 
as an exceptional event at higher rates than the others. It is 
assumed that this is caused by various drivers’ patterns and 
size of vehicles. To complement this error, the algorithm 
should be improved to include driving patterns and 
complement response and processing time of the ZigBee 
network. 
We plan to expand this system in a larger parking lot. 
This new test bed has more intersections and vehicles so the 
improved sensor management to handle more sensors is 
required. We also plan to design a management application 
for administrator to manage the whole lighting system. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by the MKE(The Ministry 
of Knowledge Economy), Korea, under the HNRC(Home 
Network Research Center) –ITRC(Information Technology 
Research Center) support program supervised by the 
NIPA(National IT  Industry Promotion Agency (NIPA-2010-
C1090-1011–0010) 
and 
by 
the 
Human 
Resources 
Development of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology 
Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) grant funded by the 
Korea government Ministry of Knowledge Economy 
(20104010100570). 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Pan, L. Yeh, Y. Chen, Y. Lin, Y. Tseng, "A WSN-Based 
Intelligent Light Control System Considering User Activities and 
Profiles," IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 8, no. 10, pp. 1710-1721, Oct. 
2008 
[2] Y. Uhm, I. Hong, G. Kim, B. Lee, S. Park, "Design and 
implementation of power-aware LED light enabler with location-
aware adaptive middleware and context-aware user pattern," IEEE 
Trans. Consumer Electronics, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 231-239, Feb. 2010 
 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

[3] Z. Hwang, Y. Uhm, Y. Kim, G. Kim, S. Park, "Development of LED 
smart switch with light-weight middleware for location-aware 
services in smart home," IEEE Trans. Consumer Electronics, vol. 56, 
no. 3, pp. 1395-1402, Aug. 2010 
[4] A. H. Networks, V. Namboodiri, S. Member, and L. Gao, 
“Prediction-Based Routing for Vehicular,” Networks, vol. 56, no. 4, 
pp. 2332-2345, 2007. 
[5] R. Simmons, B. Browning, Y. Zhang, and V. Sadekar, “Learning to 
Predict Driver Route and Destination Intent,” Proceedings of the 
IEEE, pp. 127-132, 2006. 
[6] K. Park, M. Bell, I. Kaparias, and K. Bogenberger, “Learning user 
preferences of route choice behaviour for adaptive route guidance,” 
Engineering and Technology, pp. 159-166. 
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

