Primary Language for Semantic Computations and Communication without Syntax 
Petro Gopych 
Universal Power Systems USA-Ukraine LLC 
Kharkiv, Ukraine 
pmgopych@gmail.com, pmg@kharkov.com  
 
 
Abstract—Recent binary signal detection theory (BSDT), 
extended by its infinity hypothesis (infinity of common 
prehistory of universe, life, and mind), is called extended 
BSDT. Its basic notions underlie BSDT primary language (PL, 
a hypothetical genuine mathematics used by animals for their 
internal computations). BSDT PL operates with meaningful 
words defined as finite binary affixes to infinite binary strings 
that have common infinite initial parts. In this paper, by an 
analysis of composite PL words (sentences), it has been 
demonstrated that meanings of their constituents can only 
conditionally be related. Meanings of composite words taken as 
a whole are perceived unambiguously and, under condition 
that communicated parties have common evolution history 
(respective infinite strings share their infinite initial part), 
make possible reliable, in particular non-syntactic, meaningful 
(semantic) communication. It has also been shown the BSDT 
neural network learning paradigm, “one-memory-trace-per-
one-network”, and super-Turing hyper-computations are the 
mandatory requirements for doing semantic computations and 
for unambiguous understanding of meanings of finite symbolic 
messages. Numerical and empirical evidences of some PL 
predictions and potential PL applications are briefly discussed.  
Keywords-context; 
infinity; 
meaning; 
subjectivity; 
categorization; complexity; super-Turing computations. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Many researchers believe the problem of linguistic 
meaning cannot adequately be solved without solving the 
problem of consciousness. Taken together, recent binary 
signal detection theory, BSDT [1], and its atom of 
consciousness model, AOCM [2], give a chance of finding a 
new solution to the problem of meaning. The result is a 
primary language, PL [3], implementing John von 
Neumann’s idea of a low-level “primary language truly used 
by the central nervous system,” and structurally “essentially 
different of those languages to which our common 
experience refer” [4, p. 92]. BSDT PL [3] is thus a low-level 
language of symbols (spike patterns) probably used by the 
nervous system for its internal computations. It may also be 
used as a precursor to higher-level (including natural) 
languages that may be built with its help. 
In this paper, basic BSDT PL’s assumptions (new infinity 
hypothesis and meaning and subjectivity defined with its 
help) and some formalism details (computations with infinite 
binary strings that share infinite initial part) are briefly 
summarized. Within the PL framework for describing the 
meanings of components of composite words, the notion of 
conditional meaning for PL words of different meaning 
complexity [3] is introduced and on its ground their meaning 
ambiguity is discussed. For the first time, it will be explained 
in which way the rigid certainty of meanings of given-level 
(given meaning complexity) PL words and inevitable 
ambiguity of relations between meanings of different-level 
(of different meaning complexity) PL words ensure the 
richness of PL semantics, and how the PL provides a 
possibility of reliable communication without syntax (or even 
without any language at all) between animals of the same (or 
relative) species. For the success, it is needed to fulfill major 
requirement of BSDT PL infinity hypothesis – for different 
communicators infinite strings describing the meaning of a 
finite symbolic message must share their infinite initial part 
or, in other words, communicators must share significant 
part of their evo-devo history. Non-syntactic communication 
and communication without any language at all are the 
problems of great importance for linguistics, cognitive 
sciences, and artificial intelligence because their study 
informs us about the dynamics of language as a population 
phenomenon, bodily forms of signaling, and about a 
cognitive and bodily infrastructure for social interaction [5].  
Computational, 
neuroscience, 
and 
psychological 
evidences of some PL predictions are discussed (the latter 
becomes possible because there are elements of psychology, 
i.e., meanings, in the background of PL mathematics). We 
conclude the network learning paradigm “one-memory-trace-
per-one-network” and super-Turing hyper-computations are 
the mandatory requirements for successful semantic 
computations and for unambiguous understanding of the 
meanings of finite symbolic messages. It is claimed that, in 
living organisms (where meanings of communicated 
messages are crucially important), Turing and super-Turing 
computations are the everyday, routine, ubiquitous practice. 
The paper consists of Sections I to VII and reference list. 
II. 
BSDT  PL INFINITY HYPOTHESIS 
Extended BSDT, eBSDT, is the BSDT extended by new 
infinity hypothesis [2, 3] implying the infinity of common 
prehistory of the universe, life, the mind, language, and 
society and, according to which, main the eBSDT quantities 
– meanings of finite-in-length symbolic messages – are 
defined as infinite symbolic strings that have common “in 
the past” infinite initial parts. BSDT PL [3] and BSDT 
AOCM [2] are grounded on the eBSDT and closely related 
because meanings are interpreted as subjective experiences 
of respective feelings (qualia) and vice versa [2]. 
The leading idea is to equate a real-world physical 
device devoted to the recognition of particular meaningful 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

symbolic (binary for certainty) message originated from a 
thing of the world, complete binary infinite on a semi-axis 
description of the story of creation of this device in the 
course of evolution from the beginning of the world until 
now, and the meaning of the message under consideration 
[3]. Under the things of the world, we understand any 
inanimate objects, animate beings, and any relations 
between/within them. If in an arbitrary chosen place to split 
infinite on a semi-axis binary string just introduced into two 
parts then its finite and infinite fractions could be thought of 
respectively as the name of a thing and the context in which 
this name appears. Such a generalization allows the defining 
of an infinite but countable number of meaningful finite 
binary messages (PL words) that would name all the known 
(and unknown but conceivable) things of the world.  
Because of the common co-evolution of all the things of 
the world meanings of their names are to be described at a 
given moment by different infinite strings with common 
infinite initial parts. The main feature of these strings is 
that, having at their ends different finite-in-length fractions, 
they share their infinite initial part (the text written in it does 
not matter here). Thanks to this property, the lengths of 
infinite PL meaning descriptions which differ, if they are 
indeed different, may explicitly be compared (Section III 
B). Since the meaning of a name is simultaneously the 
physical device designed to recognize exactly this name, 
name’s meaning is the property of perceiving organism 
(sensory agent) and, through it only, of the thing whose 
name is currently under consideration. The same is also the 
reason why a name’s meaning is simultaneously the 
animal’s respective internal (psychological) state or its 
current subjective “first-person” experience or quale [2, 3].  
In order for the AOCM/PL to be able to do semantic 
computations (i.e., to operate explicitly with meaningful 
strings of infinite length), specific super-Turing techniques 
and the implementation of real-world super-Turing physical 
devices are required. These are BSDT ASMs (abstract 
selectional machines [6]), AOCM/PL’s building blocks 
devoted to processing separate meaningful messages or PL 
words/names. Because of our infinity hypothesis, the ASMs, 
AOCM, and PL should be based on notions that appeal to an 
extent to psychology (to meanings of names) and, for this 
reason, are beyond the scope of traditional mathematics. 
III. 
ELEMENTS OF BSDT PL FORMALISM 
A. Meaningless and Meaningful Words 
All the conceivable meaningful PL expressions are 
defined as infinite spinlike (with components ±1) binary 
strings cxixj
i of the same infinite length, l(cxixj
i) = l(cx0) = א0 
bits (א0, Georg Cantor’s aleph) or of the same meaning 
complexity [3]. They constitute (are the members of) an 
ultimate or proper class Scx0 (the set of strings of the length 
l(cx0) that is not a member of any other set [7], cxixj
iScx0; 
the term “proper class” may intuitively be interpreted “as an 
accumulation of objects which must always remain in a state 
of development” [8, p. 325]). Given-level (Section III B) 
cxixj
i are uniquely specified (marked/labeled) by their right-
most fractions, i-bit strings xj
i (xj
i is an affix added to the cxi, 
cxi is common infinite context for all the xj
i of the length i 
with different arrangements of their ±1 components; i = 0, 1, 
2, …  and j = 1, 2, …, 2i). The number of elements (the 
cardinality) of the fraction of the Scx0 that comprises all the 
cxixj
i with xj
i not longer than i bits is the sum ∑2k = 2i + 1 – 1 
(k = 0, 1, …, i). Consequently, between naturals in their 
usual order and all the elements of the whole Scx0, cxixj
i, a 
one-to-one correspondence can be established. That means 
the Scx0 is countable and its cardinality, |Scx0|, equals א0. On 
the other hand, |Scx0| = 2i + 1 – 1 with i = א0; that is, if the 1s 
that are inessential in this expression are omitted, it will be 
the famous formula for the size of the Cantor’s continuum.  
An affix xj
i may simultaneously be treated either as the 
ijth i-length binary string, message, computer code/ 
algorithm, vector in i-dimensional binary space (i-BS), point 
in the i-BS, element of the set of 2i points of the i-BS, PL 
word or PL name. Depending on the current context, these 
terms will further be used interchangeably.  
A word/name xj
i is the meaningless fraction of a 
meaningful string cxixj
i; i.e. such a name gets its meaning 
from its context and from itself, M(xj
i) = cxixj
i. Different xj
i 
specify all the conceivable strings cxixj
i and at the same time 
represent all the conceivable mathematical expressions as i-
length binary strings – that is, they provide complete (non-
Gödelian) 
arithmetization 
of 
these 
expressions 
by 
ordinals/naturals (xj
i may be treated as ordinals/naturals 
written down in binary notations). For this reason, xj
i are 
also the ijth eBSDT Gödel’s numbers, Gij
x = xj
i, enumerating 
themselves and meaningful strings cxixj
i. The same xj
i are 
also the ijth partial Gregory Chaitin’s Ω, Ωij
x = xj
i (the ijth 
halting probabilities [9] for arbitrary binary computer codes 
not longer than i bits running on the ijth Chaitin’s self-
delimiting computers or, we hypothesize, on respective 
BSDT ASMs). xj
i as well as Gij
x and Ω ij
x are random and 
incomputable because they are randomly selected from 2i 
different binary i-lengh strings and, then, assigned to things 
to be named [3]. In other words, xj
i, Gij
x, and Ωij
x provide 
irreducible descriptions (specifications) of these things. The 
totality of given-level (Section III B) values of xj
i, Ωij
x, or 
Gij
x is the totality of given point-of-view irreducible 
descriptions of all the things of the known world [3]. 
If string variable xi consists of variables up and vq then xi 
= upvq, i = p + q; xi is a string template of i empty cells 
needed to produce the strings xj
i by filling these cells in +1s 
and −1s; upvq is a concatenation of up and vq. The values of 
variables xi, up, and vq are respectively the strings xj
i, ur
p, and 
vs
q that are the members of sets Sxi, Sup, and Svq whose 
cardinalities are respectively |Sxi| = 2i, |Sup| = 2p, and |Svq| = 
2q; if p ≤ q ≤ i, Sup
Svq
Sxi. Composite set/space Sxi may 
also be interpreted as either the Sup whose vectors are 
colored in 2q colors or the Svq whose vectors are colored in 
2p colors. If so, p and q are the measures of discrete 
“colored” non-localities of vectors in spaces Svq and Sup, 
respectively [3]. Three-dimensional blue-and-red binary 
space (“colored Boolean cube”) has earlier independently 
been used for representing the Boolean functions of one-
dimensional cell automata, e.g., [10, ch. 6]. The rainbow of 
colors in finite-dimensional binary spaces here discussed is 
a direct generalization [3] of the two-color case [11]. 


48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

B. Categories, Meaningful Words of Different Levels 
The form C(xi) = cxixi (it is a concatenation of string cxi 
and string template xi) defines a category (notion or 
concept) of meaningful names cxixj
i. If to dynamically fix p 
left-most components of an xj
i as a particular ur
p, then cxixj
i = 
cxi(ur
pvs
q) = (cupur
p)vs
q = cvqvs
q where cxi = cup, xj
i = ur
pvs
q (i.e., 
xj
i is a composite string), cvq = cupur
p, xj
iSxi, ur
pSup, and 
vs
qSvq. Infinite strings cupur
pScu0 and cvqvs
qScv0 are the 
members of different ultimate classes, Scu0 and Scv0, but, 
because of our infinity hypothesis implying that cxi = cup, the 
lengths of cupur
p and cvqvs
q are comparable and the former is 
l(cxixj
i) − l(cupur
p) = i − p = q > 0 bits shorter (has smaller 
meaning complexity) than the latter (note, Scv0 = Scx0 and 
l(cxixj
i) = l(cvqvs
q); infinite words [12] of automata theory 
have no such properties and remain within the framework of 
traditional mathematics). The form C(vq) = (cupur
p)vq = cvqvq 
with values (cupur
p)vs
q = cvqvs
q provides a temporal sub-
categorization of members of the category C(xi) = cxixi. 
Since, under condition cxi = cup, cxixj
i and cupur
p are of 
different lengths (have different meaning complexities), we 
refer to their affixes as names of different levels: the level of 
xj
i is zero, the level of ur
p (if it is a fraction of xj
i) is q = i – p, 
i.e. the number of “ignored” bits that differentiate the length 
of cupur
p from the length of cxixj
i (q also defines discrete 
colored 2q-state non-locality of ur
p; as l(cxixj
i) = l(cvqvs
q), vs
q 
is also a zero-level name). Only zero-level names get 
definite meanings (see Fig. 1), namely xj
i in cxixj
i or vs
q in 
(cupur
p)vs
q; the string ur
p has no definite meaning in 
(cupur
p)vs
q but it gets a strictly defined meaning as a right-
most (zero-level) fraction of curur
p (if ur
p is not a fraction of 
any composite string). A right-most (zero-level) item of a 
composite meaningful name is called the “focal” item (it 
occupies dynamically created “focus of attention”), a 
composite name’s non-focal item produces a focal name’s 
“fringe” (by analogy with fringes of memory and 
consciousness [2, 3]) or its short-range immediate context. 
All the PL’s meaningful strings are defined on a semi-
axis (i.e. they are “one-side infinite”), have the lengths א0 
bits (i.e. they are countable), and must always be arranged in 
a way when they share their infinite initial part, the length 
of which is again א0. Since infinite meaningful strings are 
arranged in such a way, their beginnings (bit-by-bit common 
infinite initial part) are always the same but their end-points 
may not coincide and one of these strings may in general be 
a number of bits longer or shorter than the other (in other 
words, they may have larger or smaller meaning complexity 
[3]). Therefore the strings that are of the same infinite length 
in the sense of Cantor (that are countable) may be of 
different infinite length (meaning complexity) in the sense 
of the BSDT PL. The level of a PL name is the measure of 
such a difference or the relative measure of complexity of 
meanings; absolute measure (the length of a meaningful 
string taken separately) is useless for comparing meaning 
complexities because all meaningful strings taken separately 
have the same length, א0. Consequently, the notions of a 
name’s meaning complexity and a name’s level (relative 
measure of its meaning complexity) exist in the framework 
of the BSDT PL only and have their roots in its infinity 
hypothesis. Meaning complexity embraces given the context 
Shannon-type ensemble complexity (the length of xj
i in bits) 
specifying a name’s statistical properties and Kolmogorov-
type algorithmic complexity (the length in bits, א0, of 
computer program, cxixj
i, that gives complete irreducible 
infinite description of the ASM that selects the xj
i) 
specifying the complexity of devices selecting the names of 
given ensemble complexity [3].  
Composite names xj
i = ur
pvs
q, the values of xi = upvq, are 
thought of as PL sentences. If so, the value of a focal string 
variable, e.g. vs
q, corresponds to a sentence’s feature/ 
attribute that is currently in the focus of attention; its fringe, 
e.g. ur
p, is the fringe of an animal’s memory or 
consciousness. 
A 
composite 
name’s 
“holophrasical” 
presentation, e.g. xj
i, corresponds to the perception/ 
understanding of a sentence as a whole whereas its serial 
presentation (e.g., a sequence of vs
q with 1 ≤ q ≤ i) 
represents the sentence’s serial perception/understanding as 
a sequence of its meaningful fractions or “words”. Given the 
context, different zero-level names are synonyms naming the 
same thing in different ways (e.g., xj
i is one of 2i synonyms 
defined given the context cxi and vs
q is one of 2q synonyms 
defined given the context cvq); if cvq = cxiur
p (i.e., if vs
q is a 
focal fraction of compound name xj
i = ur
pvs
q), both types of 
synonyms describe the same thing but of different points of 
view (grounds for the understanding). Any paraphrase of PL 
sentences (other choice of their “focal” fractions) cannot 
change their whole meanings and in that sense BSDT PL 
lacks “compositional semantics” [3]. 
As composite words are treated as PL sentences, the set 
of rules defining the relations of meaning of a composite 
word to meanings of its constituents represent the PL 
syntax. If internal structure of PL words/sentences is 
ignored and their meanings are only perceived as a whole 
then communication with their help do not appeal to PL 
syntax and, consequently, is carried out without syntax.   
C. Meanings, Subjective Experiencies (Qualia) and Truths 
Given the cxi, each string xj
i is selected by its BSDT 
ASM(xj
i) intentionally designed in the course of evolution 
and tuned in the course of its individual development 
exactly for this purpose [6]. An infinite, symbolically- 
written, complete description of evo-devo prehistory of 
designing this real-world physical ASM(xj
i) is the explicit 
meaning of xj
i, Mexpl(xj
i) = cxixj
i. The running of ASM(xj
i) 
itself in its real-world physical form is the implicit meaning 
of xj
i, Mimpl(xj
i), or internal, “mental” or psychological 
representation of the thing named by the xj
i [2, 3]. As M(xj
i) 
= Mexpl(xj
i) = Mimpl(xj
i), the meaning of xj
i given cxi is 
animal’s being in a specific psychological state which is a 
“quale” (subjective “first-person”/private experience or 
feeling) of this meaning [2, 3]. In particular, the meaning of 
a category of names is a set of respective qualia. 
The name xj
i is true if its meaning, M(xj
i) = cxixj
i, is true 
or, in other words, if strings cxi and xj
i are correctly adjoined 
to each other. If there is no such correct correspondence, 
meaningful name is false. Since the cardinality of Scx0, |Scx0| 
= א0, is infinite, the number of PL truths is also potentially 
infinite and, for any meaningful string, its truth value 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

T(cxixj
i) certainly exists (it is either “true” or “false”). Each 
true meaningful name, e.g. cxixj
i, names by definition the ith 
real-world thing given to an animal through its ijth 
psychological state or, in other words, through the activity 
of physically implemented real-world ASM(xj
i) [2, 3]. Thus, 
for meaningful names, the truth is the norm and the falsity is 
an anomaly caused, e.g., by an animal’s dysfunction or 
disease. In any case, there is no lie and no liar paradox – a 
source of Kurt Gödel’s incompleteness which does not hold 
for PL meaningful zero-level names, cxixj
i. This inference is 
caused by the fact that PL name meanings are always the 
ones that animals/humans actually keep in mind. It is also 
the reason why BSDT PL works so well as a primary 
language (to survive, an animal does not lie to itself) [3]. 
As truth values T(cxixj
i) are never communicated together 
with xj
i, they should always be discovered in the process of 
decoding (understanding) the received names xj
i and 
confirmed by checking their correspondence to the reality 
or, more directly, to an animal’s respective psychological 
state. At the same time, a zero-level name’s fringe items 
(names), due to their non-locality, have no meanings but 
only conditional meanings (Section IV and Fig. 1). Hence, 
for PL names of different levels (meaning complexities) 
relations between their meanings remain fundamentally 
ambiguous. This vagueness is a BSDT PL counterpart to 
Gödel’s incompleteness (axioms, theorems, and meta-
mathematical expressions for which Gödel’s results hold 
are, in our terms, an infinite fraction of infinite in number 
meaningless strings xj
i) [2,3]. 
IV. 
BSDT PL MEANING AMBIGUITY 
It is assumed that, in a meaningful string cxixj
i, its context 
cxi and its name xj
i describe respectively the static part of the 
ASM(xj
i) selecting the xj
i (its “hardware” already fixed in the 
course of evolution) and the dynamic part of the ASM(xj
i) 
(its “software” designed in the course of the hardware’s 
adaptive learning and development). The length of xj
i in bits, 
i, defines the number of now essential (explicitly considered) 
features of the ith thing named by the xj
i; the jth arrangement 
of ±1 components of xj
i is the jth PL description of this ith 
thing (e.g., the value +1 or –1 of a component of the xj
i may 
mean that the respective feature is included to, +1, or 
excluded from, –1, the consideration). The complexity of 
meaning of the name xj
i reflects the meaning complexity of 
the physically implemented real-world ASM(xj
i), not the 
complexity of the thing named by xj
i. 
If xj
i = ur
pvs
q, strings cupur
p and (cupur
p)vs
q = cvqvs
q describe 
given the context, cxi = cup, an ASM(ur
p) and ASM(vs
q) that 
may for a time period dynamically be created from the 
ASM(xj
i) that in turn is the product of a similar process 
described by the string cxixj
i. ASM(ur
p) and ASM(vs
q) are 
“virtual” ASMs (i.e. temporally designed for) selecting the 
names ur
p and vs
q of the pth and the qth “virtual” things (i.e. 
of temporally highlighted/allocated fractions of the ith 
composite thing named by its ijth composite name xj
i); in 
other words, virtual ASMs highlight the prth and qsth 
“partial” meaningful fractions of the ijth description of the 
ith thing. Composite names essentially enrich the PL 
semantics but raise the problem of comparing the meanings 
of names selected by ASM(ur
p), ASM(vs
q), and ASM(xj
i). 
Zero-level names xj
i and vs
q (vs
q is a part of xj
i = ur
pvs
q) 
name given the context the same thing in the same way but 
from different points of view defined by their contexts 
(static for xj
i, cxi, and in part dynamically created for vs
q, cvq 
= cupur
p; Fig. 1(a)). vs
q is selected by the ASM(vs
q) that is 
“virtual” with respect to the ASM(xj
i), here cxi = cup and for 
xj
i and vs
q their common infinite context is cxi. Thus, 
ASM(xj
i) can temporally serve as ASM(vs
q) but in any case 
the same thing is under the consideration and the meaning 
of xj
i, M(xj
i) = cxixj
i, and the meaning of vs
q, M(vs
q) = 
(cupur
p)vs
q = cvqvs
q, may unambiguously be related (cvqvs
q is 
simply a variant of cxixj
i). 
If, given the context, cxi = cup, names xj
i and ur
p are both 
at the level of zero, then their meanings are to be of different 
proper classes and should have different meaning 
complexities (meaning complexity of xj
i is l(cxixj
i) − l(cupur
p) 
= i − p = q bits larger than that of ur
p; see Fig. 1(a) and (c)). 
This means they describe different things from the same 
point of view or the same thing at different stages of its 
evolution. The names xj
i (Fig. 1(a)) and ur
p (Fig. 1(c)) are 
respectively selected by present-stage-of-evolution ASM(xj
i) 
and q-stages-back-in-evolution ASM(ur
p) and refer to 
animals of evolutionary different species. Meaningful string 
cupur
p and respective part of cxixj
i = (cupur
p)vs
q may coincide 
bit by bit but even in this case meanings of xj
i and ur
p may 
only conditionally be related to each other and 2q additional 
conditions (strings vs
q in Fig. 1(a)) are required to uniquely 
establish their correspondence. 
 
x
5
x4 
5
4 
u
3
6(magenta)
cxi
cup
(a)
(c)
u
3
6 
u
3
6(green)
s
p
i
xj
i = ur
pvs
q, cxi = cup
32
28
24
20
0
2
4
6
0
4
8
12
16
i
cxi
0
2
4
6
0
2
4
6
0
4
8
j
x
5
28 
(b)
i = 5
p = 3
x
5
4
x
5
12
x
5
20
v1
2
v2
2
v3
2
v4
2
 
 
Figure 1. Comparing given the context different-level BSDT PL meaningful 
names of different proper classes: (a) zero-level names, (b) colored zero-
level names corresponding to names in (a), (c) zero-level names that are 
predecessors to names in (a) and counterparts to names in (b). 
 
If ur
p is a q-level fringe of zero-level focal string vs
q and 
they are both fractions of xj
i = ur
pvs
q  (Fig. 1(a)) then ur
p has 
no meaning (Section III B). But it could get a definite 
conditional meaning if one supposes that ur
p is conditioned 
by the color of a zero-level name ur
p(color) selected by a 
respective q-stages-back-in-evolution ASM (zero-level xj
i in 
Fig. 1(a) are unambiguously related to zero-level names 
ur
p(color) in Fig. 1(b)). ur
p(color) and ur
p conditioned by one 
of q colors, though, have conditional but certain meanings. 
But once colors are deleted (only uncolored strings are used 
in computations) one-to-one correspondence between xj
i and 
ur
p(color) disappears and, instead of it, we obtain 2q-state 
uncertainty between the xj
i and ur
p and between the meaning 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

of xj
i and conditional meaning of ur
p (Fig. 1). The origin of 
the conditioned relationships just explained between 
meanings of names of different meaning complexities is the 
properties of ultimate/proper classes caused in turn by BSDT 
infinity hypothesis. Of this follows that famous Burali-Forti 
paradox “there can be two transfinite (ordinal) numbers, a 
and b, such that a neither equal to, greater than, nor smaller 
than b” [13, p. 157] means in our terms that meanings of PL 
names, whose meaning complexities differ in q bits, can only 
be compared with 2q-state uncertainty (Fig. 1). 
In Fig. 1, panel (a) demonstrates zero-level names xj
i and 
vs
q of meaningful strings cxixj
i and (cxiur
p)vs
q (xj
i = ur
pvs
q; i = 5, 
p = 3, and q = i – p = 2); the rectangle has the height i and 
the width |Sxi| = 2i = 32, the ijth bar of the height i in the jth 
horizontal position designates the name xj
i = Gij
x = Ωij
x; bars 
x4
5 = u6
3v1
2, x12
5 = u6
3v2
2, x20
5 = u6
3v3
2 and x28
5 = u6
3v4
2 that 
correspond to four colored highlighted bars in (b) are also 
highlighted (u6
3 is q-level fringe of zero-level vs
q that is a 
focal fraction of xj
i); substrings v1
2, v2
2, v3
2, and v4
2 may 
encode the colors of colored strings ur
p(color) in (b). Panel 
(b) shows conditioned zero-level names ur
p(color) = 
Gr
p(color) = Ωr
p(color) corresponding to names xj
i in (a) (the 
word color is a parameter, names ur
p(color) are selected by 
conditioned 
q-stages-back-in-evolution 
ASM 
and 
conditionally name the things unconditionally named by the 
xj
i); equal-in-size rectangles colored in |Svq| = 2q = 4 colors 
consist of |Sup| = 2p = 8 bars of the height p; uncolored bars 
in (a) and respective colored bars in (b) (e.g. u6
3(green) and 
x4
5) denote different descriptions of the same thing. Panel (c) 
displays uncolored zero-level (focal) names ur
p of 
meaningful 
strings 
cupur
p 
(they 
name 
evolutionary 
predecessors of the thing named by the xj
i); the prth bar of 
the height p in the rth horizontal position (it is shaded) 
designates ur
p = Gpr
u = Ωpr
u for the case u6
3 = G3,6
u = Ω3,6
u. In 
(a), (b), and (c), strings that are numerically equivalent to the 
u6
3 are shaded in the same way; contexts (they are shown as 
bold arrows) are equal to each other bit by bit, cxi = cup. 
Uncolored and colored names name real-world and 
conditioned (“virtual”) things, respectively. A bijection, xj
i
 ↔ 
ur
p(color), exists between names in (a) and names in (b); it 
may be e.g. x28
5 ↔ u6
3(magenta) or x4
5 ↔ u6
3(green). A 
bijection also exists from names ur
p in (c) to given-color 
names ur
p(color) in (b), e.g. ur
p ↔ ur
p(green) (once it is 
established, other conceivable bijections, e.g.  ur
p ↔ 
ur
p(magenta), become impossible). If colors are deleted, 
these bijections (they are indicated as curved bidirectional 
arrows) disappear producing, instead of 2q-state (4-state in 
(b)) discrete colored non-locality of vectors ur
p, 2q-state (4-
state in (b)) uncertainty (degeneracy) of meaning relations 
between names in (a) and (b), in (b) and (c), and in (a) and 
(c). Infinite strings cxixj
i and cupur
p are like Burali-Forti’s 
“transfinite ordinals” a and b mentioned above. 
V. 
NUMERICAL AND EMPIRICAL BSDT PL VALIDATIONS 
Semantic computations produce meaningful results of 
meaningful data. BSDT PL computations are exactly of this 
type because we imply that the meaning (infinite context) of 
any finite mathematical expression is always taken into 
account when any formal operations (computations) are 
being done on it. For this reason, elements of psychology 
(meanings) are always involved in semantic computations 
and their completely formal (i.e. independent on meanings) 
descriptions become strictly speaking impossible. Thanks to 
this fact it does become possible to verify the methods of 
proposed PL mathematics by methods of psychology and 
neuroscience or, in other words, by comparing PL 
computations with internal computational mechanisms that 
are actually in live animals/humans.  
A. Solving Communication Paradox 
In Section III B and Section IV we saw that only zero-
level names whose internal structure (the manifold of their 
possible focal and fringe constituents) is ignored or, in other 
words, only those PL sentences that are presented without 
syntax and perceived “holophrasically” have given context 
unambiguous meanings. This fact and the fact that meanings 
of PL meaningful names are the ones that animals/humans 
actually keep in mind [3] make the BSDT PL an appropriate 
tool for the description of communication without syntax (or 
without any language at all) that is typical for animals and 
human infants, e.g. [5] and references therein. We 
hypothesize: communication without syntax (it is exhibited 
as an animal’s basic/inherent behaviors that truly reflect its 
respective inner states or behavioristic part of animal’s 
cognition) suffices to support the simplest animal sociality. 
Since complete meaningful descriptions of PL names, 
cxixj
i, are fundamentally infinite, during any finite time 
period they can never be communicated in full even in 
principle while in fact many times a day everybody observes 
in others and experiences him/herself successful meaningful 
information exchanges. This communication paradox [2, 3] 
speaks of everyday, routine, ubiquitous use of super-Turing 
computations in human meaningful and socially-important 
communication. The communication paradox can be solved 
by appealing to BSDT infinity hypothesis [2, 3] and the 
technique of BSDT ASMs that are super-Turing devices 
with programmatic and computational processes that are 
completely separate in time (ASMs do not waste their 
computational resources on serving themselves and, for this 
reason, are faster than universal Turing machines [6]).  
But, dividing the programming and program running is 
insufficient to overcome the communication paradox. To 
cope with it, let us additionally assume that the ASM-
transmitter and the ASM-receiver share in full their 
prehistory, i.e., let they were designed, implemented in a 
physical form, and learned beforehand to perform the same 
meaningful function – selecting the same finite binary 
message xj
i given the same infinite context cxi. If it is, and not 
in any other case, the meaning of xj
i, cxixj
i, is equally 
encoded, decoded, interpreted and understood by both 
parties and for both parties, the value of its truth, T(cxixj
i), is 
the same. For this reason, and because the name’s meaning is 
simultaneously a psychological state an animal experiences 
producing as well as perceiving this name in meaningful 
information exchange, the transmitter and the receiver are to 
be 
exactly 
physically, 
structurally, 
and 
functionally 
equivalent (are to be “mirror” replicas or “clones” of each 
other). 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

 Several important PL predictions come out.  
B. Coding by Synaptic Assemblies 
Where meanings are essential (e.g., in living organisms) 
BSDT network learning paradigm “one-memory-trace-per-
one-network” [14] must be widespread in practice and, in 
particular, any memory for meaningful records  must be 
built of the number of networks that coincides with the 
number of records to be stored in memory. This paradigm is 
not consistent with the usual desire of designers and 
engineers to store in a network as many memory traces as 
possible but it is well supported by recent empirical 
neuroscience finding of coding by synaptic assemblies [15, 
16]. In these experiments, mice were trained to perform new 
motor tasks and in living animals changes in the number of 
synaptic contacts associated with learning new skills were 
measured. In complete accordance with the BSDT 
assumption [14] that each new memory trace should be 
written down in an always new separate network (synaptic 
assembly), it turned out “that leaning new motor tasks (and 
acquiring new sensory experiences) is associated with the 
formation of new sets of persistent synaptic connections in 
motor (and sensory)” brain areas [17, p. 859].   
C. Super-Turing Computations by Mirror ASMs 
To ensure correct understanding of meanings of finite 
symbolic communicated messages, the ASM-transmitter 
and ASM-receiver that are the mirror replicas of each other 
need to be used. Mirror ASMs implement meaningful super-
Turing computations: for the transmitter and the receiver, 
they ensure the use of the same infinitely long “boundary 
conditions” cxi needed to perform Turing-type computations, 
which have been programmed beforehand, with finite-length 
strings xj
i, e.g., as in [14]. Mirror ASMs physically divide 
infinite meaningful message to be processed into infinite, 
cxi, and finite, xj
i, parts and take the former into account as 
their exactly identical “hardware” and “software”, designed 
and physically implemented beforehand in the course of 
animal evolution and development. Thanks to this trick to 
correctly understand the meaning of the cxixj
i it is enough to 
correctly transmit, receive, and decode the xj
i only. Mirror 
ASMs also explain why meaningful communication without 
syntax is successful only between animals of the same (or 
relative) species: such animals are a priori equipped with 
the same “hardware” and “software” that fix the common 
infinitely long context needed to finish meaningful super-
Turing computations of current interest over a finite time 
period. The picture described is well supported by the 
empirical finding and studying of mirror neurons – the ones 
that are active when an animal behaves or only observes 
respective behaviors of others; see e.g. [18, 19] and 
numerous references therein. The ASM/mirror-ASM 
computational system just described and the neuron/mirror-
neuron 
circuitries 
already 
observed [18, 
19] 
may 
respectively be treated as theoretical and real-world 
implementations of super-Turing machines with infinite 
inputs, which until now have been hypothetical, e.g. [20], 
that are to be capable of computing with infinite strings or, 
what is the same, with real-valued/continuous quantities. 
D. Knowing Memory Performance without Knowing 
Memory Record 
Since BSDT PL employs a non-Gödelian (but envisaged 
by Gödel [21]) arithmetization by ordinals/naturals xj
i and 
since these ordinals/naturals are given context randomly 
chosen to name the things to be named, the following effect 
has been predicted [3]. By examining in an experiment an 
ASM hierarchy (neural subspace [14]) that generates the 
meaning of a trace xj
i, all the parameters describing the ASM 
selecting the xj
i may successfully be found but the content of 
xj
i – specific randomly-established arrangement of its ±1 
components – will always remain unknown. If it is, then, for 
example, the content of a particular given-length memory 
record does not affect memory performance and cannot 
empirically be found. This rather surprising prediction has 
been corroborated well by numerical BSDT analysis [22] of 
receiver operating characteristics (ROCs, functions providing 
memory performance) measured in groups of brain patients 
and control healthy subjects. In such a way the idea of non-
Gödelian BSDT arithmetization of meaningful mathematical 
expressions by ordinals/naturals randomly chosen given the 
context of a set of ordinals/naturals with their given upper 
limit has numerically and empirically been substantiated. 
VI. 
EXAMPLES AND POTENTIAL PL APPLICATIONS 
Any formal axiomatic system (FAS, it comprises all its 
axioms and theorems) is supposed to represent an infinite 
fraction of meaningless finite binary strings xj
i related to 
particular proper class, Scx0 (Section III A). For this reason, 
FAS computations are also PL computations and numerous 
available computational results e.g. in physics or biology 
may be treated as their examples performed given a context 
defined formally and informally. A separate infinite PL 
string that gives a meaning to a finite symbolic message xj
i 
(e.g., a formula written in binary notations) includes 
descriptions of the FAS formalism needed to derive it and of 
the problem that gives it physical sense. This picture is 
another representation of formal and informal knowledge 
from e.g. a book and gives nothing new, except of drawing 
attention to the fact that manipulations with numbers are 
meaningless until a giving-the-meaning context is added.  
The situation changes dramatically once one wants to 
communicate this formula’s meaning to someone else. Let 
us consider a lecturer in a lecture room. In the beginning, he 
and his students have different knowledge on the formula of 
interest and students cannot correctly understand its 
meaning. The lecturer’s aim is to give them a piece of 
additional knowledge and, in this way, to equalize, for all of 
them, the context of understanding this formula/message. At 
the end of the lecture, for the lecturer and for his students, 
infinite PL strings describing specific knowledge should 
become bit-by-bit equivalent not only “in the past” but also 
“in the present”, and the formula’s meaning should be 
understood by all the parties in the same way [2]. If it is not, 
a misunderstanding arises. How, for members of a social 
(semantic) network, the difference in their previous 
knowledge 
influences 
on 
understanding 
meaningful 
messages may empirically be estimated as described in [23]. 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

In this example, non-syntactic messages represent a very 
small fraction of general flow of information. Among them 
it may e.g. be the fact that the lecturer is walking when he 
gives his talk. This non-syntactic and even non-language 
message (bodily signal) is effortlessly understood by 
everyone who is in the room because all people are 
members of the same species and have the same innate 
bodily infrastructure (in particular mirror neuron system) to 
produce and perceive/understand walking. Humans/animals 
produce and perceive such message automatically with 
practically no chance of misunderstanding because its 
meaning is provided, for all of them, by innate infinite PL 
strings of the same length that are equivalent “in the past”.   
The range of potential PL applications covers everything 
where meanings are important. If they become inessential, 
the PL can be reduced to traditional mathematics (a FAS).  
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
BSDT PL provides a framework that is sufficient to 
perform principal semantic computations and based on them 
communication without syntax. BSDT PL seems also to be 
sufficient to explain the discrete computational part of 
intelligence of animals of poor sociality and, consequently, 
to design the discrete computational part of intelligence of 
artificial devices (e.g., robots) or computer codes mimicking 
the behavior of such animals. At the same time, the PL is 
unable to explain the mechanism of dividing its names 
(sentences) into focal and fringe components and, 
consequently, of directing an animal’s attention to particular 
thing – we hope it may be done by methods beyond the 
BSDT. To explain/reproduce the “attentive” part of animal 
intelligence in a biologically-plausible way and to design 
the “attentive” part of the intelligence of intelligent robots, 
analog (e.g., wave-like) computational methods similar to 
those that are used in real brains are most probably required. 
In contrast to formal languages that are in end the 
products of a finitely defined calculus, BSDT PL is a 
calculus of finite binary strings (spike patterns or “symbols”) 
with infinitely defined contexts. It is grounded on 1) the 
BSDT [1] providing the technique of encoding/decoding in 
binary 
finite-dimensional 
spaces 
(BSDT 
ASMs 
[6] 
implement PL’s inference rules) and 2) the new infinity 
hypothesis [2, 3] providing the technique of super-Turing 
(semantic) computations with infinite binary strings that 
share their infinite initial part. BSDT PL is the simplest 
language of its kind and has great potential for designing the 
adequate models of higher-level languages, including in 
perspective the natural languages of humans. At the same 
time, meaning ambiguity of different-level BSDT PL names 
that have been established as their fundamental property 
raises many intriguing problems to be solved in the future.  
REFERENCES 
[1] P.M. Gopych, “Elements of the binary signal detection theory, 
BSDT,” in New research in neural networks, M. Yoshida, H. 
Sato, Eds. New York: Nova Science, 2008, pp. 55-63. 
[2] P. Gopych, “BSDT atom of consciousness model: The unity 
and modularity of consciousness,” in ICANN-09, LNCS, vol. 
5769, C. Alippi, M.M. Polycarpou, C. Panayiotou, G. Ellinas, 
Eds. 
Berlin-Heidelberg: 
Springer, 
2009, 
pp. 
54-64, 
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-04277-5_6. 
[3] P. Gopych, “On semantics and syntax of the BSDT primary 
language,” in Information models of knowledge, K. Markov, 
V. Velychko, O. Voloshin, Eds. Kiev-Sofia: ITHEA, 2010, 
pp. 135-145, http://foibg.com/ibs_isc/ibs-19/ibs-19-p15.pdf 
<retrieved: February, 2012>. 
[4] J. von Neumann. The computer and the brain. New Haven: 
Yale University Press, 1956. 
[5] N.J. Enfield, “Without social context?” Science, vol. 329, 
Sep. 2010, pp. 1600-1601, doi:10.1126/science.1194229. 
[6] P. Gopych, “Minimal BSDT abstract selectional machines 
and their selectional and computational performance,” in 
IDEAL-07, LNCS, vol. 4881, H. Yin, P. Tino, E. Corchado, 
W. Byrne, X. Yao, Eds. Berlin-Heidelberg: Springer, 2007, 
pp. 198-208, doi:10.1007/978-3-540-77226-2_21. 
[7] W.V. Quine. Set theory and its logic. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1969. 
[8] L. Pozsgay, “Liberal intuitivism as a basis of set theory,” 
Proc. Sym. Pure Math., vol. 13, part I. Providence, Rhode 
Island: AMS, 1971, pp. 321-330. 
[9] G. Chaitin. The limits of mathematics. Singapore: Springer, 
1998. 
[10] K. Mainzer. Thinking in complexity, 5th ed. Berlin: Springer, 
2007. 
[11] P. Gopych, “BSDT multi-valued coding in discrete spaces,” 
in CISIS-08, ASC, vol. 53, E. Corchado, R, Zunino, P. 
Gastaldo, Á. Herrero, Eds. Berlin-Heidelberg: Springer, 2009, 
pp. 258-265, doi:10.1007/978-3-540-88181-0_33. 
[12] D. Perrin and J.-É. Pin. Infinite words. Amsterdam: Academic 
Press, 2004. 
[13] H. Poincaré. Science and method. London: Thomas Nelson 
and Sons, 1914. 
[14] P. Gopych, “Biologically plausible BSDT recognition of 
complex images: The case of human faces,” Int. J. Neural 
Systems, 
vol. 
18, 
Dec. 
2008, 
pp. 
527-545, 
doi:10.1142/S0129065708001762. 
[15] T. Xu, X. Yu, A.J. Perlik, W.F. Tobin, J.A. Zweig, K. 
Tennant et al., “Rapid formation and selective stabilization of 
synapses for enduring motor memories,” Nature, vol. 462, 
Dec. 2009, pp. 915-919, doi:10.1038/nature08389. 
[16] G. Yang, F. Pan, W.-B. Gan, “Stably maintained dendritic 
spines are associated with lifelong memories,” Nature, vol. 
462, Dec. 2009, pp. 920-924, doi:10.1038/nature08557. 
[17] N.E. Ziv and E. Ahissar, “New tricks and old spines,” Nature, 
vol. 462, Dec. 2009, pp. 859-861, doi:10.1038/462859a. 
[18] G. Rizzolatti and L. Craighero, “The mirror-neuron system,” 
Ann. Rev. Neurosci., vol. 27, 2004, pp. 169-192, 
doi:10.1146/annurev.neuro.27.070203.144230. 
[19] C. Keysers, J.H. Kaas, V. Gazzole, “Somatosensation in 
social perception,” Nat. Rev. Neurosci., vol. 11, June 2010, 
pp. 417-428, doi:10.1038/nrn2833. 
[20] T. Ord, “The many forms of hypercomputations,” App. Math. 
Comp., 
vol. 
178, 
July 
2006, 
pp. 
143-153, 
doi:10.1016/j.amc.2005.09.076. 
[21] K. Gödel, “Remarks before Princeton bicentennial conference 
on problems of mathematics,” in The Undecidable, M. Davis, 
Ed. New York: Raven Press, 1965, pp. 84-88. 
[22] P. Gopych and I. Gopych, “BSDT ROC and Cognitive 
Learning Hypothesis,” in CISIS-10, AISC, vol.  85, Á. 
Herrero, E. Corchado, C. Redondo, Á. Alonso, Eds. Berlin-
Heidelberg: Springer, 2010, pp. 13-23, doi:10.1007/978-3-
642-16626-6_2. 
[23] J. Krüger, C. Krüger. On communication. An interdisciplinary 
and mathematical approach. Dortrecht, The Netherlands: 
Springer, 2007. 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

