Analysis of Semantically Enriched Process Data for Identifying Process-Biomarkers
Tobias Weller∗, Maria Maleshkova∗, Martin Wagner†, Lena-Marie Ternes† and Hannes Kenngott†
∗Institute of Applied Informatics and Formal Description Methods (KIT), Germany
Email: {tobias.weller,maria.maleshkova}@kit.edu
†Department of General, Visceral and Transplant Surgery, University Hospital Heidelberg, Germany
Email: {Martin.Wagner,Lena-Marie.Ternes,Hannes.Kenngott}@med.uni-heidelberg.de
Abstract—Intelligent data analysis is used in multiple domains
to ﬁnd new insights in data that has not been known before.
Among others, intelligent data analysis is used in the health-
care sector to analyse patient and process data for discovering
conclusions and supporting the decison-making process. Besides
this, Semantic Web Technologies are currently ﬁnding new
and broader application areas, including the medical domain.
We want to use the advantages of semantic technologies in
our data analysis for identifying Process-Biomarkers in medical
treatment processes. The semantics allow for a more efﬁcient
retrieval of arduous and complex requests, which enables a
more intelligent data analysis. This allows for identifying and
quantifying effects between different performed tasks and events,
in medical treatment processes, in a more detailed way. To address
this we 1) extracted information from different data sources; 2)
applied Semantic Web Technologies on the extracted information
and integrated them into a collaborative platform and enriched
them with further semantic background knowledge; 3) performed
different statistical methods on the semantically enriched data to
identify Process-Biomarkers.
Keywords–Data
Analysis;Healthcare;Semantic
Technologies;
Semantic MediaWiki
I.
INTRODUCTION
Intelligent data analysis uses techniques from Knowledge
Discovery and Data Ming to predict the outcome and ﬁnd
patterns in the data. There are approaches available that extend
these existing techniques in order to include semantic infor-
mation about the data [1][2]. This shows among others that
Semantic Web Technologies ﬁnd their way in new application
areas, including the medical domain. Hereby, one can use
the advantages of Semantic Web Technologies including data
integration, data retrieval and intelligent data analysis [3][4].
Semantics enables a machine-readable description of data.
Thereby, context information can be included that can be used
by machines and in analysis. We want to contribute towards
an intelligent data analysis by using Semantic Web Technolo-
gies in the medical domain by presenting our approach for
identifying Process-Biomarkers.
In the medical domain, Biomarkers [5] are used as in-
dicators to determine a biological condition and to make
clinical estimates. Thus Biomarkers are, among others, used
to assess the medical condition of an individual. The National
Institutes of Health (NIH) deﬁned in 1998 Biological Markers
(Biomarkers) as ”a characteristic that is objectively measured
and evaluated as an indicator of normal biologic processes,
pathogenic processes, or pharmacologic responses to a thera-
peutic intervention” [5].
Although
Biomarkers
are
well-established
in
the
biomedicine,
there
are
no
such
indicators
for
medical
treatment processes. Therefore, we want to make a ﬁrst
step towards establishing this term as part of a medical
treatment process analysis. We introduce in this context
”Process-Biomarkers” and use the term as a process related
measurement that reﬂects a coherence between a performed
task and event in a medical treatment process.
The considered problem that we want to tackle is to
identify and quantify coherences of performed tasks and events
in medical treatment processes. We are interested if speciﬁc
events, like a surgical complication, occurred during a surgery,
effects the length of stay of a patient or if the fact that a patient
is smoker inﬂuences the occurrence of complications during a
surgery. Thus, we aim to identify correlations between different
parameters in medical treatment processes.
In order to address this problem, we present an approach
to identify correlations in medical treatment processes. For
this purpose, we exported process and patient data from a
Hospital Information System (HIS) and semantiﬁed them. We
integrated the data with other available data, such as medical
treatment ﬂow schema, ontologies to structure the process
and other meta-information, into a collaborative platform. All
available information in this collaborative platform can be
queried and analyzed in order to identify Process-Biomarkers.
This semantically enriched data allows not only to analyse the
data itself but also include background knowledge in our data
analysis.
We demonstrate the applicability of our approach by mod-
eling a concrete medical treatment process and considering
information extracted from the Hospital Information System
(HIS) for rectal surgeries. Information include habits of the
patient, timestamps of different performed tasks, if different
complications occurred during the surgery, loss of blood during
the surgery and length of stay in the hospital. Overall, we
address the following research questions:
1)
How can we use different information from multiple
sources?
2)
How can we implement an infrastructure necessary
for storing, accessing, and processing information?
3)
Which methods can we apply to identify Process-
Biomarkers and enable intelligent data analyis?
The paper is structured as follows. First, we present state
of the art in the ﬁeld of integrating data and applying Semantic
Web Technologies on data in section II. In addition, we
will show similar approaches to identify correlations in data.
Afterwards, we will introduce the goals and the signiﬁcance
of our contributions in Section III. Section IV introduces our
proposed methodology to identify correlations in the medical
treatment processes and quantify the results. This Section
includes the enrichment of the medical data with semantics,
handling different scales of measurements in the data and
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

introducing methods, which we used to identify Process-
Biomarkers. We applied multiple methods to identify Process-
Biomarkers in order to compare the results and receive multiple
views on the process data. After that, we will describe the
results of the proposed methodology in Section V. Finally, in
Section VI, we will conclude the paper.
II.
RELATED WORK
Our approach is addressed by roughly two kinds of work:
1) integrating data from different sources and applying Se-
mantic Web Technologies 2) performing statistical methods to
identify correlations in the data.
Previous works covered the aspects of data integra-
tion [6][7][8][9]. Hereby, the Biomedical and Live Science
domain used Semantic Web Technologies in order to struc-
ture and integrate data from different sources [10][11]. Data
from different data sources is usually represented in differ-
ent formats. Therefore, in order to integrate the data from
different data sources in one data store, an ETL approach is
needed to extract the data and transform them into a common
representation. Hereby, approaches that converts the data and
structure them in an ontology already exists [12][13]. Usually,
the data is only on a local machine available. It is hard for
domain experts to contribute to a semantic enrichment. A
collaborative approach and providing the possibility to domain
experts to enrich the data with their knowledge is preferable.
This additional information can be exploited in subsequent data
analysis.
For the purpose of capturing and structuring medical
treatment processes in BPMN, we had to ﬁnd suitable on-
tologies and approaches that allowed to model all consid-
ered aspects. There are many ontologies for BPMN 2.0
available [14][15][16] that allows to capture the semantics
in processes and include meta-information. However, not all
ontologies are online available and follow the latest BPMN 2.0
version. We used a BPMN Ontology from the Data & Knowl-
edge Management (DKM) research unit [17][18] to structure
processes. This ontology has a very detailed formalization in
OWL 2 DL of the BPMN 2.0 speciﬁcation. However, we
abstract from the ontology and the process modeling, so that
the ontology can also be changed in future. This approach
enables a ﬂexible representation of knowledge.
Patient related aspects, like, e.g., the type of surgery, were
modeled by using OPS Code [19], which provides medical
classiﬁcations and terminologies for health care systems.
The second aspect that we addressed with our approach is
the application of statistical methods on the integrated semantic
data in order to identify Process-Biomarkers. In the medical
domain are Biomarkers identiﬁed by performing experiments,
recording the data and applying Student’s t-test on the recorded
data [20][21][22]. However, we could not perform experiments
during a process. Therefore, we used historical data and
applied a similar hypothesis test and correlation analysis on the
data. Similar approaches were used to identify tumor perfusion
related parameters [23], cardiac and metabolic markers in
visceral and abdominal subcutaneous [24] and impacts of
clinical and genetic features on the clinical progression of
Huntington’s Disease [25]. In all these approaches could no
experiments be performed. They mostly used Spearman’s rank
correlation to ﬁnd correlations, however, they did not use other
correlation coefﬁcients like, e.g., Kendall in order to compare
their results with other statistical methods.
III.
MOTIVATION
We want to use Data Science analysis and Semantic Web
Technologies and apply them in the medical domain to address
our research questions and tackle the raised problems of
identifying Process-Biomarkers.
The information, which we will use for Process-Biomarker
identiﬁcation, is distributed across different data sources. In
order to use them, we will ﬁrst integrate the information
into one SPARQL store and semantically enrich them with
additional information. Afterwards, we can take advantage
from the Semantic Web Technologies by efﬁciently querying
the data and easily integrate further information. Our approach
to identify Process-Biomarkers is shown in ﬁg. 1. We extracted
information such as process data, medical treatment process
and patient data. Afterwards, we structured it according to
existing ontologies (1). All available information is integrated
into a SPARQL store, which was enriched with additional
semantic information (2). Afterwards, we queried the data (3)
and analyzed it (4) in order to identify Process-Biomarkers.
Figure 1. Overview of our proposed approach.
We included semantic information into the SPARQL store,
in order to retrieve query results that could not be answered
without the new semantic information. Therefore, the knowl-
edge that physicians and nurses are both persons enables to
analyse the inﬂuence of persons on a process. Retrieving
the distinct groups from the raw data sets without semantic
is only possible under hard effort. Therefore, the semantic
information allow simpliﬁed analysis of the data. This kind
of knowledge improves the retrieval of data and makes the
analysis smarter and therefore more intelligent. The semantic
information is machine-readable and can be used by analysis
method to comprehend the relations of data for more efﬁcient
data analysis.
Another aspect is that the correlations in medical treatment
processes are inﬂuenced by many different impacts. Thus, the
loss of blood during a surgery might depend on the type of
surgery, the duration, if complications occurred during the
surgery, the age of the patient, and its medical condition.
Considering all these impacts in our analysis requires a method
to model and query these information.
In addition, the improved retrieval of information allows
reﬁned queries. Therefore, we can perform tests for detect-
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

ing Process-Biomarkers on different abstraction levels on the
data. Thus we can use the semantic information and meta-
information to reﬁne Process-Biomarkers like e.g the type of
surgery does not correlate to the duration of the surgery, but
the type of surgery in combination with the surgeon, which
performed the surgery, does correlate with the duration of the
surgery.
Process-Biomarkers are indicators that help process ana-
lysts to comprehend and understand a process and the relations
of different process variables and its outcomes in a greater
depth. This knowledge is available by the Process-Biomarker,
which is a quantiﬁed correlation between two performed tasks
or events in a medical treatment process. Thus, a process
analyst can comprehend the fact that a speciﬁc complication
during the surgery increases the frequency of blood analysis
after the surgery and therefore inﬂuences the process. Process-
Biomarker also indicates the strength of this coherence. The
challenge of ﬁnding correlations in processes is the great
amount of possible variables might have inﬂuences on the
process.
In addition, by determining the strength of a coherence,
one can state the likelihood and conﬁdence of the Process-
Biomarkers. By knowing correlations and conﬁdences of
Process-Biomarkers, the prediction of the outcome and the
course of a medical treatment process can be improved.
Therefore, persons, involved in the medical treatment process,
can adapt themselves to possible outcomes and courses. Thus,
knowing Process-Biomarkers help process analysts to predict
a possible outcome and optimize the likelihood of medical
treatment processes to aim a best possible outcome.
Besides predicting future occurrences, Process-Biomarkers
can also be used to optimize a process and claim next steps.
Therefore, the known correlations and the possible outcome of
a medical treatment process can be used to adjust the process
for preventing an unwanted outcome. Thus, this knowledge can
be used to optimize medical treatment processes according to
an established optimization problem.
IV.
SEMANTICAL PROCESS CORRELATION ANALYSIS
Our approach is separated into two steps. The ﬁrst step is
the integration of data from multiple sources and the semantic
enrichment. This is described in Section IV-A. The second
step is the data analysis by exploiting the semantic information,
which we integrated into our system. We introduce the methods
that we used to identify Process-Biomarkers in Section IV-B.
A. Data Integration and Semantic Enrichment
The ﬁrst step that we have to tackle is the integration of
data from different data sources. We propose a collaborative
platform for capturing, annotating and querying process op-
erations, process data, patient data and related process data.
Fig. 2 shows a high-level overview of the architecture.
We used a Semantic MediaWiki (SMW) v. 2.3 [26][27] as
collaborative platform. This is an extension to MediaWiki [28]
that allows for storing information in a structured way and
publishes them according to the Linked Data principles [29].
The Semantic MediaWiki performs as the central hub for
storing and accessing information. In the backend of the SMW
runs an Open Virtuoso Database v. 6.01.3127 that stores the
information. Open Virtuoso provides an endpoint that allows
Figure 2. High Level Architecture of the proposed framework.
for querying all available data in the SMW by using SPARQL
1.1 [30]. The advantage of SMW as collaborative platform is
the easy access by multiple persons and the easy integration of
background knowledge by domain experts through the well-
known wiki user interface.
There are two parts of the framework: 1) integrating
process data, medical treatment process, patient data and model
them with existing ontologies 2) storing and accessing these
information semantically in a collaborative platform.
The following data is available for analysis and identifying
Process-Biomarkers:
1) Process data from Hospital Information System: The data
is stored in a relational database. We exported and structured it
according to available ontologies in the medical domain. Avail-
able information includes the day of the performed surgery,
involved persons, timestamps of each tasks, complications that
occurred during the surgery and type of surgery. The data was
exported and transformed into RDF.
2) Medical treatment process ﬂows: We modeled the medical
treatment process, which shows the sequence of tasks for
the considered medical treatment process, by using Business
Process Model and Notation (BPMN) as modeling language.
The main reason is that BPMN is proposed as a standard by
the Object Management Group (OMG) in 2008. The current
available version of BPMN is 2.0.2, published in ISO/IEC
19510 [31]. In addition, there are many workﬂow engines,
written in multiple programming languages, available that
allows the execution of the processes like, e.g., Oracle Business
Process Management Suite [32], Camunda [33] and Sydle [34].
We used an existing ontology from the Data & Knowledge
Management (DKM) research unit [17][18]. to structure the
information.
3) Patient data from Hospital Information System: This
information includes general patient information like gender,
weight and age, as well as patient speciﬁc information like the
habits (e.g. smoker), former diseases (hepatic diseases) and
the length of stay in the hospital. It is stored in a relational
database. Therefore, we exported and transformed it into a
suitable representation according to existing ontologies and
standards.
4) Meta-Information: Besides capturing and modeling medi-
cal treatment processes and related information, the semantics
allow also for including meta-information about the range of
values for all parameters in the process. For example, we
declared that the parameter loss of blood can only take values
greater than zero. This knowledge helps to validate data and
detect the parameter’s scale of measurement.
For the ﬁrst part of our framework, the process and patient
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

data was exported from the Hospital Information System in
spreadsheet format. Afterwards, the data was uploaded via a
programmed bot into the SMW. The medical treatment process
was captured with the Cognitive Process Designer [35] v.0.6,
which is an extension to SMW that allows for modeling
processes in BPMN. The integration of an existing BPMN
Ontology [17] occurred manually.
An important aspect for identifying Process-Biomarkers is
the comprehensive analysis of the data. Different views on the
data allows for different analysis and thus revealing reﬁned
statements. Providing semantic information on the available
data allows for raising enhanced queries and therefore different
views. An example of this circumstance is including the infor-
mation that wound infection, haemorrhage, abscess and burst
abdomen are all complications that might occur after a surgery.
By including this information, one can retrieve the information
if a complication occurred for a patient after the surgery,
without deﬁning each of these complications speciﬁcally in
a query. The advantage is that we can thus check if a Process-
Biomarker exists for wound infection. However, we can also
generalize the statement and check if a Process-Biomarker for
complications that occur after a surgery exists, like, e.g., if the
medical condition of a patient inﬂuences the fact of having
complications after a surgery. Another advantage is that queries
do not have to be adapted if additional information about
complications are included in the process data but deﬁning
them as complication.
We included process speciﬁc information, not given by
the ontology, in order to specify the tasks in more detail.
These semantic information can later be used, in addition to
the available data from the HIS, for analysis and identifying
Process-Biomarkers.
We considered different scales of measurements of the
data, because the used methods to identify Process-Biomarkers
cannot be applied to all scales of measurements. We included
the knowledge about the scale of measurement of each pa-
rameter by using semantic properties. This knowledge was
used later in the analysis step automatically to select the
appropriate methods for identifying Process-Biomarkers, as
well as validating the data.
B. Data Analysis by Exploiting Semantic Information
We introduced knowledge about the cardinal scape in the
semantic properties in the previous section. This knowledge is
now used to preprocess the data automatically. For character-
istics that follow a cardinal scale, we automatically calculated
bins by using Scott’s normal reference rule [36]. Assigning the
values to bins does, on the one hand, represent a coarsement of
the data, however, on the other hand, it simpliﬁes calculations
and the accompanying coarsement seems acceptable. Scott’s
normal reference rule calculates the optimal number of bins.
After having the number of bins available, we calculated the
width of the bins. Scott’s normal reference rule is shown in
the following.
h = 3.5σ
n
1
3
After preprocessing the data, we applied methods for
identifying Process-Biomarkers. In statistics, the coherence
between two or more variables is calculated by using test
statistics and correlation analysis. Different correlation test
have different characteristics and advantages. Applying multi-
ple methods on the data allows for comparing and validating
the results. Furthermore, not every correlation test can be
applied to every scale of measurement. Therefore, we used
one test statistic and three correlation coefﬁcients to identify
Process-Biomarkers that are presented in the following.
Chi-squared [37] is a statistical hypothesis test that allows
for chi square test of independence.
Bravais-Pearson correlation coefﬁcient (classical corre-
lation) [38] computes the correlation between two variables.
Its range is between [−1; 1]. Whereby, -1 implies a perfectly
negative correlation between the variables, zero no correlation
and 1 a perfectly positive correlation. A negative correlation
leads to an increase of a variable if the respective other
decreases and vice versa. A positive correlation of a considered
variable leads to an increase of the variable, if the respective
other increases and vice versa.
Spearman’s rank correlation coefﬁcient [39] is a non-
parametric measurement of dependence between two variables.
Thus, in contrast to Bravais-Pearson correlation coefﬁcient, it
does not assume a linear correlation between the two consid-
ered variables and can therefore measure the strength of the
correlation between two variables on any monotonic function.
The range of the Spearman’s rank correlation coefﬁcient is
[−1; 1]. Whereby, the interpretation of the result is same as
for the Bravais-Pearson correlation coefﬁcient.
Kendall rank correlation coefﬁcient [40] is, similar
to Spearman’s rank correlation coefﬁcient, a nonparametric
measurement of dependence between two variables and its
range, and interpretation, is the same as for Spearman’s rank
correlation coefﬁcient.
For identifying Process-Biomarkers, we used Chi-Squared
Tests, Bravais-Pearson correlation coefﬁcient, Spearman’s rank
correlation coefﬁcient and Kendall rank correlation coefﬁcient.
We used the Apache Commons Mathematics Library [41] for
performing the Chi-Squared Test and calculating the coef-
ﬁcients. By having semantic informations an annotations in
the data, we can exploit them in our statistical methods and
analysis the data in more detail.
V.
EXPERIMENTS
For our experiments, we had 1,690 process instances
available that describe an intraoperative medical treatment
process of a patient including surgical preparation like, e.g.,
premedication, type of surgery and related process information
like the loss of blood during and complications during the
surgery. In average are 72 observations for a patient available
and at highest 90 distinct observations.
The data set includes all different scales of measurements.
Information like the type of the main surgery, which is
described by a nominal scale and information if the patient is
smoker (true/false), which is an ordinal scale is available, as
well as information about the duration of performed activities
and the loss of blood during the surgery, which are both
described by a cardinal scale.
We performed on these data chi-squared tests, Bravais-
Pearson, Spearman’s rank and Kendall rank correlation tests.
Due to the semantic, we could query and retrieve semantically
related information. For instance if in general there was a
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

TABLE I. SUBSET OF EXAMPLARY RESULTS FROM THE PROCESS-BIOMARKER IDENTIFICATION.
Variable 1
Variable 2
Chi-Square
Pearson
Spearman
Kendall
Operating Room Block-time
Surgical Complication [y/n]
0.005
0.2061
0.2136
0.1751
Start induction -
End removal anesthesia
Grade of anastomotic leak
0.0236
0.1496
0.2435
0.1924
Surgical complication [y/n]
Duration of hospitalisation [d]
0
0.4761
0.5322
0.4453
Incision-Suture
Duration of hospitalisation [d]
0
0.3305
0.3876
0.2764
Operating room-time
Operating Room Block-time
0
0.9708
0.9672
0.8569
complication could be queried because of the information that
each speciﬁc complication is typeOf complication. Likewise,
we could also retrieve risk factors by including the information
which properties belong to this class. On the one hand, we
tested all available data on each other, if the scale of mea-
surements allowed it, and on the other hand, we deﬁned own
tests, based on the experience and assumptions of physicians.
A script queried the data in the SPARQL store. Afterwards,
R [42] was used to perform tests on the retrieved data. This
workﬂow was executed fully automatically.
In total, we performed 2,023 tests on the available data.
We performed the tests on the available variables but also on
own deﬁned variables like, e.g., the ratio of the surgery by the
time of anesthesia and looked if a correlation exist. Due to the
amount of correlation test, we show in table I a subset that
was evaluated by domain experts.
Physicians evaluated the results according to their knowl-
edge and experience. Some of the results are obviously self-
explaining such as that operating room-time and the Operating
Room Block time does inﬂuence each other. So that the
time a patient spends in the operating room block depends
on the time he spends in the actual operating room. Other
identiﬁed Process-Biomarkers are also comprehensible like,
e.g., if a surgical complication occurs during the surgery, then
the length of stay for a patient in the hospital increases. To
comprehend the detected Process-Biomarkers, we visualized
the created bins and the number of observations for each bin
via a chart. Fig. 3 shows the number of observations in the
automatically created classes, separated according to the fact
if a patient had a surgical complication or not. It illustrates
that the length of stays for a patient indeed is increased,
if there was a surgical complication. The query for surgical
complication could be performed, because we provided the
semantic knowledge of each speciﬁc surgical complication
into the SMW and therefore could retrieve the corresponding
information.
Some other Process-Biomarkers like the Start induction -
End removal anesthesia inﬂuences the Grade of anastomotic
leak is surprisingly, although there is only a small correlation.
An anastomotic leak is a lack of tightness of a surgically
created hollow organ or vascular anastomosis. The fact that
Incision-Suture Time effects the duration of hospitalization
is also interesting, but more comprehensible. If the operation
takes more time, then it might be a more complicated surgery
or complication occurred during the surgery and therefore, the
length of stay for a patient increases. Therefore, we suppose
that the causality is not effected by the operating time, but by
a consequent event.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS
We applied semantics in the medical domain in order to
contribute towards an intelligent data analysis. We integrated
Figure 3. Representation of the bins of the length of stay for a patient,
separated if a surgical complication occurred or not.
information from different sources into a collaborative plat-
form and used existing concepts and properties from ontolo-
gies to describe the medical treatment process and therefore
included background knowledge which could be exploited in
the data analysis.
The
obtained
results
from
the
identiﬁed
Process-
Biomarkers help physicians to comprehend effects during the
medical treatment process on speciﬁc outcome like, e.g., the
length of stay for a patient or the loss of blood during a surgery.
In addition, the identiﬁed Process-Biomarkers help to adjust
the medical treatment processes for preventing an unwanted
outcome. Besides the improvement of predictions, one can use
Process-Biomarkers to optimize processes, in advance, accord-
ing to speciﬁc endpoints such as length of stay for a patient
and the mortality. The result of the statistical optimization is
an improved process. Still, the Process-Biomarkers can also be
used to adapt proceeding processes to prevent adverse results.
Although, much data was available, we want to extend
the considered process and the available data with tempo-
ral previous and subsequent processes. Thus, we can make
statements with identiﬁed Process-Biomarkers that go beyond
a single process. We focused in this work on the medical
domain, however, our approach is generally applicable. Thus,
we can apply the used methods in other domains, for instance
to identify Process-Biomarkers in business processes.
In conclusion, we have taken a ﬁrst step towards a statistical
analysis of semantically enriched medical treatment data that
allows for identifying Process-Biomarkers. The collaborative
platform is well-suited for interdisciplinary work and allows
for integrating external knowledge. We will show in a future
work, that the detected Process-Biomarkers will help us to
improve the prediction of values, relevant for the medical
treatment process.
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

REFERENCES
[1]
L. Gal´arraga, C. Teﬂioudi, K. Hose, and F. M. Suchanek, “Fast rule
mining in ontological knowledge bases with amie,” The VLDB Journal,
vol. 24, no. 6, 2015, pp. 707–730.
[2]
C. J. Matheus, G. Piatetsky-shapiro, and D. McNeill, “20 selecting and
reporting what is interesting: The keﬁr application to healthcare data.”
AAAI Press/MIT Press, 1996.
[3]
A. Wiesner, J. Morbach, and W. Marquardt, “Information integration
in chemical process engineering based on semantic technologies,”
Computers & Chemical Engineering, vol. 35, no. 4, 2011, pp. 692–
708.
[4]
A. Sheth and C. Ramakrishnan, “Semantic (web) technology in ac-
tion: Ontology driven information systems for search, integration and
analysis,” IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin, Special issue: Making the
Semantic Web Real, vol. 26, 2003, pp. 40–48.
[5]
B. D. W. Group, “Biomarkers and surrogate endpoints: Preferred
deﬁnitions and conceptual framework,” Clinical Pharmacology & Ther-
apeutics, vol. 69, no. 3, 2001, pp. 89–95.
[6]
S. Jupp and et al., “The ebi rdf platform: Linked open data for the life
sciences,” Bioinformatics, 2014.
[7]
D. Calvanese, P. Liuzzo, A. Mosca, J. Remesal, M. Rezk, and G. Rull,
“Ontology-based data integration in epnet: Production and distribution
of food during the roman empire,” Engineering Applications of Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence, vol. 51, 2016, pp. 212–229, mining the Humanities:
Technologies and Applications.
[8]
B. K¨ampgen, T. Weller, S. O’Riain, C. Weber, and A. Harth, “Accepting
the xbrl challenge with linked data for ﬁnancial data integration,” in
The Semantic Web: Trends and Challenges: 11th International Confer-
ence, ESWC 2014, Anissaras, Greece, May 25-29, 2014. Proceedings.
Springer International Publishing, 2014, pp. 595–610.
[9]
B. K¨ampgen, “Dc proposal: Online analytical processing of statistical
linked data,” in The Semantic Web – ISWC 2011: 10th International
Semantic Web Conference, Bonn, Germany, October 23-27, 2011,
Proceedings, Part II.
Springer Berlin, 2011, pp. 301–308.
[10]
C. Pasquier, “Biological data integration using semantic web technolo-
gies,” Biochimie, vol. 90, no. 4, 2008, pp. 584–594, recent advances in
complete genome analysis.
[11]
T. Katayama and et al., “The 3rd dbcls biohackathon: improving life
science data integration with semantic web technologies,” Journal of
Biomedical Semantics, vol. 4, no. 1, 2013, pp. 1–17.
[12]
M. Niinim¨aki and T. Niemi, “An etl process for olap using rdf/owl
ontologies,” in Journal on Data Semantics XIII. Springer Berlin, 2009,
pp. 97–119.
[13]
V. Nebot, R. Berlanga, J. M. P´erez, M. J. Aramburu, and T. B.
Pedersen, “Multidimensional integrated ontologies: A framework for
designing semantic data warehouses,” in Journal on Data Semantics
XIII.
Springer Berlin, 2009, pp. 1–36.
[14]
C. Natschl¨ager, “Towards a bpmn 2.0 ontology,” in Business Process
Model and Notation: Third International Workshop, BPMN 2011,
Lucerne, Switzerland, November 21-22, 2011. Proceedings.
Springer
Berlin, 2011, pp. 1–15.
[15]
J. vom Brocke and M. Rosemann, Eds., BPMN 2.0 for Modeling
Business Processes, Handbook on Business Process Management 1:
Introduction, Methods, and Information Systems.
Springer, 2015,
ISBN: 978-3-642-45099-0.
[16]
W. Yao and A. Kumar, “Conﬂexﬂow: Integrating ﬂexible clinical
pathways into clinical decision support systems using context and
rules,” Decision Support Systems, vol. 55, no. 2, 2013, pp. 499–515, 1.
Analytics and Modeling for Better HealthCare 2. Decision Making in
Healthcare.
[17]
M. Rospocher, C. Ghidini, and L. Seraﬁni, “An ontology for the
business process modelling notation formal ontology,” in Information
Systems – Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference.
IOS
PRess BV, Sep. 2014, pp. 133–146.
[18]
“Data & knowledge management,” URL: https://dkm.fbk.eu [accessed:
2016-10-04].
[19]
“German institute of medical documentation and information,” URL:
https://www.dimdi.de/static/en [accessed: 2016-10-04].
[20]
M.-C. van de Beek and et al., “C26:0-carnitine is a new biomarker for
x-linked adrenoleukodystrophy in mice and man,” PLoS ONE, vol. 11,
no. 4, April 2016, pp. 1–19.
[21]
S. Huang and et al., “Attenuation of microrna-16 derepresses the cyclins
d1, d2 and e1 to provoke cardiomyocyte hypertrophy,” Journal of
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, vol. 19, no. 3, 2015, pp. 608–619.
[22]
J. L. et al., “Pkc interacts with {STAT3} and promotes its activation in
cardiomyocyte hypertrophy,” Journal of Pharmacological Sciences, vol.
132, no. 1, 2016, pp. 15–23.
[23]
H.-J. Lee and et al., “Tumor perfusion-related parameter of diffusion-
weighted magnetic resonance imaging: Correlation with histological
microvessel density,” Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, vol. 71, no. 4,
2014, pp. 1554–1558.
[24]
I. J. Neeland and et al., “Associations of visceral and abdominal
subcutaneous adipose tissue with markers of cardiac and metabolic risk
in obese adults,” Obesity, vol. 21, no. 9, 2013, pp. E439–E447.
[25]
I. Dogan and et al., “Consistent neurodegeneration and its association
with clinical progression in huntington’s disease: A coordinate-based
meta-analysis,” Neurodegenerative Diseases, vol. 12, no. 1, 2013, pp.
23–35.
[26]
M. Kr¨otzsch, D. Vrandeˇci´c, and M. V¨olkel, “Semantic mediawiki,” in
The Semantic Web - ISWC 2006: 5th International Semantic Web Con-
ference, ISWC 2006, Athens, USA, November 5-9, 2006. Proceedings.
Springer Berlin, 2006, pp. 935–942.
[27]
“Semantic mediawiki project,” URL: https://www.semantic-mediawiki.
org [accessed: 2016-10-04].
[28]
“Mediawiki,” URL: https://www.mediawiki.org [accessed: 2016-10-04].
[29]
“Linked
data,”
URL:
https://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.
html [accessed: 2016-10-04].
[30]
“Sparql,” URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/sparql11-overview/ [accessed:
2016-10-04].
[31]
“Information technology – object management group business pro-
cess model and notation,” URL: http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue detail.
htm?csnumber=62652 [accessed: 2016-10-04].
[32]
“Oracle,”
URL:
http://www.oracle.com/us/technologies/bpm/suite/
overview/index.html [accessed: 2016-10-04].
[33]
“Camunda Services GmbH,” URL: https://camunda.org [accessed:
2016-10-04].
[34]
“Sydle,” URL: http://www.sydle.com/en/bpms/ [accessed: 2016-10-04].
[35]
T. Weller and M. Maleshkova, “Capturing and annotating processes
using a collaborative platform,” in Proceedings of the 25th International
Conference Companion on World Wide Web, ser. WWW ’16 Compan-
ion.
International World Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee,
2016, pp. 283–284.
[36]
D. W. Scott, “On optimal and data-based histograms,” Biometrika,
vol. 66, no. 3, 1979, pp. 605–610.
[37]
K. Pearson, “On the criterion that a given system of derivations from
the probable in the case of a correlated system of variables is such that
it can be reasonably supposed to have arisen from random sampling,”
Philosophical Magazine, vol. 50, no. 302, 1900, pp. 157–175.
[38]
K. Spearman, “Note on regression and inheritance in the case of two
parents,” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, vol. 58, no. 347-
352, 1895, pp. 240–242.
[39]
C. Spearman, “The proof and measurement of association between two
things,” The American Journal of Psychology, vol. 15, no. 1, 1904, pp.
72–101.
[40]
M. G. Kendall, “A new measure of rank correlation,” Biometrika,
vol. 30, no. 1/2, 1938, pp. 81–93.
[41]
“Commons math: The apache commons mathematics library,” URL:
https://commons.apache.org/proper/commons-math/ [accessed: 2016-
10-04].
[42]
“The r project,” URL: https://www.r-project.org/ [accessed: 2016-10-
04].
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

