Cloud Computing and Interoperability in Healthcare Information Systems 
 
Oana-Sorina Lupşe, Mihaela Marcella Vida, Lăcrămioara Stoicu-Tivadar 
Faculty of Automatics and Computers 
University “Politehnica” of Timişoara 
Timişoara, Romania 
Email: (oana.lupse, mihaela.vida, lacramioara.stoicu-tivadar)@aut.upt.ro 
 
Abstract—One of the areas with greatest needs having 
available information at the right moment and with high 
accuracy is healthcare. Right information at right time saves 
lives. This work proposes a solution based on cloud computing 
implemented for hospital systems having as a result a better 
management, high speed for the medical process, and 
increased quality of the medical services. Cloud computing 
technology is still new but promises a revolution in the entire 
connected areas. At national level, hospital information 
systems are somewhat rare and not very well managed. Cloud 
computing allows using the latest technologies at low prices 
(pay-per-use) and with minimum resources necessary for 
clients. The paper suggests a model for the architecture of the 
information systems in two key departments of a hospital: 
Pediatrics 
and 
Obstetrics, 
and 
Gynecology 
using 
interoperability for better access to information and preparing 
the system for future connectivity. 
Keywords-cloud computing; HL7 CDA; interoperability; 
Pediatrics; Obstetrics and Gynecology 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The most critical area that requires a lot of information, a 
lot of data and computing power is the healthcare domain. 
Doctors need, in critical moments, the medical history of 
patients in real time. Patients are sent to various 
investigations, supposing a high rate exchange of data 
between departments of medical units. Doctors need 
complete medical information of the patients to provide a 
complete and accurate treatment. 
The technology that we chose to solve these problems is 
cloud computing because the resources are dynamically 
scaled (doctors can store a lot of medical data when they 
need) and is used over the Internet as services (doctors can 
access the medical data when and where they need it). To 
access this technology one can use a variety of Internet-
connected devices which can access programs and 
development environments offered by cloud computing [1]. 
The information available at the right moment and location 
can save lives and significantly decreases the sources of 
medical errors increasing the quality of life of a patient. 
Another element used in our proposal to solve the problem 
of data exchange between medical units is ensuring the 
interoperability of the developed systems through HL7 
CDA Standard [2].  
This solution can be improved having a better security 
system for the medical data and creating a longitudinal data 
sheet of the patient (medical records for entire life span).  
Cloud computing is a technology that could help a vitally 
important area because it offers a complex infrastructure at 
low cost and also provides greater computing power to 
achieve comprehensive health care operations.   
In section two, the architecture and characteristics of 
cloud computing are described. Section three presents cloud 
computing applied in healthcare. Section four deals with 
interoperability 
in 
Pediatrics, 
and 
Obstetrics 
and 
Gynecology 
systems. 
Section 
five 
discusses 
cloud 
computing as a solution supporting information systems in a 
hospital, and Section six concludes the suggested solution. 
 
II. 
ARCHITECTURE AND CHARACTERISTICS OF CLOUD 
COMPUTING  
Cloud computing, defined by NIST (National Institute of 
Standards and Technology) [3] is a technology that supports 
ubiquity, it is convenient, supplies on demand access to the 
network for sharing computing resources (e.g., networks, 
servers, storage, applications and services), can be launched 
and developed quickly with minimal management and 
without service provider interaction.  
The cloud model consists in five essential characteristics, 
three service models and four models of development 
(Figure 1). 
 
 
Figure 1. Elements and characteristics of the clouds 
 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

A. Essential characteristics 
The essential five characteristics of cloud computing are: 
On-demand services: consumers can connect to a website 
and can use web services to access additional computing 
resources whenever they need; Wide access to the 
network: web services are based on cloud computing and 
for this reason can be accessed from any device connected 
to the Internet; Pooling resources: customers can share 
computing resources with other clients, so these resources 
can be reallocated dynamically and can be hosted anywhere; 
Elasticity: cloud computing allows users great flexibility 
that customers can scale systems (and costs) up or down as 
required; and Measured services: cloud computing 
monitors and records resources usage, which enables 
customers as payment for use (pay-per-use), a fundamental 
paradigm for cloud computing [3]. 
B. Cloud computing architecture 
Cloud computing architecture consists of: Infrastructure 
as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS) and 
Software as a Service (SaaS). 
Infrastructure as a Service is delivering hardware 
(servers, network technologies, storage) as a service. It also 
includes the operating system and virtualization technology 
for resource management. Currently, the best job profile is 
Amazon’s Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2) [3]. It 
provides a web interface that allows customers accessing 
virtual machines. 
Platform as a Service offers an integrated set of software 
that provides everything that a software developer needs to 
build an application - an online environment for quick 
development of web applications using browser-based 
development tools. 
Software as a Service – business applications hosted and 
delivered as a service via the web. These kinds of 
applications do not require installation of additional 
computer programs, the most popular being the e-mail in a 
web browser [3]. 
C. Models of development clouds 
Cloud computing is offered in four different forms: 
Public clouds – are held by a company selling cloud 
services to the general public; Private clouds – are owned 
by a single organization and are being used only in that 
organization; Community clouds – belonging to several 
organizations and allowing access only to those concerned 
for certain actions; Hybrid clouds – a composition of two 
or more types of clouds (private, public or community) that 
remain unique entities but are linked by standard 
technologies that enable portability of applications [3]. 
For medical applications, the best choice of a model is 
the private one for reasons of security and data privacy. In a 
private cloud, medical data can be accessed only by the 
authorized medical staff. 
D. Related elements of cloud computing 
The cloud architecture includes as most popular 
principles virtualization and SOA (Service oriented 
architecture). 
Virtualization is at the core of most cloud architectures. 
The 
concept 
of 
virtualization 
allows 
an 
abstract 
representation of logical and physical resources including 
servers, storage devices, networks and software. The basic 
idea is to pool all physical resources and their management 
as a whole meeting the individual demands from these 
shared resources. In addition to virtualization, service-
oriented architectures and web services are considered 
important in cloud computing. 
Service-oriented 
architectures 
have 
components 
implemented as independent services that can be linked 
together in a flexible way and can communicate through 
messages. In cloud computing virtualized IT infrastructures, 
platforms and developed applications are implemented as 
services and are made available for use in service-oriented 
architectures. In public clouds, services are offered over the 
Internet on standard web protocols and interfaces. 
SOA offers positive benefits such as [4]: 
- 
Language-neutral 
integration: 
uses 
XML 
(eXtensible Markup Language). 
- 
Component reuse: after is creating a web service to 
achieve an application, it can be reused for other 
applications which have service like this, and no 
longer is needed to rewrite code. 
- 
Organizational agility: after building blocks of 
software which respects the user specification, it is 
possible to recombine and integrate quickly. 
- 
Using existing systems: enable integration between 
new and old systems components. 
 
III. 
CLOUD COMPUTING IN HEALTHCARE 
In the medical field, cloud computing offers great 
potential for quick access to medical information. Health IT 
infrastructure is very complex and for this reason 
organization has taken additional measures to protect the 
patient’s private data under HIPAA (Health Insurance 
Portability 
and 
Accountability 
Act). 
Maintaining 
confidentiality and integrity of information stored in all 
forms, and providing data backup and recovery processes in 
extreme cases are extremely important in this field.  Quick 
access to medical history of each person at any location can 
accelerate diagnosis and treatment quality, avoiding 
complications, increasing quality and saving lives. In 
addition, cloud computing can help patients to gain access 
to their medical history from anywhere in the world via the 
Internet contributing to personalization in healthcare. The 
healthcare domain needs increased security and privacy 
levels, meaning that cloud computing technology has to be 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

more carefully managed in order to achieve this 
requirements. The matter is less technical and more ethical 
and legal. Before cloud computing technology can be fully 
adopted as a structure for health IT, providers must gain the 
trust of society and to demonstrate that they meet the 
HIPAA (Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act) standard [5]. 
More than ever, healthcare services need cooperation 
between healthcare units due to high mobility of individuals 
for work or holidays. It is very important to ensure the 
availability of medical data to all the locations a patient is 
present in. Several scenarios and developments are already 
available in literature and presented in the following. 
In [6], a scenario is presented to implement a cloud-based 
service for ePrescribing: the physician that uses the 
application is connected to the PHR (Personal Healthcare 
Record) system and reads a summary of medical history of 
each patient’s records and selects a list of drugs. The 
application validates the selection of drugs based on their 
interaction with other drugs, patient allergies and 
medication history of the patient. If there are not 
incompatibility alerts, the prescription is stored in data 
centers of Insurance Organization waiting to be processed in 
Pharmacies. These systems are stored in a private cloud 
because in this way the information can be accessed only by 
authorized persons. Another proposal [6] is implementing a 
Semantic Wiki for User Training, based on the cloud 
technology available on demand and implemented on 
Amazon cloud infrastructure, a flexible, low-cost and 
scalable platform. Wiki users use the same database to store 
and read medical information. This solution offers support 
only for the ePrescribing system and for a cloud-based wiki. 
In [7], a model is presented as an integrated EMR 
(Electronic Medical Record) sharing medical data between 
medical units. The application is developed on a cloud 
platform that keeps the EMR system on the form of 
Software as a Service and can be used by Government, 
Hospitals, Doctors, Patients, Pharmacies and Health 
Insurance Organizations, through the Internet. This system 
allows access to national data sharing; the data center is 
common to all units. Communication between the data 
center and the healthcare organizations is done via HL7 
messages. All patient data are stored and accessed in the 
same location over the Internet from any healthcare 
organizations. 
Using cloud computing in medicine results in benefits for 
the medical units and patients. Several benefits are:  
 
it is useful in storing medical data (cloud computing is 
scalable, increasing or decreasing resources, as needed), 
 
offers remote access (the data can be accessed via the 
Internet from anywhere),  
 
allows data sharing between authorized units  
 
the updates for the medical history of the patient - 
consultations, prescriptions, hospitalization - are made 
in real time and are useful for  future treatment 
validation. 
IV. 
INTEROPERABILITY IN PEDIATRICS AND OB-GYN 
SYSTEMS 
 
4.1 General information about interoperability in cloud 
 
Interoperability is the ability of two or more systems or 
components (for example two or more medical informatics 
systems) to exchange information and use the information 
that has been exchanged [8]. 
A web service is any service that is available over the 
Internet or an Intranet, uses standardized XML messaging 
system and is self-describing, discoverable and not tied to 
any operating system or programming language [9]. 
In eHealth is mandatory to use a standardized 
communication. In presenting the proposed system, one 
standard 
is 
used: 
HL7 
CDA 
(Clinical 
Document 
Architecture). 
Cloud computing technology supports interoperability, 
ensures high availability of resources, systems are “always 
ON”, and available to communicate with other computing 
systems in the cloud.  
 
4.2 Standard used in healthcare information systems 
 
The HL7 CDA standard is a document markup standard 
that specifies the structure and semantics of “clinical 
documents” for the purpose of data exchange [2]. 
CDA has three levels of document definition: Level 1 
(the root hierarchy, and the most unconstrained version of 
document), Level 2 (additional constrains on the document 
via templates at the “Section” level), Level 3 (additional 
constrains on the document at the “Entry” level, and 
optional additional constrains at the “Section” level) [10].  
In Figure 2, a CDA example for the pediatrics healthcare 
system developed in order to evaluate the proposed 
architecture is presented. The codes used in Romania are 
ICD-10-AM and LOINC (translated in Romanian) [11]. 
 
 
Figure 2. CDA example 
 
The CDA example presents that a patient has allergy to 
penicillin, and it is represented with ICD-10-AM (in allergy 
case is used L50.0).  
CDA documents are encoded in XML. The process is 
derived from the HL7 RIM (Reference Information Model) 
and also uses HL7 version 3 data types [10].  
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

The information flow between the components of our 
model is this: The Pediatrics application sends an XML with 
the mother ID, baby’s ID and the baby’s birthdate, the ob-
gyn application reads the XML request, identifies the 
needed data, and converts it to a XML in CDA format and 
sending it to the Pediatrics department where the data is 
read and filled in the baby’s chart. 
V. 
CLOUD COMPUTING AS A SOLUTION SUPPORTING 
INFORMATION SYSTEMS IN A HOSPITAL 
As cloud computing can support different healthcare 
information systems by sharing information stored in 
diverse locations, a solution based on this technology was 
adopted for our case. A private cloud-based infrastructure 
was developed for each healthcare unit. To eliminate the 
drawback of cloud computing represented by weak security 
we have chosen the private cloud for each unit. 
The architecture for the systems in the cloud is presented 
in Figure 3. All the medical data are stored in a private 
cloud and all the departments of the hospital can access 
medical patient data when is needed. In this case, the 
medical act is performed quickly, and the typing errors 
reduced, all of this driving to higher quality.  
For increased security the suggested solution consists in a 
private cloud-based architecture where applications and data 
storage can be found within each private data center of the 
hospital (one in the Pediatrics hospital and one in the Ob-
Gyn hospital). When individual patient data is needed from 
one department to another – both having different health 
information systems - it will be transmitted in real time to 
the proper location using an HL7 CDA message solution. 
 
Figure 3. Architecture for hospital system 
 
The solution ensures interoperability of the systems and 
a clear communication. Also the flexibility of the solution 
allows the connectivity in the cloud for new systems and 
devices. 
The proposed solution is under development in 
ASP.NET environment for Windows Azure and the hospital 
database will be integrated into SQL Azure. 
We started with two departments of the hospital: 
Pediatrics, and Obstetrics and Gynecology, because these 
are important starting points for the EHR (Electronic Health 
Record).  
First contact with the medical world is starting at birth 
after which all the information about an individuals’ health, 
immunizations, treatments, problems during pregnancy and 
all information of the child at birth are stored in the 
department of obstetrics and gynecology. After birth, the 
child is taken into care by a pediatrician for monitoring and 
treatment, if the case. 
This is the reason why these two departments are the 
first departments of a hospital we wanted to give the 
opportunity to have a better communication and computing 
power and also more storage space using cloud computing 
and communications through HL7 CDA. The architecture of 
the solution is presented in Figure 4. 
 
Figure 4. Architecture and communication for two departments 
 
The applications were developed for each department 
separately (Pediatrics and Ob-Gyn) and also the support for 
communication in a local network. The next step is to 
upload the applications on the cloud and interconnect them. 
To achieve interoperability we use XML files based on 
HL7 CDA standard. In Figure 5, the flow of data between 
the two medical units which exchange information is 
presented. 
 
Figure 5. Exchange of medical data between units 
 
The data of a new born child being added in the database 
of the pediatrician; the physician will be asked if wants to 
add the data manually or retrieve it from the database of the 
hospital, which technically is located in the private cloud of 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

the Obstetrics and Gynecology unit, where the baby was 
born. When the data acquisition from the Obstetrics and 
Gynecology unit option is chosen, the Pediatrics application 
will create an XML file with the PIN (Personal 
Identification Number) of the mother, date of birth of the 
child and registration number of the child (every child is 
registered at birth with a unique identification number in the 
hospital). The XML file with these data will be sent to the 
data server from the private cloud of the unit of Obstetrics 
and Gynecology. When these dates are available in the 
server, via a specific application it will check the validity of 
the received message will analyze the request and if the data 
exists in the server the application will form another XML 
file which contains the medical data record of the baby from 
birth until to the day of discharge. These XML file is 
created in HL7 CDA standard format, and it will be sent to 
the unit who requested the data.   
Once received, the required medical data in XML 
format, the Pediatrics application will read the XML file and 
will display the medical records to the location point where 
the physician adds the patient. The received medical data 
will be saved in the database server of the private cloud of 
the Pediatrics unit. The pediatrician will have access to the 
medical history of the baby from birth and during 
pregnancy, information important for monitoring and 
treating the child. 
For the applications to communicate better with each 
other and more effectively, we used the HL7 CDA standard, 
due to its features structuring the medical data on several 
levels and with certain codes that can be read by any 
application that uses these medical standards. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
Using the cloud computing technology a medical act may 
considerably improve the access to information, which can 
be done be much easier. The scalability, that is the key of 
the cloud computing, can offer more resources needed for 
certain operation at any time. 
The 
collaboration 
between 
medical 
units 
is 
an 
opportunity offered by cloud computing for healthcare staff. 
With this technology can be checked the availability of a 
physician, a medical specialist, a product or a service at 
different times and in different cases. Patients can be guided 
to appropriate persons or units where they can find what 
they need. This is a huge benefit for patients and health 
professionals, increasingly the quality of the medical 
service. The costs of the IT infrastructure will be cheaper 
because the medical units will only rent the infrastructure to 
store medical data as it need and will no longer need the 
latest equipment for the applications used, managed or 
maintained. They need only computers or devices with 
access to Internet. 
The private cloud solution ensures the security of data 
and communication between departments, and messaging is 
done in a secure way. The application is equipped with a 
module that verifies the received and sent information.  
Future work will improve the security solution 
(implement HIPAA requirements, using HTTPS) and will 
evaluate the results through measuring the interoperability 
degree achieved by the presented solution [12]. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partially supported by the strategic grant 
POSDRU/88/1.5/S/50783, 
Project 
ID50783 
(2009), 
cofinanced by the European Social Fund – Investing in 
People, within the Sectorial Operational Programme Human 
Resources Development 2007 -2013. 
 
REFERENCES 
 [1]  Q. Zhang,  L. Cheng, and  R. Boutaba, “Cloud computing: state-of-
the-art and research challenges,” Journal of Internet Services and 
Applications, vol. 1, pp. 7-18, May 2010. 
[2] “HL7 version 3 Interoperability Standards Normative Edition 2009, 
Based on HL7 v3 Data Types,” Release 1, Disk 1 – Standards 
Publication 
[3] P. Mell and T. Grance, “The NIST Definition of Cloud Computing,” 
NIST Special Publication 800-145, September 2011 
[4] G. Raines, “Cloud Computing and SOA,” Systems Engineering at 
MITRE, Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA) Series, 2009 
[5]  P. K. Bollineni and K. Neupane, “Implications for adopting cloud 
computing in e-Health,” Master’s Thesis Computer Science, 
September 2011 
[6] D. Papakonstantinou, M. Poulymenopoulou, F. Malamateniou, and G. 
Vassilacopoulos, “A cloud-based semantic wiki for user training in 
healthcare process management,” XXIII Conference of the European 
Federation for Medical Informatics (MIE 2011), August 2011, vol. 
169, pp. 93-97, doi: 10.3233/978-1-60750-806-9-93 
[7] B. Pardamean, and R. R. Rumanda. „Integrated Model of Cloud-Based 
E-Medical Record for Health Care Organizations,” 10th WSEAS 
International Conference on E-Activities, December 2011, pp. 157-162 
[8] “IEEE Standard Glossary of Software Engineering Terminology,” IEEE 
Std 610.12-1990. 
[9] E. Cerami, “Web Services Essentials,” Third Indian Reprint, O’Reilly 
Media, Inc., 2007  
 [10] 
CDA 
levels: 
http://www.corepointhealth.com, 
Accessed 
in 
20.02.2012 
[11] J. M. Ferranti, R. C. Musser, K. Kawamoto, and W. E. Hammond, 
“The Clinical Document Architecture and the Continuity of Care 
Record: A Critical Analysis,” Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association, vol. 13, pp. 245-252, February 2006 
[12] M. Vida, and L. Stoicu-Tivadar, “Measuring medical informatics 
systems interoperability using the LISI model,” 9th IEEE International 
Symposium on Intelligent Systems and Informatics (SISY 2010), 
September 2010, pp. 33-36, doi: 10.1109/SISY.2010.5647396 
 
 
 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-224-0
INTELLI 2012 : The First International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

