Content Adaptation for an Adaptive Hypermedia System 
 
Marta Fernandes, Paulo Couto, Constantino Martins, Luiz Faria 
GECAD – Knowledge Engineering and Decision Support Group 
Institute of Engineering – Polytechnic of Porto 
Porto, Portugal 
mamaf@isep.ipp.pt
 
 
Abstract— The aim of this paper is presenting the 
recommendation module of the Mathematics Collaborative 
Learning Platform (PCMAT). PCMAT is an Adaptive 
Educational Hypermedia System (AEHS), with a constructivist 
approach, which presents contents and activities adapted to the 
characteristics and learning style of students of mathematics in 
basic schools. The recommendation module is responsible for 
choosing different learning resources for the platform, based 
on the user's characteristics and performance. Since the main 
purpose of an adaptive system is to provide the user with 
content and interface adaptation, the recommendation module 
is integral to PCMAT’s adaptation model. 
Keywords- adaptive educational hypermedia; user model; 
adaptation model; learning objects; recommendation module 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
E-learning has been gaining prominence in the past few 
years, but 2012 has seen some significant changes due to the 
rapid spread of massive online open courses (MOOCs). 
MOOCs are free online courses aimed at large scale 
participation. They have existed for a few years [1], but after 
more than a hundred and sixty thousand students in over a 
hundred and ninety countries enrolled in Sebastian Thrun 
and Peter Norvig’s “Introduction to Artificial Intelligence” in 
September 2011 [3], several free online learning platforms 
have launched that now offer courses on various subjects. 
Currently, Coursera, a social entrepreneurship company that 
partners with top US universities and was founded in January 
2012, has had almost two million students enroll in its 
courses [2]. Udacity, founded by Sebastian Thrun and two 
colleagues after the success of “Introduction to Artificial 
Intelligence”, has enrolled more than seven hundred and fifty 
thousand students [4]. And edX, a nonprofit start-up from 
Harvard University and the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, whose first courses started this fall, already has 
close to four hundred thousand students [2]. 
MOOCs are not massive in the number of students alone, 
there is also great diversity in the people enrolling. Students 
of these courses include both men and women from all over 
the world, with varying levels of education and ranging from 
preadolescents to senior citizens. As can be expected, these 
students do not all learn in the same way or with the same 
ease, yet MOOCs, as is the case with most e-learning, offer a 
one-size-fits-all solution. 
Unlike traditional e-learning approaches, Adaptive 
Educational Hypermedia Systems adapt interface, content 
presentation, link navigation and so on, to the specific 
characteristics, needs and interests of different users. As 
these goals and characteristics change, so does the content 
presented by the system [5]. The aim of these systems is to 
help 
users 
achieve 
their 
learning 
goals, 
therefore 
characteristics such as previous knowledge and learning style 
are particularly important [5, 7].  
AEHSs offer an educational experience that is tailored to 
each individual student and as e-learning continues to evolve 
and grow, they are a solution to a problem that is particularly 
noticeable in large-scale e-learning projects such as MOOCs: 
the absence of a teacher that will guide students and provide 
them with individual explanations, adapted to their specific 
abilities, knowledge and personality. A student who already 
possesses a doctorate will learn in a very different way than 
someone who is still in high school. AEHSs can adapt 
content presentation to suit each student’s different level of 
knowledge and in that way improve their learning 
experience. 
Adaptive Hypermedia Systems (AHSs), of which AEHSs 
are a subset, have been the subject of much research but 
more development, experimentation and implementation are 
necessary to conclude about the adequate features and 
effectiveness of these systems [5]. Some examples of 
Adaptive Educational Hypermedia Systems are AHA! [7], 
OntoAIMS [8] and WINDS [9]. 
In this paper, we introduce the adaptation model of the 
Mathematics Collaborative Learning Platform [10], and 
present an in-depth analysis of its recommendation module. 
PCMAT is an AEHS with a constructivist approach, which 
assesses the user’s knowledge and presents contents and 
activities adapted to the characteristics and learning style of 
students of mathematics in basic schools. This adaptation is 
achieved by means of the recommendation module, which is 
responsible for choosing different learning resources for the 
platform. With the development of PCMAT, our main 
objective is to help drive AHS research forward, but we also 
hope to assist Portuguese students, who are still significantly 
below the OECD average in mathematics performance [11], 
improve their knowledge of the subject. 
In SECTION II we make brief descriptions of the User 
Model and the Adaptation Model. In SECTION III we 
describe in more detail the platform's recommendation 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

module and in SECTION IV we take some conclusions and 
talk about future work. 
II. 
ADAPTATION 
A. User Modelling 
AHSs change several aspects of the system based on the 
user's characteristics, such as goals and preferences. These 
characteristics, which can be provided by the user or inferred 
by the system, are stored in the User Model [12]. In the case 
of AEHSs, the User Model, or Student Model, also stores the 
user's knowledge. The purpose of AEHSs is helping users 
achieve their learning goals. When one goal is reached, the 
system re-adapts to the newly acquired knowledge [12, 13, 
14]. This means that the Student Model is of particular 
importance for AEHSs because the information it contains 
about the user's knowledge is crucial for a properly adapted 
learning experience. 
The Student Model includes Domain Dependent Data 
and Domain Independent Data. The first consists of the 
user’s subject knowledge, learning goals and a complete 
description of the user's navigation through the course. 
Domain Independent Data consists of personal information, 
demographic data, academic background, qualifications, 
learning style, cognitive capacities, etc. Depending on the 
system being developed, some of these features are relevant 
for the User Model and some are not [12, 14, 15]. 
Determining which of the user's characteristics should be 
used is an important step in the creation of an AHS [13]. 
PCMAT's Student Model stores several characteristics, 
but the most relevant one is the user's learning style. 
Learning differs from individual to individual and depends 
on many unique and personal factors [16]. Learning styles 
attempt to be representations of how an individual learns. It 
is now known most people are multimodal, meaning they 
have more than one learning style [17, 18], as opposed to 
having only one learning style as was previously believed. 
The Learning Styles theory has been subject to criticism [19, 
20, 21], but it is also supported by several studies [22, 23, 
24]. There does not seem to be, however, any evidence 
suggesting the use of learning styles is detrimental. 
Moreover, it is the personal opinion of the mathematics 
teachers working on this project that learning styles might 
indeed be useful and facilitate the user's learning process. 
One of the objectives of this project is assessing the 
usefulness of learning styles as a feature of the User Model 
of Adaptive Educational Hypermedia Systems. 
B. Adaptation Model 
The development of PCMAT takes into account the 
constructivist learning theory. The system sets up a path into 
the subject, using the information obtained from assessing 
the user's previous knowledge. It adapts content and 
activities to the user's characteristics and performance, and is 
capable of automatic feedback and support, through 
pedagogical strategies and educational activities explored in 
a constructivist manner.  
PCMAT uses the features contained in the User Model to 
create a specific domain concept graph, adapted from the 
domain model, and uses it to provide adaptation that will 
respond to the student's needs. The initial scheme is set by 
the teacher, but the path each student takes in the graph is 
determined by the interaction with the system using 
progressive assessment, the student's knowledge and the 
user's characteristics in the user model. Adaptation occurs 
through changes in content presentation, in the structure of 
links and in the links annotation [29]. 
Changes to content presentation are achieved by showing 
or omitting each of the multiple fragments a course page is 
composed of. These fragments consist of different learning 
objects such as exercises, figures and narrative text, among 
others. Changes in the structure of links and the links’ 
annotation serve the purpose of guiding the student through 
the course, towards the most relevant information and away 
from knowledge that is not appropriate yet [5]. 
III. 
RECOMMENDATION MODULE 
Choosing the most appropriate learning object for a 
student, for a given section of his learning path, implies 
defining 
the 
relationship 
between 
specific 
student 
characteristics and the parameters of a learning object. The 
recommendation module takes as input data from the User 
Model and uses a Fuzzy Logic system to output a set of 
parameters the learning object must comply with. These 
parameters are based on elements of the IEEE LOM’s 
general and educational categories [27]. 
The system takes as input both domain dependent data, 
such as the student's subject knowledge, and domain 
independent data, namely the student's learning style and 
learning rate. The Fuzzy Logic engine then maps these 
characteristics into the following parameters [25]:  
difficulty - indicates the level of ease associated with the 
learning resource. 
resource type - indicates the potential educational use(s) 
or type(s) of content associated with the learning resource. 
semantic density - indicates the degree of concision or 
brevity of expression in a resource. 
interactivity level - indicates the degree to which the 
learning resource is able to respond to the actions and input 
of the user. 
interactivity type - indicates whether the resource 
requires action on the part of the user. 
The relationships established between User Model 
characteristics and Learning Object parameters are the 
following: 
knowledge + learning rate -> difficulty 
learning style + learning rate -> resource type 
knowledge + learning rate -> semantic density 
learning style -> interactivity level 
learning style -> interactivity type  
Both knowledge level and learning rate contribute to the 
choice of a learning object's difficulty level because, in our 
view, a student that learns at a faster pace should more easily 
be able to understand the contents of a more difficult 
learning object than a student that learns at a slower pace.   
The resource type depends on the learning style for 
obvious reasons. If the student tends toward the visual 
learning style, a diagram will be a more appropriate learning 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

object than a block of text. The learning rate is also taken 
into account because certain resource types, such as 
exercises, might at some point in the course be appropriate 
for faster learning students, whereas slower learning students 
might need more learning time before being presented with a 
learning object of that type. The semantic density of a 
learning object can be determined in two different ways. It 
might refer to the ratio between the number of written or 
spoken words and the total number of words, or it may be 
determined by the total length of the learning object [25]. We 
take into consideration the student's knowledge level and 
learning rate when determining the appropriate semantic 
density of a learning object because not only will it be easier 
for a more knowledgeable student to understand a learning 
object of greater semantic density, but a student who learns 
faster is one who understands content more rapidly and 
therefore should be able to deal with greater semantic density 
more easily. As for the interactivity level and interactivity 
type of a learning object, we have chosen to only factor in 
the student's learning style because we believe neither 
knowledge nor learning rate must influence the interactivity 
of a learning object. A student’s learning style, on the other 
hand, should be taken into consideration because a highly 
interactive object seems more appropriate to a student with a 
kinesthetic learning style, than to a student with an auditory 
learning style. 
The mapping between student characteristics and 
learning object parameters is performed using Fuzzy Logic. 
The recommendation module takes the numeric values, 
which represent the input data and, after fuzzifying them, 
uses the specified Fuzzy rules to determine the output 
parameters the learning object must be in accordance with. 
An example of a Fuzzy rule is: if learning_rate is slow and 
knowledge_level is low then difficulty is very_easy. 
These parameters, as well as a set of context-dependent 
keywords, are then used by PCMAT’s search and retrieval 
module to retrieve a list of compliant learning objects.  
After obtaining the list, the recommendation module 
verifies in the Student Model if the object at the top of the 
list has already been presented to the student. If there is a 
record of that object in the Student Model, the system checks 
the following objects until it cannot find a match. If all the 
learning objects in the list have already been shown to the 
student, the recommendation module asks the search and 
retrieval module for more learning objects that comply with 
the parameters specified. It then checks the Student Model 
again until it finds an object in the list that has not been 
shown to the student yet. If, after asking the search and 
retrieval module for learning objects a given number of 
times, no such object can be found, the system searches the 
Student Model for the learning object with the oldest 
timestamp. Once the system finds a learning object that can 
be presented to the student, be it a brand new one or one 
retrieved from the Student Model, that object is processed for 
inclusion in one of the fragments that make up the course’s 
pages. 
The courses pages are created using XHTML, which 
means that the recommendation module must process the 
learning object so that it will extend the Web page 
seamlessly. Learning objects can be of many different types, 
such as images, videos, text documents, and so on. 
Integrating these different types of objects in a seamless 
manner is achieved by using JQuery to determine some of 
the object’s parameters (height and width, for example) and 
adjust the fragment’s own parameters accordingly. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The PCMAT platform is being developed in an attempt 
to contribute to the progress of AHSs, in particular AEHSs. 
As e-learning systems become more commonplace and grow 
in prominence, the usefulness of adaptive systems becomes 
more apparent. Our work on PCMAT intends to show the 
advantages of such systems, as well as perform more 
experimentation on User Modeling.  
This project is still a work-in-progress, but has already 
helped define new strategies for the implementation of an 
AEHS to support and improve mathematics in the context of 
basic schools. It has also contributed to the definition of a 
student 
model 
describing 
the 
personal 
information, 
knowledge, preferences, and learning style of the user, the 
definition of a process and tools needed to produce learning 
objects aligned with the IEEE LOM standard, and the 
implementation of a set of adaptive and dynamic 
pedagogical strategies [26]. 
In 
this 
paper, 
we 
have 
presented 
PCMAT's 
recommendation module. This module is responsible for 
defining the parameters of a learning object, based on the 
user's characteristics and performance. The proper choice of 
learning objects is crucial to the system's adaptability and the 
individualization of the learning process. 
PCMAT has already undergone some preliminary tests in 
two basic schools and achieved good results. After the 
testing phase, students from both the experimental and 
control groups had to answer a written test set up by their 
teachers. The results show the average student scores, from 
both schools, in the experimental group was higher than the 
average student scores in the control group, 59,1% (σ = 19,7) 
against 44,2% (σ = 21,8). The differences observed are 
statistically significant (p=0,010). Students from the 
experimental groups also performed better in the knowledge 
acquisition of individual concepts. The two groups were 
statistically compared using a two sided, independent 
samples t test with a 0.05 (5%) critical level of significance 
[28]. 
These results are very positive, and a strong indicator that 
PCMAT's architecture is viable and appropriate for AEHSs 
used in the context of basic schools. They also allow us to 
conclude that AEHSs, by adapting to the different needs and 
characteristics of a student, contribute indeed to the 
effectiveness and efficiency of the learning process. In 
addition, students perceived this tool as being relevant to 
their learning experience, and as a self-operating application 
to be integrated in a more global learning strategy that also 
includes tutoring (direct contact with the teacher) and peer 
learning. The teachers that participated in this experiment 
agreed with these definitions of the platform as well.  
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

PCMAT will enter a new testing phase in the coming 
months, with a larger sample size. We hope to confirm the 
results previously obtained in order to conclude about the 
adequate features and true effectiveness of the PCMAT 
system. We will continue working on the system in order to 
improve its adaptability. Our current and future work also 
focuses on a Natural Language Processing module, which is 
capable of analyzing and assessing the answers given by 
students to open-ended questions. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to acknowledge FCT, FEDER, 
POCTI, POSI, POCI and POSC for their support to GECAD 
unit, and the project PCMAT (PTDS/CED/ 108339/2008). 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] K. Masters, "A brief guide to understanding MOOCs", The 
Internet Journal of Medical Education, vol. 1, number 2, 
2011, doi: 10.5580/1f21, http://www.ispub.com/journal/the-
internet-journal-of-medical-education/volume-1-number-2/a-
brief-guide-to-understanding-
moocs.html#sthash.bngD45s5.dpbs, retrieved: February 2013. 
[2] L. 
Pappano, 
"The 
Year 
of 
the 
MOOC", 
http://www.nytimes.com/2012/11/04/education/edlife/massive
-open-online-courses-are-multiplying-at-a-rapid-
pace.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0, retrieved: February 2013. 
[3] Udacity, http://www.udacity.com/us, retrieved: February 
2013. 
[4] K. M. Heussner, "Udacity nabs another $15M to bring more 
interactivity 
to 
online 
education", 
http://gigaom.com/2012/10/25/udacity-nabs-another-15m-to-
bring-more- 
interactivity-to-online-education/, 
retrieved: 
February 2013. 
[5] M. Fernandes, P. Couto, C. Martins, L. Faria, C. Bastos, and 
F. Costa, "Learning objects recommendation in an adaptive 
educational 
hypermedia 
system", 
Proc. 
8th 
WSEAS 
International Conference on Educational Technologies 
(EDUTE '12),  2012,  pp. 123-128. 
[6] V. Chepegin, L. Aroyo, P. De Bra, and D. Heckman, "User 
modeling for modular adaptive hypermedia", SWEL'04 
Workshop at the AH2004 Conference, TU/e Computing 
Science Report 04-19, 2004, pp. 366-371. 
[7] P. De Bra, "Web-based educational hypermedia", in Data 
Mining in E-Learning, C. Romero and S. Ventura, Eds. 
Universidad de Cordoba, Spain, WIT Press,  2006, pp. 3-17. 
[8] L. M. Aroyo, R. Mizoguchi, and C. K. Tzolov, "OntoAIMS: 
ontological approach to courseware authoring", in The 
Second Wave of ICT in Education: from Facilitating 
Teaching and Learning to Engendering Education Reform, 
2003, pp. 2-5. 
[9] M. Kravcik and M. Specht, "Flexible navigation support in 
the Winds learning environment for architecture and design", 
Proc. Third International Conference AH2004, Eindhoven, 
The Netherlands, August 23-26, 2004,  pp. 156-165. 
[10] C. Martins, P. Couto, M. Fernandes, C. Bastos, C. Lobo, L. 
Faria, and E. Carrapatoso, "PCMAT - mathematics 
collaborative learning platform", Highlights in Practical 
Applications of Agents and Multiagent Systems, AISC 89, 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 93-100. 
[11] "OECD, PISA 2009 Results: Learning Trends: Changes in 
Student Performance Since 2000 (Volume V)", 2010. 
[12] P. Brusilovsky, "Adaptive hypermedia, user modeling and 
user adapted interaction", Ten Year Anniversary Issue, Alfred 
Kobsa, Ed. 11 (1/2), 2001, pp. 87-110. 
[13] C. Martins, L. Faria, and E. Carrapatoso, "Constructivist 
approach for an educational adaptive hypermedia tool", Proc. 
ICALT, IEEE, 2008, pp. 303–305. 
[14] C. Martins, L. Faria, C. V. Carvalho, and E. Carrapatoso, 
"User modeling in adaptive hypermedia educational systems", 
Educational Technology & Society, 11(1), 2008, pp. 194–207. 
[15] P. Brusilovsky, "Adaptive hypermedia: an attempt to analyze 
and generalize", in Multimedia, Hypermedia, and Virtual 
Reality, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 1077, P. 
Brusilovsky, P. Kommers and N. Streitz, Eds. 1996, pp. 288–
304. 
[16] D. Ritu and M. Sugata, "Learning styles and perceptions of 
self", International Education Journal, Vol. 1, No 1, 1999, pp. 
61-71. 
[17] N. D. Fleming, "VARK, a review of those who are 
multimodal", 
2007, 
http://www.vark-
learn.com/english/page_content/multimodality.htm, retrieved: 
February 2013. 
[18] P. Miller, "Learning styles: the multimedia of the mind", 
Educational Resources Information Center ED 451 140, 2001. 
[19] E. Brown, T. Fisher, and T. Brailsford, "Real users, real 
results: examining the limitations of learning styles within 
AEH", Proc. 18th Conf. Hypertext and Hypermedia, 2007, pp. 
57-66. 
[20] D. Hargreaves, "About learning: report of the learning 
working group", Demos, 2005. 
[21] S. A. Stahl, "Different strokes for different folks?", in Taking 
sides: Clashing on controversial issues in educational 
psychology, L. Abbeduto, Ed. Guilford, CT, USA: McGraw-
Hill, 2002, pp. 98-107. 
[22] A. Kolb, "Learning styles and learning spaces: enhancing 
experiential learning in higher education", Academy of 
Management Learning and Education, 4 (2), 2005, pp.193-
212. 
[23] S. Montgomery and L. N. Groat, "Student learning styles and 
their implications for teaching", Occasional Paper, Center for 
Research on Learning and Teaching, University of Michigan, 
1998, 
http://www.eecs.umich.edu/cse/cs_connections/cs4hs_present
ations_09/Student_Learning_Styles.pdf, retrieved: February 
2013. 
[24] A. S. Richmond and R. Cummings, "Implementing Kolb’s 
learning styles into online distance education", International 
Journal of Technology in Teaching and Learning, 1(1), 2005, 
pp. 45-54. 
[25] N. Friesen, S. Fisher, and A. Roberts, CanCore Guidelines 
Version 
2.0: 
Educational 
Category, 
2004, 
http://cancore.tru.ca/guidelines/CanCore_Guidelines_Educati
onal_2.0.pdf, retrieved: February 2013. 
[26] C. Martins, L. Faria, M. Fernandes, P. Couto, C. Bastos, and 
E. Carrapatoso, "PCMAT - mathematics collaborative 
educational system", Intelligent and Adaptive Educational-
Learning Systems: Achievements and Trends, Smart 
Innovation, Systems and Technologies, Vol. 17,  A. Peña-
Ayala, Ed. Springer, 2013, pp. 183-212. 
[27] IEEE 1484.12.1-2002, Standard for learning object metadata, 
The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Inc., 
New York, 2002. 
[28] M. Bland, An introduction to medical statistics, 3rd ed., 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000. 
[29] P. 
Brusilovsky, 
"Efficient 
Techniques 
for 
Adaptive 
Hypermedia", Intelligent Hypertext: Advanced Techniques 
for the World Wide Web, Charles K. Nicholas and James 
Mayfield (Eds.), Springer-Verlag, London, 1997, pp. 12-30
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

