N-Screen Service Platform based on Location-Awareness 
 
Jiho Kim, Dohee Lee and Ohyoung Song 
School of Electrical and Electronics Engineering 
Chung-Ang University 
Seoul, Korea 
{jihokim, dynamic85}@wm.cau.ac.kr, song@cau.ac.kr 
 
 
Abstract—We propose a location-aware multimedia delivery 
platform for N-Screen service. Our architecture allows the 
content providers to enable consistent LBS and seamless 
multimedia service for adaptive source multi device (ASMU). 
Keywords- LBS; N-Screen; Multimedia delivery platform 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Location Based Services (LBS) can reach useful and 
convenience lifestyle of users. As the advance of wireless 
network 
technologies 
and 
the 
accuracy 
of 
the 
location/positioning technologies accelerate, many LBS will 
appear to be realizing more efficient and reliable services. 
Recently, multimedia service has become one of popular 
applications, which users take advantage of spare time at a 
smart home/hotspot, as smart home/hotspot services plays an 
important role in providing entertainment for the user. 
Therefore, smart home users require supporting mobility of 
multimedia service because it needs to be served seamlessly 
at any place [1]. 
With extensive use of smart phones and with 
development of smart television, the necessity for the 
seamless display among various devices, so called ‘N-
Screen’, becomes apparent [2]. N-Screen service can be 
perceived as the essential multimedia service by providing 
one-source multi-use (OSMU). Seamless N-Screen services 
are an emerging killer application in personal wireless 
devices. Seamless services in the heterogeneous networks 
require smooth automation person by person. In order to 
provide intelligent services, we manage location of the 
mobile user. By location information, the proposed platform 
makes adaptively modifying the multimedia contents 
according to heterogeneous networks as well as devices. 
We propose a location-aware multimedia platform for N-
Screen service. Our architecture allows the content providers 
to enable seamless multimedia service with location-
awareness for adaptive-source multi-device (ASMD). 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the 
section 2, we describe related works on seamless multimedia 
services. In section 3, we propose a location-aware 
multimedia platform for N-Screen service. The section 4 
concludes the paper. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS ON SEAMLESS MULTIMEDIA 
SERVICES 
There have been researches related to seamless 
multimedia services. Content adaptation framework for 
Heterogeneous Devices utilizes information about devices, 
network, interaction, social activities and users in order to 
adapt digital content and SNS activities [3]. Functional 
architecture and mechanism for mobile station to provide 
seamless 
multimedia 
services 
offer 
continuous 
and 
bandwidth-adaptive IPTV service while switching the 
mobile terminals [4]. Method models for the multimedia 
service adapt the interfaces and interaction processes of 
heterogeneous devices [5]. A multimedia service platform 
includes session mobility management and adaptive 
streaming to manage video streaming sessions on 
heterogeneous networks and devices [14]. 
N-screen is a technology aimed to provide seamless 
computing environment by supporting synchronized data or 
program or display [2]. Classification of N-Screen service 
introduces various kinds of N-screen service scenarios and 
technologies based on overall scenario model [6]. One of N-
Screen deals with token-sharing mechanism among media 
for guarantying synchronization and continuity of playing 
contents [7]. Another is new control architecture of group 
communication that delivers contents to available devices 
added or deleted dynamically by users in N-Screen service 
architecture [8]. Some of them are at the level of automated 
data synchronization such as Dropbox [9], uCloud [10], and 
others are focusing on ceaseless displaying covering from 
mobile device to personal computer and television [11]. 
Several studies have been made on context/location-
aware service that can be considered as the decisive 
application by accomplishing the pervasive intelligence. 
Context-aware middleware provide an automatic service 
based on a user’s preference inside a smart home [12]. A 
flexible context-sensitive user profile model gathers static 
and dynamic data characterizing the user and his operational 
context in order that Services, especially the multimedia ones, 
must perform automatically actions/operations to adapt the 
delivered content to the user expectations and his 
environment capabilities [13]. A context-aware scalable 
media delivery for heterogeneous devices has shown good 
context-aware use cases with video streaming for best 
possible quality under the constraints of client device 
capability, network conditions [15].  
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

Mobile nodes (MNs) for multimedia services must 
support seamlessly the service roaming in the heterogeneous 
devices and networks. Our schemes manage user profile 
information that should be registered and managed by the 
servers which are located in the remote space. For location-
aware intelligent services, we use the location agent with 
location/position surveillance and tracking in each spot. 
Location agent play essential role in assigning location aware 
intelligence in wireless networks. The smart and ubiquitous 
computing is dynamic providing the wireless access for 
seamless multimedia service.  
III. 
LOCATION-AWRE MULTIMEDIA PLATFORM 
By location information, we can increase application 
with the enhanced intelligence by providing seamless 
services and automatic contents adaptation. For seamless 
multimedia service, the location information will play an 
important role in defining context-awareness. In order to 
provide intelligent services we use smart techniques for 
location management of the user. The proposed multimedia 
platform makes autonomously modifying the multimedia 
contents according to heterogeneous devices as well as 
networks. 
Fig. 1 shows the proposed architecture which consists of 
several two components - Location Agent and Multimedia 
Contents Agent. The Multimedia Contents Agent is an agent 
that administrates various services. It decides proper services 
with profile information such as the user’s preference and the 
device’s type. The Location Agent that is able to detect the 
accurate location will play the major role. Intuitively, it is 
clear that successful location detection can lead to fully 
automated activation of roaming services while minimizing 
the service latencies. The mobility prediction is possible by 
validating location history, by the profiles. The widest 
existing deployments for positioning are WPAN networks 
based on ZigBee, which is particularly suited for indoor 
applications, especially at home, in office building. Location 
Agent and Location Tag support our fine-grained location 
recognition using wireless networks. 
 
Figure 1. Location-aware multimedia delivery platform architecture 
  
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

The Location Agent detects when user have Location 
Tag enters the ZigBee network. Typical ZigBee tag exist two 
types: The Location Agent detects when user have Location 
Tag enters the ZigBee network. Typical ZigBee tag exist two 
types: the integrated USIM with ZigBee transceiver in the 
smartphone and stand-alone ZigBee dongle. The motion 
detector senses any movement around the sensor. Hybrid 
positioning scheme due to two types of measurements from 
different sensors (IR, ZigBee) enhances location accuracy of 
the user. Also, an advantage of ZigBee zoning is that ZigBee 
tag store the user’s profile. User profile contains user 
information, schedule and preferred services. A crucial 
benefit of the profile is that flexible multimedia push 
services can be customized to adjust user’s specific needs. If 
there is person present, service appliances are turned on. 
When a user moves into a different spot, location is the 
significant contexts in order to determine which types of 
devices are available and how communication should be 
conducted to fit the user’s needs. The platform enforces fast 
location detection as well as provides service roaming for 
wireless network where various display environments. 
In the platform of our architecture several information 
are managed by context based protocol as shown in Fig. 2. 
The procedure includes initiate, request and response of 
service, multimedia and location information. Figure 2 
shows the procedures in order to register user's current 
location as well as service profile in the platform and acquire 
user’s service profile from the platform. First, in the case of 
user’s service initiation, a user accesses the Location Agent, 
which gets the User ID using WPAN and requests User 
Registration to the platform. In the case of user’s service 
roaming, the user accesses the Location Sensor#2 from 
Location Sensor #1. The Location Sensor #2 recognizes the 
User using ZigBee. New intelligent applications will 
combine the characteristics of location-aware, device-aware 
and multimedia applications in varying degrees and forms. 
As shown in Fig 2(b), if a user move into the office, 
automatic recognizance of the presence of other devices 
through sensing the presence of neighboring beacons, allows 
the transfer of the current content seamlessly from the smart 
phone to the tablet. 
IV. 
CONCLUTUION 
Our platform architecture integrates location-aware 
scheme for seamless mobility with multimedia services by 
the cooperation of Location Agent and Multimedia Contents 
Agent. We expect that the proposed location-aware a 
multimedia delivery platform can be applied as intelligent to 
existing multimedia applications for N-screen service. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by a grant (SS100020) from 
the Seoul R&BD program funded by the Seoul Development 
Institute of the Korean government and supported by the 
Ministry of Knowledge Economy (10041725), Republic of 
Korea. 
Figure 2. Protocol design (a) and service flow (b) for location-aware seamless multimedia push service  
  
 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Younghun Yoo, Byung Chul Shin, Seong Gon Choi, Sang 
Kwon Kim, “User Mobility Mechanism for Seamless 
Multimedia Service in Home Networks,” ICACT 2008, Fab 
2008.  
[2] K. Ha, K. Kang, and J. Lee, "N-screen service using I/O 
Virtualization technology", 2010 International Conference on 
Information and Communication Technology Convergence 
(ICTC), pp. 525-526, 2010 
[3] Jun Lee, HyungSeok Kim, Jee-In Kim, “A Framework for 
Adapting 
Content 
of 
Social 
Network 
Services 
for 
Heterogeneous Devices,” IEEE International Conference on 
Consumer Electronics (ICCE), pp506-507, 2012 
[4] Kam Yong Kim, Seong Gon Choi, “Functional Architecture 
for User-Centric Multimedia Service on Mobile Station,” 13th 
International Conference on Advanced Communication 
Technology (ICACT), pp.93-98, 2011 
[5] S.J. Kim, K.J. Gil, H.S. Kim, S.B. Lim, and J.I. Kim, 
"Adaptive interactions in shared virtual environments for 
heterogeneous devices", Journal of Visualization and 
Computer Animation 21(5): 531-543 , 2010. 
[6] Taiwon Um, Hyunwoo Lee, “Classification ofN-Screen 
Services 
and 
its 
Standardization,” 
14th 
International 
Conference on Advanced Communication Technology 
(ICACT), pp.592-602, 2012 
[7] Jong-Hyoun Kim, Soo Hong Kim, “N-Screen Convergence 
Services Applied Hands and Objects Tracking in Educational 
Environment,” 5th International Conference on New Trends 
in Information Science and Service Science (NISS), pp.412-
415, 2011 
[8] Ullah, F., Sung Chang Lee, Seng Kyoun Jo, Hyun Woo Lee, 
“Dynamic Addition and Deletion of Device in N-Screen 
Environment,” Fourth International Conference on Ubiquitous 
and Future Networks (ICUFN), pp.118-122, 2012 
[9] 2012 Dropbox, https://www.dropbox.com/, Dropbox Service 
[10] Korea 
Telecommunication, 
http://ucloud.com/main.kt, 
uCloud Service 
[11] Goo Jun, “Home media center and media clients for multi-
room 
audio 
and 
video 
applications,” 
Consumer 
Communications and Networking Conference, 2005. CCNC. 
2005 Second IEEE, 2005, pp. 257-260. 
[12] J. Choi, D.K. Shin, and D. Shin, “Research and 
Implementation of the Context-Aware Middleware for 
Controlling Home Appliances”, IEEE Transaction on 
Consumer Electronics, 51-1. pp.301-306, 2005. 
[13] Soraya Ait Chellouche, Julien Arnaud, Daniel Négru, 
"Flexible User Profile Management for Context-Aware 
Ubiquitous Environment," Consumer Communications and 
Networking Conference (CCNC), 2010 7th IEEE, 2010. 
[14] Chung-Ming Huang, Chung-Wei Lin, and Chia-Ching Yang, 
"Mobility 
Management 
for 
Video 
Streaming 
on 
Heterogeneous Networks," Multimedia, IEEE, 2010. 
[15] Kwong Huang Goh, Jo Yew Tham, Tianxi Zhang, Timo Laakko, 
“Context-Aware Scalable Multimedia Content Delivery Platform for 
Heterogeneous Mobile Devices,” The Third International 
Conferences on Advances in Multimedia, 2011 
 
 
 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-269-1
INTELLI 2013 : The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

