     Semantic Reasoning Method to Troubleshoot in the Industrial Domain 
Antonio Martín, Mauricio Burbano, 
Higher Polytechnic School 
Seville University 
Seville, Spain 
toni@us.es, aryburcen@us.es 
Iñigo Monedero, Joaquín Luque, C.arlos León 
Technical High School of Computer Science 
University of Seville 
Seville, Spain 
cleon@us.es 
 
 
Abstract—Currently industrial information provides even 
more granular information through unit and equipment 
databases, which provide details about installed equipment, 
including models, designed capacity, throughput, and start 
up/shutdown 
dates 
for 
turbines, 
generators, 
refining 
equipment, etc. All these data and information are stored in 
digital repositories, digital archives, and business Web sites. 
Access to these collections poses a serious challenge. The 
present search techniques based on manually annotated 
metadata and linear replay of the material selected by the user 
do not scale effectively or efficiently to large collections. This 
can significantly reduce the accuracy of the search and draw in 
irrelevant documents. The artificial intelligence and Semantic 
Web provide a common framework that allows knowledge to 
be shared and reused in an efficient way. In this paper, we 
propose 
a 
comprehensive 
approach 
for 
discovering 
information objects in large digital repositories based on 
analysis of recorded semantic metadata and the application of 
Case Based Reasoning technique. We suggest a conceptual 
architecture for a semantic search engine. We have developed 
a prototype, which suggests a new form of interaction between 
users and digital enterprise repositories, to support efficient 
share distributed knowledge. 
Keywords- Case base Reasoning, Ontology, jColibri, 
Semantic Interoperability, Artificial Intelligence. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays an enormous quantity of heterogeneous and 
distributed information is stored in BB.DD, Web sites, 
digital storehouses, etc. Digital Industry Repository (DIRs) 
are online databases that provide a central location to collect, 
contribute and share knowledge resources to use in the 
industrial domain. Mechanisms to retrieval information and 
knowledge from digital repositories have been particularly 
important. DIRs present centralized hosting and access to 
content. DIRs provide the ability to share digital objects or 
files, the permissions and controls for access to content, the 
integrity, and intellectual property rights of content owners 
and creators. 
In the traditional search engines, the information stored 
in DIRs is treated as an ordinary database that manages the 
contents and positions. Results generated by the current 
searches are a list of results that contain or treat the pattern. 
Although search engines have developed increasingly 
effectively, information overload obstructs precise searches. 
Thus, it is necessary to develop new intelligent and semantic 
models that offer more possibilities. Our approach for 
realizing content-based search and retrieval information 
implies the application of the Case-Based Reasoning (CBR) 
technology and ontologies. The objective here is thus to 
contribute to a better knowledge retrieval in the industrial 
domain.  
There are researchers and related fields works, which 
include intelligent techniques to share information such as 
[1] which describes the application of intelligent systems 
techniques to provide decision support to the condition 
monitoring of nuclear power plant reactor cores. An 
intelligent image agent based on soft-computing techniques 
for color image processing is proposed in [2]. Huang et al. 
[3] propose an intelligent human-expert forum system to 
perform more efficient knowledge sharing using fuzzy 
information retrieval techniques. Yang et al. [4] present a 
system to collect information through the cooperation of 
intelligent agent software, in addition to providing warnings 
after analysis to monitor and predict some possible error 
indications among controlled objects in the network. Gladun 
et al. [5] suggest a Semantic Web technologies-based multi-
agent system that allows to automatically control students’ 
acquired knowledge in e-learning frameworks. 
The meta-concepts have explicit ontological semantics, 
so that they help to identify domain concepts consistently 
and structure them systematically. In [6] authors propose a 
construction safety ontology to formalize the safety 
management knowledge. Bertola et al. [7] present the 
building blocks for creating a semantic social space to 
organize artworks according to an ontology of emotions, 
which takes into account both the information two ancestral 
terms share and the probability that they co-occur with their 
common descendants. In [8] authors present an approach, 
which allows users to semantically query the BIM design 
model using a domain vocabulary, capitalizing on building 
product ontology formalized from construction perspectives. 
Zhang et al. [9] propose a framework to quantify the 
similarity measure beneath a term pair, which takes into 
account both the information two ancestral terms share and 
the probability that they co-occur with their common 
descendants. In [10] authors present a method for selecting a 
semantic similar measure with high similarity calculation 
accuracy for concepts in two different CAD model data 
ontologies.  
There are a lot of researches on applying Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) and semantic techniques to share 
knowledge. In this paper, we present a full integration of AI 
technologies and semantic methods during the whole life 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

cycle and from the industrial point of view. Our work differs 
from related projects in that we build ontology-based 
contextual profiles and we introduce an approaches used 
metadata-based in ontology search and expert system 
technologies. This paper describes semantic interoperability 
problems and presents an intelligent architecture to address 
them. 
We 
concentrate 
on 
the 
critical 
issue 
of 
metadata/ontology-based 
search 
and 
expert 
system 
technologies [11]. More specifically, the main objective of 
this research, is search possible intelligent infrastructures 
form constructing decentralized public repositories where no 
global schema exists. For this reason, we are improving 
representation by incorporating more metadata from within 
the information. The objective has focused on creating 
technologically complex environments industrial domain and 
incorporates Semantic Web and AI technologies to enable 
precise location of industrial resources.  
The contributions are divided into the next sections. The 
first section reports a short description of important aspects 
in Industrial domain, the research problems and current 
work. Next section describes the role of Semantic and 
artificial intelligence in industrial domain. Next section 
concerns the design of a prototype system for semantic 
search framework, in order to verify that our proposed 
approach is an applicable solution. Finally, we present the 
results of our on going work on the adaptation of the 
framework and we outline the future works. 
II. 
ASPECTS TO REACH EFFICIENT SHARED KNOWLEDGE 
Industrial repositories contain a large volume of digital 
information, generally focusing on making their knowledge 
resources to improve associate decision-support systems. 
Within a pool of heterogeneous and distributed information 
resources, users take site-by-site searching. Quality of search 
results varies greatly depending on quality of the search 
query from too limited set of results to a too large number of 
irrelevant results. For certain cases specifying a couple of 
keywords can be enough, if they are really specific and no 
ambiguity is possible [12]. Currently, electronic search is 
based mainly on matching keywords specified by users with 
sought information web pages that contain those keywords. 
Ambiguity of most word-combinations and phrases, which 
are used for searching web resources, and poor linguistic 
features of available web-content indexing and matching 
mechanisms severely affect the results of most internet 
searchers.  
Thus, considerable effort is required in creating 
meaningful metadata, organizing and annotating digital 
documents, and making them accessible. This work concerns 
applications of the semantic technology for improving 
existing information search systems by adding semantic 
enabled extensions that enhance information retrieval from 
information systems. Use of ontologies can provides the 
following profits: 
- Share and common understanding of the knowledge 
domain that can be communicated among agents and 
application systems.  
- Explicit conceptualization that describes the semantics of 
the data.  
In our work we analyzed the relationship between both 
factors ontologies and expert systems. We have proposed a 
method to efficiently search the target information on a 
digital repository network with multiple independent 
information sources. The use of AI and ontologies as a 
knowledge representation formalism offers many advantages 
in information retrieval. This scheme is based on the 
principle that knowledge items are abstracted to a 
characterization by metadata description, which is used for 
further processing. This characterization is based on a 
vocabulary/ontology that is shared to case the access to the 
relevant information sources. This motivates researchers to 
look for intelligent information retrieval approach and 
ontologies that search and/or filter information automatically 
based on some higher level of understanding that is required. 
We make an effort in this direction by investigating 
techniques that attempt to utilize ontologies to improve 
effectiveness in information retrieval.  
To reach these goals we need the capacity of different 
information 
systems, 
applications 
and 
services 
to 
communicate, share and interchange data, information and 
knowledge in an effective and precise way, as well as to 
integrate with other systems, applications and services in 
order to deliver new electronic products and services.  
III. 
SYSTEMS 
AND 
SERVICES 
INTEROPERABILITY 
REQUIREMENTS 
Connectivity and interoperation among computers, 
among entities, and among software components can 
increase the flexibility and agility of industrial systems, thus 
reducing administrative and software costs for industry. In 
the business case, expands to include the ability of two or 
more business processes, or services, to easily or 
automatically work together [13]. It is clear that the ability to 
interoperate is key to reducing industrial integration costs 
and inefficiencies, increasing business agility, and enabling 
the 
adoption 
of 
new 
and 
emerging 
technologies. 
Interoperability is the ability of two or more industrial assets 
like hardware devices, communications devices, or software 
components, to easily or automatically work together.  
ISO/IEC 2382 Information Technology Vocabulary 
defines interoperability as the capability to communicate, 
execute programs, or transfer data among various functional 
units in a manner that requires the user to have little or no 
knowledge of the unique characteristics of those units. An 
interoperability framework can be described as a set of 
standards and guidelines, which describe the way in which 
organizations have agreed, or should agree, to interact with 
each other. 
In this context, interoperability is the ability of 
information and communication technology systems and of 
the business processes they support to exchange data and to 
enable sharing of information and knowledge. Technical 
dimension of interoperability includes uniform movement of 
industrial data, uniform presentation of data, uniform user 
controls, uniform safeguarding data security and integrity, 
uniform protection of industrial confidentiality, uniform 
assurance of a common degree of service quality, Figure 1. 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

 
Figure 1. Abstraction layers interoperability 
Specifically, the goal of semantic interoperability is to 
improve communication on industrial related knowledge 
both among humans and machines. In order to achieve this, a 
two-pronged approach is necessary: achieving a unified 
ontology and tackle concrete and clearly delineated issues. 
Organizational interoperability is defined as the state where 
the organizational components of the industrial system are 
able to perform seamlessly together. The vision is an 
integrated industrial system that provides efficient, effective 
and holistic. The functional goal is to allow data to be 
exchanged 
between 
different 
projects 
in 
multiple 
corporations using different equipment’s, software etc. From 
multiple 
manufacturers 
or 
vendors. 
Technical 
interoperability consists in being able to communicate and 
interact between two systems coming from different 
manufacturers.  
Different efforts are being leveraged by many standards 
efforts 
to 
address 
semantic 
and 
organizational 
interoperability and are proving to be a model for addressing 
semantic and organizational interoperability like ebXML, 
RosettaNet, the new UN/CEFACT work on aligning its 
global business process standards work with Web services, 
etc. In June 2002, European heads of state adopted the 
Europe Action Plan 2005 at the Seville summit. They calls 
on the European Commission to issue an agreed 
interoperability framework to support the delivery of 
European Digital services to enterprises. This recommends 
technical policies and specifications for joining up public 
administration information systems across the EU. This 
research is based on open standards and the use of open 
source software. These aspects are the pillars to support the 
European delivery of Digital services of the recently adopted 
European Interoperability Framework (EIF) [14] and its 
Spanish equivalent (MAP, 2014). This document is a 
reference for interoperability of the new Interoperable 
Delivery of Pan-European Digital Services to Public 
Administrations, Business and Citizens program (IDAbc). 
Member States Administrations must use the guidance 
provided by the EIF to supplement their national 
Interoperability Frameworks with a pan-European dimension 
and thus enable pan-European interoperability [15]. 
Furthermore achieving semantic and organizational 
interoperability requires strictly agreeing on the meaning of 
information 
and 
aligning 
business 
processes 
across 
enterprises/industries. At one level, general cross-industry 
frameworks and software infrastructure approaches can be, 
and are being, developed for semantics and business 
processes. For example, general semantics for major 
business transactions, such as purchase orders and invoices, 
are outlined through standards such as Universal Business 
Language (UBL), UN/CEFACT Core Components, and 
Open Applications Group Integration Standard (OAGIS). 
IV. 
SYSTEM ACHITECTURE AND KEY ELEMENTS 
Our system works comparing items that can be retrieved 
across heterogeneous repositories and capturing a semantic 
view of the world independent of data representation. The 
proposed architecture is based on our approach to share 
information in an efficient way by means of metadata 
characterizations and domain ontology inclusion. It implies 
to use ontology as vocabulary to define complex, multi-
relational case structures to support the CBR processes [16]. 
The goal is achieved from a search perspective, with possible 
intelligent 
infrastructures 
to 
construct 
decentralized 
industrial repositories where no global schema exists. This 
goal implies the application of CBR technique.  
In order to support the semantic shared knowledge in 
industrial repositories, a prototype CBR and ontology based 
techniques have been development. The architecture of our 
system is shown in Figure 2, which mainly includes four 
elements: the acquire engine, ontology, knowledge base, and 
graphic user interface. 
 
Figure 2. ReasInd architecture 
A. The Acquire Engine - Case Based Reasoning 
CBR is a problem solving archetype that solves a new 
problem, by remembering a previous similar situation and by 
reusing knowledge of that state. In CBR application, 
problems are described by metadata concerning desired 
characteristics of an industry resource, and the solution to the 
question is a pointer to a resource described by metadata. A 
new difficult is solved by retrieving one or more previously 
experienced cases, reusing the case, revising, and retaining. 
In our system when a description of the current request is 
input to the system the reasoning cycle may be described by 
the following processes [17].  
The system retrieves the closest-matching cases stored in 
the case base. Reuse a complete design, where case-based 
and slot-based adaptation can be hooked, is provided. If 
appropriate, the validated solution is added to the case for 
use in future problem solving. Check out the proposed 
solution if necessary. Since the proposed result could be 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

inadequate, this process can correct the first proposed 
solution. Retain the new solution as a part of a new case. 
This process enables CBR to learn and create a new solution. 
The solution is validated through feedback from the user or 
the environment, Figure 3.  
 
Figure 3. ReasInd Case Based Reasoning Cycle  
Implementing a CBR application from scratch remains a 
time-consuming software engineering process and requires a 
lot of specific experience beyond pure programming skills. 
This involves a number of steps, such as: collecting case and 
background 
knowledge, 
modeling 
a 
suitable 
case 
representation, defining an accurate similarity measure, 
implementing retrieval functionality and implementing user 
interfaces. In this work, we have chosen framework jColibri 
to development the intelligent search.   
JColibri is a java-based configuration that supports the 
development of knowledge intensive CBR applications and 
helps in the integration of ontology in them [18]. This way 
the same methods can operate over different types of 
information repositories. The Open Source JColibri system 
provides a framework for building CBR systems based on 
state-of-the-art software engineering techniques. JColibri is 
an open source framework, which affords the opportunity to 
connect easily an ontology in the CBR application to use it 
for case representation and content-based reasoning methods 
to assess the similarity between them. Nevertheless, at the 
same time, it ensures enough flexibility to enable expert 
users to implement advanced CBR applications. 
B. Knowledge Base. 
The understanding provided through semantic models is 
critical to being able to properly drive the correct insights 
from the monitored instrumentation, which ultimately can 
lead to optimizing business processes or, in this case, 
industry services. As a result, semantic models can greatly 
enhance the usefulness of the information obtained through 
operations integration solutions. In the physical world a 
control point such a valve or temperature sensor is known by 
its identifier in a particular control system, possibly through 
a tag name like 103-AA12.  
CBR case data could be considered as a portion of the 
knowledge, i.e. metadata about resources. The metadata 
descriptions of the resources and objects (cases) are 
abstracted from the details of their physical representation 
and are stored in the case base. Every case contains both 
description problem and the associated solution. The 
information model provides the ability to abstract different 
kinds of data and provides an understanding of how the data 
elements relate. A key value of the semantic model then is to 
provide access to information in context of the real world in 
a consistent way.  
Semantic models allow users to ask questions about what 
is happening in a modeled system in a more natural way. As 
an example, an oil production enterprise might consist of five 
geographic regions, with each region contains three to five 
drilling platforms, and each drilling platform monitored by 
several control systems, each having a different purpose. One 
of those control systems might monitor the temperature of 
extracted oil, while another might monitor vibration on a 
pump. A semantic model will allow a user to ask a question 
like, "What is the temperature of the oil being extracted on 
Platform 5?", without having to understand details such as, 
which specific control system monitors that information or 
which physical sensor is reporting the oil temperature on that 
platform. Within a semantic model implementation, this 
information is identified using "triples" of the form "subject-
predicate-object"; for example: 
    Tank1 <has temperature> Sensor 7 
    Tank 1 <is part of> Platform 4 
    Platform 4 <is part of> Plant1 
These triples, taken together, make up the ontology for 
Plant1 and can be stored in the model server. This 
information, then, can be easily traversed using the model 
query language more easily than the case without a semantic 
model to answer questions such as "What is the temperature 
of tank 1 on Platform 4". 
C. Ontology Development. 
Ontology models can be used to relate the physical 
world, to the real world, in the line-of-business and decision 
makers. The objective of our system is to improve the 
modeling of a semantic coherence for allowing the 
interoperability of different modules of environments 
dedicated to the industrial area. We have proposed to use 
ontology together with CBR in the acquisition of an expert 
knowledge in the specific domain. We need a vocabulary of 
concepts, resources and services for our information system 
described in the scenario, which requires definition about the 
relationships between objects of discourse and their 
attributes. The primary information managed in the domain 
is metadata about industrial resources, such as guides, digital 
services, alarms, information, etc. ReasInd project contains a 
collection of codes, visualization tools, computing resources, 
and data sets distributed across the grids, for which we have 
developed 
a 
well-defined 
ontology 
using 
Resource 
Description Framework (RDF) language [19].  
The total set of entities in our semantic model comprises 
the taxonomy of classes we use in our model to represent the 
real world. Together these ideas are represented by an 
ontology. This provides the semantic makeup of the 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

information model. The vocabulary of the semantic model 
provides the basis on which user-defined model queries are 
formed. Our ontology can be regarded as quaternion 
ReasInd:={caller, resources, properties, relation) where 
caller represent the user kinds, resources cover different 
information sources like electronic services, web pages, 
BB.DD., guides, etc. Also, properties contains all the 
characteristics of the services and resources and a set of 
relationships intended primarily for standardization across 
ontologies. We integrated three essential sources to the 
system: electronic resources, a catalogue of documents, and 
personal Data Base, Figure 4.  
 
Figure 4. Class hierarchy for the ReasInd ontology 
The W3C defines standards that can be used to design the 
ontology [20]. We wrote the description of these classes and 
the properties in RDF semantic markup language. We have 
chosen Protégé as our ontology editor, which supports 
knowledge acquisition and knowledge base development. 
Protégé provides an environment for the creation and 
development of underlying semantic knowledge structures-
ontologies and semantically annotated web services. Protégé 
organizes these elements like a dynamic process workflow 
[21].  
 After designing the ontology, we wrote the classes and 
the properties description of in RDF semantic markup 
language. 
Then 
the 
domain 
expert, 
in 
this 
case, 
administrative staff fills blank units of instance according to 
the domain knowledge. 13.000 cases were collected for user 
profiles and their different resources and services. Each case 
contains a set of attributes concerning both metadata and 
knowledge.  
D. Graphic User Interface. 
ReasInd is a platform, which is an intermediate link 
between users and search engine. Keeping in mind that our 
final goal is to reformulate requests in the ontology to 
queries in another with least loss of semantics. We come to a 
process for addressing complex relations between ontologies. 
By using ReasInd, the user can tune the query in accordance 
with his needs, excluding answers from an inappropriate 
domain and add semantically similar results. Advanced 
conversational user interface interacts with the users to solve 
a query, defined as the set of questions selected and 
answered by the user during the conversation. The real way 
to get individualized interaction between a user and ReasInd 
is to present the user with a variety of options and to let the 
user choose what is of interest at that specific time. In our 
system, the user interacts with the system to fill in the gaps 
to retrieve the right cases, Figure 5. 
 
Figure 5. Graphical User interface 
Transformation algorithm was implemented in the 
research prototype as the combined capability of the query 
transformation agent and the ontology agent of the intelligent 
multi-agent information retrieval mediator. The system has 
different users profiles to help to user to build a particular 
environment, which contains his interest search areas in the 
industry repositories domain: Plan Managers, Assistants, 
Operators, and Engineers. In this intelligence profile setting, 
people are surrounded by intelligent interfaces merged, thus 
creating a computing-capable environment with intelligent 
communication and processing available to the user by 
means of a simple, natural, and effortless human-system 
interaction. If the information space is designed well, then 
this choice is easy, and the user achieves optimal information 
through the use of natural intelligence, that is, the choices are 
easy to understand so that users know what they will see if 
they click a link, and what they annul by not following other 
links. 
Profile agents assist to learners with the search, according 
to the specifications they made. The search parameters in a 
profile, the start of a search, or the access to the list of 
retrieved learning objects, can be controlled by invoking 
appropriate search operations, which extract metadata from 
learning resources. Ideally, profile agents learn from their 
experiments, communicate and cooperate with other agents, 
around in DIRs. 
V. 
EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION 
In order to validate our approach, we have developed an 
intelligent control architecture in an industrial domain, 
concretely in an electric power system. This system 
integrates the management knowledge into the network 
resources specifications. We study an example of alarm 
detection and intelligent troubleshooting. We have used a 
network which belongs to a company in the electrical sector 
Sevillana-Endesa's (SE) a Spanish power utility. ReasInd is 
used to optimize the operation of hundreds of connected 
sensors currently installed. The Spanish power grid company 
has got a network using wireless on the regional high-tension 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

power 
grid. 
These 
low-cost 
wireless 
sensors 
and 
accompanying analytics can dramatically improve plant 
performance, increase safety, and pay for themselves within 
months. The use of integrating knowledge in agents can help 
the system administrator in using the maximum capabilities 
of the intelligent network management platform without 
having to use another specification language to customize the 
application. 
We have used the SCADA system due to the 
management 
limitations 
of 
network 
communication 
equipment. SCADA consists of the following subsystems, 
Figure 6: 
 
Figure 6. Elements of the prototype 
- Remote Terminal Units (RTUs) connecting to sensors in 
the process, converting sensor signals to digital data and 
sending digital data to the supervisory system.  
- Communication infrastructure connecting the supervisory 
system to the RTUs. 
- A supervisory computer system, gathering acquiring data 
on the process and sending commands control to the process. 
ReasInd monitors in real time, the network’s main 
parameters, making use of the information supplied by the 
SCADA, placed on the main company building, and the 
RTUs are installed at different stations. SCADA systems are 
configured around standard base functions like data 
acquisition, monitoring and event processing, data storage 
archiving and analysis, etc. The fundamental role of an RTU 
is the acquisition of various types of data from the power 
process, the accumulation, packaging, and conversion of data 
in a form that can be communicated back to the master, the 
interpretation and outputting of commands received from the 
master, and the performance of local filtering, calculation 
and processes to allow specific functions to be performed 
locally. The supervision below and RTU includes all 
network devices and substation and feeder levels like circuit 
breakers, reclosers, autosectionalizers, the local automation 
distributed at these devices, and the communications 
infrastructure. 
ReasInd allows the operator to search information, 
alarms, or digital and analogical parameters of measure, 
registered on each RTU. Starting from the supplied 
information, the operator is able to undertake actions in order 
to solve the failures that could appear or to send a technician 
to repair the stations equipment. The system has the 
capability of selecting an agent, which is best suited for 
satisfying the client’s requirement, without the client being 
aware of the details about the agent. Collaborative agents are 
useful, especially when a task involves several systems on 
the network.  
VI. 
EVALUATION AND CORROBORATIONS 
Experiments have been carried out in order to evaluate 
the effectiveness of run-time ontology mapping. The main 
goal has been to check if the mechanism of query 
formulation, assisted by an agent, gives a suitable tool for 
augmenting the number of significant cases, extracted from 
DIRs, to be stored in the CBR. For our experiments, we 
considered 15 users with different profiles. So that we could 
establish a context for the users, they were asked to at least 
start their essay before issuing any queries to the system. 
They were also asked to look through all the results returned 
by the system before clicking on any result. In each 
experiment, we report the average rank of the user-clicked 
result for our baseline system, another search engine, and for 
our system ReasInd [22]. Then we calculated the rank for 
each retrieval document by combining the various values and 
comparing the total number of extracted documents and 
documents consulted by the user, Figure 7. 
 
Figure 7. Performance ReasInd & traditional ES 
In our study domain, we can observe that the best final 
ranking was obtained for our prototype and an interesting 
improvement over the performance of others search engines. 
Our system performs satisfactorily with about a 98.5 % rate 
of success in real cases.  
During the experimentation, heuristics and measures that 
are commonly adopted in information retrieval have been 
used. Statistical analysis has been done to determine the 
importance values in the results. While the users were 
performing these searches, an application was continuing 
running in the background on the server, and capturing the 
content of queries typed and the results of the searches. We 
will discuss the issue of response time for five agents 
associated with transceiver resources. We can establish that 
ReasInd speed in our domain improves the answer time and 
the average of the traditional search engine. The results for 
ReasInd are 25,4 % better than executing time searches/sec 
in the traditional search engines. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
Semantic models based on industry standards take that 
one step further, especially as application vendors adopt 
those standards, which, as always, will happen more rapidly 
through pressure from the user community. Semantic models 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

play a key role in the evolving solution architectures that 
support the business goal of obtaining a complete view of 
"what is happening" within operations and then deriving 
business insights from that view. In this paper, we provide 
different possibilities, which semantic web opens for 
industry. One important objective is to study appropriate 
industrial cases, collect arguments, launch industrial projects 
and develop prototypes for the industrial companies that not 
only believe together with us but also benefit from the 
Semantic Web.  
We have investigated how the semantic technologies can 
be used to provide additional semantics from existing 
resources in industry repositories. We investigated how the 
semantic technologies can be used to provide additional 
semantics from existing resources in industrial repositories. 
For this purpose, we presented ReasInd a system based on 
ontology and AI architecture for knowledge management in 
industrial repositories.  
This study addresses the main aspects of a semantic and 
intelligent information retrieval system architecture trying to 
answer the requirements of the next-generation semantic 
search engine. We conclude pointing out an important aspect 
of the obtained integration: improving representation by 
incorporating more metadata from within the information 
and intelligent techniques into the retrieval process, the 
effectiveness of the knowledge retrieval is enhanced. This 
scheme is based on the principle of the knowledge items that 
are abstracted to a characterization by metadata description, 
which is used for further processing. We have proposed to 
use ontology together with CBR in the acquisition of an 
expert knowledge in the specific industry domain. The study 
analyses the implementation results and evaluates the 
viability of our approaches in enabling search in intelligent-
based digital repositories.  
Future work will be concerned with the design of 
distributed and self-managed industry services, which are 
able to automatically discover, compose, and integrate 
heterogeneous components, able to manage heterogeneous 
data/knowledge/intelligence sources, able to create, deploy 
and exploit linked data, and able to browse and filter 
information based on semantic similarity and closeness. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
G. M. West, S. D. J. McArthur, and D. Towle, “Industrial 
implementation of intelligent system techniques for nuclear power 
plant condition monitoring”, Expert Systems with Applications, 
Volume 39, Issue 8, Pages 7432-7440, 15 June 2012. 
[2] 
S. Guo, C. Lee, and C. Hsu, “An intelligent image agent based on 
soft-computing techniques for color image processing”, Expert 
Systems with Applications, Volume 28, Issue 3, Pages 483-494, April 
2005. 
[3] 
Y. Huang, J. Chen, Y. Kuo, and Y. Jeng, “An intelligent human-
expert forum system based on fuzzy information retrieval technique”, 
Expert Systems with Applications, Volume 34, Issue 1, Pages 446-
458, January 2008. 
[4] 
S. Yang and Y. Chang, “An active and intelligent network 
management 
system 
with 
ontology-based 
and 
multi-agent 
techniques”, Expert Systems with Applications, Volume 38, Issue 8, 
Pages 10320-10342, August 2011. 
[5] 
A. Gladun, J. Rogushina, F. Garcia-Sanchez, R. Martínez-Béjar, and 
J. Fernández-Breis, “An application of intelligent techniques and 
semantic web technologies in e-learning environments”, Expert 
Systems with Applications, Volume 36, Issue 2, Part 1, Pages 1922-
1931, March 2009. 
[6] 
S. Zhang, F. Boukamp, and J. Teizer, “Ontology-based semantic 
modeling of construction safety knowledge: Towards automated 
safety planning for job hazard analysis (JHA)”, Automation in 
Construction, Volume 52, Pages 29-41, April 2015. 
[7] 
 F. Bertola and V. Patti, “Ontology-based affective models to 
organize artworks in the social semantic web, Information Processing 
& Management”, Volume 52, Issue 1, Pages 139-162, January 2016. 
[8] 
H. Liu, M. Lu, and M. Al-Hussein, “Ontology-based semantic 
approach for construction-oriented quantity take-off from BIM 
models in the light-frame building industry”, Advanced Engineering 
Informatics, Volume 30, Issue 2, Pages 190-207, April 2016. 
[9] 
S. Zhang and J. Lai, “Exploring information from the topology 
beneath the Gene Ontology terms to improve semantic similarity 
measures”, Gene, Volume 586, Issue 1, Pages 148-157, 15 July 2016. 
[10] W. Lu et al., “Selecting a semantic similarity measure for concepts in 
two different CAD model data ontologies”, Advanced Engineering 
Informatics, Volume 30, Issue 3, Pages 449-466, August 2016. 
[11]  A. Badii, C. Lallah, M. Zhu, and M. Crouch., “Semi-automatic 
knowledge extraction, representation and context-sensitive intelligent 
retrieval of video content using collateral context modelling with 
scalable 
ontological 
networks”, 
Signal 
Processing: 
Image 
Communication, Volume 24, Issue 9, Pages 759-773, 2009. 
[12] M. Fernandez. et. Al., [online]. “Semantically enhanced Information 
Retrieval: An ontology-based approach, Web Semantics: Science, 
Services and Agents on the World Wide Web”, In Press, Corrected 
Proof, Available online 01 July 2014. 
[13] T. Segaran, “Programming Collective Intelligence: Building Smart 
Web 2.0 Applications”, Published by O'Reilly Media, August 23rd 
2007. 
[14] SEC. Commission Staff Workking Paper: linking up Europe, the 
importance of interoperability for egovernment services, [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://europa.eu.int/ISPO/ida/export/files/en/1523.pdf, July 2016. 
[15] EIF. European Interoperability Framework Version 2. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://ec.europa.eu/isa/strategy/doc/annex_ii_eif_en.pdf, Juny 2016. 
[16] J. Toussaint and Cheng, K., “Web-based CBR (case-based reasoning) 
as a tool with the application to tooling selection,” International 
Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, Volume 29, Issue 1, 
pp 24–34, 2006. 
[17] H. Stuckenschmidt and F. V. Harmelen, “Ontology-based metadata 
generation from semi-structured information”, K-CAP, pp. 163–170, 
ACM, 2011. 
[18] GAIA - Group for Artificial Intelligence Applications. jCOLIBRI 
project, “Distribution of the development environment”, [Online]. 
Available from: http://gaia.fdi.ucm.es/research/colibri/jcolibri/, July 
2016.  
[19] W3C. “RDF Vocabulary Description Language 1.0: RDF Schema”, 
[Online]. Available from: http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-schema/, July 
2016. 
[20] D. Taniar, and J. W Rahayu, “Web semantics and ontology”, 
Hershey, PA: Idea Group, 2006. 
[21] PROTÉGÉ. “The Protégé Ontology Editor and Knowledge 
Acquisition 
System”, 
[Online], 
Available 
from: 
http://protege.stanford.edu/, July 2016. 
[22] D. Amerland, “Google Semantic Search: Search Engine Optimization 
(SEO) Techniques That Get Your Company More Traffic, Increase 
Brand Impact and Amplify Your Online Presence”, Que Publishing 
Kindle Edition, July, 2013. Pp. 2013 – 229. 
 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

