CPS-based Model-Driven Approach to Smart Manufacturing Systems  
Jaeho Jeon1, Sungjoo Kang2, Ingeol Chun3
Embedded SW Research Department 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute 
Daejeon, Republic of Korea 
Email: {jeonjaeho111, sjkang2, igchun3} @etri.re.kr 
Abstract—With advent of new technologies such as Cyber-
Physical Systems (CPS), Internet of Things (IoT) and BigData, 
the technologies have led to the new concept of “Smart 
Factory” in the field of manufacturing. Several challenges have 
been raised up on how to handle flexibility, optimization, and 
interoperability in production life-cycle. This paper proposes a 
model-driven approach by ETRI CPS Modeling Language 
(ECML) to solve the challenges and presents a case study of 
Smart Factory by implementing from the facility design to 
virtualization. 
Keywords-cpps; smart factory; industry 4.0; modeling and 
simulation
I.
INTRODUCTION
Manufacturing industry is now transforming into the 
fourth industrial revolution, called Industry 4.0. This 
transformation has the meaning of embracing a number of 
contemporary automation, data exchange and manufacturing 
technologies such as CPS, IoT, Big Data [1]. Nowadays, the 
assembly of these new technologies has led to the new 
concept, “Smart Factory”, in the field of manufacturing and 
the entire value chain from product design to delivery is 
digitalized and integrated. 
Manufacturing competitors have used many technologies 
to solve the issues regarding the complexity of the 
manufacturing system, and Model-Driven Engineering 
(MDE) technique [7] becomes one of the solutions to handle 
the complexity. In this paper we propose a model-driven 
approach by ECML to solve the challenges in constructing a 
smart factory and present a “multiple-product production by 
process control system (MPPCS)” as an implementation for 
a smart factory. The rest of the paper is structured as follows: 
in Section 2, the background of smart factory regarding 
Industry 4.0 and related challenges are examined. Section 3 
introduces a modeling and simulation technique described in 
ECML. Section 4 describes a case study and the paper 
concludes with a summarization in Section 5. 
II.
SMART FACTORY 
This section describes how the fourth industrial 
revolution came up with in German and US, and it also 
explains about a CPPS architecture which plays an 
important role in a smart factory. 
A.
Industrie 4.0, Industrial Internet and Challenges 
Manufacturing industry is currently changing to a new 
paradigm, targeting innovation, lower costs, better responses 
to customer needs, and alternatives towards on-demand 
production [2]. Along with the change, German government 
has been promoting “High-Tech Strategy 2020 Action Plan” 
since 2013 and mentioned “4th industrial revolution” or 
“Industrie 4.0” [3]. The “Industrial Internet” is first 
introduced by General Electric in US in its visionary paper 
[6]. Even though both nations use different terms, several 
key challenges are addressed in common: 
•
Flexibility: flexible adaptation of the production 
chain to changing requirements,  
•
Optimization: production optimization due to IoT, 
CPS, and BigData 
•
Interoperability: 
interoperable 
data 
exchange 
between cyber and physical entities 
B.
CPPS Architecture 
CPS refers to the convergence of the physical and 
computing (cyber) systems over the network. When applied 
to production, CPS is specialized in Cyber-Physical 
Production Systems (CPPS) [6]. CPPS consists of 
autonomous and cooperative elements and sub-systems that 
connect with each other in situation dependent ways, on and 
across all levels of production [10]. Fig. 1 illustrates an 
architecture of CPPS. 
Figure 1. CPPS architecture 
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

CPPS architecture refers to that the cyber and the 
physical factory are synchronized in time by exchanging data 
and control messages between them. The simulation in the 
cyber factory takes data in real-time from the physical 
factory so that the accurate model (the physical factory 
model) can be defined. Once the simulation is done, the 
simulator generates control messages and sends back to the 
actuators in the physical factory so that the flexible 
adaptation of the production chain and the production 
optimization are possible.
III.
MODELING AND SIMULATION
For handling the flexible adaptation of manufacturing 
processes and the production optimization by a model-driven 
approach, it is very important to define the physical elements 
in a modeling language which enables modeling the factory 
as a whole in terms of processes, dependencies and 
interrelations, data and material flows [8].  ECML can be a 
possible candidate for it. Fig. 2 illustrates a representation of 
the physical factory in ECML. 
Figure 2. Physical factory modeling 
ECML is a hybrid system modeling language as a basis 
of DEV&DESS formalism [5][10] and Meta Object Facility 
(MOF) [4]. It is a modular, hierarchical and graphical 
language for modeling and simulation of systems that can be 
a discrete event systems described by state transition rules 
and a continuous systems described by differential equations. 
It also supports an encapsulation of models, model reuse, and 
multi-resolution modeling. ECML enables to define, design, 
and verify the manufacturing resources such as 4M (Man, 
Material, Method and Machine) related to processes, 
products and physical resources in the plants.  
Once the factory model is defined in ECML, the next 
step is to do simulation for constructing a virtual factory. 
Generally precise simulations depend on how closely and 
directly the models are associated with the target systems. 
CPS-based simulation takes models with real-time data from 
the physical factory. Once the simulation is done, the models 
can be represented as 3D models, as shown in Fig. 3, in a 
virtual environment on a third-party application. 
IV.
CASE STUDY
MPPCS, as a case study, is a conceptual facility to 
support the flexible adaptation of systematic processes 
according to CPS-based simulation. The goal of CPS-based 
simulation is to propose an optimized process regarding the 
resources, such as semi-finished products and parts, and to 
produce final products in the most effective way in terms of 
cost and time. 
Figure 3. Virtualization of physical factory 
First of all, MPPCS is defined in ECML according to the 
specification in terms of structures and behaviors. For 
example a picker and a lift of the facility are considered as 
structural parts, and dynamic movements of the picker are 
considered as behavioral parts. The facility receives a set of 
operating schedules from the CPS-based simulation. These 
schedules are generated by CPS-based simulation by 
receiving real-time data from sensors of the facility regarding 
whether the facility is in idle status or how much progress its 
facility has been done. If any congestions occur in a certain 
facility, the simulator will regenerate optimal operating 
schedules, and the resources will be redistributed to the other 
facilities according to the schedules. 
V.
CONCLUSION
This paper proposed a CPS based model-driven approach 
using ECML and presented a case study to test an optimal 
process generation which can be a solution to the challenges 
about smart manufacturing systems. Our future research will 
focus on covering other challenges such as a self-awareness 
of products and a human-machine interaction (HMI).  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the ICT R&D program of 
MSIP/IITP. [R-20150505-000691, IoT-based CPS platform 
technology for the integration of virtual-real manufacturing 
facility] 
REFERENCES
[1]
D. Lucke,  C. Constaninescu, and E. Westkämper, “Smart 
Factory 
A 
Step 
towards 
the 
Next 
Generation 
of 
Manufacturing,” Proceedings of the 41st CIRP Conference on 
Manufacturing Systems, Tokyo, Japan, pp. 115-118, 2008. 
[2]
A. A. F. Saldivar, Y. Li, W. n. Chen, Z. h. Zhan, J. Zhang and 
L. Y. Chen, "Industry 4.0 with cyber-physical integration: A 
design and manufacture perspective," Automation and 
Computing (ICAC), 2015 21st International Conference on, 
Glasgow, pp. 1-6, 2015. 
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

[3]
W. MacDougall, "Industrie 4.0 Smart Manufacturing for the 
Future,” Mechanical & Electronic Tehcnologies, Germany 
Trade & Invest(4) 40, 2014.  
[4]
OMG, ISO/IEC 19502:2005(E). “Meta Object Facility (MOF) 
Specification”, Version 1.4.1. 
[5]
B. P. Zeigler, H. Praehofer, and T.G. Kim, “Theory of 
Modeling and Simulation,” Academic Press, 2000. 
[6]
J. Posada et al., "Visual Computing as a Key Enabling 
Technology for Industrie 4.0 and Industrial Internet," in IEEE 
Computer Graphics and Applications, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 26-
40, Mar.-Apr. 2015. 
[7]
M. Brambilla, J. Cabot, and M. Wimmer. “Model-Driven 
Software Engineering in Practice,” Synthesis Lectures on 
Software Engineering, Morgan & Claypool Publishers,  pp. 
30, 2012. 
[8]
M. Sacco, P. Pedrazzoli, W. Terkaj, “VFF: Virtual Factory 
Framework: Key Enabler for Future manufacturing,” In 
Proceedings of ICE – 16th International Confernce on 
Concurrent Enterprising, Lugano, Svizzera, pp. 83-90, 2010. 
[9]
L. Monostori, “Cyber-physical Production Systems: Roots, 
Expectations and R&D Challenges,” Procedia CIRP, vol. 17, 
pp. 9-13, 2014, ISSN 2212-8271 
[10] J. Jaeho, C. Ingeol, and K. Wontae, “Metamodel-based CPS 
Modeling Tool,” Lecture Notes in Electrical Engineering 
(LNEE), vol. 181, pp.285–291, 2015. 
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

