MoleTestTM:
A Web-based Skin Cancer Screening System
Jonathan Blackledge
School of Electrical Engineering Systems,
Dublin Institute of Technology,
Kevin Street, Dublin 8, Ireland.
Email: jonathan.blackledge@dit.ie
http://eleceng.dit.ie/blackledge
Dimitri Dubovitski
Moletest UK Limited,
Woodland Point, Wootton Mount,
Bournemouth, Dorset BH1 1PJ UK.
Email: dmitri.dubovitski@moletestuk.com
http://www.moletestuk.com
Abstract—This paper reports on a research and development
programme undertaken in the Bioengineering Research Group
http://teapot.dit.ie/ at Dublin Institute of Technology which led
to the launch, in September 2010, of a new SME called Moletest
UK Limited. Based on an exclusive license awarded by Dublin
Institute of Technology in 2010, we report of the development
of the world’s ﬁrst remote skin cancer screening system which
is based on a customer uploading a good quality digital image
of a suspect mole. A ‘background to the case’ is given and the
concept of the approach discussed together with an overview of
the methods and algorithms developed in order to provide the
service now available.
Index Terms—Intensive Applications and Services (RIAS), Skin
cancer screening, Tele-Dermatology, Telemedicine, Large scale e-
health systems.
I. INTRODUCTION
This paper provides an overview of a new web-based
technology for skin cancer screening called MoletestTM [1]
and [2]. The technology is based on an expert system designed
to classify moles through an analysis of a good quality digital
image uploaded by the user of the system. The technology is
an example of an intensive application and service in the area
of Health Informatics and has been developed as a personal-
ized e-Health Service. Health Informatics is the appropriate
and innovative application of concepts and technologies to
improve health care and health and may be subdivided into
two principal categories:
• Tele-Health which is related to direct (video conferenc-
ing) or indirect (website delivery) of health information
or health care to a recipient;
• e-Health which encompasses products, systems and ser-
vices, including tools for health authorities and profes-
sionals and personalized health systems for patients and
citizens.
The
market
for
global
Tele-Health,
e-Health
and
Telemedicine in general is estimated to reach the order
of $13.9 Billion by 2012 [3]. The system discussed in
this paper is an example of Telemedicine known as Tele-
Dermatology and the reason for developing the system is that
one in six people will develop skin cancer at some stage in
their lives but 90% of early melanoma cases can be cured.
Thus if the condition is spotted early enough, Melanoma is
almost always curable. However, if it has time to spread, the
condition can be fatal.
A standard approach to the diagnosis of Melanoma is to
urge people to look for any change in colour, size and shape
of a mole or freckle, following the A-B-C-D guidelines which
are as follows:
• Asymmetry - any change in the shape of the mole or
freckle.
• Border irregularity - any change in edge irregularities.
• Colour variety - different shades of colour on the same
mole or freckle.
• Diameter - most melanomas are 6mm or more in diam-
eter.
Another option is to use a mole mapping chart, such
as that provided by www.my-skincheck.com, to help people
familiarize themselves with their skin and make it easier to
identify any changes. Finally, an easier, albeit more expensive
method for checking a mole, is to use technological advances
such as ‘mole mapping’. Mole mapping is usually based
on total body photography where an overview is taken and
those images of moles that appear to be suspicious and are
taken again at higher magniﬁcation. These images are then
submitted to diagnostic software which assesses the mole and
makes a relative prediction as to whether it is benign or
malignant. This process is educational for patients as they
can be talked through each case and informed about what is
being looked for throughout the procedure by a Dermatologist.
Clinics frequently store any images so that they can be used for
comparison and to identify any changes that may occur over
time. If a mole is diagnosed as being suspicious, a referral
is made to a plastic surgeon for its removal. Mole mapping
does not change the risks of getting skin cancer, but it helps
to detect it earlier. However, it can be expensive as it usually
requires specialist clinics to be established and managed.
Skin cancer is one of the most common forms of cancer and
is particularly common in Caucasians. With rates of malignant
melanoma expected to treble over the next thirty years, it is
important to develop user friendly technologies that can screen
22
INTENSIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Resource Intensive Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-135-9

for this condition. There are two types of skin cancer. Non-
melanoma, which usually occurs in people that spend or have
spent a lot of time working outdoors, and, if caught early,
can be cured and melanomas, or malignant melanoma. This is
the most serious form of skin cancer and, if not detected, can
quickly spread to other parts of the body. It usually appears
as a mole or freckle and thus, can, in principal, be diagnosed
using suitable image analysis of the mole or freckle.
It is often difﬁcult to visually differentiate a normal mole
from abnormal and general practitioners do not usually have
signiﬁcant expertise to diagnose skin cancers. Skin cancer
specialists can improve the identiﬁcation rate by over 80%
but are often severely overloaded by referrals from regional
general practices. It is possible for a general practitioner to
take a high quality digital image of the suspect region on a
patients skin and email the result to a remote diagnosis center.
However, this can also lead to a (remote) overload and it is for
this reason that Moletest has been developed, i.e. in response
to the need for a screening method that can ‘ﬁlter’ benign
melanomas via a general practice or by a user directly.
II. MOLETESTTM
Moletest ([1], [2]) represents a unique healthcare oppor-
tunity for remote skin diagnosis of suspicious moles using
digital images and has the potential to become a world-wide
life-saving product. While there are a range of competitive
technologies available, Moletest is the only system of its
type that can provide accurate reports based solely on the
submission of high ﬁdelity digital images using an Internet
resource. The online facility has been designed speciﬁcally to
combat skin cancer that is predicted to become the fourth most
common cancer for men and for women in the UK alone by
2024.
A. Skin Cancer
Incidence of skin cancer continues to rise. Malignant
Melanoma is often diagnosed late and this delay can be fatal.
Exposure to UV radiation increases the risks of malignant
melanoma development. Patients are advised to report moles
that have changed, grown, bled, itched, and so on to their
doctor or dermatologist. The clinical diagnosis is difﬁcult
and many ‘normal’ moles are removed and some cancerous
ones are not. Skin cancers are extremely common. In 2006
over 81,600 non-melanoma skin cancer, were registered in
the UK and 14,593 in Ireland but registration is known to
be incomplete. It has been estimated that the lifetime risk of
developing malignant melanoma is 1 in 91 for men and 1 in
77 for women in the EU based on statistics on incidences
and mortality data for 2001-2005. In the UK, the number of
conﬁrmed cases is thought to be about 5% of the total number
of patients examined annually. In other words around 2 million
people are examined for skin cancer each year and Figure 1
shows the rising rates of melanoma (past and projected) for
the UK. However, in practice, vastly more are likely to want
to check out a suspect mole without having to visit their GP
if the alternative were relatively cheap and easy to use.
Fig. 1.
Rising rates of melanoma per 100,000 (past and projected) for the
UK (Source: Cancer Research)
People now in their 60s and 70s are more than ﬁve times
more likely to be diagnosed with malignant melanoma than
their parents were. Men of this age in particular are now
seven times more likely to get the disease than they were
in the 1970s. This is blamed on the advent of cheap package
holidays in the 1970s which has led to a ‘generation shift’
in the rates of skin cancer. This generation - who would
have been in their 20s and 30s when cheap package holidays
became popular - now have 36 cases of malignant melanoma
per 100,000 compared with 7 per 100,000 in the mid-1970s.
The extrapolated statistics show the annual European ﬁgure
for skin cancer is around 2,460,000 which represent only 5%
of those asking to be tested giving a potential EU market alone
of 50 million tests per year. These statistics have provided the
focus for the project reported in this paper, i.e. the development
of a generic skin cancer screening system designed for ease
of use, interoperability and remote operation.
B. Technology
The technology used is based entirely on an analysis of
a good quality colour digital image of the area of skin to
be diagnosed [4]. The speciﬁc area of interest is identiﬁed
automatically using a unique object location algorithm. Vari-
ous features are then identiﬁed and measures obtained which
include both conventional Euclidean and fractal geometric
parameters, the letter being used to quantify object texture
and boundary irregularity, for example. A combination of these
parameters is used to generate a ‘feature vector’ which is then
compared with historically equivalent cases where the medical
outcome is known. This involves a continuously evolving
expert system against which the results are tested using a
bespoke Fuzzy Logic decision making engine. The accuracy of
the diagnosis is 90%++ and is due primarily to the application
of fractal geometry for characterizing objects that are innately
textural (as with medical images in general) and are therefore
23
INTENSIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Resource Intensive Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-135-9

not suitable for use in conventional machine vision systems.
The system is entirely unique in that is relies exclusively on
high ﬁdelity optical images thereby providing the basis for an
online system that is cheap, reliable and easy to use.
III. IMAGE ANALYSIS
Details of the approach used to develop the original skin
cancer screening system are given in [5] and [6]. In this
section, we provide a brief overview of the image analysis
that is used for Moletest.
Image analysis involves the use of image processing meth-
ods that are often designed in an attempt to provide a machine
interpretation of an image, ideally, in a form that allows
some decision criterion to be applied [7]. Image analysis for
pattern recognition uses a range of different approaches that
are not necessarily based on any one particular theme or
uniﬁed theoretical approach. The main problem is that, to date,
there is no complete theoretical framework or mathematical
model for simulating the processes that take place when a
human interprets an image generated by the eye, i.e. there is
no fully compatible model, currently available, for explaining
the processes of visual image comprehension. Hence, ma-
chine vision remains a rather elusive subject area in which
automatic inspection systems are advanced without having a
fully operational theoretical framework as a guide. This is
why numerous algorithms for understanding two- and three-
dimensional objects in a digital image have and continue to be
researched in order to design systems that can provide reliable
automatic object detection, recognition and classiﬁcation in an
independent environment, e.g. [8], [9], [10], [11].
In the work reported here, the object is analyzed in terms of
metrics derived from both a Euclidean and fractal geometric
perspective, the output ﬁelds being used to train a fuzzy
inference engine. The approach is unique in that it speciﬁcally
exploits fractal geometry in digital imaging [12] to assess
border and surface irregularity, for example, and Euclidean
geometry to assess shape and asymmetry in terms of area,
perimeter and centre of gravity. Colour component analysis is
also undertaken. In this sense, the image analysis algorithms
developed are based on an extension and quantiﬁcation of the
A-B-C-D guidelines discussed in Section I.
The recognition structure is based on some of the image
processing, analysis and machine vision techniques reported in
[13], for example. The approach considered is generic in that
it can, in principle, be applied to any type of imaging modal-
ity for which there are numerous applications where self-
calibration and learning is often mandatory. Example applica-
tions may include remote sensing, non-destructive evaluation
and testing and other applications which speciﬁcally require
the classiﬁcation of objects that are textural. The system
reported in this paper is, in principle, just one of a number of
variations which can be used for medical image analysis and
classiﬁcation in general. This is because the system includes
features that are based on the textural properties of an image
(deﬁned in terms of fractal geometric parameters including
the Fractal Dimension and Lacunarity) which is an important
theme is medical image analysis.
IV. FEATURE DETECTION AND CLASSIFICATION
Suppose we have an image which is given by a function
f(x, y) and contains some object described by a set of features
S = {s1, s2, ..., sn}. We consider the case when it is necessary
to deﬁne a sample which is somewhat ‘close’ to this object
in terms of a matching set. This task can be reduced to
the construction of some function determining a degree of
proximity of the object to a sample - a template of the
object. Recognition is the process of comparing individual
features against some pre-established template subject to a set
of conditions and tolerances. This process commonly takes
place in four deﬁnable stages:
• image acquisition and ﬁltering (as required for the re-
moval of noise, for example);
• object location (which may include edge detection);
• computation of object parameters;
• object class estimation.
We now consider aspects of each step. In particular, we
consider the design features and their implementation together
with their advantages, disadvantages and proposals for a solu-
tion whose application, in this paper, focuses on the problem of
designing a skin cancer screening system. It is for this reason,
that the examples given to illustrate the steps proposed, are
‘system related’.
The system discussed in this paper is based on an object
detection technique that includes a novel segmentation method
and must be adjusted and ‘ﬁne tuned’ for each area of appli-
cation. This includes those features associated with an object
for which fractal models are well suited [7] and [12]. The
system outputs a decision using a knowledge database which
generates a result (a decision) by subscribing different objects.
The ‘expert data’ in the application ﬁeld creates a knowledge
database by using supervised training with a number of model
objects [14]. The recognition process is based on the following
principal steps:
1) Image Acquisition and Filtering.
A physical object is digitally imaged and the data trans-
ferred to memory, e.g. using current image acquisition
hardware available commercially. The image is (Wiener)
ﬁltered to reduce noise and to remove unnecessary
features such as light ﬂecks.
2) Special Transform: Edge Detection.
The digital image fm,n is transformed into ˜fm,n to
identify regions of interest and provide an input dataset
for segmentation and feature detection operations [15].
This transform is based on an edge detection ﬁlter
designed speciﬁcally for the application considered [5].
3) Segmentation.
The image fm,n is segmented into individual objects
{f 1
m,n}, {f 2
m,n}, . . . to perform a separate analysis of
each region. This step includes such operations as
thresholding, morphological analysis and edge detection.
24
INTENSIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Resource Intensive Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-135-9

4) Feature Detection.
Feature vectors {x1
k}, {x2
k}, . . . are computed from the
object images {f 1
m,n}, {f 2
m,n}, . . . and corresponding
transformed images { ˜f 1
m,n}, { ˜f 2
m,n}, . . . . The features
are numerical parameters that characterize the object
inclusive of its texture. The feature vectors computed
consist of a number of Euclidean and fractal geometric
parameters together with statistical measures in both
one- and two-dimensions. The one-dimensional features
correspond to the border of an object whereas the two-
dimensional features relate to the surface within and/or
around the object.
5) Decision Making.
This involves assigning a probability to a predeﬁned
set of classes [16]. Probability theory and fuzzy logic
[17] are applied to estimate the class probability vec-
tors {p1
j}, {p2
j}, . . .
from the object feature vectors
{x1
k}, {x2
k}, . . . . A fundamental problem has been to
establish a quantitative relationship between features and
class probabilities, i.e.
{pj} ↔ {xk}
where ↔ denotes a transformation from class probability
to feature vector space. A ‘decision’ is the estimated
class of the object coupled with the probabilistic accu-
racy [18].
The approach reported in this paper uses a number of
new algorithms that have been designed to solve problems
associated with the above steps, details of which lie beyond
the scope of this publication but are available in
[5] and
[6]. For example, two new morphological algorithms for
object segmentation have been considered which include auto-
threshold selection. One of these algorithms - a contour tracing
algorithm - extracts parameters associated with the spatial
distribution of an object’s border. This algorithm is also
deployed in the role of feature detection.
With regard to the decision making engine, the approach
considered is based on establishing an expert learning proce-
dure in which a Knowledge Data Base (KDB) is constructed
using answers that an expert makes during normal manual
work. Once the KDB has been developed, the system is ready
for application in the ﬁeld and provides results automatically.
However, the accuracy and robustness of the output depends
critically on the extent and completeness of the KDB as well
as on the quality of the input image, primarily in terms of
its compatibility with those images that have been used to
generate the KDB.
V. APPLICATION TO SKIN CANCER SCREENING
A demonstration version of the system is available online
at http://eleceng.dit.ie/arg/downloads/SCSS.zip which includes
information on the system and an instruction manual. Instal-
lation is initiated through setup.exe from the root folder
in which the downloaded application has been placed (after
unzipping the downloaded the ﬁle setup.zip).
The system developed has been designed for use with a
standard PC with input from a good quality digital camera us-
ing Commercial-Off-The-Shelf (COTS) hardware. It analyses
the structure of a mole or other skin ‘defects’, detects cancer-
identifying features, makes a decision using a knowledge
database and outputs a result. Dermatologists create a KDB
by training the system using a number of case-study images.
This produces a KDB which ‘improves’ with the use of the
system.
The current system is composed of the following basic
steps:
1) Filtering
The image is Wiener ﬁltered [7] to reduce noise and
remove unnecessary and obtrusive features such as light
ﬂecks.
2) Segmentation
The image is segmented to perform a separate analysis
of each object (moles and/or other skin features). Two
segmentation modes are available:
• Automatic Mode
The software identiﬁes a mole as the largest and
darkest object in the image. This mode is applicable
in most cases.
• Manual Mode
The area of interest is manually selected by the user.
This is most useful in cases when multiple moles
and/or foreign objects are present in the image with
possible overlapping features, for example.
3) Feature Detection
For each object, a set of recognition features are com-
puted. The features are numeric parameters deﬁned in
[5] and [6] that describe the object in terms of a variety
of Euclidean and fractal geometric parameters, colour
components and statistical metrics in one- and two-
dimensions. The one-dimensional features correspond to
the border of a mole and the two-dimensional features
relate to the surface within the object boundary. In
addition, a recognition algorithm is used to analyse the
mole structure as illustrated in Figure 2. This provides
information on the possible growth of the object when
an inspection is undertaken over a period of time.
4) Decision Making
The system uses fuzzy logic to combine features into
a decision. A decision is the estimated class of the
object and its accuracy. In the system available at
http://eleceng.dit.ie/arg/downloads/SCSS.zip, the output
is designed to give two classes: normal and abnormal.
This provides the simplest output with regard to the use
of the system in a general practice, for example, in which
abnormal cases are immediately referred to a specialist.
A. Key Advantages
The technology delivers high accuracy and automation
which has been made possible by the following innovations:
Fractal geometric analysis:
Biological structures (such as body tissues) have
25
INTENSIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Resource Intensive Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-135-9

Fig. 2.
Analysis of the structure of a mole for comparative growth analysis.
natural fractal properties. Numerical measurements
of these properties, enables efﬁcient and effective
detection of abnormalities.
Extended set of detectable features:
High accuracy is achieved when multiple features are
measured together and combined into a single result.
Advanced fuzzy logic engine:
The knowledge-based recognition scheme used en-
ables highly accurate diagnosis and offers signiﬁcant
improvements over current diagnostic methods.
B. Knowledge Database
The knowledge-based required by the system requires ex-
tensive training before clinical operation. The training process
includes a review and probabilistic classiﬁcation of appropriate
images by experts. The minimal number of training images
depends on the number of classes and the diversity of objects
within each class. An example of the output generated by the
system is given in Figure 3 which provides a decision as to
whether the object is ‘normal’ or ‘abnormal’ together with an
estimate of the associated precision.
C. Comparison with Other Approaches
There are a number of commercially available products
which offer a range of aids and tools for skin cancer detection.
Some of them use an extensive database to estimate the
pathology and may require a relatively signiﬁcant amount
of time to make a decision. Other products calculate several
properties and represent them graphically. Medical staff are
then used to make a ﬁnal decision. More interesting tech-
niques involve the capture of images using different sen-
sors or a multiplicity of different images. However, these
systems are as yet, not approved for clinical diagnosis and
are not a referenced form of Dermatoscopy. The following
list provides some of the more common products currently
available: (i) MoleMAX - http://www.molechecks.com.au; (ii)
Fig. 3.
Example of the ouput generated by the skin cancer screen system.
DermLite - http://www.dermlite.com/mmfoto.html; (iii) Der-
moGenius Lite - http://www.dermogenius.de; (iv) MelaFind
- www.melaﬁnd.com. Comparing these products with the
methods developed for the Moletest system, it is clear that
there are no other automatic recognition systems with self-
adjusting procedures and self-controlled functions.
D. Discussion
The methods discussed in the previous sections represent
a novel approach to designing an object recognition system
that is robust in classifying textured features, the application
considered in this paper, having required a symbiosis of the
parametric representation of an object and its geometrical
invariant properties. In comparison with existing methods, the
approach adopted and reported in this paper has the following
advantages:
Speed of operation. The approach uses a limited but effec-
tive parameter set (feature vector) associated with an object
instead of a representation using a large set of values (pixel
values, for example). This provides a considerably higher oper-
ational speed in comparison with existing schemes, especially
with composite tasks, where the large majority of methods
require object separation. The principal computational effort
is that associated with the computation of the features deﬁned
in Section IV.
Accuracy. The methods constructed for the analysis of
sets of geometrical primitives are, in general, more precise.
Because the parameters are feature values, which are not
connected to an orthogonal grid, it is possible to design
different transformations (shifts, rotational displacements and
scaling) without any signiﬁcant loss of accuracy compared
with a set of pixels, for example. On the other hand, the overall
accuracy of the method is directly inﬂuenced by the accuracy
of the procedure used to extract the required geometrical
tags. In general, the accuracy of the method will always be
lower, than, for example, classical correlative techniques. This
is primarily due to padding, when errors can occur during
the extraction of a parameter set. However, by using precise
26
INTENSIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Resource Intensive Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-135-9

parameterization structures based on the features deﬁned in
Section IV, remarkably good results are obtained.
Reliability. The proposed approach relies ﬁrst and foremost
on the reliability of the extraction procedure used to establish
the geometrical and parametric properties of objects, which,
in turn, depends on the quality of the image; principally, in
terms of the quality of the contours. It should be noted that
the image quality is a common problem in any vision system
and that in conditions of poor visibility and/or resolution, all
vision systems will fail. In other words, the reliability of the
system is fundamentally dependent on the quality of the input
data.
Among the characteristic disadvantages of the approach, it
should be noted that: (i) The method requires a considerable
number of different calculations to be performed and appro-
priate hardware requirements are therefore mandatory in the
development of a real time system; (ii) the accuracy of the
method is intimately connected with the required computing
speed - an increase in accuracy can be achieved but may be
incompatible with acceptable computing costs. In general, it
is often difﬁcult to acquire a template of samples under real
life or ﬁeld trial conditions which have a uniform distribution
of membership functions. If a large number of training objects
are non-uniformly distributed, it is, in general, not possible to
generate accurate results.
VI. WEBSITE DEVELOPMENT
The reader is referred to the Moletest website available at
http://www.moletestuk.com which was developed by Digital
Trip Limited http://www.digital-trip.co.uk/ starting in early
2010. Figure 4 shows the Home Page of the website which
includes contact details, information, instructions and prices
etc. The user is required to register on-line and upload a good
Fig. 4.
Home Page of Moletest Website http://www.moletestuk.com
quality colour image of the mole which can be pre-processed
as required to the speciﬁcations of the example images that
are provided as a user guide. In principle, all customers need
to do is upload a 5MP image or better of the suspect mole
to Moletest’s website - an image of this quality can even
be taken on some mobile phones - pay a fee and wait for
their results, which they will normally get within 24 hours.
The online service uses an easy-to-understand ‘trafﬁc light’
approach to screening for non-melanoma and melanoma skin
cancer. Green denotes a ‘normal’ lesion, amber ‘borderline’
and red a possible ‘cancerous melanoma’. The results are
based on using a 42 element feature vector to train a fuzzy
inference engine using both Euclidean and fractal parameters
as discussed in [5] and [6] and illustrated in Figure 5
Fig. 5.
Decision making engine based on Fuzzy Sets for 42 Features
composed of both Euclidian and fractal geometric parameters.
The system - which is supervised and audited by a panel
of advisory dermatologists - evaluates the customer’s image
against a knowledge database of known results to see if there
are any characteristics consistent with previous cases of cancer
using the classiﬁcation scheme outlined in Section IV and
discussed further in Section V. The system continues to ‘learn’
by comparing its ﬁndings with later clinical diagnoses of der-
matologists following biopsies and other examinations, using
these comparisons to inform future analyses. It is envisaged
that the new Moletest service will have the dual beneﬁts of
increasing the early detection of non-malignant and malignant
melanoma (one of the most deadly cancers if not detected
early), whilst potentially saving vast amounts of time spent
within GP surgeries assessing healthy patients that could have
otherwise been screened by Moletest.
The website has been developed in collaboration with a
team of leading Dermatologist’s headed by Professor R Cerio
at The London Cancer Centre. This includes monitoring the
images submitted to evaluate the output of the expert system
and to train the system further. Figure 6 shows the 2010/2011
timetable for handing over to the ‘expert system’ after which
routine monitoring of the decisions obtained are undertaken
by a Dermatologist.
Since the lunch of the service in September 2010, the growth
of the system has been quasi linear. Figure 7, Figure 8 and
Figure 9 provide example statistics on usage of the Moletest
website from launch to 1 November 2010.
VII. WEBSITE LAUNCH
The launch of Moletest was undertaken be de Facto Com-
munications Limited http://www.defacto.com/ which special-
ize in integrated PR and communications for healthcare com-
27
INTENSIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Resource Intensive Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-135-9

Fig. 6.
Time-table for ‘hand-over’ to Moletest’s image analysis system.
Fig. 7.
Statistics associated with Exit Points
Fig. 8.
Statistics associated with Searches.
Fig. 9.
Statistics of Links.
panies and their products and services in ﬁelds ranging from
pharmaceuticals and diagnostics to medical devices and IT.
The launch of the service included the development of tech-
nical and consumer based video series for youtube, examples
of which are available at [19], [20] and [21]. The launch also
included a series of interviews and press coverage, e.g. [22],
[23], [24], [25] and [26].
In terms of developing an intensive application and service,
one of the principal issues in operating the service has been
to develop an image suitability test which assesses whether or
not the quality of the image uploaded by a user is suitable for
submission to the image analysis and decision making engine.
This test has been developed since the launch of the service
as experience has been gained with the type and quality of
images submitted and has been undertaken in parallel with
changes to the instructions given to the user with regard to
the importance of uploading good quality images. The image
suitability test includes checks on:
• contrast and brightness;
• image resolution;
• object completeness;
• noise.
The system automatically responds to a user if the image they
submit is not suitable, requesting that a better quality images
is uploaded based on one or more of the four classiﬁcations
given above and directing the user to the examples given on
the website.
VIII. CONCLUSION
Moletest is based on a methodology for implementing
applications that is concerned with two key tasks:
• the partial analysis of an image in terms of its fractal
structure and the fractal properties that characterize that
structure;
• the use of a fuzzy logic engine to classify an object based
on both its Euclidean and fractal geometric properties.
The combination of these two aspects has been used to
deﬁne a processing and image analysis engine that is unique
28
INTENSIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Resource Intensive Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-135-9

in its modus operandi but entirely generic in terms of the
applications to which it can be applied.
The image analysis technology developed for Moletest is
part of a wider investigation into the numerous applications
of pattern recognition using fractal geometry as a central pro-
cessing kernel. This includes the design of pattern recognition
algorithms including the computation of parameters in addition
to those that have been used to develop Moletest such as
the information dimension, correlation dimension and multi-
fractals [12]. The inclusion or otherwise of such parameters
in terms of improving systems such as Moletest remains to
be understood. However, it is clear that texture based analysis
alone is not sufﬁcient in order to design a recognition and
classiﬁcation system. Both Euclidean and fractal parameters
(as well as other metrics relating to colour composites) need
to be combined into a feature vector in order to develop an
operational image analysis system which includes objects that
have textural properties such as those associated with medical
imaging and in the case of Moletest, Tele-Dermatology.
The overall response to Moletest has, to date, been positive.
This includes comments such as the following made by Prof
Rino Cerio, Consultant Dermatologist and a Professor in
Dermatopathology, and a member of Moletest’s professional
advisory panel [2]: The incidence of malignant melanoma
has quadrupled over the last 30 years, due to the advent of
cheap air travel to locations of greater ultra violet sunlight
exposure and patients’ failing to get moles checked until it
is far too late. Although a rare form of cancer, melanoma,
accounts for over 75% of skin cancer deaths - most of which
could have been avoided with early detection. With skin cancer
rates increasing, Moletest could potentially screen hundreds
of thousands of cases of benign and safe moles away from
GP surgeries - leaving the NHS to concentrate on higher risk
patients. Any advances in screening or testing procedures that
complements existing detection services should be welcomed
by the medical community.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Professor J M Blackledge is supported by the Science
Foundation Ireland and Dr D Dubovitski is supported by
Moletest UK Limited. Both authors are grateful to Dublin
Institute of Technology for its continuing support and to the
Institute’s ‘Hothouse’ for its support with regard to Licensing
the Technology and undertaking the arrangements associated
with the commercialization of the technology leading to the
lauch of Moletest in 2010.
REFERENCES
[1] Moletest Limited
http://www.moletestuk.com
[2] Moletest Wikipedia
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moletest
[3] Global Telemedicine Market, Technocal Report 2008-1012, TechNavio
Insights.
http://www.docstoc.com/docs/64935061/
Global-Telemedicine-Market-2008-2012
[4] Hothouse Technologies to License in ICT, http://www.dit.ie/hothouse/
media/dithothouse/techtolicensepdf/CancerFinal.pdf
[5] J. M. Blackledge and D. A. Dubovitski, Object Detection and Classiﬁ-
cation with Applications to Skin Cancer Screening, ISAST Transactions
on Intelligent Systems, Vol. 1, No 1, 34-45, 2008
[6] J. M. Blackledge and D. A. Dubovitski, Object Detection and Texture
Classiﬁcation with Applications to the Diagnosis of Skin Cancer, Proc.
of EU Theory and Practice of Computer Graphics, Vol. 20, No. 1, 41-48,
Cardiff University, 16-19 June, 2009
[7] J. M. Blackledge, Digital Image Processing, Horwood Sciemntiﬁc
Publishing, 2005.
[8] E. R. Davies, Machine Vision: Theory, Algorithms, Practicalities, Aca-
demic Press, 1997
[9] , H. Freeman, Machine vision. Algorithms, Architectures, and Systems,
Academic Press, 1988.
[10] J. Louis and J. Galbiati, Machine Vision and Digital Image Processing
Fundamentals, State University of New York, 1990
[11] W. E. Snyder and H. Qi, Machine Vision, Cambridge University Press,
2004
[12] M. J. Turner, J. M. Blackledge and P. A. Andrews, Fractal Geometry in
Digital Imaging, Academic Press, 1998.
[13] M. Sonka, V. Hlavac and R. Boyle, Image Processing, Analysis and
Machine Vision, PWS, 1999
[14] L. A. Zadeh, Fuzzy sets and their applications to cognitive and decision
processes, Academic Press, 1975
[15] V. S. Nalwa and T. O. Binford, On Detecting Edges, IEEE Trans. Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, PAMI-8, 699-714, 1986
[16] N. Vadiee, Fuzzy Rule Based Expert System-I, Prentice Hall, 1993
[17] E. H. Mamdani, Advances in Linguistic Synthesis of Fuzzy Controllers,
Journal of Man and Machine, Vol. 8, 669-678, 1976
[18] E. Sanchez, Resolution of Composite Fuzzy Relation Equations, Inf.
Control, Vol. 30, 38-48, 1976
[19] Moletest technology and step-by-step guide on how to use the service,
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cs043K4HD6A
[20] Prof Rino Cerio on the risks of melanoma and moles, http://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=n v E1eXgXA
[21] Prof Rino Cerio explains to worried patients how to check ‘suspect’
moles, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vrGEopBa 0k
[22] Interview with Professor Blackledge by the Irish Times, http://www.
irishtimes.com/newspaper/innovation/2010/0924/1224279237912.html
[23] D. Rose, Website can ‘Detect Skin Cancer from a Photograph of
a Mole, http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/public/sitesearch.do?querystring=
moletest&p=tto&pf=all
[24] A £40 home test which could help combat skin cancer,
http://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article-1314448/
A-40-home-test-help-combat-skin-cancer.html
[25] S. Wagner, Software-based service could identify cancerous moles,
http://www.theengineer.co.uk/news/software-based-service-could-
identify- cacerous-moles/1005107.article
[26] High-tech mole test to identify the most life-threatening types of skin
cancers,
http://www.microsoft.com/uk/nhs/content/articles/
high-tech-mole-test-to-identify-the-most-life-threatening-types-of-skin.
aspx
29
INTENSIVE 2011 : The Third International Conference on Resource Intensive Applications and Services
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-135-9

