On the Study of Internet Ossification and Solution  
Lin Han, Richard Li 
Futurewei Technologies, Inc. 
Santa Clara, California, U.S.A 
email: {lin.han, richard.li}@futurewei.com
 
Abstract— The current Internet is based on IPv4 and IPv6. 
It has been in service for many years and is very successful. 
However, it is facing challenges in protocol ossification, security, 
and service quality. Recently, the geographical tension, trading 
confrontation, the regulation for data protection and 
localization have raised decentralization requirements for the 
Internet. This paper analyses the factors for the Internet 
ossification and proposes a new architecture that is distributed 
based on region or country. It can maintain the support of the 
current IPv4/IPv6, and provide more flexibility for the protocol, 
thus mitigating the ossification of the Internet. 
Keywords- Future Internet; Ossification; Decentralization; 
Distributed; Internet Protocol. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The Internet has penetrated everywhere in our life and has 
provided tremendous momentum to the development and 
progress in communication, technology, culture, and 
economy. The current Internet is based on IPv4 [1] and IPv6 
[2] protocols, and consists of many other protocols for 
different areas, such as address assignment, domain name 
service, routing and switching, security, transport. All these 
protocols are governed by the Internet Engineering Task 
Force (IETF). In the document thereafter, the name IP 
represents both IPv4 and IPv6. 
However, the Internet’s deficiency and ossification are 
also noticed. This includes slow evolution, protocol 
ossification, resource allocation unfairness, security and 
privacy concerns. 
The paper briefs our research on a new architecture for the 
Internet and associated protocol structures. It can provide 
extra flexibility for the Internet while maintaining the current 
IP based technologies and services. Internet ossification can 
be mitigated by a new architecture including distributed 
Internet resource management and domain name service, free 
choice of address type, and heterogeneous communications. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section II, 
we present an overview of the Internet architecture and 
protocols. Section III discusses the Internet ossification and 
analyzes the root causes. The technical factors are analyzed in 
Section IV. Our new network protocol is proposed in Section 
V. Section VI presents the detailed architecture with the new 
network  protocol. The compatibility issues are discussed in 
Section VII. Section VIII summarizes the benefits of the new 
proposal. Section IX concludes the paper and gives further 
research directions.  
II. 
OVERVIEW OF THE INTERNET 
The Internet is the global system of interconnected 
computer networks that uses the Internet protocol suite to 
communicate between networks and devices [3]. Recently, 
with the growth of 5G [4], Internet of Things (IOT) [5], Non-
Terrestrial-Network (NTN) integration [6], the Internet has 
become the communication infrastructure that almost every 
person, every device and everything can be connected to. The 
Internet scope is very broad and has a couple of key 
fundamental blocks: 
• The definition of IP address, the mechanism to allocate 
and assign the IP addresses. There are two types of IP 
addresses, one in IPv4 and another is IPv6. Currently, IPv4 
is in the process of becoming obsolete from the 
perspective of IETF, and IPv6 is the only supported 
address. The IP address (except the local address and non-
routed address) is globally significant and unique in the 
world. It is allocated by the Internet Assigned Numbers 
Authority (IANA) [7] to each region and country. There 
are five Regional Internet Registries (RIRs). Each RIR has 
a couple of Local Internet Registries (LIRs) or National 
Internet Registries (NIRs). They are responsible for the 
allocation of the IP addresses block on their authorized 
areas. Figure 1 and Figure 2 show the hierarchical 
architecture of IANA. 
 
Figure 1.  The hierachy of IANA architecture. 
 
Figure 2.  Understanding address management hierarchy [25]. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
INTERNET 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Evolving Internet

• The definition of Asynchronous System Number (ASN) 
[8], and the mechanism to assign ASN. ASN is used for 
Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) [9] to represent 
autonomous systems across the Internet. Similar to the IP 
address, the public ASN is also globally significant. It is 
managed by IANA. ASN is key to BGP, which is the 
critical protocol for the inter-connection and inter-working 
of different networks distributed globally. BGP will 
exchange the global IP address of different networks, thus 
making every global IP address reachable from anywhere 
around the world. 
• The definition of Domain Name, the mechanism to 
manage Domain Name Servers and provide the Domain 
Name System (DNS) [10] Service. Similar to the IP 
address, the Domain Name is also globally significant. 
The DNS root zone management [11] and DNS root 
servers [12] are managed by IANA as well. Domain Name 
and Domain Name Servers are distributed globally. There 
are thirteen DNS root servers located in the U.S.A. 
Different leaf servers belonging to different regions and 
countries are deployed globally. In addition to this, some 
countries may have mirror root servers in their own region 
to back up the root server and speed up the DNS services. 
• The protocols to control the Internet. The fundamental 
protocols are IPv4, IPv6 and many other protocols on top 
of IPv4 and IPv6. Excluding protocols on L2 that are 
controlled by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers 
(IEEE) 
and 
the 
International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU), the protocols for 
Internet include layers from L3 to L7 that are controlled 
by IETF. There are thousands of protocols related 
standards that are called RFC (Request for Comments) 
documents, e.g., more than 500 RFC for IPv6 has been 
published. Below just lists a very small portion of RFCs 
and very typical protocols: 
1. Host configuration related protocols (ND [13], 
DHCPv6 [14], etc.) 
2. L3 or routing protocols (BGP, IS-IS [15], OSPF 
[16], etc.),  
3. Traffic Engineering (MPLS [17], RSVP-TE [18], 
SRv6 [19], etc.) 
4. L4 or transport protocols (TCP [20], UDP [21], 
etc.),  
5. Upper layer protocols (QUIC [22], TLS [23], 
HTTP [24], etc.),  
III. 
INTERNET OSSIFICATION 
The Internet was essentially designed with simplicity and 
scalability. [26] has detailed an analysis of how this is 
achieved and lists the important timeline for Internet 
evolution. After the Internet has become available to the 
public in the 1990s, it experienced more than 40 years of 
development of technology. Gradually, the evolution of the 
Internet became slower and slower. There are less and less 
new technologies and services coming up for the Internet, 
especially for the parts of infrastructure and fundamentals. 
The structure of the Internet has become more rigid and 
difficult to change over time, and this sometime is called 
Internet ossification. For example, IPv6 was designed to 
replace IPv4, but this has not been accomplished since the first 
IPv6 standard RFC 2460 [27] was introduced in 1998. Even 
right now, there are still arguments that IPv4 should not be 
obsoleted [28], and the adoption of IPv6 at the level of Service 
Providers is still slow. 
There are some research works that proposed a new or 
enhanced architecture for the Internet, such as RINA [29], 
SCION [30], New IP [31], IPv10 [32], and Extensible Internet 
(EI) [33][34]. Detailed analysis and comparison of the 
proposals of RINA, SCION and New IP can be found in [35]. 
IPv10 is to allow the communication between IPv6 and IPv4. 
EI introduces Layer 3.5 between L3 and L4 to provide 
services that were not available in the current Internet 
architecture. 
Two categories of factors associated with management 
and technical solutions can contribute to Internet ossification: 
• Consensus challenges:  
The Internet is a huge global network. Many technical 
definitions, solutions, and changes are globally significant. 
Any decisions or changes about its development, 
operation and deployment involve a wide range of 
stakeholders, including governments, organizations, 
operators, and individual users. Reaching consensus on 
changes can be very difficult and slow, especially when 
there are competing interests or different priorities. As a 
comparison in the standardization in wireless area, 3GPP 
has finished the 5G (the fifth generations of wireless 
technology) in almost the same period that IETF has not 
completed the IPv4 to IPv6 transition. 
• Technical solutions:  
Due to the vast number of users, devices and applications, 
the Internet has accumulated many technical feedbacks 
and problem reports. Completely fixing those problems or 
enhancing the existing solutions are always slow. Some 
quick fixes are implemented in the short term but may 
need to be addressed or replaced later on. The slow global 
consensus on any problem fixing, new enhancements or 
features, can make it more difficult to change any piece of 
the Internet's infrastructure. The Internet is a complex 
system 
that 
involves 
many 
different 
networks, 
technologies, and standards. How to drive the Internet 
moving forward but maintain the previous investment is 
not only a business objective but also a technical 
challenge. Ensuring compatibility between these different 
elements can be difficult, and changes to one part of the 
system may have unintended consequences elsewhere. 
Due to this reason, people are always conservative and 
hesitate to adopt new technologies.  
Overall, Internet ossification has made it more difficult to 
adopt new technologies and hinders the Internet's ability to 
continue evolving and progressing. 
IV. 
DESIGN FACTORS FOR INTERNET OSSIFICATION 
Even there are many factors, technical or non-technical, 
contributing to the Internet ossification. We think some short-
term design of the Internet has made the Internet less flexible 
at the beginning, thus is one of the most important factors we 
need to consider when thinking about the future architecture. 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
INTERNET 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Evolving Internet

The following are some technical perspectives that contribute 
to the Internet ossification. 
• The Internet resources (IP address, ASN and Domain 
Name) assignment and management are essentially a 
centralized hierarchical architecture. The problem of this 
centralized architecture is that (1) IANA and Regional 
Internet Registries are both non-profit organizations that 
do not have any jurisdiction. (2) The Internet resources are 
hardly allocated fairly, for example, the IPv4 address 
block is not enough in some countries but more than 
required in other countries. (3) Address preference is not 
the same in different regions, countries, operators, users, 
and applications. For example, IPv4 is still preferred by 
many service providers. That is one reason why IPv6 
deployment is so slow. (4) A centralized architecture 
makes the Internet fragile when the geopolitical tensions 
are high. In the recent events of war and trading 
confrontation, some voices to stop the Internet service to a 
specific area have been heard and have put a threat on the 
integration of the Internet. 
• Since IP address is globally significant, it requires that all 
end-user devices and network devices use IP as unique 
format for the data packet header. All L3 devices should 
follow the same principle to process IP packets and 
provide the services to the upper layer. This design is 
called “narrow waist”. Obviously, it has benefits in 
simplicity and scalability, but it becomes one factor 
contributing to the Internet ossification, since any changes 
in the IP header will have a global impact and it will be 
hard to get consensus in IETF. 
• From the IP packet forwarding perspective, the IP based 
Internet is flat. All Internet packets are forwarded based on 
IP address lookup; thus, all globally reachable IP 
addresses must be stored in every network device (even in 
MPLS network, the Provider Edge Routers also must store 
all reachable IP prefixes). This can result in two problems: 
(1) a huge amount of IP addresses or prefixes storage leads 
to huge lookup table size. (2) BGP, the only protocol to 
exchange the global IP reachability between different 
networks in different regions or countries, must process 
huge numbers of global IP prefixes.  
V. 
CONSIDERATION OF NETWORK LAYER 
From the analysis in Section IV, we can see one of the 
major factors for Internet ossification is the IP design is too 
rigid. Such rigid design was partially because the hardware or 
semiconductor performance was limited in the 80s and 90s in 
the last century. To achieve the line rate of packet processing, 
it is hard to give too many flexibilities in the address and 
functions in the packet header, e.g., the address type and size, 
the extensions, and options. After many years’ development, 
the semiconductor industry has progressed a lot. Recently, 
high-performance chips with programmability have been 
commercialized. It is time to think about what we can do from 
a technical perspective that can mitigate the Internet 
ossification. 
As a global data communication network, the Internet is 
supposed to be only responsible for the inter-connection 
between different networks in the world. The networks could 
be for enterprises, Internet Service Providers (ISPs), a country 
or a region. Let us compare the similar situation in the phone 
network and the mail system. For those two global 
communication systems, there is no restriction on how to 
define a local phone number, and local address format. The 
international community only needs to get consensus on the 
country code for international calls, or the country names for 
global mail delivery. Each country will manage and design its 
own structure of phone numbers, mail addressing system and 
delivery infrastructure. Similarly, we can have a high level of 
design principles for the Internet in the future: 
• The Internet should have more democracy and freedom, 
less restrictions and centralization. 
• The Internet should be distributed globally based on 
region or country. All regions are equal and there is no 
central control. No region can impact other’s decision in 
address selection, peering and service.  
• Small countries can decide to form a region if the countries 
do not want to be independent in Internet resource and 
DNS management due to economic or other constraints.  
• Each region has the freedom and authorization to manage 
the Internet resources used locally, such as address 
selection, address allocation, ASN allocation, domain 
name registration, DNS root server, etc. 
• The Internet should support heterogeneous address types 
and communications. 
By using such a principle, we can design a new network 
protocol packet header for the Internet, as shown in Figure 3.  
The following packet format is preliminary and only for 
illustration. A final design will decide the detailed coding. 
This new packet would be on top of Layer 2, thus, a new 
EtherType assignment from IANA is required.  
 
Figure 3.  New Internet protocol packet header. 
 
Figure 4.  The Region Code Example. 
• Declaration: This field defines the basic information about 
the packet, it may contain the following essential 
information:  
1. HL: Hop limit. This value is decremented by one at 
each forwarding node and the packet is discarded if 
it becomes 0 (except on the last node). 
2. Prot: The protocol number for payload. It could be 
a protocol number defined currently by IANA, e.g., 
IPv4 or IPv6, TCP or UDP, or a new protocol 
number defined in the future.  
3. Len: Total length of the packet including the Pay 
Load. The unit can be defined in standardization. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
INTERNET 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Evolving Internet

4. Other definitions: other definitions for the packet 
header will be defined later. 
• Regional codes: This field may contain the “Src (Source) 
Region Code” and “Dst (Destination) Region Code” for 
source and destination. The size, code structure and 
detailed coding should be standardized by an international 
organization. It could contain a region or country code that 
was defined by ITU E.164 [36] and has its own hierarchy, 
e.g., region, sub-region, and more granular definitions. See 
Figure 4 as an example. Only the 8-bit “Region Code” 
needs to be standardized by an international organization. 
The “Sub-region code” will be managed locally in the 
region. 
• Service: This field contains information about the service 
and is to be defined. Its length is variable. 
• Payload: This part contains the payload whose type is 
specified by the protocol number defined in Declaration. 
The Payload could be IP type or any other types for L2 to 
L4. 
VI. 
ARCHITECTURE FOR INTERNET BASED ON NEW 
PROTOCOL 
A. Internet Resource Management 
The Internet resources will include region code, IP address 
space or other type of address space, ASN, and protocol 
number. The management of those resource is based on the 
following rules: 
International organization managed items: 
• The Region code structure and Region code assignment 
are the responsibility of an international organization, ITU 
or IANA. 
• For the protocols that the interconnection between 
different regions or countries are supported, e.g., the new 
protocol defined by this paper (new EtherType), IPv4, 
IPv6, Ethernet, MPLS, etc., the protocol numbers are still 
managed by the international organization IANA. 
Regional authority managed items: 
• Each region or country will be responsible for the sub-
region code assignment and management. 
• Each region or country will be responsible for the 
IPv4/IPv6 address and ASN number allocation and 
management for its own jurisdiction area. Different 
regions or countries may have different policies and 
schemes to manage the resource. 
• Each region or country can use the whole IPv4/IPv6 
address and ASN space. All addresses only have local 
significance in the region or country, thus different regions 
or countries may have the same address.  
• Each region or country can define new protocol numbers 
that are only used locally within the region or country. 
B. Scope of New Protocol 
The new protocol applies to the Internet connection 
between different regions and countries, as shown in Figure 5. 
It does not restrict communication within the region or 
country. The current IPv4 and IPv6 can still work. A region or 
country can define and run a new version of IP without any 
interruption or interference to the whole Internet. For 
example, IPv10 to support communication between IPv4 and 
IPv6 was proposed in IETF, but was not accepted. With the 
new protocol, one region only needs to get consensus on 
IPv10 in its own sovereignty and then use it within the region.  
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Internet based on new network protocol. 
It is important to note that a region can also use the new 
region-based protocol for communication within its own 
territory (see the communications between sub-regions in 
Region 4 in Figure 5). 
C. Domain Name Service 
The Domain Name Service architecture is similar to the 
current DNS hierarchy architecture. Figure 6 illustrates the 
new DNS architecture and Figure 7 demonstrates a DNS 
request and response crossing different regions or countries. 
The major difference with the current architecture is that the 
current centralized DNS root zone and root servers are 
removed, thus is a distributed architecture. Following are the 
details: 
 
 
Figure 6.  Domain Name System architecture. 
• Each region or country will have its own DNS root server 
and different root servers from different regions or 
countries are fully equal and there is no central control, 
thus the current DNS root zone and root servers are not 
needed.  
• All DNS root servers are connected virtually to form a 
DNS network. The network may run a protocol to 
exchange DNS information for all root servers. This 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
INTERNET 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Evolving Internet

network will overlay on top of either existing IP or the new 
network protocol proposed in this paper. 
• The connection between all DNS root servers is fully 
meshed virtually. Any connection between two servers is 
voluntary and only managed by the two servers’ regions 
or countries. When a new root server for a region or 
country joins the network, it should have agreement and 
then connection with existing root servers.  
•  The “.region” or “.country” domain is the only Top Level 
Domain (TLD) for the region or country. All other domain 
names are lower-level domains.  
• The “.region” or “.country” suffix is needed when the 
DNS requester and real domain name are in a different 
region or country. The suffix can only be omitted when the 
DNS requester and the real domain name are in the same 
region or country.  
• A domain name with a “.region” or “.country” suffix is 
always associated with an address physically located 
within the region or country.  
 
 
Figure 7.  DNS service crossing different regions or countries. 
The DNS service will have some corresponding 
implementation changes with the new architecture. Also, there 
are some regulation or legal issues involved, e.g., a company 
name in a “domain name” in a different region must be 
approved by the local authority. 
Here is an example: An international company xyz has the 
headquarter in the country named “ct1”. Then, the domain 
name “www.xyz.com.ct1” always points to an address 
assigned by the DNS authorization in the country ct1. In 
another country ct2, if there is a branch or service from the 
company xyz, the DNS request of “www.xyz.com” from ct2 
will return an address information found in the name server 
“.com” in the country ct2. If there is no registration for the 
company in ct2, the DNS request of “www.xyz.com” from ct2 
will return null. 
Due to the bonding of a name and IP address in every 
region physically, the new DNS mechanism will make the 
Internet service localization more transparent and easier to be 
compliant with the local regulation or laws. 
D. Communication Between Regions or Countries 
To provide interconnection between different regions or 
countries using the new network protocol, proper control 
plane and data plane must be defined. 
1) Control Plane 
• The border devices connecting different regions need to 
support the new control protocol.  
• The new control protocol will exchange information about 
the interconnected border devices, the associated links, the 
region code, the reachable end-user’s address details, etc. 
• The new control protocol could be a link-state routing 
protocol like IGP, or a path-vector protocol like BGP. 
• The new control protocol must also be running within a 
region or a country to populate the information learnt from 
border devices about the outside interconnected networks 
of other regions or countries, e.g., the links that can reach 
other regions or countries, the associated remote reginal 
code, the remote reachable address associated with the 
regional code, etc. 
2) Data Plane 
• For the egress region, where the traffic is originated from, 
the data packet forwarding is based on the lookup of 
“Region/Country code” at all network devices. See the 
country CT1 in Figure 8. 
• For the ingress region, where the traffic is destinated to, 
the data packet forwarding is based on the lookup of “the 
address of payload” at all network devices. See the country 
CT2 in Figure 8. In the example, the “address of payload” 
is IPv6 address. 
• For the transit region, there are two approaches: one is 
Transparent Mode, another is Tunnel Mode. 
1. For Transparent Mode, the data packet forwarding is 
based on the lookup of “Region/Country code” at all 
network devices in a transit region. See the country CT3 
in Figure 8. 
2. For Tunnel Mode, the data packet forwarding is 
based on the lookup of “Region/Country code” at edge 
network devices in a transit region. Proper packet 
encapsulation (at ingress router) or decapsulation (at 
egress router) are needed. See country CT4 in Figure 8. In 
the example, the IPv4 tunnel is used and IPv4 address 
lookup for the tunnel is done on every network device 
within the region. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Homogeneous communication: Transparent Mode and Tunnel 
Mode (only the essential parts of packet header are shown). 
• For all scenarios, a very small table is needed to store all  
“Region/Country codes” for the communication crossing 
regions. The table lookup will use “exact match”. These 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
INTERNET 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Evolving Internet

two behaviors are different than the IP prefix lookup, 
which needs a huge amount of table to store global IP 
prefixes, and the lookup is the Longest Prefix Match using 
TCAM (Ternary Content-Addressable Memory). 
 
3) Heterogeneous Communication between Regions or 
Countries 
The above discussions are about the homogeneous 
communication between regions or countries, or the address 
type are the same for all end users.  
The new network protocol and architecture can support 
heterogeneous communication worldwide. Heterogeneous 
communications are communications with different types of 
addresses. This is very useful to many applications in security, 
privacy, Internet of Things (IoT), etc. Below are some 
supported 
address 
combinations 
for 
heterogeneous 
communication: 
• Different length of IP for source and destination, e.g., 
IPv10 or other type of IP that the address length is not 32-
bit and 128-bit. 
• Different type of address for source and destination, e.g., 
between Ethernet and IP. 
• No source address, the source address is hidden in the 
application data. 
• Variable length public key as address. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Heterogeneous communication: Transparent Mode and Tunnel 
Mode (only the essential parts of packet header are shown). 
Figure 9 illustrates the data plane for a case where IPv10 
is supported in country CT1 and CT2, and how an IPv4 host 
in CT1 sends data to IPv6 host in CT2. For the IPv10 case, 
both IPv4 and IPv6 addresses are supported, thus the lookup 
of IPv6 in CT2 is obviously supported. We can see that, to 
support IPv10, only communication participants (CT1 and 
CT2) need to have an agreement to support it. This is much 
easier to have a global consensus to support IPv10. 
VII. COMPATIBILITY ISSUES 
The major changes of the Internet based on the proposed 
new network protocol are the Internet resource management, 
the DNS architecture, and the use of the new network 
protocol. 
For the communication or IP service within the same 
region or country, the current IP based Internet service can still 
be used, and there is no compatibility issue. The new Internet 
resource management and new DNS architecture have very 
little impact on the end-user applications and network 
operation, i.e., some provisioning (to the DNS server and 
domain name management) may need to be changed. 
For the communication or IP service crossing different 
regions or countries, the new network protocol needs to be 
used, and it is not compatible with the existing IP, but we can 
maximize the current Internet investment through the detailed 
design of a new network protocol header. 
It is easy to notice that the new network protocol packet 
header is very similar to the IPv4. This is intended to make the 
future design easier to be implemented in IPv4 capable 
hardware. We have two options in the final design of the 
packet header encoding: (1) re-use the IPv4 packet header for 
the new network protocol, or (2) only re-use the 32-bit IPv4 
address space for the region code and redesign other fields in 
the packet header. Since the current IPv4 header has design 
flaws in some areas, such as: (a) The protocol is not extensible 
due to the limited IPv4 option size, (b) The header checksum 
is not required, (c) Fragmentation is not a good design, then, 
we prefer option (2): define the 32-bit source and destination 
region codes and redesign other fields in the packet header. 
With the above design considerations and coupled with the 
redesigned protocol running between regions, by minimal re-
programming, the existing hardware can be easily re-used for 
the future Internet. 
VIII. BENEFITS AND ADVANTAGES OF NEW NETWORK 
PROTOCOL 
A. Benefits 
The proposed new network protocol is only for the 
interconnection between regions and countries. The Internet 
based on the new protocol will have the following benefits: 
• Much less restriction at the protocol for interconnection: 
The new network protocol only defines the regional 
interconnection mechanism that is based on regional codes 
but does not limit the communication address and 
communication mechanism within a region or a country, 
thus reducing the restriction caused by globally uniformed 
IPv6 
header 
for 
global 
network. 
Heterogeneous 
communication support will be easier to achieve between 
interested parties.  
• Minimized changes on the current Internet architecture:  
The current IPv4 and IPv6 protocols and data forwarding 
can still work in a region or country. DNS changes very 
slightly. The architecture of the IP based Internet is kept, 
and the investment is not wasted. 
The control protocol and data forwarding for the 
interconnection between regions and countries can be 
realized based on an extension of existing IP routing 
protocols and IP packet forwarding. It needs minimal 
investment. 
Existing and future IP based applications within a region 
can still run without any feeling that the underlayer 
networking is changed for the interconnection between 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
INTERNET 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Evolving Internet

regions. The application to reach outside of a region just 
needs minor modifications for the address format to 
include the regional codes. 
The routing table size will be dramatically reduced due to 
the fact that routers in a region will only keep the prefix 
defined in the region. All addresses to outside of a region 
can be summarized as regional codes. 
• Independent technology evolution:  
With the new network protocol, the Internet technology 
can evolve in different regions or countries independently. 
It is expected to be much easier and faster than the current 
situation when a global consensus is needed, thus will 
mitigate the Internet ossification a lot. 
• Distributed Internet resource management and DNS:  
The new Internet resource management and DNS are 
distributed and based on sovereignty and jurisdiction, thus 
have no legal obstacles to making the regional Internet 
technologies adaptive to local laws or regulations. It will 
make any security, privacy changes or enforcement much 
easier and faster to implement. 
The new Internet resource management and DNS root 
servers are distributed and fully controlled by a region or 
country. The Internet service of any country will not be 
impacted by other countries. It makes the Internet more 
robust and resilient to any disasters and geopolitical 
interruption. 
The new distributed Internet resource management also 
makes each region or country able to use the whole IP 
address space and ASN space. This will not only eliminate 
the unfairness issues in IP address allocation, but also 
expand the IP address resource for all countries. 
The new architecture and network protocol gives each 
region or country full control and freedom on what type of 
addresses and communications are used for the Internet 
service within the region. This will eliminate the IPv4 to 
IPv6 migration mandates if IPv4 is preferred in a region or 
country. Also, other new types of addresses can be 
invented and adopted locally. 
• Internet integrity is maintained: 
Internet fragmentation [37] is always a concern for new 
technology proposals. From a technical perspective, the 
new proposal does not impede the ability of systems to 
fully interoperate and exchange data packets. The Internet 
functions are consistent as before at all end points. Internet 
interoperability, universal accessibility, the reusability of 
capabilities, and permissionless innovation are all not 
impacted. While the data protection and localization from 
many regional regulations can be naturally satisfied by the 
architecture, more freedom in addressing can provide 
more possibilities for new technologies in security and 
privacy. 
B. Advantages 
 
 
Comparing with the existing proposals, RINA, SCION, 
New IP, IPv10 and EI, the new proposal has the following 
advantages: 
• Unlike RINA and SCION, the new proposal is not a clean 
slate solution. It can keep the current IP based Internet 
service in a region or a country unchanged. It only impacts 
the interconnection between regions and countries. 
Considering most of Internet traffic is local and 
international traffic crossing borders of countries is 
relatively small, the impact to the current Internet service 
is limited. Additionally, for the impacted interconnections 
between regions, a proper migration strategy can be 
developed to upgrade inter-links individually to the new 
protocol and minimize the service interruption. 
• The new protocol is orthogonal to other variations of IP, 
like New IP, IPv10 and EI. It can make those technologies 
easier to be adopted locally without global consensus and 
impacts.  
IX. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper has proposed a new network protocol and 
architecture that can provide more flexibility and mitigate 
Internet ossification. The new architecture is distributed 
without any central control, thus making the Internet more 
robust and resilient to geopolitical interruption. It can also 
expand the usable Internet resources for each region and 
country. Meanwhile, the new proposal can keep the current IP 
based Internet in regions, thus it can minimize the impact on 
the Internet and maximize the old investments. 
Further work is needed for detailed solutions in every area 
where new technologies or protocol redesigns are required, 
such as a protocol for distributed DNS, the control protocols 
and forwarding engine for interconnection between regions, 
upgrading and migration approaches, etc. 
It must be noted that the purpose of this paper is to analyze 
the Internet ossification and possible solutions for future 
Internet. It is expected that any solution including the proposal 
in this paper will face a lot of questioning, challenges, and 
objections. But it is believed that doing something will be 
better than doing nothing. As the most important invention of 
human beings, the Internet can only be pushed forward after 
all interested parties join the work and contribute the ideas. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  “Internet Protocol,” RFC 791, Internet Engineering Task 
Force, Sept. 1981. 
[2] S. Deering and R. Hinden, “Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) 
Specification,” RFC 8200, Internet Engineering Task Force, 
July, 2017. 
[3] “Internet,” 
Merriam-Webster.com 
Dictionary, 
Merriam-
Webster, 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.merriam-
webster.com/dictionary/Internet. [Accessed on Mar 7, 2023].  
[4] 3GPP, 
“5G 
System 
Overview,” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.3gpp.org/technologies/5g-system-overview. 
[Accessed on Mar. 7, 2023].  
[5] “Internet of Things,” Encyclopedia Britannica, Encyclopedia 
Britannica, 
Inc., 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.britannica.com/science/Internet-of-Things. 
[Accessed on Mar 7, 2023].  
[6] 3GPP, “Solutions for NR to support Non-Terrestrial Networks 
(NTN),” 
TS 
38.821. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/archive/38_series/38.821/388
21-g10.zip. 
[7]  “Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA),” [Online]. 
Available: https://www.iana.org/. [Accessed on Mar 7, 2023].  
[8]  “Autonomous System (AS) Numbers,” Internet Assigned 
Numbers 
Authority. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
INTERNET 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Evolving Internet

https://www.iana.org/assignments/as-numbers/as-
numbers.xhtml. [Accessed on Mar 7, 2023].  
[9] Y. Rekhter, T. Li, and S. Hares, “A Border Gateway Protocol 
4 (BGP-4),” RFC 4271, Internet Engineering Task Force, Jan., 
2006.  
[10]  “Domain Name Services,” Internet Assigned Numbers 
Authority. [Online]. Available: https://www.iana.org/domains. 
[Accessed on Mar 7, 2023].  
[11]  “Root_Zone Management,” Internet Assigned Numbers 
Authority. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.iana.org/domains/root. [Accessed on Mar 7, 
2023].  
[12]  “Root Servers,” Internet Assigned Numbers Authority. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.iana.org/domains/root/servers [Accessed on Mar 
7, 2023].  
[13] T. Narten, E. Nordmark, and W. Simpson, “Neighbor 
Discovery for IP Version 6 (IPv6),” RFC 4861, Internet 
Engineering Task Force, Sept., 2007. 
[14] T. Mrugalski et al., “Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for 
IPv6 (DHCPv6),” RFC 8415, Internet Engineering Task Force, 
Nov., 2018. 
[15] C. Hopps, “Routing IPv6 with IS-IS,” RFC 5308, Internet 
Engineering Task Force, Oct., 2008. 
[16] R. Coltun, D. Ferguson, J. Moy, and A. Lindem, “OSPF for 
IPv6,” RFC 5340, Internet Engineering Task Force, July 2008. 
[17] E. Rosen, A. Viswanathan and R. Callon, “Multiprotocol Label 
Switching Architecture,” RFC 3031, Internet Engineering Task 
Force, Jan., 2001.  
[18] Daniel O. Awduche et al., “RSVP-TE: Extensions to RSVP for 
LSP Tunnels,” RFC 3209, Internet Engineering Task Force, 
Dec., 2001 
[19] L. Ginsberg, B. Decraene, S. Litkowski, and R. Shakir, 
“Segment Routing Architecture,”. RFC 8402, Internet 
Engineering Task Force, July 2018. 
[20] J. Postel, “Transmission Control Protocol,” RFC 793, Internet 
Engineering Task Force, Sept. 1981. 
[21] J. Postel, “User Datagram Protocol,” RFC 768, Internet 
Engineering Task Force, Aug. 1980. 
[22] J. Iyengar and M. Thomson, “QUIC: A UDP-Based 
Multiplexed and Secure Transport,” RFC 9000, Internet 
Engineering Task Force, May 2021. 
[23] E. Rescorla, “The Transport Layer Security (TLS) Protocol 
Version 1.3”, RFC 8446, Internet Engineering Task Force, 
August 2018, 
[24] E. Rescorla and A. Schiffman, “The Secure HyperText 
Transfer Protocol", RFC 2660, Internet Engineering Task 
Force, August 1999. 
[25] APNIC, “Understanding address management hierarchy,” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.apnic.net/manage-
ip/manage-resources/address-management-objectives-
2/address-management-objectives/ [Accessed on Mar 7, 2023]. 
[26] J. Mccauley, S. Shenker, and G. Varghese, “Extracting the 
Essential Simplicity of the Internet,” Communications of the 
ACM, vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 64-74, February 2023. 
[27] S. Deering, R. Hinden, “Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6) 
Specification,” RFC 2460, Internet Engineering Task Force, 
Dec., 1998. 
[28] S.D. Schoen, J. Gilmore, and D. Täht, “IETF Will Continue 
Maintaining IPv4, ” draft-schoen-intarea-ietf-maintaining-ipv4, 
Internet Engineering Task Force, Sept. 2022. 
[29] J. Day, Patterns in Network Architecture: A Return to 
Fundamentals, Prentice Hall, 2008. 
[30] X. Zhang et al., "SCION: Scalability, Control, and Isolation on 
Next-Generation Networks," 2011 IEEE Symposium on 
Security and Privacy, Oakland, CA, USA, 2011, pp. 212-227, 
doi: 10.1109/SP.2011.45. 
[31] S. Jiang, S. Yan, L. Geng, C. Cao, and H. Xu, “New IP, 
Shaping Future Network: Propose to initiate the discussion of 
strategy transformation for ITU-T”, TSAG C-83, Sept. 2019. 
[32] K. Omar, “Internet Protocol version 10 (IPv10) Specification,” 
draft-omar-ipv10, Internet Engineering Task Force, Sept. 2017. 
[33] H. Balakrishnan et al., “Revitalizing the public internet by 
making 
it 
extensible,” 
ACM 
SIGCOMM 
Computer 
Communication Review, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 18–24, April 2021. 
[34] International Computer Science Institute, University of 
California, Berkeley, “An Extensible Internet for Science 
Applications 
and 
Beyond,” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.icsi.berkeley.edu/icsi/projects/extensible-
internet/science-applications 
[35] T. Eckert, L. Han, C. Westphal, and R. Li, “An Overview of 
Technical Developments and Advancements for the Future of 
Networking,” ITU Journal on Future and Evolving 
Technologies, vol. 3, no. 3, December 2022. 
[36] “E.164 : The international public telecommunication 
numbering plan,” International Telecommunication Union. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-E.164/. 
[Accessed on Mar 7, 2023].  
[37] W. J. Drake, V. G. Cerf, and W. Kleinwächter, “Internet 
Fragmentation: 
An 
Overview,” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_FII_Internet_Fragmen
tation_An_Overview_2016.pdf. [Accessed on Mar 7, 2023]. 
 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
INTERNET 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Evolving Internet

