Surface Sensing of 3D Objects Using Vibrissa-like Intelligent Tactile Sensors
1st Lukas Merker
Dept. of Mech. Engineering
Technische Universitt Ilmenau
Ilmenau, Germany
e-mail: lukas.merker@tu-ilmenau.de
2nd Moritz Scharff
Dept. of Mech. Engineering
Technische Universitt Ilmenau
Ilmenau, Germany
3rd Klaus Zimmermann
Dept. of Mech. Engineering
Technische Universitt Ilmenau
Ilmenau, Germany
4th Carsten Behn
Dept. of Mech. Engineering
Schmalkalden University of Applied Scienes
Schmalkalden, Germany
e-mail: c.behn@hs-sm.de
Abstract—Interacting with the environment, many robots would
beneﬁt from advanced tactile sensors complementing optical
sensors in particular when operating under poor visibility. In
nature, rats exhibit a prominent tactile sense organ, the so-
called vibrissae. For instance, these enable rats to detect shape
and texture information of objects based on few contacts. Since
vibrissae consist of dead tissue, all sensing is performed in the
support of each vibrissa, the follicle-sinus complex. Inspired by
this characteristic measuring principle, we set up a mechanical
model, consisting of a cylindrical, one-sided clamped bending
rod, which is swept along a 3D object surface undergoing large
deﬂections. In doing so, the focus is on both simulating the
scanning sweep in order to determine the support reactions of
the rod during object scanning and subsequently using these
quantities in order to reconstruct a sequence of contact points as
a basis for shape reconstruction. The simulated scanning sweeps
include tip and tangential contacts, as well as longitudinal, lateral
and axial slip. The object reconstruction reveals that simple
scanning kinematics, e.g., passive dragging of the tactile sensor
on a mobile robot, are sufﬁcient in order to capture fragments of
object shapes and thus to complement data gathered by optical
sensors.
Keywords–Vibrissa; tactile sensor; surface sensing; surface
reconstruction;
I.
INTRODUCTION
A prominent and particularly well researched sense or-
gan are the mystacial vibrissae in the snout region of the
rat, enabling the animals to gather information about object
distances, orientations, shapes and textures, as well as ﬂuid
ﬂows [1]–[4]. Basically, a vibrissa consists of a long and
slender hair-shaft with no receptors along its length, which
is conical and pre-curved [5][6] and supported by the Follicle
Sinus Complex (FSC) [7][8]. Making contact with an object of
interest, mechanical stimuli are transmitted through the hair-
shaft to the FSC, where the actual sensing is realized by
a wide variety of mechanoreceptors, which are radially and
longitudinally distributed along the follicle [9]. Despite the
fact that it is not conclusively clariﬁed how exactly animals
manage to determine object features, e.g., object shapes [10],
the basic measuring principle of a vibrissa often serves as a
paragon for developing tactile sensors.
In literature, a large number of vibrissa-inspired sensor
principles with a focus on object scanning and reconstruction
can be found. These approaches differ considerably in the
modulation of the vibrissa-shaft and its support, the eval-
uated signals (observables) and the procedure of localizing
contact points, as a basis for shape reconstruction. Usually,
the focus is on the actual object reconstruction based on
different measured signals at the base of a rod-shaped structure.
However, a theoretical generation of the support reactions
during object scanning is rarely taken into account. For the
process of object scanning, two different approaches have
been established in literature [11]: Firstly, an object can be
scanned using a tapping strategy, i.e., tapping the artiﬁcial
vibrissa against various points of the objects surface by small
pushing angles. In doing so, the artiﬁcial vibrissa is retracted
from the object right after the very ﬁrst contact resulting in
only small deformations of the artiﬁcial vibrissa. Therefore,
many approaches use linear bending theory to accomplish the
localization of the contact points [12]–[15]. For that purpose,
curvature or torque information at the base of the artiﬁcial
vibrissa [15] or even its base angles and/or moments [12]–[14]
are evaluated. Secondly, there is the sweeping strategy. In this
case, the rod is pushed against an object far beyond the very
ﬁrst contact, consequently undergoing large deformations and
sliding over the object’s surface. Therefore, a highly ﬂexible
and elastic artiﬁcial vibrissa must be used. In [11], a sweeping
reconstruction algorithm was presented, which is based on
repeatedly inferring from one contact point to the next one
by continuous measurement of the moment and rotation angle
at the base of the rod. This method dispenses the need of force
measurements, but it is limited to tangential contacts along the
artiﬁcial vibrissa and cannot be used for 3D reconstruction.
Another reconstruction approach using the sweeping scanning
strategy and evaluating moments and forces at the base of a
rod was used in [16] and [17]. In [17], the focus was on the
mechanical model, which was limited to a plane and treated
analytically. In doing so, the support reactions were generated
analytically in a ﬁrst step, validated using an experimental
setup and used for object reconstruction in a second step. With
the goal of 3D object scanning, the authors in [16] used a hub
load cell to measure the support reactions at the base of a steel
wire, which was swept along several edged 3D objects. During
scanning, lateral slip of the artiﬁcial vibrissa was prevented by
adjusting the scanning direction based on the surface normal,
which was determined exploiting the support reactions. In
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-798-6
INTELLI 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

contrast to [17], the support reactions were only measured but
not generated theoretically. In [18], the authors modeled an
artiﬁcial vibrissa using a multi-body system. There, the step
of generating the support reactions in 3D space was included,
but only for an a priori known external load. In addition,
the applied force was always perpendicular to the artiﬁcial
vibrissa, although contact forces at the tip of an artiﬁcial
vibrissa may have arbitrary orientations in many real world
scenarios. The model presented within this paper differs from
[18] by considering a changing contact force resulting from
the sweep of a rod along a mathematically described object
surface. Adapting the model of [17] for 3D scanning and
reconstruction, we focus on both, shape reconstruction of 3D
objects with a wide-ranging curvature (in contrast to [16])
and a theoretically generation of the support reactions during
object scanning. The latter provides an important basis for
future parameter studies without the necessity of performing a
large amount of experiments. During object scanning, tip and
tangential contacts are taken into account. Objects are scanned
on a straight trail without actively adjusting the scanning
direction in order to prevent lateral slip.
The paper at hand is structured in the following way:
In Section II the mechanical sensor model is presented and
used in two steps: Firstly, we demonstrate, how the support
reactions at the base of the sensor during a scanning sweep
along a prescribed 3D object surface can be generated theo-
retically. Secondly, we present a procedure of reconstructing
a sequence of contact points solely based on the support
reactions, which might either be known from the previous step
or by measurements. Both steps are implemented in a scanning
and reconstruction algorithm. In Section III this algorithm
is used for simulating scanning sweeps along an exemplary
3D surface, analyzing the support reactions at the base of
the sensor. Afterwards, these signals are used in order to
reconstruct multiple points on the object’s surface. Finally, the
results of the present paper are summed up and some future
research subjects are identiﬁed in Section IV.
II.
MODELLING
The mechanical model consists of a one-sided clamped
rod (highly elastic probe) and an object in a ﬁxed Cartesian
(x, y, z)-coordinate system, see Figure 1. The rod is circular-
cylindrically shaped and therefore characterized by the length
L and a constant circular cross-section, resulting in a constant
second moment of area I. It consists of a homogeneous and
isotropic material with a constant Young’s modulus E. From
the outset, we introduce the following units of measure using
the mentioned parameters of the rod in order to allow any kind
of scaling [17]:
[length]
:= L,
[force]
:= EI/L2,
[moment]
:= EI/L
(1)
The object is assumed as a rigid body with a strictly convex,
smooth surface z = C(x, y). The scanning sweep of the rod
along the object’s surface is realized by a kinematic drive,
in a way that the clamping position P0(x0, y0, 0) of the rod
(system input) is shifted incrementally along a straight trail in
the x-y-plane.
Figure 1. Model for object shape scanning and reconstruction – rod in
contact with an object’s surface.
After the very ﬁrst contact between the undeformed rod
and the object, the rod gets bent and slides along the surface,
see Figure 1. This process is treated as a quasi-static one. As
a consequence of the strict convexity of the object multi-point
contacts between the object and the rod are excluded. Thus,
each preset clamping position P0 results in a single contact
point P1(ξ, η, θ) on the surface with some contact force ⃗f
acting on the rod. Neglecting frictional effects (approximation
for low-friction material pairings), the contact force ⃗f with
magnitude f coincides with the outward pointing unit normal
vector ⃗n1 of the surface, see Figure 1:
⃗n1 =
⃗n0
||⃗n0||2
,
with
⃗n0 =
 −C,x (ξ, η)
−C,y (ξ, η)
1
!
(2)
⃗f = f · ⃗n1
(3)
Due to the homogenity and isotropy of the rod and its support
and the single force assumption the elastic line of the rod
shrinks to one in a plane Eψ with some unknown orientation
angle ψ (see Figure 1) and the normal vector:
⃗eψ =
 − sin(ψ)
cos(ψ)
0
!
(4)
Thus, parameterizing the elastic line of the rod by means
of its slope angle ϕ(s) in dependence on its natural coordinate
arc length s yields:
⃗q(s) =



dx(s)
ds
dy(s)
ds
dz(s)
ds


 =
 cos(ϕ(s)) cos(ψ)
cos(ϕ(s)) sin(ψ)
sin(ϕ(s))
!
(5)
dϕ
ds = κ(s)
(6)
Using a dimensionless representation of Euler’s constitutive
law (mind (1)) the curvature κ(s) writes
κ(s) = m(s) = −f · det (⃗r,⃗n1,⃗eψ)
(7)
where m(s) is the bending moment with respect to the
deformation plane Eψ and
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-798-6
INTELLI 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

⃗r =
 ξ − x(s)
η − y(s)
θ − z(s)
!
.
(8)
Using (5), the derivative of (7) writes:
κ′(s) = m(s) = f · det (⃗q(s),⃗n1,⃗eψ)
(9)
Together with (5), (6) and (9) we ﬁnd the following system of
Ordinary Differential Equations (ODE) of ﬁrst order, describ-
ing the deformation of the rod in space.
x′(s) = cos(ϕ(s)) cos(ψ)
y′(s) = cos(ϕ(s)) sin(ψ)
z′(s) = sin(ϕ(s))
ϕ′(s) = κ(s)
κ′(s) = f · det (⃗q(s),⃗n1,⃗eψ)
(10)
In contrast to the ODE system used in [17], the additional
parameter ψ allows the deformation plane to rotate in space
(with respect to the z-axis) as a consequence of lateral slip
during object scanning. Thus, sweeping the rod along an
object on a straight scanning trail, the path of the contact
point over the object’s 3D surface is not a priori known, as
it is the case when scanning 2D object contours. Therefore,
the procedure suggested in [17], to determine the rod’s base
position assuming a given contact point on the object is not
appropriate for 3D surface scanning, because the base position
corresponding to an arbitrarily preset contact point on the 3D
surface would not necessarily lie on the speciﬁed scanning
trail. Therefore, we proceed in inverse direction using the
base position P0 as system input as a basis for determining
the corresponding contact position, what better reﬂects the
practical process.
A. Generating the support reactions theoretically
The boundary conditions are formulated distinguishing
between tip contacts and tangential contacts. For tip contacts
the contact position s1 along the rod is known: s1 = 1. For
tangential contacts s1 is unknown but the condition ⃗q(s1) ⊥
⃗n1 ⇔ ⃗q(s1) · ⃗n1 = 0 must be fulﬁlled. This results in the
following Boundary Conditions (BCs) for tip and tangential
contacts, respectively:
tip:
x(0) = x0
x(1) = ξ
y(0) = y0
y(1) = η
z(0) = 0
z(1) = θ
ϕ(0) = π
2
κ(1) = 0
(11)
tangential:
x(0) = x0
x(s1) = ξ
y(0) = y0
y(s1) = η
z(0) = 0
z(s1) = θ
ϕ(0) = π
2
⃗q(s1) · ⃗n1 = 0
κ(s1) = 0
(12)
For each clamping position P0 (system input) on the scan-
ning trail, the Boundary-Value Problems (BVPs) (10)&(11),
as well as (10)&(12) are solved (respecting the additional
constraint ⃗n1 ·⃗eψ = 0) using a Matlab-algorithm. In doing so,
the unknown parameters f, s1, ψ, ξ and η are determined using
shooting methods. The algorithm proceeds by pre-supposing
tip contact, checking s1 for contradictions (e.g. s1 > 1)
afterwards in order to decide which of the BCs (11) and
(12) correctly describes the actual deformation state. Once the
mentioned parameters are known, the six support reactions at
the base of the rod are calculated in the following way:
⃗f0 =
 f0x
f0y
f0z
!
= −⃗f,
(13)
⃗m0 =
 m0x
m0y
m0z
!
= −
 ξ − x0
η − y0
θ
!
× ⃗f
(14)
The presented model as well as the simulation algorithm
are revised versions of those in [20]. The changes and im-
provements relate in particular to a transformation of the used
coordinate system and a more general analytical formulation
of the BCs (11)&(12).
B. Reconstructing contact points using the support reactions
For object reconstruction, we assume the support reactions
(13)&(14) to be known either from simulations or measure-
ments. In contrast to the previous step of generating the support
reactions, this allows to determine the magnitude of the contact
force f, its direction ⃗n1 and the orientation ψ of the bending
plane Eψ in advance:
f = ||⃗f0||2,
⃗n1 = −
⃗f0
||⃗f0||2
,
ψ = atan2(m0x, −m0y) (15)
where atan2 is the four-quadrant inverse tangent [21]. Having
all parameters of the ODE system (10) at hand by use of (15),
the initial values follow from the known support position P0
and ⃗m0:
x(0) = x0
y(0) = y0
z(0) = 0
ϕ(0) = π
2
κ(0) = −⃗m0 · ⃗eψ
(16)
Thus, the step of object reconstruction requires the solution
of an Initial-Value Problem (IVP) only. The contact point
is localized by integrating (10)&(16) with the termination
condition, that the curvature at the contact point is zero
(κ(s1) = 0).
III.
RESULTS & DISCUSSION
For all simulations, we used an elliptic paraboloid as an
exemplary object surface:
(x, y) 7→ C(x, y) = 0.5x2 + y2 + h
(17)
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-798-6
INTELLI 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

with the object distance h = 0.4. The scanning sweeps were
realized by shifting the clamping position P0 on a straight
scanning trail in negative x-direction with a constant lateral
displacement y0 = −0.5:0.1:0.5 from the coordinate origin,
resulting in a total of eleven trails in the x-y-plane. In Figure 2,
the signal strengths of all support reactions generated as
described in Subsection II-A are indicated by the color-bars
and plotted against the base positions during object scanning
(scanning trails).
-0.5
0
0.5
-2
-1
0
1
2
-2
-1
0
1
2
-0.5
0
0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
Figure 2. Signal strengths of the observables (support reactions) during
object scanning on different scanning trails – reaction forces f0x, f0y and
f0z (TB) on the left and reaction moments m0x, m0y and m0z (TB) on
the right. The color-bars on the right indicate the signal strengths.
The reaction forces f0x, f0y and f0z from Top to Bottom
(TB) are shown on the left and the reaction moments m0x,
m0y and m0z (TB) on the right. The color-bars indicate
the dimensionless signal strengths for each clamping position
(mind (1)). The scanning trail y0 = 0 is omitted in Figure 2
for two reasons: On the one hand, it represents a plane special
case with longitudinal slip (contact point movement over the
surface within the sensing plane) only, which is not in the
focus of the present paper, since it was already analyzed in
detail in [17]. On the other hand, the corresponding signals
of this sweep are signiﬁcantly higher compared to all other
scanning sweeps and would therefore impair the comparability
in Figure 2. It is striking that all components of the support
reactions show some symmetric patterns, due to the symmetry
of the object. The maximum values of all components increase
for smaller values |y0|, i.e., the closer the scanning trail is to
the coordinate origin. Mind that all diagrams in Figure 2 have
to be read from right to left due to scanning in negative x-
direction. It is obvious that the component f0x changes in
sign from minus to plus for all chosen scanning trails. The
component f0y is negative for positive values y0 and vise versa.
The vertical component f0z is always positive and a glance
on the entirety of all trails already makes it possible to get
the idea of some longish convex shape. The clamping moment
components behave in a similar way as the reaction forces: The
component m0x is positive if y0 > 0 and negative if y0 < 0.
The component m0y always changes in sign from minus to
plus. A great similarity can be seen between the components
f0x and m0y, as well as f0y and m0x. The magnitude of m0z
must always be zero, since there is no twist of the rod due
to the plane bending assumption. Even though especially the
vertical component f0z in Figure 2 might give a rough hint on
the scanned object shape, the support reactions do not allow a
more precise conclusion about the scanned object shape based
on purely visual observation. Therefore, the support reactions
from Figure 2 are used for the actual object reconstruction as
described in Subsection II-B.
(a)
(b)
Figure 3. Object surface scanning and reconstruction: (a) Reconstructed
elastic lines during object scanning – tip contacts s ∈ (0, 1] in red,
tangential contacts s ∈ (0, s1] in blue and s ∈ (s1, 1] in black; (b)
Reconstructed sequences of contact points based on ten scanning sweeps.
Figure 3a shows the reconstructed elastic lines during
sweeps along the elliptic paraboloid (17) on four exemplary
scanning trails y0 ∈ {−0.5; −0.2; +0.2; +0.5}. Tip contacts
are colored in red. For tangential contacts, the interval s ∈
(0, s1] is colored in blue and the straight end s ∈ (s1, 1] in
black. It can be seen that for each sweep, starting with the
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-798-6
INTELLI 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

very ﬁrst contact between the undeformed rod and the surface,
the rod bends around the object symmetrically and ﬁnally
detaches from the object without any snap-off, as observed
during plane object scanning [17]. This highlights the fact,
that the 2D scanning scenario analyzed in [17] is a special
case, which only occurs for special object geometries and
arrangements. However, in a real world scanning scenario,
geometries and orientations of scanned objects are not known
in advance. Therefore, the special case considered in [17] can
not be guaranteed and is therefore rather unlikely to occur in
reality.
For large lateral displacements |y0|, only tip contacts occur.
In contrast, for lower lateral displacements |y0|, tangential
contacts increasingly occur. In these cases, the sweep starts
with a sequence of tip contacts, continues with tangential
contacts and ﬁnally ends with another tip contact phase.
Of course, for tip contacts (s1 = 1), no axial slip (con-
tact point movement along the rod) but lateral slip (contact
point movement along the object’s surface) occurs during
scanning. For tangential contact, axial and lateral slip occur
simultaneously. In Figure 3b the original object surface is
superimposed with the reconstructed sequences of contact
points. The colors are arbitrary chosen and intended to make
it easier to visually distinguish the individual sequences, each
resulting from one scanning sweep. The sharp edges in the
contact point sequences, in particular evident in the innermost
(orange and yellow) sequences result from the transition from
tip to tangential contact and vise versa. It is striking that the
reconstructed points are unevenly distributed over the scanned
surface in a way that especially the lateral area of the surface
is characterized by a high density of points. As a consequence,
a large reconstruction gap in the area below the center of
the object remains. This is due to the fact that even though
the trails were distributed equidistantly below the object (see
Figure 2), there seems to be an area enclosed by the innermost
orange sequences in Figure 3b, which cannot be reached by
the rod. However, it can be assumed that the size of this
gap might be reduced by scanning in different directions (e.g.
perpendicular to the trails in Figure 2) or/and at different object
distances h. Returning to the biological paragon, both ideas
can be found in the whisking behavior of rats during object
exploration [19]. Besides the reconstructed contact points in
Figure 3b, the presented measuring principle provides the
surface normals at each point, evaluating (15). Thus, the sensed
data consisting of a 3D point cloud accompanied by normal
vectors is very similar to the one provided by some optical
systems, e.g., a laser range ﬁnder. This highlights that the
presented measuring principle is highly suitable to complement
optical sensors in robot exploration and path planning tasks.
IV.
CONCLUSION
Within the paper at hand we presented a vibrissa-inspired
tactile measuring principle for 3D object surface scanning and
reconstruction. In doing so, we considered two consecutive
processes separately: ﬁrstly, we analyzed the process of the-
oretically generating the support reactions at the base of a
rod, which is swept along a 3D object surface. Secondly,
we demonstrated how to use these quantities in order to
reconstruct sequences of contact points on the object’s surface.
Both steps were implemented in an algorithm and simulated to
demonstrate the general applicability. Instead of representing a
self-contained investigation, the present paper should be seen
as a preliminary concept study. However, it demonstrates that
the presented measuring principle is well suited to complement
optical sensors in the environmental exploration of robots.
By clarifying which mechanical signal strengths are detected
during object scanning and how these signals can be used
for object reconstruction, we provided a basis for further
investigations connecting the mechanical signals (observables)
with the actual measurand (3D surface). In doing so, we aim
to implement the presented concept into an intelligent tactile
sensor in the future. The ﬁndings of the present paper are to
be validated using an experimental setup in future works. In
this context, the effect of some aspects, which are neglected
within the presented paper (in particular friction and dynamical
effects) on the reconstruction quality should be examined. In
addition, the inﬂuence of some external disturbance factors,
e.g., temperature variations and wind ﬂows, have to be investi-
gated. First experimental investigations identifying ﬂuid ﬂows
were already presented in [22]. As the presented measuring
principle can be realized with different materials and sensors,
it can be assumed, that the temperature dependence of the
overall system determines by the thermal properties of the used
materials and force-torque-sensors.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Brecht, B. Preilowski, and M. M. Merzenich, “Functional architec-
ture of the mystacial vibrissae,” Behav. Brain Res., vol. 84, pp. 8197,
1997.
[2]
E. Gui´c-Robles, C. Valdivieso, and G. Guajardo, “Rats can learn a
roughness discrimination using only their vibrissal system,” Behav.
Brain Res., vol. 31, pp. 285–289, 1989.
[3]
G. E. Carvell and D. J. Simons, “Biometric Analyses of Vibrissal Tactile
Discrimination in the Rat,” J. Neurosci., vol. 10, pp. 26382648, 1990.
[4]
T. J. Prescott, B. Mitchinson, and R. A. Grant, “Vibrissal behavior and
function” Scholarpedia 6(10):6642, 2011.
[5]
H. M. Belli, A. E. T. Yang, C. S. Bresee, and M. J. Z. Hartmann,
“Variations in vibrissal geometry across the rat mystacial pad: Base
diameter, medulla, and taper,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 117, pp. 1807–
1820, 2016.
[6]
D. Voges et al., “Structural Characterization of the Whisker System of
the Rat,” J. Sens., vol. 12, pp. 332–229, 2012.
[7]
D. Campagner, M. H. Evans, M. S. E. Loft, and R. S. Petersen, “What
the whiskers tell the brain,” Neurosci. vol. 368, pp. 95–108, 2018.
[8]
S. Ebara, T. Furuta, and K. Kumamoto, “Vibrissal mechanoreceptors”.
Scholarpedia. 12, pp. 32372. DOI: 10.4249/scholarpedia.32372, 2017.
[9]
T. Furuta et al., “The cellular and mechanical basis for response
characteristics of identiﬁed primary afferents in the rat vibrissal system,”
Curr. Biol., vol. 30, pp. 814–826, 2020.
[10]
J. H. Solomon and M. J. Z. Hartmann, “Radial distance determination
in the rat vibrissal system and the effects of Weber’s law,” Phil. Trans.
R. Soc. B., vol. 366, pp. 3049–3057., 2011.
[11]
J. H. Solomon and M. J. Z. Hartmann, “Extracting object contours with
the sweep of a robotic whisker using torque information,” Int. J. Robot
Res. vol. 29, pp. 1233-1245, 2010.
[12]
J. H. Solomon and M. J. Z. Hartmann, “Artiﬁcial whiskers suitable for
array implementation: accounting for lateral slip and surface friction,”
IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 24, pp. 1157–1167, 2008.
[13]
D. Kim and R. Mller, “Biomimetic whiskers for shape recognition,” In
Proceedings of the 1995 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation, Nagoya, Japan, 21-27 May 1995, pp. 1113-1119.
[14]
M. Kaneko, N. Kanayama, and T. Tsuji, “Active antenna for contact
sensing,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom., vol. 14, pp. 278-291, 1998.
[15]
A. E. Schultz, J. H. Solomon, M. A. Peshkin, and M. J. Z. Hartmann,
“Multifunctional Whisker Arrays for Distance Detection, Terrain Map-
ping, and Object Feature Extraction,” IEEE International Conference
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-798-6
INTELLI 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

on Robotics and Automation, Barcelona, Spain, 18-22 April 2005, pp.
2588-2593.
[16]
T. N. Clements and C. D. Rahn, “Three-Dimensional Contact Imaging
With an Actuated Whisker,” IEEE Trans. Rob., vol. 22, pp. 844–848,
2006.
[17]
C. Will, C. Behn, and J. Steigenberger, “Object contour scanning using
elastically supported technical vibrissae,” ZAMM J. Appl. Math. Mec.,
vol. 98, pp. 289-305, 2018.
[18]
L. A. Huet, J. W. Rudnicki, and M. J. Z. Hartmann, “Tactile sensing with
whiskers of various shapes: determining the three-dimensional location
of object contact Based on mechanical signals at the whisker base.”
Soft Robot., vol. 4, pp. 88–103, 2017.
[19]
R. A. Grant, B. Mitchinson, C. W. Fox, and T. J. Prescott, “Active Touch
Sensing in the Rat: Anticipatory and Regulatory Control of Whisker
Movements During Surface Exploration,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 101,
pp. 862-874, 2008.
[20]
L. Merker, J. Steigenberger, and C. Behn, “3D Recognition Of Obstacles
Using A Vibrissa-like Tactile Sensor,” IEEE International Conference on
Flexible and Printable Sensors and Systems (FLEPS), Glasgow, United
Kingdom, 08-10 July 2019.
[21]
MathWorks®, Support (R2020b), https://de.mathworks.com/help/matlab/
ref/atan2.html, retrieved: October, 2020.
[22]
M. Scharff et al., “An artiﬁcial vibrissa-like sensor for detection of
ﬂows,” Sensors, vol. 19, 2019.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-798-6
INTELLI 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

