 
 
Optimization of Multi-server Video Content Streaming in 5G Environment
Eugen Borcoci, Tudor Ambarus 
University POLITEHNICA of Bucharest 
Bucharest, Romania 
emails: eugen.borcoci@elcom.pub.ro, 
tudorambarus@yahoo.com 
 
 
 
 
Joachim Bruneau-Queyreix,  Daniel Negru,  
LaBRI Lab, University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France 
emails: joachim.bruneau-queyreix@labri.fr 
daniel.negru@labri.fr 
Jordi Mongay Batalla,  National Institute of 
Telecommunications Warsaw, Poland 
email: jordim@interfree.it 
 
 
Abstract — This paper presents a preliminary work, 
proposing an architectural control plane solution for 
optimization of multiple-server video content streaming in 5G 
wireless environment. The starting point was an existing video 
streaming delivery system, having a light, over-the-top (OTT) 
architecture, which performs for each client request of a 
content object, an initial selection among multiple servers and 
paths, then followed by in-session dynamic media adaptation. 
This work extends the above system concepts to a different 
environment, i.e., heterogeneous Cloud Radio Access Network 
and cooperation with Mobile Edge Computing. The proposed 
solution can support recently developed multi-server and 
multi-path dynamic adaptive streaming over HTTP.  
Keywords — Content delivery; 5G; Server selection; Path 
selection; C-RAN; DASH. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Content, media and especially video traffic have become 
significant part of Internet and integrated networks traffic, 
including mobile one and will still grow in the next years. 
Estimations show [1][2], that in 5G networks, the data rate 
required for a mobile user equipment (MUE) will have to 
increase to 10 Mbps or more for high-definition (HD) video 
service, and 100 Mbps for ultra-high-definition TV 
(UHDTV), in various mobility scenarios. Other applications 
(e.g., 3D video conferences) might require even higher 
transmission rates up to 10 Gbps. Some forecast [3] show 
that video traffic (e.g., TV, video on demand, Internet video 
streaming, peer to peer) is estimated to become between 80 
and 90 percent among overall consumer traffic. 
On the other side, among the strong requirements to be 
addressed by 5G [1], some are related to very low end-to-end 
(E2E) latency (few milliseconds) especially for critical 
communications. 
For 
media 
video 
streaming, 
this 
requirement could be met by applying content delivery 
networks (CDN) - like techniques [4], i.e., placing in an 
intelligent way content servers and replica servers, in the 
proximity of communities of end users. The content objects 
are cached in several servers, based on criteria as content 
popularity, time-life, CDN provider policies, etc. One 
challenge to be solved in 5G is to decide the locations where 
to locate the original and caching servers. The solution can 
be also determined by the 5G architecture adopted for the 
Radio Access Network (RAN) and also for the core network, 
which aggregates and performs control of several 
heterogeneous RANs [2][5].  
This paper proposes a control plane architectural 
solution for video content delivery optimization, applicable 
in 4G and or 5G networks environment, if several (multiple) 
content servers (and/or caching) and paths are available, 
working to  serve a given user. Note that the algorithms and 
procedures 
to 
place 
the 
servers 
and 
then 
to 
place/store/replace the  media objects and also the dynamic 
control of the time-life of the media objects in these servers 
do not constitute the target of this work. 
The starting point of this work has been a previously 
designed light architecture system [6-8], for efficient video 
streaming and delivery, acting in Over-the-Top (OTT) style, 
i.e., controlling only a Content Server and User/Client 
functionalities and working on top of the current multiple-
domain Internet. The system operation is based on 
collaboration between several entities: a Service Provider 
(SP), several Content Servers (CS) and the End User (EU). 
An assumption is valid: the geographical locations of servers 
and mapping of different media objects to servers are known 
by the SP management entity. When a user request for a 
media content object arrives to SP entity, the system 
performs an initial selection among multiple servers and 
paths pairs. Then, during the video streaming session, two 
methods have been used to preserve/enhance the Quality of 
Experience (QoE) perceived by the user: media flow 
adaptation (adaptive streaming protocols) and/or server 
switching. For the video session phase, the Dynamic 
Adaptive Streaming over Hypertext Transfer Protocol- 
HTTP (DASH) [10][11], has been selected and implemented. 
The novel contribution of this paper consists in the 
following aspects. First it extends the initial system concepts 
(shortly described above, and detailed in [6-8]), to novel 
network environment like 5G having a Cloud Radio Access 
Network (C-RAN) – based architecture, and possibly 
including Mobile Edge Computing (MEC) capabilities. 
Second, for server selection phase it is considered not only 
an OTT approach but an extension; the network status and 
channel information, existent at RAN level is used as 
additional input in the overall optimization algorithm. Third, 
the system proposed here supposes not only a single-server-
at-a-time selection, but multiple servers, allowing a single 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-516-6
INTERNET 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Evolving Internet

 
 
client (see Multi-description DASH in [9]) to receive streams 
in parallel from several servers.  
The paper structure is the following. Section II is a short 
overview of related work. Section III outlines the overall 5G 
environment architecture based on C-RAN and MEC 
concepts. Section IV discusses some multi-server content 
delivery problems in 4G or 5G environment and introduces 
the architecture proposed for C-RAN and MEC contexts. 
Section V is focused on multiple server selection based on 
multi-criteria algorithms. Section VI contains conclusions 
and future work outline. 
 
II. 
RELATED WORK  
Media/content delivery systems over the current public 
Internet frequently use light OTT architectures. They are 
more simple and cheap, in comparison with complex 
solutions involving network resources management and 
control, like - CDNs [4] or Content Oriented Networking 
[12].  
The work presented in [6-8] has proposed and developed 
an OTT-style content streaming system (named DISEDAN), 
having as business actors the SP, (owning several Content 
Servers - CS) and EUs, which consume the content. The SP 
basically delivers content in OTT style (however, an SP 
might own and manage a transportation network). The 
solution consists in:  (1) two-step server selection (first at SP 
side and then at EU side) based on multi-criteria 
optimization algorithms that consider context- and content-
awareness and (2) in-session, so-called dual adaptation, 
consisting of media adaptation and/or content source 
adaptation (i.e., streaming server switching) when the quality 
observed at EU suffers degradation. 
For in-session adaptation, the DASH technology has 
been selected. It is attractive because it uses conventional 
HTTP Web servers [10][11]. The DASH minimizes server 
processing power and is video codec agnostic. A DASH 
client continuously selects (on-the-fly) segments having the 
highest possible video representation quality that ensures 
smooth play-out, in the current downloading conditions.  
The basic variant of the system presented above (i.e., 
pure OTT style and standard DASH) has limitations. First, in 
its basic version ignores some possible information on 
network status;  the server selection is optimized only by 
using SP knowledge (static and/or dynamic) about CSs status 
and then  some client/user information (available locally or 
learned by the client by probing several CSs). Also, during 
in-session adaptation, each client (using DASH and/or server 
switching) tries to maximize, in a selfish way, its own QoE. 
Therefore no overall optimization is performed – from the 
network resources usage point of view. This work proposes 
to solve such limitations, in the context of 4G and 5G. 
The single server-single client DASH performance can 
be improved as in [9], by using multiple-server DASH 
(MD-DASH), with better features w.r.t. bandwidth, link 
diversity and reliability. In [9], an innovative lightweight 
streaming solution is introduced, by taking advantage of 
bandwidth 
aggregation 
over 
multiple 
paths 
using 
simultaneously multiple content sources. This evolving 
approach outperforms the QoE delivered by current DASH-
based or P2P-based solutions. Results in [9] show 
advantages in terms of quality delivered at the End-User’s 
side and buffer occupancy. In addition, splitting content into 
multiple independent sub-streams provides the opportunity 
to implement easy-to-design content- and server-adaptation 
mechanisms. The MD-DASH is adopted in the system 
proposed in this paper.  
A related problem, in multiple-server systems, is 
servers’ location. The work [5] analyses the performance of 
several caching solutions for 4G, 5G networks.  Fig. 1 
shows (based on [5]) four possible levels of caching (i.e., a 
hierarchy) in a generic cellular network: in Internet, in 
Mobile Operator Network (MON) core, in Base stations 
(BS) of the RAN, or even in user terminals. The last case is 
advantageous if advanced Device–to-Device (D2D) direct 
communications are available. 
 
MON Core 
Internet 
 
 
 
 
 
 
BS 
U 
 
 
U1 
D2D 
U 
 
BS 
U 
 
 
U 
D2D 
U 
 
Possible media paths 
 
Content Server  
or  
Replication Server 
 
Figure 1.  Hierarchical caching levels - possible in a mobile cellular  
network  
MON – Mobile Operator Network; BS- Base Station; D2D – Device to 
Device communication; U- generic Mobile User Terminal/Equipment; U1- 
Consumer User instance. 
Note that placing caching servers in proximity of 
potential users (i.e., in RAN or even user terminals) can be 
very valuable in 5G environments, in order to meet  the very 
low E2E latency requirement (order of miliseconds) [1][2].   
The article [13] optimizes HTTP-based multimedia 
delivery in multi-user mobile networks by combining the 
client-driven dynamic adaptation scheme DASH-3GPP with 
network-assisted adaptation capabilities. The adaptive 
HTTP streaming with multi-layer encoding (scalable video 
coding – SVC) allows efficient media delivery in multi-user 
scenarios. Additionally, the proposal takes benefit from 
mobile edge computing (MEC) deployed in RANs, close to 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-516-6
INTERNET 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Evolving Internet

 
 
the users, in order to provide network assistance in the 
optimization process. A novel element- mobile edge-DASH 
adaptation function (ME-DAF) is introduced, which 
combines SVC-DASH-MEC to support efficient media 
delivery in mobile multi-user scenarios. The ME-DAF is 
inserted in the Data Plane managing effectively the DASH 
requests and media flows for multiple users. Our approach 
is different, in the sense that we also use MEC capabilities 
to provide network assistance, but he DASH sessions for 
multiple users are not concentrated in a single element, thus 
we avoid some scalability problems. 
III. 
THE  CLOUD RAN AND MOBILE EDGE COMPUTING  
The emergent 5G will bring novel network and service 
capabilities [1][2]. It will ensure user experience continuity 
in various contexts like high mobility (e.g., in trains), dense 
or sparsely populated areas, or heterogeneous technologies. 
The target application range is broad: manufacturing, 
automotive, energy, food and agriculture, education, city 
management, government, healthcare, public transportation, 
and so forth. 
The 5G has very ambitious goals and raises challenges  
[1][2], in terms of data volume, number of connected 
devices, latency, energy consumption, flexibility, etc. The 
5G will be fully driven by software: a unified operating 
system is needed, in a number of points of presence, 
especially at the network edge. To achieve the required 
performance, scalability and agility the 5G can rely on 
technologies like Software Defined Networking, (SDN) 
Network Function Virtualization (NFV), Mobile Edge 
Computing (MEC) and Fog Computing (FC). 
Recently, C-RAN architecture has been proposed [14-18], 
applicable both in 4G or 5G, able to provide among others, 
high spectral and energy efficiency. In C-RAN, the 
traditional base station (BS) is split into two parts: baseband 
units (BBUs) clustered as a BBU pool in a centralized 
location and several distributed remote radio heads (RRHs) 
plus antennas, which are located at the remote site. A high 
bandwidth low-latency optical or microwave transport 
network connect the RRHs and BBU pool (the connection is 
realized in hub-style from several RRUs to a single BBU). 
The RRHs perform  radio frequency functions and support 
high capacity in hot spots. The BBU pool is virtualized and 
performs several functions as large-scale collaborative 
processing (LSCP), cooperative radio resource allocation 
(CRRA), and intelligent networking. The BBU pool 
communicates with RRHs via common public radio interface 
(CPRI) protocol, which supports a constant bit rate and 
bidirectional digitized in-phase and quadrature (I/Q) 
transmission, and includes specifications for control plane 
and data plane.  
Several functional splits between BBU and RRH in 4G 
and 5G C-RANs are possible [19]. Shifting more 
functionality to the RRH can decrease the capacity 
requirement and increase delay requirement on the fronthaul 
links, but complicate and increase the cost of RRHs. If we 
consider the functional stack  layers defined already in 4G, 
as Radio Frequency (RF), Physical Processing (PHY), 
Medium Access Control (MAC),  Radio Link Control (RLC), 
Packet Data Convergence Protocol (PDCP), one might have 
for RRH  functions: 4G - RF and 5G: RF,PHY, or 
RF,PHY,MAC, or RF,PHY,MAC,RLC. In general, the 
fronthaul network  (between BBU and RRH) constraints 
have high   impact on worsening C-RAN performance;  the 
scale size of RRHs accessing the same BBU pool is limited 
and could not be too large due to the implementation 
complexity. 
Each variant of the C-RAN architecture has some 
advantages and limitations. A „highly centralized‟ C-RAN, 
is easily upgradable and allows network capacity expansion; 
it can support multi-standard operation, maximum resource 
sharing and multi-cell collaborative signal processing. 
However, it has high bandwidth requirement between the 
BBU and RRHs. A „partial centralized‟ C-RAN requires 
much lower transmission bandwidth between BBU and 
RRH, by integrating some baseband processing into RRH.  
C-RAN allows to operators to save costs and use green 
and efficient infrastructures. Open interfaces offers support 
for algorithms customization. The RAN virtualization 
solution can allow: HW/SW decoupling, multivendor I/O, 
flexible deployments, etc.  
However, 5G new strong requirements and services 
(especially in terms of latency, energy efficiency, etc.) are 
difficult to be met by C-RAN only. Here, Mobile Edge 
Computing (MEC) can help. 
MEC is a recent network architecture developed by the 
European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI), 
[20] enabling distributed cloud computing capabilities and an 
IT service environment at network edge.  By running 
applications and performing related processing tasks closer 
to the customers, network congestion is reduced and 
applications perform better. MEC can be implemented at the 
BSs, and enables flexible and rapid deployment of new 
applications and services (middleware, infrastructure) for 
customers. So, the operators can open their RAN to 
authorized third-parties, such as application developers and 
content providers. Location services, Internet-of-Things 
(IoT), video analytics, augmented reality, local content 
distribution, and data caching are some of the use cases 
identified by MEC.  
The main element is the MEC application server (it can be 
integrated in RAN), which provides computing resources, 
storage capacity, connectivity and, if necessary, access to 
RAN information. It supports a multi-tenancy run-time and 
hosting environment for applications. The applications can 
be constructed as virtual appliances and packaged as 
operating system virtual machine (VM) images. They can be 
provided by equipment vendors, service providers and third-
parties. The MEC application server can be deployed at the 
macro base station eNodeB LTE/4G or at the Radio 
Network Controller (RNC) in 3G networks. It can also 
collect data about storage, network bandwidth, CPU 
utilization, etc., for each application or service deployed by 
a third party. Therefore application developers and content 
providers can take advantage of close proximity to cellular 
subscribers and real-time RAN information.  
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-516-6
INTERNET 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Evolving Internet

 
 
The MEC “edge” approach can cooperate with C-RAN 
architecture; MEC will add flexible decentralization and 
proper dynamic instantiation and orchestration of virtual 
machines serving for network management in close 
proximity to terminals. In a heterogeneous C-RAN 
environment the MEC server can be deployed either at BBU 
pool or in eNodeBs.  
 
IV. 
VIDEO CONTENT DELIVERY SOLUTIONS IN 
HETROGENEOUS C-RAN   
 
C-RAN technology can efficiently support video content 
delivery, especially when intelligent cooperative caching is 
applied [5][19]. The powerful C-RAN BBU can control all 
radio access technologies (RAT), and possibly facilitate the 
video encoding and transmission towards user over different 
RATs. Hierarchical cooperative caching framework in C-
RAN is proposed in [19] with contents jointly cached at the 
BBU and at the RRHs. However, the fronthaul C-RAN 
constraints have high   impact on lowering CRAN 
performance and the scale size of RRHs; accessing the same 
BBU pool is limited and could not be too large in terms of 
RRHs number, due to the implementation complexity. On 
the other side heterogeneity is a frequent characteristic to be 
considered in integrating today various RATs. 
The Heterogenous CRANs (H-CRAN), [22] takes into 
account the heterogeneous networks  (HetNets). The RAN 
components are Low Power Nodes (LPN) (e.g., pico BS, 
femto BS, small BS, etc.) aiming to increase capacity in 
dense areas with high traffic demand and  High Power Nodes 
(HPN - e.g., macro or micro BS) that can be combined with 
LPN to form a HetNet. 
The H-CRAN architecture can include a central entity, 
which is the extended (eBBU pool), containing baseband 
processing units (the architectural layers are L1-baseband, 
MAC and Network). The BBU pool is linked via Gateway to 
the external Internet. Several peripheral “islands“  realized 
with different technologies are linked to the BBU pool in 
hub – style, via  two types of links: backhaul (BBU – HPNs), 
or  fronthaul links (BBU pool – LPN).  Several 
configurations can exist like: 2G/3G/LTE islands containing  
Base station Controllers (for 2G/3G), Macro Base Stations 
(MBS) seen as HPNs and LPNs, i.e., RRHs (the latter can be 
linked directly to the BBU pool via fronthaul links); 5G 
MBSs (as HPNs) and RRHs; WiMAX BS (HPN) and RRHs; 
IEEE 802.11 HPN Access Point (AP) and RRHs. Each 
peripheral island can be seen as an alternative path connected 
to Internet via Gateways. 
The H-CRAN can support efficiently video and media 
delivery services [22]. Recall that in conventional delivery 
solutions the video packet encoding and scheduling is done 
at head-end station (HS). Data will flow on predetermined 
paths (via assigned RATs) to mobile user equipments 
(MUE).  However, the path from HS to MUE has a long 
delay for the feedback represented by the Network State 
Information (NSI); so, only certain quasi-static info is 
accessible to the HS and this determines low performance  
for adaptive flow control and video encoding techniques. 
Therefore bringing content sources closer to end user by 
caching could significantly improve the performance of 
adaptive systems.  
Three techniques are proposed by this paper to be 
combined, to improve the video content delivery in H-CRAN: 
(a)distributed caching, (b)multi-server DASH-based delivery 
and (c)MEC approach,  to achieve optimization  of RAN 
resource allocation and QoE improvement at end user level.  
Caching variants can be used in  H-CRAN. When no 
eBBU Pool caching is applied, then the eBBU pool is 
directly connected to the RATs. However, it still can 
improve the delivery because it can easily obtain their online 
NSI and may utilize it in the packet scheduling (multi-RAT 
scheduler). The priorities of different video packets (e.g., 
those generated by Scalable Video Coding - SVC) or QoS 
requirements from multiple MUEs may also affect the 
scheduling at the eBBU pool. The H-CRAN with packet 
scheduling exposes better delivery performance than 
conventional heterogeneous networks with only HS 
scheduling.  
The video can be also cached at the local eBBU pool, 
based on the technology of content awareness caching for 5G 
networks, thus   reducing the traffic amount from original 
HS. More, both the video encoding and transmission can be 
adapted to the online NSI of multiple RATs. The eBBU pool 
can even work as a Service Provider (SP) with the units 
encoding the source video, controlling the frame rate, and 
managing the pre-caching content and buffering in MUEs. 
More accurate online NSI can determine the encoding 
redundancy and the size of pre-caching content could be 
minimized, thus saving the scarce spectrum resource. More 
accurate NSI at the eBBU pool may lead to decisions to 
reduce encoding redundancy and therefore increase the 
efficiency. Caching (replica servers) can be also placed in 
HPNs, eNodeBs,  and even in RRHs or MUE if sufficient 
storage resources are available [5] [19].  
A multiple-source adaptive streaming (MS-stream) 
solution is proposed in [9], targeting to enhance the 
consumer’s perceived quality. Compared with traditional 
single-server approach this solution can to better exploit 
expanded bandwidth, link diversity, and reliability. It is 
codec agnostic, DASH compliant, and receiver-driven, thus 
being a pragmatic and evolving solution for QoE 
enhancement. The content is split into multiple independent 
sub-streams providing the opportunity to achieve easy-to-
design bitrate adaptation and server-switching mechanisms. 
This approach can be used also in H-CRAN environment, 
and we considers such a solution, where several caching 
entities are distributed over the BBU pool or in the RANs 
(see Fig. 1), or even in MUEs. 
Fig. 2 shows a high level view of the architecture 
proposed in this paper; it introduces MS-stream approach to 
5G H-CRAN environment, while additionally taking benefit 
from MEC support to achieve global optimization of server-
path resources. Different islands having heterogeneous RATs 
are connected in hub-style to the eBBU pool. At its turn the 
eBBU pool is connected to the mobile core network and 
through this to the general internet. Several caching nodes 
can be placed in different places following different policies 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-516-6
INTERNET 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Evolving Internet

 
 
of the Service Provider and other criteria (popularity, time-
life, cost, etc.). MEC servers are supposed to be installed 
close to each HPNs of the H-CRAN. The specific Control 
Plane of our system is composed mainly by the Service 
Provider (SP) entity placed at eBBU pool level and several 
functional blocks called RAN Monitors (RAN-Mon), which 
are installed as application instances over MEC servers. The 
SP gets the video content requests from the user terminals 
and optimizes server utilization.  The RAN-Mon block role 
is similar as in [13], i.e., it interacts with MEC server in 
order to collect RAN statistics (NSI, i.e., cell load 
information, channel state information provided by channel 
state indicator, etc.).  
Fig. 2 considers a variant where the MEC server is 
collocated with a Macro Base Station (MBS). DASH clients 
can run in mobile terminals. The SP communicates in the 
Control Plane with RAN-Mon and is aware of network 
resources status; such information is usually available at 
RAN level in 4G or 5G.  
An user client content object request is addressed (similar 
to DISEDAN system discussed in Section II) to SP entity. 
Based on user request the SP performs a selection phase 
(based on multiple criteria algorithm) of a set of servers 
containing DASH descriptions (see [9] for details) of the 
required media object media. Then the user (after making the 
final filtering/selection and performing a local-information 
based selection) starts a set of parallel Data Plane dialogues 
with the caching servers selected. During the sessions, 
individual adjustments of the flow rates can be applied by 
using DASH algorithms and/or changing the current server 
set (server switching). Also in an action of selecting an 
updated set of servers, the multiple criteria optimization 
algorithm can be applied. The main difference from 
DISEDAN system and also from approach presented in [13] 
is the fact that not only individual, but overall optimization 
can be achieved while taking benefit from RAN information. 
 
V. 
MULTI-SERVER SELECTION OPTIMIZATION FOR H-
CRAN  
This section is devoted to propose a solution for multiple 
server set selection to serve a given user request, coming 
form an mobile end user terminal, to the Service Provider. It 
will be supposed that SP has enough knowledge about 
caching servers placed in a given region, and also about 
distance and channel status between a given server and 
mobile terminal of the requesting user. This paper will not 
detail the signaling messages between the SP and different 
MEC servers placed in RAN. 
Several multi-objective optimization algorithms can be 
considered. In this work, the optimization is based on a 
previously used procedure - Multi-Criteria Decision 
Algorithms (MCDA) - which has been proved powerful and 
efficient in [23][24]. Note the important fact that the method 
proposed has no limitation in number of parameters to be 
considered as input. The multi-criteria algorithm can use 
more or less parameters as they are available in the system. 
The multi-objective optimization algorithm tries to find 
min F(x) = [f1(x), ..fk(x)] where x ∈ Xi, the decision variables 
space, and f1(x), ..fk(x), are a set of objectives, [23] [24]. 
 
 
 
 
 
MIMO 
Caching DASH server 
5G MBS 
D2D 
BBU Pool 
MS-Stream 
DASH client 
RAN-5G island 
Internet 
 
 
 
 
MEC Srv 
Mon 
X2/S1 
Backhaul 
HPN 
RRH 
Fronthaul 
 
U 
U 
Other islands  
3G/4G/WiMAX 
GW 
GW 
Parallel DASH sessions 
SP 
Mobile  
Core 
Network 
 
Figure 2.  Architecture based on H-CRAN for multiple source streaming and MEC support (variant: MEC implemented at MBS); GW- gateway; RRH- 
Remote Radio Head; MBS- Macro Base Station; D2D- Device to Device; HPN- High Power Node; MS- multiserver; BBU – Baseband Unit; MEC Mobile 
Edge Computing; X2/S1 – Interfaces imported from 4G technology; U- generic notation for an user having a mobile terminal   
 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-516-6
INTERNET 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Evolving Internet

 
 
 
One method to solve MCDA problem is offered by 
reference level decision algorithm [24], which considers a 
decision space Rm  and the decision parameter/variables: vi, 
i=1, ..m; ∀i, vi≥0. A candidate solution is an element Ss=(vs1, 
vs2, .., vsm) ∈ Rm. Let S be the number of candidates indexed 
by s = 1, 2, ..S. The value ranges of decision variables might 
be bounded by given constrains.  
The algorithm searches a solution satisfying a given 
objective function, conforming a particular metric. Two 
reference parameters are defined: ri =reservation level=the 
upper limit for a decision variable which should not be 
crossed by the selected solution; ai=aspiration level=the 
lower bound for a decision variable, beyond which the 
solutions are seen as similar. For each decision variable vi, ri 
and ai , will be  computed among all solutions s = 1, 2, ..S: ri 
= max [vis], ai = min [vis], where s = 1, 2, ..S. 
Two modifications of the decision variables are applied 
in [24]: a. replacement of each variable with distance from 
its value to the reservation level: vi  ri-vi; (higher vi will 
decrease the distance); b. normalization is also introduced to 
get non-dimensional values, which can be numerically 
compared. For each variable vsi, a ratio is computed, for each 
solution s, and each variable i: vsi' = (ri-vsi)/(ri-ai), where 
the factor 1/(ri-ai) - plays also the role of a weight. To 
support a variety of SP policies,  a modified formula can be 
used, i.e.: 
vsi' = wi(ri-vsi)/(ri-ai) 
             (1) 
 
where the factor wi ∈ (0,1] represents a weight (associated to 
a priority) that can be established from SP policy 
considerations. Such weights  can significantly influence the 
final selection. The optimization algorithm presented below 
is derived from that applied in [7]: 
 
1. Compute the matrix M{vsi'}, s=1…S, i=1…m 
2. Compute for each candidate solution s, the minimum 
(worst case) among all its normalized variables vsi': 
 
 
mins = min{vsi'}; i=1...m  
(2) 
3. Make selection among solutions by computing: 
vopt  = max {mins}, s=1, ..S  
(3) 
 
This vopt  is the optimum solution, i.e it selects the best value 
among those produced by the Step 1. 
4. Repeat the algorithm for the servers left, until a desired 
set of “best” servers is obtained, or the list is exhausted. 
(this step is necessary to determine the set of active servers 
for MS-stream). 
 
The performance of such optimization algorithm has 
been already proven in [6][7]. In the context of H-CRAN its 
efficiency depends finally on the accuracy of the network 
parameters delivered by MEC server to SP. 
A simplified example shows the optimization procedure. 
One supposes that decision variables are those defined in 
Table 1. The variable v1 is estimated directly by the SP, by 
inspecting the servers. The other variables are provided by 
the MEC server to SP. Table 2 presents six candidates 
solutions (entries are native not-yet normalized values). 
Priority examples are introduced in Table 1, derived from SP 
policy. Here, the server load and numbers of RAN cells 
crossed are considered the most important. 
In this example one can define: a1= 0, r1=100; a2=0, 
r2=10; a3=120, r3 = 20; a4=0, r4=100; a5=0, r5=30. 
TABLE I.  
DECISION VARIABLES EXAMPLE 
Decision 
variables  
Semantics 
Units 
Priority 
v1 
Load of the caching server  
( %) 
1- max 
v2 
Number of RAN cells or sub-
networks  to be crossed 
Integer 
2 
v3 
Average capacity available on 
the channel server- client 
Mbps 
2 
v4 
Load of the cell of the server  
(%) 
3 
v5 
Estimated server-client  delay 
ms 
4- min 
TABLE II.  
CANDIDATE SOLUTIONS EXAMPLE 
 
s1 
s2 
s3 
s4 
s5 
s6 
vs1 
0 
20 
40 
70 
80 
50 
vs2 
2 
3 
1 
3 
4 
5 
vs3 
60 
30 
50 
80 
50 
60 
vs4 
30 
10 
20 
60 
20 
30 
vs5 
15 
20 
10 
10 
20 
5 
 
Applying the basic algorithm (i.e., with no priorities) 
simple computation will show that formula (4) is max{0.5, 
0.3, 0.5, 0.3, 0.2, 0.5}, showing that solutions s1, s3, s6 are 
equivalent. Suppose we want n servers for MS-stream 
delivery. Then the step 4 of the algorithm simply means to 
select the first n servers of the list, considering the order 
given by the step 3 of the algorithm; if n=3, they are { s1, s3, 
s6}. 
If some decision variables are considered more 
important in the selection process, then introduce policies, 
can be defined. An example of priorities assigned is given in 
the last column of the Table 1. To these priorities the SP can 
associate weights (acting as compression factors) defined, 
e.g., w1= 0.5, w2= 0.7, w3= 0.7, w4= 0.8, w5= 1.0. Then the 
step 3 of the algorithm will produce the {0.5, 0.3, 0.3, 0.15, 
0.1, 0.25}. It is seen that s1 solution is the best, followed by 
s2 and s3. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS, EXTENSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper proposed an architectural solution for 
optimizing video content delivery in 5G Heterogeneous 
Cloud RAN environment. A previously developed  multi-
server video streaming system, based on DASH adaptation 
subsystem has been taken and combined here with Mobile 
Edge Computing (MEC) capabilities, in order to optimize the 
resource usage in RAN and enhance the quality of 
experience (QoE) seen by the end users.  
Specific work developed here is on the initial best path-
server selection, producing a subset of servers (which will 
serve the DASH sessions of the users). While the efficiency 
of Multi-criteria decision algorithms has been already proven 
in such types of problems, the contribution here is the 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-516-6
INTERNET 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Evolving Internet

 
 
extension of such an approach to MS-stream + MEC 
cooperation in H-CRAN environment. Due to network 
related information, both QoE increase and global 
optimization of RAN resource usage is expected. 
Future work will be done to evaluate the system 
performance in a large network environment, and extension 
of algorithm applicability during the DASH sessions, when 
problems appear to switch the set of caching servers. More in 
depth study should be also done to embed the RAN 
Monitoring 
subsystem 
in 
mobile 
edge 
computing   
environment.  
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J.G. Andrews, .et al., “What Will 5G Be?”, IEEE Journal on 
Selected Areas in Communications, Vol. 32, No.6, pp. 1065-
82, June 2014. 
[2] M. Peng, Y. Li, Z. Zhao, and C. Wang, “System Architecture 
and Key Technologies for 5G Heterogeneous Cloud Radio 
Access Networks”, IEEE Network Magazine, vol. 29, no. 2, 
pp. 6–14, Mar. 2015. 
[3] “Cisco Visual Networking Index: Forecast and Methodology 
2013–2018”, White Paper, June 2014. 
[4] P. A. Khan and B. Rajkumar, “A Taxonomy and Survey of 
Content Delivery Networks”, Department of Computer 
Science and Software Engineering, University of Melbourne. 
Australia : 
s.n., 
2008, 
www.cloudbus.org/reports/CDN-
Taxonomy.pdf , [retrieved: Dec., 2015]. 
[5] X.Wang, M. Chen, T. Taleb, A. Ksentini, and V. C. M.Leung, 
"Cache in the Air: Exploiting Content Caching and Delivery 
Techniques for 5G Systems", IEEE Communications 
Magazine, pp.131-139, February 2014. 
[6] http://wp2.tele.pw.edu.pl/disedan/ [retrieved: May, 2016] 
[7] E. Borcoci, M. Vochin, M. Constantinescu, J. M. Batalla, and 
D. Negru, “On Server and Path Selection Algorithms and 
Policies in a light Content-Aware Networking Architecture”, 
ICSNC 2014, 
http://www.iaria.org/conferences2014/ICSNC14.html 
[retrieved: July, 2016]. 
[8] A. Bęben, J. Mongay Batalla, P. Wiśniewski, and P. Krawiec 
(WUT), “ABMA+ : lightweight and efficient algorithm for 
HTTP adaptive streaming”, ACM Multimedia Systems 
(MMSys), 
Klagenfurt 
(Austria), 
May 
2016, 
[doi: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2910017.2910596] 
[9] J. Bruneau-Queyreix, D. Négru, J. M. Batalla, and E. Borcoci,  
“Multiple Description-DASH: Pragmatic video streaming 
maximizing 
End-Users' 
Quality 
of 
Experience” 
IEEE International Conference on Communications, 23-27 
May 2016, Kuala Lumpur,  Malaysia, http://icc2016.ieee-
icc.org/content/symposia, [retrieved: July, 2016]. 
[10] I. Sodagar, "The MPEG-DASH Standard for Multimedia 
Streaming Over the Internet," MultiMedia, IEEE, vol. 18, no. 
4, pp. 62 – 67, 2011,.  
[11] ISO/IEC 23009-1, "Information technology -- Dynamic 
adaptive streaming over HTTP (DASH) -- Part 1: Media 
presentation description and segment formats," ISO/IEC, 
Geneve, second edition, 2014.  
[12] J. Choi, J. Han, E. Cho, T. Kwon, and Y. Choi, “A Survey on 
Content-Oriented Networking for Efficient Content Delivery”, 
IEEE Communications Magazine, pp. 121-127, March 2011. 
[13] J. O. Fajardo, I. Taboada, and F. Liberal, "Improving Content 
Delivery Efficiency Through Multi-Layer Mobile Edge 
Adaptation", 
IEEE 
Network 
Magazine, 
 
pp.40-46, 
November/December 2015. 
[14] P. K. Agyapong,  M. Iwamura,  D. Staehle,  W. Kiess and A. 
Benjebbour, „Design Considerations for a 5G Network 
Architecture” IEEE Communications Magazine, pp. 65-75, 
November 2014. 
[15] M. Peng, Y. Sun, X. Li, Z. Mao, and C. Wang, "Recent 
Advances 
in 
Cloud 
Radio 
Access 
Networks:System 
Architectures, Key Techniques, and Open Issues" IEEE 
Communications Surveys and Tutorials, pp. 1 - 27,  2016, 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1604.00607,  [retrieved: July, 2016]. 
[16] N. Panwar,  S. Sharma,  and A. K. Singh,  “A Survey on 5G: 
The Next Generation of Mobile Communication” , accepted 
in Elsevier Physical Communication, pp.64-84, 4 Nov 2015,  
http://arxiv.org/pdf/1511.01643v1.pdf, [retrieved: July, 2016]. 
[17] A. Checko et al.,  “Cloud RAN for Mobile Networks—A 
Technology Overview”,  IEEE Communications  Surveys & 
Tutorials, Vol. 17, No. 1, pp. 405-426, First Quarter 2015. 
[18] China Mobile Research Institute, “C-RAN White Paper: The 
Road 
Towards 
Green 
RAN”, 
June 
2014, 
http://labs.chinamobile.com/cran/wp-
content/uploads/2014/06/20140613-C-RAN-WP-3.0.pdf, 
[retrieved: July, 2016]. 
[19] T.X. Tran, A. Hajisami, and D.Pompili, “Cooperative 
Hierarchical Caching in 5G Cloud Radio Access Networks 
(C-RANs)”,  https://arxiv.org/pdf/1602.02178, [retrieved: 
October, 2015]. 
[20] M. Patel et al., “Mobile-Edge Computing Introductory 
Technical 
White, 
Paper,” 
2014, 
https://portal.etsi.org/portals/0/tbpages/mec/docs/mobile-
edge_computing_- 
introductory_technical_white_paper_v1%2018-09-14.pdf, 
[retrieved: October, 2015]. 
[21] H. S. Matharu, “Cloud RAN and Mobile Edge Computing, a 
dichotomy 
in 
the 
making”, 
http://www.microwave-
eetimes.com/content/cloud-ran-and-mobile-edge-computing-
dichotomy-making, 2016, [retrieved: July, 2016]. 
[22] M. Sheng,  W. Han, C. Huang, and S. Cui, ‘Video Delivery in 
Heterogenous Crans: Architectures and Strategies’, IEEE 
Wireless Communications, pp.14-21, June 2015. 
[23] J. Figueira, S. Greco, and M. Ehrgott, “Multiple Criteria 
Decision Analysis: State of the Art Surveys”, Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, 2005. 
[24] A. P. Wierzbicki, “The use of reference objectives in 
multiobjective optimization”. Lecture Notes in Economics 
and Mathematical Systems, vol. 177., Springer-Verlag, pp. 
468–486.  
 
 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-516-6
INTERNET 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Evolving Internet

