A Linear Matrix Inequality Based Strategy For Maximum Amplitude Analysis In
Discrete Time Systems
Graziano Chesi
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
The University of Hong Kong
Email: chesi@eee.hku.hk
Tiantian Shen
Department of Electronic Information Engineering
Hunan Normal University
Email: titiansaint@foxmail.com
Abstract—A
typical
problem
in
engineering
consists
of
quantifying the maximum amplitude of the signals of discrete-
time
linear time-invariant
systems.
This paper
suggests
a
strategy based on the solution of a convex optimization problem,
in particular, a linear matrix inequality feasibility problem. The
proposed strategy is motivated by the fact that the existing
methods are generally conservative.
Keywords: Discrete-Time; Maximum Amplitude; LMI.
I. INTRODUCTION
Discrete-time linear time-invariant systems represent a wide
class of control systems of interest [1]–[3]. For instance, they
can model a worktable motion control system or a space
station orientation control system where digital control is
implemented through the use of digital-to-analog and analog-
to-digital converters [4]. A typical problem in these systems
consists of quantifying the maximum amplitude of their sig-
nals. Indeed, this problem is met in order to establish that
physical quantities do not exceed their allowable limits, a
necessary step for ensuring safety.
This paper suggests a strategy for dealing with this prob-
lem. This strategy exploits polynomials and the Gram matrix
method [5] [6], and requires the solution of a Linear Matrix
Inequality (LMI) feasibility problem, which belongs to the
class of convex optimization.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses some
related works. Section III introduces the problem formulation.
Section IV presents a motivating example. Section V described
the proposed strategy. Section VI reports the conclusions.
II. RELATED WORKS
The problem of quantifying the maximum amplitude of the
signals of linear time-invariant systems has been studied in
the literature. In particular, LMI methods have been sought
because they can be tested through convex optimization and
because they may be exploited in the design of feedback
controllers. A pioneering work is [7], which considers the
canonical problem of quantifying the peak of the impulse
response, and shows how upper bounds can be established via
LMIs based on set invariance of quadratic Lyapunov functions.
Another pioneering work is [8], which describes how this
methodology can be used in the design of feedback controllers
ensuring desired upper bounds on the peak of the impulse
response. The reader is also referred to recent works such as
[9] [10] where this methodology is exploited in optimal control
and in model predictive control.
However, the methodology exploited in these related works
is generally conservative and may provide upper bounds that
are rather far from the sought quantities as it will be shown in
Section IV. The idea proposed in this paper aims at providing
an LMI-based strategy where conservatism is eliminated. This
paper extends our previous work [11] where only continuous-
time systems are considered.
III. PROBLEM FORMULATION
The notation is as follows. The set of integer numbers is
denoted by Z. The set of real numbers is denoted by R. The
transpose of a matrix A is denoted by A′. The inﬁnity norm
of a matrix A is denoted by ∥A∥∞, i.e., ∥A∥∞ = maxi,j |ai,j|
where ai,j is the entry of A on the (i, j)-th position.
We consider the discrete-time linear time-invariant system
(
x(t + 1)
=
Ax(t) + Bu(t)
y(t)
=
Cx(t)
(1)
where t ∈ Z is the time, x(t) ∈ Rn is the state, u(t) ∈ Rm is
the input, y(t) ∈ Rp is the output, and A ∈ Rn×n, B ∈ Rn×m
and C ∈ Rp×n are given matrices. For the system (1), we
consider the problem in canonical form described hereafter.
Let us start by introducing the following deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 1: The impulse response of the system (1) with
respect to the i-th input channel is the function Yi(t), deﬁned
as the solution y(t) for initial condition x(0) = 0 and input
u(t) = δ(t)Ei, where Ei is the i-th column of the m × m
identity matrix, and δ(t) is the impulse deﬁned by
δ(t) =
 1
if t = 0
0
else.
(2)
The problem addressed in this paper is as follows.
Problem 1: Given c ∈ (0, ∞), establish whether c is
an upper bound of the maximum amplitude of the impulse
response of the system (1) with respect to all input channels,
i.e.,
∥Yi(t)∥∞ < c ∀t ≥ 0 ∀i = 1, . . . , m.
(3)
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-723-8
INTELLI 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

IV. MOTIVATING EXAMPLE
In order to motivate the strategy proposed in this paper,
let us consider the simple discrete-time linear time-invariant
system described by



x(t + 1)
=

0
1
−0.3
1

x(t) +
 0
1

u(t)
y(t)
=

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank the Reviewers for their
useful comments. This paper is supported by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61803152).
REFERENCES
[1] J. C. Doyle, B. A. Francis, and A. R. Tannenbaum, Feedback Control
Theory.
New York: McMillan, 1992.
[2] P. J. Antsaklis and A. N. Michel, Linear Systems. Cambridge University
Press, 2006.
[3] L. Qiu and K. Zhou, An Introduction to Feedback Control.
Prentice
Hall, 2010.
[4] R. C. Dorf and R. H. Bishop, Modern Control Systems.
Prentice Hall,
2016.
[5] B. Reznick, “Some concrete aspects of Hilbert’s 17th problem,” Con-
temporary Mathematics, vol. 253, pp. 251–272, 2000.
[6] G. Chesi, “LMI techniques for optimization over polynomials in control:
a survey,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 55, no. 11, pp.
2500–2510, 2010.
[7] S. Boyd, L. El Ghaoui, E. Feron, and V. Balakrishnan, Linear Matrix
Inequalities in System and Control Theory.
SIAM, 1994.
[8] C. W. Scherer, P. Gahinet, and M. Chilali, “Multiobjective output-
feedback control via LMI optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Auto-
matic Control, vol. 42, no. 7, pp. 896–911, 1997.
[9] A. White, G. Zhu, and J. Choi, “Optimal LPV control with hard
constraints,” International Journal of Control, Automation and Systems,
vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 148–162, 2016.
[10] W. Jiang, H. Wang, J. Lu, W. Qin, and G. Cai, “Synthesis of mixed ob-
jective output feedback robust model predictive control,” Asian Journal
of Control (in press), 2017.
[11] G. Chesi and T. Shen, “On the computation of the peak of the impulse
response of LTI systems,” in International Conference on Information
Science and System, Tokyo, Japan, 2019.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-723-8
INTELLI 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

