Analytical Network Process for the On-line Dispatching 
Boris Davydov 
Institute of Natural Science 
Far Eastern State Transport University 
Khabarovsk, Russian Federation 
e-mail: dbi@rambler.ru 
Vsevolod Kuzmitskiy 
Institute of Natural Science 
Far Eastern State Transport University 
Khabarovsk, Russian Federation 
e-mail: vsevolod.kuzmitskiy@mail.ru 
Andrey Serenko 
Institute of Natural Science 
Far Eastern State Transport University 
Khabarovsk, Russian Federation 
e-mail: a.serenko@mail.ru 
 
 
Abstract-Analytical network process (ANP) is usually used for 
solving the complex multifactor problems when search for the 
rational decisions is made in stationary operating conditions 
with a large resource of time. In this paper, we propose the 
idea of development the ANP as applied to operational 
dispatching. The developed method is based on reducing the 
amount of information that is introduced into the decision 
support system via man-machine dialogue in the real time. 
Much of the data on the state of infrastructure and its 
adjustments comes from neighboring information systems. 
These data are used to specify the weights of the links between 
the elements presented in the ANP-model of the object. This 
algorithm simplifies the process of filling the estimated 
supermatrix and saves a lot of time. Also, simplified variants of 
interface are proposed to serve the operative data entering 
through the dialogue of operator with the DSS. The paper 
provides an example of applying the modified ANP in solving 
the problem of railway traffic dispatching. 
 
Keywords-Intelligent 
transport 
system; 
real-time 
management; railway dispatching; decision making; analytical 
network process (ANP) 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
Decision 
making 
to 
overcome 
the 
complicated 
nonstandard situation is interrelated with processing a large 
amount of information. The expert analysis of an object or a 
process in its development is usually carried out over rather 
a long period of time. A lot of documentary sources and 
opinions of various experts are referred to, when analyzing 
the object. There are a number of effective methods to solve 
the specified problems, which are based on the use of 
special evaluating scales or the pairwise comparisons. The 
Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP) and the Analytical 
Network Process (ANP) are the most often used expert 
methods [1].  
In many operational cases there is a problem of solving a 
difficult situation when little time is allocated to find a 
rational 
solution. 
Many 
problems 
of 
operational 
management of such large systems as railways or power 
system relate to the tasks of this kind. Nonstandard 
situations regularly arise in these systems and there are no 
ready-made algorithms to find a way out. In these cases a 
large effect is obtained by using methods of expert 
assessments mentioned above. The expert analysis methods 
can be effectively applied in solving the railway traffic 
dispatching problems. Their properties make it possible to 
obtain a compromise solution when there is a conflict 
among managers of the control center [2]. 
Section 2 of this paper provides an overview of the well-
known publications on the problem of expert analysis, 
which allows solving complex multifactor problems. 
Section 3 considers the emerging problems of railway 
dispatching. Section 4 offers a modified ANP method in 
application to the task of operative dispatching. It also 
presents the idea of forming such an interface which would 
significantly simplify the process of estimating the factors in 
the phase of information input into the Decision Support 
System (DSS). Section 5 sets out the conclusions and 
directions for further research. 
 
II. OVERVIEW OF THE RELATED LITERATURE 
 
At present there are a number of methods in decision 
theory, which make it possible to analyze the multifactorial 
problems. Based on these methods, the algorithms produce 
decomposition of the object into its elements through the 
pairwise comparisons; next, a calculation of the matrix 
which includes the weights of these elements. Most of the 
works that develop these expert methods consider only the 
algorithm for calculating the priority vector [3]. Other works 
improve the technique for handling the input (primary) data 
while retaining the scaling mechanism [4]. Most of the 
publications are devoted to the use of classical techniques 
AHP / ANP in solving practical problems [5][6].  These 
techniques are also implemented in the decision support 
systems: Technique of Order Preference by Similarity to 
Ideal Solution (TOPSIS), Cognitive Hierarchy Process 
(CHP), Fuzzy Cognitive Hierarchy Process (FCHP) [7]-[9], 
and others. We are not aware of familiar with any studies, 
which would formulate and solve the problem of sharing 
algorithms that improve the data entry and processing in the 
expert determination of the optimal solutions. 
Many researchers work at the real-time technical conﬂict 
resolution problem in a railway [10]. Most of them use 
determinate modeling of the railway traffic. This approach 
allows accurate predicting the future evolution of the traffic 
on the basis of the actual train positions and speeds, as well 
as the signaling and safety system constraints. Assessing the 
possibility of using the algorithm of expert evaluations in 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-352-0
INTELLI 2014 : The Third International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

the process of object management in real time, Kabir et al. 
[4] have the opinion that it is impossible to solve the 
multifactor problem in a few short steps, as this will result 
in unacceptable inaccuracy. In our present paper we attempt 
to overcome this difficulty by means of using a priori 
information which comes through auxiliary channels. 
Besides, we try to create a rational construction of 
exchanging data between the operator and the DSS. Our 
goal is to create the DSS that allows dispatcher to get the 
intellectual and quick help in difficult cases of the railway 
traffic control, i.e., to obtain the solution of multifactor 
problem as soon as possible (within a few minutes).  
 
III. ANP-MODEL FOR THE RAILWAY DISPATCHING 
 
Selection of the decision on trains flow management is a 
typical problem of the railway dispatching. This is often a 
difficult task since we must take the priorities of the trains, 
the wagons, the work time of locomotive crews and a lot of 
other factors into account. Such difficult tasks are the 
typical multifactor scheduling problems. 
Technical, commercial and organizational factors are 
taken into account in the decision-making process for the 
rational traffic management of trains. In addition, issues of 
providing the train traffic safety are constantly in sight of 
the manager. There are deviations from the normal 
operation that regularly occur on the railroad. These 
deviations often have a unique character because every time 
their reason is a peculiar combination of different factors. In 
many cases, simulation model is a poor description of the 
work of the railway section, as the relevant information 
about the process may be absent or tardy. In this case, 
operating decisions are made by the dispatcher. Intelligent 
DSS gives the opportunity to build an integrated dynamic 
model of the process by combining the actual data, which 
come on-line from the rail section, and the information that 
is entered by the operator. It is possible to use an efficient 
algorithm to determine the adjustments' priorities vector, 
based on the expert ANP-analysis. 
ANP-model contains a number of technical clusters that 
correspond to the work of the stations, the train locomotives 
and the service divisions: power, signaling, communications 
and others. The separate cluster reflects the commercial 
weights of trains. The chief dispatcher of a railway line 
estimates the size of arcs which are directed to elements of 
this segment. Duty managers, who control the sets of 
locomotives, cars and other equipment, determine the 
intensity of the links between other specialized elements of 
the model. The common work of managers and the DSS is 
made in a dialogue mode that gives synergistic effect when 
determining the management decisions. 
 
 
IV.  MODIFIED ANP-MODEL AND RATIONAL MAN-MACHINE 
INTERFACE 
 
ANP-model is created by decomposition of the goals, 
the function conditions of the system and the results of the 
process execution. The elements of a decomposed problem 
are grouped into the clusters, each of which reflects one of 
the components of the large structural elements of the object 
under analysis. The elements are connected by the links, and 
movement along the links leads, ultimately, to the final 
alternative solutions (see Figure 1). Each dispatcher assesses 
the elements which relate to his duties.  
 
Element 11
Element 12
Element 21
Element 22
Element 31
Element 32
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Cluster 3
Train 
dispatcher
Power 
dispatcher
Rail line 
manager
 
Figure 1. Fragment of network model 
The corresponding weight of each of the final decision is 
formed on the basis of transition matrix, which is called the 
supermatrix in the ANP-approach. Controller of the certain 
object (we call him the rail line manager) introduces the 
values of DSS components, i.e., intensity of the links, which 
reflect the assessment of the importance of each of the 
factors. Herewith, he is using a certain estimating scale, 
mostly - from 1 to 9.  
The process of scaling becomes very consuming in the 
case of multifactor model and the presence of cross-links 
between the elements. The expert makes his judgments and 
enters the relevant data into the DSS by using a technique of 
pairwise comparisons. When solving the multifactor 
problem, this process becomes very time-consuming and 
laborious. Similar problems can go quickly in the work of 
the manager, one after another, which leads to a significant 
increase of the facts and paired comparisons together with 
psychological strain. In the present research we propose to 
reduce the number of operations that are performed by the 
dispatcher in the estimation process in on-line mode. These 
reductions are made in the following way.  
At the first stage, the dispatcher selects the type and 
location of the scenario which is considered in determining 
a specific decision, e.g., appointing the locality and time of 
the implementation of the adjustment and its type. This 
selection is reflected in the fact that the process model is 
simplified. Simplification is due to the fact that some of the 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-352-0
INTELLI 2014 : The Third International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

elements are excluded by the dispatcher from the model as 
well as their respective links. These excluded elements have 
little influence on the result of the adjustment in this 
particular situation. 
The second stage is represented by two sub-stages. In 
one of them part of the data, relating to commercial 
priorities, is entered by the rail line manager, who is 
responsible for this range of issues. Information that reflects 
the state of the infrastructure is introduced by the 
dispatchers of the relevant services: locomotives, power 
supply and others (fatty links). Considering the fragment of 
the model it is evident that the number of links (dotted 
links) that require estimation by the dispatcher is 
significantly reduced (see Figure 2). 
 
Other problems
Place and the 
relevant parameters
Commercial 
features
Commercial 
problems
Technical 
problems
Alternatives
Necessary add.  
actions
Technical 
features
El.1
El.2
El.3
El.1
El.2
El.3
El.1
El.2
El.3
El.1
El.2
El.3
El.1
El.2
El.3
El.1
El.2
El.3
El.1
El.2
El.3
El.1
El.2
El.3
 
Figure 2. ANP network with some a priori and a posteriori cluster links 
The volume of work that is performed in this second 
sub-step, is significantly reduced. This will ensure the 
achievement of the goal, namely, relieving the rail line 
manager from the large volume of non profile work. This 
allows him to focus on finding the most rational solution, 
which leads to conflict prevention or mitigation of its 
consequences.   
The numerical estimation of intensity in each of the 
factors is used in the classical scheme of expert analysis. 
Furthermore, the operator has difficulty in establishing the 
consistency between different acts of pairwise comparisons. 
In the on-line method, which is proposed in this paper, non-
standard ways of presenting the operator’s judgments are 
used.  
One way assumes that operator selects a point in the area 
which is bounded by the axes of intensity relationships 
between elements using an interactive pen (see Figure 3). 
This example shows the pairwise comparison of elements 
from the estimation position based by two criteria. Intensity 
axes are the criteria for comparing the elements (e.g., 
technical and economic criteria). Curved lines show the 
mutually beneficial nature of the interaction of the criteria 
by which the operator compares elements. 
 
Sy
1
Sy
2
Sy
3
Sy
4
Sx
1
Sx
2
Sx
3
Sx
4
 
Figure 3. Existence domain of particular solution 
 
The intensity value of the corresponding connection 
between a pair of elements is plotted on each axis. When the 
rail line manager compares the elements, he marks the point 
with these coordinates, which corresponds to his intuitive 
understanding of the features intensity. The second way is 
that a bar graph should be displayed on the screen for the 
use by the manager. A specific zone in the diagram is given 
for the each link (Figure 4).  
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Impact 
value
Clusters/ 
elements
min
max
 
Figure 4. Mechanism of interlocking ratings 
 
When making judgments on the intensity of features, the 
dispatcher makes mark in the certain areas corresponding to 
each connection between elements. This enables the 
manager to clearly see the ratio of their intensities, which 
speeds up the process of the data entering. Using these 
methods allows a person who makes the judgments, to 
connect the image thinking and, thus, simplify and 
accelerate the dialogue with the DSS. 
 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
 
The article describes the ANP-model which is designed 
for the determination of rational solutions in terms of lack of 
time. The decision making process is accelerated due to 
obtaining estimates from adjacent experts and their use in a 
single supermatrix. Furthermore, the volume of the 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-352-0
INTELLI 2014 : The Third International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

processed information is reduced due to the fact that the 
dispatcher indicates the type of scenario and other 
information that reduces the dimensionality of the model. 
The paper also offers a convenient interface that simplifies 
the process of making dispatcher judgments.  
In the future, we are planning to show how to solve the 
particular problems of railroad dispatching using the new 
ANP model. Development of the ideas in this work is 
expected in the direction of collective decision-making in 
conditions that require a compromise. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Many thanks to Mr. Alexander Korchugov, the head of 
department of the Far Eastern Railway Dispatching Center 
for his great help in carrying out the case studies. Thanks 
are due to referees for their constructive comments. This   
work   was   supported   by   Russian   Foundation   for   
Basic   Research,   under research project № 12-08-98513-
р_vostok_а. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] T. L. Saaty and L. Vargas, Decision making with the analytic network 
process. Pitsburg, PA: Springer, 2006.  
[2] B. Davydov, “Collective Intelligent Management of Freight Trains' 
Flow,” The Second International Conference on Intelligent Systems 
and Applications (INTELLI 2013), Apr. 2011, pp. 147-152 
[3] M. Karel and M. Gavalec, “On-line fuzzy optimization based on 
cognitive hierarchy process,” 9th International. Conference Fuzzy 
Sets Theory and its Applications (FSTA 08), Feb. 2008, pp. 174-195 
[4] M. A. Kabir, H. H. Latif and S. Sarker, “A multi-criteria decision-
making model to increase productivity: AHP and fuzzy AHP 
approach,” Int. J. Intelligent Systems Technologies and Applications, 
vol. 12, 2013, pp. 207-229. 
[5] M. Karel and M. Gavalec, “Multi-criteria models in autonomous 
decision making systems,” 10th International Symposium on the 
Analytic Hierarchy Process (ISAHP 2009), Aug 2009, pp. 257-263 
[6] G. Longo, E. Padoano, P. Rosato and S. Strami, “Considerations on 
the application of AHP/ANP methodologies to decisions concerning a 
railway infrastructure,” 10th International Symposium on the 
Analytic Hierarchy Process (ISAHP 2009), Aug 2009, pp. 334-348 
[7] H. H. Chen and H. Gu, “A fuzzy ANP model integrated with 
Benefits, Opportunities,Costs, and Risks to prioritize intelligent 
power grid systems,” Mathematical Problems in Engineering, vol. 34, 
Dec. 2013, pp. 259-269  
[8] C. M. Wu, C. L. Hsieh and K. L. Chang, “A hybrid multiple criteria 
decision making model for supplier selection,”  Mathematical 
Problems in Engineering, vol. 34, Dec. 2013, pp. 425-434 
[9] C. F. Camerer, T. H. Ho and J. K. Chong, “A cognitive hierarchy 
model of games,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 12, Aug. 
2004, pp. 861-898 
[10] J. Törnquist, “Computer-based decision support for railway traffic 
scheduling and dispatching: A review of models and algorithms”  
Proceedings of algorithmic approaches for transportation modeling, 
optimization and systems (ATMOS 2005), Oct. 2005, pp. 232-246 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-352-0
INTELLI 2014 : The Third International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

