Improving Measurement by Addressing the Sensor Fault Isolation Problem in
Control System
Thanh Nga Thai
School of Electrical Engineering
Ha Noi University of Science and Technology
Ha Noi, Viet Nam
thaithanhnga@gmail.com
Abstract—In many processes, an intelligent system using a
development simulation effective for the diagnosis system
depends on the sensor fault isolation problem. This work
presents a review of using advanced measurement technology
relevant to the sensor fault detection field through the
implementation of process instrumentations to improve safety
and reliability in systems. The system’s dynamics change in
time as it is affected by multiple functions and nonlinear
characteristic measurements. In such an environment, the
controllers should adapt on the fly to ensure performance
stability.
An
adaptable
development
method
should
be
employed to improve measurement in control systems.
Keywords-sensor
fault
types;
nonlinear
characteristic
measurement; fault detection and isolation FDI; diagnosis;
adaptable method.
I.
INTRODUCTION
All real systems may encounter malfunctions or defects,
which occur in sensors, actuators or the components of the
system itself [1]. Abnormalities and component faults are
increasingly studied as part of research meant to improve
reliability and safety in industrial systems, especially in
automatic control systems. Passive faults and active faults
based on fault diagnosis can refer to the design and operation
of measurement and control [2]. If a characteristic property
or parameter of a system changes from the standard
condition, the diagnosis system checks some predictable
faults such as the blocking of an actuator or the loss of sensor
or the disconnection of a system component. A diagnosis
decision using previously acquired knowledge from a
healthy system is usually made by using observation based
methods or parameter estimation techniques. However, some
nonlinear characteristics in the system may not be exact or
observed in the estimating process. There is a need to require
an effective adaptive development method for sensor fault
diagnosis. Improving fault measurement via sensor isolation
is the main way to achieve an intelligent environment for a
diagnosis system as compared to other conventional fault
diagnosis procedures that only work with fault tolerant
system.
In a dynamic system, the intrinsic parameters of a system
will modify the system’s dynamic. For the measurement
system, inaccurate values of physical variables in the sensor
and
the
environment
factors,
such
as
poor
or
bad
environmental conditions, affect to stable configuration
structure or cause damage to the stability of the system. For
example the bias, the drift or the freezing at low temperature
of sensors can lead to seriously unstable configuration or can
influence
the
system
structure.
These
inner
unstable
characteristics are described by using the function of
phenomenological analysis or general basis function, which
are observed behaviors of the system. The change in the
inputs affects the output and it can be the reason of some
otherwise unobserved states in control system.
The step of detecting and measuring these nonlinear
characteristics in a system, such as factors for structural
damage, is critical towards measuring the quality of a
system. Because the characterization of each component or
each part in a system is completely different, such as for
example
random
fault-variation
of
supply
voltage,
temperature changes or inaccurate instrument reading, the
automatic recovery system needs some specific control
techniques to improve safety and reliability. The methods for
fault detection of these nonlinear characteristics have to
operate under the constraint that there is potential inaccuracy
in the model, or the model used may not precisely match the
situation. The following optimization techniques in [4][7]
present
the identification of possible improvements of the
onboard systems[6].
Improving measurements by sensor fault isolation in a
control system to avoid accidents and optimization route is
an efficient desired fault detection method to improve a
diagnosis system. This work gives an overview of the
various ways of measurements to better analyze and design
for adaptable development methods. This also combines with
modern control theory, provides a development simulation of
nonlinear characteristic as a virtual tool for understanding the
effects of input noise and time delay on the system operation
and tolerance. The diagnosis system then identifies the
relationship between fault detection and the allowable delay
operations while ensuring a stable system performance.
These analysis improvements based on the model free
nonlinear control, a well defined controllability observer,
provide more for the mathematical basis by multifunction
faults in section II. Section III is the application adaptive
method for some sensor fault groups. The conclusion will
approach to the periodic diagnosis role in the complex
system using this method.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-723-8
INTELLI 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

II.
MAIN PROBLEM
There are two main aspects to improving detection of
when a fault happened in the control system. The first is the
sensor fault type which is either open loop or close loop.
Understanding the process control loop in the field of
instrumentation by open loop- manual mode and close loop-
automatic mode determines the solution and decision for
the parameter faults involved in the process. The second is
the method based on modelling to reflect the control system.
A.
Maintaining the sensor fault types
There are different faults in an automatic control system
such as sensor faults, actuator faults, component faults or
control unit faults. At the same time, there are unknown
inputs acting on the system causing disturbances generating
system noise in a dynamic system. This paper gives some
idea of sensor faults as occurring in the electronic part of an
automatic control system working with mission critical
aspects and operating in a well defined and protected
environment.
Many measurement errors are caused by defects in
sensors such as shortcut, offset, bias, power breakdown,
sticking, scaling error, hysteresis. Approaching the fault free
functioning in the electronic part for measured outputs is
discussed as a problem to perfect performance. The open
loop system is decomposed into three parts: sensors, actuator
and plant dynamics. External system disturbances or process
noise affect the dynamic of the plant and FDI needs robust to
deal with these uncertainties and remain fault sensitive for
diagnosis. Figure 1 presents some type of faults happening in
an open loop.
Figure 1. Fault happened in open loop system.
Starting at the input with the fault happening in sensor and
then in each part of components in open loop, the diagnosis
system uses dynamic switches to check the connection
between them for the maintenance mode. Measurement of
these faults as active faults or passive faults depends on
using the system model. Based on the modeling approach as
model based or model free, different FDI techniques are used
for the system dynamic. Some technical details are needed in
order
to
deal
with
the
nonlinear
characteristic
while
stabilizing a fault. The sensor fault types are the small and
large bias, the slow and fast sensor drift, the freezing at the
current sensor location or the oscillatory failure, increased
sensor noise, non return to zero, the malfunction as short
circuits, heating or erroneous signal conversion from analog
to digital, aging, etc [8]. The basic faults detected in sensors
are divided in passive faults and active faults. Passive faults
are such as small and large bias, the slow and fast sensor
drift, non return to zero. Active faults are two groups. The
first group is based on the freezing at the current sensor
location, oscillatory failure, increasing sensor noise. The
second group considers the cause of sensor fault and external
influences as the malfunction itself, the malfunction of the
sensor heating or the aging for longtime, the erroneous signal
conversion from the analog to digital or the influences as
temperature or dust. Nonlinear characteristic sensor fault
approach in this way is critical to the quality of measuring
production processing capability. First, to determine the fault
detection method in the operation system, the development
adaptation measure is referred. Second, an intelligent control
needs a development simulation to find complementary
characteristic faults like type of faults, location fault or
duration fault for diagnosis system. The reason is these
characteristics in each part of the components are completely
different from random faults to specific faults. A method
implies
nonlinear
characterization
fault
detection
for
operating constraints in process system can be suggested.
Based on the measurements obtained at the current and the
past operating point, the position of the next operating points
with respect to the previous is found by solving a nonlinear
optimization problem in its application to the stabilization as
a set of points. Regarding the measurement and control
methods, this knowledge about the optimization solution is
on the use of models for dynamic system. Extending in the
system perspective, the plant model mismatch presented the
uncertain or the unknown disturbances estimation becomes a
solution
model
nonlinear
compensation.
This
called
characteristic structure is intrinsic to a corporation with the
potential inaccuracy unobserved.
Another
approach
is
an
advance
control
method
for
nonlinear optimization based on the control law. It provides
an overview of distinction between measure and control
system as operating point and set point regulation. In this
action, when the computer control is either reliable or prone
to errors, the controller software handles using entirely
different error and accommodation mechanisms. The stable
controller, corresponding to each situation is designed off-
line using model predictive control method with the fixed
parameter sent to online controller redesign- design control
system.
Three mains fault types in this approach are abnormal fault,
the regular and the random fault or the control law as normal
law, alternate law and direct law. These are called the
characteristic structure control outside by law.
A structure of the definition control laws requires the entire
process envelope. Since each automation operation of a
dynamic system is characterized by the establishment of the
operating points, the control system is interested in the
dynamic behavior related to the observations. In figure 2,
fault happened in a close loop related with the control law
programming.
Sensor
Actuator
Process
Fault
happened
Fault
happened
Fault
happened
Input
Output
Measurement
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-723-8
INTELLI 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

Figure 2. Fault happened in close loop system.
The requirement to reduce isolation faults based on the
control method is still the subject of ongoing research. From
the point of view of the control system, feedback is used to
deal with active faults and adjustments are made to bring the
system back in order. In fault detection, the first step is the
stabilization assurance. The second step is the operating of
threshold and false. The threshold includes the sensitivity to
load, speed or noise, repeatability. Isolation fault consist of
threshold, false, discrimination and severity. To achieve the
best performance in a system, a predicted condition and
remaining life need a suitable threshold. Modern control
method approaches are to have the output which has
characteristic input for detection as the prediction, and
dynamic function as dysfunction. Control law provides set
points, which are based on the best performance for the
robust control system.
Depending on the fault characterization on sensors and
control rules, the diagnosis system decides which is the
suitable method based on the model based method and model
free method. There are many research articles such as signal
based fault detection and integration with the model based
method fault detection to achieve full control system
functionalities [1][4][8]. These can be considered as the
combination between the method model based and model
free. Each opinion makes some choices and generated
somewhat
different
results.
There
are
a
few
articles
comparing the differences between them and also the
application for each particular fault.
B.
Model based and model free method
Considering the traditional model approaches to system
engineering, we have traditionally relied on mathematic
models. There are two main approaches: model based
approaches and model free approaches. In the system
dynamic, methods are model based which is done according
to the structure of the model and the existing input-output
relationships. Model based fault diagnosis is a fundamental
role of fault detection for small faults with determining
time, size and cause of fault in a dynamic system operation.
Model free is used in real time measurements and process
history when model based are unavailable or not useful [3].
The majority of FDI techniques have been designed
assuming linearity while the majority of physical processes
are strongly nonlinear, so the accurate models of dynamic
system are nonlinear. In the model based method, analytical
redundancy
means
to
exploit
mathematical
relations
between measured or estimated variables to detect possible
dys-functions and should be understood as knowledge based
dynamic model [3]. Residual generation uses the model of
the system, in which the control inputs sent to the actuators
and the system outputs, as measured by the injected sensors
predicting the behavior of the system or part of it,
comparing between the prediction actions and the actual
action. Fault detection computes quantitative indexes of
fault presence and the residual. The associated algorithms
associate functional and non-functional properties of models
to performance benchmarking and optimization. Modern
control theory approaches are not only model based but also
model free in which the output has a characteristic
prediction of the input for fault detection. Model free is used
when there is no explicit dynamical model of the control
system, and it actually uses the redundancy and correlations
of the data in a hidden manner. It exploits measurements
acquired
in
real
time,
or
available
in
a
previously
constructed database, such as using the behavioral signal
model. The idea of this work is the residual generation
which indices the fault presences, fault isolation problem
changes into an appearance sensor fault. It integrates a
characteristic
prediction
function
in
the
passive
fault
situation via hidden data related with time delay and noise
operation in the system. These sensors work as a real time
measurement and process history data independent of the
control system. The meaning is that a control based
mechanism replaces measurements from a sensor in passive
fault to ensure stable performance as per an adaptive model.
III.
APPLICATION ADAPTABLE METHOD
Some methods approach to diagnosing fault system are
divided into four groups.
Group 1 and group 2 are
following an obtained model method. Group 3 is the
connection from the choice of group 1 and 2 to achieve
suitable characterization threshold for structure state. Group
4 shows the combination for adaptable method as automatic
tool for the supervision.
A.
Application model based for sensor in group 1
Fault detection relies on the analytical redundancy
principle using an accurate model of the system to mimic the
real process behavior. If a fault occurs, the residual signal
can be used to diagnose and isolate the malfunction such as a
set point. In the case of noisy measurement, the identification
technique gives the variances of the input-output noise
signals. Fault detection by multi set points is based on the
history data for the ability of time delay and noise operation
as full control functionalities system. To analyze the
Actuator
Sensor
Process
Fault
happened
Fault
happened
Fault
happened
Input
Output
Control law
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-723-8
INTELLI 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

diagnosis effectiveness of the FDI system in the presence of
abrupt changes or drift in measurements, fault modeled by
step or ramp functions have been generated, indicate that the
minimal detectable faults on the various process is a
parameter of interest for industrial diagnosis applications.
Comparisons
between
values
of
working
parameters
obtained in the simulation and measurement can make it
possible to predict and design. Small and large bias, the slow
and fast sensor drift, non return to zero are caused by the
freezing at the current sensor location, and is considered as
the malfunction of the sensor heating or the aging for
longtime. Multi set points as multi malfunction sensor
propose the technical layers are applied model based method
[2][3][5].
B.
Application model free for sensor in group 2
The dynamic nonlinear model has been developed by
dividing
the
dynamic
operation
of
the
machine
into
elementary model by means thermodynamic and mechanic
links. Reconfigure system from the different methods by the
predicted suitable method. When uncertainties are caused by
modeling errors, linearization errors, parameter variations,
etc, such a disturbance decoupling approach cannot be
directly
applied,
an
approach
suggests
an
exploiting
estimated distribution matrices. From the group 1, group 2
continues with the adaptive method to observe the behavior
in the system as model free in the operating system [1][2][5].
C.
Equation relationship between them in structure state
equation
Characterization applies to suitable threshold prediction
as nonlinear characteristic to improve the safety and
reliability in system from the structure state equations. The
full
nonlinear
control applied
to
the positioning
and
orientation problem is assessed and adapted to the expected
performances. Following the free model based, structure
state equation change to the positioning and orientation
relationship equations [1][2][8]. This promising method to
solve the FDI problem consists of using an accurate model of
the system to mimic the real process behavior by covering
the difference between real system and model behaviors
rather than the corporation with the potential inaccuracy of
the model or model mismatch in parameter identifications.
D.
Adaptive method for improving measurement
The way to ensure stability performance in the system
becomes a step in the control based mechanism [5][9],
related
to
the
time
delay
and
noise
operations,
the
dysfunction for the stabilization and observation is applied
to sensor fault isolation problem. Time delay and noise
operation become the condition environment as a standard
to adaptive method for improving measurement. The
application includes automatic supervision of close loop
operation as early as possible.
IV.
CONCLUSION
An adaptable development method following this way
can improve the measurement in control system. It shows
that sensor fault isolation in control systems achieves the
robust system by controlling passive faults and active faults.
The material in sensor problem relates to the design of
control structure allowing established autonomous position
and orientation characterization. Coating material combines
specific requirements towards the best available solution.
Selecting the variety and technical guidance applied to the
sensor fault isolation problem achieves the required standard
structure.
Future
works
will
study
the
detail
of
the
relationship between switch dynamics with the role sensor in
the tolerance fault for the actuators. Finally, this justifies the
periodic diagnosis point in complex dynamic system by
securing the self-control problem.
REFERENCES
[1]
S.Simani, C. Fantuzzi and R. J. Patton ‘’Model based fault diagnosis
in dynamic systems using identification techniques’’, Springer, 2003,
pp. 2-28.
[2]
R. Isermann, ‘’Fault diagnosis systems- An introduction from fault
detection to fault tolerance’’, Springer, 2006, pp. 15-25.
[3]
L. Fernandez and J. Luis, ‘’Fault detection for nonlinear systems: a
new approche’’, thesis unpublished, pp. 8-20.
[4]
P. Goupil, ‘’Fault diagnosis and fault tolerant control and guidance
for aerospace vehicles’’, Springer, 2014, pp. 2-18.
[5]
T.N. Thai, ‘’ Characteristic matrix faults for flight control system’’,
ICMMS, 2014, pp. 1-4.
[6]
S. Chatty, S. Convesy, H. Gaspard and J.L. Vinot, ‘’The accident of
flight 447 Rio-Paris: a case study for HCI research’’, Hal, 2009, pp1-
4.
[7]
O. T. Pleter, C.E. Constantinescu and B.I.Jakab, ‘’Reconstructing the
Malaysian 370 Flight trajectory by optimal search’’, Journal of
navigation, 2016, pp. 4-8.
[8]
D. Ossmann, H.D. Joos and P.Goupil ‘’Enhanced sensor monitoring
to maintain optimal aircraft handling in case of faults’’, Journal of
guidance control and dynamics, 2017, pp. 1-5.
[9]
T.D. Nguyen, ‘’ A conceptual approach to the problem of action
angle variables’’, ARMA, August 2018, Volume 229, Issue 2, pp.
789-794.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-723-8
INTELLI 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

