Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure – Security Considerations and Approaches
Rainer Falk, Steffen Fries 
Corporate Technology 
Siemens AG 
Munich, Germany 
e-mail: [rainer.falk | steffen.fries]@siemens.com 
 
 
Abstract—Rechargeable 
electric 
vehicles 
are 
receiving 
increasing attention from different stakeholders: from 
customers as gas prices are constantly rising, from car 
manufacturers 
to 
address 
customer, 
market, 
and 
environmental demands, and also from electric energy utilities 
for integrating them into smart electric grids. While in the first 
step, the emphasis is placed on electric vehicles as energy 
consumers, using their battery for storing energy and feeding it 
back to the energy network will be the consequent next step. 
Batteries of electric vehicles will realize a distributed energy 
electric storage for stabilizing the electric power grid. Thus the 
electric vehicle will participate as a mobile energy node within 
the smart grid having two types of interfaces, one for 
electricity and one for data communication for charging and 
feedback control, information exchange, and for billing. Since 
IT security in the smart grid is already considered as a major 
point to be addressed, the enhancement of the smart grid with 
electric mobility has to address IT security as well. This article 
describes example interactions of electric vehicles with the 
charging 
infrastructure 
and 
it 
shows 
which 
security 
requirements have to be fulfilled in important use cases. 
Moreover, security considerations of current standardization 
activities ISO/IEC and SAE are described. 
Keywords - eMobility security; Smart Grid security; charging 
infrastructure; IEC 61851; IEC 15118 
I. 
Introduction 
The 
Smart 
Grid, 
comprising 
power 
generation, 
transmission, and distribution systems, comprises two 
parallel infrastructures, the electrical grid carrying the  
energy, 
and 
the 
information 
and 
communication 
infrastructure used to automate, control, and monitor the 
electrical grid. The information and communication part of a 
Smart Grid is increasingly becoming one of the essential 
parts of power system operations as it is responsible not only 
for retrieving monitoring information from field equipment 
but also, more importantly, for issuing and transmitting 
control commands realizing intelligent control algorithms for 
on optimized operation of the smart grid. 
The number of electric vehicles as bicycles, motorcycles,  
and cars is expected to increase significantly. Electric 
vehicles will be connected with the Smart Grid for charging 
or for power feedback. They connect to the Smart Grid 
through charging stations. Charging points in public or 
corporate places provide the possibility for high power AC 
or DC charging. Other connection points may be provided by 
combined service stations, e.g., for parking lots, or common 
home power plugs in residential areas. Closely linked with 
the pure flow of energy is the management and control of the 
energy demand for charging electric vehicles. It allows 
matching the energy demand with the energy available 
within the energy grid. A defined part of the vehicle battery’s 
capacity can also be used as energy storage to stabilize the 
energy grid when needed by feeding back energy from the 
vehicle to the electrical grid. Besides the control of energy 
flow there may be a second communication channel for the 
billing for consumed or provided energy.  
The charging infrastructure as a part of the critical 
infrastructure Smart Grid requires integrated protection 
against unintentional and intentional attacks. Safety and IT 
security measures, which are already being part of the Smart 
Grid core (e.g., defined as standard or realized in proprietary 
deployments), need to be enhanced to cover also the Smart 
Grid access infrastructure. This Smart Grid access 
infrastructure is provided for electric vehicles through the 
charging infrastructure. While current deployments do not 
feature an information exchange between the electric vehicle 
and the charging infrastructure beside a minimum local 
control of the charging process through pilot signals, 
upcoming standards and proposed scenarios provide feature 
rich communication options. The Smart Grid communication 
and control network of an energy utility is increasingly 
opened to various nodes not being under control of any 
energy network operator  and thereby exposed to attacks. 
Highly dependable management and operations of the 
information infrastructure are prerequisites for a highly 
reliable energy network as the power system increasingly 
relies on the availability of the information infrastructure. 
Therefore, the information infrastructure must be operated 
according to the same level of reliability as required for the 
stability of the power system infrastructure to prevent any 
type of outage. Especially consumers and utility companies 
can both benefit from managing this intelligently, and 
standards anticipating the new environment are emerging 
from many directions. The immediately apparent security 
needs target the prevention of financial fraud and ensure the 
reliable operation of the power grid. Both are complex 
objectives. But surely all of the security ramifications of the 
charging infrastructure have not been discovered yet. 
Especially the interaction between new market participants 
and value added services is currently under investigation. In 
any case, ensuring privacy, safety, and assuring that the 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-204-2
INTERNET 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Evolving Internet

charging service is operating correctly are basic objectives to 
derive related IT security requirements. Hence, integrated 
information security is a central part of the charging 
infrastructure.  
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: 
Section II describes use cases around the electric vehicle 
charging infrastructure. Section III discusses information 
assets derived from the use cases, threats to these assets and 
also defines first security requirements. Section IV gives an 
overview about the security standardization for the vehicle to 
grid interface, while Section V concludes the document.  
II. 
USE CASES 
The electrical vehicle charging infrastructure consists of 
a combination of power services for electric vehicles and 
value-added services based on the information and 
communication infrastructure as illustrated in Figure 1.  
 
Figure 1.  Communication among Actors of an Electric Vehicle Charging 
Infrastructure 
One main goal of this information and communication 
infrastructure is to offer customers a choice of service 
options beneficial to all three, the utility company, the 
mobility operator as power (service) provider, and the 
customer. The utility can operate most efficiently when 
energy demand is fairly constant over time. Price incentives 
can be offered towards those customers having a flexible 
vehicle charging schedule with the objective to smooth out 
energy demand variations. This requires the analysis and 
consideration of several variables, e.g., schedule, equipment, 
location, payment options, and additional services.  
The variety of peers in a charging infrastructure as 
depicted in Figure 1 shows the complexity, but also the 
manifold of possibilities for optimized service offerings. The 
following subsections provide an overview on potential use 
cases 
surrounding 
the 
charging infrastructure. 
Each 
subsection provides potential realization options for the 
considered use case. Note that the use case discussion stems 
mainly from standardization work currently done in ISO/IEC 
and SAE. but the use cases show the potential of a Smart 
Grid charging infrastructure to be a flexible platform to 
realize a variety of known and upcoming service offerings  
A. Control of the Electric Vehicle Charging Environment 
Connecting 
electric 
vehicles 
with 
the 
charging 
infrastructure provides flexible control of the charging 
process through enhanced communication between electric 
vehicle, charging spot, and the energy provider in the 
backend, e.g., to adapt the charging to the current energy 
provisioning situation. It also covers scenarios with limited 
control of the charging operation through the charging spot 
or backend. Charging in these scenarios may be controlled 
completely by the electric vehicle to the limits set by the 
environment. This is typically the case for AC (alternating 
current) charging, while in DC (direct current) charging 
control is being performed by the charging spot. 
B. Connecting to the Charging Infrastructure 
Connecting a vehicle to the charging infrastructure may 
use a portable cord set to be provided by either the electric 
vehicle owner or the charge spot operator. This cord set and 
the connectors may be different depending whether charging 
is being done using AC or DC , or depending on the country. 
An alternative is provided through wireless (inductive) 
charging avoiding any power cord to the car. Special 
consideration of the physical charging environment is 
necessary here, to ensure safe operation. 
C. Billing and Payment for Charging Service 
Billing and payment for consumed energy or value added 
services can be performed through various options: 
- At the charging spot, including money, prepaid, credit 
cards, combination with parking ticket, etc. 
- From within the vehicle (e.g., via a contract-related 
credential stored within the car). This option includes 
identification of the electric vehicle as well as charging 
contract verification. 
Besides the direct customer interaction, there is also the 
interaction with clearinghouses that settle accounts between 
different energy providers. These become necessary when 
using contract based payment from within a car at a charging 
spot belonging to a different mobility provider.  
D. Negotiated Incentive Rate Plan 
Negotiating incentive rate plans may depend on, e.g., the 
contract between the customer and the mobility provider. 
Thus different realization options may be: 
- Time of use (TOU): The utility provides a price incentive 
to charge a vehicle at times of lower demand typically 
based on time of day, day of week, and season of year. 
Prices are set ahead of time, in an attempt to shift load 
towards a more favorable time of day. 
- Direct load or price control through utility: The customer 
receives a price incentive to give the utility direct control 
over the charging process. Normally, the customer is 
given a fixed, reduced price, and the utility has the option 
to interrupt or delay charging at critical times. 
- Dynamic tariffs: This is a variation of time of use 
sometimes called real-time pricing (RTP). Price 
schedules vary more frequently, usually daily. Once 
delivered, the prices are firm and the customer, not the 
utility, controls the load. 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-204-2
INTERNET 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Evolving Internet

- Critical peak pricing (CPP): This is another variation on 
time of use, in which the utility retains the right to 
override the price schedule with higher prices on a 
limited number of days having particularly high demand 
or other unusual events. 
- Optimized charging: The customer gives the utility 
control of the charging load in turn for a price incentive. 
The utility may, at critical times, reduce or interrupt 
charging, based in part on the state of charge of the 
vehicle. 
E. Charging Location 
The charging location may vary effecting potentially also 
the provided service and payment options: 
- Charging in private environments like the vehicle 
owner’s home or another’s home within the same 
utility’s service area or another’s home within a different 
utility’s service area. The charging location may not be 
directly connected with the charging infrastructure in 
terms of dynamic charging control. Hence, certain 
options for tariffs or value added services may not always 
be available. 
- Charging at public charge spot can also be distinguished 
based on the contractual relation of the vehicle owner to 
the charging spot operator or mobility operator like: 
charging spot belonging to the same utility as customer 
contracted, different utility (comparable to “roaming”) or 
charging without a contractual relationship (payment 
based on money, pre-paid card, credit card, etc.). 
- Fleet operator premises may not require a contractual 
relationship per vehicle directly. They may be based on 
the fleet operator, providing an energy “flat rate”. Control 
of the charging process may be distinguished as 
described above. 
F. Value Added Services  
Connecting the vehicle with a charging spot featuring a 
communication interface provides the opportunity to 
leverage this communication connection also for value added 
services. Examples comprise: 
- Software updates for ECUs or infotainment systems 
- Remote diagnosis and maintenance 
- Multimedia service during charging 
G. Electricity Feedback 
While in the first place charging is the main service 
provided for electric vehicles, it is also envisioned to use 
electric vehicles as dynamic energy storage. The electric 
vehicle could feed back energy into the Smart Grid upon 
request. Here, a distinction of the use cases can be done in a 
similar way as for charging: 
- Based on the feedback locations, e.g., for integration 
within micro grids, to increase their independence from 
the main grid allowing the local usage of stored energy. 
- Based on a local feedback plan, were the customer 
configures, e.g., a certain amount of energy, which is 
required as minimum capacity of the vehicle battery. 
- Based on backend scheduling / needs. 
These use cases show a variety of different services for 
the electric vehicle charging infrastructure. They illustrate 
how valuable the transmitted information is for the 
availability and reliable operation of the services, but also for 
the safety and privacy of the end user. 
 
III. 
INFORMATION ASSETS, POTENTIAL THREATS, AND 
DERIVED SECURITY REQUIREMENTS  
As just shown in the previous section, various use cases 
exist in which different peers exchange information to realize 
a dedicated service. Experience with the existing data 
communication infrastructure can be leveraged to analyze 
the charging infrastructure regarding potential threats as well 
as to determine suitable countermeasures. This may 
especially 
comprise 
security 
protocols 
or 
security 
mechanisms, which have been proven effective in the current 
communication infrastructures. Examples comprise security 
protocols like TLS (Transport Layer Security [3]) and digital 
signatures. 
A. Information Assets in Charging-Related 
Communication 
The 
information 
transported 
over 
the 
different 
connections is the asset that may motivate attacks against the 
charging infrastructure. The following table summarizes 
important information assets and their criticality for the 
system. The majority of these information assets are 
expected to be transmitted especially over the vehicle-to-grid 
interface. 
TABLE I.  
INFORMATION ASSETS IN THE ELECTRIC VEHICLE 
CHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE 
Information 
asset 
Description, potential content 
Security 
relation 
Customer ID 
and location 
data 
Customer name, vehicle identification 
number, charging location, and 
charging schedule 
Effects 
customer 
privacy  
Meter Data 
Meter readings that allow calculation 
of the quantity of electricity consumed 
or supplied over a time period. These 
are generated by the charge spot and 
may be validated by the vehicle. 
Effects system 
control and 
billing 
Control 
Commands 
Actions requested by one component 
of other components via control 
commands. These may also include 
inquiries, alarms, or Notifications. 
Effects system 
stability and 
reliability and 
also safety  
Configuration 
Data 
Configuration data (system operational 
settings and security credentials, also 
thresholds for alarms, task schedules, 
policies, grouping information, etc.) 
influence the behavior of a component 
and may need to be updated remotely. 
Effects system 
stability and 
reliability and 
also safety 
Time, Clock 
Setting 
Time is used in records sent to other 
entities. Phasor measurement directly 
relates to system control actions. 
Moreover, time is also needed to use 
tariff information optimally. It may also 
be used in certain security protocols.  
Effects system 
control 
(stability and 
reliability and 
also safety) 
and billing 
Access 
Control 
Policies 
Determination whether a 
communication peer is entitled to send 
and receive commands and data. 
Such policies may consist of lists of 
Effects system 
control system 
stability, 
reliability, and 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-204-2
INTERNET 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Evolving Internet

Information 
asset 
Description, potential content 
Security 
relation 
permitted communication partners, 
their credentials, and their roles. 
also safety 
Firmware, 
Software, 
and Drivers 
Software packages installed in 
components may be updated 
remotely.  Updates may be provided 
by the utility (e.g., for charge spot 
firmware), the car manufacturer, or 
another OEM. Their correctness is 
critical for the system reliability. 
Effects system 
stability and 
reliability and 
also safety 
Tariff Data 
Utilities or other energy providers may 
inform consumers of new or temporary 
tariffs as a basis for purchase 
decisions. 
Effects 
customer 
privacy and 
competition 
B. Potential Threats 
Some example threats are described in the following to 
illustrate the need to integrate security measures into the 
charging infrastructure right from the beginning. These 
threats focus on the specifics of electric vehicle charging and 
connected communication. 
1) Eavesdropping / Interception 
Eavesdropping 
is 
a 
passive 
attack 
to 
intercept 
information, which may compromise privacy or be used to 
gain more information for additional, active attacks. 
Eavesdropping requires the adversary to have either physical 
or logical access to the communication connection. Both the 
link to the vehicle and to the backend may be intercepted 
(Figure 2). 
 
Home Gateway or  
Backend Services  
(Billing, etc.) 
Electric Vehicle 
Charging Spot 
 
Figure 2.  Potential Locations for Eavesdropping  
Communication with the charging spot in general can be 
done using different technologies, like Wireless or Powerline 
Communication (PLC). Common to these technologies is 
that the radiation of the communication transfer (through the 
frequency used) is high enough that it is sufficient for an 
adversary to be in closer vicinity to the communication 
instead of having direct physical access. Missing security 
measures will enable an adversary to eavesdrop the 
communication. 
As 
shown 
above, 
charging 
related 
communication may include a variety of information being 
valuable for an attacker like tariff information, charging 
status information, or billing relevant information. 
2) Man-in-the-Middle Attack 
An attacker may intercept communication on the 
interface between the vehicle and the charging point and 
modify this information. An example may be tariff options 
provided by the mobility operator and send via the charging 
spot to the vehicle. This may be accomplished in the easiest 
case through a modified charging cable. 
Another example is the usage of a faked charge spot as 
depicted in Figure 3: A potential adversary may use its own 
(faked) charging spot to which honest customer connect. The 
adversary’s charge spot is connected to an official charge 
spot and only routes the communication between the honest 
customer and the original charge spot. The adversary can 
then consume the charging energy partially, so that the 
honest customer receives only a fraction of her purchased 
energy, but pays for the complete consumption by her 
vehicle plus the adversary’s vehicle. 
 
faked charging spot  
offers service 
Control and Billing 
Infrastructure 
pays all 
charges for free 
OEM charging spot 
Electric 
Vehicle 
 
Figure 3.  Man-in-the-Middle Attack to steal Energy  
Interesting in this attack is that the adversary actually 
performs the manipulation on the energy provisioning path 
and not on the communication path. The latter one is 
untouched. This attack shows the need for connecting the 
flow of energy to the flow of information. 
3) Transaction Falsifying or Repudiation 
The 
customer 
himself 
may 
intentionally 
or 
unintentionally claim to have received less energy than stated 
on the billing record.  Likewise, the utility may claim to have 
delivered more energy to the customer. 
4) Attack network from within vehicle (and vice versa) 
If the electric vehicle is connected to the charging 
infrastructure, e.g., using a value added service, an adversary 
(software) may inject or modify application-level traffic 
intentionally (as an attack) or unintentionally (faulty 
software component, malware). 
5) Tampered or substituted component 
A customer may manipulate a component trusted by the 
utility to provide accurate billing or control information. This 
affects both components in the charging spot and within the 
electric vehicle. Examples are pirated or faked replacement 
parts. 
C. First Set of Security Requirements 
Basic security requirements of the electric vehicle 
charging infrastructure have to be addressed. They target the 
availability and reliable energy provisioning. They also aim 
to limit attack effect (geographical and functional), enforce 
authorized control actions on the smart grid, and correct 
billing of energy transactions between involved peers 
(customer, charging sport operator, market, utility).  
Based on the stated information assets and depicted 
threats, the basic security requirements can be more 
specifically addressed by requiring dedicated cryptographic 
measures as there are:  
- Mutual authentication of end-to-end communicating 
entities. The authentication may be performed on 
different layers of the OSI reference model, e.g., on 
transport layer and on application layer. This is especially 
useful, if the peer to authenticate against is either a local 
communication peer or a backend peer, depending on the 
online state of the charging spot.   
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-204-2
INTERNET 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Evolving Internet

- Non-repudiation of billing and tariff information to 
ensure secure transactions.  
- Protected communication between the electric vehicle 
and the charging spot, the electric vehicle and backend 
services, the charging spot and backend services, 
between backend services.  
- Authorization, especially for control of the charging. 
- Integrity-protected, 
authenticated 
and 
authorized 
software updates to avoid malfunctions through software 
from unauthorized sources  
- Logging of security relevant events to enable auditability 
of the system. 
- Security failure and exception handling, to support 
system reliability, also in case of security breaches, 
- In general confidentiality and integrity of sensitive data.  
These security requirements cover typically lead to 
technical and organizational security measures. Hence, to 
ensure a thorough security approach supporting the 
interaction of different peers using equipment from different 
vendors, standardization of an appropriate security approach 
as part of the overall system approach is necessary. 
 
IV. 
STANDARDIZATION LANDSCAPE FOR THE 
CONNECTION TO THE CHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE 
This section details the standardization activities focusing 
on the communication interface between the electric vehicle 
and the charging spot, but further connections to the backend 
are also considered. The main focus is placed on 
standardization activities from the ISO/IEC. An overview 
about related SAE activities is given as well. 
Charging Connector
IEC 62196-1/2/3
SAE J1772
Charging Communication
ISO 15118
ISO 61851-24
SAE J2293-2
SAE J2847
SAE J2836
Charging Topology
IEC 61851-1/21/22/23/24
IEC 61439-5
Safety
IEC 61140
IEC 62040
IEC 60529
IEC 60364-7-722
ISO 6469-3
SAE J1766
ISO 61850
Charging Connector
IEC 62196-1/2/3
SAE J1772
Charging Communication
ISO 15118
ISO 61851-24
SAE J2293-2
SAE J2847
SAE J2836
Charging Topology
IEC 61851-1/21/22/23/24
IEC 61439-5
Safety
IEC 61140
IEC 62040
IEC 60529
IEC 60364-7-722
ISO 6469-3
SAE J1766
ISO 61850
 
Figure 4.  Communication Standards for the Electric Vehicle Charging 
Infrastructure [1] 
As shown in Figure 4, standardization activities of 
ISO/IEC and SAE can be divided into four categories: 
charging connector, charging communication, charging 
topology, and safety. The following table summarizes more 
information about relevant standards. 
TABLE II.  
COMMUNICATION STANDARDS AND THEIR SCOPE  
FOR THE ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE  
Standard 
Scope 
Content 
IEC 
62196 
Charging 
Connector 
Plugs, socket-outlets, vehicle couplers 
and vehicle inlets – Conductive charging  
SAE 
J1772 
Charging 
Connector 
Electric Vehicle Conductive Charge 
Coupler 
Standard 
Scope 
Content 
ISO 
15118 
Charging 
Communication 
Road vehicles - Communication protocol 
between electric vehicle and grid 
SAE 
J2293 
Charging 
Communication 
Energy Transfer System for Electric 
Vehicles 
SAE 
J2836 
Charging 
Communication 
Use Cases for Communication between 
Plug-in Vehicles and the Utility Grid (-1), 
Supply Equipment (EVSE) (-2), Utility Grid 
for Reverse Power Flow (-3)  
SAE 
2847 
Charging 
Communication 
Communication between Plug-in Vehicles 
and the Utility Grid (-1),  Supply 
Equipment (EVSE) (-2), Utility Grid for 
Reverse Power Flow (-3) 
IEC 
61850 
Power Systems 
Communication 
Communication networks and systems in 
substations 
IEC 
61851 
Charging 
Topology 
Electric vehicle conductive charging 
system 
IEC 
61439 
Charging 
Topology 
Low-voltage switchgear and control gear 
assemblies 
The following sections describe ISO/IEC activities 
related to charging communication and their IT-security 
considerations. This overview shows the increasing 
consideration of IT security requirements in the definition of 
evolving charging communication protocols. This is 
especially the case for new protocols like ISO/IEC 15118 
targeting the communication for charging control and value 
added services between electric vehicles and charging spots. 
A. IEC 61851 
IEC 61851 defines a conductive charging system and was 
standardized in 2001. The standard addresses equipment for 
charging electric road vehicles at standard AC supply 
voltages (as per IEC 60038) up to 690 V and at DC voltages 
up to 1000 V, and for providing electrical power for any 
additional services on the vehicle if required when connected 
to the supply network. The standard comprises different parts 
addressing specific charging options: 
- IEC 61851-1: Electric 
vehicle 
conductive 
charging 
system – General requirements         
- IEC 61851-21: 
Electric 
vehicle 
conductive 
charging system - Electric vehicle requirements for 
conductive connection to an A.C./D.C. supply 
- IEC 61851-22 Electric 
vehicle 
conductive 
charging 
system - A.C. electric vehicle charging station 
- IEC 61851-23 Electric 
vehicle 
conductive 
charging 
system - D.C electric vehicle charging station 
- IEC 61851-24 Electric 
vehicle 
conductive 
charging 
system - Control communication protocol between off-
board D.C. charger and electric vehicle 
IEC 61851 targets four different charging modes: 
- Mode 1 (AC): slow  charging from a standard household-
type socket-outlet 
- Mode 2 (AC): slow  charging from a standard household-
type socket-outlet with in-cable protection device 
- Mode  3 (AC):  slow  or  fast  charging using  a  specific  
EV socket-outlet and plug with control and protection 
function permanently installed  
- Mode 4 (DC): fast charging using an external charger  
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-204-2
INTERNET 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Evolving Internet

The communication between the vehicle and the 
charging spot depends on the mode applied. There is no data 
communication in Mode 1 and Mode 2. In Mode 3 only the 
control pilot communication exists, while in Mode 4 
additional communication functions are available to allow 
battery management. Common to all modes is that IT-
security is not provided. Nevertheless, for the vehicle 
integration 
into 
a 
smart-grid-connected 
charging 
infrastructure, (secure) communication is required for tariff 
exchange, billing, optimization of charge cost and grid load, 
value added services, etc. To support these functions in the 
future, ISO/IEC 15118 is currently being specified 
addressing these communications needs, including an 
integrated security concept (see next section). 
B. ISO/IEC 15118 
ISO/IEC 15118 is being standardized in an ISO/IEC joint 
working group. Its main focus is the interface between an 
electric 
vehicle 
and 
a 
charging 
spot 
interface. 
Communication with the backend infrastructure is not 
directly targeted. The specification is split into different 
parts, which are all still work in progress: 
- ISO 15118-1: General information and use-case 
definition (cf. [5]) 
- ISO 15118-2: Technical protocol description and Open 
Systems Interconnections (OSI) layer requirements (cf. 
[6]) 
- ISO 15118-3: Physical layer and Data Link layer 
requirements (cf. [7]) 
Security is integral part of the standard and has been 
considered right from the design phase. ISO/IEC 15118-1 
contains a security analysis, which investigates in specific 
threats, which are partly stated in section III.B above. This 
security analysis is the base for the security requirements and 
resulting security measures targeting the specified use cases.  
The security measures defined in ISO/IEC 15118-2 build 
upon existing standards as far as possible. The access media 
for AC and DC charging will be powerline communication 
in the first step. Support of inductive charging will most 
likely use wireless communication. As both feature different 
OSI layer 1+2, security measures have not been placed here 
to allow an independent solution. As shown in Figure 5 
ISO/IEC 15118-2 applies TCP/IP for the communication 
between the vehicle and the charging spot. Consequently, 
security is applied on transport layer using TLS (cf. [3]) 
ensuring a protected channel between both. Since ISO/IEC 
15118 targets the communication between the vehicle and 
the charging spot, this might be sufficient at the first glimpse. 
But security measures on application layer have also been 
defined applying XML security (digital signatures and 
encryption). Application layer security became necessary, as 
the communication also targets billing and payment relevant 
information, which are exchanged with the backend in 
contract based payment scenarios.  Moreover, to enable 
contract based payments, the vehicles need authentication 
means. To enable secure communication with the backend, 
the electric vehicle possesses a digital  vehicle certificate and 
a corresponding private key. These security measures go 
beyond the communication hop between the electric vehicle 
and the charging spot. The direct data interaction of the 
electric vehicle with the backend is shown in Figure 5 in the 
charging cycle loop. Here, charging spot meter readings are 
signed by the vehicle and forwarded by the charging spot to 
the backend. They build the base for the billing process later 
on. Note that the general data exchange in Figure 5 has been 
simplified and mainly security related exchanges are shown.  
  
 
Tear Down 
Energy Provider with Control and Billing 
Functionality, Clearinghouse, Charge 
Spot Provider 
Charging Spot 
Connection establishment 
Charging Cycle 
Charging Finished 
TLS Session establishment 
Service Discovery 
TLS protected Communication 
TLS Session Termination 
Connection termination 
Signed meter readings for billing 
Initialization 
TLS Session establishment 
Otional: Request Tariff for Contract ID 
TLS protected communication (may be a temporary or a permanent connection to exchange Information.  
In special use cases the TLS connection to the backend may not be available during the charging period.  
Exchange of security relevant 
information (Certificate Updates, etc.) 
Note also that the signed meter reading 
contains the meter reading itself, but also 
session related information like the session ID 
as well as the communication partner IDs. 
This is explained in the document. 
Electric 
Vehicle 
Payment Details (optional with 
encrypted Tariff Information) 
Signed Contract Authentication 
Meter Status 
Signed Meter Receipt  
Meter Status 
Signed Meter Receipt  
 
Figure 5.  Information Exchange for Electric Vehicle Charging  
The proposed security solution takes the connection state 
of a charging spot into account to support charging spots that 
have very limited or even no online connectivity. In general, 
the charging spot is assumed to be online at least once a day. 
This online period may coincide with the charging period of 
an electric vehicle. Therefore, explicit precautions have to be 
given to the exchanged data, especially, if the backend 
depends on these. 
To enable secure transmission of data from the backend 
to the vehicle (e.g., credential updates or tariff information) a 
secret needs to be established between the vehicle and the 
backend allowing an end-to-end encrypted transfer. The 
vehicle certificate contains static Diffie-Hellman parameters 
to enable an easy setup of a session based encryption key. 
Only the backend needs to generate fresh per-session Diffie-
Hellman parameters that are used to calculate a fresh Diffie 
Hellman secret, which can then be used as session secret. 
This has the advantage, that the backend can pre-calculate 
session keys for vehicle communication, once the vehicle’s 
certificate is known at the backend. This approach is known 
from many of today’s web server applications, which use the 
same technique. 
For the normal operation the vehicle certificate will be a 
contract-based credential. Thus the backend already 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-204-2
INTERNET 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Evolving Internet

possesses the certificate information, once the customer 
enrolled for a contract. For setup operation, the vehicle may 
possess an OEM credential installed during manufacturing of 
the car and used for bootstrapping the contact based 
credential.  
Notably, the used security mechanisms target elliptic 
curve cryptography (ECC) for authentication (during key 
management phases) and for digital signatures. The digital 
signature standard ECDSA based on ECC provide 
comparable security to RSA but uses significantly shorter 
cryptographic key sizes. As the certificates support ECDSA, 
the Diffie-Hellman key agreement is performed in its elliptic 
curve variant ECDH. Moreover, elliptic curves can be 
implemented efficiently in hardware. As ISO/IEC 15118 
targets especially electronic control units (ECU) in vehicles 
and charging sports, memory and calculation constraints are 
evident and pose further implementation requirements.  
As described above, digital certificates for the charging 
spot, and, depending on the use cases, also a vehicle 
certificate are the basis for protecting the charging control 
communication. This requires a dedicated credential 
management infrastructure (Public Key Infrastructure – PKI) 
handling the initial provisioning, but also the revocation and 
update of certificates and cryptographic keys. The call flow 
as depicted in Figure 5 is based on the application of 
unilateral authenticated TLS, where the electric vehicle 
implements the client part. Hence, the client is required to 
check the certificate validity including the issuer. The 
standard ISO/IEC 15118 requires vehicles to store only a 
fixed, limited number of root certificates to enable issuer 
verification. Moreover, it also restricts the number of 
supported intermediate certification authorities. Besides the 
validity and issuer, the client also needs to check the 
certificate revocation status. One option to avoid the 
handling of certificate revocation lists is the usage of short 
term certificates from the server side. Another option is the 
provisioning of the revocation state by the server itself, e.g., 
by attaching a fresh Online Certificate Status Protocol 
(OCSP) response to the certificate during the authentication 
phase. To keep a balance regarding the implementation and 
operational effort, the current ISO/IEC 15118 proposal 
features both, short term certificates for the server side 
certificates and OCSP responses for intermediate CAs. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The focus of this paper has been the discussion of 
security requirements and solution approaches for the 
interface between an electric vehicle and a charging spot. 
Especially the standard ISO/IEC 15118 was in focus here 
addressing a variety of use cases while considering security 
right from the beginning. Nevertheless, to enable online 
control of the charging operation and also value added 
services, at least the charging spot needs to be connected to 
the Smart Grid core.  
One standard, which can be directly applied for the 
energy automation communication is IEC 61850 [9], already 
applied in substation automation. This communication can 
be protected by security measures according to IEC62351 
[8]. The security in IEC 62351 features similar protection 
means for TCP/IP based communication also based on TLS. 
This eases the secure interworking between the Smart Grid 
communication core and the access via the charging 
infrastructure. Moreover besides pure charging control, there 
may be also value-added services provided through the 
charging spot like multimedia services, software or firmware 
updates, remote diagnosis, and so on. All of these services 
have to be protected appropriately. The intrinsic complexity 
of this overall Smart Grid vehicle charging system requires a 
systematic approach to include required security measures 
right from the beginning that can be used and managed 
efficiently. It is expected that new use cases will enhance the 
existing security requirements and also influence the further 
development of communication standards. 
VI. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  
The base version of this report (see [11]) compiled in June 
2011 has been supported by the German Federal Ministry 
for the Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear 
Safety within the Harz.EEmobility project under contract 
03KP623 (see [2] for more information). The further 
research and investigation leading to this update of the 
initial report is part of the FINSENY (Future INternet for 
Smart ENergY) project (see [3] for more information). The 
authors gratefully acknowledge the contributions of all 
FINSENY project partners. FINSENY is partly funded by 
the European Commission within the FI-PPP, which is part 
of the Framework Program FP7 ICT. 
References 
[1] The German Standardization Roadmap for Electromobility, 
http://www.elektromobilitaet.din.de/sixcms_upload/media/3310/Nor
mung-Roadmap_Elektromobilit%E4t_en.pdf, last access April 2012  
[2] HarzEE-mobility, https://www.harzee-mobility.de/, last access April 
2012 
[3] FINSENY – Future Internet for Smart Energy: http://www.fi-ppp-
finseny.eu/  
[4] T. Dierks and E. Rescorla: “The Transport Layer Security (TLS) 
Protocol Version 1.2”, RFC5246, IETF, 2008. 
[5] ISO/IEC 15118-1: Road vehicles — Vehicle-to-Grid Communication 
Interface — Part 1: General information and use-case definition, 
Work in Progress 
[6] ISO/IEC 15118-2: Road vehicles — Vehicle-to-Grid Communication 
Interface — Part 2: Technical protocol description and Open Systems 
Interconnections (OSI) layer requirements, Work in Progress 
[7] ISO/IEC 15118-2: Road vehicles — Vehicle-to-Grid Communication 
Interface — Part 3: Physical layer and Data Link layer requirements, 
Work in Progress 
[8] ISO-IEC 62351, Part 1-8, http://www.iec.ch/cgi-
bin/procgi.pl/www/iecwww.p?wwwlang=E&wwwprog=sea22.p&sea
rch=iecnumber&header=IEC&pubno=62351, last access April 2012    
[9] ISO-IEC 61850, Part 1-9, http://www.iec.ch/cgi-
bin/procgi.pl/www/iecwww.p?wwwlang=E&wwwprog=sea22.p&sea
rch=iecnumber&header=IEC&pubno=61850 , last access April 2012  
[10] IEC 61851, Part 1, 21-24, www.iec.ch/cgi-
bin/procgi.pl/www/iecwww.p?wwwlang=E&wwwprog=sea22.p&sea
rch=iecnumber&header=IEC&pubno=61851, last access April 2012  
[11] R. Falk and S. Fries: Securing the Electric Vehicle Charging 
Infrastructure – Current status and potential next steps, Oct 2011, 
Berlin, VDI-Berichte 2131, VDI-Verlag Düsseldorf. ISBN 978-3-18-
092131-0. 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-204-2
INTERNET 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Evolving Internet

