Reconfigurable Digital Twins for an Industrial
Internet of Things Platform
Eliseu Pereira∗†, Maria Arieiro∗, Gil Gonc¸alves∗†
†SYSTEC - Research Center for Systems and Tecnologies
∗Faculty of Engineering, University of Porto
Rua Dr. Roberto Frias, 4200-465 Porto, Portugal
Email: {eliseu, up201606469, gil}@fe.up.pt
Abstract—Digital Twin (DT) emerged as an Industry 4.0
concept that reflects the behavior of physical entities and pro-
cesses in the digital environment providing real-time information
and insights. Typically, DTs are deployed on specific scenarios
or components, virtualizing services and monitoring process
variables. This extremely focused software implementation makes
harder the adaptation and replication of DTs for new components
with similar characteristics. This work’s main goal was to develop
a flexible platform that facilitates the implementation and modi-
fication of DTs for IEC-61499 compliant Cyber-Physical Systems
(CPS), allowing their functionalities management and variables
monitoring. The DT component was integrated into a web-based
platform (Jurassic Park) that manages IEC-61499 compatible
devices executing the runtime environment (DINASORE). The
platform was validated in 2 different scenarios, 1) in a distributed
system composed of different DTs and 2) controlling a gripper
of a robotic arm.
Index Terms—Cyber-Physical Systems, Digital Twin, IEC-
61499, Industrial Internet of Things, Virtualization.
I. INTRODUCTION
The changeover to Industry 4.0 was introduced in the shop-
floor of new information and communication technologies
such as the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), Cyber-Physical
Systems (CPS), among others. The digitalization and virtual-
ization of the physical devices provided to users and operators
support for communicating with other devices, tracking errors,
optimizing production and many other advantages [1][2].
Digital Twins (DTs) implement virtual models of physical
entities to mirror the geometry and behaviour of that entities
in the digital domain. With those digital models, real-time
monitoring and control of the physical entities can be achieved
[3]. Cyber-Physical Production Systems (CPPS) have a need
to be easily reconfigurable, since these systems stand out
by responding quickly to changes in production and being
flexible enough to introduce new functionalities according
to the different needs of the production lines. One of the
existent standards for the CPPS reconfiguration is the Inter-
national Electro-technical Commission (IEC) 61499 standard
[4], which allows the encapsulation of different functionalities
in software modules, the so-called Function Blocks (FBs).
Several DTs proposals have been made recently, however
there is a lack of flexible solutions that are applicable in
the production lines. Nowadays, the creation of a DT is
a centralised process, oriented towards the device that is
intended to be reflected in the digital world. This makes the
DT not very flexible. In the complex case of a system with a
diversity of physical entities fulfilling different functionalities,
reusing a DT is a critical process and will require increased
computational and human effort. This limitation could be
solved through the usage of standards for the deployment
of reconfigurable CPPS, such as the IEC-61499 standard.
However, its integration with the DT concept is still limited
and barely explored by the scientific community. Some of the
most relevant limitations are the difficulty to manage complex
systems with many software modules and the lower flexibility
and adaptability of the systems to new tools, at the software
and hardware level [5].
The main objective of this work was to develop a flexible
DT application, integrated with a web-application (Jurassic
Park [6]) and with the physical devices (executing the DI-
NASORE [7] runtime environment). The DT solution will
include 1) a monitoring module, 2) a control module and 3) a
visualisation module. The monitoring module is intended to be
the processing component of the information that arrives from
the physical environment. The main purpose of this module
is to understand the behaviour of the physical entities and
store that information in the digital world. The DT control
module aims to be the response feature of the DT solution.
Through this module, the user can act on the physical entities,
thus making the system not only an analysis component but
also an acting component with the purpose of modifying the
system. The general idea behind the DT visualization module
is to allow the management of the DTs from the application
system. The solution was validated in 2 different scenarios,
1) used to monitor and control a distributed CPS, and 2) to
control a robotic arm gripper.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: in
Section II, we present the literature review, Section III exposes
the implementation carried out and Section IV presents the
main tests and results made to validate the DT solution
developed. The conclusions and future work are presented in
Section V.
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
Digital Twins (DTs) can adopt different methodologies, con-
cepts and technologies, providing capabilities of simulation,
monitoring or optimization. For that, we initially present the
main technologies used as basis for the implementation of the
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-977-5
INTELLI 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

DT platform, and after the related work presents a description
of the more relevant DT implementations.
A. Background
There are several enabling technologies that allow the
implementation of CPSs [8], for different purposes, like device
management, data collection, workflow orchestration, among
others. The DT solution stacks different technologies, having
as basis an environment with essential capabilities, like recon-
figuration of software, data interoperability or communication
transparency [9].
The DINASORE [7] is a distributed platform which enables
the pre-processing of data in edge devices, using Python
based FBs. This platform allows the construction of a wide
variety of FBs by the user, with different goals, like to control
drivers, integrate sensors, apply processing techniques, among
other functionalities. The DINASORE uses the 4DIAC-IDE
as graphical user interface to orchestrate the FB pipelines,
deployed after in the distributed CPS.
The 4DIAC-IDE [10] is a tool developed by Eclipse that
allows the orchestration of a workflow of FBs, after being
deployed in a distributed system. With this tool, it is possible to
draw the FBs distributed systems through a graphical interface
and then deploy it into the devices connected to the network.
The Jurassic Park [6] is a web-based application that acts
as a centralised repository of FBs, allowing the creation and
management of FBs. The Jurassic Park is composed of two
individual components, the backend and the web application.
This application is integrated with the DINASORE and the
4DIAC-IDE, allowing the full deployment and management
of distributed systems through the IEC-61499 standard.
B. Related Work
As identified in [11], currently there is a huge need in pro-
viding on-demand manufacturing services through Industrial
Internet of Things (IIoT) networks. These services are easily
achieved with the implementation of cloud-based manufactur-
ing solutions. The literature review presented in [12] shows a
set of cloud solutions available to help in the implementation
of Digital Twins (DTs), in particular the Microsoft Azure IoT
solution and the Amazon Web Services (AWS) IoT solution.
When large industrial companies began to realize that the
implementation and consequent application of DTs could have
a huge impact on the efficiency of their production lines, they
begin their own initiative to develop their own tools [13][14].
In [15], the authors present DT use cases in the industrial en-
vironment, where Siemens presents two DT implementations,
one for the power system and the other for the wastewater
plant. General Electric has not only developed a DT for a
wind farm, but has also been able to prove through this im-
plementation that a wind farm should be operated, developed
and maintained in a more efficient way. British Petroleum
has developed a DT of oil and gas facilities located in more
restricted areas. The air vehicle manufacturer Airbus has used
DT-based solutions to monitor its production lines and to
optimise its operations. Going into a more specific example
of a DT implementation in the industry context, [16] presents
a DT within a production line of hollow glass manufacturing.
The authors of this implementation argue that this work has
allowed them to realize that digital simulations have a great
impact on how production lines can be optimized, since the
simulations reflect their behavior in the real world.
In [17], the authors present a DT solution in the commercial
greenhouse sector. The article highlights the need of the
commercial greenhouse production systems to become more
energy-efficient while maintaining a sustainable production.
Therefore, the DT solution mentioned was proposed in order
to provide a control and monitoring feature of the production
flow of a greenhouse production system. The authors of this
article also defend two essential ideas. One of them is that,
with DT implementations, it is possible to turn the industrial
environment more energy and climate friendly and that leads
to a reduction of costs within the production lines. The other
idea is that, nowadays, the industrial environment requires
developed generic DT frameworks capable of controlling the
processes accurately and to respond to changes in the orders
of the production lines.
III. IMPLEMENTATION
The DT platform was conceptualized to structure multiple
DTs, allowing their monitorization and control. This concept
is composed of three main objects, 1) the digital twin, that is at
the top of the architecture and is responsible for controlling the
functionalities of the physical equipment, 2) the functionality,
which describes the DT characteristics, mainly the monitoring
system variables and the functions to trigger the execution
of certain actions, and 3) the device, that reflects the physical
entity in the digital world, like sensors, machines, etc. The DT
platform developed is embedded in the Jurassic Park taking
advantage of some of its features. Figure 1 shows the DT
proposed solution composed of three components, the DT
visualisation module, the DT monitoring module and the DT
control module.
The DT visualisation component (presented in Section
III-A) allows the interaction between the DT platform and
the user. This component is incorporated into the web ap-
plication of the Jurassic Park. The main functionalities of this
visualisation component focus on the management of the DTs.
Additionally, this component will be responsible for triggering
the monitoring and control requests from the DTs. The DT
monitoring module (presented in Section III-B) is intended to
serve as a processing tool of the information that arrives from
the physical entity to the digital one and serves the information
to the user through the graphical interface. The component is
incorporated into the web server of the Jurassic Park using the
Open Platform Communications - Unified Architecture (OPC-
UA) communication protocol as data source to collect the
information from the physical world. The monitoring module
collects data from the FBs variables and events that are running
on the DINASOREs connected to the platform, allowing the
user to filter the ones to monitor. The DT control component
(presented in Section III-C) permits to trigger functionalities
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-977-5
INTELLI 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

Fig. 1: DT architecture integrated with the Jurassic Park and
DINASORE.
over the physical entities connected to the platform. The
component uses the variables and events from the FBs that are
running on the devices connected to the platform and assigns
them a trigger feature. In this way, the user will have the
opportunity to manipulate the events of the FBs. As in the
case of the monitoring component, the control component is
also incorporated into the web server.
The backend component (web server) is a complex module
that uses several technologies to consolidate the integration
of all the services it supports. This component is responsible
for the HTTP API that manages the FBs and the real-time
communication of the devices connected to the platform as
well as the database. One of the most relevant technologies
used in the backend is the Node.js framework, which integrates
several components of the backend such as the API, the real-
time communication with the web application and the real-
time communication with the DINASOREs, through the OPC-
UA communication protocol. The backend component uses as
database the MySQL database. The backend includes also an
File Transfer Protocol (FTP) server that makes available the
download of FBs by the DINASOREs.
The frontend component (web application) is the graphical
user interface of the platform, and it was developed using
React [18]. This component is responsible for the page com-
ponents (buttons, boxes, tables, among other User Interface
(UI) elements), which are customized according to the existent
resources in the CPS. The automatic update of the information
is performed using the Socket IO library, which supports real-
time communication with the backend, and avoids the need of
refreshing the web page to update the information.
A. Digital Twin GUI
The DT visualisation component allows the user to create
and manipulate DTs. The platform allows the user to group the
devices they want to monitor and control into a category called
DT and subsequently they can associate that DT with a general
functionality. Therefore, in order to describe the page elements
in a more user-focused way, we list below the different pages
implemented to fulfil the requirements of the DT component.
The new DT page allows the user to add new DTs with a
specific name and to associate them with respective DINA-
SOREs. The page has a menu for creating a new DT, and
in this menu the user has access to all the devices that are
communicating with the Jurassic Park in real-time. Therefore,
to create a new DT, the user only has to complete the field to
insert the name of the new DT and open the list of available
devices and selected those he wants to associate. It should be
noted that the user can choose more than one DINASORE.
Additionally, the user can only create the new DT if he has
chosen at least one DINASORE.
The Digital Twin monitoring page, in Figure 2a, performs
all the management of the DT. On this page, the user can
observe the functionalities that are currently active with the
respective DT. Besides that, it is also on this page that the user
can create other functionalities and associate a DT capable of
observing the variables and/or events of interest. Looking first
at the feature of the page concerning the creation of a new
functionality, the user can choose the name of the functionality
they want to add to the monitoring platform. After choosing
the name, the user will also have to choose one DT from the
range of available DTs that were previously created in the
New Digital Twin page, which they want to associate with the
new functionality. Through this page, the user will have at his
disposal a table, listing all the functionalities currently active
and a set of features. The Details feature allows the user to
view in detail the information that is being collected from the
variables and events that are currently being monitored. The
Add Details feature enables the user to choose the variables
and events that they want to monitor on a given FB. With the
Edit feature, the user can edit the name of the functionality. In
addition to being able to edit and manipulate the variables and
events that each functionality will monitor, the user can also
delete the available functionalities they want with the Delete
feature.
Whenever the user presses the functionality details button,
the interface redirects to a new page. The functionality details
page, in Figure 2b, has two different tables, one for monitoring
variables and another for triggering events. Note that the
page only displays the variables and events that have been
previously selected on the DT monitoring page. Thus, the
user has at their disposal information organised either by
variables or by events. Regarding the variables monitoring,
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-977-5
INTELLI 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

(a) DT monitoring web page.
(b) Functionality details web page.
Fig. 2: Digital Twin graphical interface, including the monitoring (a) and functionalities details (b) web pages.
the user can observe in the table some information of the
variable such as the variable name, the FB where the variable
is being monitored, the device that is allocating and also
the current value of the variable. Additionally, the user can
delete the variables that they no longer wish to monitor by
clicking on the delete button present in each row of the table.
The event monitoring table does not differ much from the
variable monitoring table. It is also possible to see the name
of each event selected by the user, the associated FB and the
DINASORE where it is being mapped. However, unlike the
variable monitoring table, the event table has a button that
allows the user to trigger an action on the associated event.
When the user presses the trigger event button, the Jurassic
Park automatically sends a request to the server to execute
the event on the associated FB. The user also has a button
available on the event table that allows them to delete events
that they no longer wish to observe.
B. Digital Twin Monitoring
The monitoring component of the DT platform is respon-
sible for requesting and collecting information on each DT,
which is then made available in the DT visualisation com-
ponent. For that, the user should create the different DTs
and functionalities, as well as define the monitored devices,
variables and events. With the previous objects created, the
next integration is to automatically receive real-time feedback
of the values of the monitored variables. Initially, the request
is sent via WebSockets from the web application, where
a persistent listener waits for feedback from the monitored
variables. On the server side, the communication with the
DINASORES is performed using a OPC-UA client. When
the monitored variables present a change, the OPC-UA client
automatically identifies it, and then the data is sent back to
the backend controller which ensures the notification of the
new value to the web application, waiting for the information
through the listener function. When the user no longer wants
to observe the variables, an event to cancel the subscriptions
is sent to the OPC-UA client.
C. Digital Twin Control
The DT control component allows the user to trigger events
in certain FBs running on specific DINASOREs. After inter-
acting with the UI element, a particular message, containing
the information relating to the triggered event, is sent to the
backend component. Having the information regarding the
event in the backend, a function sends the action to the de-
vice in question, using Transmission Control Protocol/Internet
Protocol (TCP/IP) sockets. For that, the function uses as input
the event information, in particular the FB name, event name,
device IP address and port. When the DINASORE receives the
message, it pushes an event on the specified FB and executes
the triggered functionality.
IV. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
The experiments perfomed to validate the DT component
of the platform focused on two use cases that allow to test
the different implemented features. The experimented use
cases are 1) the monitorization of simulated sensors and
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-977-5
INTELLI 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

the optimization of energy in a distributed CPS, and 2) the
manipulation of a robotic arm gripper.
A. Monitoring and optimizing a distributed CPS
The first validation scenario is a distributed system with
different devices connected to the platform. This experiment
consisted of connecting a set of raspberry pis to the plat-
form, which are responsible to execute two different FBs
pipelines/workflows, one for sensing purposes and the other
for energy optimisation. This set of FBs pipelines allows the
monitoring of variables and trigger of events in a distributed
system, allowing the validation of the previously explained
monitoring and controlling features of the DT platform.
(a) Sensor simulation FBs workflow.
(b) Energy optimization FBs workflow.
Fig. 3: Distributed CPS composition with a sensorization (a)
and optimization (b) workflows.
The first raspberry pi was used to validate the variable
monitoring component, using a small FBs workflow, that
simulates a sensing system, present in Figure 3a. The FBs
composing the workflow are 1) the SENSOR SIMULATOR,
responsible for generating a random value to simulate the value
of a sensor, and 2) the MOVING AVERAGE, which calculates
the average of the last N values. After the deployment of the
workflow, the next step was to create a DT for the sensing
component, associated with the raspberry pi that executes the
DINASORE. Then, we created a functionality that includes
the following monitoring variables, 1) the variable VALUE
(variable containing the simulated sensor data) from the SEN-
SOR SIMULATOR FB and, 2) the variable VALUE MA
(variable containing the moving average which is calculated)
from the MOVING AVERAGE FB.
The second raspberry pi hosts a set of FBs that optimize
the energy consumption of a process, present in Figure 3b.
These FB pipeline allows the validation of the event triggering
process through the DT platform and consequently the mon-
itoring of variables linked to that event. The FBs composing
the workflow are 1) the ENERGY COSTS, which specifies
the function for energy costs regarding velocity and power,
2) the ENERGY MODEL, which is the model that allocates
the energy consumption, using as input the energy costs,
and 3) the OPTIMIZE ENERGY, which optimizes the given
function, through the use of the Dual Annealing algorithm.
The DT associated to the optimization workflow will include
a functionality that contains the following variables and events:
1) the COST variable (optimised energy costs) present in the
ENERGY COSTS 1 FB, and 2) the READ event (triggering
optimisation) of the ENERGY COSTS FB. Thus, with this
variable and event combination, we are able to trigger an event
via the DT platform, sent to the raspberry pi, that executes the
optimization.
B. Creating a Digital Twin for a Gripper
The second validation scenario focuses on the creation of
a DT for a robotic arm gripper, validating the control and
monitoring features in a physical component. The component
used was a 3D printed gripper using a raspberry pi as con-
trolling system for the servo motor. This experiment consisted
in controlling the gripper through the developed DT platform
by manipulating the event trigger to make the gripper arm
open and close according to the event, as shown in Figure
4b and 4c. The FB workflow that allows the control of the
gripper, present in Figure 4a, is composed of the FBs: 1) the
CONTROL GRIPPER, responsible for identifying whether
there is a request to open or close the gripper, depending
on which, the FB sends the corresponding percentage to the
output (PCT), and 2) the CONTROL SERVO, which receives
as input the percentage and then updates the general-purpose
input/output (GPIO) that controls the servo motor with the
corresponding value.
(a) FBs workflow to control the gripper.
(b) Gripper open.
(c) Gripper closed.
Fig. 4: Results obtained with the gripper scenario, including
the FBs workflow (a) and the physical gripper (b) and (c).
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-977-5
INTELLI 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

The DT created intends to monitor and control the gripper
manipulation. For this use case, two distinct events and a
variable (to evaluate whether the events are being properly
triggered) have been added to the functionality associated to
the DT. The selected events to control the gripper were the
OPEN GRIPPER and CLOSE GRIPPER events. In order to
check whether the control on the DT platform is functional,
the gripper would have to open when the user pressed the
release button. If the close button was pressed, the gripper
would have to execute the closing movement. The execution
of both movements were validated visually and also through
the monitoring variable (percentage), which confirms if the
gripper moves according with the monitored percentage.
V. CONCLUSION
In conclusion, the main objectives of this platform were to
implement a flexible and reconfigurable DT solution capable
of increasing the monitoring capacity and enable the remote
control of a CPS. The components developed, mainly the
DT visualisation component, the DT monitoring component
and the DT control component permitted the CPS to accom-
plish the described attributes, like DT reconfiguration. The
DT solution was integrated together with a mature stack of
technologies including the Jurassic Park and the DINASORE.
The experiments performed support the usability and flexibility
of the web based platform. Finally, it is important to highlight
that one of the greatest contributions of this project was to
develop a platform that, given its flexibility and configurability,
can be easily integrated in the industrial sector and supports
the IEC-61499 standard.
As future work, one of the main goals will be the storage of
data generated by the DT variables, taking into consideration
constraints of data volume, in terms of storage and data
flow/rate. On top of this unstructured database, it will be
possible to implement predictive algorithms to forecast and
optimize the behavior of DTs. Additionally, the entire platform
(Jurassic Park with DT component and DINASOREs) will
be integrated in an industrial scenario composed of different
machines, including integration of sensors, simulation of pro-
cesses, and optimization of resources.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
INDTECH 4.0 - New technologies for intelligent manufac-
turing. Support on behalf of IS for Technological Research
and Development (SI a Investigacao e Desenvolvimento Tec-
nologico). POCI-01-0247-FEDER-026653
REFERENCES
[1] G. Gonc¸alves, J. Reis, R. Pinto, M. Alves, and J. Correia, “A step
forward on intelligent factories: A smart sensor-oriented approach,”
in Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE Emerging Technology and Factory
Automation (ETFA), 2014, pp. 1–8.
[2] L. Ant˜ao, R. Pinto, J. Reis, and G. Gonc¸alves, “Requirements for testing
and validating the industrial internet of things,” in 2018 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation
Workshops (ICSTW), 2018, pp. 110–115.
[3] K. Ding, F. T. S. Chan, X. Zhang, G. Zhou, and F. Zhang, “Defining a
Digital Twin-based Cyber-Physical Production System for autonomous
manufacturing in smart shop floors,” International Journal of Production
Research, vol. 57, no. 20, pp. 6315–6334, 2019.
[4] K. Thramboulidis, “Iec 61499 in factory automation,” in Advances
in Computer, Information, and Systems Sciences, and Engineering,
K. Elleithy, T. Sobh, A. Mahmood, M. Iskander, and M. Karim, Eds.
Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 2006, pp. 115–124.
[5] G. Lyu and R. W. Brennan, “Towards IEC 61499-Based Distributed
Intelligent Automation: A Literature Review,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Informatics, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 2295–2306, 2021.
[6] J. Pedro Furriel, E. Pereira, J. Reis, and G. Gonc¸alves, “Jurassic park -
a centralized software modules repository for iot devices,” in 2021 10th
Mediterranean Conference on Embedded Computing (MECO), 2021, pp.
1–4.
[7] E. Pereira, J. Reis, and G. Gonc¸alves, “Dinasore: A dynamic intelligent
reconfiguration tool for cyber-physical production systems,” in Eclipse
Conference on Security, Artificial Intelligence, and Modeling for the Next
Generation Internet of Things (Eclipse SAM IoT), 2020, pp. 63–71.
[8] Q. Qi, F. Tao, T. Hu, N. Anwer, A. Liu, Y. Wei, L. Wang, and
A. Nee, “Enabling technologies and tools for digital twin,” Journal of
Manufacturing Systems, vol. 58, pp. 3–21, 2021, digital Twin towards
Smart Manufacturing and Industry 4.0.
[9] E. Pereira., R. Pinto., J. Reis., and G. GonC¸ alves., “Mqtt-rd: A mqtt
based resource discovery for machine to machine communication,” in
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Internet of Things,
Big Data and Security - IoTBDS,, INSTICC.
SciTePress, 2019, pp.
115–124.
[10] A. Zoitl, T. Strasser, and A. Valentini, “Open source initiatives as basis
for the establishment of new technologies in industrial automation: 4diac
a case study,” in 2010 IEEE International Symposium on Industrial
Electronics, 2010, pp. 3817–3819.
[11] Y. Lu and X. Xu, “Cloud-based manufacturing equipment and big data
analytics to enable on-demand manufacturing services,” Robotics and
Computer-Integrated Manufacturing, vol. 57, pp. 92–102, 2019.
[12] T. Catarci, D. Firmani, F. Leotta, F. Mandreoli, M. Mecella, and
F. Sapio, “A conceptual architecture and model for smart manufacturing
relying on service-based digital twins,” in Proceedings - 2019 IEEE
International Conference on Web Services, ICWS 2019 - Part of the
2019 IEEE World Congress on Services.
IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, USA,
2019, pp. 229–236.
[13] A. Fuller, Z. Fan, C. Day, and C. Barlow, “Digital Twin: Enabling
Technologies, Challenges and Open Research,” IEEE Access, vol. 8,
pp. 108 952–108 971, 2020.
[14] A. Rasheed, O. San, and T. Kvamsdal, “Digital twin: Values, challenges
and enablers from a modeling perspective,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp.
21 980–22 012, 2020.
[15] F. Tao, H. Zhang, A. Liu, and A. Y. Nee, “Digital Twin in Industry:
State-of-the-Art,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 15,
no. 4, pp. 2405–2415, 2019.
[16] H. Zhang, Q. Liu, X. Chen, D. Zhang, and J. Leng, “A Digital Twin-
Based Approach for Designing and Multi-Objective Optimization of
Hollow Glass Production Line,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 26 901–26 911,
2017.
[17] D.
Anthony
Howard,
Z.
Ma,
J.
Mazanti
Aaslyng,
and
B. Nørregaard Jørgensen, “Data architecture for digital twin of
commercial greenhouse production,” in 2020 RIVF International
Conference on Computing and Communication Technologies (RIVF),
2020, pp. 1–7.
[18] A. Fedosejev, React. js essentials.
Packt Publishing Ltd, 2015.
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-977-5
INTELLI 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

