 
Individual Identification Using EEG Features 
 
Mona F. M. Mursi Ahmed 
email: monmursi@yahoo.com 
 
 
May A. Salama 
email: msalama@megacom-int.com 
 
 
Ahmed Abdullah Hussein Sleman 
email: mindhunter74@gmail.com  
Electrical Engineering Dept. 
Faculty of Engineeringat Shoubra, Benha Univ. 
Cairo, Egypt 
 
Abstract— Electroencephalography (EEG) is a method of 
monitoring electrical activity along the scalp by measuring voltage 
variations resulting from neural activity of the brain. A number of 
published research papers have indicated that there is enough 
individuality in the EEG recording, rendering it suitable as a tool 
for person authentication. In recent years there has been a 
growing   need for greater security for person authentication and 
one of the potential solutions is to employ the innovative biometric 
authentication techniques. In this research paper, we investigate 
the possibility of person identification based on features extracted 
from person’s measured brain signals electrical activity (EEG) 
with different classification techniques; Radial Basis Functions 
(RBF), Support Vector Machines (SVM) and Backpropagation 
(BP) neural networks. The highest identification accuracy was 
achieved using modular backpropagation neural network for 
classification. 
Keywords—EEG; identification; biometrics; brain-waves; 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The brain is one of the largest and most complex organs in 
the human body. It is involved in every thought and movement 
produced by the body, which allows humans to interact with 
their environment, communicating with other humans and 
objects. It consists of several parts as indicated in Figure 1 [1] 
and every part is responsible for certain functions and activities. 
There are several different methods used for measuring the 
activity of the brain such as positron emission tomography 
(PET), functional magnetic resonance imaging (FMRI), 
Magnetoencephalography (MEG), and EEG. 
EEG is the recording of electrical activity along the scalp. 
EEG measures voltage fluctuations resulting from ionic current 
flows within the neurons of the brain [2]. In recent years there 
has been a growing   need for greater security for person 
authentication. Using EEG as a biometric has some advantages 
over other biometrics like fingerprint and iris image. Unlike 
other biometrics, we find that brain-waves are almost impossible 
to be mimicked; even similar activities produce different brain-
waves per person, can’t be easily stolen – requires special 
equipment touching the scalp and can’t be produced by forcing 
the person to do so being sensitive to the person’s mental state. 
EEG data could be collected with single or multi-electrodes 
device. This depends on the EEG device and the number of 
signals needed to be processed. All electrode names mentioned 
hereafter are based on the 10-20 system for EEG electrodes 
locations [3]. An overview of this system is shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 1. Brain Structure 
 
Figure 2.  10-20 Standard System for EEG electrodes locations 
One of the potential solutions to identify individuals is to 
employ the innovative biometric authentication techniques. In 
this paper, we present a biometric authentication system based 
on EEG and using offline dataset. After presenting an overview 
of the previous work (Section II) in this area of research, we first 
describe the used dataset (Section III) and what the feature 
vector is composed of. Then we elaborate on using 3 different 
classification techniques: Radial Basis Function, Support Vector 
Machines and modular backpropagation neural networks 
(Section IV). Finally, a conclusion of our work and future work 
are discussed (Section V). We use MATLAB in all our 
experiments. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

 
II. 
PREVIOUS WORK 
Different methods have been applied for EEG based person 
identification. Based on our survey, different methods differ in 
data collection and Brain Computer Interface (BCI), 
Preprocessing and feature extraction, and/or classification 
techniques. 
Both Autoregressive (AR) and Power Spectral Density 
(PSD) were used in [4] and [5] to produce the input feature 
vector of collected EEG data. AR model of order 19 was 
selected after testing the orders 10 – 50 as being the optimal 
order. PSD of frequency range 4 Hz – 32 Hz has been applied 
and added to the feature vector to produce a final vector of 127 
features. A maximum identification accuracy of 97.5% was 
reported in [4] using K-nearest neighbor (KNN) and Fisher's 
Discriminant Analysis (FDA) as classifiers while [5] reported a 
95.4% accuracy for a consistent person state and 84.5% for 
persons on diet using same classification techniques. Arguing 
that autoregressive model coefficients may not have a 
remarkable effect on the system performance as a feature 
extraction method, as mentioned in [6], relying only on PSD for 
the frequency range (5 Hz to 32 Hz) enabled them to an obtain 
identification accuracy of 90% and 93.7% using dual space 
Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) based on simple 
regularization and KNN for classification. Independent 
Component Analysis (ICA) was used in [7] by separating multi-
channels EEG data into independent sources. After testing 
different ICA algorithms using ICALAB Signal Processing 
Toolbox [8], JADEop ICA algorithm was found to give the 
highest percentage of identification accuracy (100%) with 5, 10, 
and 20 subjects using backpropagation neural networks for 
classification and in order to find the minimum number of 
relevant channels for person identification, all possible 
combinations of 4, 3, and 2 channels were tested to find that the 
best combination of channels to use is {ch1, ch11, ch14} i.e., 
{FP1, T5, C4}. 
Instead of determining a set of features for classification, [9] 
uses convolutional neural networks to select the most distinctive 
features that can be used for classification leading to an 
identification accuracy of 80% with a dataset of 10 subjects that 
are in a resting state with their eyes open. 
III. 
DATASET AND FEATURE VECTOR 
The dataset used in our work is the large version of the KDD 
Dataset [10], which contains EEG recording for 10 alcoholic 
subjects and 10 control subjects. A subject's sample is a 1-
second recording of EEG. The dataset contains measurements 
from 64 electrodes placed on the scalp sampled at 256 Hz.  
Statistics about this KDD dataset are shown in Error! 
Reference source not found.. 
TABLE I. KDD Dataset Statistics 
Subjects 
20 subjects 
Sample  length 
1 second 
Samples per subject 60 samples 
Dataset size 
20 x 60 = 1200 samples 
Although this dataset examines EEG correlation of genetic 
predisposition to alcoholism, we used the EEG data for person   
identification regardless of the state of the person. First, we 
derived the feature vector, which had four types: 
 
AR Coefficients (order 6) 
 
Spectral Power 
 
Power Spectral Entropy 
 
Approximate Entropy 
We started by finding out the best combination of features to 
use by attempting every different valid combination of the 
suggested features while choosing backpropagation neural 
networks for classification being it used in many previous of the 
researches and giving good results. The results indicated in 
Figure 3 show that using all 4 types of features together gives 
the best classification accuracy (87%). 
 
Figure 3. Results of using different combination of proposed features 
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was then applied to 
reduce the dimensionality of the obtained feature vector to a 
length of 36 to speed up the classification process. 
IV. 
CLASSIFICATION 
Various classification techniques have been experimented. 
The results of classification using RBF, SVM, and modular 
backpropagation neural networks are discussed below. In all 
classification techniques, we use 2/3 of the mentioned dataset 
for training the test its accuracy against the remaining 1/3 of it. 
A. RBF 
Different dataset sizes (number of subjects and samples per 
subject) and different numbers of centers were tested for 
classification.  The results are shown in Table II. 
TABLE II. RBF CLASSIFIER RESULTS 
# 
Subjects 
Samples 
Max Training 
Accuracy 
Max Testing 
Accuracy 
% 
Centers 
% 
Centers 
1 
10 
10 
82 
6 
50 
2 
2 
10 
20 
83 
6 
60 
2 
3 
10 
30 
82 
13 
66 
5 
4 
20 
10 
70 
4 
38 
9 
5 
20 
20 
69 
9 
40 
19 
6 
20 
30 
68 
16 
44 
18 
 
The best classification accuracy obtained was 44% with the 
whole dataset and using 18 centers. 
0
20
40
60
80
100
AR
PS
AR+PS
All
Together
Accuracy (%)
Features
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

 
B. SVM 
Different SVM model types and kernel functions - 
mentioned in Error! Not a valid bookmark self-reference. - 
were tested. 
TABLE III. DIFFERENT SVM MODEL TYPES THAT WILL BE TESTED 
Model 
Types 
Weston and Watkins (WW) 
Crammer and Singer (CS) 
Lee, Lin, and Wahba (LLW) 
Guermeur and Monfrini (MSVM2) 
Kernel 
Functions 
Linear kernel 
Gaussian RBF kernel 
homogeneous polynomial kernel 
non-homo. polynomial kernel 
First, the results of testing different model types with half of 
the dataset (2/3 of the half for training and 1/3 of the same half 
for testing) shows that CS model type is the best one to use as 
indicated in Figure 4. 
 
Figure 4. Results of using different SVM model types for classification 
Second, testing different kernel functions with the CS model 
but now with the whole dataset shows that the non-homogenous 
polynomial kernel function gives the best classification accuracy 
(63%) as shown in Figure 5. 
 
Figure 5. Results of using SVM CS model type with different kernel functions 
C. Modular Neural Network 
In attempt to achieve better accuracy for identification taking 
into consideration that being an individual alcoholic affects his 
EEG measurement, a modular backpropagation neural network 
is used for classification as follows. A separate BP network, 
BP2, is used to classify control subjects while BP1 is used to 
classify alcoholic subjects. 
 
Figure 6. Modular Neural Network design for classification 
The property of a subject being alcoholic or not is fed into 
BP1 to decide onto which network to use to identify that person. 
The result of the design shown in Figure 6 was 93.5% for the 
whole dataset. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
After testing different combinations of the four proposed 
feature types, using them all together was shown to give best 
accuracies. Moreover, the lower the number of channels used 
to extract the features, the less the identification accuracy we 
get, which was the reason we have chosen to use all the 64 
channels used in the dataset to extract the proposed features. 
Finally, after attempting different classification techniques to 
identify the 20 subjects in the dataset, the best obtained result 
(93.5%) was using a modular backpropagation neural network 
at which there is a separate network for identifying alcoholic 
subjects and another for identifying control subject where the 
property of being alcoholic or not was a pre-given property to 
the whole network design. Although being an alcoholic subject 
has a noticeable effect on its EEG, we found that separating 
alcoholic and control subjects yielded better identification 
results – having a single classifier for all subjects yielded 
accuracies of 44%, 63%, and 87% using RBF, SVM and 
backpropagation neural network while the modular design 
yielded 93.5% identification accuracy. The best accuracy we 
have got (93.5%) is lower than that obtained in [7] while it used 
a different dataset and used ICA instead of PCA that was used 
in our system. In comparison to [9] that used Convolutional 
Neural Networks for classification to get an identification 
accuracy of 80% with a dataset of 10 subjects, our system 
outperformed that yielding better 93.5% identification accuracy 
with a dataset of 20 subjects. Keeping in mind the particularity 
0
20
40
60
80
Testing Accuracy
Model Type
SVM Accuracy
Accuracy
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Testing Accuracy
Kernel Function
SVM Accuracy
Accuracy
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

 
of the dataset used (EEG of alcoholic/control subjects), we 
could better improve the accuracy of the final proposed 
classification network by having alcoholic and control group of 
subjects each identified by a separate network. The latter piece 
of information might not be generally available in practice and 
we would have to use a single network for classification 
regardless of the subject state. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, it was shown that EEG can be used effectively 
for individual identification. A combination of 4 feature types 
were used to construct the feature vector; Autoregressive model 
of order 6, Spectral Power, Power Spectral Entropy, and 
Approximate Entropy, which was found to give best accuracy 
results. Different approaches were proposed that yielded 
identification accuracies of 44%, 63%, and 93.5% using RBF, 
SVM 
and 
modular 
backpropagation 
neural 
network 
respectively. In future work, we would consider measuring EEG 
from volunteering individuals to construct the EEG dataset. 
Also, the measurements would be performed in different mental 
states      so that it would be more efficient to identify individuals 
when they are doing certain activities. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  "Structure 
of 
the 
Brain," 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://controlmind.info/human-brain/structure-of-the-brain. 
[retrieved: 10, 2016]. 
[2]  E. Niedermeyer and F. H. L. d. Silva, Electroencephalography: 
Basic Principles, Clinical Applications, and Related Fields., 
Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2005. 
[3]  "10-20 
System," 
05 
2015. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.wikiwand.com/en/10-20_system_(EEG) 
[retrieved: 10, 2016]. 
[4]  F. Su, L. Xia, A. Cai, Y. Wu, and J. Ma, "EEG-based Personal 
Identification, from Proof-of-Concept to A Practical System," 
in International Conference on Pattern Recognition, 2010.  
[5]  F. Su, L. Xia, and A. Cai, "Evaluation of Recording Factors in 
EEG," in Systems Man and Cybernetics (SMC), IEEE 
International Conference, 2010.  
[6]  F. Su, H. Zhou, Z. Feng, and J. Ma, "A Biometric-based Covert 
Warning System Using EEG," in Biometrics (ICB), 5th IAPR 
International Conference, 2012.  
[7]  P. Tangkraingkij, C. Lursinsap, S. Sanguansintukul, and T. 
Desudchit, "Selecting Relevant EEG Signal Locations for 
Personal Identification Problem Using ICA and Neural 
Network," in Eigth IEEE/ACIS International Conference on 
Computer and Information Science, 2009.  
[8]  "ICALAB for Signal Processing," 05 2015. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.bsp.brain.riken.jp/ICALAB/ICALABSignalProc/ 
[retrieved: 10, 2016]. 
[9]  L. Ma, J. W. Minett, and T. Blu, "Resting State EEG-Based 
Biometrics for Individual Identification Using Convolutional 
Neural Networks," in 37th Annual International Conference of 
the IEEE EMBC, 2015.  
[10]  KDD Dataset [Online]. Available: 
https://kdd.ics.uci.edu/databases/eeg/eeg.html [retrieved: 10, 
2016]. 
 
 
  
 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

