A Marketplace for Cyber-Physical Production Systems: Architecture and Key Enablers
Susana Aguiar, Rui Pinto, Jo˜ao Reis, Gil Gonc¸alves
Department of Informatics Engineering
Faculty of Engineering, University of Porto
Porto, Portugal
Email: {saguiar, rpinto, jpcreis, gil}@fe.up.pt
Abstract—With the Industry 4.0, which can be referred to as the
fourth industrial revolution, the concept of Smart Factories has
emerged into the spotlight. This new trend in automation and
manufacturing encompasses a wide range of technologies such as
Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS), the Internet of Things (IoT), and
Cloud computing. The conjunction of these technologies creates
new opportunities at all levels, such as technological, economical,
and societal. In this paper, an architecture that combines results
from two European R&D projects is presented. The aim of the
proposed architecture it to allow a step forward in utilizing all
the advantages of the Industry 4.0 concept and the technological
advances. The ultimate goal of the proposed architecture is to
allow the existence of a ﬂow of information from the physical
equipment in the shop-ﬂoor up to an on-line Marketplace, and
to allow a safe and reliable way of using all the information.
Keywords–Smart factories; Intelligent Production systems; In-
dustry 4.0; Cyber-physical systems; Marketplace.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Today, sensors can be found in just about anything, from
home appliances, mobile phones, cars to complex health
equipment or industrial equipment. These sensors continuously
produce enormous amounts of data concerning some type of
event. All these different available sensors provide heteroge-
neous raw data, which is provided at different formats and with
no common semantics to describe its meaning. Sheth, Henson,
and Sahoo [1] described this paradigm as ”too much data and
not enough knowledge”.
This paradigm is being leveraged by the development of
components and systems called Smart Components. Smart
Components in manufacturing are deﬁned as components
that incorporate functions of self-description, communication,
sensing, and control in order to cooperate with other smart
components, analyze a situation, make decisions based on the
available data, and modify their behavior through feedback [2].
Over the past few years, many projects have been dedi-
cated to these issues. Among those projects there are two in
particularly that have been focused on bringing knowledge to
all the collected data, in industrial environments: the ReBorn
- Innovative Reuse of modular knowledge Based devices and
technologies for Old, Renewed and New factories project, and
the SelSus - Health Monitoring and Life-Long Capability Man-
agement for SELf-SUStaining Manufacturing Systems project.
The ReBorn project [3] was a project funded under
THEME FoF.NMP.2013-2 - Innovative re-use of modular
equipment based on integrated factory design until August of
2016. The vision of ReBorn was to demonstrate strategies and
technologies that support a new paradigm for the re-use of
production equipment in factories. This re-use will give new
life to decommissioned production systems and equipment,
helping them to be reborn in new production lines. Such new
strategies will contribute to sustainable, resource-friendly and
green manufacturing and, at the same time, deliver economic
and competitive advantages for the manufacturing sector.
The developments made in ReBorn helped production
equipment to extend its life cycle, contributing to economic
and environmental sustainability of production systems [4]
[5]. The concept of modular production equipment may also
be re-used between different production systems, after servic-
ing and upgrading. This new business paradigm will move
from an equipment-based business to a value added business,
where equipment servicing and equipment knowledge are main
drivers.
The SelSus project [6] is a project also funded by the
European Commission under the Seventh Framework Program
for Research and Technological Development, until August of
2017. The vision of SelSus is to create a new paradigm for
highly effective, self-healing production resources and systems
to maximize their performance over longer life times through
highly targeted and timely repair, renovation and upgrading
through the use of the Smart Component concept as a Sel-
Comp (SelSus Component). These next generation machines,
ﬁxtures and tools with embed extended sensory capabilities
and smart materials combined with advanced Information and
Communications Technology (ICT) for self-diagnosis enabling
them to become self-aware and supporting self-healing pro-
duction systems. Distributed diagnostic and predictive repair
and renovation models will be embedded into smart devices
to early prognosis failure modes and component degradations.
Self-aware devices will built on synergetic relationships with
their human operators and maintenance personnel through con-
tinuous pro-active communication to achieve real self-healing
systems. This will drastically improve the resilience and long
term sustainability of highly complex manufacturing facilities
to foreseen and unforeseen disturbances and deteriorations
thereby minimizing energy and resource consumption and
waste.
The current work consists on an architecture that enables
the connection between Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs)
in a manufacture context with an open marketplace. This
architecture intends on bridging the gap between the results
achieved in both ReBorn and SelSus projects, namelly the
ReBorn Marketplace and the Selsus Dashboard.
This paper is organized in four more sections. In Section
II, a brief overview of related work is presented. Section
III presents the previous results that are the basis for the
work proposed in this paper, and in Section IV the proposed
architecture to be implemented is described. Finally, Section
V concludes the paper by exposing some ﬁnal remarks and the
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-576-0
INTELLI 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt)

next steps for future work are identiﬁed.
II.
RELATED WORK
Nowadays, sensors and actuators have become more af-
fordable and available, which contributed to the wide adoption
of WSNs solutions, used for monitoring of physical and
environmental conditions into several applications.
WSNs are an emerging technology that exhibits a great
potential and that can play an important role in many appli-
cations. It is becoming common to use WSNs in a variety of
applications areas such as environmental monitoring, military,
or industrial ﬁelds, specially since data gathering is one of the
pillars for the implementation of IoT concepts. However, since
they typically contain small sensor devices, WSNs present
some constraints, such as limitations on the memory, com-
putation, energy, and scalability [7]. To take full advantage
of the WSNs potentialities an infrastructure that is powerful,
scalable, and secure must be implemented.
Llanes et al. [8] presented a survey of the main approaches
that have been developed to deal with all the raw data collected
by sensors. Sensors continuously collect data regarding a given
event and send it to a gateway, which usually needs a speciﬁc
protocol to process the received raw data. The problem is that
the various sensor manufacturers provide different communi-
cation protocols that use different message formats, so there
is not an universal technology that can receive raw sensor
data and support every message type for processing further
the received information. In the survey, several solutions are
described, as well the strengths and limitations of each one.
Also, an attempt was made by Gil et al. [9] to provide an
Universal Gateway in order to mitigate this problem. Shen
et al. [10] provided an overview of recent developments
of agent technology applied to manufacturing enterprises,
which include enterprise collaboration regarding supply chain
management and virtual enterprises, manufacturing process
planning and scheduling, shop ﬂoor control, and also holonic
manufacturing as an implementation methodology.
There have been other studies on how to manage the
physical sensors. Sensor Modeling Language (SensorML) [11]
intends to provide standard models in a XML encoding for
physical sensors description and measurement processes. It is
being used by the international non proﬁt organization Open
Geospatial Consortium (OGC), which is committed on making
quality open standards for the global geospatial community.
As mentioned before, sensors from different manufactures
use different communication protocols, which makes it difﬁcult
to share sensors and its information between applications.
Shneidman et al. [12] presented an infrastructure called Hour-
glass, which addresses the need for a software infrastructure
that enables the rapid development and deployment of appli-
cations that use data from several, heterogeneous sensor net-
works. Yuriyama & Kushida [13] propose a new infrastructure
called Sensor-Cloud infrastructure, which can manage physical
sensors on an IT infrastructure. The proposed Sensor-Cloud
Infrastructure virtualizes a physical sensor as a virtual entity
in the Cloud.
Several research work has been performed regarding this
new paradigm of connecting and virtualizing sensors in Cloud
infrastructures for data processing. Yan et al. [14] propose a
cloud-based production system, across distributed data centers,
which integrates several web and Cloud computing technolo-
gies. Yang et al. [15] propose a full connection model of
product design and manufacturing in an IoT-enabled Cloud
manufacturing environment, which uses the social networks
to enable the connection of multiple parties. Zhang et al. [16]
describes the Cloud Manufacturing (CMfg), deﬁned for solving
the bottlenecks in the data and manufacturing applications.
Alam & Saddik [17] present and describe a digital twin archi-
tecture reference model for the cloud-based CPS, named C2PS.
Neto et al. [18] presented the ﬁrst steps in the development
of a framework that takes advantage of several technologies
like UPnP, OSGi, and iPOJO, which addresses some of the
challenges needed to enable a Sensor Cloud in the shop ﬂoor.
Alamri et al. [19] provides a survey of some of the
most relevant work related to Sensor-Cloud infrastructure, its
deﬁnition, architecture, and applications. Moano et al. [20]
analyse how the IoT can be used in the manufacturing industry,
by proposing a metamodel for integrating the Internet of
Things, Social Networks, Cloud, and Industry 4.0.
With the increase of the number of devices connected to
the Internet, having centralized Cloud services will become
unsustainable. This is leading to new paradigms, such as Fog
or Edge computing [21] [22].
A huge requirement that is slowing the advances and
the wide use of the technologies described previously is the
security and data privacy. The security and privacy issues
over the IoT have been addressed by several authors [23]–
[29], which propose new approaches of securing and enable
reliability on sensor data [30] [7]. Nevertheless, there is still
a lot of work to be done in areas such as cryptographic
mechanisms, data, identity, and privacy management, as well
as deﬁning trusted architectures.
III.
PREVIOUS RESULTS
The work proposed in this paper, arises from the idea of
combining some of the results accomplished in the ReBorn
and SelSus projects. In both projects, the achieved results
are based on the concept of a Smart Component, which has
different designation in each project, namely VERSON in
ReBorn and SelComp [31] in SelSus. A Smart Component, as
mentioned before, is an intelligent agent-based representation
of industrial equipment in manufacturing environment, which
enables both complex machines and sensor & actuators of
added value functionalities, such as self-description capabil-
ities and standardized communication skills. These are useful
for inter-device collaboration and process optimization, based
on analyses of collected environmental and context data, for
proper decision making regarding actuation and equipment
behavior modiﬁcation.
In the following sections, a brief overview of the ReBorn
and SelSus projects is presented as well as the results that
are used for the proposed architecture, namelly the ReBorn
Marketplace and SelSus Dashboard.
A. ReBorn Marketplace
As mention before, the ReBorn main goal was to demon-
strate strategies and technologies that support a new paradigm
for the re-use of production equipment in factories (Figure 1).
This new paradigm builds on self-aware and knowledge-
based equipment that needs functionalities to collect and man-
age information regarding their capabilities and their evolution
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-576-0
INTELLI 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt)

Figure 1. ReBorn re-use approaches
over time, maintenance, upgrade or refurbishment operations
over its lifetime and information of use and wear. To enable
this, versatile and modular, task-driven plug&produce devices,
with built-in capabilities for self-assessment and optimal re-use
were implemented, along with strategies for their re-use and
models for factory layout design and adaptive conﬁguration.
These new technologies were demonstrated in the context
of intelligent repair, upgrade and re-use of equipment, the re-
design of factory layouts and ﬂexible & adaptable production
on shop ﬂoor within several industrial demonstration scenarios.
This demonstration scenarios include a ﬂexible pick&place
machine, a multi-purpose on demand 3D printing module,
a condition monitoring and virtual programming, a modular
and self-conﬁguring servo press, and tools for planning and
assessment as presented in Figure 2. Having ReBorn technol-
ogy available, signiﬁcant reduced the efforts when setting-up
and ramping-up production systems, enabling a signiﬁcant step
towards 100% re-use of industrial equipment.
Figure 2. Tools for planning and assessment
One of the resulting technologies of the ReBorn project is
the Marketplace represented in Figure 3. This tool is a platform
that allows equipment owners and buyers to have a common
ground to communicate. The ReBorn Marketplace [5] offers
its services in an online platform format, as a Platform as
a System (PaaS). PaaS enables the creation of an evolving
market between actors, which would be difﬁcult to reach
without this platform. PaaS comprises different participant
groups, making a multi-sided market possible.
Figure 3. Marketplace
The ReBorn Marketplace is a n-sided market, with service
providers on one end and service consumers on the other.
This will attract service suppliers in order to respond to
the demand side of the platform. The demand side, in the
Marketplace, is comprised of any potential end-user to the
platform offerings. Service consumers comprise the Market-
place participants, which mainly relate to the ReBorn Mar-
ketplace service offerings. The Marketplace service suppli-
ers can normally be instantiated by any entity capable of
offering its services to the platform while altogether adding
value to the platforms base proposition. Service suppliers are
Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) who provide mainly
machines and components, as well as equipment information,
functionalities (software), and operations. Entities capable of
providing complementing services to the platform, in order to
co-create value, are labeled as complementors. Complementors
can be, for instance, independent software developers that
provide additional equipment functionalities.
Figure 4 provides a high level overview of the ReBorn
Marketplace architecture. The Marketplace has all the basic
functionalities such as management of clients, vendors, and
products; general administration of the Marketplace; and ser-
vices related to payment methods. Additionally to these basic
functionalities, for the ReBorn Marketplace it was necessary
to developed modules that provide the ability to communicate
and manage the VERSONs, one being the Plugin Manager. The
Plugin Manager main functionality is to allow the management
of the application content of each equipment smart component,
it is an easy and simple way of allowing the upgrade of
the smart component software. The Plugin Manager allows
the integration of new technologies and functionalities in
industrial equipment on the ﬂy. It will be extended in the new
architecture.
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-576-0
INTELLI 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt)

Figure 4. Marketplace Architecture
B. Selsus Sensor Cloud
The SelSus vision will be achieved by the development of
a new synergetic diagnostic and prognosis environment, which
is fully aware of the condition and history of all the machine
components within a system or factory and is in constant
knowledge enriched dialog with their human personnel. In
Figure 5 the overall project architecture is presented.
Figure 5. SelSus Architecture
One key area explored in the SelSus project is related with
industrial WSNs and Cloud Systems that ranges from sensor
integration, sensor data visualization, statistical processing
and access, where sensors, external to the process, used for
machine monitoring are introduced at the shop-ﬂoor level [32].
Sensor information is considered one key element for
machine behavior modeling and process optimization, due
to the possibility of gathering not only data from machine
parametrization (variables that control the process) but also
from the observable impact of this parametrization in the ﬁnal
quality of the product. Moreover, this type of information
builds knowledge that, despite allowing an immediate percep-
tion of the process conditions, it can be used in a myriad of
applications. These applications range from predictive mainte-
nance where a failure of a certain machine can be predicted
within an interval of conﬁdence, to the optimization of a certain
process to minimize the cost without jeopardizing the product
quality, and even learning if a process is drifting from what
was deﬁned in the design phase.
The concept of the Smart Component in SelSus [32]
is applicable to both machine and WSNs, and is a virtual
representation of these shop-ﬂoor components. This means that
different Smart Components, where one represents a machine
and the other a WSN, are both uniquely identiﬁed in the Cloud
that is able to receive inter-device data. This way, it is possible
to visualize and analyze independently the information from
each component or correlate data information from a group of
different Smart Components.
Figure 6. SelSus Dashboard
The SelSus Sensor Cloud, as seen in Figure 6, is a
graphical tool that enables the user to dynamically change
the conﬁguration, reconﬁguration, of a Smart Component. This
conﬁguration is drawn by using a directed acyclic graph, com-
posed by three different types of nodes: 1) Interfaces or End
Nodes (Web Service and Cloud); 2) Modules (Control Chart
and Normalization); 3) Sensors (e.g., Voltage, Temperature,
PiezoEletric, and Flow). Currently, there are two available
Interfaces or End Nodes: Cloud and Web Service. These are
called End Nodes because are the nodes that can only receive
information. The Cloud node means that sensor or processed
information can be sent to the Cloud, and Web Service means
that the same information can be sent to an external entity.
The SelSus Sensor Cloud is used for data acquisition,
storage, processing, visualization and access purposes. This
type of solution was chosen due to the necessity of easy
collection of data from multiple components, quick visualiza-
tion of manufacturing process dynamics, statistical processing
for monitoring purposes, and information exchange to other
external applications.
IV.
PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE
The ReBorn Marketplace already has several services im-
plemented and running. One of these services is the ability of
the equipment Smart Component communicate data directly to
the Marketplace. This information is stored by the Marketplace
and can be used by other external applications.
On the other side, the SelSus Sensor Cloud allows the
user to reconﬁgure the methods used to process the sensor
data locally at the SelComp level, even before the raw data
from the components is synchronized with the System Level.
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-576-0
INTELLI 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt)

One of these methods allows the user to graphically develop
an interpreter of raw sensor data packets at the gateway
level for automatic data acquisition. The SelSus Dashboard
also provides a Statistical Analysis section to enable some
of the potentialities of using different data analytics and
machine learning algorithms to analyze machine and sensor
data, available at the Sensor Cloud level, which can be used
in the reconﬁguration process of the Smart Component.
The proposed architecture consists on connecting the Re-
Born Marketplace with the SelSus Dashboard, extending the
functionalities of both tools. By taking advantage of the already
developed applications, the efforts can be applied to the de-
velopment of the missing bridge between the two projects and
the new needed functionalities. Figure 7 presents the overall
architecture of how to combine the developments from both
projects, ReBorn and SelSus.
Figure 7. Proposed Architecture
As it can be seen, there are several blocks that compose the
architecture shown in Figure 7. These blocks can be divided
into three main blocks: (1) SelSus developments (SelComp
and SelSus Dashboard); (2) ReBorn developments (ReBorn
Marketplace); and (3) new developments necessary to bring
the two tools together (Maintenance Dashboard, Simulation
Dashboard, Plugin Manager Extension, and Security Module).
All these blocks will be described in the following sections.
In order to implement this new architecture, new com-
ponents and functionalities will have to be developed and
integrated with the already existing tools. As shown in Figure
7, the Maintenance Dashboard, Simulation Dashboard, Plugin
Manager Extension, and Security Module will be implemented.
Most of the functionalities and components will be added
to the Marketplace side. Some of these modules were already
developed in SelSus and will be extended to be used in
the Marketplace, namely the Maintenance Dashboard and the
Simulation Dashboard. These modules enable trading software
and services in the Marketplace, extending the ability to sell,
buy, or rent equipment.
The Maintenance Dashboard’s main goal is to allow for an
easier planning of the maintenance scheduling of a company.
As mentioned before, the Marketplace can receive information
from the equipment’s Smart Components, which is stored in
the Marketplace. This information is useful in order to compare
collected metrics from different equipments, which can be used
to aid OEM to provide maintenance services to their customers.
Assuming that an OEM, besides selling equipment for
several customers at different countries, is also providing
maintenance services, which usually cover annual inspections
of the equipment in the costumer facilities, the information
stored in the Marketplace reveals to be very important. The
OEM is able to better use their resources as well as save
money by optimizing the traveling that is needed by the
maintenance engineer, taking into consideration the actual
status of the equipment. This also permits a more active pre-
ventive maintenance, allowing the generation and simulation of
several possible maintenance routes, based on the equipment
metrics and in the current context and environment where the
equipment is located.
The Simulation Dashboard aims at simplifying the pro-
cess of developing new functions that can be sold in the
Marketplace and uploaded to the Smart Components. This
Simulation Dashboard module will facilitate the design of new
functionalities, metric calculations, and treatment of raw data
of the Smart Components. The user will be able to design
a new functionality and simulate it, in order to check if the
behavior of the Smart Component is the desired one. The new
functionality can then be stored in the Marketplace for selling.
The existing Plugin Manager will be extended in order to
also manage the download of new functionalities, instead of
being limited to Smart Components software updates. The ex-
tended Plugin Manager will be able to manage the downloads
of all software, both functionalities and software versions of
the Smart Component.
One of the issues, nowadays, referenced by the industry
that hinders the wide use of the full functionalities of todays
technologies is the lack of security as well as the lack of pri-
vacy. For that purpose, a Security Module will be implemented,
in order to reinforce the system security, by adding privacy to
every communications performed between the different tools.
As shown in Figure 7, the idea is to be able to have a Secu-
rity Module in all the layers of the architecture. This Security
Module will be conﬁgurable, in order to adapt to the needs
of each layer and each OEM. The Security Module will have
two main functionalities, namely privacy and authentication.
This will be accomplished through the use of an encryption
algorithm, which will use a public key encryption algorithm,
in order to provide means of data encryption.
The communication between an OEM and the Marketplace
is performed over the Internet, which is well known to be
insecure if users are not authenticated and data exchange
is encrypted. Other simpler encryption algorithms, such as
symmetric keys, might also be considered to be implemented.
The Security Module will have the ability to be updated with
new methods, much like the Smart Component through the
Dashboard.
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-576-0
INTELLI 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt)

V.
CONCLUSION
Nowadays, sensors are widely available, mostly because
they are becoming increasingly more powerful, diverse, and
cheaper. With the Industry 4.0 the concept of Smart Factories
emerged. At the core of this concept is the use of sensors to
collect data. This collected data is then processed using data
analytics algorithms, to be used for many different purposes
such as monitoring or predictive maintenance. Over the last
few years, a lot of research has been dedicated to this topic.
Two such projects are the ReBorn and Selsus projects.
This paper proposes a new architecture that combines both
ReBorn and SelSus results, namelly the ReBorn Marketplace
and the SeSuls Dashboard. The idea is to use the results and
developments already accomplished and take them a step for-
ward. With the implementation of the described architecture, a
ﬂow of information will exist from the equipment at the shop-
ﬂoor, up to the Marketplace and back. This will allow to take
advantages of all the current technological advances, and allow
a safe and reliable way of using all the available information.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Sheth, C. Henson, and S. S. Sahoo, “Semantic sensor web,” IEEE
Internet computing, vol. 12, no. 4, 2008, pp. 78–83.
[2]
“Review
of
standardization
opportunities
in
smart
industrial
components,”
URL:
http://publica.fraunhofer.de/starweb/
servlet.starweb?path=epub.web&search=N-413239 [accessed: 2017-05-
10].
[3]
“ReBorn Project web site,” URL: http://www.reborn-eu-project.org/
[accessed: 2017-05-10].
[4]
S. Aguiar, R. Pinto, J. Reis, and G. Gonc¸alves, “Life-cycle approach
to extend equipment re-use in ﬂexible manufacturing,” in INTELLI
2016, The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and
Applications.
IARIA, 2016, pp. 148–153.
[5]
R. Fonseca, S. Aguiar, M. Peschl, and G. Gonc¸alves, “The reborn
marketplace: an application store for industrial smart components,”
in INTELLI 2016, The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent
Systems and Applications.
IARIA, 2016, pp. 136–141.
[6]
“SelSus Project web site,” URL: http://www.selsus.eu/ [accessed: 2017-
05-10].
[7]
F. Banaie and S. A. H. Seno, “A cloud-based architecture for secure and
reliable service provisioning in wireless sensor network,” in Computer
and Knowledge Engineering (ICCKE), 2014 4th International eConfer-
ence on.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 96–101.
[8]
K. R. Llanes, M. A. Casanova, and N. M. Lemus, “From sensor data
streams to linked streaming data: a survey of main approaches,” Journal
of Information and Data Management, vol. 7, no. 2, 2017, pp. 130–140.
[9]
G. Gonc¸alves, J. Reis, R. Pinto, M. Alves, and J. Correia, “A step
forward on intelligent factories: A smart sensor-oriented approach,” in
Emerging Technology and Factory Automation (ETFA), 2014 IEEE.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–8.
[10]
W. Shen, Q. Hao, H. J. Yoon, and D. H. Norrie, “Applications of
agent-based systems in intelligent manufacturing: An updated review,”
Advanced engineering INFORMATICS, vol. 20, no. 4, 2006, pp. 415–
431.
[11]
“Sensor ML,” URL: http://www.ogcnetwork.net/SensorML [accessed:
2017-05-10].
[12]
J. Shneidman, P. Pietzuch, J. Ledlie, M. Roussopoulos, M. Seltzer, and
M. Welsh, “Hourglass: An infrastructure for connecting sensor networks
and applications,” Tech. Rep., 2004.
[13]
M. Yuriyama and T. Kushida, “Sensor-cloud infrastructure-physical
sensor management with virtualized sensors on cloud computing,” in
Network-Based Information Systems (NBiS), 2010 13th International
Conference on.
IEEE, 2010, pp. 1–8.
[14]
J. Yan, Y. Ma, L. Wang, K.-K. R. Choo, and W. Jie, “A cloud-based
remote sensing data production system,” Future Generation Computer
Systems, 2017, pp. 1–13.
[15]
C. Yang, S. Lan, W. Shen, G. Q. Huang, X. Wang, and T. Lin,
“Towards product customization and personalization in iot-enabled
cloud manufacturing,” Cluster Computing, 2017, pp. 1–14.
[16]
L. Zhang, Y. Luo, F. Tao, B. H. Li, L. Ren, X. Zhang, H. Guo, Y. Cheng,
A. Hu, and Y. Liu, “Cloud manufacturing: a new manufacturing
paradigm,” Enterprise Information Systems, vol. 8, no. 2, 2014, pp.
167–187.
[17]
K. M. Alam and A. El Saddik, “C2ps: A digital twin architecture
reference model for the cloud-based cyber-physical systems,” IEEE
Access, vol. 5, 2017, pp. 2050–2062.
[18]
L. Neto, J. Reis, D. Guimar˜aes, and G. Gonc¸alves, “Sensor cloud:
Smartcomponent framework for reconﬁgurable diagnostics in intelligent
manufacturing environments,” in Industrial Informatics (INDIN), 2015
IEEE 13th International Conference on.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 1706–1711.
[19]
A. Alamri, W. S. Ansari, M. M. Hassan, M. S. Hossain, A. Alelaiwi, and
M. A. Hossain, “A survey on sensor-cloud: architecture, applications,
and approaches,” International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks,
vol. 9, no. 2, 2013, pp. 1–18.
[20]
J. I. R. Molano, J. M. C. Lovelle, C. E. Montenegro, J. J. R. Granados,
and R. G. Crespo, “Metamodel for integration of internet of things,
social networks, the cloud and industry 4.0,” Journal of Ambient
Intelligence and Humanized Computing, 2017, pp. 1–15.
[21]
B. Varghese, N. Wang, D. S. Nikolopoulos, and R. Buyya, “Feasibility
of fog computing,” CoRR, 2017, pp. 1–8.
[22]
M. Satyanarayanan, “The emergence of edge computing,” Computer,
vol. 50, no. 1, 2017, pp. 30–39.
[23]
R. Roman, P. Najera, and J. Lopez, “Securing the internet of things,”
Computer, vol. 44, no. 9, 2011, pp. 51–58.
[24]
Q. Jing, A. V. Vasilakos, J. Wan, J. Lu, and D. Qiu, “Security of the
internet of things: perspectives and challenges,” Wireless Networks,
vol. 20, no. 8, 2014, pp. 2481–2501.
[25]
A. Sajid, H. Abbas, and K. Saleem, “Cloud-assisted iot-based scada
systems security: A review of the state of the art and future challenges,”
IEEE Access, vol. 4, 2016, pp. 1375–1384.
[26]
S. Sicari, A. Rizzardi, L. A. Grieco, and A. Coen-Porisini, “Security,
privacy and trust in internet of things: The road ahead,” Computer
Networks, vol. 76, 2015, pp. 146–164.
[27]
X. Lu, Q. Li, Z. Qu, and P. Hui, “Privacy information security
classiﬁcation study in internet of things,” in Identiﬁcation, Information
and Knowledge in the Internet of Things (IIKI), 2014 International
Conference on.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 162–165.
[28]
A. Alcaide, E. Palomar, J. Montero-Castillo, and A. Ribagorda, “Anony-
mous authentication for privacy-preserving iot target-driven applica-
tions,” Computers & Security, vol. 37, 2013, pp. 111–123.
[29]
A. Puliaﬁto, A. Celesti, M. Villari, and M. Fazio, “Towards the
integration between iot and cloud computing: an approach for the
secure self-conﬁguration of embedded devices,” International Journal
of Distributed Sensor Networks, 2015, pp. 1–9.
[30]
J.-X. Hu, C.-L. Chen, C.-L. Fan, and K.-h. Wang, “An intelligent
and secure health monitoring scheme using iot sensor based on cloud
computing,” Journal of Sensors, vol. 2017, 2017, pp. 1–11.
[31]
L. Neto, J. Reis, R. Silva, and G. Gonc¸alves, “Sensor selcomp, a smart
component for the industrial sensor cloud of the future,” in Proceedings
of the 2017 IEEE International Conference on Industrial Technology.
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1256–121.
[32]
“SelSus
-
White
paper
on
sensor
cloud,”
URL:
http://www.selsus.eu/ﬁleadmin/mount/documents/SelSus - D3.5 -
White paper on sensor clouds.pdf [accessed: 2017-05-10].
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-576-0
INTELLI 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt)

