Species Pattern Analysis in Long-Term Ecological Data Using Statistical and 
Biclustering Approach 
 
Hyeonjeong Lee 
Bio-Intelligence & Data Mining Laboratory, Graduate 
School of Electronics,  
Kyungpook National University,  
Republic of Korea  
e-mail: dic1224@naver.com 
Miyoung Shin 
School of Electronics Engineering,  
Kyungpook National University,  
Republic of Korea  
e-mail: shinmy@knu.ac.kr
 
 
Abstract—Analyzing 
long-term 
ecological 
data 
and 
appropriate visualization techniques are important for 
understanding biodiversity mechanisms and predicting effects 
of environmental changes. In this study, we applied an 
unconventional approach of finding species pattern, the 
tendency of species abundance monthly and annually in long-
term ecological data, by using statistical and biclustering 
methods. We tended to find out the similarity between each 
species after summarizing long-term dataset, and then 
visualized a correlation matrix and network, which exhibit 
significant statistical association with each other. For detecting 
species sets frequently appearing together or showing similar 
variation in abundance, we also employed a clustering based 
association mining. For experiments, we used weekly 
abundance butterfly data from the Environmental Change 
Network (ECN) in the UK. We could find out how often sets of 
species show the repeated pattern in long-term species 
abundance data. The approaches we have described can enable 
researchers to gain insight of many other relationships like 
between various species and environmental factors. In addition, 
combining our methods with detailed analyses or assumptions, 
such as genetic associations between species and functional 
subsystems may especially be effective in further analysis.  
Keywords- long-term ecological data; association mining; 
visualization; species set; species abundance pattern.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Analyzing long-term ecological data is important for 
understanding biodiversity mechanisms and predicting 
effects of environmental changes. Several long-term 
environmental monitoring projects, such as Terrestrial 
Ecosystem Research Network (TERN), National Ecological 
Observatory Network (NEON), and Long-Term Ecological 
Research (LTER) have attempted to manage and share 
records of climate and species in international networks [1]-
[3]. Accordingly, appropriate data analyses and visualization 
methods play a significant role in providing more insights 
into underlying trends in long-term ecological data. Many 
studies have attempted to search various patterns or trends of 
species, mostly plotting abundance of individual species 
across time, without regarding for associations between 
species [4][5]. In this study, we aim to find sets of species 
showing similar abundance pattern in long-term ecological 
data. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In 
Section Methods, our proposed methodology is represented. 
Section Results and Discussion draws the experimental 
results and discussion.  
II. 
METHODS 
In this study, we applied an unconventional approach of 
finding species pattern, the tendency of species abundance 
monthly and annually in long-term ecological data, by using 
statistical and biclustering methods. We first summarized the 
long-term dataset, and then tended to detect the presence of 
interesting trend by calculating the similarity between each 
species statistically. After that we visualized a correlation 
matrix and network, which exhibit significant statistical 
association with each other.  
For detecting species sets frequently appearing together 
or showing similar variation in abundance, we also employed 
a clustering based association mining. Association rule 
mining finds interesting itemsets (in this case, sets of 
species) that occur frequently in a dataset [6][7], and 
biclustering clusters rows and columns of a data matrix 
simultaneously [8]. We applied the BiMax clustering 
algorithm which is relatively faster than traditional 
approaches like Apriori algorithm, since Apriori often create 
too many rules and is time consuming. For performing the 
BiMax clustering to find associated species under certain 
condition, we first constructed experimental data in a such 
way that rows and columns represent species and samples 
(all months in 18 years), respectively. After that we utilized 
discretization to assign either 0 (less than average 
abundance) or 1 (more than average abundance) to each 
value of monthly species abundance. That is, we only 
focused on species sets that appearing more than average 
abundance in every months. By doing so, we could find out 
interesting species-sets in the rule form of {species set} ⇒  
{major month and its abundance percentage}. We also 
visualized the species sets into species abundance heatmap 
illustrating monthly and annually repeated abundance pattern 
of species sets.  
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
For experiments, we used butterfly data from the 
Environmental Change Network (ECN) in the UK [9]. 
Weekly abundance records of 29 kinds of butterflies from 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

1994 to 2012 are analyzed, showing several possible species 
sets. We visualized the overall trend of dataset as shown in 
Fig.1. Correlation between each species in long-term data are 
shown in Fig.2. The color and width of boxes in Fig.2 (a) 
and edges in Fig. 2 (b) represent how much two species 
show the similar abundance in long-term data. The size of 
node in Fig. 2 (b) is proportional to its degree or the number 
of edges. We could also find out how often sets of species 
show the repeated pattern in long-term species abundance 
data by applying biclustering based association mining on 
month-species summarized dataset (Fig.3). We represented 
species sets as association rule forms, for example, {"Red 
admiral", "Meadow brown"} ⇒ {JUN 5.6%, JUL 61.1%}, 
which indicates that a species set including two species “Red 
admiral” and “Meadow brown” is appearing in June and July 
as a percentage of 5.6 and 61.1, respectively. Fig. 4 
illustrates top 100 interesting species sets at a glance. 
Relationships between species and climate, i.e., temperature 
and wind speed are however not found in this experiment. 
Nevertheless, the results show that our approach have 
general use in finding the species sets for addressing species 
abundance patterns of interest. It might be showing better 
performance if more ecological data are accumulated in 
recent years or near future.  
The approaches we have described can enable 
researchers to gain insight of many other relationships, for 
example, between various species and environmental factors. 
In addition, combining our methods with detailed analyses or 
assumptions, such as genetic associations between species 
and functional subsystems may especially be effective in 
further analysis.  
 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This subject is supported by Korea Ministry of 
Environment (MOE) as “Public Technology Program based 
on Environmental Policy (2014000210003).”  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Terrestrial Ecosystem Research Network: TERN. [Online]. Available 
from: http://www.tern.org.au/  
[2] M. Keller, D. S. Schimel, W. W. Hargrove, and F. M. 
Hoffman, “A continental strategy for the National Ecological 
Observatory Network,” The Ecological Society of America, 
pp. 282-284, 2008.  
[3] J. T. Callahan, “Long-term ecological research,” BioScience, 
vol. 34, pp. 363-367, 1984.  
[4] S. Benham, “The Environmental Change Network at Alice 
Holt Research Forest,” Forestry Commission, pp. 1-12, 2008, 
ISSN: 1756-5758, ISBN: 973-0-85538-762-4.  
[5] B. J. McGill, et al., "Species abundance distributions: moving 
beyond single prediction theories to integration within an 
ecological framework," Ecology letters, vol. 10, pp. 995-1015, 
2007, doi: 10.1111/j.1461-0248.2007.01094.x.  
[6] A.  Mukhopadhyay, U. Maulik, and S. Bandyopadhyay, “A 
novel biclustering approach to association rule mining for 
predicting HIV-1-human protein interactions,” PLoS One, vol. 
7, e32289, 2012.  
[7] R. Giugno, A. Pulvirenti, L. Cascione, G. Pigola, and A. Ferro, 
“MIDClass: Microarray data classification by association 
rules and gene expression interfals,” PLoS One, vol. 8, 
e69873, 2013.  
[8] A. Prelić, et al. “A systematic comparison and evaluation of 
biclustering methods for gene expression data,” Bioinformatics, vol. 
22, pp. 1122-1129, 2006.  
[9] M. D. Morecroft, et al., “The UK Environmental Change 
Network: emerging trends in the composition of plant and 
animal 
communities 
and 
the 
physical 
environment,” 
Biological Conservation, vol. 142, pp. 2814-2832, 2009.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
 
Figure 1. Overall trend of long-term ECN butterfly data for Alice Holt from 1994 to 2012: (a) annual trend of average temperature, number of species, and 
average individuals of butterflies (b) bar graph of butterfly species abundance and ratio at each year.  
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

 
(a) 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
 
Figure 2. Correlation between each species are represented as: (a) species correlation matrix, and (b) species correlation network.  
 
 
 
Figure 3. Species-month Summarized data with rows indicating months and columns indicating species of butterflies. The color represents how much 
individuals of each species are shown in each month on average from 1994 to 2012. This summarized data are used for further analysis.  
 
 
 
Figure 4. Top 100 interesting species sets frequently shown in each months among the datasets 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-518-0
INTELLI 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications (includes InManEnt 2016)

