Smart Factory Automation for Robotic Production of  
Satellite Formations and Constellations 
 
Klaus Schilling 
Computer Science VII: Robotics and Telematics 
University Würzburg 
Würzburg, Germany 
e-mail: schi@informatik.uni-wuerzburg.de 
 
 
Abstract—In space industry, the emerging mega-constellations, 
demanding thousands of satellites per year, dramatically 
change production approaches for satellites. Here, the 
transition 
from 
traditional 
human 
labour-intensive 
manufacturing of few satellites towards automated, robot-
supported, flexible industry 4.0 production systems is 
progressing. The goal of this contribution is an outline of the 
production 
steps 
supported 
by 
automation, 
robotic 
manipulators and mobile robots for a flexible flow of materials. 
Specific requirements concern integrated production and 
testing capabilities to comply with the challenging space 
environment and to guarantee the mandatory high quality 
performance standards. 
Keywords-satellite production; intelligent distributed system; 
industry 4.0; robotics; intelligent manufacturing; flexible 
manufacturing; integration and testing . 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The sector of space technology sees currently disruptive 
changes often described by “New Space” or Space 4.0. The 
traditional large, multifunctional spacecraft in geostationary 
orbits are complemented by networks of hundreds of small 
satellites in Low Earth Orbits (LEO) [1][2]. Application 
areas address telecommunications (such as Starlink with 
about 1700 satellites or OneWeb with about 400 satellites 
launched) and Earth observation (such as Planet with about 
400 nano-satellites of only 6 kg in orbit). There are plans for 
placing several thousand further satellites to provide a 
continuous service with low latency, in particular for Internet 
of Things (IoT) applications. 
While traditionally less than a hundred satellites per year 
were manufactured in handwork, now small series 
production approaches are required to achieve outputs of a 
few thousand per year. The goal of this contribution is to 
address factory automation and robotic production processes 
to realize in a short period of time a sufficient number of 
satellites in orbit to offer the intended communication 
services. In parallel, the usual extremely high quality 
standards in integration and testing are to be guaranteed to 
support operations of the multi-satellite system with 
appropriate performance under harsh space environment 
conditions. 
Thus, 
challenges 
for 
advanced 
cyber-
manufacturing systems result. 
This contribution discusses in Section II the standardized 
satellite design suitable for automated production. Section III 
addresses the use of automation in the integration process, 
while Section IV has emphasis on related quality control and 
test approaches. 
II. 
SATELLITE SYSTEM DESIGN 
The challenges in the transition to automated production 
start already with design of the satellite suitable for later 
automated serial production. In contrast to traditional human 
labor and time intensive satellite manufacturing, now 
standardization and modularization of the satellite bus and 
of the satellite subsystems become key elements [3] - [5].  
 
Figure 1. Modular building blocks of the satellite subsystems, supporting 
efficient integration onto a backplane by standardized electrical interfaces. 
A digital twin accompanies the complete satellite life 
cycle, but in parallel modular hardware building blocks 
(Figure 1), too. This way, early Hardware-in-the-Loop 
(HiL) tests can be introduced from the beginning in order to 
calibrate the digital twin by real hardware performance. 
Typical satellite system building blocks, like subsystems for 
on-board 
data 
handling, 
communication, 
attitude 
determination and control, energy storage and distribution, 
are plugged by connectors on the base plate (cf. Figure 1).  
 
7
Copyright (c) The Government of Germany, 2022. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-977-5
INTELLI 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

 
 
Figure 2.  The UNISEC FlatSat development kit providing access for a broad 
range of test instruments to subsystem hardware, plugged into the base plate. 
 
UNISEC Europe provided an advanced electrical interface 
definition [6] suitable for very small satellites including 
CubeSats. All data and power lines are physically placed in 
the backplane. This replaces the usual harness. Advantages 
of the proposed bus are robust and rapid development, 
integration and testing of the satellite as well as simple 
maintenance, extension and replacement of subsystems in 
the complete satellite lifecycle, from development (in a flat-
sat configuration) to flight model realization (cf. Figure 2). 
When the satellite is in orbit, the FlatSat serves as Electrical 
Ground Support Equipment (EGSE), to analyze anomalies 
observed in satellite operations. 
III. 
AUTOMATION IN SATELLITE INTEGRATION 
There is automation already employed at the level of 
components and subsystems. For example, in Figure 3, the 
gluing of solar cells on the side panels for power generation 
is presented. Here, by a pneumatic end-effector, the fragile 
solar cells have to be placed very accurately on the side 
panel position to be fixed by adhesive and subsequently 
electrically contacted. This delicate process is handled by a 
force-controlled two arm robot. Software continuously 
 
Figure 3.  Robotic assembly of a satellite solar array. 
monitors the health status of solar cells as well as the status 
of the adhesive. In particular, if a solar cell breaks during 
manipulation, quick reaction is necessary to avoid gluing a 
faulty part and thus producing a defect side panel. 
 
The automation level in satellite integration has to be 
adapted according to the design complexity and the number 
of satellites. For traditional production of just small 
quantities, human labor will do the integration. With 
increasing quantities, human-robot collaboration increases 
efficiency and reliability (cf. Figure 4), finally leading to 
fully automated processing for large quantities (cf. Figure 5). 
Here, robots with force control are employed to guarantee 
the safety of the human collaborator. 
 
Figure 4. Human-cooperation at Zentrum for Telematics, Würzburg, to 
jointly integrate and test satellites. The robot acts as a third arm and 
contributes high precision motion capabilities. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Fully automated integration: here, after optical quality check in the 
illuminated box, the robot arm moves the board to plug it into the baseplate. 
 
In the fully automated mode (cf. Figure 5), the completed 
component and subsystem boards are picked by the robot 
from the storage area, and, after satisfactory quality checks, 
the integration into the base plate is performed. It uses smart 
8
Copyright (c) The Government of Germany, 2022. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-977-5
INTELLI 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

force control of the robot to enable the very sensitive plug-
in of connectors without destroying the baseplate and 
nevertheless providing a solid connection to tolerate the 
high vibration level at rocket launch.  
 
IV. 
INTEGRATED SPACE ENVIRONMENT TESTING 
After each integration step tests are applied to assure 
performance. Often, for more extensive space environment 
tests, the integrated parts have to be transported from the 
robotic work cell (cf. Figure 5) to a dedicated test area for 
assessment of vibration, radiation or motion and pointing 
capabilities. This transport is autonomously realized by 
mobile robots to the target facility (cf. Figure 6). 
Coordination by information exchange via communication 
links in the production environment is essential between the 
involved machines. In addition, results are to be transferred 
to the factory’s process planning system in order to 
potentially initialize a re-planning process in case of 
anomalies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Related advanced robotics and automation approaches 
were implemented at the Center for Telematics in Würzburg 
as demonstrator plant, using the example of nano-satellites. 
Care was taken that the applied methods are scalable to 
larger satellites, too. Satellites assembled this way were 
already placed successfully in orbit (NetSat mission 
launched 2020 [7]). 
Similar approaches are, therefore, considered in research 
studies as basis for future in-orbit assembly [8]. The 
limitations in volume and mass by the rocket shroud often 
lead to very complicated designs to fold bulky parts, like 
deployables or arrays, for the delivery into orbit. It is always 
a critical and failure prone operation to unfold after 
deployment from the rocket. It would, therefore, be much 
easier to transfer the components and then finally integrate 
them by similar robotics to complete satellites in orbit. 
  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The planned mega-constellations demand thousands of 
satellites to be produced in a short timeframe. This cannot 
be 
achieved 
by 
traditional 
satellite 
manufacturing. 
Therefore, modern consumer mass production technologies, 
like industry 4.0, are analyzed for transfer and adaptation to 
small series suitable for space environments. An approach 
based on modularization and standardization of satellite 
subsystems and  components  was  developed and tested for  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
nano-satellites. It demonstrated the potential of modern 
automation and robotics technologies in order to increase 
efficiency in satellite assembly. 
This technology demonstrator for integrated assembly and 
test proved first principles and processes for efficient 
automated production. Suitability to comply with the 
challenges 
of 
the 
harsh 
space 
environment 
was 
Figure 6. Process flow in satellite integration with integrated space environment testing. 
close worker / robot cooperation for 
efficient  satellite system integration 
modular satellite bus architecture to support  
flexible integration in production 
integrated automated 
tests for functionality and 
performance of the satellite  
flexible flow of materials 
between integration and testing 
areas by transport robots 
9
Copyright (c) The Government of Germany, 2022. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-977-5
INTELLI 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

demonstrated in orbit at the NetSat mission launched 
September 2020. Future developments will now be 
practiced for production of larger quantities of small 
satellites for telecommunication and Earth observation 
applications. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The financial support for the project “Adaptive 
Production” within the “Digital Production” Program of the 
Bavarian Ministry of Economics is acknowledged, as well 
as the contributions from all motivated collaborators in this 
project. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Acatech, Recommendations for Implementing the Strategic 
Initiative Industry 4.0 - Final report of the Industrie 4.0 
working group, April 2013. 
https://en.acatech.de/publication/recommendations-for-
implementing-the-strategic-initiative-industrie-4-0-final-
report-of-the-industrie-4-0-working-group/  [accessed May 
2022] 
 
 
 
[2] 
Euroconsult, „Prospects for the small satellite market, 7th 
edition“, 2021.  
https://digital-platform.euroconsult-ec.com/product/prospects-
for-the-small-satellite-market/   [accessed May 2022] 
[3]  E. Hand, “Startup Liftoff”, Science Vol. 348, Issue 6231, pp. 
172 – 177, 2015. 
[4]  N. Jones, “Mini satellites prove their scientific power”, 
Nature 508, pp. 300 – 301, 2014.  
[5]  K. Schilling and M. Dowling, “Disruptive Technology 
potential 
of 
Small 
Satellites”, 
The 
4S 
Conference 
Proceedings, paper 320, 2016. 
[6] 
UNISEC Europe; CubeSat Subsystem Interface Definition, 
2015.      
 http://unisec-europe.eu/standards/bus/ [accessed May 2022] 
[7] 
J. Scharnagl, F. Kempf, S. Dombrovski, and K. Schilling,  
“NetSat – Challenges of a Formation Composed of 4 Nano-
Satellites”, 72th International Astronautical Congress, 
Dubai, IAC-21-B4.7.8, 2021 
[8] 
F. Kempf et al.,   “AI-In-Orbit-Factory – AI approaches for 
adaptive 
robotic 
in-orbit 
manufacturing 
of 
modular 
satellites”, 72nd International Astronautical Congress, 
Dubai, IAC-21- D1.1.2, 2021. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10
Copyright (c) The Government of Germany, 2022. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-977-5
INTELLI 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications

