Smart and Individual Travel Assistance - Barrierfree Mobility for all  
Smartphone application for barrierfree cross-modal transportation information in real-time 
 
Nadine Schlueter, Jan-Peter Nicklas, Petra Winzer 
Research Group of Product Safety and Quality Engineering 
University of Wuppertal 
Wuppertal, Germany 
schlueter@uni-wuppertal.de; nicklas@uni-wuppertal.de; 
winzer@uni-wuppertal.de 
Lars Schnieder 
Institute of Transportation Systems 
German Aerospace Center 
Braunschweig, Germany 
lars.schnieder@dlr.de
 
Abstract—Public transport operators focus on a public 
transport system, which is inclusive and fair to all groups of 
society as required in the United Nations´s Convention on the 
Rights of Persons with Disabilities. This requires an innovative 
approach reflecting both the users’ and the service providers’ 
perspective. From the passengers’ point of view it becomes 
obvious that not only the accessibility of a single mode of 
transportation is relevant. Furthermore, a systemic view is 
required as a trip from door to door most likely includes 
different means of transportation. The interchanges within one 
transportation system as well as the change-over to other means 
of transportation must be improved regarding the special 
requirements of people with reduced mobility and/or sensory 
restrictions. So, in order to create a public transportation 
system for all, all public transport service providers and their 
processes have to be linked with each other. This article 
describes how this objective can be achieved by a holistic 
approach that helps developing individual and smart solution 
available and useable for each passenger.  
Keywords - cross-modal public transportation; barrierfree; 
smart 
solutions; 
customer-orientation; 
feedback; 
service 
application. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Every mobility chain - not only in public transportation - 
is accompanied by an information chain. This has to be seen 
both from the passengers’ perspective as well as from the 
public transport service providers’ point of view. Especially 
passengers with reduced mobility and/or sensory restrictions 
have to be informed in due time. Not only when operations are 
affected as planned, but especially in case of unexpected 
events and service disruptions. In this case, existing travel 
itineraries have to be updated or new travel itineraries have to 
be generated and distributed to the relevant passengers. 
Updates of travel itineraries need to reflect changeover times 
and have to consider special needs of passengers with reduced 
mobility. In particular, this means that information needs to be 
presented in time and in an understandable way, e.g., in sign 
language [1]. By carrying out the demo research project aim4it 
(Researchproject aim4it - accessible and inclusive mobility 
for all with individual travel assistance. EU Funding 
programme Future Travelling (ENT III, Flagship Call 2013), 
Projectnumber: 4304059) , barrierfree mobility for all should 
be achieved as demanded by UN´s Convention on the Rights 
of Persons with Disabilities [2] as well as corresponding 
legislation on European [3] and national level [4]. 
Innovative intermodal transport information systems 
(ITIS) manage the challenge to provide such relevant pre-trip, 
on-trip and post-trip information to passengers. Precise and up 
to date information is the basis for travel assistance 
applications. 
Within the travel assistance application information 
representation is tailored to the specific requirements of 
passengers with sensory restrictions, e.g., information display 
in sign language using an avatar on smartphones. Blind 
passengers benefit from audible output provided by screen 
readers. 
The offer of travel assistance applications significantly 
increases service quality perceived by the passenger and can 
thus increase the use of public transportation. By doing this 
public transport can make a significant contribution towards a 
sustainable modal split, which helps to reduce pollution in 
urban areas. Furthermore, with suitable evaluation algorithms 
customer feedback can be systematically solicited, evaluated 
and interpreted by the public transport operators. Better 
handling of passenger feedback is a solid basis for a 
continuous improvement of public transport operations. For 
example, timetables can be adjusted or available digital maps 
further enhanced furthermore, service personal can be used 
more appropriate. Overall, this will result in a better service 
quality for passengers – not only the ones with reduced 
mobility and/or sensory restrictions. All groups of our society 
benefit from improved passenger information and value-
added services.  
In the following sections, it will be described how an 
innovative approach can support the development of a 
barrierfree public transportation system. The technical 
components have to fulfill the passenger´s needs as well as the 
public transport service provider´s needs and will be further 
described below. Furthermore, the chosen use case example 
“UC6: Passenger feedback function” will be explained in 
more detail to point out the innovative methodological 
approach, which helps to continuously improve value-added 
services for passengers with reduced mobility. Finally, a 
conclusion will sum up the most important facts and show the 
next steps on the way to a barrierfree public transportation 
system for all. 
41
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

II. 
INNOVATIVE APPROACH FOR  BARRIERFREE PUBLIC 
TRANSPORTATION  
The project aim4it (accessible and inclusive mobility for 
all with individual travel assistance) incorporates and 
integrates both the user’s and service provider’s point of view. 
In order to bring together both views service blueprints of the 
passenger processes and use cases from the public transport 
service provider´s point of view are linked to each other. 
Demands and requirements from passengers and public 
transport service providers are linked to the processes and sub-
processes of service maps and use cases (see Figure 1) in order 
to gain known-ledge about all relevant requirements (for more 
information refer to [5]) that need to be fulfilled. 
 
 
Figure 1. Innovative approach for developing barrierfree public 
transportation systems in accordance to [6] 
 
Furthermore, a requirements management approach for 
networks is implemented to evaluate, structure, assess and 
monitor the process of requirement fulfillment [7] and to 
assure the quality of the project outcome. In order to show the 
way how the system is developed, based on elicited 
requirements and processes, a short use case example is given 
in the following. 
When a journey is viewed from the perspective of the 
customer/user, it becomes clear that it is not enough to design 
individual transport modes and facilities for just one transport 
system. In order to be passenger-friendly and suitable for use 
by passengers with special mobility needs (in this use case 
visually impaired passengers as well as the deaf and hard of 
hearing) all transport modes and, therefore, all service 
providers have to be considered [8]. For a given destination to 
be reachable by everyone, barrierfree mobility chains for all 
transport modes should be set up. As every mobility chain is 
accompanied by an information chain passengers with 
reduced mobility and/or sensory restrictions have to get all 
relevant information about departure and arrival times as well 
as necessary transfer procedures at interchange stations. This 
information must be up-to-date, precise and understandable at 
important nodes before, along as well as after the journey. 
Significant information needs to be conveyed in optical, 
acoustical and/or tactile form [9]. 
These demands and requirements lead to several use cases 
(UC), which will be addressed in the aim4it project: 
 
UC1: Request for connection protection especially 
for passengers with reduced mobility who have a 
need for prolonged changeover times at interchange 
stations. 
 
UC2: Information about current incidents in the 
public transport network in sign language. 
 
UC3: Request for staff assistance to get on and off 
the vehicle to facilitate use of public transport 
services for passengers with reduced mobility. 
 
UC4: Re-Routing especially in case of incidents, but 
also in case of delays in public transport operations. 
 
UC5: In-Vehicle passenger information based on the 
integrated on-board information system (IBIS). 
 
UC6: Passenger feedback function to trigger 
continuous 
improvement 
activities 
of 
public 
transport operators. 
Afterwards those use cases are transferred, based on their 
storyline, into Unified Modelling Language (UML) sequence 
diagrams in order to support the development of technical 
interfaces between the different information systems of the 
service providers. For the use case 5 “in-vehicle passenger 
information” such a sequence-diagram is shown as an 
example in Figure 2. It shows how the background system (the 
journey planner, which is part of the intermodal transport 
information system, ITIS), the travel assistance application on 
the passengers’ smartphones, the Bluetooth-Gateway on 
board of the vehicle as well as the on-board unit of the 
intermodal transport control system (ITCS) interact with each 
other. 
 
Based on the defined use cases and the sequence diagrams 
that show, which information sources are available and how 
they should interact with each other, the whole system 
architecture with its components was set up. The following 
Figure 2. Detail of sequence diagram about “In-Vehicle Passenger 
Information” use case 
 
42
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

section describes those components, based on the use cases in 
more detail. 
III. COMPONENTS OF THE AIM4IT SYSTEM 
ARCHITECTURE  
The intended overall aim4it system provides a benefit 
from the user’s as well as the public transport service 
provider’s point of view. The key idea of the aim4it system 
architecture is to use industry standards. This facilitates 
implementation of the aim4it travel assistance application as 
well as field integration in the test field in Vienna. 
Furthermore, it allows easy transfer of project results to other 
regions after the project.  
 
 
Figure 3. 
Aim4it system architecture [10] 
Thereby the aim4it smartphone app is the key element as 
shown in Figure 3. The following sections will explain the 
aim4it sub-systems and their interactions in more detail. 
A. 
aim4it smartphone app 
With the aim4it smartphone app passengers with reduced 
mobility and/or sensory restrictions get assistance in both trip 
planning and execution. At home the passenger can start the 
planning of the trip by entering information about the start and 
the destination into the app. Data entry and display on the 
aim4it user interface are designed in a user-centered way. All 
information provided will be displayed as multi-sensual 
output to secure information for the different groups of 
passengers. For example, blind and visually impaired 
passengers receive audible output. Once all data is entered, the 
aim4it smartphone app sends a request for a barrierfree trip to 
the Intermodal Transport Information System (ITIS) [11]. 
This way a bi-directional communication between passengers 
and service providers can be established [12]. This bi-
directional link will be maintained once the passenger started 
his journey. This means once a triggering condition for a 
route-update has been identified by the ITIS the passenger will 
receive a new itinerary on his smart phone (see Figure 4). With 
the app the passenger can also “book” other value-added 
services. If required prolonged change-over times at 
interchange stations can be requested as well as boarding 
assistance to enter or leave the public transport vehicle. 
 
 
Figure 4. Push-updates for passenger´s smartphones 
 
The passenger receives updates about current public 
transport operations with push-updates. Figure 4 shows a 
sample screen shot of the aim4it smartphone app. The 
example shows a trip with the subway line U2 in Vienna to 
the convention center. The trip from start to destination 
requires an interchange from subway line U2 to the bus line 
82A. The connection from subway to bus is successfully 
booked and the bus driver is informed. The passenger 
receives a positive acknowledgement about this. 
B. Intermodal Transport Information (ITIS)  
Based on the start and end point of the requested trip the 
ITIS performs barrierfree routing from start to destination. In 
order to do this, the system is supplied with all relevant time 
table information from time table planning systems. 
Furthermore, the available infrastructure at stations (e.g., lifts 
and escalators) is part of the system. The combination of time 
table data and infrastructure modelling allows the execution 
of barrierfree routings. In addition to “just” reflecting time 
table data, the ITIS also reflects real-time data [13] of current 
public transport operations. Real-time data is provided by the 
Intermodal Transport Control System (ITCS). Furthermore, 
available information from augmented digital maps (e.g., 
based on crowdsourcing projects such as wheelmap) and 
aim4it 
Background 
System
Smartphone app
(App)
Quality 
management 
system 
aim4it mobile device
Aim4it 
passenger 
user interface
Intermodal 
Transport 
Control 
System 
(ITCS)
Intermodal 
Transport 
Information 
System (ITIS)
Augmented 
digital 
maps
aim4it station staff
Time table 
management system
Bus driver 
display
aim4it on board components
IP-Data – 
distributor
aim4it bus driver 
user interface
Feeder / 
distributor
Incident capturing 
system  (ICS)
Bluetooth 
communication
Bluetooth 
communication
Message 
data base 
and 
message 
distributor 
Video generator 
for sign language 
Data link 
to ITCS 
Portalsystem 
43
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

incident from the incident capturing system (ICS, see section 
III, D) are considered in the routing function. For example, 
incident messages can be entered by local service staff at 
stations (e.g., defect of an escalator). The barrierfree route 
compiled by the ITIS is sent to the smartphone app. There it 
is displayed for barrierfree navigation along the planned trip 
chain. Besides this routing function, the ITIS also serves as a 
“message broker” between the passenger and the public 
transport operators. For the use cases “connection protection” 
and “staff assistance” the ITIS receives the requests, maps the 
requests to specific vehicle movements and forwards these 
requests to the intermodal transport control system (ITCS). If 
required by the usecase feedback from the ITCS will be 
forwarded 
to 
the 
passenger 
by 
the 
ITIS 
(e.g., 
acknowledgement of staff assistance request). The passenger 
will receive corresponding information on his/her smart 
phone.  
C. Intermodal Transport Control Systems (ITCS) 
The intermodal transport control system (ITCS) 
continuously monitors the current status of public transport 
operations (see Figure 5). Each day the current time table is 
loaded into the system.  
 
 
Figure 5. Operations control center 
 
Each vehicle receives information, that is relevant. Time 
table information is displayed to the driver who adheres to the 
schedule in the best possible way. Based on GPS-tracking the 
vehicles send updates about schedule adherence and their 
current position to the ITCS. Based on the available 
information, existing conflicts in public transport operations 
can be detected (or future conflicts predicted) and appropriate 
corrective action is triggered by the staff in the operations 
control center. In the operations control center previously 
booked connection requests are monitored. The same applies 
for previously booked requests for staff assistance. In case 
planned connections cannot be kept or planned staff assistance 
at a station cannot be guaranteed any more, appropriate action 
is taken. Connection monitoring is visualized in the screenshot 
in Figure 6 below. This list provides information, which 
connections are subject to monitoring and if these are critical 
due to delays especially of the feeding bus. 
 
 
Figure 6. Display of secured connections at the operator’s terminal in the 
operations control center 
 
Besides this equipment in the operations control center 
each vehicle (bus and tram) has an ITCS on-board unit. By 
implementing a new bi-directional interface between the 
aim4it smart phone app and the onboard unit new services 
become available to the passengers. An example of a possible 
new feature is the request for bus driver assistance e.g., to 
board the vehicle. This request can be processed in two 
different ways. In a first option, the request is entered into the 
smart phone app and is sent to the ITIS. By the ITIS this 
request is passed to the ITCS where the corresponding vehicle 
is identified. Via the existing data link between the ITCS and 
the vehicle the request for bus driver assistance is sent to the 
bus (see Figure 7) [11]. In a second option, a direct 
communication link between app and vehicle (e.g., WiFi or 
Bluetooth) can be used. 
 
 
Figure 7. Bus driver display shows requested assistance 
 
On board of the vehicle the boarding request is displayed 
to the bus driver within the aim4it bus driver user interface 
when the vehicle approaches the proposed station. Figure 7 
shows how a boarding request of a wheel chair user is 
displayed to the bus driver. 
D. Incident Capturing System (ICS) 
During operations the initial route of the passenger will be 
updated based on available information about timetable 
deviations or changes in the status of the network 
infrastructure (real-time data). Real-time data also includes 
incidents and disruption information due to their mostly short-
44
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

term nature. For this reason public transport service providers 
have to capture incidents in their route network [14]. For 
example, this can be line closures (e.g., due to an accident) or 
a defect of facilities at stations. With the incident capturing 
system the operator can enter currently existing problems. 
This information is made available to the ITIS. ITIS 
determines which line/station is affected by the entered 
incident message. Furthermore, ITIS has an overview, which 
passengers need to be informed about currently existing 
restrictions within the public transport network. The existing 
incident is reflected in the routing of passengers (see section 
IV.D). With the push service all passengers receive 
information that is relevant to them in their specific usage 
context. For example, a wheel chair use will get an adequate 
route information in case a lift is broken. In this case, he/she 
might be asked to use a different route or to leave the subway 
at another station. In case an incident has been solved the 
incident message is revoked. In this case, the ITIS can 
determine a new route.  
IV. 
VALUE-ADDED SERVICES AND THEIR CONTINUOUS 
IMPROVEMENT  
With the aim4it smartphone app passengers with reduced 
mobility and/or sensory restrictions get on-trip assistance. 
This includes several services, which are based on pre-defined 
use cases. The implemented use cases are further described in 
the following sections. 
A. UC 1: Request for connection protection 
Most often trips in a public transportation network can 
only be realized with at least one transfer [10]. To provide a 
dependable transportation chain time tables have to be 
matched and transport operators have to monitor connections 
in order to synchronize transportation chains in case of 
incidents. If needed, the connecting vehicle can wait for 
passengers of the feeding vehicle. The request for connection 
protection in the aim4it system takes into account that 
passengers with mobility or sensual restrictions need a longer 
transfer time to the vehicle. Based on this service the 
connection is guaranteed and the passenger is informed in due 
time. The driver of the receiving vehicle is informed about the 
prolonged waiting time at the requested station. In addition, 
connections can also be cancelled if no longer required (e.g., 
due to re-routing, see Section IV.B – Incident information in 
sign language) to avoid delay [1, 10]. If a connection cannot 
be kept because of delays or incidents within the public 
transport network the passenger will get an automatic route 
update. 
B. UC 2: Incident information in sign language 
All passengers need to get access to detailed and reliable 
information 
regarding 
their 
trip. 
To 
provide 
such 
comprehensive information 
by 
the 
travel assistance 
application for sensory restricted passengers, this information 
have to be made available in an appropriate way. Whenever 
service irregularities (e.g., delays, cancellations, missed 
connections) are detected in the ITCS error information is 
forwarded to the passenger. In order to provide barrierfree 
information, this process includes several media types, which 
supply information for the passenger in a way suitable for his 
special needs.  
The aim4it project pays special attention to deaf and 
hearing-impaired passengers. As this passenger group has 
difficulties in deciphering complex linguistic structures 
relevant information will be provided by sign language-based 
avatar videos. The aim4it message generator automatically 
transforms the text message to a video stream, displaying 
error information in sign language for deaf and hard of 
hearing passengers on their smartphones [1, 10]. Figure 8 
shows the video avatar for displaying information in sign 
language. 
 
 
Figure 8. Video avatar for displaying information in sign language [10] 
 
C. UC 3: Request for staff assistance 
On trip the passenger can make stop requests along with 
requests for bus driver assistance. For instance, a blind or 
sensory restricted passenger can call for help to get on the 
vehicle (see Figure 9). It is also possible to call for help to get 
off the vehicle. Therefore, the bus driver can assist, e.g., a 
wheelchair user by a bus integrated ramp (see Figure 10).  
 
 
Figure 9. Sensory restricted passenger requests via aim4it application 
 
Currently the U1 can not operate between
Reumannsquare and Central station
45
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 10. Assistance for wheelchair user 
 
This service provides an easier usage of public 
transportation services for passengers with reduced mobility 
or with sensual restrictions. Information about a staff 
assistance request is sent by the passenger prior to the trip. The 
staff member awaits the passenger at the previously defined 
station and helps to board the vehicle. At the designated 
station the staff member helps again by alighting from the 
vehicle [1, 10].  
D. UC 4: Re-routing 
During the trip of a passenger, a previously defined trip 
may become impractical. This may be due to  
a) 
the passenger changing his or her mind about basic 
parameters of the initial trip,  
b) 
the passenger showing up to late at the start station or 
missing a connection or  
c) 
irregularities of public transport operations, for example, 
in case of delays, cancellation or detours.  
Therefore, dynamic re-routing is an integral part of the 
system. Once one of these triggering conditions is identified 
by the smartphone app a new trip request is initiated. Using 
available information in the ITIS as well as the information 
about the passenger´s disability profile a new route is 
generated considering current position of the passenger and 
real time data of public transport operations (including delays 
and incident information). If re-routing involves another use 
case, e.g., “Request for staff assistance” information is 
updated or the request is cancelled [1, 10]. 
E. UC 5: In-vehicle passenger information based on IBIS 
IP 
In order to establish internet protocol (IP) based 
communication, wireless communication between the aim4it 
application and the public transportation vehicle will be 
implemented by means of Bluetooth 4.0-interface. This way 
waiting passengers can recognize, which line the approaching 
vehicle is assigned to (Figure 11).  
 
 
Figure 11. Recognition of approaching line via aim4it application 
 
Additional information is sent from the vehicle to the 
application on board. This contains information about the 
travel directions, route and stop sequences, real-time 
information to catch connected services, etc. Deviations from 
the scheduled timetable can be sent as well [1, 10]. 
F. UC 6: Feedback for continuous improvement 
To realize a continuous improvement of the public 
transportation system, as well as the aim4it services, the 
passengers have to be surveyed. With the aim4it feedback 
function passengers with sensory restrictions or restricted 
mobility will be directly involved in this improvement process 
during their travel [15]. Based on these assessed performances 
and opinions of the passengers, the public service providers 
can improve performances of service quality in a precise way. 
The public transport operators can set up the right priorities 
for the adaptation of existing facilities and services or add 
new, gathered requirements for further design, planning and – 
after implementation - assessment of public transportation 
systems. To realize this actual state of the art customer 
satisfaction measurement concepts have to be enhanced and 
combined with the potentials of up-do date information and 
communication technology [16, 17]. 
In detail, this means that passengers, their processes and 
their contact points are used to implement a concept for 
customer- and process-oriented satisfaction measurement, 
which is based on real time data. 
The service blueprint showing the passenger processes, 
their contact points and links to service providers [8] offer 
input for the performance cluster that is a knowledge base for 
survey questions and their results. Furthermore, it is used as 
basis for the use cases of each function that is supplemented 
with available information systems and standards in public 
transportation [15]. The execution of every journey generates 
data that is sent to and from the smartphone device of the 
passenger. This data can serve as a kind of direct performance 
measurement in the sense of the European standard specifying 
service quality for the public transport domain [15]. With this 
data the actual quality delivered by the public transport 
operator can be measured by using statistical matrices.  
46
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

One possible measurement concept is the so called direct 
performance measures (DPM) [18]. DPM have proven to be 
an adequate method of monitoring the actual performance of 
services based on operational data records. Examples of data 
collected in public transportation are information indications 
of passengers arriving on time, indications of passengers 
departing early/late from the (re)routing service. This data can 
be used as a DPM for the service criterion “adherence to 
schedule” [15]. Another example is the indication of 
connections met, which is a result of the connection protection 
service in connection with the (re)routing service. This can 
also be used to quantify actual service performance regarding 
the service criterion “process data” (e.g., successful execution 
of service) or the request for bus driver assistance (e.g., 
successful execution of staff assistance) [6].  
Furthermore, the aim4it smartphone app allows to conduct 
customer satisfaction surveys (see Figure 12).  
 
 
Figure 12. Mock-up of graphical user interface for customer feedback [6] 
 
Customer satisfaction surveys shall assess the degree to, 
which a customer believes his or her demands with respect to 
public transport services have been met [15]. These levels of 
satisfaction with a provided service can be compared against 
defined scales of quality expected by the customer. With the 
integration of customer satisfaction surveys into the travel 
assistance application surveys can be conducted and reported 
just in time of delivering the service. By using a star-rating for 
different categories of service quality the customer can 
evaluate the service he just consumed and the assessment can 
be linked to the system data. This way, the actually achieved 
service performance is linked to the customer satisfaction, not 
to the planned service performance [6]. 
The gathered data will be analyzed with respect to 
different kind of criteria that are based on the passengers’ 
service requirements. In this case, two different kind of 
analysis are possible. A simple one offers KPIs to get an 
overview about the actual performance while the complex 
analysis offers widespread facts to gain knowledge about 
correlations of service attributes [6].  
Both analyses support the implementation of a continuous 
improvement process of service quality in different ways:  
(1) existing quality levels are identified,  
(2) areas for potential improvement are identified and  
(3) corrective action can be taken. Corrective actions 
include actual improvement of performance, appropriate 
communication to the customers as well as corrective 
action in the case of unacceptable performance [6]. 
While KPIs are a simple analysis to achieve an overview 
on the actual performance, the customer satisfaction index is 
a more complex analysis. For this product, attributes will be 
defined, which have an effect on customer satisfaction. In the 
smartphone application questions regarding the product 
attributes (in this case e.g., kindness of staff during staff 
assistance) are presented to the passenger, when the product 
criteria are used. 
The customer is asked to evaluate each attribute he or she 
just consumed [7]. The evaluation includes their perception 
and expectation of performance and importance. The 
smartphone application provides a five-point scale (but you 
can use x-point scale also). Where for example, for 
performance: 
1-means 
very 
dissatisfied, 
2-somewhat 
dissatisfied, 3-neither dissatisfied and satisfied, 4-somewhat 
satisfied, 5-very satisfied. For the measurement of importance 
a different scale applies, where 1-means is not important, 2- 
little importance, 3-neutral, 4-important, 5-very important [6]. 
As a result, a customer quality map can be set up (see Figure 
13). 
 
 
Figure 13. Importance/Performance portfolio of the CSI [6] 
 
The customer quality map is split into four areas. The areas 
of this map indicate, which attributes should be kept at the 
current level, and, which should be improved. Section I shows 
quality attributes whose values should be kept. Section II 
shows service characteristics whose attributes should be 
improved first (in the short time). Section III contains 
insignificant attributes. Public transport operators should 
transfer their resources they spend on those criteria to other 
areas. Section IV includes characteristics for improvement, 
but they are rated as insignificant by the passenger [19]. For 
47
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

this reason, these service characteristics should be considered 
as last for service improvement [6]. 
By implementing such a feedback function into the aim4it 
system and carrying out the KPI and CSI analysis 
continuously the service providers are able to improve their 
services constantly while avoiding mismanagement of 
resources. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Currently, the demonstrator of the aim4it app is tested and 
implemented by the consortium members. First results of the 
integration in the city of Vienna (Austria) show the enhanced 
possibilities of such an application. A first prototype of the 
smart phone application has been tested with a focus group of 
passenger with reduced mobility in Vienna (two blind 
persons, three deaf persons, two persons in a wheel chair). 
Based on the project results and future real scenario tests the 
local public transport operator in Vienna evaluates if project 
results can be incorporated into the productive version of the 
travel assistance application after the end of the project. Based 
on the project results, further value added services for travel 
assistance can be developed in the future, which is facilitated 
by using industry standards in the project. The results of the 
aim4it project will be the basis for further standardization 
projects (further enhancement of the outcomes of the previous 
national standardization project IP-based communication in 
public transportation, IP-KOM-ÖV). In close cooperation 
with the VDV (German Transport Companies) aim4it project 
results will be integrated into the existing set of standards. 
Aim4it project results will be formulated as change requests 
and fed into the standardization process carried out by VDV. 
Only this way it will be possible to enable a nationwide 
implementation of smart applications as they need some kind 
of common standards so that needed data can be exchanged. 
Thus, domain experts will review the project’s deliverables 
and will reflect project outcomes in an updated revision of the 
TRIAS standard (Travellers‘ Real-time Information and 
Advisory Standard). 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The promotion plan 64.004/2014 of the European research 
program era-net transport has been funded by the German 
Federal Ministry of Transport and Digital Infrastructure based 
on an enactment of the German Parliament. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J.-P. Nicklas, N. Schlüter, L. Schnieder, and P. Winzer, 
“Barrierfree Mobility for All by a Smart and Individual Travel 
Assistance,” Proceedings of SMART 2015: The Fourth 
International Conference on Smart Systems, Devices and 
Technologies, IARIA, ISBN 976-1-61208-414-5, Brüssel, pp. 
22–23, 2015. 
[2] United Nations, “Convention on the Rights of Persons with 
Disabilities,” [A/RES/61/106], January, 24th, 2007. 
[3] European Commission, “European Disability Strategy 2010-
2020: A Renewed Commitment to a Barrier-Free Europe”, 
COM(2010)636, Brussels, 15.11.2010.  
[4] Federal Ministry of Justice and Consumer Protection, 
Bundesministerium 
der 
Justiz 
und 
Verbraucherschutz 
„Personenbeförderungsgesetz (PBefG)“, [Online] Available 
from: 
http://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/pbefg/, 
Berlin, 
2013.08.07 
[5] J.-P. Nicklas and P. Winzer, “Approach for Using 
Requirements Engineering in Collaborative Networks,” in 
Entering the Experience Economy from product quality to 
experience quality, S.M. Dahlgaard-Park and J.J. Dahlgaard, 
Eds. Proceedings of the 17th QMOD-ICQSS International 
Conference on Quality and Service Sciences, 2014. 
[6] L. Schnieder, A.-M. Ademeit, M. Barrilero, N. Schlüter, J.-P. 
Nicklas, P. Winzer, B. Starzyńska, A. Kujawińska, and J. 
Diakun, “Systematic improvement of customer satisfaction for 
passengers 
with 
special 
mobility 
needs,” 
in: Urban Transport 2015, J.L. Brebbia and G. Miralles, Eds.  
XXI International Conference on Urban Transport and the 
Environment. Spanien: Valenica. WitPress, pp. 375–390, 
2015, DOI: 10.2495/UT150301. 
[7] B Starzyńska, A. Kujawińska, M. Grabowska, J. Diakun, E. 
Więcek-Janka, L. Schnieder, N. Schlüter, J.-P. Nicklas, 
„Requirements Elicitation of Passengers with Reduced 
Mobility for the Design of High Quality, Accessible and 
Inclusive Public Transport Services,” in: Management and 
Production Engineering Review (MPER), Vol. 6, No.3, Sept. 
2015, S. 70–76. DOI: 10.1515/mper-2015-0028. 
[8] J.-P. 
Nicklas, 
N. 
Schlüter, 
and 
P. 
Winzer,  
“Integrating customers‘ voice inside network environments,”  
in: Special Issue: QMOD 2011-2012 Conferences: Selected 
Best Papers. Total Quality Management & Business 
Excellence Journal. Volume 24, numbers 7-8, J. Dahlgaard, Ed. 
July-August 2013. Taylor & Francis, 2013. ISSN: 1478-3363, 
pp. 980–990. DOI 10.1080/14783363.2013.791104. 
[9] H. Bandelin, T. Franke, R. Kruppa, A. Wehrmann, and D. 
Weißert “Einheitliche Plattform für ÖPNV-Kommunikation 
auf gutem Weg,“ in: Der Nahverkehr 30, issue 7-8, 2012, p. 44.  
[10] J.-P. Nicklas, N. Schlüter, P. Winzer, and L. Schnieder  
“Accessible and inclusive mobility for all with individual travel 
assistance – aim4it,” in: 2015 IEEE 18th International 
Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC),  
Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spanien, 14.-18. September 2015, 
S.1569-1574, DOI 10.1109/ITSC.2015.256. 
[11] L. Schnieder, D. Wermser, and M. Barrilero, “Integrated 
Modelling of Business Processes and Communication Events 
for Public Transport,” in: Proceedings of Symposium 
FORMS/FORMAT - Formal Methods for Automation and 
Safety in Railway and Automotive Systems. Braunschweig 
(Germany), pp. 233–242, 2014. 
[12] A. Stelzer, F. Englert, H. Stephan, and C. Mayas, “Using 
Customer Feedback in Public Transprotation Systems”, in: 
Proceedings of 3rd International Conference on Advanced 
Logistics and Transport, A. M. Alimi, M., Abed, M. Benaina, 
M. Benttalima, M., Negi, H.M. Kammoun, and M., Wali, Eds. 
ICACT, S.42-47, 2014. 
[13] CEN TS 15531 “Service Interface for Real time Information“ 
(SIRI) 
[14] VDV-Schrift 720 [Print-Version] “Kundeninformationen über 
Abweichungen vom Regelfahrplan,“ Ausgabe 07, 2011. 
[15] EN 13816:2002: “Transportation - Logistics and services - 
Public passenger transport- Service quality definition, targeting 
and measurement”.  
[16] J.-P. 
Nicklas, 
N. 
Schlüter, 
and 
P. 
Winzer,  
“Measurement Concept for Security in Mass Transportation,” 
in: Future Security. N. Aschenbruck, P. Martini, M. Meier, and 
J. Tölle, Eds. 7th Security Research Conference, Future 
Security 2012, Bonn, Germany, September 4-6, 2012. 
Proceedings: Springer-Verlag New York Inc, ISBN 978-3-
642-33160-2, pp. 1–4. 
[17] N. Schlüter, J.-P. Nicklas, and P. Winzer, “Measurement of 
Customer Satisfaction in Business Networks,” in: Proceedings 
14. QMOD Conference on Quality and Service Science 2011. 
48
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

C. Jaca, R. Mateo, E. Viles, and J. Santos, Eds. Pamplona, 
Spain: Servicios de Publicaciones Universidad de Navarra 
(14). ISBN: 84‐8081‐211‐7, pp. 1321–1336 
[18] C. Lovelock and J. Witz, “Service Marketing - People, 
Technology, Strategy,” New Jersey: Peasron, Vol.5, 2006.  
[19] A. Töpfer, “Konzeptionelle Grundlagen und Messkonzepte für 
den 
Kundenzufriedenheitsindex 
(KZI/CSI) 
und 
den 
Kundenbindungsindex 
(KBI/CRI),“ 
in: 
Handbuch 
Kundenmanagement. Anforderungen, Prozesse, Zufriedenheit, 
Bindung und Wert von Kunden. 3. Vollst. Überarbeitete und 
erw. Auflage. A. Töpfer, Ed. Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg, 
2008.  
 
 
49
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

