Case-based Decision Support for the Assessment of Bridges  
 
Bernhard Freudenthaler, Reinhard Stumptner, 
Josef Küng 
FAW – Institute for Applied Knowledge Processing 
Johannes Kepler University 
Linz, Austria 
e-mail: {bfreudenthaler, rstumptner, jkueng}@faw.at 
Georg Gutenbrunner 
 
VCE Holding GmbH 
Vienna Consulting Engineers 
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: gutenbrunner@vce.at
 
 
Abstract—The main idea of this contribution is computer aid 
for Structural Health Monitoring activities. The increasing age 
of infrastructure makes actions necessary to predict lifetime 
and to guaranty safety, especially for critical structures like 
bridges for example. Thereby, acceleration sensors are widely-
used to measure (ambient) vibrations of structures, which are 
stored by a connected computer system for later processing. 
These records are a basis for following procedures and make 
an assessment of a building’s condition possible. Due to several 
reasons, the process of analysing a signal is very complex in 
particular because of the individuality of each structure. This 
means that the measurement results (characteristics of a 
building) 
strongly 
depend 
on 
structure-design 
and 
a 
marginally different design (from layman’s point of view) can 
cause completely different measurement results. Consequently, 
only an experienced expert can interpret a measurement 
correctly and still, this analysis process is difficult and time-
consuming, 
what 
necessitates 
computer 
aid 
for 
the 
interpretation to speed it up and to improve the quality of 
results. This is the point where decision support in terms of 
Case-based Reasoning can be introduced. The idea is to 
transfer the expert’s experience (description of the structures’ 
designs and measurements incl. interpretation) into a so-called 
case base which is continuously growing and enhanced by 
future experience. The Decision Support System can, relying 
on these cases, compare new measurements of possibly 
unknown structures with measurements of known buildings 
(from the case base) and suggest an interpretation by means of 
adapting past interpretations, which were taken under similar 
conditions (similar structure design) using certain similarity 
measures. 
Keywords: Bridge Monitoring; Case-based Reasoning; 
Decision Support System; Structural Health Monitoring 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Bridges play a major role in the higher transportation 
infrastructure. They represent large and expensive civil 
engineering structures with great importance to our economy 
and society and are, moreover, often exposed to extreme 
environmental and meteorological conditions. In order to 
deal with problems caused by these possible influences, 
intelligent solutions are needed. Fortunately, engineering and 
monitoring can ensure the bearing capacity of bridges to 
resist these conditions and thus, negative impacts on our 
economy and society can be prevented. 
When bridges reach the end of their service life, which 
can be the result of structural damage and/or material 
degradation, they should have reached a minimum 
acceptable performance level. For the determination of this 
level many significant factors have to be taken into account. 
A Bridge Management System (BMS) can evaluate the 
adequate time for improvements on a bridge and it can 
improve the overall condition of an agency’s network of 
bridges right in time. 
A BMS is a decision support tool that consists of the 
following three major parts: 
 
 
Inventory (data regarding the characteristics and 
condition of the bridge),  
 
Inspection (examinations of the bridge) and  
 
Recommendations (regarding the maintenance and 
improvement of the bridge).  
 
As an additional and actually very important feature, a 
BMS is also capable of prioritizing the allocation of funds. 
Therefore, BMSs are important for every stage of a bridge’s 
life. 
The importance of the current topic comes even clearer, 
when considering that the global higher transportation 
network operates about 2.5 million bridges. Current BMSs 
categorise these bridges with various methodologies and 
approaches. This results in very inhomogeneous figures. In 
2005 the U.S. Federal Highway Agency (FHWA) stated that 
28% of their 595,000 bridges are rated deficiently. Only a 
portion of it (about 15%) has structural reasons. In Europe 
this figure varies around 10%, whereas for Asian networks 
no such figures are available. Nevertheless, if we consider an 
average of 10% deficiency, we look at 250,000 bridges that 
definitely require structural health diagnostic, improvement 
and monitoring. Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) shall 
also be used preventively before bridges become deficient. 
This considerably enlarges the number of applications of 
Bridge Monitoring [21]. 
SHM is the implementation of a damage identification 
strategy to the civil engineering infrastructure. Damage is 
defined as changes to the material and/or geometric 
properties of these systems, including changes to the 
boundary conditions and system connectivity. Damage 
affects the current or future performance of these systems.  
226
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

The damage identification process generally is structured 
into four levels [19]: 
 
 
Damage detection, where the presence of damage is 
identified, 
 
Damage location, where the location of the damage 
is determined, 
 
Damage typification, where the type of damage is 
determined and  
 
Damage extent, where the severity of damage is 
assessed. 
 
Extensive literature on SHM has been developed over the 
last 20 years [8]. This field has matured to a point where 
several 
broadly 
accepted 
principles 
have 
emerged. 
Nevertheless, these principles are still challenged and further 
developed by various groups of interests. The strategies in 
mechanical 
engineering 
or 
aerospace 
take 
different 
approaches. However, the civil engineering community can 
considerably benefit from these efforts. 
At the Stanford SHM workshop in 2005 Farrar and 
Worden [10] specified axioms for Structural Health 
Monitoring, which are an attempt to formulate common rules 
and understanding to support the “fundamental truth” that 
has been argued by the community. These axioms do not 
represent operators for SHM. In order to generate 
methodologies, it will be necessary to add a group of 
algorithms, which carry the SHM practitioner from data to a 
decision. The discipline of statistical pattern recognition is 
proposed for this approach. The axioms formulated are: 
 
 
Axiom 1: The assessment of damage requires a 
comparison between certain system states. 
 
Axiom 2: The existence and location of damage can 
be identified in an unsupervised learning mode, but 
the type of damages and damage severity can only 
be identified in a supervised learning mode. 
 
Axiom 3: Intelligent feature extraction is necessary 
because the more sensitive a measurement is to 
damage, the more sensitive it is to operational and 
environmental changes which do not have to be 
classified as damages.  
 
Axiom 4: There is a trade-off between the sensitivity 
of an algorithm to damages and its sensitivity to 
noise.  
 
Axiom 5: The size of a damage that can be detected 
from changes in the system dynamics is inversely 
proportional to the frequency range of an excitation. 
 
The information of greatest interest is the knowledge 
about the condition of a bridge or its single elements. SHM 
provides the opportunity to quantify the condition and to 
provide the basis for decisions. Fortunately, due to bridges’ 
importance for economy and society as well as their high 
vulnerability, procedures and tools of SHM may be best 
developed for them. 
This contribution illustrates the possibilities of (semi-) 
automatic assessment in the field of Structural Health 
Monitoring, whereas at first the related research is discussed. 
The next chapter (Motivation for Bridge Monitoring) shows 
the requirements of the industry to support the conventional 
evaluation of measurement data by an intelligent system. For 
this purpose, an introduction to Decision Support Systems 
and Case-based Reasoning is provided. Finally, the current 
state of a research prototype for the Case-based Decision 
Support System for Bridge Monitoring and intended future 
work is shown. 
II. 
RELATED RESEARCH 
Due to the constant aging of our infrastructure, the field 
of Structural Health Monitoring has attracted a great deal of 
attention. In order to reduce the costs for maintenance and to 
increase the safety level of structures, the request of 
structural reliability, evaluation and remaining lifetime 
assessment is assuming a major importance. The use of non-
destructive dynamic testing methods for the evaluation of the 
structural performances provided important steps forward. 
On the one hand, an improvement of the data reliability 
could have been gained; on the other hand, it succeeded in 
overcoming the limitations of traditional visual inspection 
methods. 
In a next step, the measured response of a structure can 
be used in conjunction with several different numerical 
methods. These methods can mainly be divided into two 
categories: model-based and parameter-based. The first one 
is relying on a reference model, e.g., Finite Element (FE) 
model. By contrast, the main characteristic of the second one 
is a general mathematical description of specified parameters 
or system features, e.g., analysis of time series details by 
means of wavelet theory. 
System identification with respect to determination of 
damages usually is done by extracting normal modes and 
frequencies. Based on them, engineers are able to calculate 
stiffness and damping coefficients. By updating initial 
mathematical models with finite element methods to predict 
the expected values of the actual measurements, damages 
can be localized and quantized as well. A comparison with 
reference data from earlier measurements allows experts to 
make statements on the structure’s safety and furthermore 
gives the possibility to make lifetime predictions for the 
investigated bridge. However, Structural Health Monitoring 
produces a flood of data and the fact that each bridge - 
actually any arbitrary structure - has different dynamic 
parameters makes a manual analysis and interpretation very 
time-consuming and expensive. 
Another main disadvantage of manual analysis is the 
subjective interpretation of human experts. Each expert 
interprets a measurement differently, based on his level of 
experience. Therefore, there is a strong need for intelligent 
Decision Support Systems (DSS) in safety assessment and 
lifetime prediction for civil engineering structures in general, 
and for bridges in particular. Case-based Reasoning (CBR) 
seems to be an appropriate approach to work with huge 
measurement data packets. For supporting engineers in 
interpreting measurement results and in making decisions, 
reasonable case sensitive DSSs have to be developed and 
adapted. CBR systems have a powerful cyclic problem 
227
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

solving core process. Based on known similar cases (stored 
past problems and their solutions), CBR helps engineers in 
interpreting certain situations. Since the main objective of 
CBR is not to develop new solutions for new problems but to 
reuse known problems and solutions, the reasoning process 
is comparably fast. CBR can be used for example to interpret 
measuring data of periodic measurements or as an integrated 
alert system for permanently monitored civil engineering 
structures. 
A very common model for Decision Support Systems is 
the phase model by Simon [20]. It consists of three phases 
[15][12], namely 
 
 
Intelligence,  
 
Design and  
 
Choice. 
 
The phase “Intelligence” is responsible for recognising 
problems. The indicators are very often weak, so that they 
have to be identified in advance. Hence, the engineer realises 
divergences of the norm and recognises the existence of a 
problem.  
The phase “Design” serves decision makers as a platform 
to find alternative solutions for recognised problems by using 
already known solutions of similar problems.  
Finally, the phase “Choice” allows decision makers to 
define and set criteria for finding new alternative solutions, 
which actually might perform better. Solutions for the actual 
problem can either be found by using known alternatives or 
new ones can be created. The objective is to select one single 
solution for the problem. The support for the decision-
making process in this phase is exactly the typical 
application area of Decision Support Systems. 
A. Ambient Vibration Monitoring 
Each structure has its typical dynamic behaviour, which 
may be interpreted as “Vibrational Signature”. Changes in a 
structure, such as all kinds of damages are leading to a 
decrease of the load-carrying capacity and have effects on 
the dynamic response. This fact implicates to use the 
measurement and monitoring of the dynamic response 
characteristics for evaluation of the structural integrity.  
Different types of bridge vibration tests exist: the bridge 
can either be excited with a heavy shaker or drop weight 
(Forced Vibration Testing) or by ambient excitation such as 
wind, traffic and micro seismic activity (Ambient Vibration 
Testing). The latter (Ambient Vibration Monitoring) is the 
fundamental principle used in the BRIMOS® technology 
(Bridge Monitoring System) which has been used in the field 
of Structural Health Monitoring for many years. It has the 
big advantage that no expensive equipment is needed to 
excite the bridge and that the traffic does not have to be 
interrupted. 
The term Structural Health Monitoring in the meaning of 
Ambient Vibration Monitoring comprises the recording of 
the dynamic behaviour by the use of measuring instruments 
as well as the evaluation and analysis of the measured 
signals. The fundamental tools of health monitoring are 
system identification, damage determination and localization 
as well as safety assessment and the maintenance 
management for infrastructure. 
The analysis provides the determination of the modal 
parameters, namely the structure’s natural frequencies, its 
mode shapes and its damping coefficients. These parameters, 
which are gained from the measurements, represent the real 
condition of a structure and are used to update mathematical 
models of a structure or are simply compared to reference 
data from earlier measurements.  
Up to now, the analysis of measurement data requires the 
knowledge of an expert. This forms a weak point in the 
whole procedure, since the work done by experts is time-
consuming and results are subjective. Therefore, a system 
supporting the engineer who interprets measuring data would 
be desirable, in order to make analysis easier and faster. 
B. System Identification 
Unfortunately, calculation models for determining 
stresses and consequently for measuring structures only 
represent an approximation to reality and have to be 
calibrated. For the determination of the conformity between 
the calculation model and the actual load-bearing behaviour 
up to now frequent stress tests (for example at railway 
bridges) have been carried out and the measured 
deformations (flexures) were compared with calculated 
reference values. Based on this, conclusions can be drawn on 
the load-bearing safety and performance capability of the 
structure. 
A simpler and by far better method for the determination 
of these parameters is based on the determination of the 
dynamic characteristic by ambient vibration measurements. 
With these measurements, the vibration behaviour of a 
structure is recorded, evaluated and interpreted under 
ambient influences, e.g., without artificial excitation, by 
means of highly sensitive acceleration sensors. 
The methodology to make conclusions on the load-
bearing capacity of a structure by measuring its dynamic 
behaviour and to check mathematical model assumptions 
already is very old. In [9] there is a report on stress tests 
between 1922 and 1945 in Switzerland where tests by free 
oscillations at the aerial Beromünster in 1941 are described. 
The results were used for checking the calculation 
assumptions, deviations between measured and calculated 
results were interpreted and statements for similar future 
towers were done. 
The checking of structures by means of dynamic 
measuring methods has a long tradition in Switzerland. It 
was carried out until the beginning of the 1990s in the form 
of tests by free oscillations by means of initial strains or 
intermittent stresses and by excitation with unbalance 
exciters or hydraulic shakers. Similar tests were also carried 
out in Austria and Germany for scientific purposes but at a 
much smaller scope. However, they were not extensively 
applied for system identification or check and calibration of 
calculation models. In [5] it is suggested to further develop 
dynamic procedures for the assessment of the maintenance 
condition of structures. 
The rapid development of measuring technology on the 
one hand and computer technology as well as software on 
228
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

the other enables us to carry out dynamic measurements of 
ambient structure vibrations and their evaluation very 
quickly and with relatively low expenditures today. 
Vibrations influencing the structure, which are due to 
natural excitation sources like micro-seismic phenomena, 
wind, waves etc., are regarded as ambient causes. The 
measuring 
and 
evaluation 
system 
BRIMOS® 
takes 
advantage of these progresses and opens a wide field of 
application to technology. 
The dynamic characteristic of a structure can not only be 
used for a single check of calculation models. Furthermore, 
statements on the chronological development of the load-
bearing capacity and therefore estimations on the remaining 
service life duration are enabled by measurements at certain 
intervals. Measurements at any moment supply snapshots of 
structural integrity and can be used in combination with 
parallel mathematical analyses for the determination of 
possible damages to the structure. 
The list of decisive dynamic parameters to be determined 
for system identification is quite long and consists of 
eigenfrequencies, mode shapes (an example is shown in 
Figure 1), damping coefficients, vibration intensities, etc. 
During monitoring all analyses of system identification are 
applied. 
In addition to the procedures of structure mechanics and 
dynamics, statistical methods have to be used which 
determine trends from large data quantities. The use of so-
called trend cards, which clearly represent an eventual 
change of individual parameters by means of a time-
frequency diagram, has proved successfully. 
The eigenfrequencies are an essential parameter for the 
description of the vibration behaviour of a structure in the 
linear elastic field. A mode shape like in Figure 1 is a 
vibration form in which the structure oscillates with the 
respective eigenfrequency. The actual oscillation of a real 
structure is composed of the respective shares of the 
individual mode shapes. 
The mathematical modal analysis provides both, the 
eigenfrequencies and the mode shapes of a structure, 
whereas in experimental modal analysis the eigenfrequencies 
 
 
Figure 1.  First Modeshape of an Austrian Danube Bridge consisting of 
three Spans 
are obtained as well and the mode shapes can be determined 
point by point (at the measuring points). Both methods have 
to be carried out for system identification. The actual static 
system is obtained by comparing the measuring results with 
the calculated values and by adaptation of the calculation 
model to the measurements. In order to get a correct image 
of the actual load-bearing system, one must not restrict 
oneself to the first eigenfrequency and the respective modal 
form. In fact, the consideration of several, also higher 
frequencies and the respective forms is required. 
C. BRIMOS® 
BRIMOS® (Bridge Monitoring System) is an application 
for system identification and the detection of damages in 
bridges as well as any other civil engineering structure. Its 
development is based on several research projects started 
almost 15 years ago. About 1000 structures have been 
assessed so far and the experience has been incorporated into 
the assessment procedure. It is based on the already 
mentioned “Vibrational Signature” of a structure, which is 
obtained by a measurement campaign. Depending on the 
extent of this campaign various properties can be computed, 
which are combined to the BRIMOS rating. This 
classification allows a fast identification on the structure’s 
integrity as well as the corresponding risk level. The results 
are based on  
 
 
Measured 
dynamic 
parameters 
(like 
eigenfrequencies, mode shapes, damping pattern in 
the lengthwise direction, vibration intensity and 
static as well as dynamic vertical displacements),  
 
Visual inspection,  
 
Finite Element model-update and  
 
Reference data (BRIMOS-Database and BRIMOS 
Knowledgebase).  
 
The result is a factor, which relates to a predefined risk 
level. 
D. Bridge Monitoring 
The extent of monitoring is mainly depending on 
required results. Currently five levels are used in order to 
determine the depth of investigation [21]: 
 
 
Level 1: Rating  
It represents the conventional assessment of the 
structure starting with a visual field inspection that 
provides a subjective impression of the condition of 
a 
structure. 
Some 
preliminary 
analytical 
investigation is performed in order to provide a 
rating as a basis for decisions. This would be a 
typical application of a bridge management system 
like PONTIS or DANBRO. Many bridge owners use 
certain databases to store the results. 
 
Level 2: Condition Assessment  
A rough visual field inspection has to be an element 
of any SHM campaign. Afterwards a decision has to 
be reached whether the conventional approach is 
satisfactory or an extended or even sophisticated 
229
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

additional approach has to be considered. This 
determines the type and quantity of instrumentation. 
For condition assessment a simple instrumentation is 
sufficient and a simple Decision Support System 
would provide the necessary additional information. 
Storage and pre-processing of data should be done in 
the existing database where a link to existing 
conventional tools is available. The monitoring can 
be performed at single spots only. 
 
Level 3: Performance Assessment  
This intermediate level uses the same procedure as 
described in level 2. The level of assessment and 
performance elaboration in the decision support 
process is considerably higher since additional 
information like mode shapes is measured and 
determined. This provides additional indicators for 
the assessment and will illustrate the performance of 
a structure. 
 
Level 4: Detail Assessment and Rating  
The next step is to establish an analytical model 
representing the structure and the model is compared 
with the monitoring results. In case that phenomena 
are detected that cannot be explained based on the 
records, further steps have to be taken to clarify the 
situation. The most obvious method is to introduce a 
permanent record over a certain period of time to 
capture the necessary phenomena being responsible 
for the specific case. Load testing also has been 
proven 
successfully 
to 
establish 
performance 
parameters. With these results a simple model 
update can be performed to assess the results and 
provide a rating. Certainly, extensive monitoring is 
required. The records shall cover at least 24 hours, 
but shall rather be much longer to capture 
environmental aspects and traffic situations as 
completely as possible. 
 
Level 5: Lifetime Prediction  
For a serious lifetime prediction, the records taken 
have to be long enough to cover at least three cycles 
relevant for the structure. This normally is in an 
interval of three years. Simulation should be run on 
the analytical model in order to achieve a theoretical 
performance for comparison. To handle the major 
quantity of data, software for decision support is 
required. Load testing would be done targeted and 
extensive. In addition, micro structural testing might 
be useful in order to look into the performance of 
single elements of a structure. The update process 
would be extensive and considering several 
conditions of a structure. This in particular includes 
the loaded and unloaded case and all the 
nonlinearities involved. The monitoring system shall 
be operated online, probably web-based, providing a 
warning in case of critical/unknown situations. The 
final lifetime prediction could be performed. 
 
The costs related to these procedures are mainly 
depending on the extent of the monitoring campaign and the 
number of man-hours to be invested in modelling, simulation 
and update procedures. The effort can also be influenced by 
the type of a structure (e.g., number of spans). For the future 
of Structural Health Monitoring it is expected that the 
monitoring-costs will be rather reduced than increased. This 
can happen through the introduction of time saving 
modelling procedures and sophisticated monitoring software 
[21]. 
III. 
MOTIVATION FOR BRIDGE MONITORING 
Bridge Monitoring (BM) has undergone a long 
development period and many useful results have been 
produced. Nevertheless, the transformation into a business 
case has been scarcely managed by 2008. The three main 
reasons for that are: 
 
 
BM is a very complex issue. The key players 
concentrate on issues which the ordinary bridge 
owner is not interested in. A joint language has not 
been found and appealing method statements are 
lacking. 
 
The discrepancy between the expectations of the 
owners and the services that can be provided by the 
available budget is huge. The community has not 
been able to explain that the new methods do not 
eliminate the problem of aging or damaged bridges 
but can only serve it in a better way. For this reason, 
monitoring campaigns, which are so expensive that 
they can only be of scientific interest, mostly are 
performed in the frame of research projects. 
 
The involved hardware is still very expensive and 
not robust. The discrepancy of life expectation of a 
typical bridge with 100 years and three years for a 
monitoring system is unacceptable. 
 
Apart from these facts there are other aspects which are 
related to the national practice of bridge management and 
cultural differences.  
Three main driving forces have been identified that 
enable the performance of a reasonable BM campaign: 
 
 
Responsibility: Meaning the existence of a standard 
or recommendation that obliges the owners to 
monitor their structures. 
 
Economy: If BM can prove that it saves money. 
 
Curiosity: Owners of bridges are very often willing 
to spend money on creating better knowledge of 
their bridge stock, especially when there has been 
reasonable doubt of an actual condition. 
 
The monitoring community has managed to issue some 
guidelines and recommendations. The latter form the basis 
for eventual orders. Nevertheless, they cannot be seen as an 
obligation to apply Bridge Monitoring.  
A good conception has been promoted and implemented 
in Austria. The regulations for bridge management allow 
both, the visual inspection and the monitoring campaign. In 
case that monitoring enables to achieve better quantified 
results, the inspection period can be increased up to 100%. 
230
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

This saves money on inspections which can be invested in 
monitoring. A better service is performed at the same costs.  
A. State of the Art 
The selection of a suitable observation concept has to be 
mainly based on external factors. These are the number of 
structures to be observed in combination with the budget 
available. For this purpose it is necessary to offer services on 
increasing quality levels. The levels can be subdivided into 
spot, periodic, permanent and online assessment campaigns 
at structures [13]. The respective features are: 
 
 
A spot observation shall comprise a very quick 
measurement campaign with only few sensors which 
can be simply handled. It shall provide information 
on the general condition of a structure in order to 
create a ranking.  
 
Periodic assessment means a measurement campaign 
on a structure which is repeated after a specified 
period of time, to generate information on the 
performance over time. The single spot information 
might comprise rather long periods.  
 
Permanent observation and assessment of structures 
becomes necessary when certain limits are passed. 
This observation allows a very detailed assessment 
based on permanent recordings and can help to 
implement quick decision making. 
 
Online observation and assessment allows warning 
through electronic media, either by SMS (Short 
Message Service) in the simple case or by online 
status through the internet. Decisions might be taken 
by the computer based on the measurement data. 
These alert systems would only be applied at 
extremely critical structures.  
 
In general, it has to be stated that clients need and desire 
support of their work and not to create issues that make it 
more complicated. In respect to that the procedures have to 
be carefully watched and permanently improved. The 
information policy also plays a major role in the client-
consultant relationship. The new methodologies are rather 
complex and require a deep understanding of structural 
dynamics, physics and measurement techniques. Due to the 
fact that this expertise is rarely available at the owners 
engineering department, the fear to be exposed to unknown 
black box applications has to be taken from them with 
bringing transparency to the systems.  
Nevertheless, they spend considerable amounts of money 
on monitoring actions and would like to be informed 
frequently about progress and results. Therefore, it has to be 
ensured that the technology-part is in good and competent 
hands and that they will receive the information they desire. 
From a historical point of view the best success has been 
achieved with very simple reporting techniques. A periodic 
report received by e-mail comprising single page information 
generally turned out to be preferred.  
The main information is provided in a single window, 
where upper and lower normalized thresholds are given and 
measurement results of this period are placed within these 
thresholds. With a single look at this graph, the personnel 
can see whether any of the thresholds has been exceeded at 
once. When all indicators are green, the client can be 
pacified and knows that the ordered observation is 
permanently working.  
The periodic report mentioned above provides the 
following information: 
 
 
A photo and a system plot of the structure of interest 
for an easy and quick identification. 
 
A window where the periodic results are placed 
within the relevant thresholds over the observation 
period. 
 
Eventually a second window, containing special 
information required by the client, such as wind 
speed information or any other desired quantity. 
 
Finally, a rating should be provided, based on the 
measurements taken in the reporting period. This 
should enable the client to immediately see whether 
any changes have happened. 
 
Eventually, the specification of a remaining life 
capacity can be provided if the necessary data are 
recorded. 
 
Besides this one-page record for the client, also a 
scientific report for the expert is generated by the DSS. This 
makes a quick assessment of all the single measurements 
possible in order to create expertises or to learn from 
operation. On average, the system is calibrated with the 
information gained over a certain period of time. This might 
also comprise a change in the rating and would update the 
remaining life capacity based on existing knowledge. 
B. System Requirements 
During the last decades, the capability of both, computers 
and sensors, have undergone an explosive growth presenting 
many new challenges of how to manage the resulting amount 
of data. Scientists have often found themselves confronted 
by gigabytes of complex data that contained comparatively 
little information of actual interest making successful 
management almost impossible. 
The problem of searching for the right information is 
very difficult even if one precisely knows where it can be 
found. However, it gets almost insoluble if the location 
additionally is not known exactly. Due to the complexity of 
data itself and the “human error rate”, two phenomena can be 
recognized: 
 
 
Useful information is often overlooked, which leads 
to a poor utilization of data. 
 
Possible benefits of increasing data-gathering 
capabilities are only partially used. 
 
Since humans have not undergone similar developments 
in measurement data management as has the technology 
behind the measurements themselves, one has to look for 
intelligent ways that help to solve this dilemma. Since 
manual data analysis is quite tedious and impractical, other 
231
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

concepts like computational tools and techniques for an 
automated analysis of large complex data sets have to be 
developed. 
Furthermore, the evaluation of data and the assessment of 
structures must be carried out by experts with many years of 
experience at the moment. By developing a Decision Support 
System, the expert should not be replaced but essentially 
supported in his activities. Such a system should support the 
whole data process, from the receipt of data, preliminary 
sorting, filing, evaluation, assessment up to visualization of 
explored results. For the preparation of such a system it is 
required to establish something like a knowledge database. 
In the latter the criteria normally used by the expert for 
assessment 
could 
be 
mathematically 
formulated 
(= 
formulation of rules, knowledge acquisition). The advantage 
is that the knowledge basis can be continuously expanded 
and that no “forgetting” exists. By the use of several methods 
of statistics up to now unknown connections could be filtered 
out of the existing measurement data pool. It should be 
possible to integrate measurement data from third persons 
from different measurement systems. The whole system 
should be based on methodologies like being implemented 
by the BRIMOS software and include very recent 
approaches (fuzzy logic, neural networks in damage 
identification). 
For 
visualization 
of 
results 
a 
GIS 
(Geographic Information System) interface can be provided.  
The backbone of such a system would be a huge database 
containing measurement data and corresponding results of 
the analysis from the past. This knowledge base is filled with 
material from past measurements up to present ones and 
consequently 
will 
grow 
continuously. 
Using 
such 
methodology, the system for the user may become a “living 
system” and may increase his/her trust. With every 
improvement the results are likely to become better and the 
thresholds might vary too. Thresholds should not be treated 
totally inflexibly and have to be adapted to new knowledge.  
Finally, engineers would be interested in a system, where 
they can search for similar objects or similar measurement 
data for arbitrary objects and measurement data respectively. 
Then, by having the corresponding results of comparable 
measurements from the database, it might become possible 
to draw new conclusions for certain objects. This would 
represent 
a 
very 
interesting 
feature 
for 
periodic 
measurements but also for spot observations. Treating the 
database of the past measurements as a case base, by means 
of CBR and similar techniques, benefit might be expected 
for 
interpreting 
the 
measurement 
data 
of 
periodic 
measurements, spot observations and in particular of 
permanently monitored structures. 
The annual expenses for bridge maintenance in Austria 
amount to approximately 130 million Euro. According to 
current predictions this value will triple in the next 15 years. 
New methods for structural assessment are required in order 
to identify urgently necessary measures and to reduce the 
expenditures for purely precautionary maintenance. The 
Decision Support System proposed in this contribution is to 
lower the costs and the time consumption for the evaluation 
of measurement data and condition assessment, and at the 
same time accuracy and objectivity shall be increased. 
IV. 
DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEMS 
Since 1950 [15] there were efforts to develop systems to 
support experts of various fields in taking decisions. 
Decision Support Systems represent an approach that tries to 
integrate many different disciplines into the field of 
computer science. A reason for the arise of DSSs was a wish 
to have a system helping humans to manage very complex 
situations. Soon these systems became more and more 
attractive for users and researchers. 
Problem solving and decision making are very important 
tasks in all intelligent activities. One who makes decisions 
usually evaluates and chooses among different alternative 
decisions. Problem solving on the other hand is a task to find 
a “way” between a desired goal and what is given at the 
beginning, to find intelligent steps to reach this goal. Expert 
systems and artificial intelligence in general deal with this 
problem in the following way.  
The stages of problem solving are: 
 
 
To recognise situations which call for actions, 
 
To formulate problems, 
 
To find actions and to set up goals, 
 
To evaluate and 
 
To choose. 
 
There are two scientific approaches in this case: 
 
1. The 
normative 
approach: 
Prescribe 
optimal 
behaviour, how decisions should be taken. 
2. The descriptive approach: Understand how humans 
behave when they are solving problems and take 
decisions. 
 
The normative approach was first developed in 
economics; “the rational economic man” is an important 
term in this connection. Later it was implemented in the 
fields of Operations Research and management science. The 
theory is based on a rationality paradigm; rational behaviour 
is prescribed by formal axioms. Normative models for 
decision making are called “formal models”. The decision 
maker in the process of finding a decision calculates the 
consequences for each alternative decision, rates the results 
and tries to compute the optimal way to his/her goal. To do 
so, future consequences of current actions have to be 
predicted and suggestions have to be made. A DSS should 
make decision making more effective and implies a 
normative perspective of the problem. These normative 
theories help to analyse the structure of a decision. 
The normative theories enable us to optimise decisions 
under certain conditions, as long as the problems do not get 
too complex. The complexity of real-world decision making 
mostly overtaxes this approach, see [15]. 
DSSs are useful especially when there is a fixed goal but 
no algorithmic solution. The paths of solution mostly are 
very numerous and user-dependant. This leads to the main 
goal of DSSs, namely to improve decisions by better 
understanding and preparation of tasks which lead towards 
evaluation and choosing. Ill-structured problems in this 
232
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

regard are processes where there is no known or clear 
method to reach a solution, because the nature of the 
problem is complex and unclear or there arise situations 
which are new and consequently unknown. Well structured 
problems can be seen as decision making processes which 
are routine and repetitive. Usually it is not possible to fully 
automatise information processing to reach a conclusion. 
Only if an information processing task can be mapped to an 
algorithm then the decision process is structured and it can 
be implemented in a computer program to reach an 
automated solution.  
Decision 
support 
for 
“unstructuredness” 
is 
accommodated in: 
 
 
The nature of requests made on a DSS. 
 
The manner in which a DSS responses are utilised. 
 
The recognition of alternative methods for satisfying 
a request. 
 
Structured problems are routine because they are 
unambiguous, as there is a single solution method. If 
problems become less structured, then there exists an 
increasing number of alternative solution methods whereby 
solutions may not be equivalent. A completely unstructured 
problem in contrast has unknown solution methods or 
solutions are too numerous to evaluate.  
Mainly in the field of management there are many 
situations where decisions have to be taken for non-
programmable problems. The development of Artificial 
Intelligence technology especially in such connection has 
enlarged the spectrum of application of DSSs. 
A. Decision Support Systems for Real-World Problems 
Computer Systems nowadays are frequently used to 
solve numerous “real-world problems”. In 1958 for example 
a computer system was used to find the optimal allocation of 
water between Egypt and the Sudan. The water system 
contained five major dams, several other barrages and 
control points and the monthly volumes of inflow between 
1905 and 1942 were used as input data. The system was 
developed by IBM; it became the first considerable example 
for a computer assisted real-world plan [15]. In the 1960s the 
use of such devices was spreading rapidly.  
Due to improved computer hardware and because of a 
changed attitude of users towards computers in general, 
computer applications to real-world problems became more 
and more attractive. Today, computers are used to collect, 
store and retrieve data, display and present it in different 
ways and help humans in understanding complex situations 
and problems. The computer became a “complete” 
information processor as part of complex information 
systems. Real-world computer systems process information 
such as digital values, analogue signals, images, etc. A 
computer with sufficient software may represent the physics 
or chemistry laboratory for scientists for instance. With using 
computer simulations for experiments costs, risks and time 
can be saved in many scientific fields. Consequently, there is 
no need to prove that an idea for an experiment will be 
useful. Using computers for experiments allows the planner 
or manager to make mistakes without consequences. 
V. 
CASE-BASED REASONING 
According to Aamodt and Plaza [2], “Case-based 
reasoning is a recent approach to problem solving and 
learning (…)”. Case-based Reasoning is a cyclic problem 
solving process, whereby already known knowledge is used 
to solve new problems. This knowledge is represented in 
form of cases which consist of a problem and a 
corresponding solution. The cases are stored in the so-called 
case base mainly providing the functionality to search for 
similar problems. Main objectives of CBR are the reuse of 
solutions of similar problems, no new problem solving 
processes whenever it is not necessary, no new solutions 
have to be developed for new problems if the case base 
contains a comparable problem and finally, the creation of 
solutions is rapid and cost-effective. Figure 2 shows one of 
the most important fundamentals of Case-based Reasoning, 
namely the CBR-cycle according to Aamodt and Plaza [2]. 
The cycle is subdivided into four phases: Retrieve, 
Reuse, Revise and Retain. 
 
 
Retrieve: Due to a new problem a new case is 
defined. Accordingly similar cases are retrieved 
from the case base where all known cases and 
general knowledge are stored. The retrieval of 
similar cases is operated by so-called similarity 
measures such as the similarity measure by 
Hamming, the Tversky-contrast model or even the 
Euclidean distance in an n-dimensional space. 
 
Reuse: If one has found one or more similar cases, 
the most similar retrieved case(s) is(are) combined 
with the new case, whereon the CBR-system can 
suggest solutions for the initial problem. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  CBR-Cycle (According to [2]) 
 
 
233
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

 
Revise: The suggested solution is tested to 
demonstrate the ability of the CBR-system to solve 
the initial problem. If the retrieved solution is faulty, 
it can be adapted and a confirmed solution is created.  
 
Retain: Useful experience (significant cases) is 
stored for future reuse. The operator can add the new 
case or a learned case to the case base or the CBR-
system creates and stores the new case automatically 
or semi-automatically. Finally, the case base grows 
and becomes more intelligent for future problems. 
A. Simple Example 
In this chapter we present a simple example to show how 
Case-based Reasoning could be used in the field of 
Structural Health Monitoring. 
An example for a case base can be seen in Figure 3 
where (in this very simple example) two cases are stored. A 
case consists of a problem (symptoms) with certain attributes 
and an appropriate solution (including diagnostics and 
corrective). When a new problem arises (shown in Figure 4) 
at first a solution is not available. To provide it, instead of 
starting a problem solving process, knowledge is reused from 
already known cases. 
It has to be defined, which attributes or parameter values 
can be compared with each other. In this example, the 
attributes “Global frequency”, “Piping Element”, “Sensor”, 
“Pipe Temperature” and “Capacity Utilization” are used. 
 
Figure 3.  Simple Example – Case Base 
 
Figure 4.  Simple Example – New Problem 
 
 
Figure 5.  Simple Example – Adaptation 
 
Figure 6.  Simple Example – Result 
One can compare the values of the attributes of new 
problems with the values of the attributes of cases in the case 
base. In this simple example no kinds of weights are used, 
for a real world system weighted attributes in general would 
be useful. If one compares the new problem to the cases in 
the case base, one can see that case 1 is more similar to the 
new problem than the case 2. 
So, one can use the solution of case 1 and adapt it to the 
new problem. Figure 5 shows the adaptation of the reused 
solution to the new problem. The result shown in Figure 6 is 
a new case with the initial problem and the reused and 
adapted solution which can be stored in the case base. Thus, 
the case base grows continuously and probably becomes 
more intelligent for future problems. 
B. Similarity Measures 
Similarity measures play a great role for Case-based 
Reasoning. These measures are essential to be able to 
compare new problems with the cases in the case base. One 
can imagine that it is fundamental to choose the right 
methods of similarity measuring for given data. In the 
following, an example is shown to illustrate how one can 
calculate the similarity between cases. Therefore, the 
Generalized Similarity Measure by Hamming defined by the 
following formula (1) is used: 
 
234
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

n
i
i
n
i
i
i
i
i
w
w sim x y
x y
sim
1
1
)
( ,
( , )
 
(1) 
 
Table I shows a case base with five cases. The attributes 
again are “Global Frequency”, “Piping Element”, “Sensor”, 
“Pipe Temperature” and “Capacity Utilization” and each 
case x1 ... x5 has its individual parameter values.  
When there is a new case y, one wants to know, which 
case in the case base is the most similar one to the new case 
y, see Table II. 
To be able to use the Generalized Similarity Measure by 
Hamming, for each attribute functions have to be defined, 
e.g., how similar is a Plug Flow Reactor “PFR” to a Branch 
Connection “BC” or how similar is an Accelerometer 
“A15a” to an “A18b”? The functions e.g., can be defined 
like this: 
 
 
Global Frequency = simGF(xGF,yGF) = For each hertz 
(Hz), which differs from case xi to case y, the 
similarity value is reduced by 0,01. 
 
Piping Element = simPE(xPE,yPE) =  
o 
Plug Flow Reactor: Similarity value of 1 
o 
Branch Connection: Similarity value of 0 
 
Sensor = simS(xS,yS) =  
o 
Accelerometer 18b: Similarity value of 1  
o 
Accelerometer 15a: Similarity value of 0,75 
o 
Accelerometer 21a: Similarity value of 0,85 
o 
Accelerometer 24c: Similarity value of 0,5 
 
Pipe Temperature = simPT(xPT,yPT) = For each degree 
Celsius (°C), which differs from case xi to case y, the 
similarity value is reduced by 0,01. 
 
Capacity Utilization = simCU(xCU,yCU) = For each 
percentage point (%), which differs from case xi to 
case y, the similarity value is reduced by 0,01. 
 
TABLE I.  
CASE BASE 
 
 
TABLE II.  
NEW CASE Y 
 
 
TABLE III.  
WEIGHTING COEFFICIENTS AND SIMILARITIES 
 
 
If one uses these functions for the similarity search, a 
new table with the similarities between the cases of the case 
base and the new case y can be generated, see Table III. The 
last row in Table III shows weighting coefficients (wi), 
which represents the importance of an attribute for 
calculating the similarity. 
To calculate the similarities between the cases in the case 
base and the new case y, the Generalized Similarity Measure 
by Hamming is used. The similarity between the case x1 and 
the case y is shown in the following calculation (2): 
 
93
,0
25
,3
7,0 )
5,0
,0 95
,0 75
,0 75
2,0
1
8,0
1
1(
, )
( 1 y
x
sim
 (2) 
 
Using this formula for the other cases x2 ... x5, the 
following similarities can be calculated: 
 
x1: 0,93 
x2: 0,89 
x3: 0,94 
x4: 0,62 
x5: 0,67 
 
As one can see in this listing, the case x3 is the most 
similar case to the new case y and would be used to find an 
already known solution for the new case y. 
VI. 
CASE-BASED DECISION SUPPORT FOR BRIDGE 
MONITORING 
The main idea of Case-based Decision Support for 
Bridge Monitoring is to support a human expert in the 
interpretation of measurement data taken from certain 
structures, especially from bridges. In general, the idea is to 
support the interpretation process by providing comparable 
measurements which may have lead to comparable 
interpretations. Thereby, in case of periodic measurements or 
spot observations, measurement results of similar structures 
should provide a basis for the interpretation of new 
measurements and in case of permanent monitoring, similar 
historical measurements can be taken into account to draw a 
conclusion to the state of the building. The ambient 
vibrations in the form of raw measurement data have to be 
interpreted by an engineer with profound technological 
235
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

knowledge and experience in the interpretation of such data. 
Another disadvantage of human interpretation, besides the 
time it consumes, is its subjectivity. Each expert interprets a 
structure differently. On the basis of these facts, a Decision 
Support System is needed to support engineers in 
interpreting measurement data and decision making in order 
to be able to take decisions faster and not to spend their time 
with doing rather easy routine work. Consequently, a main 
incentive of a Case-based Decision Support System for 
Bridge Monitoring is cost-effectiveness and promptness by 
finding solutions. 
The development of the Decision Support System for the 
interpretation of periodic measurements is divided into the 
following steps, whereby for permanent monitoring step 1 in 
general is not necessary: 
 
1. Search for Similar Bridges 
 
First of all one has to search for similar structures to have 
a basis for further conclusions and comparisons. If the 
bridge, which should be observed, is already stored in the 
case base, then the engineer has to load its geometric data or 
has to feed the system with this information. The system now 
can compare this geometric information with the cases in the 
case base and search for similar bridges. Each kind of bridge 
(e.g., simply supported, continuous, cable stayed, suspended, 
etc.) has different attributes which have to be compared with 
each other. According to its nature, a bridge consists of 
different kinds of structural elements (e.g., bridge decks, 
cables, pylons, etc.) and for each structural element, different 
attributes are stored. For instance, a bridge deck among other 
things has attributes like length and breadth, main span, 
number of fields or material. The similarity between the 
cases in the case base in case of this system is the Euclidean 
Distance in an n-dimensional space. In case of two 
dimensions for instance the Euclidean Distance would be the 
“measurable” distance between two points. Using the 
following formula (3) the Euclidean (n-dimensional) space 
becomes a metric space. This fact makes the system become 
attractive 
for 
metric 
index 
structures 
to 
improve 
performance. 
 
n
i
i
i
y
x
X Y
d
1
2)
(
, )
(
 
(3) 
 
The system provides the most similar bridges with the 
distances to the analysed bridge. It is evident which bridge 
will be the most similar one in case that the observed bridge 
already is contained in the case base, namely the same one. 
 
2. Search for Comparable Measurements (of Similar 
Bridges) 
 
As a result of the first step (in case of periodic 
measurements), similar bridges due to their geometric data 
are retrieved. This is a preliminary selection in order to avoid 
the situation that different kinds of bridges, which accidently 
have similar measurement results, are compared which most 
likely would lead to a complete misinterpretation of the 
measurement. If the system only considers the measurement 
results of bridges and not the geometric data in a first step, 
disparate bridges (due to their geometric data) could have 
similar measurement results although they are totally 
different. In the second step, the already known 
measurement results of the retrieved similar bridges are 
provided. These results generally consist of modal 
parameters, namely the structure’s natural frequencies, its 
mode shapes and its damping coefficients which together 
represent the “real” condition of a bridge. In the following, 
the modal parameters of the similar bridges can be used as a 
suggestion for the interpretation of new measurement data of 
bridges which should be observed. 
 
3. Support of Analysis Process 
 
The steps for the interpretation and preprocessing of 
measurement data by a human expert can be stored in an 
adequate way in the case base. Thereby, similar bridges also 
have similar preprocessing steps for the interpretation of 
measurement results.  
A. Case-based Reasoning for Periodic and Permanent 
Monitoring 
As already mentioned in the previous chapters, there 
generally are two different applications of Structural Health 
Monitoring, namely periodic and permanent measuring. 
Depending on this kind of strategy the provision of decision 
support has to be adapted. While in case of permanent 
monitoring always one and the same structure is observed 
and decision support generally can rely on data from this 
certain structure, decision support for periodic or single 
monitoring on the other hand has to be handled differently. 
Decision support for structures which are measured 
periodically or ever for just a single time can only take into 
account measures of other structures to provide some kind of 
support. It is obvious that in this case only measures from 
similar structures can usefully contribute to the interpretation 
of such measuring data.  
Below two activity diagrams are shown to illustrate the 
difference between periodic and permanent monitoring. 
The first diagram represents activities for periodic 
monitoring and the second one for permanent monitoring. 
 
Periodic Monitoring (shown in Figure 7): 
 
Measurement of a bridge 
 
Analysis of measured data 
 
Determination of similar bridges/cases by means of 
Case-based Reasoning 
 
Providing a suggestion about the condition of the 
bridge, based on the Case-based Reasoning system 
 
Accept or reject the suggestion 
 
236
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

 
 
Figure 7.  Activity Diagram – Periodic Monitoring 
 
Permanent Monitoring (shown in Figure 8): 
 
Measurement of a bridge (automatically) 
 
Generation of attributes for a representation as cases 
(preprocessing) 
 
Finding similar situations with the Case-based 
Reasoning system 
 
If the Case-based Reasoning system classifies the 
current situation as critical, then the system suggests 
possible solutions for solving this problem 
 
The following chapters introduce more details like the 
integration of monitoring data, performance enhancement 
and the database model of the CBR system for example. 
B. Data Preparation 
After measurements of certain structures are taken, 
engineers start to analyse and classify them. For the analysis, 
measurement results (eigenfrequencies), and in most cases 
additional data, e.g., from visual inspections, are taken into 
account. Consequently, each case consists of a set of 
weighted attributes with different meanings and different 
data types. Due to the aim of representing the cases as points 
in a normalised n-dimensional metric space (each dimension 
has a finite range between 0 and 1), the definition of 
similarities/distances has to be well-thought-out.  
The (Euclidean) distance between two cases  and  is 
defined as following: 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Activity Diagram – Permanent Monitoring 
 
 
 
The function  of the formula which is shown above 
returns a value between 0 and 1 representing the distance 
between two parameter values of a certain dimension. For 
the current application of the Case-based Reasoning system 
for Structural Health Monitoring it has turned out to be 
sufficient to rely on similarity representation in the metric 
space with numerical attributes (e.g., eigenfrequencies) on 
the one hand and predefined distances between parameter 
values on the other hand. Such distances for a certain 
attribute are defined in a matrix (which generally is 
symmetric: dmn = dnm) organised as following: 
 
 
v1 
v2 
v3 
... 
vn 
v1 
0  
d12 
d13 
... 
d1n 
v2 
d21 
0 
d23 
... 
d2n 
v3 
d31 
d32 
0 
... 
d3n 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
... 
vn 
dn1 
dn2 
dn3 
... 
0 
 
Defining distances this way only is useful as long as all 
possible parameter values are known. As these distances in 
general have to be predefined by the user, the number of 
237
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

values has to be limited to a reasonable amount. In case of a 
symmetric distance matrix and a diagonal (dii) equal to zero, 
the number of predefined distances for a certain number of 
parameters n is 
. Thus, for n = 20 the number of 
distances is 190. One has to realise that these dimensions 
soon will become unclear and unmanageable for a user. 
 also can be a complex function, just having the 
constraint to return a value between 0 and 1 in our case. An 
attribute of the cases could be a graph for instance. There are 
algorithms to calculate the similarity between two graphs 
(Graph Edit Distance, see also [17][18]), so  would be this 
algorithm for distance calculation between attributes of the 
dimension concerned. 
C. Data Model 
Figure 9 shows the Data Model which gives an overview 
of the Case-based Decision Support System. There is a class 
called “CaseBase” where the name and a description of the 
case base are stored. The class “Case” is a container for the 
cases of the system. “AttributeBase” consists of all available 
attribute types with certain weights, which represent their 
importance. “SolutionBase” describes all available solution 
types. The parameter values of attributes and solutions are 
stored in the classes “Attribute” and “Solution”. It is also 
possible to define standard values for attributes and solutions 
and for these values one can store standard distances (as 
shown in the matrix above). Standard values for an attribute 
type “material” could be “wood”, “concrete” and “steel” for 
instance. This property is represented by the class 
“StandardDistance”. Another class is called “IsPrototypeOf”. 
This class defines if a case has a prototype (a case which 
represents a group of cases) and vice versa if a case is a 
prototype of other cases. 
D. Indexing 
Experiments with data from “real-world” pointed out an 
important issue, namely run-time performance. As a case 
(measurement incl. background information) normally 
consists of numerous attributes and many distance 
calculations are necessary to retrieve a set of the most similar 
cases, it turned out to be necessary to improve runtime 
performance. Beside multidimensional indices (the current 
implementation uses an M-Tree), algorithms could be 
considered to reduce the dimensions of the data-vector and to 
speed up the system. 
Effective and adequate indexing and prototyping can be 
efficient ways to reduce the runtime of searching similar 
cases. Groups of cases with very low distances can be 
represented by prototypes. Due to the fact that comparisons 
of attributes in this system are metric, the Metric Tree (M-
Tree) is a possibility to improve runtime performance by 
approximately 67% [7]. The algorithm for inserting elements 
keeps the M-Tree balanced, it grows bottom-up. Figure 10 
shows the structure of the Metric Tree and one can see the 
division of the metric space achieved by the M-tree in Figure 
11. 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  Data Model 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10.  Example M-Tree 
 
238
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

 
 
Figure 11.  Example M-Tree 
The M-Tree divides the space into hierarchically 
organised clusters. A cluster is represented by the centre and 
by the so-called partial tree covering radius. In the example 
above there are two clusters on the highest level (centres A, 
B) including lower-level clusters (C, D, E) and leaf-nodes 
(F...N). Relying on this scheme the model can speed up 
similarity search operations. In case of range queries or k-
nearest neighbour queries, the search algorithm of the M-
Tree only explores partial trees containing potential 
candidates and does not consider partial trees (incl. contained 
objects), where, according to the distance between query 
object and cluster-centre, also taking the partial tree covering 
radius into account, a valid search result is not possible. 
For more information about the M-Tree model (e.g., 
insertion, nearest neighbour search) see [7]. 
VII. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Bridge Monitoring is a very complex task. Any building 
has its individual dynamic parameters which make the 
automation of measurement analysis and interpretation 
become quite challenging problems. Aspects like the 
personal impression of the analyst have influence on the 
interpretation of measurement results, which by now rarely is 
represented in a formal way. As mentioned, the Case-based 
Decision Support System tries to provide decision support to 
the engineer by pointing out comparable historical 
measurements. The interpretation of measurement results can 
be supported well because similar bridges in similar 
condition have comparable measurement results. Due to 
using the M-tree model for indexing, the probably big 
number of entries in the case base, similar cases generally 
can be provided in a more adequate runtime, although the 
similarity search can still be a very time-consuming 
operation. The system described in this contribution 
currently is in the state of a “research prototype” and mainly 
provides the functionality to retrieve the most similar 
structures/objects of a query object.  
The main reason for the system requirements explained 
in this contribution is not a possible redundancy of the expert 
in the analysing process of Bridge Monitoring but major 
assistance in his/her work in order to handle the 
overwhelming amount of measurement data. Besides, these 
routines might help to attract notice to new aspects which 
are, due to a lack of time and knowledge, ignored and 
unknown so far. All in all, the new procedures would support 
an expert in understanding and classifying the measurement 
of a bridge and, finally, lead to a better utilization of the 
measurement data. A design of such system was introduced 
in this contribution including suggestions for similarity 
measures and indexing methods.  
The outcome of the current investigation is a prototypic 
implementation of the proposed Case-based Decision 
Support System for Structural Health Monitoring, drawing 
conclusions from measurement results (eigenfrequencies) 
and visual evaluation of buildings to their condition. First 
experiments with measurements from different types of 
structures indicated that this is a very promising field of 
research. Assessing simple structures perform well but the 
more complex the buildings become (e.g., bridges), the more 
obviously it turned out that many improvements on the part 
of computer scientists’ methods as well as on the part of civil 
engineers’ procedures are necessary. It may be not enough 
that the reasoning algorithm just relies on past cases, further 
rules and constraints might be essential. As an example the 
fact can be mentioned, that measurement results strongly 
depend 
on 
environmental 
influences 
(e.g., 
weather 
conditions like temperature, humidity, etc.) for instance, 
which has to be taken into account in order to be able to 
draw conclusions from the signal to the building’s state more 
precisely. On the other hand civil engineers would have to 
improve their inspection procedures in order to collect all 
data which influences a measured signal and which 
consequently is important for a computer system to assess a 
measurement 
correctly. 
Nevertheless, 
the 
current 
implementation already can provide support for interpreting 
signals and in case of evaluating more or less simply 
designed structures (first experiments with lamp posts were 
carried out), whereby the output of the Case-based Decision 
Support Prototype is very close to the engineer’s output. 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Freudenthaler, G. Gutenbrunner, R. Stumptner, and J. 
Küng, “Case-based Decision Support for Bridge Monitoring”, 
Proceedings of the Third International Multi-Conference on 
Computing in the Global Information Technology 2008 – 
ICCGI 2008, Athens, July 2008. 
[2] A. 
Aamodt 
and 
E. 
Plaza, 
“Case-Based 
Reasoning. 
Foundational Issues, Methodological Variation and System 
Approaches”, AI Communications, vol. 7, no. 1, Amsterdam: 
IOS Press, 1994, pp. 39-59. 
[3] A.A. Angehrn and S. Dutta, “Case-based decision support”, 
Communications of the ACM, New York: ACM Press, 1998, 
pp. 157-165. 
[4] C. Beierle and G. Kern-Isberner, Methoden wissensbasierter 
Systeme. 
Grundlagen, 
Algorithmen, 
Anwendungen, 
2. 
Auflage, Wiesbaden: Vieweg, 2003. 
[5] R. Cantieni, Untersuchung des Schwingungs-verhaltens 
großer Bauwerke, Technische Akademie Esslingen, 1996. 
[6] R.H. Chi and M.Y. Kiang, “An integrated approach of rule-
based and case-based reasoning for decision support”, 
Proceedings of the 19th annual conference on Computer 
Science, New York: ACM Press, 1991, pp. 255-267. 
[7] P. Ciaccia, M. Patella, and P. Zezula, “M-tree: An Efficient 
Access Method for Similarity Search in Metric Spaces”, 
Proceedings of 23rd VLDB Conference, Athens, 1997, pp. 
426-435. 
239
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

[8] S.W. Doebling, C.R. Farrar, M.B. Prime, and D.W. Shevitz, 
Damage Identification and Health Monitoring of Structural 
and Mechanical Systems from Changes in their Vibration 
Characteristics: a Literature Review, Research Report LA-
13070-MS, ESA-EA Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los 
Alamos, NM, 1996. 
[9] J. Eibl, O. Henseleit, and F.H. Schlüter, Baudynamik. 
Betonkalender 1988, Band II, Berlin: Ernst & Sohn, 1988, pp. 
665–774. 
[10] C.R. Farrar, K. Worden, G. Manson, and G. Park, 
“Fundamental Axioms of Structural Health Monitoring”, 
Proceedings of 5th International Workshop on Structural 
Health Monitoring, Stanford, CA., September 2005. 
[11] B. Freudenthaler, Case-based Reasoning (CBR). Grundlagen 
und ausgewählte Anwendungsgebiete des fallbasierten 
Schließens, Saarbrücken: VDM Verlag Dr. Müller, 2008. 
[12] B. Freudenthaler, R. Stumptner, E. Forstner, and J. Küng, 
“Case-based Reasoning for Structural Health Monitoring”, 
Proceedings of the Fourth European Workshop on Structural 
Health Monitoring 2008, Cracow, July 2008. 
[13] P. Furtner and E. Forstner, BRIMOS Method Statement: 
Dynamic System Identification and Damage Detection in 
Bridge Structures, VCE, 2007. 
[14] G. Guariso and H. Werthner, Environmental Decision Support 
Systems, Ellis Horwood series in computers and their 
applications, 1989. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[15] M.R. Klein and L.B. Methlie, Knowledge-based Decision 
Support Systems. With Applications in Business, New York: 
WILEY, 1995. 
[16] J.H. Moore and M.G. Chang, “Design of Decision Support 
Systems”, ACM Press, vol. 12, Issue 1-2, 1980. 
[17] R. Myers, R.C. Wilson, and E.R. Hancock, “Bayesian Graph 
Edit Distance”, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and 
Machine Intelligence, vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 628-635, 2000. 
[18] A. Robles-Kelly and E.R. Hancock, “Edit Distance From 
Graph Spectra”, Proceedings of the Ninth IEEE International 
Conference on Computer Vision, 2003. 
[19] A. Rytter, Vibration Based Inspection of Civil Engineering 
Structures, PhD thesis, Department of Building Technology 
and Structural Engineering, Aalborg University, Denmark, 
1993. 
[20] H.A. Simon, The New Science of Management Decisions, 
New York: Harper & Row, 1960. 
[21] H. Wenzel, Health Monitoring of Bridges, Chichester: John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd., 2008. 
[22] H. Wenzel and D. Pichler, Ambient Vibration Monitoring, 
Chichester: John Wiley & Sons Ltd., 2005. 
 
240
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

