Exploring Various Aspects of a Video Learning Channel:
The Educational Case Study of Eclips
Herwig Mannaert, Ilke Franquet
Christine Lippens and Kelly Martens
Faculty of Business and Economics
University of Antwerp
Email: {herwig.mannaert}@uantwerp.be
Abstract—In recent years, video tutorials have become an impor-
tant tool to enhance active student learning. They are considered
to be an effective and efﬁcient instrument to enhance the
progression of students. In 2016, the Faculty of Business and
Economics of the University of Antwerp developed a strategy
on technology-enhanced learning, with a strong focus on the
creation and the use of both course speciﬁc and integrative video
tutorials. To make the tutorials available to students throughout
their entire study career, the faculty started in 2017 with the
development of a faculty-wide learning channel, called Eclips.
The platform offers students the opportunity to prepare for a
lecture, revise learning content and ﬁll knowledge gaps across
the curriculum. In this paper, the structure, design, and content
of the learning channel are elaborated. As adoption is crucial for
any new technology, various statistics about the content and usage
during the ﬁrst two academic years are presented. Finally, as e-
learning technologes are often considered to be disruptive, some
possible new value networks are explored, including other target
groups and interactions with the broader societal environment.
Keywords–Technology Enhanced Learning; Blended learning;
Digital learning channels, Disruption in learning.
I.
INTRODUCTION
This paper extends a previous paper which was originally
presented at the Eleventh International Conference on Mobile,
Hybrid, and On-line Learning 2019 [1].
The importance of e-learning and Technology Enhanced
Learning (TEL) has grown in recent years. Several scholars
consider this as a crucial, and potentially even disruptive force
in higher education [2]. While there is an ever growing supply
of online e-learning tools and Massive Open Online Courses
(MOOC), universities are also encouraged, and even forced, to
develop their own initiatives to supprt Technology Enhanced
Learning. For instance, accreditation bodies like the European
Foundation for Management Development (EFMD), strongly
advise universities to increase the use of TEL [3].
The University of Antwerp, in particular the faculties
Faculty of Business Economics (FBE) and Faculty of Medicine
and Health Sciences (FMHS), has been focusing for several
years on the use of video tutorials to address the heterogeneous
incoming students, and to improve the long-term knowledge
of students across the curriculum. The existing video tutorials
were selected by the lecturers to make sure that the quality
and the level were aligned with the ﬁnal objectives of the
programmes. These videos were used during the course or
served to clarify certain topics of the course. Lecturers could
also create their own videos in the recording rooms that have
been available on the different campuses of the university.
However, there was no platform available to collect, group,
and structure all this information. Therefore, the Faculty of
Business Economics decided in 2017 to create a comprehensive
digital learning channel in order to create a clear and structured
collection of content for both students and lecturers. This
offering should enable the students to navigate in an easy
way through all the content that they have learned during their
bachelor and master years. By creating this integrated video
platform, called the Eclips Learning Channel, the faculty wants
to give the students the possibility to revise the subjects at their
own pace and to consult educational video material (also used
in previous study years) when they feel it is necessary to do so.
It also gives lecturers a complete view on the study material
that students are supposed to have absorbed.
In this paper, we use a case-based approach, based on
the Eclips Learning Channel, to explore several key aspects
of the design, organization, and adoption of such a faculty
digital learning channel. In Section II, we give a brief literature
overview of the possible power of video as a teaching medium,
discuss some aspects related to the adoption of technologies,
and present the overall strategy of the faculty to leverage this
technology. In section III, we refer to the literature related to
the disruptive nature of e-learning technologies, and explore
some possible implications for the learning channel. The actual
structure, content, and design of the Eclips Learning Channel
are detailed in Section IV. Section V is concerned with
adoption, and gives an overview of the main realizations in
terms of content development and student usage, distinguishing
between an initial phase and a second phase. In Section VI,
we explore some possible new value networks, discussing the
current and future efforts to broaden the scope and reach of the
video learning channel. Finally, we present some conclusions
and limitations in Section VII.
II.
ACADEMIC VIDEO TUTORIALS
A. The Case for Video Tutorials
Apart from the great advantage of ﬂexibility, video can
be a very powerful teaching medium, as stated by Thomson
et al.[4]. Video tutorials, often presented as screencasts, are
short videos adopted by lecturers to stimulate active learning
during the course. In the form of shorter mini-lectures, such
as explanations of assignments or exam solutions, they can
be used as supplementary resources when teaching a module
169
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[5]. Research, for instance by Morris and Chikwa [6], has
conﬁrmed that students prefer short screencasts that summarise
lectures, or delve in-depth into complex concepts. Lloyd and
Robertson demonstrated positive learning gains in an under-
graduate statistics course for students using a supplemental
video tutorial [7].
Apart from being part of the lecturer’s own module, video
tutorials can also be used to cope with the heterogeneity of
student groups by offering students the opportunity to refresh
knowledge or to ﬁll up knowledge gaps. Research by Pinder-
Grover et al. showed that screencasts lead to demonstrable
improvements in course performance, especially for those
students who enter with the least amount of exposure to
the subject matter [8]. These hiatus frequently occur at the
beginning of a study career, because of lack of background
in a certain topic or limited prior knowledge when entering
university. Moreover, it is also manifest that students continu-
ously need to refresh speciﬁc topics during their study career,
because of the inevitable process of knowledge evaporation.
B. Adoption of TEL and E-Learning
The adoption of an innovative technology is not a trivial
thing, and has been extensively studied. In his seminal work
Diffusion of Innovations (DOI) [9], Rogers described the
lifecycle of innovations in terms of their adoption. In 1989,
Davis proposed his Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) [10],
stating that the individual adoption of a technology is primarily
based on it’s perceived usefulness en it’s perceived ease of
use. This model, which has been reﬁned throughout the years
[11], is considered to be an important reference model for the
adoption of new technologies.
As e-learning technologies are innovative technologies that
require a change in the behavior of both students and lecturers,
the adoption of e-learning technologies in general and a
faculty learning channel in particular is crucial. Therefore,
in accordance with the Technology Acceptance Model [10],
the perceived usefulness and the perceived ease of use were
considered to be prime directives during the design and im-
plementation of the Eclips Learning Channel.
C. Faculty Strategy on Video Learning
At the Faculty of Business and Economics of the University
of Antwerp, video tutorials tended to be part of a certain course
module, conﬁned to the related course within the Blackboard
Learning Management System (LMS). In order to make video
tutorials available for students during their entire study career,
the faculty decided to set up a digital learning channel with
permanent and mobile access. In this way, students can watch
the tutorials during their studies whenever they need to, and
lecturers can refer to this channel in a cross-curriculum way.
The faculty has organised its courses based on domains
or so-called Learning Tracks, and leverages this structure to
deal with various aspects or cross-cutting concerns of academic
courses, such as internationalisation and examination formats
[12]. Therefore, it was decided to organize the Eclips Learning
Channel based on these same learning tracks: Business Eco-
nomics, Economics, Quantitative Methods, Engineering, Infor-
mation Systems, Business Communication, Research Methods
and Broadening Subjects. The faculty also decided to adopt
an hybrid model for its video tutorials, using both in-house
produced tutorials and existing clips from external providers.
When the channel was ﬁrst implemented and launched at the
start of the academic year 2017-2018, it was primarily targeted
at ﬁrst-year undergraduate students, i.e., the ﬁrst bachelor year.
The main emphasis was on providing video resources for this
group of students. In the academic year 2018-2019, the focus
moved towards the second bachelor year, in order to keep
serving the original target group of students.
In order to support and encourage the in-house creation of
video tutorials, the faculty set up a dedicated ECLIPS record-
ing studio. When developing a video tutorial, different video
production styles are offered to lecturers by the production
team. Production styles include screencasts and recording with
a glassboard or green screen. It is important to provide a
variety in video production styles, as standardisation of video
production faces many limitations, as stated for instance by
Hansch et al.: It is important to match the video style to
the instructor. There is not a one-size-ﬁts-all approach [13].
For the sourcing of the video tutorials from elsewhere, the
faculty relies upon their faculty staff to assess the quality and
consistency of the selected video tutorials. In order to support
the quality control and assessment, a quality checklist and a
list of guidelines were developed to support the evaluation of
both in-house made and external video clips.
III.
E-LEARNING AND DISRUPTION
The terms disruptive technologies and disruptive innova-
tion were ﬁrst deﬁned and analyzed by Clayton Christensen
[14]. It refers to an innovation that creates a new market and
value network and eventually disrupts an existing market and
value network, as opposed to sustaining innovations or devel-
opments that maintain existing value chains and incumbents.
Christensen himself has argued that e-learning technologies are
fundamentally disruptive [2][15], and will probably disrupt the
educational landscape and value networks.
Though the notion of disruption features heavily at confer-
ences on e-learning and learning technologies, industry experts
like Peter Philips wonder whether we are really ready to
embrace disruptive e-learning technologies, and ask who is
going to drive the disruption [16]. And indeed, we can clearly
see inertia in the application of e-learning technologies, as for
instance Learning Management Systems (LMS) are still mainly
used to publish PDF ﬁles, and lectures are often recorded from
beginning to the end, year after year. Nevertheless, indications
exist that education value chains may be overturned in the
future by e-learning technologies. Consider for instance that
students are already turning to online resources such as Khan
Academy for assistance, or requesting to replace introductory
courses by an online MOOC of a world leading university.
Therefore, academic faculties and institutions should ac-
tively look to participate in, and/or to establish new value
networks in education. In order to gain knowledge of applying
e-learning technologies and to participate in collaboration
efforts, the faculty decided in the academic year 2016-2017 to
participate in the collaborative development of an online course
on Research and Writing Skills for Projects and Dissertations
produced by Epigeum [17]. To emphasize the architecture of
collaboration, this online course has been integrated in the
Eclips Learning Channel. Moreover, it was decided to explore
new partnerships and opportunities for new value networks
during the development lifecycle of Eclips.
170
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

IV.
DESIGN AND REALIZATION
In this section, we detail the actual development of the
Eclips learning channel, including three main aspects: struc-
ture, content and design. But in accordance with our emphasis
on the adoption of this innovative technology [10], we ﬁrst
discuss the approach to create an overall concept for the
learning channel, and to gather people around it.
A. Approach
As a ﬁrst step, lecturers who showed interest in Digital
and Blended Learning and Teaching (DBLT) before, were
contacted and asked for input regarding the content of the
learning channel. In order to ensure that the entire faculty was
represented, these lecturers were selected across the various
departments. Moreover, the content of the learning channel was
discussed on the department meetings of these departments.
All this information was collected in order to get a good
overview on the information that lecturers believed to be
necessary for their own course. Since the students are the main
target group, a workshop was organized in which a group of
21 students were asked to give their opinion on the structure,
content and design of the learning channel. This feedback was
taken into account during the further development of Eclips.
As with other pedagogical aspects or so-called cross-
cutting concerns, such as internationalisation and examination
formats, the structure is based on the eight learning tracks
within the faculty [12]. The project was initially deﬁned for a
three year period, during which the faculty envisioned to add
content in a gradual way. In accordance with considerations
for adoption [10], signiﬁcant attention was given to the visual
or graphical aspect of Eclips during the creation of the learning
channel. In order to make the adoption of the learning channel
successful, the two target groups — students and lecturers —
needed to be reached, informed and actively stimulated. As
stated before, the focus during the ﬁrst academic year was on
the courses of the ﬁrst year bachelor. Therefore, the main target
group initially consisted of the ﬁrst year’s students who were
informed in the information sessions at the beginning of the
academic year. In their welcome package, they received for
instance a pen with the Eclips logo. For the adoption by other
students (Bachelor 2, Bachelor 3, Masters) the faculty was
counting on the second target group to spread the word. This
second group, the lecturers, was informed during the yearly
staff meeting in the beginning of the academic year. They were
also invited to take a look at the recording room containing
the necessary supporting equipment to record video tutorials.
B. Structure
The learning channel is embedded in the Blackboard Learn-
ing Management System (LMS), and has a clear structure to
navigate, both for students and lecturers. The Eclips Learning
Channel presents video tutorials and digital modules according
to the structure of the eight learning tracks within the curricula
of the various study programs of the faculty. For every learning
track, the responsible lecturers decide and deﬁne their own
substructure by mutual agreement within the learning track.
Mindmaps are used to guide the students and lecturers through-
out the entire structure.
The technology realizing the internal structure of the chan-
nel is quite elementary and consists of two basic building
blocks: the electronic learning platform Blackboard and a Pow-
erPoint presentation to represent the mindmap structure, which
is converted into an HTML5-package within Blackboard. The
Eclips Learning Channel is made available as a separate course
in the list of courses within Blackboard, and is accessible to all
students and lecturers of the faculty. Opposed to other courses,
the learning channel will be visible during the entire academic
lifespan of both the student and lecturer. When the student or
lecturer clicks on Eclips in Blackboard, he is presented with
the main HTML5-mindmap, as represented in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Main structure of the mindmap.
When navigating to a video tutorial in the mindmap, an
information sheet shows details about the author, the produc-
tion date and duration of the video, the hosting platform or
source, and a short description of the video content. Each
information sheet has a unique identiﬁer that refers to the video
tutorial or digital module. The video can be started by clicking
on the play button in the right corner of this information
sheet, as represented in Figure 2. The use of hyperlinks behind
Figure 2. Example information sheet of a video tutorial.
the icons in the mindmap ensures that the user can navigate
through the different learning tracks to ﬁnd the video tutorial or
digital module that he or she wants to consult. The technology
used to create the HTML5-package ensures that users are able
to navigate through the mindmaps and watch the videos on
their mobile devices. This concern was expressed during a
workshop organized with the students, and is closely related
to the perceived usefulness [10].
In case a student has a suggestion to upload a video tutorial
in the learning channel, or there is an error in the video tutorial,
171
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the student can contact the Eclips team through an interactive
forum. Using the unique identiﬁer in the information sheet, the
student can easily refer to a speciﬁc video tutorial.
C. Content
As mentioned before, in the ﬁrst academic year of the
project (2017-2018), the faculty focused on courses for the
ﬁrst year bachelor students. More speciﬁcally, the focus was
on the courses with a low pass rate and/or the courses taken
by a high number of students, i.e., Accountancy, Economics,
Mathematics and Statistics. The lecturers of these subjects
received technical support from the Eclips team members to
create the video tutorials. This turned out to be quite beneﬁcial
for the content in general and the pace at which the content
of the learning channel was created in particular. Even though
these four subjects received priority, lecturers of other subjects
were also invited to create video tutorials. In the second
academic year of the project (2018-2019), the focus shifted
to the courses of the second year bachelor, in order to ﬁnish
the main development part of the project in 2019-2020 with a
focus on the third year bachelor. This time path was selected to
ensure that the content of the learning channel would gradually
grow in a synchronous way with the students who started
their academic life at the same time the learning channel was
launched. The students can consult the learning channel during
their entire academic career at the University of Antwerp.
The content of Eclips consists of both external video
tutorials and in-house made videos. The external video tutorials
are carefully selected by the lecturers, keeping the quality of
the video tutorials in mind. These include video tutorials from
websites like Khan Academy and PatrickJMT, and the above
mentioned e-learning course from Epigeum. For in-house
video tutorials, the faculty provides a recording studio where
lecturers can record video tutorials with the assistance of an
Eclips team member. Various types of recordings are possible
in order to realize a variety of content types in the learning
channel. Examples of these types are video tutorials making
use of a glassboard, handwritten video tutorials, PowerPoint
presentations, and green screen recordings. The type of the
recording depends on the preference of the lecturer and the
topic of the video tutorial. The current number of available
video tutorials for each learning track is shown in Table I, and
will be discussed in the next section.
D. Design
The user interface and experience are crucial with respect
to the perceived ease of use, and therefore a critical success
factor related to usage of this video platform by the students
and lecturers. Together with the graphical design team of
the University of Antwerp, a logo, a set of icons, and a
comprehensive house style were designed. The icons are used
in the mindmaps in which the students navigate through the
structure. The logo makes it possible to brand both not only
the in-house made video tutorials, but also the Eclipslearning
channel as a whole. Even though Blackboard is the platform
that is used to publish the learning channel, the mindmaps,
logo and icons give it a refreshing and contemporary look.
In order to make sure that the in-house video tutorials,
made by different lecturers, exhibit a uniform look and feel,
these in-house made tutorials start with the Eclips introduction
screen, represented in Figure 3. To provide maximum support,
Figure 3. Example introduction screen.
a template for PowerPoint and Camtasia, i.e., a video editing
program, were created. The main colour used in the templates
is green, since this colour is used to represent the faculty
within the university. The various learning tracks have different
unique colours to identify them.
V.
ADOPTION AND GROWTH
In this section, we present some data regarding the avail-
able content and usage of the learning channel. We distinguish
between the initial phase, corresponding to the ﬁrst academic
year after the launch, and the second academic year.
A. Initial Content and Use
The main realization is of course the mere fact that the fac-
ulty developed a dedicated, visually attractive learning channel,
offering both in-house and external video tutorials and digital
modules, and providing a clear structure in which the students
can easily navigate. However, the actual success of the project
is related to the adoption of the learning channel, and needs
to be expressed in terms of content created by the lecturers,
and usage of the video tutorials by the students. Table I shows
TABLE I. NUMBER OF VIDEO TUTORIALS OR DIGITAL MODULES IN
ECLIPS.
Learning track
In-house
External
Total
Business communication
7
6
13
Research methods and tool
11
10
21
Quantitative methods
43
108
151
Business economics
58
0
58
Economics
15
0
15
Total
134
124
258
the number of video tutorials and digital modules, that were
available for each learning track in May 2018, less than one
year after the launch of Eclips. Only the learning tracks that
actually contain content are mentioned in Table I. In Figure 4,
the growth of the offering in the different phases of the
project is summarized. This ﬁgure shows that especially after
the launch of the learning channel, the available content in
general, and the production of in-house made video tutorials in
particular, started booming. The highest growth rate is located
in the learning track quantitative methods. This is both logical
and desirable from a pedagogical point of view, since the
content of quantitative methods covers the core competences
that are prerequisites for other learning tracks.
172
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 4. Eclips Content growth.
Through the Mediasite of the university, the video platform
in which the in-house made videos are uploaded and made
available, the lecturers can consult statistics on the views of
their video tutorials. It gives an overview of how many students
have watched the videos, which parts of the video have been
watched the most, etcetera. In other words, it offers the lecturer
a clear insight in the topics that students ﬁnd more relevant
and therefore consult accordingly. These results are, up to May
2018, less than a year after the launch of Eclips, summarized
for the various learning tracks in Table II.
TABLE II. NUMBER OF VIEWS FOR THE VARIOUS VIDEO TUTORIALS.
Learning track
Number clips
Total views
Average views
Business communication
7
269
38
Research methods and tool
11
1232
112
Quantitative methods
43
8140
189
Business economics
58
59327
1023
Economics
15
2639
176
Total
134
71607
534
B. Continued Use and Growth
During the second academic year (2018-2019), the devel-
opment of video tutorials continued. As mentioned before, the
main emphasis was on courses for the second year bachelor,
though tutorials for other courses were developed as well. An
overview of the available video tutorials at the end of Septemer
2019, and their distribution over the various learning tracks, is
represented in Table III.
TABLE III. NUMBER OF VIDEO TUTORIALS IN SEPTEMBER 2019.
Learning track
In-house
Growth
External
Total
Business communication
8
+14.29%
6
14
Research methods and tool
31
+181.82%
10
41
Quantitative methods
49
+13.95%
113
162
Business economics
76
+31.03%
0
76
Economics
22
+46.67%
0
22
Total
147
+26.72%
113
260
The growth percentages for the in-house made video tuto-
rials clearly show a positive evolution in the adoption of the
learning channel from the side of the lecturers. Moreover, we
see a very strong growth in the learning track for research
methods and tools. This is in accordance with the strategy to
focus on the second year bachelor during this second academic
year of the learning channel project, as that learning track
exhibits no courses in the ﬁrst year bachelor.
During this second academic year, it was also decided
to create public channels on YouTube for three learning
tracks, i.e., quantitative methods, business economics, and
economicsm and to publish a number of video tutorials from
these learning tracks on these public channels. Some numbers
on the usage of these public channels are presented in Table IV.
We make a distinction between the total amount of views on
the YouTube channels (column 1 and 3), and the views originat-
ing from Blackboard and coming certainly from our students
(column 2 and 4). Moreover, these ﬁgures are presented on a
yearly basis (’Y’, column 1 and 2) for the 12 months leading
up to September 2019, and on the basis of monthly averages
(’M’, column 3 and 4).
TABLE IV. NUMBER OF VIEWS ON YOUTUBE SEPTEMBER 2019.
Learning track
Total-Y
Student-Y
Total-M
Student-M
Quantitative methods
20524
4684
1710
390
Business economics
58335
18019
4861
1502
Economics
288
29
24
2
Table IV shows that the adoption of the learning channel
from the side of the students is evolving in a positive way
as well. In order to gain more insight in this adoption by
students, a survey was performed at the end of the examination
in a number of courses, i.e., European Environment, Marketing
Policy, Economics (both for Business Administration and So-
cial Economics students), Macro-Economics, and Mathematics
(for Business Engineering, Business Administration, and So-
cial Economics students). The students were asked whether the
TABLE V. RELATIVE AWARENESS AND USE OF ECLIPS BY STUDENTS.
Course
Known
Unknown
Often
At all
Never
European Environment
76,7
23,3
Marketing Policy
79,7
20,3
Economics (BA)
11,1
23,3
65,6
Economics (SE)
24,3
34,5
41,2
Macro-Economics
1,5
15,7
82,7
Mathematics (BE)
95,9
4,1
15,8
57,5
26,7
Mathematics (BA)
83,2
16,8
5,3
26,4
68,3
Mathematics (SE)
80,4
19,6
19,4
42,4
38,2
Eclips learning channel was either Known or Unnown to them,
and/or whether they viewed video tutorials from the learning
channel Often, At all, or Never.
Once again, these results, presented in Table V, were quite
satisfactory from an adoption point of view. It is also worth
noticing that the highest adoption rate is found in the course on
Mathematics. As this is a difﬁcult course with a low pass rate,
it seems that Eclips is certainly perceived to have an added
value during the study process. Moreover, the adoption rate
is the highest for the Business Engineering students, who are
widely considered to be the top students of the faculty.
173
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

VI.
TOWARD NEW VALUE NETWORKS
As e-learning technologies are often considered to be
disruptive [2], they have the potential of disrupting existing
value chains, and can therefore be threatening to academic fac-
ulties and institutions. However, this disruptive nature entails
opportunities as well, as it could enable academic faculties to
develop new value networks. In this section, we discuss some
synergies and collaborations that have been developing as part
of the Eclips project.
A. Synergies with Other Faculties
Since the launch of Eclips in September 2017, two other
faculties of the University of Antwerp started with the imple-
mentation of their own tailor-made learning channel. These
additional faculty channels share the Eclips brand, including
the concept and the graphical design. Moreover, these channels
exhibit the same structure and navigation based on learning
tracks. In general, they offer parts of the content from the
original channel, i.e., mainly in the quantitative methods learn-
ing track, but contain one or more additional learning tracks
with video tutorials dedicated to speciﬁc courses offered in
the degree programmes of these faculties. This interfaculty
cooperation clearly offers multiple opportunities for the future.
Such opportunities range from simple economies of scale for
recording equipment, to the exchange and co-creation of video
tutorials and/or scripts. An additional beneﬁt is that the mere
fact that the channel is being replicated in other faculties, has
a positive impact on the perceived usefulness of the channel,
and therefore on the adoption [10].
The development of the Eclips initiative into multiple learn-
ing channels for several faculties also implies an increase in
efforts to manage the Eclips channel(s). For instance, the reg-
ulations concerning copyrights should be taken into account.
Using video excerpts or short videos as educational resources
without adding changes in a protected learning environment is
allowed by Belgian legislation. However, referring or linking
to the existing tutorials on the external channels should be
done very carefully. Moreover, a growing learning channel
consisting of three subchannels, needs permanent maintenance
and monitoring. Due to the interaction with different parties
delivering video tutorials, this may become quite challenging.
B. Reaching Multiple Target Groups
It is part of the mission of any university to connect
to and interact with the outside world. In 2018, the faculty
included the pre-students as second target group for the in-
house produced tutorials. Three public subchannels, i.e., in
the domains of mathematics, statistics and accountancy, were
launched on YouTube. This was done to increase the perceived
ease of use, and to connect to pupils of secondary schools
and their teachers. The video tutorials are offered to provide
this new target group with a tool to bridge possible knowledge
gaps between secondary school and university before entering
the university. As such, these tutorials will help pre-students
to assess their readiness, and function as a support instrument
in their study orientation process.
An additional beneﬁt of these public channels is that they
are also being consulted by students of other universities.
Individual students have told us in interviews multiple times
that friends of them, studying at other universities, view video
tutorials on these public channels as well. Without doubt, the
students showed a sense of pride while telling this, which will
deﬁnitely have a positive impact on the perceived usefulness,
and therefore on the adoption [10].
As lifelong learning becomes and remains a crucial issue in
our society, the faculty recently decided to address alumni as
a third target group of the Eclips learning channel. Specialized
expert knowledge, based on research being done by academics,
will be used to create video tutorials as well, serving both
graduate students and alumni. Unlike the more accessible
knowledge offered in the subchannel for pre-students, more
advanced niche knowledge is targeted for the alumni subchan-
nel. This channel is yet to be launched formally, but initial
preparations have already begun.
Figure 5 presents a schematic overview of the various
Eclips (sub)channels, with their the corresponding target
group, i.e., pre-students, students, and alumni. For every in-
dividual target group, the technological hosting platform and
the type of content are included in the summary as well. As an
illustration, the QR codes referencing the different pre-student
channels are also included in the representation.
C. Possible Future Collaborations
Reaching out to pre-students and alumni could both lead
to collaborations with other organizations, and therefore new
value networks. The interaction with pre-students in secondary
schools for instance, could lead to more formal collaborations
with these secondary schools and their teachers. Several sec-
ondary school teachers have already conﬁrmed to be interested
in producing their own dedicated video tutorials. This would
allow them to take advantage of the facilities and competencies
offered by the Eclips team and platform, and to collaborate on
the content with other secondary schools that are part of the
university network.
The interaction with alumni on the other hand, could lead
to more formal collaborations with their employers. Organiza-
tions could for instance be interested to tap into video tutorials
for basic courses that are relevant for certain groups of their
employees. Another type of possible content partners are the
spin-off companies of the university. A few spin-off companies
have already expressed an interest to build upon university
research video tutorials, in order to develop e-learning content
for some of their products which are actually based on research
that was performed at the university.
VII.
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have given an overview of the design,
development, and initial adoption of the Eclips Learning Chan-
nel, providing video tutorials for the students of the Faculty
of Business and Economics of the University of Antwerp. This
development proofs that a single faculty can indeed build a
digital learning channel with a perceived added value, using
limited human resources, i.e., three part time team members,
and elementary technological resources, i.e., Blackboard and
PowerPoint. It also proves that taking into account upfront
issues related to the adoption of such Technology Enhanced
Learning techniques, can indeed foster a controlled and posi-
tive adoption of such a learning channel.
We have shown data on content and usage, indicating a
clear positive evolution in the adoption of the Eclips learning
channel at both sides of adoption, i.e., lecturers and students.
174
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 5. Schematic representation of Eclips (sub)channels and various target groups.
From the side of the lecturers, this adoption can be seen in
both the amount of video tutorials produced in the initial
phase, and the continued growth during the second academic
year. At the side of the students, several numbers indicate a
positive adoption of the learning channel as well. The number
of views during the ﬁrst academic year was clearly satisfactory,
and continued to improve during the second academic year.
Moreover, a survey has demonstrated that both awareness and
usage of the learning channel by students is good to very good.
Another realization of the learning channel is that it is
being adopted from two external parties at different adoption
sides. First, two other faculties of the university decided to
replicate the entire concept of the Eclips learning channel, and
adapted the mindmaps to make a logical structure for their own
faculty. Second, we have evidence that a number of students
from other universities use the video tutorials while studying
their courses. Both instances of external adoption contribute to
the perceived usefulness of the initiative, and should therefore
create an additional positive impact on the adoption.
Two academic years after it has been launched, there is
ample evidence that the learning channel continues to gain
momentum. However, the ultimate goal of the learning channel
is of course to improve the study efﬁciency and results from
the students. Though there are some preliminary indications
that the learning channel has a positive impact on the student
efﬁciency, such as informal conversations and the increased
usage, there is no conclusive evidence yet for this. Therefore,
we are planning to perform in the near future a quantitative
study to gather evidence for a positive correlation between the
use of the learning channel and the study results.
Finally, we have stated that e-learning initiatives like the
Eclips learning channel, should take advantage of the poten-
tially disruptive nature of e-learning technologies to establish
new value networks. Though we have only just started to
reach out to other target groups, i.e., pre-students and alumni,
we have already explored some possible collaborations with
secondary schools and (spin-off) companies.
REFERENCES
[1]
I. Franquet, C. Lippens, K. Martens, and H. Mannaert, “Exploring
aspects of a faculty digital learning channel : the case of eclips,”
in Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Mobile,
Hybrid, and On-line Learning (eLmL) 2019, 2019, pp. 44–48.
[2]
C. Christensen, S. Aaron, and C. William, Disruption in Education.
EDUCAUSE and the Future of Higher Education, Colorado, pp. 19–
44.
[3]
U. Bernath, T. Brahm, D. Euler, and S. Seufert, “EFMD CEL Pro-
gramme Accreditation for Technology-Enhanced Learning – Lessons
Learned.” International Journal of Excellence in e-Learning, vol. 27,
no. 3, 2008, p. 1–19.
[4]
A. Thomson, R. Bridgstock, and C. Willems, “‘Teachers ﬂipping out’
beyond the online lecture: maximising the educational potential of
video.” Journal of Learning Design, vol. 7, no. 3, 2014, pp. 67–78.
[5]
M. Lee, S. Pradhan, and B. Dangarno, “The effectiveness of screencasts
and cognitive tools as scaffolding for novice object-oriented program-
mers.” Journal of Information Technology Education, vol. 7, 2008, pp.
61–80.
[6]
C. Morris and C. Gladson, “Screencasts: How effective are they and how
do students engage with them? Active learning in higher education,”
Teaching of Psychology, vol. 15, no. 1, 2012, pp. 25–37.
[7]
S. Lloyd and C. L. Robertson, “Screencast Tutorials Enhance Student
Learning of Statistics,” Teaching of Psychology, vol. 39, no. 1, 2012,
pp. 67–71.
175
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[8]
K. Green, T. Pinder-Grover, and J. Millunchick, “Impact of Screencast
Technology: Connecting the Perception of Usefulnes and the Reality
of Performance.” Journal of Engineering Education, vol. 4, 2012, pp.
717–737.
[9]
E. Rogers, Diffusion of Innovations.
Simon and Schuster, 2003.
[10]
F. D. Davis, “Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and user
acceptance of information technology.” MIS Quarterly, vol. 13, no. 3,
1989, p. 319–340.
[11]
V. Venkatesh, M. G. Morris, G. B. Davis, and F. D. Davis, “User
acceptance of information technology: Toward a uniﬁed view.” MIS
Quarterly, vol. 1, no. 2, 2003, p. 425–478.
[12]
G. Oorts, H. Mannaert, P. De Bruyn, and I. Franquet, On the evolvable
and traceable design of (under)graduate education programs.
Springer
International Publishing, 2016, vol. 252, pp. 86–100.
[13]
H. Hansch, L. Hillers, K. McConachie, C. Newman, P. Schmidt, and
T. Schildhauer, “The Role of Video in Online Learning: Findings From
the Field and Critical Reﬂections.” p. 32, 2015.
[14]
C. Christensen, The Innovator’s Dilemma.
Harvard Business Review
Press, 1997.
[15]
C. Christensen and H. Heyring, The Innovative University: Changing
the DNA of Higher Education from the inside Out. Jossey-Bass, 2011.
[16]
P. Philips. Are we really ready for disruption in learning? [Online].
Available:
https://elearningindustry.com/disruption-in-learning-ready-
post-conference-thoughts (2018)
[17]
Epigeum.
Research
and
writing
skills
for
disserta-
tions
and
projects:
An
introduction.
[Online].
Avail-
able:
https://www.epigeum.com/courses/studying/research-writing-
skills-dissertations-projects (2017)
176
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

