Reliability Issues and Improvements in Remote Monitoring Security Systems
R. Hariprakash
G. Venkat Ramu
T. Rajakumari
S. Ananthi
K. Padmanabhan
BIHER,Bharath
University of Madras
Polytechnic College
Univ. of Madras
AC Tech, Anna
Univ, Chennai-73
Chennai-25, India
Chennai, India
Chenna-25, India
Univ., Chennai-25,
rhp_27@ieee.org
ramu_nec@yahoo.com
visa4466@hotmail.com
ananthibabu@yahoo.com
ck_padmanabhan@rediffmail.com
Abstract – The paper deals with the methods of security
implementation in community areas based on certain
high technology sensor system and communication
methods. Security systems for home or industry have a
lot to perform today in terms of reliability and
performance. After examining the various modes for
security
management,
the
paper
describes
data
collection and fusion which demand careful processing
and discerning of the security problem. Herein, the
problem of data detection without errors becomes
important to avoid falsely discerning insecurity levels.
This paper examines some signal management methods
for error free operation of signals from Doppler motion
sensors and camera image data. Amongst them this is
considered the technique for encoding data using the
Hilbert Transform.
This is better for motion sensors
with a few extra bits of transmission enabling error free
reception at the monitoring computer station.
Also
considered are wavelet compression and transmission
for remote site image data using spread spectrum.
Keywords: Home security system; Hilbert Transform for
data encoding; Wavelet transform; Spread spectrum.
1.
REMOTE SENSOR SURVEILLANCE-
METHODS AND PROBLEMS
Now-a-days, it is common to have a central monitoring
system of remote surveillance doing the job for many a
home or industry floor. The monitoring system itself has to
be securely located in a place difficult to identify. It deals
with the problem of receiving inputs from a multitude of
signal sensors, from all its customers, periodically. It has to
process them despite any transmission system noise and
identify events of insecurity as well as send suitable
commands to take proper action [1]. In this, there are two
categories of security levels: i) totally un-manned and
uninhabited; ii) partially manned by sentinel.
The methodology and implementation of security
monitoring systems are varied and wide. On the one hand,
there
are
various
methods
of
sensing
the
internal
environment to be monitored employing whatever sensors
that would fit the environment best. On the other, there are
different approaches to prevent intrusion, by simulating the
presence of human existence in an unmanned area. When
many sensors and cameras are used for many rooms and
areas,
the
quantity
of
signals
become
large;
their
continuous monitoring over extended periods of time
render the data manipulation large and extensive. Among
these are the several CCTV, metal detectors, burglar
alarms, fire alarms, access control and so on [2].
While new techniques in sensors have brought forth
more and more components for the security environment,
there have also been incidents of pilferage, interference
and mal-operation in many sites leading to failure of the
entire monitoring system. Attacks against security have
been very many. Therefore, in this write – up, we first cite
the sensor techniques and then concentrate on how the
sensor information is getting immense when a single
monitoring station caters to many sites which have
entrusted their security problems to it. With such a
continuous flow of information to the processing station,
data can be interrupted by hostile elements and it can gain
errors. Erroneous information in security monitoring would
invariably provide false alarms. So much so, it becomes
necessary to confirm the validity of such communicated
data while also being able to correct errors. In this context,
methods conventionally available in data communication
for error detection are not sufficient in this respect because
none of these could provide the surety of correctness of
data, though they could correct a very small percentage or
errors which might be present. Particularly important are
the motion sensor data with regard to error detection.
2. TYPES OF SECURITY SENSORS
Security makes use of sensors extensively. Sensors must
be reliable and should not provide false alarms and must
operate with low power and also from battery in order to
provide security signaling even when power is purposely
shut down in the area being protected. Vendors [3] supply
products for real estate developers and hotel operators a
cost effective and reliable way to provide their customers
with total control over home or hotel rooms.
To provide security in unattended situations, simulation
methods are common. The monitoring systems simulate
the presence of inmates for external observers. This is by
switching on and off, the several internal lights, issuing
325
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

noise akin to speech and turning on the television set at
intervals, particularly during day time. This means a pre-
planned appliance switching control from an external
monitoring station in order, to simulate the presence of
inmates in an actually vacant home or commercial site.
Signal commands sent for activating these simulation
systems need to be protected because if they are watched
by an intruder, it makes it easy for him to intrude such a
site.
Sites hired for security management by the central
monitoring station may need activation and de-activation
as and when needed. Current technology provides for
security systems activated with one or more buttons or
with a voice command key pad with select regions of
security or levels. The activation can also be made from
external through telephony, but this has to be handled with
suitable password protection and encryption embedded in
it.
There are a variety of signal sensors available in this
area. The most common are the switches in the several
movement paths, tampering signal detection components
for lockable items, door signals, lighting signals. There are
motion sensors based on the Infra-red, microwave and
ultrasound reflectance principle which are capable of
sensing human and only human movement. The three
states of any sensor signal would be:
i) inactive
ii) active, indicating a presence of an event
(closure, opening) and
iii) failed sensor.
Here again, the characteristics of sensors - the
resolution, linearity, sensitivity, response time, offset,
range,
hysterisis,
long
term
stability,
their
temporal
behavior etc., need
reliable proper signal hardware
concepts.
For movement of humans in unexpected sites and
areas, usually reflectance sensors or infra-red thermal
detecting sensors are used.
The path-way switches, the door hinge switches are
digital; the motion Doppler signals are analog and need
processing further; the mixed signals arise from reflectance
sensors with varying threshold depending on ambient
lighting conditions. Most of these are available with
wireless communication in built. Security monitoring
based
on
audible
signals
detected
through
remote
microphony [4] is also cited with classification techniques
based algorithms for detecting non-speech and speech
audio.
There are several issues relating to sensors that need to
be addressed today. Sensors should be precise and should
be communicative by themselves such as the radio remote
transmitting door lock sensor [5]. There are also systems
like the Sony’s Wireless iPod Whole-House S-AIR Audio
System [6]. In this paper, with respect to motion sensors, a
new encoding scheme is indicated that enables data to be
transmitted with error correction embedded in the method.
With Doppler signal data from sensors, the movement
profile of the source, which, in our case, happens to be the
possible
intrusion
in
the
monitored
site,
should
be
identified with high level of probability. The ability of the
radar to reject faster than walking speed targets can also be
controlled by time constants in the circuit. A typical value
of radial velocity is 16 mm/s at the MID frequency of
10.687GHz and this determines the range [7].
3.
SIGNAL HANDLING AT MONITORING SITE
Sensor signal processing follows sensor signal
conditioning. The question as to which signal sensors
would do all detection and processing at site and which
ones at the remote monitoring station have to be decided
first. For most sensors, it involves advanced signal
processing algorithms that go far beyond sensor signal
conditioning.
Examples
are
linearization,
adaptive
filtering,
correlation,
signal
transforms,
signal
compression, and pattern recognition. While some of these
can be implemented easily with analog circuits, digital
signal processing does the rest. Signals digitized can be
stored for long time for comparative inferences. It is
possible to send signals all collectively as and when they
are sampled and communicate them remotely to the
monitoring site via a communication channel. Or else, the
processing can be done by local hardware and only the
final components of signal complexes be transmitted to the
monitoring site.
Complex systems of security levels are required in
the several vulnerable locations. Once a preprocessed
signal is available, it is not necessary to perform all further
processing in the site itself.
Doppler signal processing
from at least two different motion sensors would need not
merely be a signal indicating a motion that is causing a
suspicion, but also the time course of the signal indicating
its positive aspect of suspicion.
Image signals are also now becoming more and more
important. These are usually transmitted with encryption
and compression. They need to reduce the data size and
increase the throughput.
326
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

4.
INFORMATION FUSION FROM MULTI-SITE
SENSOR COMPLEX
In areas related to industrial and military applications,
there are such systems of information processing, such as
the (VMMD) Vehicular Multi-Sensor Mine Detection [8].
Land mine detection sensor development and systems
integration are evaluating new technologies, incrementally
improving existing technologies, increasing the probability
of detection, reducing the false alarm rate, and planning
out usable deployment scenarios.
With all these sensors and data, one would think that a
body of data would exist from which effective real time
algorithms for information fusion or “detection” could be
developed. The application of Dempster-Shafer evidential
theory for implementing a home security system using
sensor data fusion has also been considered [9].
Figure 1 A early bird MID homebrew MID device using Gunn
Diode and Mullard CL8960 mixer [5] .
There should be a multiplexed signal processing
software, which would handle the several communicated
signals from time to time from the customer sites.
Thus, 300 signal bits would need to be processed at
least once a few seconds, continuously and with around
100 customers per one network that monitors its area, there
would be a signal processing of 30000 bits in unit time
slot.
The mathematical processing of the signals would
vary
from
simple
to
mathematically
time
intensive
approaches, such as complex Fourier transform, for the
Doppler signals from motion sensors.
Then, the simulated testing of the sites are also to be
included as part of the sentinel system. In this, the site
would be simulated with events from a manned or
automatic program of closure or opening of proximity
switches, movement simulators with lights or infra red
beaming lights with motion and so on. The programs for
such periodical testing would be part of the maintenance
routine which would be run as often as needed or requested
by the customer.
So much so, a monitoring station hired to monitor
surveillance activity in about 50 sites would be dealing
with more than 500 signals over the whole day in
sequence; this would require sufficient processing power
and software management.
Consider a system with around fifty digital logic
outputs from switches and proximity sensors; around a
dozen motion sensor input signals processed or given in
raw format with just a digitization on an 8 or 10 bit ADC.
Combine this with the signals which are created to
simulate human presence by the outputs to the lights, the
noise speakers, the switching on and off the television or
other similar simulated activity, including
answering a
telephone call from recorded information, all amounting to
around 40 approximately.
The above will need a signal vector, which could be
having a dimension that would be 50 + 12 2 10 + 40 =
330. The sampling time could be anywhere between hours
to a few seconds, depending upon the security system’s
time resolution. (The Doppler signals are two in number,
which are analog but converted into 10 bits digital by the
ADC and hence we have 122  10). This is just from a
single site being monitored for security. There could be
many such homes and security monitored sites contracted
by the monitoring central agency, which will be therefore
continuously receiving information from the several sites
all through the 24 hours.
The job management and control strategy as well as
emergency functions of the central monitoring system
would be to analyze the above data, assuming that there is
no loss or corruption in the system used for transmission or
any
man-made
interference
in
the
system
of
communication.
There
could
also
be
a
protocol
communicated
via
any
of
the
wireless
or
similar
communication systems, including the use of the cellular
phone [10].Error free transmission should be the aim, since
errors in data, if not identified, will lead to false alarms and
disturbances to customers.
5.
ENCODING OF SIGNSALS FROM MOTION SENSOR
Motion sensors are a very important of the totality of
sensors at sites.
The sensors of the motion detectors quantifies motion
that can be either integrated with or connected to other
devices that alert the presence of a moving object within
the field of view. In Simpler systems, the motion sensors
used to be connected to a burglar alarm to alert the security
327
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

station after it detects motion or the signal used to trigger a
red light camera. Amongst these sensors, (PIR) Passive
infrared sensors [11] look for body heat. In Some specific
cases the signals are usually detected either by all of these
and in addition, ultrasound or infra red sensors.
The ultrasonic active sensors send out pulses and
measure the reflection off a moving object. The Doppler
effect principle is used for ultrasound signal transducers to
detect and determine the moving intrusion and hence it is
more reliable. To avoid false alarms due to pets, the dual-
technology motion detectors are used [12]. In these
PIR/Microwave
combination
detectors
Pet-Immune
functions that allow the sensor to ignore pets that weigh up
to 40 pounds or 80 pounds. The IR sensor detects
movement by thermal noise from the source which varies
much more than threshold with an intrusion in the region
of the sensor.
This motion sensor detects IR energy changes in
multiple areas and then couples them for extremely
accurate detections. Quad-zone Logic provides multi-
segmented detection zones over the detection area. It is
designed so that a human-size target will normally fill four
to eight zones [11], and this will cause an alarm to be
generated. Any smaller temperature change (i.e., small to
medium-size pets, rodents or moving curtains) only
activates one or two zones at the same time, creating a
much weaker detection signal.
Using a noise reduction current, the 40  40
PIR/Microwave/Pet Immunity motion detector provides
high-reliability performance against outside noise, such as
electromagnetic interference and especially noise from
fluorescent lights, thus solving a problem common to
microwave motion sensors. Its Anti-Crosstalk System
prevents interference from other microwaves if you have
more than one detector in the area.
In Motion artifacts, it is known that the signal at an
instantaneous time is likely to be corrupted by noise bursts,
such as, for instance, a lightning flash (that could also be
notoriously simulated by the intruder!). Dual sensors and
cumulative signal processing
would enable the detection
of such artifacts but at double the cost. If the motion is
detected without ambiguity, then the remote monitor will
call for operator intervention who would then switch on to
direct video observation of the site.
With ultrasound motion sensors, we get two signals in
quadrature. By taking a combination of these with the
Hilbert Transform, we can detect the motion direction. Let
er, eq be the real and quadrature signals. Taking the Hilbert
Transform of the second, we get
H {eq} = eq’
Adding and subtracting to er, we get the forward and
reverse direction time signals.
Therefore, we can transmit the signal er and eq’ as well
as the Hilbert transform of er and eq to the remote monitor
for evaluating the movement and assessing direction and
further inferences. In this process, we can also detect errors
in the signal transmission, as we shall see in the next
paragraph, which is an added advantage of this technique.
But transmission of the signal through a medium, say,
by some form of radio telephony, is beset with errors of
PCM data en-route. Then it means much more for these
motion sensors than other direct sensors. A bit error in a
stream will intimate a sudden change which will be
interpreted as a movement caused by Doppler shift of
ultrasound reflected. That is why some form of detecting
errors has also to be included.
6.
ENCODING OF SIGNALS, NEW METHODS
The Signal s(t) that is picked from the sensor
is
usually digitized and the value of the same is stored in,
say, N bits, for each sample.
The principle is to take an encoded version of the
signal, which uses the signal and its past samples, while
transmitting to the distant monitoring site. This encoding is
very much like the encoding used for sending GSM signals
with convolution encoded data. The system of motion
sensor along with this convolution encoding would be built
at the site, along with the hardware of the sensor
electronics. An example of such encoding by convolving
with delayed signal components, would have a block
diagram as shown below in a simple scheme with two
delays. Actually GSM uses a convolution with a larger
constraint length.
The signal is xn, in its nth sample; this is combined with xn-2
in order to get yn
yn = xn EOR xn-2
...(1)
Another bit that is transmitted is zn..
zn = x n EOR x n-1 EOR x n-2
... (2)
At the receiving end the signals are combined by a simple
exclusive OR and we get the signal wn, which is same as xn-
1. Two bits are transmitted for each data bit, see Figure 2.
The decoding process at the received monitor would detect
and correct errors using Viterbi’s algorithm [12]. It is
possible to detect errors present and to some extent correct
the same.
328
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

Figure 2 Sensor codes are also convolution encoded and
transmitted.
The scheme works alright because only detection of
errors is more important here rather than its correction.
There is yet another scheme which uses the improved
(RS) Reed
Solomon
coding [13].This is
useful
for
correcting bit errors in data by adding additional bits. The
scheme is very complex using Galois field numbers. This
has provision only for correcting a small number of bits in
a total stream. If n is the data bits, t is the number of errors
to be corrected, then n+2t bits will be total that would be
sent by the RS encoder. Usually t is very small fraction of
the total n. For example, the RS (255,235) code has 8%
(20/256) of the transmitted message as redundant and it
can correct ten errors. This scheme is very popular in
general
communications.
But
here,
for
security
applications, this has one drawback. It cannot tell if the
data is free from error. Though it can correct t errors in a
total of n+2t, if there were more than t, it will give a wrong
result. In security data, we can ignore a set of incorrect
data rather than having it fully corrected; but we should not
be informed with wrong data any time.
In the proposed method, the encoding does not suffer
such a limitation.
Suppose for the signal s(t),
after
digitization, its Hilbert transform is calculated, this gives
the total signal as
s' = sr + jsh
…(3)
Here, s’ denotes the transmitted signal comprising of the
real and imaginary parts of the signal. The imaginary part
is obtained
from the real
part through the Hilbert
Transform. The same is done using digital data with the
formula given in (5). The first term in the above equation
is the actual signal and the second is the Hilbert transform.
Therefore, the data bits which are transmitted will be
double the actual signal data.
Thus, each bit of sr is combined with the bit from sj
and a dibit is transmitted. This is having the same overhead
of 1:2 like the convolutional encoder.
The property of the Hilbert transform is used at the
reception data processor. If we take the Hilbert Transform
of the latter signal sj, we get the negative of the real part
signal, giving
H{sj} = - sr
…(4)
Figure 3a showing the data and parity symbols in the newly
developed H.T. coding.
Figure 3b Hilbert transform based data encoding for motion
sensors
So, after collecting the data, its Hilbert Transform
is also evaluated see Figure 3b.The N Hilbert transform
values of N data are calculable directly as an (FIR) Finite
Impulse Response equation and the matrix of calculations
for finding the transform can be shown [14] as
'
1
1
N
y
C
y
n
n
j n
j
 
 

… (5)
The y is data (discrete form) and y’ the transform,
while the C coefficients are a cyclic set of values,
Also,
H {sr} = sj
… (6)
Taking for example, 256 samples of data, the same number
of data which are obtained by transforming the former, will
make for total data of 512 samples, which is treated as a
composite data while sending through the channel. In
addition, convolutional data can be used for additional
basic bit error correction.
329
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

Now, channel noise and interference will produce bit errors
on the data, even after correction to the extent possible.
Let us illustrate a sample data stream which is just a simple
continuous analog signal. The same is digitized and after
combining with the Hilbert transformed bits so that the
total data stream has two bits for each actual sensor data
bit. Suppose, there are random locations of bit errors which
cause the value to differ in the received signal at certain
sample locations. The signal and its transform are shown in
Figure 5 (a-e).
Thus, a check is made on the above data bits by
performing digital Hilbert transform, the data part as well
as both the transform parts. From this, we calculate the
syndrome by the following equations.
[a]  ae
The data a, gets corrupted as wrong data set ae.
[b]  b
The other parity part b is the Hilbert Transform of a, which
also gets corrupted. Denote H as the Hilbert transform
operator,
Evaluate [s] =H {H (b)} + [a] -Mean[a]
This [s] is the syndrome of the errors received in [ae].
This is plotted in Figure 4 for this sample data set.
Figure 4 a) Data set plotted, showing error point at (5).
Figure 4 b) Showing Hilbert Transform of data as received.
Figure 4 c) The syndrome shows exactly where errors have
occurred.
Thus, it is inferred whether the data is free from
corruption in the transmission channel or not.
If the
equation is non-zero at certain time slots, these time slots
could have erroneous data bits. Since some of the data slots
are known to be erroneous, ignoring these data bits, the
rest of the data is examined for a change from a previous
data set for detection of real motion effect. The sensor
electronics itself could be using an embedded controller, in
which case, the output of the sensor could transmit a
combined data set as per equation (3).
Figure 5 Showing methods of error detection and correction in
the Hilbert Transform coding Scheme.
a). Sample segment of signal with bit errors.
b). Hilbert Transform of original signal, as transmitted.
c). Hilbert Transform of received signal part.
d). Hilbert Transform component of the received signal.
e). Transform of corrected Hilbert transform, the negative of
signal itself.
Thus, by a suitable encoding technique, it contributes to
the overall system reliability.
7.
INTRUDER INTERVENTION – IMAGE DATA
Information is often transmitted with a view that
security allows a transmitter to send a message to a
receiver without the message being detected by an intruder
or be disturbed from reception by jamming by a purposely
introduced
noise
signal.
Today,
any
of
the
mobile
communication receivers can be inactivated by properly
jamming the select region with high power jamming
techniques [15]. A portable cell phone jammer featured by
universal and handheld design, could block worldwide cell
phone
networks
within
0.5-10meters,
including
330
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

GSM900MHz, GSM1800MHz, GSM850MHz/CDMA800
Hz and also 3G networks (UMTS/W-CDMA).
We need definitely techniques to combat jamming in
these security maintenance systems, because it is easy for
an intruder to jam the signals passed from the monitoring
station before he intrudes into the area. It would take time
for the monitoring station to understand that jamming has
been introduced in a particular home or location, by which
time the culprit would have escaped after gaining his
objective.
There is no better technique than spread spectrum
communication which is proof against jamming. Among
the
two
schemes
available,
the
frequency
hopping
technique is more useful see Figure 6.
Figure 6 The principle of spread spectrum communication as
useful for security monitoring systems.
While the scheme is by itself satisfactory only for en-
route jamming, it is not quite satisfactory for jamming
from
near
the
site.
Further
techniques
have
been
investigated by the authors for such a purpose [16].
8 WAVELET TRANSFORMED SPREADSPECTRUM
In Wavelet decomposed spread spectrum, we take the
signal s (t) and first convert it into wavelets at different
frequencies (scales) and time grids as C (a,b). Then, we
transmit each of these in different frequencies as a spread
spectrum signal. In frequency hopping spread spectrum
technique, the signal is sent at different frequency bands as
decided by a random PN sequence.
Whatever are the advantages in the conventional
Frequency Hopping technique, they are improved when
wavelet
decomposed
signal
packets
are
spread
and
transmitted [17].
Figure 7 Spread spectrum uses hopping frequencies.
The spread spectrum signal is available at different
frequency bands at all times (Figure 7).
Figure 8a
Figure 8b
Figure 8a shows the presence of signals at different frequencies at
different at time slots. Figure 8b Wavelet based spreading has
signals in all frequency bands at all times.
With the method of sending each wavelet scale in one
frequency band, we have the signal available in all the
spread frequency bands.
To retrieve the signal back in Figure 8a, we simply
take the signal at different time slots, do a filtering with the
PN sequence and integrate over a bit time to get the bit
value.
If the signal gets jammed in one or more frequency
bands, as in Figure 8c (by? code), the probability of error is
high at time slots t2, t3.
331
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

Figure 8c
Figure 8d
In Figure 8c The time slots t2, t3 are noisy signals caused
by
jamming. In Figure 8d here, with wavelets at each band, all time
slots are noisy in f2, f3.
But, in (d), when two bands (f1, f2) are noisy and
jammed, then at all times we get only noisy signals at the
two bands f1 and f2.
However, the signal is only partly contained in these
bands. When we do the wavelet reconstruction of the
signal at the t1 time slot, we get the erroneous output as
… (8)
where the dwt (a,b) corresponds to the (discrete wavelet
decomposed ) signal at the band a at all time slots (b) and
N(b) denotes the noise time signal at the time slot b, while
the function ψ(a,b) is the wavelet function chosen.
8.1 IMAGE DATA FROM LOCATION
The data of an image is coded and sent usually. There
was a jamming as shown in Figure 10b, while Figure 10a
shows the actual image.
In the method of wavelet based spread spectrum, the
image is converted into 2-D wavelet data.
The wavelet
coefficients for the first level are denoted as:
Ca1, Ch1, Cv1 and Cd1.
These
are
the
wavelet
coefficients
known
as
approximate coefficients and detailed coefficients. Ca1 is
the first level approximate coefficient.Ch1 is the horizontal
detailed coefficient; Cv1 the vertical detailed and CdI the
diagonal detailed coefficient.
If the image is 256 256, the first level coefficients
above will each be of size 128  128.
Then, a second level wavelet 2-D DWT decomposes
the same into a set of further four coefficients
Ca2, Ch2, Cv2, Cd2.
Note that the Ca2 is the second level approximate
Coefficient;
the
others
are
second
level
detailed
coefficients. The Ca1 is not necessary for reconstruction, if
the above four are given.
Thus, the picture or image of 2D DWT coefficients occupy
a matrix of size 256  256 by stacking the elements of the
above 7 coefficient matrices.
Figure 9 Wavelet coefficients for site image data shown in
Segments.
The above matrix is also the same size as the original
image for some of the wavelet transforms such as db1 or
Haar, but its size will be slightly larger for other wavelets.
The data from the above matrix is got conveniently by
tacking the row data and column data into a linear vector.
This vector is 65536 1. This vector is what is fed to the
communication receiver.
Suppose the jamming occurs in this data stream, then
what would the above matrix look like (?).
It will be
jammed at the exact locations as shown in Figure 10b. Thus
Figure 10c shows this.
Then, this data is used by the receiving communication
system. It converts the stream of data thus jammed. Then,
the image is got by an inverse 2-D DWT process by
equation (8). This gives the matrix image of reconstructed
data, though jammed en route.
This image is decoded and shown in Figure 9d There
is evidently loss of detail due to smear visible at a few
locations in this, but not so many as in the image jammed
by the direct jamming as in Figure 10b.
The information as to how much improvement in the
process of reconstruction against jamming is given by
summing up the pixel errors for the entire image. Thus, if
332
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

the image original and the image got after jamming shown
in Figure 10b is considered, we get an error. But if we do
the same with the Figure 10d image, we get error less than
the first one.
The ratio between the two errors is varying between 7
to 14 for several images and several kinds of patterns of
jamming.
This method, therefore, combines data encryption
(because wavelet information is not visible as any
meaningful image) as well as error detection. If an image
is in error, it might indicate an intruder for instance.
Erroneous image received might be subject to false
alarming. Here, we can identify errors in data clearly,
while maintaining image secrecy [18].
Figure 10a (Top left)
Shows original image.
Figure 10b (Top right) Shows erroneously received image
Figure 10c (Bottom left) Wavelets
Figure 10d (Bottom right) reconstructed image, showing that data
had met with errors.
9. CONCLUSION AND SUGGESTIONS
Data collection from site [19] and transmission for
remote monitoring were discussed. Among the several
sensors, a method for dealing with motion Doppler sensors
was described.
Also, data communication with encoding using the
Hilbert transform was considered for detection of errors in
data. Clear detection of a motion event due to any intrusion
is one of the major criteria in intruder detection. The
method based on the Hilbert transform encoding was
shown to be better in several respects, compared to the
Reed Solomon type of encoding.
Data of images are better handled by wavelets. Spread
spectrum communication which is the choice for remote
security management can benefit from sending images in
wavelet coefficient encoding. This not only does some
compression but also provides secure image decoding and
error detection.
Security system remote monitoring has been discussed
in the context of protecting a living environment so far.
Other environments include plant and process units in
factories.
In process plant units, data management and control
schemes are involved for operating the several plant items
like motors, compressors, boiler, reaction vessels and so
on. In mechanical plant, there would be robotic assembly
lines handling jigs and fixtures. In these situations, security
aspects are concerned with data mismanagement by
intruders.
With computer based controls all over, the computer
data are fed to process units through PLC modules to fix
the set values of operating levels of each equipment. It is
possible to add units for remote transmission of process
variables from every such unit, such as the temperature,
pressure, concentration, flow rate etc to the remote station
with the plant Identifier code juxtaposed at periodic
intervals.
Intrusion
herein
can
be
done
with
undesirable
intentions to mal-operate the plant by altering the set
values or process variable data. Since most plants of these
kinds work under a bus scheme like the ProfibusR, security
aspects should be incorporated in these schemes of plant
control, with remote monitoring of the data. Schemes for
key encrypted handling in such fieldbus control are
discussed in [20]. The method uses one of the bits in the
protocol to provide for such encryption.
As to the pros and cons of totally local management of
security problems versus totally remote monitoring, there
are several issues to be thought of. Wherever a security
site is fully managed by local system, the problems of
communication and jamming by intrusion is avoided.
Remote monitoring helps in assessing the integrity of the
security system by periodic checks on its inside hardware,
which is not feasible with all local monitoring. Remote
monitoring is ideal for multiple sites as the cost is
distributed among them. Security of several plants located
at different sites and handled by a single remotely
monitored system is helpful for interactive management
among the plants.
333
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

There is good scope for development of sensors with
built in remote transmission through some form of RF
communication with encryption. There is likewise a need
for separately developing communication protocols similar
to the ones employed for cellular telephony particularly for
process plant management. Emphasis can be made on error
free data communication even with greater redundancy
than used in general communication schemes for absolute
error free data collection, which is absolutely important in
any security system management.
Future
systems
should
examine
and
standardize
sensors free from artifacts and develop methods for
communication. Emphasis must be on detection of errors
and possibly correcting them to the extent possible by all
known methods of redundant data encoding.
References
[1]. R.Hariprakash, G.Venkat Ramu, T. Rajakumari, S.
Ananthi, and K. Padmanabhan: “Some Problems &
Methods for Remotely Controllable Automatic Home
Security
Systems”
presented
at
ICSNC.2008.41,
pp. 400-403 , 978-0-7695-3371-1/08©2008 IEEE.
[2]. Security systems and Devices “, controlelectronic.com
[3]. x10.com/security Systems
[4]. Abu-El-Quran, A. R., and Goubran R. A: “Security
Monitoring Using Microphone Arrays and Audio
Classification”, Proc. IEEE Conf., IMTC 2005 pp.
1144-1148, May 2005.
[5]. www.pulseliving.com- Advanced KNX/EIB and Z-
Wave automation for homes and hotels.
[6]. Sony AIR-SA20PK Wireless iPod Whole-House S-
AIR Audio System smarthome.com
[7]. K. Holford, “Microwave intruder detection”, Wireless
World, Vol.86, pp. 34-40.
[8]. Rob
Siegel,
“Land
mine
Detection”,
IEEE
Instrumentation and Measurement Magazine, Vol.
5(4), pp. 22-27, 2002.
[9]. B. Moshiri, A. M. Khalkhali, and H. R
Momeni,:
“Designing a home security system using sensor data
fusion with DST and DSmT methods”, Proc. of the
10th IEEE Conf. on Information Fusion, July 2007,
pp. 1-6, ISBN: 978-0-662-45804-3.
[10]. “GSM phone for remote control”, Elektor India,
March 2002.
[11]. “Pet-Immune
IR/Microwave
Motion
Detector
Eliminates False Alarms” Optex Product No.: MX-
40PI, UPC: 788924082486.
[12]. R.J.Mc. Eliece, R.B Ash and C.Ash, “Convolution
encoding
and
Viterbi’s
algorithm”,
Chapter-6,
Introduction to .Discrete Mathematic, McGraw-Hill
Intl., 1989.
[13]. M. Sudan, “Decoding of Reed Solomon codes beyond
the error correction bound,” Jour. of Complexity, vol.
13, pp. 180–193, 1997.
[14]. Cizek.V:“Discrete Hilbert Transform”, I.E.E.E. Trans.
on audio and Electroacoustics”, Vol.18(4),pp. 340-44,
1970.
[15]. blog.tayx.co.uk/2008/03/10/cell-phone-jammer.pp.682
[16]. T. Rajakumari, S. Ananthi and K.Visalakshi, “Use of
Hilbert Transform Data encoding for spread spectrum
communications”, Presented at the Intl. Conference on
Advanced
Telecommunications
,
(AICT2007)
Organized by IEEE at Mauritius , May 13-19, 2007
[17]. Sonia Grgic, Mislav Grgic and Branka Z-Cihlar,
“Analysis of image compression using Wavelets,”
IEEE Trans. Indl. Elec. 48(3), 2001.
[18]. S. Ananthi, R. Hariprakash, V.Vidya Devi and K.
Padmanabhan
“Spread
Spectrum
Communication
Using Wavelets of Signal for More Security”, Proc.
of
the
Advanced
International
conf.
on
Telecommunications, (AICT/ICIW2006), pp. 87,19-
25 Feb’ 06 at Guadelope, (0-7695-2522-9/06 © 2006
IEEE).
[19]. Texas Instruments Data manual: “Converters - Analog
to Digital (ADC) 12Bit 50KSPS I2C Lo-Power 8Ch
MUX Converters”, SBAS181C – Nov’ 01 - Revised
Mar 2005.
[20]. P.Swaminathan, K.Padmanabhan, S. Ananthi and
Pradeep.R: “The Secure Fieldbus (SecFB) protocol --
Network communication security for secure industrial
process
control”,
Proc.
of
the
TENCON
2006,
Hongkong, pp. 1-4, 1-4244-0548-3/06©2006IEEE.
334
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 2&3, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

