400
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Educational Video Game Design Based on Educational Playability: A 
Comprehensive and Integrated Literature Review 
 
Amer Ibrahim, Francisco Luis Gutiérrez Vela, Patricia Paderewski Rodríguez, José Luís González Sánchez, and 
Natalia Padilla Zea  
Dept. of Software Engineering   
University of Granada 
Granada, Spain 
{ameribrahim, fgutierr, patricia, joseluisgs, npadilla}@ugr.es
Abstract—Design techniques can have an important effect on 
how video games teach and players learn. The ability to 
harness these techniques in the design of educational video 
game can impact the motivation and engagement of playing 
and learning by creating more options for players to connect 
with game content as well as to other players. This article 
focuses on the design phase of the game development process 
and highlights the role of some techniques that can be used to 
design a successful educational video game (guidelines and 
design patterns). These techniques provide information on 
good practice and form a basis for evaluating the educational 
video game quality, acting as useful tools for developers to 
enhance video game playability. To this end, we have presented 
a set of guidelines and design patterns in order to provide an 
acceptable level of playability and, in this way, a better player 
experiences and learning achievement. 
Keywords- Playability; Player Experience PX; Educational 
Video Game EVG; Guidelines; Design Pattern. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
There has recently been a great deal of interest in using 
and designing games for education, integrating education 
and game design in order to grabbing the players’ attention 
and maintaining attention over long period of time. 
Accordingly, we must understand the structure of games and 
use this in teaching, and meeting the needs and player 
requirements due to the different profiles of the players on 
the market. Designing successful Educational Video Games 
(EVG) requires ensuring their fun and educational aspects 
and the different design perspectives (artistic, ludic, social, 
etc), also, requires design techniques that ensures the Player 
Experience (PX) improvement and provides an appropriate 
level of fantasy, immersion, learning and challenge to engage 
players. A poorly designed game or a bad choice of game 
elements (story, challenges, puzzles, etc.) means that the 
player spends more time ascertaining how to play than in 
achieving the objectives of the content provided [3]. 
In this work, we aim to use guidelines and design 
patterns techniques, in addition to take into account the 
playability concept in EVG due to its capability to ensure fun 
and entertainment of the game, as well as the effect that 
playability has on PX, and its role to improve the quality of 
game design [33][34]. Using playability and video game 
guidelines are useful in order to ensure player satisfaction, 
and to ensure the development of an effective EVG both 
from educational and fun standpoints. Also, using design 
patterns is appropriate as an effective model to support the 
design and analysis of EVGs so that the video game 
experience and the efficiency of the learning process may be 
improved. Our proposal gathers together what is suitable and 
useful for EVG design (rules, gameplay, PX, etc.) from a set 
of works that relate to different video game genres, 
interactive systems, hypermedia systems and multimedia 
systems.  
Following this introduction, in Section 2, we discuss 
some studies of EVGs design; present the different design 
technique of EVGs. In Section 3, we present a definition of 
Educational Playability, in addition to present an analysis of 
the relationship between playability in EVG and the 
presented design techniques (guidelines, design patterns), 
and define the importance of guidelines and design pattern in 
the design of EVGs. In Section 4, we present our set of 
playability guidelines and playability design patterns. 
Finally, we present our conclusions in Section 5, followed by 
our references. 
II. 
EDUCATIONAL VIDEO GAME DESIGN: RELATED 
WORK 
Many researchers have discussed the use of video games 
as useful educational tools to improve learning and 
performance, and they have attempted to provide a set of 
techniques for EVG design. In this section, we propose some 
researches that have been realized to provide norms and rules 
during the design process, which can be useful as a base to 
introduce a suitable and a high quality set of guidelines and 
patterns for the design of EVGs. 
Malone and Lepper [68] provided that endogenous 
integration of educational content into games enhanced 
learner motivation. In a well-developed educational game 
experience, "some integral relationship [exists] between the 
instructional content and motivational embellishments". 
Prensky [44] outlined the principles of good game design in 
his book, Digital Game-Based Learning. These principles are 
the heart of what makes digital video games so engaging and 
addictive. Prensky predicts that games will be “much more 
realistic, experiential, and immersive” and include “more and 
better storytelling and characters”. He has argued that video 
games can help provide such a context for learning. Prensky 
highlighted several relevant concepts that characterize video 
games: rules, goals, outcomes, feedback, competition, story, 

401
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
challenge, opposition, problem solving, interaction, and 
representation. 
Kasvi [29] listed the seven requirements suggested by 
Norman [22] for an effective learning environment 
(feedback, 
goals, 
motivation, 
challenge, 
satisfaction, 
engagement and suitability); Kasvi suggested that computer 
games fulfill all of the requirements and believes that they 
“satisfy them better than most other learning mediums”. 
Rosenzweig and Vanderdonckt presented the benefits of 
using guidelines in HCI [32]. They advised that consistency 
be ensured among products and services in order to provide a 
better user experience. Guidelines should be more than one 
person’s lightly-considered opinion, but they are not rigid 
standards that can form the basis of a contract or a lawsuit. 
Guidelines are not a comprehensive academic theory that has 
strong predictive value rather they should be prescriptive 
[59]. 
Pivec [43] in the book Guidelines for Game-Based 
Learning aimed to help all pedagogues, teachers and trainers 
implement their own ideas in the form of an EVG. Pivec and 
Kearney [42] have presented a model for game based 
learning, which includes some Game Flow criteria for player 
enjoyment in games which can be considered guidelines of 
the 
game 
design 
based 
on 
the 
following 
points: 
Concentration, Challenge, Player Skills, Control, Clear 
Goals, Feedback, Immersion and Social Interaction. Padilla 
Zea presented a set of guidelines for designing collaborative 
educational videogames, which facilitate the incorporation of 
collaborative processes into educational videogames [52]. 
Moreover, various works have presented evaluation 
heuristics which offer mechanisms to improve the PX 
[26][27], and these heuristics can be helpful to build EVG 
guidelines.  
As previously mentioned EVG is a play and learn 
environment, this dual nature of EVGs makes them difficult 
to design and implement. Due to this complex nature of 
EVGs, it is important to take advantage of what is already 
known about best practices for each EVG components. We 
have therefore focused on existing guidelines found in 
similar works such as e-learning and videogames to build our 
set of guidelines [39][57].  
Also Design patterns in video games have been a topic of 
discussion for some time now. Using patterns in EVGs 
allows the integration of educational content and video game 
design ideas, and in this way they help us to balance the 
game challenges and the learning objectives in EVGs. The 
idea of applying the design patterns approach to produce 
game designs was first described by a practitioner within the 
game industry [8] and an extensive collection has been 
developed for gameplay design patterns [61]. Rogers [65] 
provides a complete guide to video game design from ideas 
to characters, mechanics, and level design. Church proposed 
tools to help designers understand game design and to 
maximize the player's feeling of involvement and self [21]. 
Björk and Holopainen [61] defined design pattern in their 
book “Patterns in Game Design” as the following: “Game 
design patterns are semiformal interdependent descriptions 
of commonly reoccurring parts of the design of a game that 
concern gameplay”. They also presented a large collection of 
game design patterns that were compiled by analyzing 
existing games, explaining the template used for the game 
design patterns that followed, and suggesting means for 
identifying patterns and applying them to the design of a 
game. Church introduced formal abstract design tools 
(FADTs) as a way to achieve a shared design vocabulary 
[21]. Falstein attempted to find a list of 400 rules that apply 
to game design by including rules that make a good game 
[51]. Church and Falstein have proposed the same 
objectives; to define a way to describe and share game 
design knowledge. In his book “Art of Game Design: A 
Book of Lenses”, Schell presented a hundred ways to look at 
game design from a multiplicity of angles [30]. Several other 
books have also been written about game design [5][56]. 
Kiili [36] considered that the objective of patterns was to 
fulfill the need for a common tool to facilitate the interaction 
between designers and to develop high quality educational 
games. He defined pattern design in educational games in 
this way: Educational game design patterns are semiformal 
interdependent descriptions of commonly reoccurring parts 
of the design of an educational game that concern and 
optimize gameplay from an educational perspective focusing 
on the integration of engagement and learning objectives. 
In this section, we have focused on existing guidelines 
and patterns found in the works presented above (e-learning 
systems, EVG requirement, and video game design). By 
analyzing these works we can conclude that game designers 
to get a ‘good’ EVG design, they need to focus on 
playability, 
internal 
structures 
(Game 
rules, 
Game 
mechanics…), and expected player experience (How games 
evoke emotional-intellectual responses from players...). 
Accordingly, educational video game design is suffering the 
lack of theoretical and methodological norms, and there is a 
misunderstanding of the game features that must be included 
in games and the teaching methodologies that are compatible 
with game playability. In this paper, we will propose a set of 
guidelines and design patterns that take into account the need 
to promote and maintain the playability of an EVG, to build 
and improve the PX of the game process and facilitate the 
game development process, these guidelines and patterns 
were compiled by analyzing the existing game techniques to 
achieve a good EVG design. 
III. 
PLAYABILITY, GUIDELINES AND DESIGN PATTERNS: A 
TOOL TO IMPROVE THE PLAYER EXPERIENCE 
EVGs design has been a topic of discussion for some 
time now. The importance of EVGs arises from the failure of 
e-learning systems and technology enhanced learning 
process to engage students and keep them motivated to study 
[44]. Due to the lake of motivation in e-learning systems 
many designers are shifting towards using interactive 
learning based on games, e.g., Aldrich [13] introduced more 
interrelated concepts covered by educational simulations.  
Learning through play is currently an effective and 
attractive educational strategy. Games are fun, learning is 
hard, and forcing people to learn in games can ruin the fun. 
Lots of literature exits on why games should be good tools 
for education, but very little on how to ensure that they are. 
During our research we found many EVGs that appeared on 

402
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
the market before their efficacy had been ensured. As a result 
numerous games have failed, due to the lack of game design 
methods to convert the objectives of players, educators and 
designers into reality [64], as well as the fact that analyzing 
methods are rarely used discuss the level of playability in 
EVGs in a structured way. Another problem arises from the 
fact that an EVG is a combination of fun and learning. Thus, 
a good EVG development process requires cooperation and 
synergy between game designers and educators in order to 
ensure a good player experience [53].  
To this end, we have proposed a set of player centered 
design patterns that support EVG design, i.e., game design 
that places the player experience first and foremost. Björk 
and Holopainen [61] have mentioned several points that 
demonstrate the need for design patterns that do not depend 
on a designer’s experience:  Problem-Solving for Game 
Interaction Design; Inspiration; Creative Design Tool; 
Communicating with peers: Communicating with other 
professions. 
Based on the above, we present our opinion regarding 
design patterns and guidelines in video game design. Design 
patterns and guidelines provide many benefits during the 
design of video games:  
• 
Allow new perspectives for both design and 
analysis, and provide a network of relations 
between different game design concepts.  
• 
Design patterns are formal tools used for solving 
known problems, i.e., they function as a design 
toolbox. 
Patterns 
allow 
different 
levels 
of 
abstraction in order to address a specific game 
design problem, and offer the best way to solve 
issues related to software development using a 
proven solution.  
• 
Facilitate the development of highly cohesive 
modules, which may be used many times in 
different contexts and applications.  
• 
Describe many design decisions that cannot be 
recorded through the use of primitive methods.  
• 
Patterns 
have 
the 
ability 
to 
increase 
the 
opportunities for communication and reduce 
misunderstandings between educators, designers 
and 
players, 
leading 
to 
more 
efficient 
communication between them.    
• 
Allow some aspect of the system structure to 
change independently of other aspects. 
A. Playability in Educational Video Game 
The majority of the presented works in this paper discuss 
the important role of PX in the structure of video game. The 
term PX -based on user experience definitions [23] – refers 
to “all aspects related to the player that are affected by and 
interact with the playing environment”, These aspects 
represent pragmatic and hedonic features of the process of 
interaction such as: sensation, feelings, emotional response, 
assessment, user satisfaction and the experience obtained 
during playing time [34]. A video game with good 
playability provides a player with positive experiences of the 
aforementioned aspects. 
The vocabulary of software usability centers on 
effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfaction (ISO 9241-11). But 
these aspects don’t necessarily add up to ‘good’ EVGs due to 
the special feature of the experiential dimensions such as fun, 
motivation and emotion “It is difficult to obtain knowledge 
about what players did when playing the game, and how 
meeting different game design elements affected their 
experience of interacting with the game” [6]. EVGs should 
be learning environments that are adaptive, scalable, robust, 
reflexive, and feature modularity, automation and variability 
[38]. Thus, we suggested the use of playability to engage, 
activate and entertain players during the playing time.  
Playability in video games is based on usability, but goes 
much further, it extends the User Experience characteristics 
with players’ dimension using a broad set of characteristics 
such as motivation, pleasure, curiosity, emotion, and social 
influences [34]. Thus, Playability isn’t limited to the degree 
of fun or entertainment experienced when playing a game. 
To this end, we have defined the Educational Playability [2] 
(Playability of EVG) as “the set of properties that describe 
the PX in the gaming environment, which main goal provide 
fun and learning in playable and learnable context, during the 
entire playing time”.  
We 
have 
previously 
presented 
that 
educational 
playability isn’t limited to the fun objectives, but also takes 
into account the educational objectives to reinforce the 
player skills and improve his/her current experience [2][3]. 
We have presented nine attributes to characterize the 
educational playability:   
“Satisfaction”: The gratification or pleasure derived from 
playing a complete video game or some aspect of it. 
Satisfaction is an attribute with a high degree of subjectivity. 
Player Satisfaction can be considered as a measurement to 
assess EVG as a successful learning system. It is related to 
the presented content, the used mechanism, educational 
elements design, and game environmental. 
“Learnability”: The player’s capacity to understand and 
master the game system and mechanics (objectives, rules, 
how to interact with the video game, etc).  
Effectiveness: The resources necessary to offer players a new 
experience (fun and learning) while they achieve the game’s 
various objectives and reach the final goal.  
“Immersion”: The capacity of the EVG contents to be 
believable, such that the player becomes directly involved in 
the virtual game world. At an educational level, this property 
is used to measure the ability of an EVG to present the 
educational aspects implicitly. 
“Motivation”: The set of game characteristics that prompt a 
player to perform specific actions and continue undertaking 
them until they are completed. At an educational level, 
motivation to play indirectly produces positive motivation to 
learn.  
“Emotion”: This refers to the player’s involuntary impulses 
in response to the EVG stimuli that induce feelings or a 
chain reaction of automatic behaviors. The educational 
content in EVGs may provoke rejection by the player, which 
reduces the motivation for the player to explore the game and 
thus achieve the educational goals.  

403
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
“Socialization”: The set of game attributes, elements and 
resources that promote the social dimension of the game 
experience in a group scenario. From an educational 
perspective, socialization is the ability to support students 
learning from one another.  
“Supportability”: we define this as the ability of EVGs to 
engage and teach players correctly, and encourage them to 
continue learning and achieve the learning objectives causing 
playability as motivational element. 
“Educability”: We define this attribute as: the educational 
characteristics of video games that support the user´s ability 
to be aware, understand and master learning goals. 
B. Playability and Design Patterns in Educational Video 
Game 
The integration of playing and learning is the main 
objective of an EVG. In this article, we highlight the 
properties of player experience which result in a successful 
game. Player experience is related to all aspects of 
interaction between the video game content and the player. 
As previously mentioned, the goal is to ensure an optimal 
player experience while blending educational objectives with 
fun challenges. To achieve this, we suggest a set of design 
patterns based on the playability attributes as a tool to reduce 
the complexity of EVG design, as well as to help the player 
improve his/her experience during playing time. A feature of 
game design patterns is that adding new patterns does not 
restrict or specialize the nature of the game, but rather 
expands it. This is because a pattern describes a particular 
aspect of playability and its effects on player experience.  
We thus present a new taxonomy of design patterns, 
which were compiled by analyzing the existing exiting game 
design patterns and the current problems that face EVG 
designers. Each pattern in our proposed set describes a part 
of the possible interaction between a player and the game. 
These patterns are related and when used together they are 
able to improve player experience and effectively resolve 
EVG problems. Design patterns provide video game 
designers with the opportunity to play a powerful role in 
constructing and improving game playability. Design can be 
reactionary, responding only to current conditions, or it can 
be visionary, by presenting solutions to problems yet 
undefined.  
The new set of patterns has been created so that the 
following points are considered: appeals to both cognition 
and emotion; improves upon the player’s previous 
experience; fosters creativity and collaboration between 
designers in order to produce the best player experience 
possible; presents a game structure that is able to bridge the 
gap between the required experience and the player 
experience; facilitates the evaluation of the experience and 
the effectiveness of the game. Using design patterns should 
increase designers' experience, helping them to ascertain 
what is meaningful to the end user and how to present it in 
the best possible way. 
C. Playability and Guidelines in Educational Video Game  
Playability and guidelines are closely related, where 
playability can play the role of guidelines during the game 
design. Playability is a property that should have high levels 
in order to keep the game fun and to maintain the player 
motivated throughout the game. Playability is a qualitative 
property that can be used during both design and evaluation 
phase; in the design phase, playability can be considered as a 
set of guidelines regarding to how to implement the 
necessary elements to give birth to a desired sort of game 
play or social entertainment. Also, playability is a tool to 
measure whether player requirements have been achieved, 
and to determine the playable-learnable aspects of a game.  
At the same time, Guidelines are a set of rules used 
during the design stages to increase the quality of the 
generated games, guidelines provide information on good 
practice and can be used as a basis for measuring the quality 
of an EVG. Guidelines facilitate decision making by 
designers and game developers when creating or using 
different elements in the game. The use of guidelines also 
ensures the design success and further development of the 
game, to a certain degree.  
The complexity of videogame development requires 
certain specific guidelines in order to be educational without 
loss of playability. Thus, guidelines play a pivotal role in 
achieving the goals of a game and that they are useful in 
creating a highly playable game design. We can say that 
guidelines are, specially, to ensure high levels of playability 
in the game. Accordingly, we present a set of guidelines that 
have been obtained by analyzing the characteristics that a 
playable game should have. Based on the above, we define 
the guidelines in EVGs as the following: “a collection of 
principles, conventions or directives which describe the 
educational video game characteristics and are used by 
developers in all stages of game creation”. 
D. Guidelines and Design Pattern Importance 
Having identified that games exhibit some unique 
playability problems, e.g., the lack of a player role in the 
game design or the inability to provide the player with the 
proposed content, we considered that there was a clear need 
to develop a collection of design patterns and guidelines that 
specifically addresses playability and player experience in 
video games. In this work, we emphasize the properties of 
player experience that are necessary to obtain a successful 
video game, where this experience is related to all aspects of 
interaction between the video game and the player. 
Accordingly, the solution should ensure optimal player 
experience and be able to blend the educational objectives 
with playful challenges, present the game objectives, and 
provide 
interesting 
choices, 
immediate 
support 
and 
assistance, and an attractive learning environment. 
We consider that the design of EVGs is ideal for 
developing design patterns and guidelines because it is able 
to: 
• 
Support an innovative approach that effectively 
integrates and balances fun challenges with 
educational objectives.  
• 
Support the playability attributes and build an 
optimal experience by including a game design that 
motivates players.  

404
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
• 
Patterns provide a common vocabulary between 
game developers and designers in this rapidly 
expanding field. 
• 
Guide the test and evaluation of the game 
experience and the efficiency of the learning 
process. 
IV. 
EDUCATIONAL VIDEO GAME DESIGN 
The purpose of the design phase is to give the game 
designer the ability to design educational video game based 
on the generated requirements in the analysis phase, 
understand the lack points and problems of players, fix the 
problems and do walkthroughs of design concepts. The 
designer can brainstorm the game elements such as 
motivation and concept; narrative context and story; the 
goals and rules of the game, including game mechanics; and 
the player interface, including the feedback and modes of 
interactivity. 
Achieving the players’ needs and requirements, and the 
educators’ objectives and requirements at design level 
involves the use of design pattern and guidelines techniques. 
In this work, we have presented a set of guidelines, which 
are sound and unambiguous and then they could be presented 
to designers without the rationale behind them. Also, we 
have used design patterns in educational video game as a 
useful way to explore suggestions for good design and to 
complete the rule of guidelines.  
A. Educational Video Game Guidelines 
In this paper, we aim to provide an integrated and 
comprehensive set of guidelines appropriate for EVGs to be 
efficient, fun and successful. The design of these guidelines 
is based on the playability attributes, and takes into account 
the need to promote and maintain playability, as well as to 
improve the PX during playing time. Also, we have 
classified the suggested guidelines into groups related to all 
EVG aspects. This classification aims to clarify the designers 
and game developers expectations, and identify how players 
will be evaluated for each objective more clearly, to show 
more knowledge of the game content as well as to improve 
learning content structure, consolidate all resources, 
activities related to the presented objective. We have 
classified our guidelines in groups, which have been 
proposed to strengthen our proposal by achieving the 
educational playability attributes during the design phase. 
We have presented the guidelines groups as follow: 
1) Game Goals 
This defines how the playful and educational contents 
can be presented in an interactive way, which is both easily 
understood and attractive to the player. Games should 
provide enticing long-term goals [25]; in addition a short-
term goal will be needed to achieve the overall game goal 
[10]. Game goals should guide player through the game and 
can be presented implicitly or explicitly, goals need to be 
presented early and clearly stated, and should be personally 
meaningful, obvious, and easily generated [14][69][68].  
EVG should offer a particular strength and sustain of 
motivating users, “if computer games are intrinsically 
motivational, then they can be exploited to make learning 
more motivating and learning will happen almost without the 
individual realizing it” [55]. Thus, appropriate game goals 
keep players immersed, interested and motivated in playing 
and take into accounts the prior skills and experience of the 
player. Also, game goals describe how to provide the player 
with the possibility to understand and master the game in a 
systematic, creative manner. These goals can be divided into 
two categories as the following:  
a) Playful Goal: presents the general objectives of the 
EVG in a simple and enjoyable way that can help to 
captivate the players.  
• 
Must facilitate the learning process. 
• 
Provide players with clear knowledge about the 
educational content in order to make the goal easier 
to achieve. 
• 
Game content must be appropriate for the 
predetermined learning objectives and players. 
• 
Game allows players to be involved in challenging 
tasks, not trivial activities. 
• 
Game outcome should be unexpected in order to 
increase the player´s curiosity. 
• 
“A good game should be easy to learn and difficult 
to master” (Bushnell's Law).  
• 
Main goal should focus on reinforcing the player’s 
skills and improve his or her prior experience. 
b) Educational Goals: describe what the educational 
component in EVG should be and how it should work.  
• 
Provide analytical and critical thinking. 
• 
Make a systematic introduction of educational 
content.  
• 
Assessment and recognition of prior learning.  
• 
The goals are divided into several sub-goals to 
scaffold learning: generally the sub-goals are 
gradually presented to lead learners to the learning 
objective. 
• 
Educational content should be: Valid and Reliable, 
Credible, Accurate, Relevant, Balanced and free of 
bias. 
Based on the definition of the playability attributes 
presented above, this set of guidelines affects on such 
playability 
attributes 
as: 
Satisfaction, 
Learnability, 
Motivation and Educability. These guidelines facilitate the 
learning and playing process, give players the ability to 
master the game, overcome the different challenges in order 
to keep a player immersed and motivated to play.  
2) Balanceability 
The balance between fun and education is a very 
important factor in the success of an EVG, and has a great 
influence during the playing time. “A key problem in the 
development of educational games is balancing how much of 
the game is a game and how much of the game is learning” 
[37]. Law [23] presents some problems of current EVG as a 
poor balance between playing and learning activities or 
between challenge and ability. The imbalance leads to a 
separation of learning from playing, which leads to an EVG 
failure.  

405
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
• 
Game must include a fun factor to motivate the 
student to achieve the learning outcomes [42]. 
• 
Educational elements should be clear but not 
dominant. 
• 
All contents should be compliant in terms of goal 
visualizing and achieving. 
• 
All game steps should contain both EVG 
components (fun and education).  
• 
Keep consistency during all EVG steps by ensuring 
efficiency in game component visualization. 
• 
Include different ways to present EVG components.  
• 
Balance must reflect as much as possible the 
player´s state (emotional, psychological, etc). 
The balance between EVGs contents will make a game 
more active and attractive, which will ensure the player 
pleasure, the efficiency of the game structure and thus 
players can reach the game goal easily. It thus affects such 
playability 
attributes 
as: 
Satisfaction, 
Immersion, 
Effectiveness and Supportive playability. 
Quest Atlantis [60] presents the balance of education, 
entertainment feature to support academic learning, 
individual development, and social transformation. In this 
manner, it integrates principles underlying the development 
of entertaining games into the design of a learning 
environment. Also, it entails a rich metagame context 
through which children perceive their participation as 
meaningful and engaging. This design includes a lot of the 
presented guidelines in this group. 
3) Game Challenge 
Challenges are the part of video game, which keeps 
players motivated to seek for knowledge in order to provide 
a solution and continue with the game. Challenges increase 
the game dynamic by presenting different levels and types of 
challenges, challenges should be introduced in a way that 
give players the opportunity to study their behavior, as well 
as to provide an appropriate challenges to players skills, 
which can be seen in the second part of Bushnell theorem 
that addresses the idea of providing players with challenge 
that scales to the abilities of the player. Games motivate 
when they challenge players and, at the same time, maintain 
the “illusion of winnability” [15][54]. Also, increasing 
challenge keep players engaged, reducing the potential for 
students to become distracted, diminishing educational 
engagement [17]. 
• 
The game should have different level settings to 
challenge all types of players, (novice or expert 
players). 
• 
The challenge should be produced from the 
diversity of the game's tasks and from the difficulty 
of these tasks. 
• 
The game has to scaffold players’ skills and 
students’ knowledge. If the game is too difficult it is 
frustrating, if it is too easy, it is boring [42]. 
• 
Challenges and the level of difficulty should be 
matched to player experience in single-player 
games or multiplayer ones. 
• 
Challenges should be balanced the playful and 
educational aspect based on the player progress.  
This group aims to challenge players’ creativity, and their 
skills. Game challenges have always been a great way to 
give players’ brain a good work out. Challenges and 
mysteries are video gaming strategies to engage players and 
could help them enhance cognitive skills, preparing them for 
weightier game challenges. It thus affects such playability 
attributes 
as: 
Satisfaction, 
Motivation, 
Emotion, 
Supportability and Educability. 
Mavis Beacon [50] presents different tests and level of 
typing speed, each level has different challenges; Mavis 
Beacon will monitor players' progress as well as to introduce 
new challenges to help players continue improving their 
keyboarding skills. 
4) Feedback 
Players must be informed as to what they are achieving at 
the educational and playful levels during the game. Feedback 
needs to be frequent, clear, constructive and encouraging. 
Feedback also provides an opportunity to give explanatory 
information, metacognitive prompts, and clues to correct 
responses [68]. An appropriate feedback should be presented 
based on the player decision and performance, and should 
help players actually to learn and to reach educational and 
playful goals [20]. Players need to know how skills translate 
into strategies for playing the game [35]. This takes place 
through the game cycle and system feedback occurs by: 
• 
Feedback should be presented to the player after a 
number of failed attempts, and to help him to 
understand why he has failed.     
• 
The games should be able to stimulate the player to 
know more about the mechanism of the system by 
giving clear feedback. 
• 
Provide 
different 
type 
of 
feedback 
audio/visual/visceral 
(music, 
sound 
effects, 
controller vibration, etc).  
• 
Feedback should be immediate with the aim of 
achieving game goals. 
• 
Feedback must guide the player through the 
environment, emphasizing key points and offering 
assistance along the way. 
• 
Feedback should allow the player to monitor the 
mastery of skills or information. 
• 
A successful game must first familiarize the player 
with the complete educational task in order to begin 
the learning process. 
• 
Provide feedback message about all player actions, 
situations (level complete, game finished, etc.) and 
status (score list, winner, loser, etc.). 
Achieving the presented guidelines in this set will 
increase player enjoyment and will assist in overcoming all 
challenges and improving the game´s objective assimilation. 
These guidelines make the game attractive to a player, 
keeping him or her interested and motivated to develop skills 
to overcome the game steps and compete with other players. 
It thus affects such playability attributes as: Immersion, 
Satisfaction, Satisfaction and Educability. 
Lure of the Labyrinth [40] lacks a good and appropriate 
design of player feedback, when players make a mistake in a 
game, it just gets corrected for them without an explanation 

406
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
in hopes to help players, it did not tell them why so even 
though it corrected them. It gets way too frustrating. 
5) Interactivity 
It describes how to make the players feel that they are 
part of a creative and dynamic community, and how to create 
more powerful interactive experiences and engagement by 
streamlining players’ interaction and motivation during the 
game time. Swartout and van Lent [72] deemed that the best 
games are “highly interactive, deliberately generating tension 
between the degree of control the story imposes and the 
player’s freedom of interaction”. Thus, the playing 
experience can be boring and unchallenging in games with 
complete freedom of interaction, when the game progress 
requires too much control; the player becomes a passive 
observer rather than an active participant [47]. De Freitas 
[62] proposed that the interactivity of EVG involves 
applying changes on the game structure and the learning 
process, how games are designed, developed and used in 
practice upon the processes of learning and how learning 
activities are structured in practice. Thus, we propose the 
following guidelines: 
• 
Game should have clear and simple instructions and 
rules. 
• 
Game should respond in different ways to correct 
and incorrect actions (using sound, images, etc.). 
• 
Permit easy reversal of actions. If a player makes a 
silly mistake, allow the player to reverse the action, 
unless it would affect the game balance adversely. 
• 
Introduce elements of positive surprise or special 
events in strategic locations.  
• 
Introduce enjoyable activities that aren’t passive.  
• 
Educational elements should be related to the 
playful ones in the same video game frame. 
This group aims to produce interactive experience that 
motivate and actively engage players in the game process. 
Thus, players discover and reinforce their abilities and learn 
new skills with interactive and fun computer games, which 
will implicitly affect on the achievement of several 
playability attributes such as: Satisfaction, Learnability, 
Motivation, Immersion and Educability.  
The ReDistricting Game [70] was designed to educate 
citizens around the issue of political redistricting. It present a 
good level of interactivity, it provides many different ways to 
draw the district lines that meet the basic mission 
requirements. It provides an active process of discovering the 
rules of the game, combined with the ability to get feedback 
on the players’ map at any time allows the players to explore 
and try out strategies, slowly refining them as they learn 
more about the game.  
6) Adaptation 
Adaptation is a very important characteristic of EVGs. In 
adaptive games the level of difficulty increases or decreases 
depending on a player’s performance. When the games are 
adaptive they support learner preferences for different access 
pathways and allow the learner to find relevant information 
while at the same time remaining immersed in the game [16]. 
Adaptation shouldn’t be only as response to players’ action 
during the game time, but should play a crucial role in the 
success of the learning process by triggering the learning 
patterns. This means the learning outcome is related to player 
performance, so if a player finds a game difficult to play, he 
will leave it and the leaning process will fail [66]. Therefore, 
we present some guidelines that can be useful to adapt 
certain features to create a tailored experience for each 
player based on how they learn and why they play games. In 
the following we present some adaptation guidelines:        
• 
Game should be easy to modify and adapt 
(difficulty level, sound level, background music, 
control keys, etc.). 
• 
Educational content should consist of modules that 
are flexible enough to be readily utilized during the 
game time with minimal adaptation efforts. 
• 
Educational content should be able to cater to 
diverse learning styles and motivation. 
• 
Rationale for using a specific style of educational 
content should be determined by the needs of the 
players, game steps and game situation. 
• 
Game contents should be adapted to the individual 
pace of the player. 
• 
The player should not be overwhelmed by the 
information the game is provided. Provide ways to 
hierarchically compartmentalize information. 
Introducing this group of guidelines adapts the game 
content (playful and educational) to the individual pace of a 
player, relates the educational content to players’ needs, this 
gives players the opportunity to construct a personal profile, 
and encourages him or her to master the game and complete 
all steps of the newly customized environment. This will 
encourage the player to spend the maximum time playing, as 
well as to compete with other players. It thus affects such 
playability 
attributes 
as: 
Satisfaction, 
Motivation, 
Supportability, Socialization and Immersion. 
Mavis Beacon [50] provides many personalized lessons, 
exercises and tests. Many entertaining typing games, also it 
presents a detailed progress reports assist in identifying 
strengths and weaknesses. It provides different level to 
teaching all letters typing each level teaches some letter 
typing.  
7) Game Control 
Providing player with the ability to easily control; 
generates a sense of belonging in the game environment. 
Players should feel a sense of control over their actions in the 
game. In fact, control has been determined to be a deciding 
variable when motivation has been observed to increase over 
time for instructional games. A controllable environment 
allows players to build confidence and self-esteem, as well as 
to extend their potential and natural abilities, earlier and to 
further extents. Also, the level of control the players have in 
their interactions can develop a sense of ownership in the 
game environment [7][62]. Control is defined by the number 
of choices available to the learner, the presence of 
contingency, and a feeling of power given to the learner by 
allowing them to produce very different outcomes [46]. 
• 
The player is not required to learn new control 
techniques during the game. 

407
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
• 
The player should be the one in control. Players 
want to feel in charge of the game-at least in regard 
to control of their avatar. 
• 
The control should be intuitive and mapped to 
platform control.  
• 
Don't throw random uncontrollable events, or 
tedious or difficult input sequences. 
• 
The control over the program is very crucial: the 
interaction should determine how the learners 
observe and infer the rules of the system, which are 
also the subject matter. 
The role of this set is increase the player interactivity and 
integration with virtual game world. This group allows the 
player more control over the experience, and engages the 
competitive mind in a positive way, helps players to develop 
skills and reduce the margin of error, thus player will find the 
virtual world enjoyable. It thus affects such playability 
attributes as: Immersion, Emotion and Learnability. 
Storm Tracker [67] is a game that allows player to 
predict the path of a storm presenting a several options that 
support a player to domain the storm mechanism, players are 
actively in control and trial and error comes into play when 
the final storm prediction is made. Also, learning the storm´s 
terminology allows players a better understanding and 
controlling of what is going on during the game and it also 
helps game play move more smoothly. 
8) Ethics   
This group defines that the game content should be 
presented within an acceptable ethical framework which has 
no negative impact upon the user - How appropriate are the 
attitudes and beliefs embedded in a game? How appropriate 
are the implied social attitudes and beliefs, e.g., about 
violence, gender, race? [4]. EVG must act as a tool to 
motivate the player's understanding and awareness of the 
content presented, establishing some basic principles of the 
real world, such as competition and the ability to complete 
tasks. Several researches show that player feel more hostile 
after playing violent video games, especially games that 
simulate real-life situations. There is also evidence that 
playing violent games can make people behave more 
aggressively immediately afterwards. In the same time 
several researchers have mentioned that the violence in a 
video game motivates and engages players, and have 
considered violence as part of our real life, and thus a game 
will lose something of its realism by hiding the violent 
scenes [19][ 71].  
• 
Game should not teach anything that may result in 
dangerous situations in real-life. 
• 
Avoid content that has an impact on physical, 
mental or moral development (for example, 
inhuman and sexist content). 
• 
Avoid 
messages 
conveying 
content 
of 
an 
aggressively 
nationalistic, 
ethnocentric, 
xenophobic, racist or intolerant nature. 
• 
Emphasis on acquiring and maintaining competence 
during playing time.  
Introducing these guidelines and achieving them will 
develop a player’s skills and experience, in particular the 
social experience. In this way, correct and real information 
will be presented to the players, which help them to take the 
responsibility to discover and achieve the game content, and 
thus the player skills will be developed. It thus affects such 
playability attributes as: Motivation, Immersion and 
Educability. 
Storm Tracker game does not show the real world 
dangerous consequences or any other aspect of the storm that 
has negative effects on the player, i.e., dead bodies, etc. We 
suggest that a game will be better if it presents dead bodies 
as result of a storm, but these bodies shouldn´t cause to the 
players any visual damage. 
9) Realism 
Another advantage of EVG is that has the ability to 
simulate real-life situations in a way which can greatly 
facilitate the learning process. Crawford describes a 
computer game as “a closed formal system that represents a 
subset of reality” [15]. This means focusing more on the real 
life simulation part with rewards, customizations and clear 
objectives. Tashiro and Dunlap [31] have explored 
relationships between simulation realism and engagement in 
learning, they consider the impact of visual realism on 
learning engagement in educational games. Krcmar [41] says 
that as the games become more and more realistic, the 
positive and negative effects on children increase, because 
“Greater realism leads to greater immersion; greater 
immersion leads to greater effects”. Also, Wood [58] find 
Players rate realistic video games more favorably than 
unrealistic ones. 
• 
Make 
real-world 
situations 
and 
simulations 
available within the game.  
• 
Relate educational content to real-world simulation. 
• 
Real-world simulation should provide to help game 
contents to be achieved.  
• 
Make story realistic, presenting real sequence of 
events throughout the game. 
Realism is very associated with the playability attributes 
such as: Satisfaction, Immersion, Emotion, Motivation and 
Educability. Realism ensures the diversity of motivations 
and the accuracy of the information. Also, it motivates the 
players' understanding and awareness of the presented 
content, establishing some basic principles of the real world 
to activate their primer experience. 
Storm Tracker game is real world simulator, it is a very 
good teaching tool about hurricanes without being too 
graphic or visually overwhelming. Concepts are presented in 
a way that allows the player to see the real world aspects 
involved in hurricane storm tracking as well as to present 
realistic outcomes of these aspects. 
10) Game Reward 
Any activity that people enjoy doing has some kind of 
reward. Rewards it is a very important way to encourage 
players to perform better due to the bonuses and advantages. 
Currently, most digital games are designed so players must 
actively complete quests based on a reward system [56]. 
Moon [56] mentioned the role of reward to induce play, and 
presented a learning model for video game based on the 
reward system. Nielsen has presented the reward as an 

408
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
extrinsic motivation that players get a reward for engaging in 
an activity, and are not motivated by the activity by itself 
[63]. The intrinsic rewards arise from the process of learning 
or playing, and the extrinsic rewards arise from results 
(grades, points, winning, or approval) [9].Thus, connecting 
the reward system and player motivation to learning process 
will help each player to have a more optimal game 
experience. 
• 
The reward should be appropriate and important in 
motivating the player. 
• 
The reward should be appropriate to the current 
educational step or level. 
• 
The reward should be related to the player´s 
progress in achieving the educational content  
• 
The reward should be commensurate with the 
capabilities of the player.  
• 
The reward should be presented at an appropriate 
time to engage the player. 
• 
Rewards can be given several times during one 
game step if necessary. 
• 
Game should present a variety of rewards. 
Presenting this group of guidelines affects on the player 
participation during the entire playing time due it’s important 
to hold the player attention as well as to make games funny 
and delighting. The rewards guidelines motivate and 
encourage players to play and learn. Thus, by using this 
group we can improve the different playability attributes 
such 
as: 
Motivation, 
Immersion, 
Learnability, 
and 
Educability.   
Math Missions [49], the Amazing Arcade Adventure by 
Scholastic, players earn money for every correct answer. 
This money can be spent on buying arcades and they even 
get to run the arcade. These rewards are presented as a way 
to motivate the learning without really being related to the 
learning experience. 
11) Structuring 
This group is related to how the EVG content is 
presented in a way which motivates the player, and how to 
introduce challenges throughout each game level creating an 
imaginary learning space that is engaging and immersive. 
The structure of EVG should provide entertaining and 
interesting content, which should be suitable for players´ 
primer skills and knowledge. Also, game elements and 
content should be related and the match between them is a 
very important, where the aesthetic aspect of the game 
structure guides the player to achieve the game goals, while 
the learning design of games should make it possible to use 
them in a modular way and to organize content and sessions 
in such a manner as to emphasize this learning aspect 
(personal learning routes, “reassembling” of parts of the 
games into different training paths, etc.) [43]. 
• 
Ensure an aesthetic consistency between playful 
and educational elements, to guide the player 
through his or her tasks and objectives. 
• 
Each item has its activity that is easy to distinguish 
from the activity of other items. 
• 
Ensure that the player can quickly recognize the 
game environment structure without the need for 
additional help. 
• 
Design the interface to offer defined tasks. The 
sequences of actions the player is performing 
should be arranged into a conceptual group of 
smaller subtasks. Each task completion should be 
punctuated with an acknowledgment, so the player 
knows that his or her task has been completed. 
• 
Utilize game elements that can be easily and 
quickly understood without requiring any additional 
help. 
• 
Storyline and the interface elements should be 
appropriate.  
• 
Each player should be able to easily distinguish his 
or her items in multi-player environment. 
The set of guidelines is related to several playability 
attributes such as: Effectiveness, Motivation, Emotion and 
Supportability. A good game structure helps players interact 
in a simple way, and maintains the enjoyment and curiosity 
of players. This group provides the ability to control and 
master the game and successfully overcoming all challenges 
in order to reach the game objectives.  
WolfQuest [73] is an immersive 3D wildlife simulation 
game, Based on real topographic maps of Yellowstone Park 
and realistic graphics, which lets players join a wolf pack 
made up of friends in the multiplayer version or seek to 
perfect their hunting skills and build their own pack in the 
single player version. The presented design of this game is 
related to its story and totally captivates players during the 
playing time. The presented elements of each frame 
represent the required function as well as to be easy to 
understand and master. 
12) Player knowledge  
This can be defined as how to encourage and motivate 
players to activate and use their prior knowledge and skills, 
and intends to generate and improve the players experience 
by providing them with the new content during playing time. 
EVGs are collections of skills, knowledge, one advantage of 
the EVG is its ability to build on or to improve the player’s 
current skills, which arises from the pleasure of mastering a 
new topic or content being learned, and the curiosity about 
the subject matter. Thus, a way to build the player 
knowledge is to engage in the game virtual world during 
game play [18]. Also, this group emphasizes that the quality 
of the presented content should be correct and effective. 
Prensky [45] explained how young people can create their 
knowledge in practice “the kids who play today’s ‘complex’ 
video games… learn to think: through experimentation and 
what real scientists call 'enlightened trial and error,' they 
learn to understand and manipulate highly complicated 
systems”. Prensky understood that “in order to ‘beat’ their 
complex games kids must learn, through complex reasoning, 
to create strategies for overcoming obstacles and being 
successful – skills that are immediately generizable”. Thus, 
video games encourage players to achieve mastery to 
challenge, forcing people to adapt and devolve their thinking 
and strategy. 

409
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
• 
Use the previous experience of players rather than 
oblige them to learn new knowledge.  
• 
Give the player the opportunity to relate his or her 
knowledge to real life situations within the game 
environment. 
• 
Each game level should add something new to a 
player’s knowledge. 
• 
The player should be encouraged to reflect upon the 
newly acquired information and integrate it into his 
or her existing body of knowledge. 
These guidelines ensure that the player’s skills and 
knowledge is increased and his or her ability to achieve the 
game goal is improved. These guidelines can increase player 
confidence during the game, and increase his or her ability to 
compete with other players. The emphasis on real knowledge 
in these guidelines will encourage the player to concentrate 
on achieving the game goals. It thus affects such playability 
attributes as: Learnability, Educability, Supportability, 
Emotion, Motivation and Socialization.  
A Branches of Power [11] game immerses students in the 
workings of the three branches of government. The player 
has to think critically about the decisions he/she is making 
about what to put in bills and whether they are popular and 
constitutional or not. Thus, the presented content is definitely 
not passive learning. During the playing time player has to 
learn basic ideas and words about what it takes for an issue 
to move from an idea into a law. Players have to make 
choices and decisions about what values they take on and 
what ideas to put into bills, they must think about those same 
things and how they affect the real world. Thus, players must 
use their experience about the game content as well as to use 
the presented content to make their decisions. 
B. Design Pattern for Educational Video Game 
To achieve learning and entertainment in a gaming 
environment, we have presented an integrated set of patterns 
must be suggested to support the player experiences based on 
the playability attributes in EVGs [1][3].  
The proposed patterns are documented in a standard 
format, as solutions to common design problems. We use 
patterns as a tool for problem-solving, to support creative 
and effective design, to build a repository of knowledge and 
encourage reuse of best practices, and as a way to share 
designers’ experience. By using the patterns described in this 
section, it should be possible to develop a structure that helps 
build both entertaining and productive educational video 
games.  
To facilitate the development and use of EVG patterns, 
we have developed a template based on the proposed 
elements by Christopher Alexander [12], our template 
consists of the following main elements: Name, Problem, 
Description, solution, Playability Elements Affected, and 
Elements of the Game Affected. Also, we have classified the 
patterns in relation to “Educational Playability.” In this way, 
we associate the proposed patterns with the situations and the 
game elements which are closed to the player’s experience 
during the game. We believe that this aspect is most 
important to develop effective and motivating learning 
games. In this context, we have classified the proposed 
patterns within a flexible interactive structure based on 
playability attributes and related to all aspects of EVGs 
(Table I), as follows: 
1) Interactive Integration: describes those patterns that 
focus on EVGs as a combination of fun and educational 
elements. It presents the structure of EVG objects, where 
educational and fun aspects are given more emphasis than in 
other types of games. 
2) Active Support: describes those patterns that help and 
support players to understand what they are doing and 
learning during the game’s progress. This discourages the 
player from stopping the game, and encourages him or her 
to think about the decisions, actions or strategies that must 
be taken in the next step. 
3) Knowledge Realism: describes those patterns that 
ensure the quality of the EVG content, by presenting 
accurate knowledge related to the real world. This gives the 
user confidence as it enables him or her to check the 
accuracy of obtained information. 
TABLE I.  
PLAYABILITY DESIGN PATTERNS TAXONOMY 
Taxonomy 
Pattern Problems 
Patterns 
EVG Elements 
Interactive 
integration  
Create an EVG in which all fun and educational aspects are included, 
Present the educational content indirectly, 
Produce a appropriate player interface,  
Generate a good player experience. 
Balanced EVG, 
Interface Structure, 
Adaptive Content  
Tasks, Disposition, 
Objective, Challenges. 
Active support 
Feedback, Keep the player informed about his or her status, Present the 
necessary information to support the game progress.  
Incentives to reward players  
Related Support, 
Reward 
Feedback, Score, 
Active Reward. 
Knowledge 
realism 
Give players new, correct knowledge, 
Effect of game reality on player experience. 
Knowledge Correctness, 
Game Reality 
Reward, 
Realism, 
Challenges, Rules. 
Beneficial play 
Use game activities to teach,  
Keep player motivated during playing time and progress in the game. 
Incremental Learn, 
Motivated Play 
Reward, Challenges. 
Knowledge 
Growth 
Support players to become aware of and to obtain new knowledge.  
Improve player experience and awareness. 
Skills Improvement, 
Embedded Learning  
Challenges, Feedback. 
Social awareness   
Use social aspect to improve player experience. 
Shared Experience 
Group challenges, 
Dependence 
among 
members. 

410
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
4) Beneficial Play: describes those patterns that provide 
players with incentives (reward, fun, pleasure) to encourage 
them to advance in the game, and consequently, in their 
knowledge and skill acquisition.  
5) Knowledge Growth: describes those patterns that focus 
on the use of EVGs to give players new knowledge and 
skills, and to improve and develop previous knowledge.  
6) Social Awareness: describes those patterns that present 
and use the social features of EVGs to facilitate learning or 
teaching through social activities and their role in 
strengthening the player experience. 
The previous table (Table I) presents the proposed 
taxonomy of design patterns, the common problems, the 
suggested solutions in each group, and EVG elements which 
are related to the discussed problem [1]. 
In the following we will present a brief description of the 
presented design patterns:  
“Balanced EVG”: describe how to create a game in which all 
fun and educational aspects are included.  
“Interface Structure”: present solution to produce an 
appropriate and attractive player interface.  
“Adaptive Content”: shows how the EVG actively should 
provide players with the proposed content.  
“Related Support”: describe how the EVG helps the player’s 
progress in the virtual game world.  
“Reward”: describe how the EVG provides players with 
incentives that encourage them to explore the game world. 
“Knowledge Correctness”: show how to give player new, 
correct knowledge during playing time.  
“Game Reality”: present how the useful aspects of game 
realism can be used and managed to improve player 
experience. 
 “Incremental Learn”: focus on the EVGs ability to increase 
the player’s desire to achieve the educational content. 
“Motivated Play”: presents solution to keep players 
motivated to play and achieve the EVG contents. 
“Skills Improvement”: support the player to become aware 
of new game knowledge and obtain it.  
“Embedded Learning”: shows how the educational content 
of an EVG can be presented throughout the game.  
“Shared Experience”: present how the social characteristics 
of EVGs can affect the Player Experience. 
C. Patterns and Guidelines. The Interrelated Objectives 
and Role 
All the presented design patterns and guideline have built 
based on educational playability and the optimal player 
experience, taking the educators view point into account to 
ensure the educational content integration, and the 
educational objectives achievement. For example we have 
proposed a set of guidelines to design a balanced educational 
video game this guidelines aims to help designers to create 
active game from a both educational and playful standpoints. 
In the same time, we have presented a new pattern to treat 
with the problem of an imbalanced EVG, and thus this 
pattern provides some ways to avoid this problem during the 
design phase. As we have mentioned above in Section 4.1 
and Section 4.2, this pattern and the related set of guidelines 
affect 
on 
some 
playability 
attribute 
as 
education, 
effectiveness, motivation. Accordingly, ensuring a high level 
of playability during the game design will ensure us a good 
player-centered design.  
In the same way, Player Knowledge guidelines have been 
presented with the aim of using game contents to build or 
develop the player experience, which has been supported by 
several design patterns, Skill Improvement, Knowledge 
Correctness 
and 
Embedded 
Learning, 
where 
Skill 
Improvement and Embedded Learning introduce solution to 
player previous skills and knowledge development, while 
Knowledge Correctness ensure the quality of the player new 
knowledge. Thus, these three patterns have complementary 
role to the Player Knowledge guidelines. In other words, 
these patterns provide solutions to some problems that could 
face players during the playing times.  Achieving this group 
ensures that the player’s skill and knowledge is increased 
and his or her ability to achieve the game goal improved, and 
thus they promote the following playability attributes:  
Supportability, Educative, Effectiveness, and Immersion.  
Other example of the integrated role of guidelines and 
design patterns is Adaptation guidelines that aim to provide 
the game content complexity and challenges based on the 
level of knowledge that a player has. This set of guidelines is 
supported by Adaptive Content design pattern, which 
provide an active way to provide the different levels of 
difficulty of the game content based on the player 
performance, in order to keep the player motivated and 
encouraged to play. This is related to several playability 
attributes Satisfaction, Motivation and Immersion, and 
affects on the Education attributes. 
 
V. 
PLAYER CENTERED DESIGN PROPOSAL FOR 
EDUCATIONAL VIDEO GAME 
To ensure that the proposed design is player centered, we 
need a playable prototype, which will be tested with the set 
of players and educators to get the final educational video 
game. In educational video game prototypes have three 
purposes, the first is to define how they video game will 
work from the player interface perspective; the second how 
the video game content will integrate from the educators 
perspective; the third is to test on real players. 
To create an educational video game that has the ability 
to provide what has been presented in the design phase we 
need an iterative and incremental development process, and 
thus, any iteration provides the possibility to reveal errors 
and omissions in the requirements, and to evaluate the 
proposed design, which help game designers and developers 
to build gradually an effective and high quality game design. 
The evaluation during any iteration gives game designers an 
imagination of the uncompleted objectives based on 
evaluation of the playability requirements, as well as to 
inform designers to develop or to change the applied 
guidelines and the patterns solution to complete the new 
players´ requirements and suggestions for improvements for 
the game that result during the evaluation step.  
At the fist iterations we suggest the use of low fidelity 
prototypes that it can be produced quickly and does not 

411
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
require much development effort, low fidelity prototype 
helps to start the design process immediately, to do quickly 
the design change, and designers’ decisions are validated 
with players. However, players could find it difficult to take 
that leap from the somewhat abstract to the real thing. On the 
other hand, high fidelity prototype can be used after an 
acceptable level of designers satisfaction, high fidelity are 
easy to comprehend by the end user but may require a lot of 
costly development effort.  
As the current market has a different players´ profiles 
that means the team of players would change their 
requirements many times with the progression of the game 
development process, this involves creating a several 
playable prototypes during the successive iteration in a short 
time, which should realize the new requirements of players, 
and thus we suggest the use of the low fidelity to keep the 
programmers efforts during these first iterations. The result 
of these iterations creates an acceptable game to players, and 
thus we can give game programmer an acceptable level of 
the game requirements to create a playable version as high 
fidelity prototype. 
In this paper, we propose a brief description of a Player-
Centered Video Game Development Approach, which 
includes the proposed design techniques and prototype. Our 
approach aims to introduce a player from the earliest phases 
of game development cycle, as well as to use the principles 
of Playability in EVG throughout the different phases of 
development in order to achieve a high level of quality in 
Playability, in the same way as with traditional desktop 
systems.  
A. Analysis 
Our approach should start with a game specification that 
includes the requirements of playability deduced from 
reference to the facets of playability, analyzing which 
attribute is affected by which specific video game elements 
[1].  
B. Design 
In the EVG design phase we have proposed the use of 
design patterns that support an EVG design and analysis, 
which are player centered; we mean game design and 
analysis that place PX first and foremost. We need design 
patterns that take into account the need to promote and 
maintain the playability of EVG at the game process. In 
addition, we focus on the guidelines for EVG design, which 
provide information on good practice and form a basis for 
evaluating the EVG quality, acting as useful tools to enhance 
videogame playability. Guidelines will be also necessary in 
order to design appropriate and playable elements according 
to the context of the game or player profiles.  
C. Prototype  
In this phase, we emphasize the design needs to 
prototype and to test with real users. It is therefore important 
to design and develop playable prototypes, and then will be 
tested to support the adaptation and refinement of the game 
with all the players as participants. Thus, we can get the 
playable elements.  
D. Evaluation  
Our approach emphasizes the use of playability test 
during all the development process phases to ensure the 
quality of playability in the final EVG. It is therefore 
important to evaluate PX in EVG based on the evaluation of 
playability. This will enhance the overall game experience 
by summing all values of PX across all playability attributes, 
as well as to determine which video game elements have 
more influence on the final experience throughout the 
development process. Thus, we will propose a specific 
heuristics for EVG, which will also help to decide if 
playability guidelines and playability design patterns are 
effective, as well as to cover all aspects of PX. Using Facets 
of Playability also helps to check Playability properties in the 
different phases.  
Table II shows the different phases of our proposal for 
EVG development based on educational playability (see 
Figure 1). 
TABLE II.  
PLAYABILITY DEVELOPMENT PHASES 
Development Phases 
Main Objective 
Importance 
Analyze 
Understand the player’s goals of playing an 
EVG to determine playability requirements.  
Include playability tasks in the project plan that have the educational and 
playful aspects, Create player profiles, Develop a task analysis, Document 
player scenarios, Document player performance requirements. 
Design 
Achieving the proposed design based on the 
generated playability requirements. 
(Playability guidelines and playability design 
patterns).  
Achieve the players’ needs and requirements, Understanding the lack points and 
problems of players, and fix the problems and do walkthroughs of design 
concepts. 
Prototype 
Design and develop a playable prototype.  
Present the designers´ understanding of players’ requirements, and the used 
design techniques.  
Evaluation 
Evaluating playable EVG by using playability 
characterization. (Playability evaluation , 
Playability Heuristics)  
EVG to be compelling and engaging, evaluation tests if playability 
characterization and playability requirements carried out, to ensure the success 
of the EVG to much extent. 

412
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 1.  Playability Development Process. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Designing and building process of an EVG is far from 
being a simple task due to the lack of methodologies that 
provide the necessary constructs and support for the 
different design tasks. During our research, we have 
perceived the need for a unified vocabulary and common 
concepts regarding EVGs and game design. Game design 
patterns and guidelines are powerful tools that can be used 
to build a real gaming future, by providing utility, 
flexibility and scalability of the video game design. 
EVGs have the potential to offer real content (playful 
and educational) in an enjoyable way, which enjoy and 
build the PX throughout the game progress. The use of 
certain norms and standards are vital for an EVG to be 
effective. Guidelines and patterns are presented as certain 
parameters that make the games apt and useful for their 
players. Guidelines are a part of game aspects and, in order 
to be successful, a game must achieve them without losing 
the playability. Patterns also play a powerful role in 
constructing and improving the PX by analyzing the 
exiting game design problems, as well as to be effective to 
resolve these problems. In this paper, we have proposed 
some patterns and guidelines; we believe there are many 
more waiting to be formalized and many more to discover. 
Currently, we are working to develop our approach of 
playability evaluation in order to build a complete 
catalogue of playability problems, and to develop an 
extended set of heuristics taking into account the different 
profiles of evaluators (educators, game designers, etc.). 
Also, we are working to develop the evaluation approach 
to be useful to filter the largest number of potential 
playability issues before making a test with users.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is financed by the Ministry of Science & 
Innovation, Spain, as part of VIDECO Project (TIN2011-
26928) and the FPU program. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Ibrahim, F.L. Gutiérrez, J.L. González Sánchez, and N. 
Padilla Zea, “Educational Playability Analyzing Player 
Experiences in Educational Video Game”, Proc. the Fifth 
International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human 
Interactions (ACHI 2012), Jan. 2012a, pp. 326-335. 
[2] A. Ibrahim, F.L. Gutiérrez, J.L. González Sánchez, and N. 
Padilla Zea, “Playability Design Pattern in Educational 
Video Game”, In González, C.S. (Ed.), Student Usability in 
Educational Software and Games: Improving Experiences. 
Hershey, USA: IGI Global, 2012 b. 
[3] A. Ibrahim, F.L. Gutiérrez, J.L. González Sánchez, and N. 
Padilla Zea, “Playability Design Pattern in Educational 
Video Game”, Proc. 5th European Conference on Games 
Based Learning (ECGBL 2011), Oct. 2011. 
[4] A. Ireland, D. Kaufman, “Computer-Based Games for 
Learning”, In S. Hirtz, D.G. Harper, and S. Mackenzie 

413
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
(Eds.), Education for a Digital World: Advice, Guidelines, 
and Effective Practice from Around the Globe. Vancouver, 
BC: BCcampus and Commonwealth of Learning, 2008. 
[5] A. Rollings, E. Adams, “Andrew Rollings and Ernest 
Adams on game design (1st ed.)”, Indianapolis, Ind.: New 
Riders, 2003. 
[6] A. Tychsen, “Crafting User Experience via Game Metrics 
Analysis”, Proc. the Workshop "Research Goals and 
Strategies for Studying User Experience and Emotion" at 
the 5th Nordic Conference on Human-computer interaction: 
building bridges (NordiCHI), 2008. 
[7] A.C. Siang and G.S.V.R.K. Rao, “E-Learning as computer 
games: Designing immersive and experiential learning” 
Advances in Multimedia Information Processing (PCM 
2004) Pt 2 Proc, vol. 3332, 2004, pp.: 633-640 
[8] B. Kreimeier. The Case for Game Design Patterns, 2002. 
http://www.gamasutra.com/features/20020313/kreimeier_0
1.htm (accessed on 30/11/12). 
[9] B. Magerko, C. Heeter, J. Fitzgerald and B. Medler, 
“Intelligent adaptation of digital game-based learning”, 
Proc. Conference on Future Play Research Play Share 
Future Play 08 (p. 200). ACM Press, 2008. 
[10] B.W.R. Penuel, S. Pasnik, L. Bates, E. Townsend, L.P. 
Gallagher, C. Llorente, and N. Hupert, “Preschool Teachers 
Can Use a Media-Rich Curriculum to Prepare Low-Income 
Children for School Success: Results of a Randomized 
Controlled Trial” Education. Education Development 
Center, Inc. and SRI International, 2009. 
[11] Branches 
of 
Power 
http://www.annenbergclassroom.org/page/branches-of-
power. (accessed on 30/11/12). 
[12] C. Aldrich, Simulations and the future of learning; An 
Innovative (and Perhaps Revolutionary) Approach to e-
Learning. Pfeiffer, San Francisco, 2003.  
[13] C. Alexander, H. Davis, J. Martinez, and D. Corner, The 
Production of Houses. New York, Oxford University Press, 
1985. 
[14] C. Clanton, “An Interpreted Demonstration of Computer 
Game Design”, Proc. conference summary on Human 
factors in computing systems (CHI 98), 1998. 
[15] C. Crawford, The Art of Computer Game Design. 
Berkeley, CA: Osborne/ McGraw-Hill, 1984. 
[16] C. N. Quinn, “Pragmatic Evaluation: Lessons from 
Usability”, 13th Annual Conference of the Australasian 
Society or Computers in Learning in Tertiary Education, 
Adelaide, 1996. 
[17] C. 
Shuler, 
“Pockets 
of 
Potential: 
Using 
Mobile 
Technologies to Promote Children’s Learning”, New York: 
The Joan Ganz Cooney Center at Sesame Workshop, 2009. 
[18] C.J. Bonk and V.P. Dennen, “Massive multiplayer online 
gaming: A research framework for military education and 
training”, Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Defense 
(DUSD/R): 
Advanced 
Distributed 
Learning 
(ADL) 
Initiative. 
 
2005. 
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.1
53.9995&rep=rep1&type=pdf. (accessed on 30/11/12). 
[19] C.P. Barlett and C. Rodeheffer, “Effects of realism on 
extended violent and nonviolent video game play on 
aggressive thoughts, feelings, and physiological arousal”, 
Aggressive Behavior, John Wiley & Sons, vol. 35(3), 2009, 
pp. 213-224. 
[20] D. Burgos, “Game-Based Learning and the Role of 
Feedback: a Case Study”, Advanced Technology for 
Learning, vol. 4(4), 2007. 
[21] D. Church, “Formal Abstract Design Tools” Game 
Developer, 
vol. 
3(8), 
WIT 
Press. 
1999. 
http://www1.cs.columbia.edu/~cs4995/files/Doug_Church_
FADT.pdf. (accessed on 30/11/12). 
[22] D. Norman, Things that make us smarter:Defending Human 
attributes in the age of the machine. New York, Addison –
Wesley, 1993. 
[23] E. L.C. Law, M. Kickmeier, D. Albert and A. Holzinger, 
“Challenges in the Development and Evaluation of 
Immersive Digital Educational Games”, (A. Holzinger, 
Ed.)Learning, IEEE, vol.  5298, 2008, pp. 19-30.  
[24] E. Rosenzweig, “Design Guidelines for Software Products: 
A Common Look and Feel or a Fantasy?”, ACM 
Interactions, vol. 3(5), 1996. 
[25] H. Barwood and N. Falstein, "Better By Design: The 400 
Project". Game Developer magazine, vol. 9 (3), March 
2002, p. 26.  
[26] H. Desurvire, M. Caplan and J.A. Toth, “Using Heuristics 
to Evaluate the Playability of Games”, Proc. the 
Conference on (CHI 2004), 2004. 
[27] H. Korhonen, E.M.I. Koivisto, “Playability Heuristics for 
Mobile Games”, Proc. MobileHCI’06, 2006. 
[28] H. MacLeod, J. Haywood, D. Haywood, and F. Littleton, 
“Choosing and Using a Learning Game in Guidelines for 
Game-Based Learning”. In Pivec, M., Koubek, A. and 
Dondi, C. (Ed.), Guidelines for Game-Based Learning. 
Lengerich, Germany: PABST Science Publishing, 2004. 
[29] J. Kasvi, Not Just Fun and Games – Internet Games as a 
Training Medium. Cosiga – Learning with Computerised 
Simulation Games, 2000. 
[30] J. Schell, The Art of Game Design: A Book of Lenses. 
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Burlington, 2008. 
[31] J. Tashiro, and D. Dunlap,”The Impact of Realism on 
Learning Engagement in Educational Games”. Proc. of 
Future Play, 2007.  
[32] J. Vanderdonckt, C. Mariage, D. Scapin, C. Leulier, C. 
Bastien, C. Farenc, P. Palanque, and R. Bastide, “A 
Framework for Organizing Web Usability Guidelines”, 
Proc. 6th Conference on Human Factors and the Web, 
Texas, 2000. 
[33] J.L. González Sánchez, N. Padilla Zea and Gutiérrez, F.L., 
Playability: How to Identify the Player Experience in a 
Video Game. Proc. 12th IFIP TC13 Conference on Human-
Computer Interaction (INTERACT2009), 2009, pp. 356-
359. 
[34] J.L.González Sánchez, Jugabilidad y Videojuegos. Análisis 
y Diseño de la Experiencia del Jugador en Sistemas 
Interactivos de Ocio Electrónico (Playability and Video 
Games. Analysis and Design of User Experience on 
Interactive and Entertainment Systems). Ed. Académica 
Española, Lambert Academic Publishing GmbH & Co KG, 
2011. 
[35] J.P. Gee, “Learning by design: Good Video Games as 
Learning Machines”, E-Learning and Digital Media, vol. 
2(1), 2005. 
[36] K. Kiili, “Call for learning-game design patterns”, In F. 
Edvardsen and H. Kulle (Eds.), Educational Games: 
Design, Learning, and Applications, Nova Publishers, 
2010, pp. 299-311. 
[37] K. Squire, H. Jenkins and the Games-To-Teach Team, 
“Designing Educational Games: Design Principles From 
the Games-to-Teach Project”, Educational Technology, 
2003. 
[38] L. Manovich, The language of new media. MA and 
London: The MIT Press, Cambridge, 2001. 
[39] L. Pereira and L. Roque, “Design Guidelines for Learning 
Games: the Living Forest Game Design Case”. Proc. the 
DIGRA2009 - Breaking New Ground: Innovation in 
Games, Play, Practice and Theory. West London. 2009. 

414
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
[40] Lure of the Labyrinth, http://labyrinth.thinkport.org. 
(accessed on 30/11/12).  
[41] M. Krcmar, K. Farrar, and R. McGloin, “The effects of 
video game realism on attention, retention and aggressive 
outcomes”, Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 27(1), 
2010, pp. 432-439. 
[42] M. Pivec and P. Kearney, “Designing and Implementing a 
Game in an Educational Context in Guidelines for Game-
Based Learning” In Pivec, M., Koubek, A. and Dondi, C. 
(Ed.), Guidelines for Game-Based Learning. Lengerich, 
Germany: PABST Science Publishing, 2008. 
[43] M. Pivec, A. Koubek and C. Dondi, Guidelines for Game-
Based Learning, Lengerich, Germany: PABST Science 
Publishing, 2004. 
[44] M. Prensky, Digital Game-based Learning. New York, 
McGraw-Hill, 2001. 
[45] M. Prensky, Don't bother me Mom-I'm learning. 
Minneapolis: Paragon House Publishers. 2006. 
[46] M. Westrom, A. Shaban, “Intrinsic Motivation in 
Microcomputer 
Games”, 
Journal 
of 
Research 
on 
Computing in Education, vol. 24(4), 1992, pp. 433-446. 
[47] M.J. Dondlinger, “Educational Video Game Design: A 
Review of the Literature”, Journal of Applied Educational 
Technology, vol. 4 (1), 2007, pp. 21-31. 
[48] M.K. Moon, S.G. Jahng, and T.Y. Kim, “A computer-
assisted learning model based on the digital game 
exponential reward system”, Turkish Online Journal of 
Educational Technology, vol. 10(1), 2011, pp. 1-14. 
[49] Math 
Missions 
http://www.superkids.com/aweb/pages/reviews/math/03/arc
ade35/merge.shtml. (accessed on 30/11/12). 
[50] Mavis Beacon, http://www.mavisbeacon.com. (accessed on 
30/11/12). 
[51] N. Falstein, “Better by design: The 400 project”, Game 
Developer Magazine, Vol. 9(3), p. 26, 2002. 
[52] N. Padilla Zea, J.L. González Sánchez, F. L. Gutiérrez, M. 
J. Cabrera, and Paderewski, P. “Design of educational 
multiplayer videogames: A vision from collaborative 
learning”, Advances in Engineering Software, Elsevier Ltd. 
Vol. 40(12), 2009, pp. 1251-1260.  
[53] N. Padilla Zea, Methodology for the Design of Educational 
Video Games on Architecture for the Analysis of 
Collaborative Learning. Doctoral dissertation, Granada 
University, 2011. 
[54] N. Whitton, “Encouraging Engagement in Game-Based 
Learning”, International Journal of Game-Based Learning 
(IJGBL2011), vol. 1(1), 2011, pp.75-84. 
[55] N. Whitton, “Motivation and computer game based 
learning” (R. J. Atkinson, C. McBeath, S. K. A. Soong, and 
C. Cheers, Eds.) Proc. ASCILITE Singapore, Citeseerx, 
vol.10, 2007, pp. 1063-1067. 
[56] R. Koster, Theory of Fun for Game Design. Paraglyph 
Press, 2004. 
[57] R.E. Mayer and R.C. Clark, E-learning and the Science of 
Instruction: Proven Guidelines for Consumers and 
Designers of Multimedia Learning, San Francisco, US: 
Pfeiffer, 2003. 
[58] R.T. Wood, M.D. Griffiths and V. Eatough, Online data 
collection from video game players: Methodological issues. 
CyberPsychology and Behavior, vol. 7(5), 2004, pp. 511-
518. 
[59] Research-Based Web Design & Usability Guidelines. 
http://www.usability.gov/pdfs/foreword.pdf. (accessed on 
30/11/12). 
[60] S. Barab, M. Thomas, T. Dodge, R. Carteaux, and H. 
Tuzun. Making learning fun: Quest Atlantis, a game 
without guns. Educational Technology Research and 
Development, vol. 53, 2005, pp. 86-107. 
[61] S. Björk and J. Holopainen, Patterns in Game Design. 
Charles River Media, 2004. 
[62] S. De Freitas, “Learning in Immersive worlds: A review of 
game-based learning”, JISC eLearning Innovation. 2006. 
http://www.jisc.ac.uk/media/documents/programmes/elearn
inginnovation/gamingreport_v3.pdf. 
(accessed 
on 
30/11/12). 
[63] S. 
Egenfeldt-Nielsen, 
“Making 
Sweet 
Music: 
The 
Educational 
Use 
of 
Computer 
Games”, 
2009. 
http://www.egenfeldt.eu/papers/sweet_music.pdf. (accessed 
on 30/11/12). 
[64] S. Egenfeldt-Nielsen, What Makes a Good Learning Game? 
Going 
Beyond 
Edutainment. 
2011. 
http://elearnmag.acm.org/featured.cfm?aid=1943210. 
(accessed on 30/11/12). 
[65] S. Rogers, Level Up!: The Guide to Great Video Game 
Design. John Wiley & Sons Publisher, New York, 2010. 
[66] S.Thomas, G. Schott and M. Kambouri, “Designing for 
learning or designing for fun? Setting usability guidelines 
for mobile educational games”, MLEARN 2003 Learning 
with Mobile Devices, Learning and Skills Development 
Agency, 2004, pp. 173-181.  
[67] Storm 
Tracker 
http://gamingandlearning.wikispaces.com/Storm+Tracker. 
(accessed on 30/11/12). 
[68] T. W. Malone and M.R. Lepper, “Making learning fun: A 
taxonomy of intrinsic motivations for Learning”. In R. E. 
Snow and M. J. Farr (Eds.), Aptitude, learning and 
instruction: Cognitive and affective process analyses. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, vol. 3, 1987, 
pp. 223-253. 
[69] T. W. Malone, “Toward a theory of intrinsically motivating 
instruction”, Cognitive Science, vol. 4, 1981, pp. 333-369. 
[70] The 
ReDistricting 
Game, 
http://www.gamesforchange.org/play/the-redistricting-
game/. (accessed on 30/11/12).  
[71] W. Bösche, F. Kattner, “Fear of (Serious) Digital Games 
and Game-Based Learning?: Causes, Consequences and a 
Possible Countermeasure” International Journal of Game-
Based Learning (IJGBL), vol. 1(3), 2011, pp. 1-15. 
[72] W. Swartout, and M. Van Lent, “Making a game of system 
design”, Communications of the ACM, vol.  46(7), 2003, 
32-39. 
[73] WolfQuest. 
http://www.wolfquest.org/. 
(accessed 
on 
30/11/12). 
 

