Digital Transformation of Education Credential Processes and Life Cycles —
A Framework of Research Questions Based on the Main Challenges
Ingo R. Keck
Scientiﬁc Data Management
TIB Leibniz Information Centre
for Science and Technology
Hannover, Germany
Email: Ingo.Keck@tib.eu
Maria-Esther Vidal
Scientiﬁc Data Management
TIB Leibniz Information Centre
for Science and Technology
Hannover, Germany
Email: Maria.Vidal@tib.eu
Lambert Heller
Open Science Lab
TIB Leibniz Information Centre
for Science and Technology
Hannover, Germany
Email: Lambert.Heller@tib.eu
Abstract—This article describes the challenges that arise in the
using and managing education credentials, and from the switch
from analogue paper-based education credentials to digital edu-
cation credentials. We analyse the available literature and notice
that this transformation—from paper to digital for education
credentials—has not been the focus of research so far. Using
an approach based on the use cases and identiﬁed challenges, we
propose a general methodology to capture qualitative descriptions
and measurable quantitative results that estimate the effectiveness
of a digital credential management system in solving these
challenges. This methodology is applied to the European Union
Horizon 2020 project QualiChain use case, where ﬁve pilots have
been selected to study a broad ﬁeld of digital credential workﬂows
and credential management. It can form the basis of a future
framework that will capture the whole life cycle of educational
credentials, from creation, storage, management, access control,
till it expires or is retracted.
Keywords–Credentials;
Education
credentials;
Digitisation;
Challenges in digitisation; Digital Badges.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Education and academic credentials are an essential part
of our modern life. Pupils ﬁnalise schools with a set of marks
certiﬁed on their ﬁnal school report. Then, based on these
results, they can apply for acceptance at higher education
institutes or apprenticeship. Students and employees continue
to collect credentials at university, at work, or via other
education ways. Even today, when digitisation has entered
into almost every part of our lives, education credentials are
still often printed and written on paper. A transformation to
digital workﬂows seems desirable to take advantage of the
additional possibilities of digital certiﬁcates. However, such a
transition is not without challenges. In [1], we ﬁrst looked at
these challenges and presented a proposal for a framework to
evaluate credential management systems that support digital
credentials transformation. This article now builds on and
extends [1] by adding to the initial reasoning and providing
an overview of related works.
Paper-based credentials show several problems in practice.
For example, when applying for a job position, the handling of
paper based credentials is tiresome for the applicant and even
more so for the company that offers the position. Indeed, most
companies nowadays require scans of the paper credentials,
and will only check the validity of the originals once the
candidate for the position has been selected, to avoid the
manual labour involved. Additionally, surveys show that lying
about education and employment credentials is a common
problem. According to a survey by CareerBuilder [2], 58% of
employers have caught a lie on a resume. Similar ﬁndings arise
from another recent survey by StatisticBrain [3], which reports
that over half of resumes and job applications (53%) contain
falsiﬁcations and over three quarters (78%) are misleading.
Digitisation of education credentials has the potential to make
credential handling both easier and more secure. Nevertheless,
it is important to ask the correct questions to be able to
investigate how well a solution performs in the implementation
and management of digital education credentials.
Everhart et al. deﬁne in [4] important key terms and
concepts regarding digital badges, that we believe can be
extended to credentials in general:
• Authentication: Certiﬁes that a credential is authentic, i.e.,
has been awarded according to the standards referred to
by the credential.
• Authorisation: The issuer of a credential has the power
to issue the credential. This power can be certiﬁed by
a trusted third party, usually the government where the
issuer is based, or a well trusted public organisation.
• Endorsement: Other parties can endorse a credential, i.e.,
signing the credential, conﬁrming its validity and thus
adding trust to the content of the credential.
• Validation: Validation refers to the value a credential
holds in the education ecosystem, i.e., how do the con-
sumers of the credential interpret its value?
• Veriﬁcation: Veriﬁcation tests if the credential is genuine
and has not been falsiﬁed.
As Room notes in [5], setting the standards in education,
and thus, deﬁning each credential’s value, is a social policy
issue and decided on a political level. Technology cannot be
used solely to solve this problem. However, the combination of
easily accessible background information as open data about
the educational standards references in a credential, together
with semantic information in digital credentials that make the
access to this information accessible and immediate, can sig-
niﬁcantly increase the transparency in this ﬁeld. This also has
the potential to facilitate the labour intense practice of cross-
country credential equivalence estimations, up to the point
where this could be done automatically, once the background
information supplies enough detail.
204
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Looking at frameworks to measure digitisation in the
economy, it appears that credentials have not been in focus
so far. In [6], Kotarba gives an overview of standard digital
economy metrics like the Digital Density Index (DDI) by
Oxford Economics and Accenture, the Digital Economy and
Society Index (DESI) by the EU commission, and Digital So-
ciety Metrics as part of OECD’s digital economy measurement
system. None of them refer to credential management as far
as we can see.
The main contribution in this article is to present the main
challenges encountered in education credential management
and usage, and the changes from analogue to digital credential
workﬂows. We propose speciﬁc questions that will allow a
qualitative and quantitative assessment of the performance of
a credential management system and infrastructure regarding
these challenges (given in Table I). Finally, we introduce the
use case of the EU Horizon 2020 project QualiChain [7], where
these research questions will be evaluated with the help of the
participants in the project’s pilots.
The article is organised as follows: Section II presents
different challenges encountered while analysing the reports
and questionnaires provided by the QualiChain pilots. In
Section III, we propose a set of questions for every challenge
presented in the previous section. In Section IV, we offer the
use case of QualiChain. In Section V, we give an overview
of relevant related work. The article closes with Section VI,
where our conclusions and future work are outlined.
II.
CHALLENGES IN EDUCATION CREDENTIAL
MANAGEMENT
How can a solution offering the issuing, management,
and veriﬁcation of digital education credentials be evaluated?
Two ways appear natural to approach this question: One can
either start looking at it from the user perspective—where the
users are the issuers, the holders, and the consumers of the
credentials—or follow the switch from the well-established
handling of paper-based credentials to digital credential man-
agement and look at all the challenges that appear. Both ways
are of equal validity and should arrive at the same results.
Based on the results acquired in [8], we noted that the overlap
in requirements between credential issuers, credential holders,
and credential consumers is substantial and that it seems more
adequate for the investigation of the digital transformation of
the education credential process and life cycles to follow the
process of changing from an analogue to a digital setting. We,
therefore, propose to segment the questions of interest into
three subtopics:
• Challenges of paper-based credentials;
• Challenges of transition to digital credentials; and
• Challenges of digital credentials.
In the following sections, we deduce and present these dif-
ﬁculties and propose ways how to measure the performance of
a presented solution for the implementation and management
of digital education credentials. Figure 1 gives an overview of
the complex of challenges.
A. Challenges of Paper-Based Credentials
Paper-based credentials are the state of the art and have a
history dating back to medieval times. Their use over centuries
makes it evident that, before digitisation, they were widely
Paper
based
Credentials
Paper
based
Credentials
Digitalisation
Digitalisation
Digital
Credentials
Digital
Credentials
Handling existing 
Credentials
Handling existing 
Credentials
Data Security
Data Security
Issuer Dependence
Issuer Dependence
Data Sovereignty
Data Sovereignty
Data Management
Data Management
Data Privacy
Data Privacy
Data Security
Data Security
Issuer Dependence
Issuer Dependence
Fraud & Verification
Fraud & Verification
Manual Handling
Manual Handling
Fraud & Verification
Fraud & Verification
Differences in 
Workflows
Differences in 
Workflows
Figure 1. Challenges in the digital transformation of education credential
processes and life cycles. Paper based credentials, the digitisation process
itself, and digital credentials each are sources of speciﬁc areas of problems
that are presented as darkly coloured boxes. It can be seen that both digital
and paper based forms share a set of common challenges (thick outline).
seen as the best solution. However, the developments in the
last decades and the move to digital workﬂows increased
the pressure on analogue, paper-based credentials and led to
growing problems, especially in fraud prevention.
1) Fraud and Veriﬁcation: Advances in digital printing
make it continuously more difﬁcult to protect paper-based
credentials against fraud. As already mentioned, a survey by
CareerBuilder [2] reports that 58% of employers have caught
a lie on a resume and 33% of them have seen an increase
in resume embellishments and fabrications like embellished
skill sets (57%), heightened responsibilities (55%), dates of
employment (42%), job titles (34%), academic degrees (33%),
companies worked for (26%) and awards (18%). A different
survey [3] states that over half of resumes and job applications
(53%) contain falsiﬁcations, and over three quarters (78%)
are misleading. Most issuers do not have the capabilities to
use advanced falsiﬁcation protection in their paper credentials,
compared to what is done, for example, for paper-based money.
Without a general standard, it would also be impossible for
a non-expert to decide if the credential in front of him/her
has the correct characteristics. There are over 3,000 higher
education establishments in the European Union alone [9].
Instead, institutions and states commonly register necessary
credentials and allow interested individuals to inquire about
a presented credential’s validity. The UK, for example, offers
the Higher Education Datacheck service [10]. The use of this
service is chargeable, and the process can take up to seven days
[11]. The process is also highly manual and time-consuming.
2) Dependence on Issuer: The problems with fraud make
it challenging to issue education credentials for anyone else
other than ofﬁcial education establishments. This leads to
the issue that learners will be unable to furnish sufﬁcient
and incontestable proof over several types of qualiﬁcations
gained outside this established system. In the job market,
written recommendation statements (also easily to falsiﬁable)
205
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

or contact persons of reference are used to compensate for this.
These methods are also manual and time costs for the people
involved. The challenge to correctly identify the issuer of such
statements is related to this problem. Additionally, this can be
why direct access to contacts for reference is often preferred.
In this case, the authenticity of the reference can be checked by
other means, like contact over ofﬁcial phone numbers, personal
knowledge, or email addresses.
3) Handling: Paper-based credentials are easy to handle
and store for the bearer. Still, in situations where many cre-
dentials have to be collected, screened, and analysed, the high
manual handling costs make their use expensive. This leads to
a time consuming and costly labour intense recruitment pro-
cess. For stafﬁng private and most public sector organisations,
it can be challenging to efﬁciently handle competency man-
agement in large organisational structures. This observation is
supported by the outcomes of our questionnaire collection at
the QualiChain pilots.
4) Data Security: Paper-based documents have success-
fully been archived over many decades using high-quality,
acid-free paper, storage in low humidity and room temperature
in pest-free environments. Additionally, data protection can be
enforced by physical access restrictions that are commonly
available and do not require specialised information technology
(IT) skills. However, most users of paper-based credentials
outside of ofﬁcial archives and libraries lack the means of long-
term storage, which makes paper-based credentials vulnerable
to loss and damage. This is made more severe by the im-
possibility to create identical copies of paper-based credentials.
In this context, it is interesting to note that digitisation in
libraries often captures more than just the works’ content.
Further, digitisation is not seen as a substitute for archiving
the works, but as an additional effort to make them readily
available and keep at least part of the contained information
safe from physical decay [12].
B. Challenges of Transition to Digital Credentials
Any solution that asks users to move from a well-
established analogue paper-based workﬂow to a digital work-
ﬂow will face challenges in this transition. Furthermore, how
well the solution solves these issues will determine how well
the users will receive it. In the following points, we present the
problems we encountered mentioned in our data collection.
1) Digitisation of Existing Credentials: Analogue creden-
tials are put into existence using written text, images, drawings,
and security characteristics in various forms. To retain all this
information in digital form is difﬁcult. To efﬁciently work with
the content of the credential, it is necessary to convert the
unstructured text, e.g., gained by a scan of the document, into
structured data that has been semantically enriched.
2) Interaction Between Analogue and Digital Workﬂows:
While workﬂows for both digital and analogue paper-based
credentials exist, it is desirable to cater to both types. The
users’ transition is seamless and can import paper-based cre-
dentials to take advantage of the added possibilities of digital
workﬂows. These transitions will often mean making manual
adjustments possible in a digital workﬂow or temporarily
creating digital twins of paper-based credentials to incorporate
them into pure digital workﬂows. This can also mean that
digital credentials are printed out, to be included in paper-
based credential workﬂows.
C. Challenges of Digital Credentials
Digital representations of credentials have their own chal-
lenges, that may be quite different from the paper-based ones.
1) Private Data Protection: Digital data can easily be
copied, and creating identical copies of digital data is part of IT
workﬂow. For example, if a digital credential is sent from the
issuer over a secure channel to the credential holder, its actual
data is copied multiple times in the process. First, the credential
is copied from the data storage at the issuer to the network
stack of the issuers system. Then, it duplicated into a transport
format, over various relays in the communication system,
and into the network stack of the receiver, unpacked. Finally,
the receiving application’s memory stores the last copy. This
characteristic of digital data makes it also easy to leak private
data in the process. In paper-based credentials, simple physical
access control is often enough. Contrary, access control has to
be secured digitally for digital credentials.
2) Data Security: Digital data ultimately is stored in phys-
ical form, and this storage will degenerate over time. It is,
therefore, important to be able to copy the digital credential to
new physical storage, and to continuously monitor the quality
of the storage before the degradation leads to damaged data. In
libraries, the “lots of copies keep stuff safe” (LOCKS) model
has been successfully implemented for electronic publications,
based on the idea that independent copies of the same data in
physical and geographical independent data stores, ensure high
data security and availability [13].
3) Data Management: Differently to paper-based creden-
tials, a digital credential can only be perceived by a user
if content or metadata is rendered in a perceivable form
(usually visual). Management systems need to ensure that users
know what is stored and what is transmitted if requested.
This requirement is also demanded in the EU General Data
Protection Regulation (see Section II-C4 for more details.)
Digital credentials also have the unique possibility to easily
collect and visualise each credential’s context and relations
to other skills and achievements. Beattie [14] argues that
by making these connections and context apparent to the
user, learning can shift from collecting credentials and thus
increasing the “height” of the credential collection towards
increased understanding and ampliﬁcation if the “depth” of
knowledge. Beattie [14] also sees it as an essential means of
the learners’ motivation, based on experience in role-playing
games design. Elkordy also reports increasing motivation in
[15]. Buchem in [16] gives an example where the depth of
a credential is codiﬁed by three levels: basic, meaning “what
everyone needs to know”, expertise, meaning “what you not
only know but also can do” and master, meaning “what only
a few people know and can do.”
4) Data Sovereignty: The ease of copying of digital data
allows for the storage of digital credentials physically far from
the users, e.g., in the cloud. However, this also means that
the actual data then is outside the physical oversight of the
user. The term “data sovereignty” [17] has been coined in
recent years to describe “the idea that users, being citizens or
companies, have control over their data” [18]. Improved data
sovereignty for the user is also at the base of recent legislative
developments like the General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) of the European Union [19]. According GDPR, data
subjects have the rights:
206
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE I. PROPOSED RESEARCH QUESTIONS TO EVALUATE THE PERFORMANCE OF A DIGITAL EDUCATION CREDENTIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM IN
SOLVING THE CHALLENGES EXPERIENCED BY THE USER.
Challenge
Question
Units
Fraud protection and veriﬁcation
How is the system protected against fraud?
qualitative
What are the costs of a successful attack against the fraud protection?
time, money
Issuer dependence
What are the requirements for an issuer of digital credentials?
qualitative
How much does issuing a credential cost?
time, money
Handling
Describe the workﬂow of a credential in the system.
qualitative
How much does handling of a credential in the workﬂow cost?
time, money
Data security
How is the credential stored in the system?
qualitative
Is the credential data format public and open?
yes/no
How many independent copies of the credential are stored in the system at any time?
number
How is the credential secured against accidental loss or data change?
qualitative
How is the credential secured against unauthorised, but intentional, loss or change of data?
qualitative
Digitisation of existing credentials
How can existing analogue credentials be included into the digital workﬂow?
qualitative
Is the content of the analogue credential converted to structured data to the same level of detail as digital
credentials?
yes/no
Interaction between analogue and
digital workﬂows
How can the system interact at the same time with digital and analogue credentials
qualitative
How much increases the effort in the workﬂow, if digital and analogue credentials are mixed?
time, money
Private data protection
How is the private data stored in the system protected against unauthorised access?
qualitative
What are the costs of a successful attack against the private data protection?
time, money
Data management
How is the data managed from the user perspective?
qualitative
Can the user tell at any time of the workﬂow, what data exactly he/she is working with?
yes/no
Can the user tell at any time of the workﬂow, who is able to access the data in question?
yes/no
Data sovereignty
How is data sovereignty enforced in the system?
qualitative
Can the holder of the credential decide at any time of the workﬂow, who is able to access the data in
question?
yes/no
How much does it cost the user to store the data under his/her exclusive physical access?
time, money
What are the costs of a successful attack against the access protection (access, denial of service, data
change)?
time, money
If there are other possibilities of storage, how convenient are they to the user?
time money
What are the costs of a successful attack against these other storage possibilities (access, denial of service,
data change)?
time, money
1) Obtain information about the processing of personal data;
2) Access to their personal data;
3) Potentially collect incorrect and incomplete personal data;
4) Request that personal data be erased when it is no longer
needed or if processing it is unlawful;
5) Receive personal data in a machine-readable format and
send it to another controller (“data portability”); and
6) Request that decisions based on automated processing are
made by natural persons, not only by computers.
Education credentials certainly are personal data in the sense
of GDPR. To provide the previously mentioned rights 1–4 to
the holder of the credential, a management system must be
able to provide access to the credential on request, and to
remove or replace credentials if required. Credentials need to
be available in portable formats (right 5), and the processes
where the credentials are used to make decisions must be
transparent (right 6).
III.
PROPOSED RESEARCH QUESTIONS
In this section, we collect the questions whose answers will
be utilised to validate the effectiveness of a system devised to
achieve the challenges presented in the previous Section II.
Each given topic translates into a set of questions. We start
each topic with a question asking for a qualitative description
of how the proposed solution approaches a relevant challenge.
Then, we go into detail by adding quantitative questions that
will enable us to measure the effect that the proposed solution
has on each challenge in a given use case. Lastly, a digital
credential solution is compared to the status quo of non-
digital workﬂows using this mixed qualitative and quantitative
approach. Table I presents our research questions; they are
grouped according to the challenges presented in Section II.
The challenge data security affects both digital and paper-
based credentials in very similar ways, so we were able to
combine all relevant questions into one ﬁeld.
IV.
USE CASE
The EU Horizon 2020 research and innovation action
QualiChain “targets the creation, piloting and evaluation of a
decentralised platform for storing, sharing and verifying educa-
tion and employment qualiﬁcations and focuses on the assess-
ment of the potential of blockchain technology, algorithmic
techniques and computational intelligence for disrupting the
domain of public education, as well as its interfaces with
private education, the labour market, public sector admin-
istrative procedures and the wider socio-economic develop-
ments.”[20] The fundamental idea of the project is to build an
open source based distributed platform, supporting the storage,
sharing and veriﬁcation of education credentials. This platform
will allow for the implementation of additional services, which
will fulﬁl the needs of the participating actors, such as data
analytics and decision support systems. QualiChain hosts ﬁve
pilot projects distributed over Europe (for details please see
[21]), where the system is tested in four real-world scenarios:
207
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

• Lifelong learning;
• Smart curriculum design;
• Stafﬁng the public sector; and
• Providing HR consultancy and competency management
services.
We provided online questionnaires to support the participants
in the pilots in the deﬁnition of the use cases, challenges
and possible research questions, as well as to deﬁne key
performance indicators. These questionnaires were ﬁlled in and
discussed with the people involved in the pilots in early 2019.
The process is discussed in detail in [8] and not repeated here
for the sake of brevity.
V.
RELATED WORK
In this section, we present relevant related work, segregated
into literature that looks at the impact of digital education
credentials, open badges infrastructure, and examples of trans-
formation from analogue to digital credentials.
A. Impact of Digital Education Credentials
The articles in the collection edited by Ifenthaler et al.
[22] offer a deep introduction into the topic of digital badges
and micro-credentials. Digital badges are a special form of
education credentials, usually following the open badges stan-
dard [23], that are often meant to be displayed prominently
by their owner. Ellis et al. [24] write “Traditional badges
are often graphic representations of what it is that the badge
represents. For example, a scout merit badge has a symbolic
graphic of what the topic of the badge is.” Digital badges
follow this tradition by incorporating images that represent
the achievements certiﬁed by the badge. Micro-credentials
are credentials that certify only a small and easy to deﬁne
achievement of the learner—thus the name micro.
In [25], Willis et al. remark that open digital badges
can bring transparency into awarding of credentials in edu-
cation and raise question about the roles of instructors, badge
providers and learning management systems. They note that
digital credentials empower individual learners to “to take
control of determining how their learning experiences can be
validated and shared.” They assume easy scaling for digital
credentials, but also warn of issues of trust, conﬁdence, ex-
cessive data collection, data protection and ethics. In [24],
Ellis et al. also press the point that digital badges will face
the risk of loosing their value in the education system if no
commonly accepted way can be found to audit and evaluate
them. Coleman et al. describe in [26] design principles for
digital badges. They argue that creativity please an important
role in learning and can be supported in badge design and
badge management. They propose to use the principles of
transmedia story telling [27], a “Curated Learning Journey”,
to create an experience for the learner that allows the learner
to “participate in the learning process in an organic way.”
Lockley et al.[28] note that “badges can be agnostic as to
the education provider. They enable digital credentials to be
issued outside higher education providers”; thus, removing the
dependence on the traditional issuers of education credentials.
They also note that micro-credentials allow learners more
ﬂexibility in their education process. More ﬂexible and shorter
education pathways empower education processes and provide
a unique opportunity not supported in traditional certiﬁcation
methods. Lockley et al. [28] devise credential badges as
“lingua franca for learners, educators and employers”; Willis
et al. [25] refer to badges as “a currency to demonstrate
marketable skills and abilities, at least in theory.” Grant in
[29] shares the point of view of badges being a currency in
credential markets and the reputation economy.
Gander in [30] is proposing to evaluate the implicit and
explicit promises and expectations of digital credentials, con-
centrating on micro-credentials. He notes that explicit promises
are rarely expressed, while the implicit promises are that
micro-credentials will meet the following properties:
• Follow established standards of evidence for skills and
knowledge achievements;
• Are related to other digital micro-credentials;
• Offer authentication of experience;
• Promise individualisation highlighting each individual’s
developmental history, special interests, and talents;
• Enable longevity of the digital information; and
• Facilitate use and continued availability.
Gander further suggests to capture as much data as possible
about these implicit expectations in the application of micro-
credentials. As a result, the analysis of their impact is conduc-
ted by comparing the evaluation in regular intervals over time.
The article also presents a case study of an institute situated
in the US, which created a series of 17 micro-credentials and
reports the start of the data collection. Aberdour in [31] argues
that a transformation of workplace learning is necessary for
organisations to stay agile, resilient, and effective. A digital
badge program is shown as a way to establish a learning culture
in a work place.
The main point of focus in the literature cited so far, is
on the social impact of digital credentials and their effect on
the transformation of the education system in itself. Though,
we think that this is an important ﬁeld of research, in our
work, we decided to not go down this route. Instead, we
look at the management of education credentials, ignoring
the changes it may have on the education system itself. We
note, however, that there is an overlap because of fundamental
properties of digital badges, that drive these reported changes
in education. This is especially true for the possibility to
issue digital (micro-) credentials without being an ofﬁcial
recognised learning institute, i.e., what we describe as the
issuer dependence of credentials.
B. Open Badges Infrastructure
Dimitrijevi´c et al. [32] present a framework of scenarios to
deﬁne requirements for Open Badges platforms. The scenarios
with the extracted requirements are:
• Offering badges: Education provider must be able to issue
digital badges, i.e., creation of badges and badges tem-
plates, use of badge metadata, documentation, alignment
to existing learning standards and publication of badges.
• Badge discovery: Learners must be able to search and ﬁnd
chances for badges, i.e., search for badge opportunities,
review and comparison, selection of a badge opportunity.
• Applying for badges: Learners must be able to request
badges, i.e., registration for badge chances, application
for badges.
• Awarding badges: The process of awarding badges con-
tains multiple requirements. They include the support
208
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

for i) automated assessment of an achievement and self-
assessment; ii) multiple assessors and peer assessors;
iii) evidence of achievements; iv) automated and manual
badge awarding; and v) digital signing of badges, in-
formation of badge applicant of decision, and issuing of
badges.
• Management of and reﬂection over collected badges:
Learners must be able to collect and manage their badges,
i.e., collection of badges, import of badges, organisation
of badges, overview dashboards, and visualisation of
badges and data.
• Displaying and sharing badges: display tailoring, tailor-
ing of social media posts and display, support for personal
badge stores, support for web display, and permissions
management.
• (Re)viewing a badge earner’s achievements: Other people
than the learner must also be able to consume and review
badges, e.g., a recruiter. Functional requirements are:
User-based search, badge-based search, (re)view of the
overall badge earner’s experience, (re)view of individual
badges, and evidence validation.
Based on these use cases and requirements, Dimitrijevi´c et
al. [32] then evaluate selected badging platforms, namely
BadgeList, BadgeOS, Credly, ForAllRubrics, Open Badge
Factory + Open Badge, Passport and Peer 2 Peer Univer-
sity (P2PU). They report in their article that all inspected
platforms cover the most basic functional requirements. The
requirements of the detailed scenarios however are much less
likely to be fulﬁlled. Few platforms fulﬁl all requirements
of the “Offering badges” scenario. Half of the platforms
support searching for opportunities from the “Badge discov-
ery” scenario, but none of them allow comparisons of the
opportunities. Regarding “Applying for badges”, all platforms
allow learners to support evidence by various means for the
application. Also, the basic functional requirements of the
“Awarding badges” scenario are in general well supported,
but requirements related to assessment are rarely fulﬁlled. The
authors also report that they were not able to verify the claim
that is was possible to digitally sign badges on the platforms.
All platforms, however, allowed the users to manage their
badges gained at the same platforms, while few allowed to
import badges from other places. The “Displaying and sharing”
scenario in general was found to be well supported, while
the “Reviewing achievements” scenario presented a mixed
picture: all platforms were found to provide an overview of
the achievements of the learner, but very few also allowed
user-based or badge-based searches. For our investigation we
followed the same basic approach as presented by Dimitrijevi´c
et al. [32], i.e., to deﬁne the relevant scenarios and then derive
the functional requirements for it. This method is a very natural
way to approach an evaluation. It also allows for including
users in the ﬁeld in the analysis, as the given scenarios translate
directly into their use cases, requirements and experiences.
On a side note, in [16], Buchem presents design patterns
that can be useful in the design a digital credential management
solution. In the “Digital badges as parts of a digital portfolio”
pattern, he describes the use of a grid system that describes
the necessary skill sets for certain topics, activities and levels,
resembling an easy to understand board game.
C. Examples of Transformation From Analogue to Digital
Education Credentials
In [33], Glover describes the case of the Shefﬁeld Business
School at Shefﬁeld Hallam University. They switched from
paper based education credentials to digital Open Badges in
2014 for a selected program for students wishing to represent
their peers in discussions with teaching staff and university
management. An anonymous survey was then executed to
capture the participating students’ impressions of the badges in
comparison to the previous paper certiﬁcates. Glover selected
the following hypotheses:
• H1: Students see badges as a way to differentiate them-
selves from peers.
• H2: Badges motivate some students to complete existing
or undertake additional work.
• H3: Students want badges that represent all aspects of
their studies, including both formal and semi-formal
learning.
Out of 89 students participating in the programme, 46 re-
sponded in the survey. The results conﬁrmed H1 and H3,
but not H2. It is interesting to note for the transformation to
digital credentials, that participants reported overall positive
or neutral reactions by their peers when sharing the digital
badge and all sharing students stated that they might or would
share the digital badges again. Glover also writes that “Several
respondents explicitly contrasted the digital badges with an
equivalent paper certiﬁcate, asserting that, as the certiﬁcate
is a tangible artefact and is a widely recognised method of
representing experience and learning, it would carry much
more credibility than a digital badge. However, despite their
scepticism around the value of digital badges, most of the
respondents qualiﬁed these remarks with statements such as
’... unless they are recognised by employers ...’, suggesting
that the utility of digital badges is directly linked to their
wider acceptance.” Glover, therefore, recommends that the
concept of badges and their purpose is to be clearly explained,
in order to maximise the perceived value of badges. He
also remarks that the open nature of digital badges means
that they can be created and issued by anyone, and for any
purpose. He assumes that this creates a credibility problem
for digital badges and recommends that organisations should
implement quality control over the creation and issuing of
badges to ensure that badges represent standardised levels of
achievement, similar to processes already in place for academic
programmes at education providers such as universities.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this article, we discussed the main challenges in edu-
cation credential management. We showed that the transform-
ation from analogue to digital in education credentials had
not received intense attention from the scientiﬁc community.
Based on the available literature and information collected
from participants in the EU QualiChain project pilots, we
developed a methodology to qualitatively and quantitatively
measure a system’s effectiveness in addressing education cre-
dential management’s challenges and the transformation from
paper-based credentials to digital credentials. We will apply
this methodology to the use cases of the Horizon 2020 EU
Project QualiChain, which covers a wide area of applications
of education credentials. Applying this methodology will al-
low us an in-depth evaluation of the project’s performance.
209
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Based on the experience gathered in this process, we plan
to extend this work in the future to a full framework for
the evaluation of the performance of education credential
management solutions. This framework should capture the
whole life cycle of education credentials from creation and
issue over storage, management, and access control, towards
credential expiring or retraction. We expect that this novel
framework will provide transparency in the way how education
credentials are managed, as well as the possibility to tracking
down all the decisions done during the whole life cycle.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work has received funding from the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant
agreement No 822404 (QualiChain). The authors would like to
express their thanks for proof reading of this article to Simon
Worthington and Salua Nassabay.
REFERENCES
[1]
I. R. Keck, M.-E. Vidal and L. Heller, ‘Digital transformation
of education credential processes and life cycles – a struc-
tured overview on main challenges and research questions’,
in Proceedings of the Twelfth International Conference on
Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning eLmL 2020, July 12–
14, 2013, Valencia, Spain, Mikroyannidis, A., Chang, M. and
White, S., Ed., ISBN: 978-1-61208-764-1, ISSN: 2308-4367,
Think Mind, 2020, pp. 53–56. [Online]. Available: https://
www. thinkmind . org / index . php ? view = article & articleid =
elml 2020 1 60 58006 (visited on 2020-12-01).
[2]
CareerBuilder, Fifty-eight percent of employers have caught
a lie on a resume, according to a new careerbuilder survey.
[Online]. Available: http://press.careerbuilder.com/2014-08-
07-Fifty-eight-Percent-of-Employers-Have-Caught-a-Lie-
on- a- Resume- According- to- a- New- CareerBuilder- Survey
(visited on 2020-12-03).
[3]
S. Brain, Statisticbrain - resume falsiﬁcation statistics, 2017.
[Online]. Available: https : / / web . archive . org / web /
20170907150814 / http : / / www. statisticbrain . com / resume -
falsiﬁcation-statistics (visited on 2020-12-03).
[4]
D. Everhart, A. Derryberry, E. Knight and S. Lee, ‘The role
of endorsement in open badges ecosystems’, in Foundation of
digital badges and micro-credentials, Springer, 2016, pp. 221–
235.
[5]
G. Room, ‘Globalisation, social policy and international
standard-setting: The case of higher education credentials’,
International Journal of Social Welfare, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 103–
119, 2000.
[6]
M. Kotarba, ‘Measuring digitalization–key metrics’, Founda-
tions of Management, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 123–138, 2017.
[7]
QualiChain – decentralised qualiﬁcations’ veriﬁcation and
management for learner empowerment, education reengin-
eering and public sector transformation. [Online]. Available:
https://qualichain-project.eu (visited on 2020-12-04).
[8]
I. Keck, M. E. Vidal, A. Mikroyannidis, C. Kontzinos, S. Skal-
idakis et al., ‘D7.1 – qualichain pilots preparation handbook’,
Tech. Rep., 2019. [Online]. Available: https://alfresco.epu.
ntua.gr/share/s/AQjQwquNRwOl- CtaHFDBLQ (visited on
2020-12-03).
[9]
European Commission, The role of universities in the europe
of knowledge, 2003. [Online]. Available: https : / / eur - lex .
europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=LEGISSUM:c11067
(visited on 2020-12-04).
[10]
HECSU, Prospects hedd veriﬁcation + authentication. [On-
line]. Available: https://hedd.ac.uk/ (visited on 2020-12-04).
[11]
D. Matthews, ‘What blockchain technology could mean for
universities’, Times Higher Education, Aug. 2017. [Online].
Available: https://www.timeshighereducation.com/news/what-
blockchain-technology-could-mean-for-universities (visited
on 2020-12-04).
[12]
B. A. Fabunmi, M. Paris and M. Fabunmi, ‘Digitization
of library resources: Challenges and implications for policy
and planning’, International Journal of African & African-
American Studies, vol. 5, no. 2, 2009.
[13]
V. A. Reich, ‘Lots of copies keep stuff safe as a cooperative
archiving solution for e-journals’, Issues in Science and Tech-
nology Librarianship, 2002. [Online]. Available: http://doi.
org/10.5062/F47P8WCW (visited on 2020-12-04).
[14]
S. Beattie, ‘Height vs. depth in badging framework design’,
in Foundation of Digital Badges and Micro-Credentials,
Springer, 2016, pp. 307–324.
[15]
A. Elkordy, ‘Development and implementation of digital
badges for learning science, technologly, engineering and
math (stem) practices in secondary contexts: A pedagogical
approach with empirical evidence’, in Foundation of Digital
Badges and Micro-Credentials, Springer, 2016, pp. 483–508.
[16]
I. Buchem, ‘Digital badges as (parts of) digital portfolios:
Design patterns for educational and personal learning prac-
tice’, in Foundation of digital badges and micro-credentials,
Springer, 2016, pp. 343–367.
[17]
R. Posch, ‘Digital sovereignty and it-security for a prosperous
society’, in Informatics in the Future, H. Werthner and F.
van Harmelen, Eds., Cham: Springer International Publishing,
2017, pp. 77–86, ISBN: 978-3-319-55735-9.
[18]
S. Amaro, Europe’s dream to claim its ‘digital sovereignty’
could be the next big challenge for us tech giants, Nov. 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://www.cnbc.com/2019/11/20/us-
tech- could- face- new- hurdles- as- europe- considers- digital-
sovereignty.html (visited on 2020-12-04).
[19]
General
Data
Protection
Regulation,
‘Regulation
(eu)
2016/679 of the european parliament and of the council of 27
april 2016 on the protection of natural persons with regard
to the processing of personal data and on the free movement
of such data, and repealing directive 95/46’, Ofﬁcial Journal
of the European Union (OJ), vol. 59, no. 1-88, p. 294,
2016. [Online]. Available: https://eur- lex.europa.eu/legal-
content / EN / ALL / ?uri = CELEX : 32016R0679 (visited on
2020-12-04).
[20]
QualiChain – decentralised qualiﬁcations’ veriﬁcation and
management for learner empowerment, education reengineer-
ing and public sector transformation, Nov. 2018. [Online].
Available: https://cordis.europa.eu/project/rcn/218758 en.html
(visited on 2020-12-04).
[21]
C. Agostinho, R. Melo, I. Keck, C. Kontzinos, V. Karakolis
et al., ‘D2.2 – qualichain stakeholders’ requirements and use
cases’, Tech. Rep., 2019. [Online]. Available: https://alfresco.
epu.ntua.gr/share/s/EﬂUU9mbTESnrZo74WAZHg (visited on
2020-12-03).
[22]
D. Ifenthaler, N. Bellin-Mularski and D.-K. Mah, Eds., Found-
ation of Digital Badges and Micro-Credentials. Springer Inter-
national Publishing, 2016. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-15425-1.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 3- 319-
15425-1 (visited on 2020-12-04).
[23]
J. Bohrer, T. F. Cook, M. Esquela, S. Gance, J. Goodell
et al. (Apr. 2018). Open Badges v2.0: IMS Final Release.
Open Badges speciﬁcation, [Online]. Available: https : / /
openbadgespec.org/ (visited on 2020-12-04).
[24]
L. E. Ellis, S. G. Nunn and J. T. Avella, ‘Digital badges and
micro-credentials: Historical overview, motivational aspects,
issues, and challenges’, in Foundation of Digital Badges and
Micro-Credentials, Springer, 2016, pp. 3–21.
[25]
J. E. Willis, K. Flintoff and B. McGraw, ‘A philosophy of
open digital badges’, in Foundation of Digital Badges and
Micro-Credentials, Springer, 2016, pp. 23–40.
210
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[26]
K. S. Coleman and K. V. Johnson, ‘Badge claims: Creativity,
evidence and the curated learning journey’, in Foundation of
digital badges and micro-credentials, Springer, 2016, pp. 369–
387.
[27]
R. Pratten, Getting started with transmedia storytelling. Cre-
ateSpace, 2011, ISBN: 978-1456564681.
[28]
A. Lockley, A. Derryberry and D. West, ‘Drivers, affordances
and challenges of digital badges’, in Foundation of digital
badges and micro-credentials, Springer, 2016, pp. 55–70.
[29]
S. Grant, ‘Building collective belief in badges: Designing
trust networks’, in Foundation of Digital Badges and Micro-
Credentials, Springer, 2016, pp. 97–114.
[30]
S. L. Gander, ‘Evaluating the public promise’, in Foundation
of Digital Badges and Micro-Credentials, Springer, 2016,
pp. 71–95.
[31]
M. Aberdour, ‘Transforming workplace learning culture with
digital badges’, in Foundation of Digital Badges and Micro-
Credentials, Springer, 2016, pp. 203–220.
[32]
S. Dimitrijevi´c, V. Devedzi´c, J. Jovanovi´c and N. Miliki´c,
‘Badging platforms: A scenario-based comparison of fea-
tures and uses’, in Foundation of Digital Badges and Micro-
Credentials, Springer, 2016, pp. 141–161.
[33]
I. Glover, ‘Student perceptions of digital badges as recognition
of achievement and engagement in co-curricular activities’, in
Foundation of digital badges and micro-credentials, Springer,
2016, pp. 443–455.
211
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

