579
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Smart Cities: Challenges and a Sensor-based Solution  
A research design for sensor-based smart city projects 
 
Lasse Berntzen, Marius Rhode Johannessen 
School of Business 
University College of Southeast Norway 
Norway 
{lasse.berntzen, marius.johannessen}@hbv.no 
Adrian Florea 
Faculty of Engineering 
“Lucian Blaga” University of Sibiu 
Sibiu, Romania 
adrian.florea@ulbsibiu.ro
 
 
Abstract - In this article, we present a research design for smart 
city initiatives, based on the argument that there is a 
connection between smart cities and the concepts of “smart 
buildings” and “smart users”. Smart cities refer to “places 
where information technology is combined with infrastructure, 
architecture, everyday objects, and even our bodies to address 
social, economic, and environmental problems”. Smart 
buildings refer to ICT-enabled and networked constructions 
such as traffic cameras and lights, buildings and other man-
made structures. With inexpensive hardware such as the 
Raspberry Pi, Intel Edison, Arduino, NodeMCU and their 
ecosystems of sensors, we can equip these structures with 
sensors. Smart users refer to the high level of education in 
developed societies, allowing us to utilize technology such as 
smart phones to create better cities. Citizens can provide data 
through their smart phones, and these data can, together with 
sensor data from buildings, be used to analyze and visualize a 
range of different variables aimed at creating smarter cities. 
We propose that a first step of smart city research should be a 
thorough process of identifying and collecting input from 
relevant stakeholders in order to find the most relevant 
objectives for research. Finally, we present case evidence from 
a pilot study that has followed our approach, which has now 
received funding for further development. 
Keywords 
- 
smart 
cities; 
smart 
buildings; 
sensors; 
sustainability; research design. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper extends the previous work that was presented 
at the Fifth International Conference on Smart Systems, 
Devices and Technology (SMART 2016) [1], by presenting 
evidence from a pilot study of developing an environmental 
monitoring unit. Starting from a research design for smart 
city that identifies and collects first the inputs from relevant 
stakeholders in order to find the most relevant objectives for 
research, we then present our experiences from a pilot 
project for environmental monitoring using an integrated 
hardware-software system, sensors-based. This represents an 
important contribution to the field of environmental 
monitoring using the idea of the car as a sensory device and 
generating some profile indicators for cities per certain 
periods of time through the project platform. 
As of 2009, more than 50 percent of the world’s 
population lives in urban areas [2], and this number is 
forecasted to increase in the coming years. Cities occupy 
only 2 percent of the planet, but account for 60-80 percent of 
energy consumption [3]. As the sizes of cities grow, so do 
the challenges facing cities [4]. These challenges include 
issues related to public health and socio-economic factors 
[5], 
energy 
consumption, 
transport 
planning 
and 
environmental issues [6]. Air pollution caused by traffic jams 
is but one concrete example of the many challenges facing 
growing cities [7]. In order to reduce traffic and 
environmental impact it is necessary to implement safe, 
reliable, rapid and inexpensive public transport. Therefore, 
itis an obvious need for cities to be smart. Dameri and 
Coccia [8] summarize the major objectives of smart cities: 
• 
Improve environmental quality in urban space, reducing 
CO2 emissions, traffic and waste; 
• 
Optimize energy consumption, by making buildings, 
household appliances and electronic devices more 
energy efficient, supplemented by recycling energy and 
use of renewable energy; 
• 
Increase quality of life, delivering better public and 
private services, such as local public transport, health 
services, and so on. 
In this paper, we argue for the application of sensors and 
data analytics for resolving some of the challenges facing 
cities. There is a connection between smart cities and the 
concepts of smart buildings and smart users. Smart cities 
refer to places where information technology is combined 
with infrastructure, architecture, everyday objects, and even 
our bodies to address social, economic, and environmental 
problems [9]. Examining how to achieve this connection 
between ICTs and the world around us is the focus of our 
paper. 
Smart buildings and smart homes refer to the use of built-
in 
infrastructure 
to 
provide 
safety 
and 
security, 
entertainment, improved energy management, and health 
monitoring [10]. A smart building or a smart home relies on 
the use of sensor technologies to achieve this. The data 
collected by such sensors can also be aggregated and used by 
the city for various purposes. Sensors can provide 
information to law enforcement, emergency response, power 
management, home care services, environmental protection, 
city planning, and intelligent transport systems. 
The concept of Internet-of-Things (IoT) is characterized 
by devices connected to the Internet that can exchange data 

580
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
with external computerized systems. In the context of smart 
cities, such devices can monitor traffic, pollution, noise level, 
use of electrical power, etc. [11]. 
Inexpensive hardware such as the Raspberry Pi, Intel 
Edison, Arduino, NodeMCU and their ecosystems of 
sensors, enables us to deploy sensor technology on a large 
scale. Such low cost devices can provide valuable 
information for optimizing energy use, infrastructure and 
public transport planning, as well as emergency response and 
other vital services. Applying sensors is just the first step 
towards smarter cities. 
The next step involves smart users. Smart users refer to 
the high level of education in developed societies, allowing 
us to utilize technology such as smart phones to create better 
cities. Cities in and of themselves are not smart, nor is a 
smart phone or computer smart unless the person using it 
does so with a specific purpose in mind. Actually, the 
apparent intelligence of the computing systems comes from 
the amount of human intelligence that was invested in it. 
Citizen participation is seen as an important element in 
smart cities [12]. Studies show a causal relation between 
high levels of education and growth in the number of 
available jobs [13]. In our context, we see citizens both as 
providing input through traditional participation projects, but 
also as providers of data for analysis. Citizens can provide 
data through their smart phones, either actively or passively 
(with consent), and these data can, together with sensor data 
from buildings, be used to analyze and visualize traffic 
patterns, movement through the city and between cities, 
environmental factors etc.  
We apply these concepts to the framework for smart city 
planning [12], in order to present a research design for the 
application of sensors and analytics in Smart City planning. 
This approach is in part the result of an ongoing 
collaboration with regional analytics businesses.  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section II 
discusses the use of sensors for data collection. Section III 
discusses how analytics can be applied as input for 
participatory planning, and Section IV presents the outline of 
a research design, using the Smart City framework of [12]. 
Section V presents the results of a pilot study applying our 
research design. The pilot study led to a successful 
application for funding to take the research further. In 
Section VI, we present our final research design, based on 
the Chourabi et al. framework [12], experiences from the 
case, and user centered design principles. Finally, we provide 
implications and conclusions in Section VII. 
II. 
A WORLD OF SENSORS 
A sensor is a component able to detect a change in its 
environment and convert this change into an electrical signal. 
The signal returned by a sensor may be binary (on/off), a 
value within a range, e.g., temperature, light, wind, humidity, 
precipitation, position, and acceleration. Camera sensors 
return images or even image streams. Since sensors are 
operating in real time, they can produce large amounts of 
information. Therefore, sensors are normally connected to 
some kind of unit that monitors changes, and forwards 
information at regular intervals, or when the change is big 
enough. The left part of Fig. 1 shows how sensors are 
connected to an aggregation and preprocessing unit. 
Many mobile devices have built in sensors, e.g., a GPS 
sensor, camera or accelerometer. The number of built-in 
sensors is expected to increase with new versions. Newer 
cars also have built-in computers handling sensor input, local 
processing 
and 
communications 
[14]. 
According 
to 
Abdelhamid et al. [15] a 2013 model car has on average 70 
sensors, while luxury models may have more than 100 
sensors. The number of sensors is expected to grow.  
Typical applications for hand-held or car mounted 
devices are traffic monitoring and prediction. The devices 
send their coordinates, and the server software receiving this 
information decides if a specific traffic route is clogged or 
not.  
Another application is environmental monitoring. One 
example is the Green Watch project [16]. The project 
distributed 200 smart devices to citizens of Paris. The 
devices sensed ozone and noise levels as the citizens lived 
their normal lives, and the results where shared through a 
mapping engine. The project showed how a grassroot 
sensing network could reduce costs dramatically, and also 
engage citizens in environmental monitoring and regulation. 
Bröring et al. [17] used the built-in diagnostic interface of 
cars (OBD-II) to obtain sensor data used to estimate current 
fuel consumption, CO2 emission, noise, standing time and 
slow moving traffic.  
Citizens can also act as sensors themselves, by reporting 
what they observe. One example is FixMyStreet.com, a web 
application that enables citizens to report problems with 
roads and other types of infrastructure. Today, low cost 
devices (e.g., Raspberry Pi, Intel Edison, Arduino and 
NodeMCU), have both processing and communication 
capabilities. Such devices can easily be connected to 
different types of sensors [18] [19], and can do local 
processing of data, before packing the results and sending it 
to a central processing facility for further processing, 
analytics and visualization. Raspberry Pi 3 and Intel Edison 
have built-in wireless communication capabilities, which 
make connection to citywide Wi-Fi networks even easier. 
Separate components are available to connect such devices 
to mobile networks. 
The most obvious examples can be found within the 
following fields: 
• 
Safety and security 
• 
Energy monitoring and control: Smart power meters 
• 
Environmental protection 
• 
Health 
A. Safety and security 
An important aspect of smart cities and smart buildings is 
to make people feel safe and secure. Sensors can be used for 
a multitude of application, both to secure property and to 
keep citizens safe. This includes intrusion alarms, 
surveillance cameras, fire detection and flood alarms. Such 
alarms can connect to law enforcement and emergency 
response, but also to private operators and trusted neighbors. 
The Norwegian company Lyse, originally an electrical utility 
company, has developed Smartly (http://www.smartly.no), 

581
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
an integrated solution for controlling temperature and 
lighting, 
house 
alarms 
and 
surveillance, 
in-house 
entertainment and fire detection. Fire and house alarms are 
connected to operators who will check what happens in case 
of an alarm. 
B. Energy monitoring and control 
Sensors can be used to monitor temperature and lights. 
Detection of movements can turn lights on, and heating and 
air-conditioning can be optimized to not spill unnecessary 
energy. Smart meters can provide information useful for 
energy planning, and prevent blackouts and brownouts by 
adjusting the price of electrical power. Fregonara and Curto 
[20] suggests developing a tool that incorporates data from 
real estate, environmental technology, architecture and 
materials science, which would make new buildings a lot 
more energy efficient than they currently are. Other 
researchers have developed frameworks for comprehensive 
monitoring aimed at increased energy efficiency. Most of the 
needed data is available through various sources, but is not 
yet linked so that it provides a holistic picture [21]. 
C. Environmental monitoring and protection 
By collecting environmental data, the building itself and 
the city can get early warnings on pollution levels and other 
environmental problems, and initiate necessary actions. 
While it may be necessary to build new and expanded 
infrastructures (i.e., In public transport), much can be done 
by increased information and access to information about 
what choice to make. This could lead to citizens being more 
aware of their environmental footprint, and thus to citizens 
making better choices [22]. In Stockholm, a pilot study of 
«smart urban metabolism» applied data from various sources 
to analyze relevant data and intervene where necessary. As 
with [21], this study also found that much of the data was 
already available, but not yet linked and utilized for 
environmental purposes [23]. 
D. Health 
Older citizens want to live in their homes as long as they 
feel safe. Sensors can be used for daily health monitoring, 
where data are sent to medical professionals, but also detect 
medical emergencies, like fall detection. Boulos and Al-
Shorbaji [24] discuss how IoT sensors coupled with data 
analytics can contribute to a healthier population, and point 
to the World Health Organization’s (WHO) healthy cities 
project, and the UK’s objective to spend £45 million on IoT 
and related technologies. Another study discusses how 
technology can be used to alleviate the consequences of flu 
outbreaks, by spreading information to people in infected 
areas [25]. 
E. Privacy issues 
Deploying large networks of sensors (proximity sensors, 
presence sensors, surveillance cameras, gas and smoke 
sensors), and in particular the data collection from personal 
devices raise some concerns related to privacy of the 
individual. Therefore, it is necessary to implement legal 
mechanisms to regulate how information can be obtained, 
what information can be obtained, and for what purpose the 
information can be used. The public must be informed and 
give their consent of use of the information. Legal and 
privacy issues will of course vary between different 
countries, but most countries will have laws governing what 
we can and cannot do. 
 
Figure 1.  Sensor network, analyzing and visualization architecture 
III. 
APPLYING ANALYTICS AND VISUALISATION IN 
PARTICIPATORY PLANNING 
Mining and analyzing data has been on the agenda of 
researchers since the 1960’s. However, the period from ca. 
2000 to present is the most interesting one in the history of 
data mining, because of the emergence of the world wide 
web and the large amounts of data generated from the web 
[26].  
A review of data mining literature between 2000 and 
2011 reveals that a number of different areas have been 
developed, which can all be used for various types of 
analysis [26]:  
• 
Neural Networks - For classification, time series 
prediction, pattern recognition • Algorithm architecture - 
For calculation, data processing, clustering  
• 
Dynamic prediction - For prediction, forecasting and 
tracking  
• 
System architecture - For association, decision making 
and consumer behavior  
• 
Intelligent agent systems - For autonomous observation 
and acting on external input  
• 
Data modeling - For representation or acquisition of 
expert knowledge  
• 
Knowledge-based systems - For knowledge discovery 
and representation  
 
Most of these can be applied in collecting data from 
sensors, and there are many examples from literature. One 
study shows how data mining and predictive analytical 
techniques can be applied to predict the number of vacant 
properties in a city [27]. Geographic information can be 
combined with a plethora of different data to provide 
valuable information for decision makers. Massa and 
Campagna show how geographic data extracted from social 

582
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
media can improve urban planning in a smart city context, 
and present a methodology for social media geographic 
information analytics [28]. A similar study mines data from 
the location-based social network FourSquare to identify 
under-developed neighborhoods [29].  
De Amicis et al. [30] have developed a geo-visual 
analytics platform for land planning and urban design, and 
argue for the importance of visual, 3D analytics. Another 
system, STAR CITY, uses sensor data from both machine 
and human-operated sensors to analyze traffic patterns in 
cities. The prototype has been tested in Dublin, Bologna, 
Miami and Rio de Janeiro [31]. Another study uses sensor 
data to model traffic noise and predict the areas that were 
most likely to experience noise on a given day [32].  
Energy monitoring for the purpose of reducing the city’s 
carbon footprint is another area made possible by analytics. 
Researchers are working on a framework, which would 
allow for integration of energy monitoring in entire 
neighborhoods [33].  
Visualization of the results produced by the analytics, can 
help decision-making. Information can be presented real 
time through the use of dashboards, using different types of 
graphical visualizations show issues that need to be dealt 
with. The combination of analytics and visualization is 
shown in the right portion of Fig. 1.  
This Section has provided a brief overview of analytics 
and its coupling to visualization, and also given examples of 
existing systems that at various levels and from several 
perspectives provide decision makers with important input. 
The combination of sensors, geographic information and 
user-generated data can, especially when coupled with some 
form of visualization, be a powerful instrument for decision 
makers. Coupled with citizen participation [34] projects, this 
can be a great resource for the development of smart cities. 
In the next Section we provide a brief outline of a possible 
research design for participatory- and sensor-based smart 
city projects. 
IV. 
TOWARDS A RESEARCH DESIGN FOR PARTICIPATORY 
PLANNING OF SMART CITIES 
Chourabi et al. [12] presents a framework for smart city 
initiatives, which is separated into internal and external 
factors (Fig. 2). These factors influence each other, and 
depending on the type of project, some are more important 
than others. The framework can be applied as a tool for 
planning smart city initiatives, and we will in this Section 
discuss how it can be applied as the foundation for a research 
design.  
Our objective is to create a research project where 
environmental sensor data from buildings, cars and people 
are collected, analyzed and visualized, so that decision 
makers have access to data about issues related to transport 
and movement, pollution and city planning. We have already 
made a mobile platform for environmental monitoring, and 
the first step will be to use this platform to help decision 
makers make better decisions on restricting car use when 
pollution levels are high.  With this in mind, the framework 
of Chourabi et al. [12] can be used for the initial project 
planning:  
 
 
Figure 2.  The Smart City Initiatives framework [12]. 
The Smart City Initiative is as described above. In our 
home regions, there are several smaller cities in close 
distance to each other, and we are working to set up a case 
study of how sensor technologies can help these cities 
become even more integrated as one single job and housing 
region. Further, it is a political goal that even if the region 
becomes more integrated, emissions from transport should 
not increase. Thus, smart solutions for transport planning and 
environmental monitoring will be an essential part of the 
project. The approach may be influenced by urban 
congestion and by city topographic classes: compact, river 
and seaside. 
The Technology consists of sensors, software and 
hardware for data mining and analytics. Using existing 
technologies such as Raspberry Pi, Intel Edison, Arduino, 
NodeMCU and smart phones would be a natural first step of 
such projects. A second step could be to evaluate the use of 
existing technology in order to examine if there is a need for 
further custom development.  
Technological challenges include IT skills of the end 
users, and issues related to organizational culture [35]. In 
Norway the population generally has good IT skills, so this 
challenge is not a major one. Setting up and creating the 
sensor platforms is another challenge. The project partner 
from Romania (LBUS) has long experience with embedded 
systems design, and is responsible for creating the sensor 
systems. The project partner from Norway (USN) has done 
several technology projects in collaboration with local cities 
and municipalities, and has focus on collecting, analyzing 
and visualizing data. 
The 
bigger 
challenge 
would 
be 
to 
overcome 
organizational barriers. We propose that the cities involved 
in the project be responsible for setting goals and objectives, 
recruiting participants and for procurement of necessary 
hardware and software, as well as placement of sensor 
platforms. Local media could also be a partner in recruiting 
“human sensors” to collect information. 
For the Organization and Policy factors, there are some 
challenges to be addressed. Organizational issues include 
alignment of goals and turf wars, and both formal (legal) and 
informal (normative) challenges as issues to consider when 
making new policy [12]. The region where our project will 

583
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
take place already has a formalized collaboration on a range 
of different issues. This means that most of the factors 
related to governance and policy have already been 
addressed in previous collaborations. The major challenge 
will be to get the different cities to agree on a set of goals, as 
well as what these goals mean in practice. 
The external factors of our projects will also have 
implications. The framework lists collaboration, leadership, 
participation, communication, data-exchange, integration, 
accountability and transparency as typical governance issues. 
Again, the established collaboration between the project 
partners should help alleviate these challenges.  
The People and Communities factor involves issues such 
as accessibility, quality of life, education, communication 
and participation. Citizen participation through the use of 
smart phone sensors will be a key factor in our project, so 
recruiting participants is a major issue. As the objective of 
the project ultimately is to create regions that are better to 
live and work in, and to travel between, we will need to be 
very clear about the potential benefits of participation. 
Communicating these through traditional and new media will 
most likely be essential. We address this factor in more detail 
below.  
Economy and Built infrastructure: Smart city initiatives 
are easier to implement in areas with high levels of 
education, entrepreneurial businesses and a good ICT 
infrastructure [12]. The cities we are trying to set up our 
project with have challenges related to growth, but there are 
several innovative businesses and industries in the region. A 
challenge often facing these businesses is how to attract the 
right employees, so it is likely that they will be positive 
towards any initiative where this could be an outcome. The 
IT infrastructure in the region is good, but there will likely be 
some challenges in more remote parts. For example, there 
are still areas without 3G or 4G mobile data coverage, and 
some of these areas could be in places where it would be 
useful to place sensors.  
The final factor, Natural environment, addresses the need 
for more sustainable and greener cities. Therefore, placing 
sensors that monitor traffic patterns and pollution, building 
usage and learning more about how and where the people in 
the region travel, are objectives in our proposed study. 
Knowing more about travel patterns allows for optimal use 
of available public transport, and could also facilitate the 
creation of apps for carpooling. Another use of sensors could 
be to scan cars passing tollbooths, and to impose higher tolls 
on vehicles with higher CO2 and NOX emissions. 
A. Recruitment and participation 
We would argue that the people and communities factor 
is essential in our proposed project. Close collaboration with 
the people who would be affected by any policy changes that 
might come from the project might help alleviate some of the 
resistance that could otherwise arise. As the brief overview 
of sensor technology and existing research projects show, 
there are so many possibilities that some kind of process is 
needed to narrow the scope of the project. Because cities and 
regions have different challenges, we propose to gather 
relevant stakeholders in a planning workshop, where the 
objective is a) to identify the most pressing objectives for the 
region in question, and b) to figure out the technical, legal 
and organizational challenges facing each individual 
objective. Identifying relevant stakeholders can be done for 
example through the stakeholder framework of Podnar and 
Jancic [36].  
Participation and collaboration between government, 
citizens and organizations is seen as essential in the 
development of smart communities [37]. Many of the 
activities (parks and recreation, planning and community 
development) typically involved in smart city projects can 
benefit greatly from citizen participation [38], and there is a 
clear 
correlation 
between 
cities’ 
adoption 
and 
implementation of sustainability policies and public 
participation in policy formulation [38].  
In addition to smart city benefits, many researchers and 
political theorists see political participation as essential for 
democracy [39]. By engaging more citizens in political 
processes, they will take more responsibility for their own 
situation, and contribute more to society. Simultaneously, 
other research [40] has shown that citizens are not that 
interested in participating. Their main interest is that 
government provides services in a good way. 
This latter view finds support in evaluations of 
participation studies. There have been many initiatives to 
utilize electronic communication to improve participation. 
However, citizens tend to remain passive [41]. Those who 
report to be active participants in democratic processes only 
make up a small percentage of the population [42]. Thus, 
Hibbing and Theiss-Morse [40] argue for so-called “stealth 
democracy”, where citizen input is collected in other ways 
than through direct and active participation.  
While active participation is difficult, people can be 
willing to contribute in other ways. Decision-makers can 
implement passive crowdsourcing, which requires less 
commitment and time than other forms of participation [43]. 
This can be done by using sensors and smartphones, coupled 
with analytics software that provides important data for 
decision-makers as outlined in the previous Sections. Passive 
crowdsourcing is an important part of the project we report 
on in Section V.  
However, active participation is also necessary in order 
to create useable applications that will encourage people to 
become “passive participants”. The EU-supported NET-
EUCEN thematic network has proposed a framework for 
measuring user involvement, with indicators for how well 
users are involved in defining, developing and assessing 
digital government [44]. While this framework was 
developed for eGovernment in general, the principles of 
involvement can be transferred to the smart city context. The 
individual indicators for the three dimensions are presented 
in Table I.  
Our goal is to involve users and stakeholders in all 
phases of the project. In the definition phase, the users and 
stakeholders will discuss and decide on issues where senor 
input, analytics and visualization will be of most value. In 
the development phase, the users and stakeholders will be 
involved in the design and development process to make sure 
that both technology and visual output is useful to handle the 

584
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
issues found during the definition phase. In the assessment 
phase, the users and stakeholders will be asked to provide 
feedback on possible modification or extensions. 
 
Table I.  
 Dimensions and indicators of user involvement 
 
V. 
EXPERIENCES FROM A PILOT PROJECT: A MOBILE 
PLATFORM FOR ENVIRONMENTAL MONITORING 
In this section, we present experiences from our pilot 
project to design and develop a mobile platform for 
environmental monitoring. Many cities have problems 
related to air quality. In discussions with city administrators 
and politicians, we found that environmental monitoring is 
high on their agendas. 
The Norwegian cities of Oslo and Bergen experience 
severe problems with air quality, especially during the winter 
season. The two cities have implemented regulatory 
measures to reduce the emission of pollutants. When 
pollution levels are high, the City of Bergen restricts the use 
of cars based on the last digit of the number plates. In Oslo, 
the city will be closed for cars with diesel engines on days 
with high pollution levels. Romanian cities, in particular 
Bucharest, experience high pollution levels due to heavy 
traffic. The problem is global, with most big cities reporting 
environmental problems. 
Air quality is commonly monitored by use of stationary 
units. Such stationary units are expensive, and provide data 
with low granularity. The stationary units are located 
throughout the city, but the number of units is small (e.g., the 
City of Oslo has 12 such stationary units). This low 
granularity has led to criticism from motorists, who claim 
that air quality measurements are not reflecting the actual 
level of pollution, only the level of pollution in a few 
selected areas. Thus, having more measurements from more 
locations can help justify policy measures to reduce 
emissions on days with high pollution. In addition, people 
who experience health problems due to pollution can use 
these numbers to avoid staying in, or travelling to, high 
pollution areas.  
A. The Pilot Project 
The main objective of the pilot project was to design and 
develop an inexpensive environmental monitoring unit using 
off-the-shelf components to be deployed in cars. The cities 
own a lot of cars, and they are regularly parked throughout 
the city.  One example is the cars used by the home care 
service. The caregivers park their cars when visiting patients, 
and moves from one location to the next at regular intervals. 
In the pilot project we built a prototype of the 
environmental monitoring platform, and secured funding for 
production of twenty units to be deployed in cars. These 
twenty units will allow us to demonstrate the practical 
usefulness of our mobile platform, and also provide a 
platform for further research and additional funding. 
B. Project Partners and their Expertise 
“Lucian Blaga” University of Sibiu (LBUS) has been 
working on embedded systems for many years, developing 
an application that keeps track of people inside a building 
based on collecting data from sensors [45] and using 
artificial intelligence tools to model energy consumption in 
buildings based on alternative data sources, such as the 
number of vehicles in a parking lot. LBUS experience 
related to smart buildings concept was materialized in 
development of a PLC-based embedded system that aims to 
automate processes and reducing the house energy 
consumption by optimizing the entire hardware assembly 
and software algorithms [46].  
University College of Southeast Norway (USN) has a 
research group focusing on “smart cities”. Smart cities use 
technology to improve services and the quality of life for 
citizens. The smart cities research is well aligned with the 
embedded systems expertise of LBUS. USN has also 
collaborated with cities and municipalities on many 
technology related projects. 
C. Related Work 
The pilot project included a literature search to find 
related projects and developments. We found examples of 
mobile environmental monitoring units, and a couple 
projects related to monitoring by cars: 
The Green Watch project [16] distributed 200 smart 
devices to citizens of Paris. The devices sensed ozone and 
noise levels as the participants walked the streets of Paris. 
CITI-SENSE, a project funded by the European Union, 
developed LEO (Little Environmental Observatory), a hand-
held environmental monitoring unit [48]. This unit monitors 
three gases (nitrogen dioxide, nitrogen monoxide and 
ozone), as well as temperature and humidity. CITI-SENSE 
targeted people living in nine participating cities – 
Barcelona (Spain), Belgrade (Serbia), Edinburgh (UK), 
Haifa (Israel), Ljubljana (Slovenia), Ostrava (Czech 
Republic), Oslo (Norway), Vienna (Austria) and Vitoria 
(Spain).  

585
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A research team from South Korea used a dedicated van 
containing environmental measurement equipment [47]. The 
van can be driven to locations where measurements are 
wanted. 
As mentioned before, Bröring et al. demonstrated the 
use of the OBD-II [17] interface connector to collect 
information from the car itself (velocity, fuel consumption). 
We have not found anyone pursuing the idea of using 
parked cars as sensor platforms. Such solution will provide 
more data and better granularity than existing solutions. 
Further, the similar projects we have identified are all large, 
well-funded and to varying degrees relying on expensive 
production processes. We demonstrate that projects such as 
these can be done in a low-cost way, using off the shelf 
hardware and a bit of creativity.  
D. The Prototype 
Our prototype used Intel Edison combined with sensors 
(air quality, temperature, humidity barometric pressure, 
noise) and a GPS receiver. The communication with the 
server was done through an Android phone. The Intel Edison 
used the built-in Bluetooth to communicate with the phone. 
The prototype was tested and evaluated. The feedback 
made us reconsider the use of an Android phone for 
communication. It requires the phone owner to install and 
configure an app, and also pay for the data traffic. A 
dedicated phone would be expensive, and many city 
employees would object to use their own mobile phones. It 
would also exclude iPhone owners. The noise sensor did not 
provide useful information when sampled at intervals. Noise 
is contextual. A large truck passing the sensor at the right 
moment may give a very high reading. The Intel Edison 
processor is also quite expensive compared to alternatives. 
Based on our experiences with the prototype, we have 
redesigned our environmental monitoring unit. The new 
version uses a LinkIt Smart 7688 Duo with two processors. 
The main processor is running the OpenWrt Linux 
distribution and will handle communication and location data 
from the GPS receiver. The second processor is compatible 
with Arduino, and handles the sensors. We also decided to 
include a GSM mobile data unit to avoid the use of an 
Android phone. A dust particle sensor replaced the noise 
sensor.  Fig. 3 shows the architecture of the environmental 
monitoring unit. A total of sixteen units have been produced 
for field testing. 
Whenever the car is parked the environmental monitoring 
unit will start sending environmental data to a server at 
regular intervals. This allows us to collect information from 
many different locations, and thus provide a much better 
granularity than existing solutions. 
E. Platform Design 
After launching the software (at boot-up), the platform 
needs about three minutes for heating and calibrating the air 
quality sensor. The Arduino compatible processor will then 
start collecting information from the sensors (air quality, 
dust particles, temperature, humidity and barometric 
pressure). The other processor, running Linux, will collect 
location and time from the GPS, and connect to the server. 
The Linux application will then collect data from the 
Arduino part, and send the data to the server. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Environmental Monitoring Unit Architecture. 
F. The results and project impact 
The pilot shows the possibility of making affordable 
units based on off-the-shelf technology. Twenty units will be 
enough to show the feasibility of our proposed solution.  The 
increased granularity of measurements will help decision 
makers making better decisions, and will be important to 
identify specific locations with air quality problems. 
The "proof of concept" prototypes will be used for 
experiments, but more important to pave the road for a larger 
joint project on data analytics and visualization of collected 
environmental data. 
The results will be available on a web site, and citizens 
can use the results to avoid exposure to high levels of 
pollution. This is of particular value to citizens suffering 
medical conditions like asthma. Citizen can put pressure on 
politicians to reduce pollution levels. Politicians and city 
administration can use the results to explain the necessity of 
using 
regulatory 
measures 
to 
reduce 
traffic 
when 
environmental conditions are bad. The results may also be an 
instrument to make citizens aware of the need to cut down 
the car energy consumption and reduce their carbon 
footprint. 
The platform can be used for other purposes. It can be 
used as an inexpensive stationary unit attached to buildings 
and other structures. By changing the sensors, it can also be 
used to measure water pollution, to monitor patients in their 
homes or to make buildings and houses more safe and 
secure. In such cases most of the software can be reused. It is 
our hope that this demonstration and platform can motivate 
others to follow their own ideas for how sensors can be 
applied. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION – A USER CENTERED RESEARCH DESIGN 
In Section IV, we presented the Chourabi et al. [12] 
framework for smart cities, and applied it to our project in 
order to identify challenges that will have to be addressed. 
Analyzing these challenges, it became apparent that all of 
them were related to user involvement and stakeholder 
management in one way or another.  

586
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The technologies we use demand a certain set of skills 
that can be met by involving our project partners from 
analytics and engineering.  
Organizing the project across different municipalities is 
another challenge, and again user involvement/stakeholders 
are important for resolving the challenge, as there is an 
existing partnership between the municipalities, where we 
have access to key stakeholders.  
 Addressing the people and communities factors requires 
citizens who are willing the act as human sensors, by 
installing the sensor pack in their cars and contributing to a 
cleaner environment.  
Finally, economy and infrastructure challenges include 
the region’s slow growth, and the scattered knowledge hubs 
located in different cities in the region. Local knowledge 
about where to find the skills is necessary and it is also 
essential to set up a regional network of partners in order to 
fulfil the overall project goal of creating a more integrated 
and green region. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND IMPLICATIONS 
In this paper, we propose a research design for smart city 
projects using sensors to collect data on a range of variables 
related to transport, energy use, safety, health and the 
environment. The sensors may be stationary (fixed to 
buildings), mobile (e.g., mounted in cars) or part of 
smartphones and their ecosystem (e.g., smart watches 
containing sensors).  
The collected data can be analyzed and visualized so that 
decision makers are able to make better informed decisions 
related to day to day management of cities. The collected 
data can also be used for prediction of what will happen in 
the future.  
We apply the smart city framework of Chourabi et al. 
[12] to address the potential issues involved in such projects. 
In addition, we argue that it is essential for smart city 
projects to find ways of involving key stakeholders, as 
different cities and regions are faced with different 
challenges. Key stakeholders should be involved in both 
project 
definition, 
project 
development 
and 
project 
assessment.  
Finally, we present findings from a pilot project that has 
followed our approach, in order to demonstrate its relevance.  
Implications for research: we contribute towards testing 
the Chourabi et al. framework [12] in a real life setting, 
verifying that the framework is useful for analyzing smart 
city projects, and uncovering challenges and obstacles that 
needs to be overcome in order to create successful smart city 
projects. Further, we show the need for user involvement in 
these projects, and present an example of a research design 
that might be useful for other research projects in the future. 
Implications for practice: we show that the factors put 
forth by Chourabi et al. [12] are indeed important to address, 
and suggest that the best way of addressing them is by 
involving key stakeholders, and by utilizing the power of the 
crowd by having citizens act as “human sensors”. Further, 
we address issues related to the granularity of existing air 
quality measurements. Current sensors for measuring air 
quality are few and far between. Most Norwegian cities only 
have one or two locations. Pollution can be a very localized 
phenomenon, restricted to certain areas because of buildings, 
winds, density of traffic and many other reasons. By fitting 
cars with sensors we are able to get measurements from 
many different areas, and can therefore create real time 
pollution maps with a much higher level of detail than those 
currently being made. This can be of great help to population 
groups such as parents with small children, asthmatics and 
people with allergies, as they can access data about polluted 
areas and make plans to avoid these if necessary.  
 Finally, and most importantly, we show that sensors can 
be deployed at low cost. There are other projects similar to 
ours that use sensors to measure pollution and other variables 
(see for example the citi-sense project, http://www.citi-
sense.eu/), but those are large, EU-funded projects. We 
demonstrate that by using off-the-shelf technology and some 
creative assembly, it is possible to reach the same results 
with fewer resources. For low- and middle-income countries, 
cost is an important issue.   
Limitations and further research: First, while we have 
finished part of the project and report on this here, this is still 
but a small piece of the entire project proposal. We need to 
conduct further research in order to address the entire scope 
of the project (creating a more integrated and greener 
region). In the next phase of the project, which is currently 
underway, we will build and deploy the 20 sensor sets we 
have received funding to build. After having been deployed 
for some time, we can experiment with the proper tools and 
techniques for analyzing the data. Later research articles will 
present the findings from these phases of the project. 
Despite these limitations, our current progress is 
promising, and demonstrates how smart technology can 
contribute towards a better future for cities and their 
inhabitants, in an inexpensive way.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was partially supported by a grant from 
Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway, contract type “small size 
bilateral cooperation projects”, “Scholarships and inter-
institutional cooperation” program - RO15, EEA Financial 
Mechanism 2009-2014, the Romanian National Agency for 
Community Programs in the Field of Education and 
Vocational Training, Contract Nos. 3/07.07.2016, COD: 16-
SEE-PCB-RO SIBIU01 / 01. 

587
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
REFERENCES 
 
[1] L. Berntzen, M. Rohde Johannesen, and A. 
Florea, “Sensors and the Smart City,” in 
Proceedings of SMART 2016, The Fifth 
International Conference on Smart Cities, 
Systems, 
Devices 
and 
Technologies 
(IARIA), May 2016, pp. 31-36, ISSN: 2308-
3727, ISBN: 978-1-61208-4763. 
[2] S. Dirk and M. Keeling. "A Vision of 
Smarter Cities: How Cities Can Lead the 
Way into a Prosperous and Sustainable 
Future," IBM Global Business Services: 
New York: Somers, 2009. 
[3] J.M. Barrionuevo, P. Berrone, and J.E. 
Ricart. "Smart cities, sustainable projects," 
IESE Insight, Vol. 14, pp. 50-57, 2012. 
[4] B. Johnson, "Cities, systems of innovation 
and economic development," Innovation 
Management Practice and Policy, 10(2-3), 
pp. 146-155, 2008. 
[5] B.A. Israel, J. Krieger, D. Vlahov, S. Ciske, 
M. Foley, P. Fortin, R. Guzman, R. 
Lichtenstein, R. Granaghan, A.G.  Palermo, 
and G. Tang, "Challenges and Facilitating 
Factors in Sustaining Community-Based 
Participatory 
Research 
Partnerships: 
Lessons Learned from the Detroit, New 
York City and Seattle Urban Research 
Centers," Journal of Urban Health. 83(6): 
pp. 1022-1040, 2006. 
[6] E. Holden and I.T. Norland, "Three 
Challenges for the Compact City as a 
Sustainable 
Urban 
Form: 
Household 
Consumption of Energy and Transport in 
Eight Residential Areas in the Greater Oslo 
Region," Urban Studies, 42(12): pp. 2145-
2166, 2005. 
[7] P. Sanders, "How Traffic Jams Affect Air 
Quality," 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://www.environmentalleader.com/ 
2012/01/05/how-traffic-jams-affect-air-
quality/, 2012. 
[8] R.P. Dameri and A. Cocchia, "Smart city 
and digital city: twenty years of terminology 
evolution," in Proceedings of ITAIS - 10th 
Conference of the Italian Chapter of AIS, 
2013, pp. 1-8. 
[9] A.M. Townsend, "Smart Cities: Big Data, 
Civic Hackers, and the Quest for a New 
Utopia," New York: W.W Norton & 
Company, 2014. 
[10] BIT, "Smart Living with Automation,” in 
Proceedings of World Congress of U-
homes,. Nov. 2011. 
[11] G. Kortuem, F. Kawsar, D. Fitton, and V. 
Sundramoorthy, "Smart objects as building 
blocks for the internet of things," IEEE 
Internet Computing, 14(1): pp. 44-51, 2010. 
[12] H. Chourabi, T. Nam, S. Walker, J.R. Gil-
Garcia, K. Nahon, S. Mellouli, T.A. Pardo, 
and H.J. Scholl, "Understanding Smart City 
Initiatives: 
An 
Integrative 
and 
Comprehensive Theoretical Framework," in 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
45th 
Hawaii 
International 
Conference 
on 
System 
Sciences, 2289-2297, 2012. 
[13] J.M. Shapiro, "Smart Cities: Quality of Life, 
Productivity, and the Growth Effects of 
Human Capital," Review of Economics and 
Statistics, 88(2), pp. 324-335, 2006. 
[14] R. Newman, "The next groundbreaking 
mobile device: your car," [Online] Available 
from: 
https:// 
ca.finance.yahoo.com/news/the-next-
groundbreaking-mobile-device--your-car-
191728738.html, 2015. 
[15] S. Abdelhamid, H.S. Hassanein, and G. 
Takahara, "Vehicle as a Mobile Sensor," 
Procedia Computer Science, vol. 34, pp. 
286-295, 2014. 
[16] C. Ratti and A. Townsend, "Smarter Cities - 
The Social Nexus," Scientific American, 
305(3): pp. 42-48, 2011. 
[17] A. Bröring, A. Remke, C. Stasch, A. 
Autermann, M. Rieke, and J. Möllers, 
"enviroCar: A Citizen Science Platform for 
Analyzing and Mapping Crowd-Sourced 
Car Sensor Data," Transactions in GIS, 
19(3): pp. 362-376, 2015. 
[18] K. Karvinen, T. Karvinen, and V. Valtokari, 
"Make: Sensors, A Hands-On Primer for 
Monitoring the Real World with Arduino 
and Raspberry Pi," Maker media, 2014. 
[19] E. Gertz and P.D. Justo, "Environmental 
Monitoring with Arduino - Watching our 
World with Sensors," Maker media, 2012 
[20] E. Fregonara, R. Curto, M. Grosso, P. 
Mellano, D. Rolando, and J.-M. Tulliani, 
"Environmental 
Technology, 
Materials 
Science, Architectural Design, and Real 
Estate 
Market 
Evaluation: 
A 
Multidisciplinary Approach for Energy-
Efficient Buildings," Journal of Urban 
Technology, 20(4): pp. 57-80, 2013. 
[21] U. Sivarajah, H. Lee, Z. Irani, and V. 
Weerakkody, 
"Fostering 
smart 
cities 
through 
ICT 
driven 
policy-making: 
Expected 
outcomes 
and 
impacts 
of 
DAREED project," International Journal of 
Electronic Government Research, 10(3), pp. 
1-18, 2014. 
[22] M. 
Tomitsch 
and 
M.H. 
Haeusler, 
"Infostructures: Towards a Complementary 
Approach for Solving Urban Challenges 
through Digital Technologies," Journal of 
Urban Technology, 22(3): pp. 37-53, 2015. 
[23] H. Shahrokni, L. Årman, D. Lazarevic, A. 
Nilsson, and N.  Brandt, "Implementing 
smart urban metabolism in the Stockholm 
Royal Seaport: Smart city SRS," Journal of 
Industrial Ecology, 19(5): pp. 917-929, 
2015. 
[24] M.N.K. Boulos and N.M. Al-Shorbaji, "On 
the Internet of Things, smart cities and the 
WHO Healthy Cities," International Journal 
of Health Geographics, 13(1): pp. 10-15, 
2014. 
[25] I. Kickbusch and C. Sakellarides, "Flu City-
Smart City: applying health promotion 
principles to a pandemic threat," Health 
Promotion International, 21(2), pp. 85-87, 
2006. 
[26] S.-H. Liao, P.-H. Chu, and P.-Y. Hsiao, 
"Data mining techniques and applications – 

588
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A decade review from 2000 to 2011," 
Expert Systems with Applications, 39(12), 
pp. 11303-11311, 2012. 
[27] S.U. Appel, D. Botti, J. Jamison, L. Plant, 
J.Y. Shyr, and L.R. Varshney, "Predictive 
analytics can facilitate proactive property 
vacancy policies for cities," Technological 
Forecasting and Social Change, (89), pp. 
161-173, 2014. 
[28] P. Massa and M. Campagna, "Social Media 
Geographic Information: Recent Findings 
and 
Opportunities 
for 
Smart 
Spatial 
Planning," TeMA Journal of Land Use, 
Mobility and Environment. Special issue, 
June 2014, pp. 645-658, 2014. 
[29] D. Quercia, and D. Saez, "Mining Urban 
Deprivation 
from 
Foursquare: 
Implicit 
Crowdsourcing 
of 
City 
Land 
Use," 
Pervasive Computing, IEEE, 13(2): pp. 30-
36, 2014. 
[30] R. de Amicis, G. Conti, B. Simões, R. 
Lattuca, N. Tosi, S. Piffer, and G. Pellitteri, 
"Geo-visual analytics for urban design in the 
context of future internet," International 
Journal 
on 
Interactive 
Design 
and 
Manufacturing (IJIDeM), 3(2): pp. 55-63, 
2009. 
[31] F. Lécué, S. Tallevi-Diotallevi, J. Hayes, R. 
Tucker, V. Bicer, M. Sbodio, and P. 
Tommasi, "Smart traffic analytics in the 
semantic web with STAR-CITY: Scenarios 
system and lessons learned in Dublin City," 
Web Semantics: Science, Services and 
Agents on the World Wide Web, (27-28): 
pp. 26-33, 2014 
[32] E.Y.W. Seto, A. Holt, T. Rivard, and R. 
Bhatia, "Spatial distribution of traffic 
induced noise exposures in a US city: an 
analytic tool for assessing the health impacts 
of urban planning decisions," International 
Journal of Health Geographics, 6(24), 2007 
[33] O. Pol, P. Palensky, C. Kuh, K. Leutgöb, J. 
Page, and G. Zucker, "Integration of 
centralized energy monitoring specifications 
into the planning process of a new urban 
development area: a step towards smart 
cities," 
e 
& 
i 
Elektrotechnik 
und 
Informationstechnik. 129(4), pp. 258-264, 
2012. 
[34] K. Yang and S.K. Pandey, "Further 
Dissecting the Black Box of Citizen 
Participation: 
When 
Does 
Citizen 
Involvement Lead to Good Outcomes"? 
Public Administration Review, 71(6), pp. 
880-892, 2011. 
[35] Z. Ebrahim and Z. Irani, "E-government 
adoption: 
architecture 
and 
barriers," 
Business Process Management Journal, 
11(5), pp. 589-611, 2005. 
[36] K. Podnar and Z. Jancic, "Towards a 
Categorization of Stakeholder Groups: An 
Empirical Verification of a Three-Level 
Model," 
Journal 
of 
Marketing 
Communications, 12(4), pp. 297-308, 2006 
[37] A. Coe, G. Paquet, and J. Roy, "E-
Governance and Smart Communities: A 
Social Learning Challenge," Social Science 
Computer Review, 19(1), pp. 80-93, 2001. 
[38] K.E. Portney and J.M. Berry, "Participation 
and the Pursuit of Sustainability in U.S. 
Cities," Urban Affairs Review, 46(1): pp. 
119-139, 2010. 
[39] Ø. Sæbø, J. Rose, and L. Skiftenes Flak, 
"The shape of eParticipation: Characterizing 
an emerging research area," Government 
Information Quarterly, 25(3), pp. 400-428, 
2008. 
[40] J.R. Hibbing and E. Theiss-Morse,"Stealth 
Democracy: Americans' Beliefs About How 
Government Should Work," Cambridge 
Studies in Public Opinion and Political 
Psychology. Cambridge University Press, 
2002. 
[41] A. Kolsaker and L.L. Kelly, "Citizens' 
attitudes towards e-government and e-
governance: a UK study," International 
Journal of Public Sector Management, 
21(7), pp. 723 - 738, 2008. 
[42] E. Amnå and J. Ekman, "Standby citizens: 
diverse 
faces 
of 
political 
passivity," 
European Political Science Review, (2), pp. 
261-281, 2014 
[43] Y. 
Charalabidis, 
E.N. 
Louikis, 
A. 
Androutsopoulou, V. Karkaletsis, and A. 
Triantafillou, "Passive crowdsourcing in 
government 
using 
social 
media," 
Transforming Government: People, Process 
and Policy, 8(2): pp. 283-308, 2014 
[44] L. Berntzen, "Citizen-centric eGovernment 
Services: Use of indicators to measure 
degree of user involvement in eGovernment 
service development," in Proceedings of 
CENTRIC 2013, The Sixth International 
Conference on Advances in Human-oriented 
and 
Personalized 
Mechanisms, 
Technologies, and Services (IARIA) Oct. 
2013, pp. 132-136, ISSN: 2308-3492, 
ISBN: 978-1-61208-3063. 
[45] J.A. Oliveira-Lima, R. Morais, J.F. Martins, 
A. Florea, and C. Lima, "Load forecast on 
intelligent buildings based on temporary 
occupancy 
monitoring," 
Energy 
and 
Buildings, Volume 116, pp. 512–521, 
Elsevier, 2016. 
[46] A. Florea and I. Băncioiu "Future House 
Automation," in Proceedings of the 19th 
International Conference on System Theory, 
Control and Computing, Oct. 14-16, pp. 
699-704, 2015 
[47] C.-M. Li, B. Liu, R.-F. Qin, and N. Yang, 
"An urban mobile monitoring system 
integrating 
remote 
sensing 
and 
environmental 
sensors," 
in 
Design, 
manufacturing 
and 
mechatronics: 
Proceedings of the 2015 International 
Conference on Design, Manufacturing and 
Mechatronics (ICDMM2015)., pp. 510-519, 
2015. 
[48] A. Bartonova and the CITI-SENSE team, 
"CITI-SENSE Citizens´ observatories and 
what they can do for you," [Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://www.citi-
sense.eu/Portals/106/Documents/Disseminat
ion%20material/CITI-SENSE%20selected 
%20products%20information%20material_ 
15032016.pdf, 2016.  

