442
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A Study of Designing Service Model for Sightseeing Using BLE Beacons
-To Provide Tourism Information of Traditional Cultural Sites -
Yuko Hiramatsu, Fumihiro Sato
Faculty of Economics
Chuo University
Hachioji-shi, Tokyo, Japan
Email: {susana_y, fsato}
@tamacc.chuo-u.ac.jp
Atsushi Ito, Hiroyuki Hatano,
Mie Sato, Yu Watanabe
Graduate School of Engineering,
Utsunomiya University
Utsunomiya-shi, Tochigi, Japan
Email: {at.ito, hatano, mie, yu}
@is.utsunomiya-u.ac.jp
Akira Sasaki
GClue Inc.
Aizu-wakamatsu-shi,
Fukushima, Japan
Email: akira@gclue.jp
Abstract—We have developed a new smartphone application for
helping tourists using Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) beacons. The
application not only provides a guide for a speciﬁc location but
also explains the traditional customs and history of the area.
There are several smartphone applications for sightseeing and are
usually designed to provide extensive information through photos,
detailed explanation and users ’ comments. Such applications
are convenient. However, a large amount of information is not
always appealing to tourists. If tourists feel that they have to know
many things about an area, is the travel attractive anymore? The
promise of the unexpected is one of the things that make traveling
attractive. Our trials in Nikko, one of the world heritage sites
in Japan, demonstrate the effectiveness of the BLE beacon for
sightseeing, especially for foreign visitors and young Japanese
people, who walk around the area on foot. The application
displays information near each beacon. Beacons on the route to
the main shrine provide information regarding the local tradition
and history of that area. However, the exact location of the
beacons is unknown to the tourists before they visit the area.
It might be a surprise like an Easter eggs for tourists. Shop
owners install beacons in their shops and provide information
regarding their products and menus. The people living the area
help the tourists engage in local cultural activities, enhancing the
tourists ’experience of a traditional cultural city. In addition,
we have created a quiz function focused on speciﬁc landscapes.
This application is aimed at becoming a gateway to understanding
traditional culture. Through trials, it was proved that our service
model using smartphone and BLE beacons were very useful to
support sightseeing.
Keywords–Location-Based Service; BLE Beacon; Local infor-
mation; Smartphone Application; World Heritage; Zeigarnik effect.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The main purpose of this study is to develop a system to
help the tourists engage in local cultural activities, enhancing
the tourists ’ experience of a traditional cultural city. We
introduce our remarkable points of our service model for
tourist information and technology.
A. Services using Information and Communication Technology
Information
and
communication
technology
(ICT)
is
widely used for travel and tourism and has now made con-
siderable information available. Tourists get information about
maps, shops, accommodations, museums, events etc. However,
the plethora of information available on the Web and SNS is
not always appealing to tourists. We have to consider what
information is appealing to tourists, when they should receive it
and who the target users of this information should be. Before
using big data in cloud by GPS signals for tourists, we should
re-inspect and analyze the information contents.
We have been studying a service model for tourist using
Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) beacon [1]. In this paper, we
investigated the information needs of tourists in Nikko and
describe the result of experiments of provision of information
using a BLE beacon system in detail.
This study was selected as one of the research themes of
SCOPE [2] and was funded by the Ministry of Internal Affairs
and Communications of Japan [3].
B. Psychology of Tourists
Many previous studies have investigated environmental
psychology and tourism. Pearce and Stringer [4] studied the
issue from the viewpoint of physiology, cognition and indi-
vidual variation. It has been shown that among the factors
that drive people to travel to new places, the expectation of
experiencing the extraordinary plays a leading role [5]. The
term ’extraordinary’ here means experiences clearly differ-
ent from the usual lifestyle. Thus, busy workers may crave
relaxation, while bored young people may crave excitement.
Therefore, separately identifying specialized target audiences
and providing them with the unique information that matches
their expectations is necessary.
C. Cultural Differences
Tourism involves encounters with people and places. Each
place has its own characteristic culture, and these differences
between cultures make travel interesting and exciting. How-
ever, some tourists do not recognize the cultural signiﬁcance
of traditional sites.
For example, Japan has ancient temples, many of which
are located far from train stations. While this may at ﬁrst
appear to make visits inconvenient, traveling the route to the
temple has traditionally been a central feature of the visit.
There are often a series of wells en route to the main temple, at
which visitors to the shrine purify themselves by washing their
hands and their hearts, as well as smaller temples surrounding
the main one. Tourists who are unaware of this tradition

443
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
may not sense the full experience. Information on this is,
however, difﬁcult to ﬁnd on the Web, and if it exists, it is
often buried among the numerous photographs and comments
left by visitors unfamiliar with the location.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2
discusses related works. Section 3 sets out our proposal based
on user research in Nikko. In Section 4, we propose a service
proposal for young tourists and foreigners, and provide outline
of system design. Section 5 provides the result of experiments
and display the effect and usefulness of our service model and
smartphone application including quizzes to give satisfaction
to visitors of Nikko. At last, in section 6, we summarize this
research and discuss future studies.
II.
RELATED WORKS
A. Our Previous Work
Students go on school trips in Japan [6]. While such
outdoor activities are valuable, students cannot fully grasp
the artistic or cultural value and meaning of the objects or
scenery by simply viewing them [7]. To address this problem,
we developed a new learning model for outdoor study [8] [9].
Human beings do not always recognize what they see.
For example, in the game of photo hunt, we may not be
able to tell the difference between two similar photographs.
However, once a particular object is noticed, our attention is
focused on it. We exploited this concept by developing a quiz
to be used as a trigger to draw attention to a particular object
in the scenery that the students were viewing. The quizzes
encouraged positive responses. We argue that such methods
will be beneﬁcial for other tourist groups as well.
B. Related Works
1) Application for sight seeing: Many sightseeing applica-
tions for smartphones already exist in Japan [10], which allow
tourists to access information about restaurants, souvenir shops
and local weather, as well as to download maps. Counting
only local applications, 666 such applications were identiﬁed
in a 2015 study. Although 96% of these were free, 91%
were downloaded only 10,000 or fewer times [11]. The EU’s
TAG CLOUD project (Technologies lead to Adaptability and
lifelong enGagement with culture throughout the CLOUD)
used smartphone technology to provide information about tra-
ditional cultural sites [12] and to investigate ways of enabling
cultural engagement using cloud-based technologies. While the
TAG CLOUD uses a cloud-based service, our application was
designed to work without requiring access to the cloud, since
Internet connections may be limited in rural areas.
2) Beacon system: There are several types of indoor loca-
tion services offered through Wi-Fi APs. However, using them
is difﬁcult since the location information using a Wi-Fi AP is
not accurate enough. One reason for this is the low number of
APs. Usually, there are not enough APs in a space such as a
shopping mall.
Recently, iBeacon [13] has become popular for location-
based services. The iBeacon function is provided in an iOS
framework and is suitable for location-based services. From
a technical viewpoint, iBeacon uses BLE that is a very low-
power device working on batteries. On the contrary, Wi-Fi APs
usually require AC power. Furthermore, iBeacon is cheaper
than Wi-Fi APs. Therefore, installing BLE beacon in a target
area is very simple.
Moreover, there are several iPhone users in Japan. 50.2%
of the smartphone users in Japan have bought iPhones (January
2016) [14]. This is another reason that iBeacon is popular in
the Japanese market.
BLE beacons are mainly used for indoor location-based
services to indicate locations and display information. For
example, they are set in shopping malls or museums. When
smartphones receive signals from a beacon, product infor-
mation or pictures are displayed on the screen. In addition,
distributing coupons using beacons in a shop is possible.
BLE Beacons are also used for control systems helping in
maintaining bus records etc.
Therefore, there are many related papers about the indoor
use of the BLE beacon [15][16][17][18]. For example, there is
a service for migrating signage displays and the movement of
its users. This system tracks speciﬁc movements of users and
provides Web contents to them. To track a user, this system
estimates the position of the user based on the Bluetooth signal
strength [19].
As a novel approach, we have been using BLE beacons
outdoor [1] [20]. We can transmit local information using
beacons or push technology, which makes it is useful for
tourists and shop owners to send local or seasonal information.
The beacon system is useful for tourists from the viewpoint of
power supply as well.
III.
SERVICE PROPOSAL
We administered questionnaires to the visitors to Nikko
[21], in order to know the focus points for our new system,
on September 2014. A total of 606 questionnaires (534 in
Japanese and 72 in English) were completed. Table I shows
the results of the rotated matrix.
TABLE I. ROTATED MATRIX.
Component
1
2
3
Nature/Landscape
.008
.810
.189
History/Culture
.017
.853
.053
Street
.478
.680
.049
Traditional performing arts
.473
.676
.122
Food
.644
.269
.157
Activity
.716
.173
.226
Shopping
.835
.154
.093
Night spot
.760
-.005
.209
Personal exchange
.647
.053
.294
Easy booking
.151
.037
.868
Quality & price of hotels
.307
.039
.771
Transportation
.116
.147
.639
Prices
.279
.346
.477
Extration Method:Principal Component Analysis
Rotation Method: Varimax with Kaiser Normalization
a. Rotation converged in 5 itertion
Cluster analysis was used to conﬁrm this pattern. Respon-
dents were asked to evaluate sightseeing activities in Nikko on
a scale of one to ﬁve. As shown in Table I, the responses were
clustered into three main groups:
•
People who focus Food, Activity, shopping, Night
spot, Personal exchange ⇒ A group who valued its
own active experiences

444
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
•
People who focus Nature/Landscape, History/Culture,
Street, traditional performing arts ⇒ A group who
valued nature, history, or traditional factors
•
People who focus easy booking, Quality and prices of
hotels, Transportation, Prices ⇒ A group who valued
the quality of accommodation or the price of goods
and services
We used these 3 components. Using Ward’s method, which
is an alternative approach for performing cluster analysis,
the data was then classiﬁed into ﬁve clusters with these 3
components. As only three persons belonged to the 5th cluster,
we classiﬁed the results into the following four clusters, as
shown in Fig. 1.
FIGURE 1. EVALUATION OF THE PREFERENCES OF THE FOUR CLUSTERS.
1)
Tourists who do not wish to be active, or who are
mainly concerned about prices and accommodation
(n = 140).
2)
Tourists who do not have any special interests, but
who wish to stay active (n = 103).
3)
Tourists interested in nature or history (n = 62).
4)
Tourists who give a high rating to almost everything
in Nikko or who particularly wish to stay active (n =
37).
Tourists in the 1st cluster would like to visit the famous hot
springs in Nikko and are unlikely to be interested in extensive
information about Nikko, since they visit Nikko primarily for
rest. Tourists in the 4th cluster are active and have many
interests, but are less numerous than those in the 1st cluster.
The age composition of the groups is shown in Fig. 2. Over
70% of those in the 4th cluster were under 30 years old.
FIGURE 2. AGES OF TOURISTS IN THE FOUR CLUSTERS (%).
Young tourists tend to plan active trips to Nikko. Their
characteristic tendencies are as follows:
•
They come to Nikko by train and navigate Nikko by
bus or on foot.
•
They are smartphone users.
•
They know little about traditional culture.
•
They like to experience new things.
A key ﬁnding was that young people reported that they
would like to have enjoyed Nikko more completely and that
most of them were smartphone users. According to the survey
of Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications in Japan,
94.1% of 20 ’s use smartphone in 2014 [22].
Responses from foreign tourists showed the same proﬁle.
IV.
SERVICE PROPOSAL FOR YOUNG TOURISTS AND
FOREIGNERS
We explain our system and report the results of our trials
and explain the role-played in Nikko.
A. Service Flow
Tourists who know little about the area and the history
currently exchange comments using SNS. We therefore ad-
dressed the use of beacons to allow residents of the tourism
area to recover information from such tourists. We designed
our service system as shown in Fig. 3.
FIGURE 3. SERVICE FLOW.
Shop owners gave us information about the goods they
stock, seasonal festivals and other information. Tourists could
access this near the beacon, which was located in front or at
the entrance of the shop. Bus timetables were furnished by
the local bus operator and information about local attractions
was supplied by the tourist association. This information was
displayed on a map in the smartphone application (Fig. 4).
In addition, we devised several quizzes using the Zeigarnik
effect [23], aimed at young students on school trips. This is
a psychological effect. We, human beings remember better an
unﬁnished event or an incomplete one. If students answer a
quiz, they might keep thinking about it till they look at the
object, the answer of the quiz near iBeacon.
Shop owners could then access customer trafﬁc diagrams,
and teachers could monitor the location of their students.

445
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
FIGURE 4. BUS TIMETABLE.
B. Comparison of Technologies that can be used for Sightsee-
ing in Historic Areas
Current smart phones incorporate a range of sensors. Table
II lists the functions of these devices and their potential use in
tourist information services. Several of the devices can be used
to collect information and identify the location of smartphone
users.
However, foreign tourists rarely use roaming data com-
munication services because of their high cost, so we also
designed a service that did not require the use of 3G/LTE.
As both GPS and the camera quickly deplete the battery, we
designed our service to work without them. The use of AR
was a potentially interesting alternative navigation method;
however, it proved impossible to run this in the background.
The ﬁnal design of our application was as shown in Fig. 5.
We assumed the following design constraints:
1)
Information should be displayed using the BLE bea-
con. For near-ﬁeld communication, NFC and RFID
may also be used. NFC requires activating a tag,
which is inconvenient for tourists. RFID works in a
similar way to a BLE beacon, but no smartphone has
the RFID function.
2)
If 3G/LTE is not available, it must be possible to
download applications and information using Wi-Fi.
In the Nikko area, the City of Nikko provides a free
Wi-Fi service at the railway station and in some
shops, allowing tourists to download applications.
Wi-Fi provides location data, in order to replace GPS.
3)
The application should provide a full range of infor-
mation including location, shopping information and
bus timetables. Real-time information such as tempo-
rary changes to bus routes because of festivals or the
blooming of cherry blossom should be downloadable
using free Wi-Fi.
C. Information on Nikko as a World Heritage Site
Using beacons, we sent location-speciﬁc information
within a range between 2.3 and 10 m [24], which transformed
an anonymous road into a zone immersed in Japanese culture.
(Refer to Fig. 6)
This reﬂects the traditional Japanese method of attending
services of worship, in which the journey to and from the
TABLE II. FUNCTIONS AND DEVICES IN A SMART PHONE.
Functions
Devices in a smart phone
Relation between tourist
information
3G/LTE
Download Info.
Communication
WiFi
Download Info./Find Lo-
cation (Indoor)
BT
Find Location (Indoor)
Location
GPS
Find Location (Outside)
NFC
Near Field Communica-
tion
RFID
Get Short Information
BLE
Accelerometer
Detect Steps
Motion Sensor
Gyro
Detect Movement
Compus
Detect Direction
Picture
Camera
Get picture/Get Short In-
formation
through
2D
barcode
FIGURE 5. SYSTEM DIAGRAM.
FIGURE 6. BEACON MAP AT NIKKO.

446
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
service are not the same. Before entering a temple or shrine,
tourists purify themselves. After leaving the shrine, they eat or
go shopping. This is an established Japanese cultural custom,
which has long been taken for granted.
The erection of signboards is seldom permitted in Nikko,
following the Convention Concerning the Protection of the
World Cultural and Natural Heritage (UNESCO, 1972). Using
beacons, we were able to show the information on a smart-
phone. We created a traditional road,‘ SANDOU ’(it means
a road approaching the main temple or shrine in Japanese),
for the Nikko cultural heritage site. Using our beacon system,
tourists could pause on the road, some to read information
about the traditional temple there and others to ﬁnd shops
selling Japanese sweets, while young students answered a quiz.
The road became a pilgrimage route to the shrine.
D. Designing the Application and Locating the Beacons
Many trials using BLE beacons have been reported in
which location-speciﬁc and shopping information was pro-
vided in shopping malls and train stations. However, the BLE
beacon has rarely been used for outdoor sightseeing.
Beacons send advertising messages at preﬁxed intervals
using channels 37, 38 and 39. iBeacon, deﬁned by Apple,
sends advertising messages every 100 ms [13]. An important
characteristic of BLE is its low power consumption. BLE
requires only 1/10 to 1/100 the power of classic Bluetooth
signalling, and a beacon may function for a year or more
without a battery change.
To improve the visitor experience, we imposed the follow-
ing requirements on the system:
•
Reduce power consumption by avoiding the use of
GPS.
•
Provide sightseeing information related to the BLE
beacon location.
•
Have navigation operate in both foreground and back-
ground while displaying the distance from the station
to the Shinkyo Bridge entrance to Toshogu (the main
shrine).
•
Display a timetable of main bus routes.
FIGURE 7. SCREENSHOTS OF OUR APPLICATION NAMED“ NIKKO KAMEN
NAVI ”.
Figure 7 displays screenshots of the application named“
NikkoNavi ”. This application was implemented on iPhone (5
or later models).
Figure 8 explains the software components of this appli-
cation. In the operating system (OS), BLE access function
FIGURE 8. SOFTWARE DESIGN TO USE BLE BEACON.
always scans advertising message. If the OS catches an ad-
vertising message, the information of the advertising message
is forwarded to the application. For example, Core Location
framework of iOS (7 or later) provides three properties such
as proximity UUID, major and minor.
Android 5.0 or later also provides similar function. If
the information such as UUID, major and minor is re-
ceived from a beacon, the application retrieves information
that matches triples (UUID, major and minor). For example,
if UUID=cb86bc31-05bd-40cc-903d-1c9bd13d966a, major=1,
minor=1, the information relating to the beacon located in the
Nikko Station is retrieved from DB and it is displayed on the
screen of the smart phone. Each beacon provided information
related to its location. For example, when the application
received a signal from beacon #13, it displayed‘ On the left,
there is a slope. At the end of the slope, there is an old temple
named Kannonji; 180 m to Shinkyo Bridge and 1,250 m to
Nikko train station ’. The visitor could use this information to
ﬁnd a small, historic temple.
To ensure stable reception of signals between the Nikko
station and Shinkyo Bridge, we calculated the distance between
the beacons as follows. In order to receive a signal from
a beacon in the background, a smartphone must receive the
signal for one minute or longer. We set a beacon to send a
one-directional message using a steel signboard.
V.
EVALUATION
In this section, we discuss the effectiveness of our system.
A. First Trial: Discovery of Beacons
Six students and three faculty members participated in the
ﬁrst trial, conducted on November 9, 2014.
1) Discovery of Beacons: We tested the beacons under
three scenarios:
Scenario 1:Walking from Nikko station to Shinkyo Bridge
Scenario 2:Taking a bus from Nikko station to Shinkyo
Bridge
Scenario 3:
Walking to the Nikko visitor centre from
Shinkyo Bridge while visiting shops where a
beacon was located
In Scenario 1, users located approximately 95% of the bea-
cons while walking. The beacon system worked as expected.
In Scenario 2, the results were prima facie unstable. If the
user sat in the back of a bus, the smartphone was located near
the window, but if the user sat in a front seat, the smartphone
was below the window. In the former case, the smartphone
could easily capture signals from beacons, but in the latter

447
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
case, the metal body of the bus blocked the signal. As the
smartphone captured the beacon signal once a minute, the
signals from some beacons were missed. Detailed testing of
the relationship between the position at which the smartphone
is held and the bus speed is a subject for future study.
In Scenario 3, about 80% of the beacons were found,
although in one case, only 33% were found. This suggests
that the beacon system works best when users have already
decided which shops to visit.
2) User awareness of the beacons: We asked subjects to
monitor their awareness of the vibration and sound emitted
by the smartphone when a beacon was found. The results
showed that if users were holding the smartphone in their hand,
awareness of the beacon was high, at approximately 60%.
However, if the phone was in the user ’s pocket, awareness
fell to about 40%. Because it is dangerous to use a smartphone
while walking on the road, different ways must be found to
alert users to the beacon. In this regard, wearable devices such
as smart watches might prove useful. This will be addressed
in the next phase of our study.
3) Overall evaluation: We asked the participants to record
their overall impression of sightseeing using the BLE beacon.
The most common responses were‘ useful ’and‘ fun ’.
The map, in particular, contributed to a feeling of safety
(2.77 in 3 grades) and the information about shops was appre-
ciated (2.70 in 3 grades). Key comments on the‘ SANDO ’
(a Japanese road approaching the main shrine) included the
following:‘ I found a small spring on the road ’and‘ The
information on the little temple was good ’. The participants
appreciated the information triggered by the beacon.
B. Second Trial: The Zeigarnik Effect
1) In order to evaluate the Zeigarnik Effect: Detailed
navigation systems are commonly created for trips. Going
further, we have deliberately created a function to provide
incomplete experiences for students using the Zeigarnik effect.
The Zeigarnik effect carries the name of Bluma Zeigar-
nik, a Lithuanian-born psychologist. This effect explains that
completed tasks are less recalled than uncompleted tasks.
Using the same beacons, we created quizzes about history
and tradition of Nikko in order to make some uncompleted
points memory and to evaluate d the results consequence of
the Zeigarnik effect.
FIGURE 9. THE SCREENSHOTS OF QUIZZES.
We intended to design this tool for students undertaking a
school trip. Figure 9 shows screenshots of our quiz function.
The screens were designed using Japanese traditional patterns,
and we used some traditional words inform the Edo periods
(200-400 years ago). However, those words are used by elderly
people now and young people just understand the meanings.
We wanted students to experience an old atmosphere using
this function on a smartphone that is a symbol of cutting-
edge technology. This function was used as an entrance to ﬁnd
some secret of Nikko by attempting to solve quizzes containing
traditional cultural information.
This was tested on September 26 and 27, 2015. Twenty-
eight students participated in the test, of whom 23 completed
ten quizzes on the road to Toshogu Shrine and a control group
of ﬁve students walked the route without the application. The
participants were ﬁrst asked to complete quizzes about the
area, whose answers could be found by observing objects at
the site.
Before and after the walking using this application, the
participants answered questionnaires as followings.
1)
Before the test
•
Evaluations about factors for travel
•
Evaluations about Nikko (1)
2)
Immediately after the test
•
About the evaluation of the application
•
Drawing a map from the Nikko station to the
main shrine
3)
After one month
•
Checking three points on a photograph
4)
After two months
•
Evaluations about Nikko (2)
After the walk, the participants were ﬁrst asked to complete
a questionnaire and to draw a map of the area [25]. Drawing
a map is said that memory is mainly visual [26]. The answers
given by users of the application were more concrete than those
of the control group. Application users were able to place an
average of 9.18 objects on the map from the station to the
shrine, whereas the controls identiﬁed an average of only 5.80.
Application users could not only remember the answers to the
quiz questions but could also recall the shops near the beacon
sites where they had answered the quiz.
After a gap of a month, the participants completed another
questionnaire and checked three points on a photograph from
the route they had walked in Nikko. Heat maps were created
on the basis of the responses. Four photographs of the route to
the main shrine were used: two in the main shrine itself and
two showing several characteristic points.
FIGURE 10. HEAT MAP ON THE WAY TO THE MAIN SHRINE.

448
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure
10 shows a heat map of the route to the main
shrine. The participants paid no heed to the architecture along
the route. This is in contrast to the photographs in the shrine
where the gaze of the participants was directed to lettering.
The red point is a restaurant sign with very big letters.
Attention was also paid to written signs on the road. The street
was recognized as the way to the main shrine. The yellow
point shows that little attention was given to the BLE beacon
in which no letters were present in the photograph.
FIGURE 11. HEAT MAP IN THE SHRINE (QUIZ USERS).
FIGURE 12. HEAT MAP IN THE SHRINE (NON QUIZ USERS).
Figure 11 shows that the participants paid heed to the
architecture of the shrine, particularly to the upper part on
the right side. This was in contrast with the approach route.
Figure 12 is the heat map by non-application users (n=19).
That is the same photo as Fig. 9. Comparing Fig. 9 with Fig.
10, the upper part on the right side is signiﬁcantly different.
The results conﬁrmed that the use of the quizzes exploiting
the Zeigarnik effect improves recall. Students remembered
both the BLE beacon and the objects used in the quizzes.
The use of quizzes in the application helped users to recall
the shops around the beacons immediately after the trial. In
the future, we will expand the scope of our study to include
‘ SANDO ’on the route to the main Toshogu Shrine.
2) The Results of Data Analysis: We compared two same
questionnaires, before and two months after to the trip in
Nikko.
The evaluations of Nikko changed as described in Fig. 13.
Before the trip, in accordance with tourist psychology [5],
FIGURE 13. THE EVALUATION ABOUT NIKKO BEFORE AND AFTER THE
TRIP (5 POINTS ’LIKERT SCALE).
the participants expected to gain some new experiences. After
the experience, their expectations decreased, except for the
subject of‘History/Culture’, which was remarkable. Using our
application, the participants evaluated the traveling experience
higher after the trip than before the trip on this point.
In addition, we analyzed their answers to questionnaires
regarding our application. The results of the cluster analysis
are shown in Table III. Using Ward ’s method, the data were
then classiﬁed into tree clusters. Cluster 1 tended to evaluate
tangible factors of our application. Cluster 2 tended to evaluate
general impression. Cluster 3 evaluated contents (quizzes) and
the map that was being used for the quizzes ’ rally. Each
colored article reﬂected the highest numerical value in the tree
clusters.
We compared two evaluations on the traveling parameters
of each cluster (Refer to Table IV).
TABLE III. THE EVALUATIONS OF OUR APPLICATION
(COMPRISING CLUSTER ELEMENTS).
Cluster 1
Cluster 2
Cluster 3
Impression
3.29
4.57
3.25
Interface
4.00
4.14
3.25
Usability
3.00
3.71
3.25
Font size
4.14
4.00
4.00
Sound
4.43
3.29
3.25
Color
4.57
4.29
3.25
Expression
4.29
3.86
3.25
Contents(Quizzes)
3.14
4.14
4.25
Visibility of the Map
3.43
3.29
5.00
There are remarkable features in cluster 3. They evaluated
six factors higher after the trip than before the trip. In the other
two clusters, they evaluated only two or three factors higher. In
cluster 3, particularly, they evaluated‘ History/Culture ’high;
the numerical value increased by 1.5 points after the trip, in
the ﬁve-points ’Likert scale. However, the‘ interaction with
the local people ’was lower than in the other two clusters.
After two months, the impressions of this application and
evaluation of user interface faded out in cluster 1. However,
according to the answers in cluster 3, the quizzes ’contents
made the area more attractive than before.

449
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE IV. THE EVALUATIONS OF OUR APPLICATION (COMPRISING CLUSTER ELEMENTS).
(A) Before the trip
(B) 2 months after the trip
Incremental difference (B-A)
Cluster
1
2
3
1
2
3
1
2
3
Nature/Landscape
5.00
5.00
3.75
4.43
4.83
4.50
-0.57
-0.17
0.75
History/Culture
4.29
4.71
3.25
4.43
4.80
4.75
0.14
0.09
1.50
Street
4.43
4.29
4.50
4.00
3.83
4.00
-0.43
-0.45
-0.50
Hot Spring
4.14
3.71
3.50
3.57
3.50
3.25
-0.57
-0.21
-0.25
Traditional Performing Art /Specialty
3.86
4.00
3.75
3.71
3.83
4.00
-0.14
-0.17
0.25
Food
4.71
4.43
4.25
3.71
3.83
4.75
-1.00
-0.60
0.50
Experience-based tour
3.43
3.57
2.50
3.00
2.83
3.75
-0.43
-0.74
1.25
Shopping
4.14
3.14
3.50
3.00
3.17
3.75
-1.14
0.02
0.25
Night Spot
3.71
3.00
4.50
3.00
2.67
3.00
-0.71
-0.33
-1.50
Relationship with people in the area
2.83
3.29
3.00
3.71
3.33
3.00
0.88
0.05
0.00
Easy reservation
4.00
3.29
3.75
3.00
3.17
3.00
-1.00
-0.12
-0.75
Price of hotels
4.57
3.71
5.00
3.00
3.17
3.50
-1.57
-0.55
-1.50
Trafﬁc convenience
4.71
4.43
4.50
3.29
3.50
1.75
-1.43
-0.93
-2.75
Commodity price
4.14
3.57
3.75
3.00
3.83
3.25
-1.14
0.26
-0.50
3) About the contents of quizzes using iBeacons: The
previous section has shown that playing a quiz rally with our
application remained in the memories of the participants. We
would like to describe these quizzes in detail in this section.
FIGURE 14. IMPRESSIONS OF QUIZZES FUNCTION.
Our quiz rally function of the application made the par-
ticipants gain positive impressions (Fig. 14). They felt the
application was unique, useful and smart. Their answers leaned
toward the right side in the ﬁgure, which means they were
favorable impressions.
There is a characteristic point in their answers. Two types
of responses to the quizzes were observed; some quizzes
were taken up by several participants, whereas others were
not selected by any. Some users evaluated the quizzes as
interesting, while others mentioned that they were difﬁcult.
However, the quizzes certainly attracted their attention. On the
contrary, no one mentioned some quizzes.
The answers pertaining to the quizzes were very interesting.
The quizzes about just history were not highly evaluated.
In contrast, participants highly evaluated quizzes on traditions
and the local culture related to the actual daily life of the local
people or in comparison to the other nation ’s customs and
traditions. For example, they were interested in a quiz about
height above sea level of their location. Participants were urged
to compere with the places they have known in their ordinary
lives. The answer showed them the place they were is as tall as
the Tokyo Sky Tree, the highest tower in Japan. To compere
with their already known place made them to feel how the
location was high and were surprised. If the answer showed
only the number of height above sea level, they would not be
interested in the quiz so much. The explanation of the quiz
told them that the holy places are established at higher place
than usual lives.
They seemed to enjoy the cultural gap among them.
4) Additional Research: This quiz function was designed
for school trips in Japan. Before the trip, students gained
insights about the destination such as history, traditions and
speciﬁc art monuments in the area and created some quizzes
for the other classmates. They did not know what types
of quizzes were being prepared by the other students. The
students prepared for their outdoor excursion as an incomplete
experience. Such an incomplete experience arouses human
interest in the object.
Therefore, we conducted additional research on high-
school students. Eleven students participated in our test on 5th
of December 2015. Before the test, they had created several
quizzes for our application, and they had already added them
into our application.
They answered the same questionnaires as in our previous
test (not all, but two questionnaires: the evaluation of our
application and the evaluation of Nikko). The data from nine
students was valid. Two of them lived near the Nikko area;
thus, we did not use these data.
According to the results of the questionnaires, high-school
students remembered objects in the area better than the previ-
ous participants did. Moreover, they answered that they were
satisﬁed with our application more than previous participants
were. In addition, most of them chose‘ interesting ’as their
impression of our application (eight out of nine high-school
students). However, the data numbers were few to analyze
with statistical signiﬁcance. Therefore, we aim to continue our
research on this subject.
C. The Results of the Research for Foreign and Japanese
Tourists
We asked tourists to install our application named‘ Nikko
Kamen Navi ’ at the Tobu Nikko Station on the 29th-30th
August, 26th-27th September and 8th November 2015. Some

450
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
users voluntarily answered the web questionnaire after using
this application.
The total number of participants was 57:15 of them
were English-speaking foreign visitors, and 42 were Japanese
tourists. Both foreigners and Japanese tended to answer that
our application was convenient, interesting and helpful. How-
ever, foreigners chose these words on a larger percentage
than Japanese; A total of 47.62% (20 people) of the Japanese
tourists and 73.33% (11 people) of the foreigners answered
that this application was convenient.
Figure 10 shows a heat map of the route to the main shrine.
Japanese students paid attention to the Japanese letters in that
photo. They walked while looking at signboards on the way
to the main shrine. However, those inscriptions were only in
Japanese. There were no signboards for foreigners because the
area belongs to the world heritage site, and it was difﬁcult to
place some new signboards. Foreigners had little information
on the way to the main shrine. Therefore, providing them
with basic information using such an application proved to
be necessary.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS
Smartphone sightseeing applications offer several types of
information. However, tourists visit sites to see real places
and experience the real environment, while the smartphone is
only a tool to enhance the experience. Thus, the information
provided to the target audience must be reﬁned. Tourists are
not primarily motivated by convenience; in fact, unfamiliar ex-
periences or inconvenience may actually arouse their curiosity.
Traditional cultural locations have special historical or
cultural signiﬁcance. Introducing tourists to relevant cultural
information about these locations helps to create a strong
impression. Our application aims to provide such information.
Owners of shops en route to the main shrine provided us
with not only information concerning their shops but also
local traditions and seasonal events, enriching the information
available to tourists. A web questionnaire showed that tourists
found the information about shops useful. In the survey, 89.2%
of the respondents were under 30 years of age. Foreigners
could access the information using the English pages.
Local information can be used to attract visitors to other
cultural sites around the world, particularly in world heritage
sites designated as special protection areas, where signboards
are banned.
Japanese students studied the history and speciﬁc artworks
of the area before their school trip. By creating quizzes for their
classmates and tackling quizzes that the others had prepared,
interest was sparked. This provided the basis for our use of
the Zeigarnik effect, in which completed tasks are less well-
remembered than uncompleted tasks. Thus, we deliberately
created incomplete experiences.
From a technological viewpoint, we are planning to intro-
duce two new functions. One will allow the beacon to function
on a solar battery; the other is to enhance the positioning
system. We can get the time information to reach the beacon
points now (refer to Fig. 15). However, these data still cannot
be used for ships on the way to the main shrine.
It is possible to develop a PDR assisted by BLE Beacon.
We measured the change in the strength of the beacon signal
around a beacon. Figure 16 shows that near the beacon, the
FIGURE 15. LOG DATA OF THE APPLICATION.
FIGURE 16. MODELS FOR PDR.
strength of the signal increases. At this point, correcting the
PDR error is possible if the PDR system has the data of
exact position (longitude and latitude) or the signal contains
its location data (longitude and latitude). We have developed
a test application that can measure such data. We are planning
to conduct some tests using this application.
Such improvements will be useful for shop owners in order
to use tourist information. There are two different types of
users of this application. If we hope to continuously use this
application, we have to consider not only tourists but also local
users, i.e., the shop owners. They will install this application
and sometimes input seasonal information, advertisements or
other announcements. It is important for the application to re-
new the seasonal information; thereby making the information
more relevant and useful.
In addition, this system will be useful during times of
disaster, letting people know the location of the nearest safe

451
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
place via the map. Communication trafﬁc often occurs after a
disaster. Our application can be used without requiring Internet
access.
We are planning a collaboration with the other world
heritage site in Kyusyu, the south area in Japan. We will use
our beacon technology and application to provide descriptions
and explanations of the traditional places and customs. In some
cases, someone will carry a beacon and participants are going
to look for it. There are many methods to use beacons. It is
easy to put beacons at some events, too.
Our main goal is to inform tourists about traditional cul-
tures. Our system allows knowledge of the culture of a location
to be transmitted to the next generation and to foreigners. Such
travel information will inspire tourists and encourage them to
treat the culture respectfully.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to express special thanks to Mr. Funakoshi
(Nikko Tourism Association), members of the‘ Study group
on School Trip ’, Mr. Takamura and Mr.Yoshida (Hatsuishi-
kai: An association of Nikko shopping streets), Mr. Daisuke
Yawaka and Mr. Takao Masuda (Chuo Univ.).
This research was performed as a SCOPE (Strategic In-
formation and Communications R&D Promotion Programme)
project funded by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and Com-
munications (MIC) in Japan.
REFERENCES
[1]
Y.Hiramatsu, F. Sato, A. Ito, H. Hatano, M. Sato, Y. Watanabe, and A.
Sasaki,“ A Service Model using Bluetooth Low Energy Beacons -To
Provide Tourism Information of Traditional Cultural Sites -,”SERVICE
COMPUTATION 2016, pp. 14-19, March 2016.
[2]
The Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, Strategic In-
formation and Communications R&D Promotion Programme, [On-
line]. Available from: http://www.soumu.go.jp/main sosiki/joho tsusin/
scope/, [Nov. 30, 2016].
[3]
The Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications of Japan [Online].
Available from: http://www.soumu.go.jp/english/index.html, [Nov. 30,
2016].
[4]
P. L. Pearce and P. F. Stringer, ”The effect of task interruption and
closure on perceived duration,” Annals of Tourism Research 18, pp.
136-154, 1991.
[5]
T. Sasaki, ”Psychology of Tourism,” Kitahojishobou,Kyoto, pp. 51-59,
2007.
[6]
Study Group on School Trip, The research Report about usage of ICT
devices at junior high school and high school, [Online] . Available from:
http://joyful-shu-gaku.com/, [Nov. 30, 2016].
[7]
The research report about usage of ICT devices at junior high school
and high school, Study Group on School Trip, [Online]. Available from:
http://joyful-shu-gaku.com/, [Nov. 30, 2016].
[8]
Y. Hiramatsu., A. Ito, and F. Sato,“ The Site-speciﬁc Learning Model
on Mobile Phones Using Zeigarnik Effect - Designing Collaboration
Tool for Outdoor Studying,”Poster Presentation at HCII (International
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction), 2013.
[9]
Y. Hiramatsu, A. Ito, M. Fujii, and F.Sato, “ Development of the
Learning System for Outdoor Study Using Zeigarnik Effect, ” HCII
2014, pp. 127-137, (table of contents Part 2), 2014.
[10]
Magazine
of
Information
Processing
Society
Japan,
IPSJ-
MGN531103.pdf, October 2012.
[11]
Y. Kurata, M. Aoki, and H. Ai., “ Outline of the Local Application
Research in Japan (in Japanese), ” Society of Tourism Informatics,
Kanazawa, pp. 68-69, 2015.
[12]
Tag Cloud, Technologies lead to Adaptability and lifelong engagement
with culture throughout the CLOUD project, [Online]. Available from:
http://www.tagcloudproject.eu, [Nov. 30, 2016].
[13]
What is iBeacon? A Guide to Beacons, [Online]. Available from:http:
//www.ibeacon.com/what-is-ibeacon-a-guide-to-beacons/,
[Nov.
30,
2016].
[14]
Kantar Worldpanel ComTech, “ Smartphone OS sales market share,
” [Online]. Available from: http://www.kantarworldpanel.com/global/
smartphone-os-market-share/intro
[15]
R. Faragher,“ An Analysis of the Accuracy of Bluetooth Low Energy
for Indoor Positioning Applications,”University of Cambridge, UK; R.
Harle, University of Cambridge, UK [Online]. Available from: www.cl.
cam.ac.uk/∼rmf25/papers/BLE.pdf, [Nov. 30, 2016].
[16]
R. Faragher,“Location Fingerprinting With Bluetooth Low Energy Bea-
cons,”IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,Volume:33
, Issue: 11, pp. 2418-2428, May 6, 2015.
[17]
M. Radhakrishnan, A. Misra, R. Krishna Balan, and Y. Lee,“ Smart-
phones and BLE Services: Empirical Insights,”IEEE 12th International
Conference on Mobile Ad Hoc and Sensor Systems (MASS), pp. 226-
234, Oct. 2015.
[18]
M. Hultgren and D. Papathanopoulos,“ Evaluating the usage of Blue-
tooth Low Energy Beacons and Smartphones for Indoor Positioning
Systems, ” University of Gothenburg Chalmers University of Tech-
nology, Department of Computer Science and Engineering G¨oteborg,
Sweden, June 2014.
[19]
Y. Niwa, S. Shiramatsu, T. Ozono and T. Shintani, “ Realizing a
Direction Estimation System for Notiﬁcation using Bluetooth Beacons,”
IPSJ Interaction 2015, pp.537-541, 2015.
[20]
A. Ito, H. Hatano, M. Fujii, M. Sato, Y. Watanabe, Y. Hiramatsu, F.
Sato, and A. Sasaki,“A trial of navigation system using BLE beacon for
sightseeing in traditional area of Nikko,”IEEE International Conference
on Vehicular Electronics and Safety (ICVES) 2015, pp. 170-175, Nov.
2015.
[21]
Nikko City Ofﬁcial Homepage, “ Tourist Information, ” [Online].
Available from:http://www.city.nikko.lg.jp.e.tj.hp.transer.com, [Nov. 30,
2016].
[22]
The Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications of Japan [Online].
Available from: http://www.soumu.go.jp/main content/000357569.pdf,
[Nov. 30, 2016].
[23]
B. V. Zeigarnik, “ On ﬁnished and unﬁnished tasks, ”In W. D. Ellis
(Ed.), A sourcebook of Gestalt psychology, New York: Humanities
Press, 1967.
[24]
IMApp Indoor Mobile App, [Online]. Available from: http://www.
ultravioletapp.it/folio/imapp/, [Nov. 30, 2016].
[25]
P. W. Thorndyke and B. Hayes-Roth,“Individual differences in spatial
knowledge acquired from maps and navigation,”Cognitive Psychology
14, pp. 560-589, 1982.
[26]
R. N. Haber and L. G. Standing,“Direct measures of short-term visual
storage, ”Quarterly Journal of Experimental Phycology 21, pp. 43-54,
1969.

