299
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Animated Virtual Agents to Cue User Attention  
Comparison of static and dynamic deictic cues on gaze and touch responses 
Santiago Martinez, Robin J.S. Sloan, Andrea Szymkowiak and Ken Scott-Brown 
University of Abertay Dundee 
Dundee, DD1 1HG. UK 
s.martinez@abertay.ac.uk, r.sloan@abertay.ac.uk, a.szymkowiak@abertay.ac.uk, k.scott-brown@abertay.ac.uk 
 
  
Abstract — This paper describes an experiment developed to 
study the performance of virtual agent animated cues within 
digital interfaces. Increasingly, agents are used in virtual 
environments as part of the branding process and to guide user 
interaction. However, the level of agent detail required to 
establish and enhance efficient allocation of attention remains 
unclear. Although complex agent motion is now possible, it is 
costly to implement and so should only be routinely 
implemented if a clear benefit can be shown. Previous methods 
of assessing the effect of gaze-cueing as a solution to scene 
complexity have relied principally on two-dimensional static 
scenes and manual peripheral inputs. Two experiments were 
run to address the question of agent cues on human-computer 
interfaces. Both experiments measured the efficiency of agent 
cues analyzing participant responses either by gaze or by touch 
respectively. In the first experiment, an eye-movement 
recorder was used to directly assess the immediate overt 
allocation of attention by capturing the participant’s eye-
fixations following presentation of a cueing stimulus. We found 
that a fully animated agent could speed up user interaction 
with the interface. When user attention was directed using a 
fully animated agent cue, users responded 35% faster when 
compared with stepped 2-image agent cues, and 42% faster 
when compared with a static 1-image cue. The second 
experiment recorded participant responses on a touch screen 
using same agent cues. Analysis of touch inputs confirmed the 
results of gaze-experiment, where fully animated agent made 
shortest time response with a slight decrease on the time 
difference comparisons. Responses to fully animated agent 
were 17% and 20% faster when compared with 2-image and 1-
image cue severally. These results inform techniques aimed at 
engaging users’ attention in complex scenes such as computer 
games and digital transactions within public or social 
interaction contexts by demonstrating the benefits of dynamic 
gaze and head cueing directly on the users’ eye movements and 
touch responses. 
Keywords-agents; digital interface; touch interface; computer 
animation; reaction time; eyetracking. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The allocation of attention by a human observer is a 
critical yet ubiquitous aspect of human behaviour. For the 
designer of human-computer interfaces, the efficient 
allocation of user attention is critical to the uptake and 
continued use of their interface designs. Historically, many 
human-computer interfaces have relied on static textual or 
pictorial cues, or a very limited sequence of frames loosely 
interconnected over time (for example, on automated teller 
device menus, or on websites). More recently, the increased 
power of computer graphics at more cost effective prices has 
allowed for the introduction of high resolution motion 
graphics in human computer interfaces. Until now, 
psychological insights on attention and the associated 
cognitive 
processes 
have 
mirrored 
Human-Computer 
Interaction’s (HCI) reliance on either static or stepped 
pictorial stimuli, where stepped pictorial stimuli consist of a 
few static frames displayed over time to imply basic motion. 
Again, this legacy can be attributed to limitations in 
affordable and deployable computer graphics.  
This paper extends previous work from CONTENT 2010 
Martinez et al. [1] and is centered on the evaluation of fully 
animated (25 frames per second) virtual agents, where both 
the head and eye-movements of the agent are animated to 
allocate user attention. In contrast to most previous studies 
that have relied on manual inputs, using peripheral devices in 
response to agent cues, this research explores the possibility 
of two different ways of interaction. The first study uses the 
captured eye-gaze of participants as a response mechanism, 
following on from the work of Ware and Mikaelian [2], 
while the second study explores the suitability of attention 
allocation involving small amount/range of locomotion (i.e., 
touch action) on the same task. 
Where observers look in any given scene is determined 
primarily by where information critical to the observer’s next 
action is likely to be found. The visual system can easily be 
directed to guide and inform the motor system during the 
execution of information searching. Consequently, a record 
of the path that observer gaze takes during a task provides 
researchers with what amounts to a running commentary on 
the changing information requirements of the motor system 
as the task unfolds [3]. This is the underlying principle of the 
reported experiment, which is an expansion of the cognitive 
ethology concept expressed by Eastwood et al. [4] to virtual 
agents. The experiments are based on the deictic gaze cue – 
the concept that the gaze of others acts like a signal that is 
subconsciously interpreted by an observer’s brain, and that it 
can transmit “information on the world” [5]. The gaze of 
another human agent is inherently difficult to avoid, and it 
can be used as a specific pointer to direct an observer’s 
attention [6]. The incorporation of this concept can be easily 
implemented into an agent-based interface.  

300
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Another aspect this study evaluates is how locomotion 
can influence the effectiveness of cueing. Most research has 
been focused on response using peripheral devices. It is 
important to assess the validity of cues on a wider range of 
modalities. In this study we analyze gaze and touch inputs in 
order to assess the suitability of agent cues in these kind of 
interfaces and their applicability in upcoming interface 
design. 
The efficiency of interfaces such as these can be assessed 
based on the speed of observer response to cues. In both 
studies, the cues are presented as fully animated (dynamic) 
agents, stepped agents (two images), or static agent images 
(one image). Coupled with appropriate software, a virtual 
agent can anticipate a user’s goals, and point (using gaze) to 
the area where the next action has to be performed. An agent 
with animated gaze may therefore be useful to adopt in 
digital interfaces to guide user attention and potentially 
increase the speed of attention allocation, or where the work 
space of human physical action may have many possible 
choices; and the possibility of not selecting the right one is 
high. 
In the following sections, we will explain in detail the 
application of the virtual agent to cue user attention. In 
Section 2 we will describe the existing literature reviews 
from two different research fields. In Section 3, we will 
explain the method used to develop a gaze experiment. Gaze 
input results will be presented in Section 4. In Section 5, we 
will describe the method of a touch experiment and in 
Section 6 its results. Finally, in Section 7, we will discuss the 
overall conclusions of both experiments: dynamic versus 
static cues, the differences observed between the interaction 
modalities (e.g., gaze and touch) and the impact on user 
engagement and agent animation on real world interfaces. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Previous studies belong to two different but related 
research fields: namely cognitive psychology and computer 
interface design. Psychological studies have reviewed 
attention and its relationship with the cues. Posner [7] 
describes the process of orienting attention. Relative to 
neutral cue trials, participants were faster and/or more 
accurate at detecting a target given a valid cue, and they were 
slower and/or less accurate given an invalid cue.  Friesen and 
Kingstone [8] worked with faces and lines drawn following 
the gaze direction towards the target area. They found that 
subjects were faster to respond when gaze was directed 
towards the intended target. This effect was reliable for three 
different types of target response: detection, localization and 
identification. Langton and Bruce [9], and more recently 
Langton et al. [10], investigated the case of attention in 
natural scene viewing. They concluded that facial stimuli, 
that indicate direction by virtue of their head and eye 
position, produce a reflexive orienting response in the 
observer. Eastwood et al. [4] produced experimental findings 
leading to the conclusion that facial stimuli are perceived 
even when observers are unaware of the stimuli. In 2006, 
Smilek et al. [11] focused on isolating specific processes 
underlying everyday cognitive failures. They developed a 
measure for attention-related cognitive failures with some 
success, and introduced the term of cognitive ethology. 
Studies in HCI and computing are mostly focused on proving 
the validity of eye-gaze as an input channel for machine 
control. One exception was Peters et al. [12] in 2009, who 
tested shared attention behaviours during virtual agent 
interaction. The method was based on a head direction 
mapping metric (directedness) using their own algorithm and 
recorded by a common and cheap available equipment, a 
webcam. They demonstrated, with some success, the 
importance of participant head motion directed to an object 
in the interface to infer the level of engagement. However, 
the absence of gaze tracking disabled the analysis of 
peripheral eye movements and covert attention. Also, the use 
of a gaze-contingent moving cross-hair was an important 
distractor on the tasks, becoming intrusive. 
Concerning the study of the eye-gaze as an input 
modality, Ware and Mikaelian [2] used an eye-tracker to 
compare the efficacy of gaze with other more usual inputs, 
such as manual using physical devices. They found that the 
gaze input was faster with a sufficient size of target. Sibert 
and Jacob [13] studied the effectiveness of eye gaze in object 
selection using their own algorithm and compared gaze 
selection with a traditional input – a hand operated mouse. 
They found that gaze selection was 60% faster than mouse 
selection. They concluded that the eye-gaze interaction is 
convenient in workspaces where the hands are busy and 
another input channel is required. 
The above research shows how eye-gaze can be used to 
assess the response of a user when accurate tracking is 
possible. In addition, it has been demonstrated that the eye-
gaze of an agent can effectively allocate attention. However, 
the interplay between pictorial cues to gaze allocated 
attention (and subsequent assessment of allocated attention) 
is still to be fully explored. Specifically regarding this point, 
for the reported experiment, two goals were set by the 
authors; to assess the extent to which the gaze of the 
observer can be used to record their selection of targets and 
response time to agent cues, and to determine whether fully 
animated agents would offer an advantage over standard 
static (1-image) or stepped (2-image basic motion) agents 
when directing attention using gaze. By focusing on gaze as 
a means of target selection, this removes as much motor 
response as possible from the observer. Manual responses 
operated through any device inevitably introduce uncertainty 
in establishing the true response time since they are an 
indirect response to the gaze cue (requiring over allocation of 
attention and eye-gaze, followed by translation of the 
response signal to the input modality of device). Therefore, 
when it comes to assessing the effectiveness of animated 
versus static and stepped agent cues, directly recording the 
eye-movements of observers and using this data to determine 
the speed of their response and their selection of objects 
offers a significant advantage. 
Nevertheless, touch inputs are increasingly appearing in 
our daily lives on screens, via smartphones, kiosks or 
Automated Teller Machines (ATMs). In this context, touch 
is considered a natural way of interaction [14]. It rapidly 
evolved from places where there was no space for 
peripherals (i.e., factory environment), such mouse or 

301
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
keyboard, to be included in portable devices, desktop PCs, 
and home entertainment.  
Originally, use of touch screens was limited by a lack of 
precision, high error rates of selections [15] and absence of 
ergonomic standards in their physical design. Although 
touch calibrations are still required in some devices such as 
eye-trackers and large touch-sensitive display screens, the 
evolution of screen technologies (i.e., capacitive, resistive, 
surface acoustic wave [16]) has largely solved the precision 
and errors in selection problems. At the same time, advances 
in hardware design have tackled the ergonomic standards 
problem by allowing the user to adjust screen position by 
independent rotations on two axes for fixed monitors and 
three axes for tablet screens. Touch screen applications are 
beginning to be found in many different contexts, such as 
information 
kiosks, 
airports, 
education, 
museums, 
amusement parks, and very widely on self-service 
technologies (e.g. Schreder et al. cite the railways usage 
[17]). Attributes of touch screens are: fast response time [14] 
(especially in most recent generation of hardware), 
contribution to user satisfaction [18] [19] and above all direct 
manipulation of elements (an important advantage for 
infrequent users of interfaces [20]). 
Previous research states that directly touching the screen 
provides a more direct approach to elements on the interface, 
conferring a more natural way of handling objects than with 
a mouse or other pointer device [21]. Ever since Jef Hann’s 
TED talk [22] (which has since clocked up over 5million 
views), the repertoire of touch screen modality has been 
evolving towards a standard for user input. Wobbrock (2009) 
outlines a multitude of gestures available for the Microsoft 
Surface, but in the meantime a more reduced selection of 
gestures is becoming apparent through the development of 
hardware and associated applications. This is most obvious 
in the form of multi-touch mass produced items such as iPod 
Touch and more recently iPad (with 15 million sales at time 
of writing). The sales of touch screen computers are 
testament to the engaging qualities of the interface 
possibilities. However, how the direct physical action affects 
the interface elements’ performance compared to interactions 
with external buttons, track pads, trackballs or mice remains 
uncertain. In the context of public space touch screens, this 
uncertainty comes from two areas. Firstly from the influence 
of layout: when there are no peripheral buttons required to be 
used (e.g. keyboard or mouse) the keys get you around an 
ATM [18]. The second uncertainty comes from the use of 
fingers to touch the screen, fingers and hands that can 
occlude large parts of the screen and thus change the layout 
requirements of a display.  In this work, we evaluate whether 
the touch task constrains or interferes to some extent with 
how cues allocate the attention of user and whether these 
agent cues are as effective on a touch screen as in a non-
contact, gaze, interface. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
III. 
GAZE-RESPONSE EXPERIMENT: METHOD 
The experiment method was as follows below. 
A. Task description 
In this experiment, participants were asked to perform an 
object selection task (using their eye gaze alone) on a series 
of twenty-four different agent animations, presented on a 
monitor at a resolution of 1024 x 768. Each of the videos 
showed a virtual agent’s head in the centre of the screen 
surrounded by eight different possible target areas (see Fig. 
1). Each agent was displayed on screen for 3000 ms. Over 
the course of the video, the agent would orient its head and 
eyes to aim at a particular target square. The point at which 
the agent oriented its head and gaze (and the nature of the 
agent’s movement) was determined by the type of agent cue 
(see below). Of the eight target areas in each video, only one 
was the right choice in each trial – the one that was 
specifically indicated by the agent. If the participants 
selected that specific area with their eye-gaze, it was counted 
as a success. If the participant selected any of the other seven 
areas, it was counted as incorrect. Fixations to areas outside 
the 8 target areas were coded as no target selected. The target 
areas were red squares approximately 150 x 150 pixels in 
size, and were all equidistant from the center of the screen. 
B. Agent Cues 
There were three different types of agent cues (see Fig. 
2): 
a) Static cue: A single image of an agent. The agent’s 
head and eyes were aimed at the target area for the duration 
that the stimulus is displayed. The orientation cue was 
therefore presented from 0 ms till 3000 ms. 
b) Stepped cue: Two images of an agent, sequenced to 
imply movement. The agent’s head and eyes were looking 
straight forward from 0 ms, before the second image was 
displayed from 960 ms. In the second image, the agent’s 
head and eyes were aimed at the target from 960 ms till 
3000 ms. 
 
 
Figure 1: The appearance of the virtual agent, 
surrounded by eight target squares, arranged on 
both the cardinal and oblique axes.  
 

302
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
c) Dynamic cue: A fully animated agent, showing 
naturalistic movement from 0 ms to 960 ms. The agent’s 
head and eyes were pointing straight forward at 0 ms, before 
the agent moved (at 25 fps) to aim its head and eyes at the 
target area. The agent’s gaze and head were aimed at the 
target at 960 ms. The full orientation cue was therefore 
presented from 960 ms till 3000 ms. 
C. Participants 
A total of sixteen participants were recruited from 
students and staff at the University of Abertay-Dundee. 
There was no compensation and all had normal or corrected-
to-normal vision. During the experiment, two of them used 
contact lenses. 
D. Apparatus 
To capture participant gaze data, a modified (fixed 
position) SMI IView HED eye-movement recorder with two 
cameras was used. One camera recorded the environment 
(the target monitor) and the other tracked the participant’s 
eye by an infrared light recording at a frequency of 50 Hz 
and accuracy of 0.5° of visual angle. Stimuli were presented 
on a TFT 19’’ monitor with a 1024 x 768 resolution and 
60Hz of frequency controlled by a separate PC. The monitor 
brightness and contrast were set up to 60% and 65% 
respectively to ease the cameras’ recordings and avoid 
unnecessary reflections. In addition, both devices were 
individually connected to two different computers. Viewing 
was conducted at a distance of 0.8 meters in a quiet 
experimental chamber.  
Each participant underwent gaze calibration controlled 
by the experimenter prior to the start of data collection. The 
participant was sat down in a height adjustable chair with 
their chin on the chin rest and in front of the monitor at 0.9 
meters distance. Firstly, the calibration of the eyetracker was 
completed by presenting a sequence of five separate dots in 
the center and in each of the corners. The calibration covered 
the same surface occupied by the target areas. 
A final image with the set of five points was shown to 
double check the calibration by the operator. The calibration 
was repeated if necessary following adjustments to the 
camera positions to ensure good calibration. The experiment 
started with a ten seconds countdown sequence. After that, 
the series of twenty-four videos (3 agent cue types x 8 target 
areas) were presented to participants in a randomized order. 
The duration of each task video was three seconds, and each 
video was shown one by one in full screen mode. Before 
each task video, a central black cross over a white 
background was shown for two seconds to center the gaze of 
the participant. This ensured that the participant was looking 
at the centre of the screen at the start of each video. Fig. 3 
shows sample screen captures from the eye-tracker. 
E. Data analysis 
 
 
Figure 2. The appearance of the three types of helper agents over 1000 ms. Helper agents used head orientation and gaze to 
highlight one of eight targets. In the above example, three types of helper agent are shown highlighting the NE target. (a) 
shows a static (1-image) helper agent, which highlights the NE target from 0 ms onwards. (b) shows the stepped (2-image) 
helper agent, which looks towards the observer in frame 1 (from 0 ms) before changing to highlight the NE target in frame 2 
(from 960 ms). (c) shows the dynamic (25-image, 25 fps) agent, which begins at 0 ms by looking at the observer, and is 
animated with natural movement so that the head and gaze shift towards the NE target at 960 ms. All helper agents are shown. 
to participants for a total of 3000 ms, so that the appearance of the agent at 1000 ms is held for two seconds. 
 

303
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The participant gaze data was analyzed using the software 
BeGaze 2.3. The data stored in BeGaze contained all the 
fixations’ timestamps. Only trials where the participant’s 
gaze started on the cross in the center of the screen were 
considered valid. Target selection was defined by the first 
full-gaze fixation occurring in the eight predefined areas of 
interest overlying the 8 target destinations. The fixation 
duration criterion for an observer response is defined in the 
light of previous literature. Ware and Mikaelian in 1987 used 
400 ms; Sibert and Jacob in 2000 considered 150 ms. 
Because extended forced fixation (400 ms) can become 
laborious, we established a criterion for successful cognitive 
response to fixation as equal as or greater than to 250 ms, 
i.e., a fixation that locates on the target area at least for 250 
ms. 
Based on this concept, of the total number of possible 
cognitive responses, 92.18% were successfully tracked. Of 
the successfully tracked data, correct responses accounted for 
95.2% of the total and mismatches accounted for 4.9%. The 
definition of a mismatch was when there was a fixation of 
250 ms or more inside an incorrect target area. In 8.47% of 
the total mismatches, no clear target was selected – i.e., there 
was no fixation of 250 ms or more in any of the target areas. 
IV. 
GAZE-RESPONSE EXPERIMENT: RESULTS 
Only one participant presented problems during the 
tracking because of the unexpected movement of her contact 
lens in the tracked eye. This resulted in four non-tracked 
responses in the same participant. 
For each agent type a total of 128 eye tracking recordings 
were made. Recordings were then evaluated and allocated to 
one of four categories: Correct (where the observer clearly 
selected the intended target), Incorrect (where the observer 
clearly selected an unintended target), No Target (where it 
was not clear which target the observer had selected), and 
Corrupted (where the eye tracking data had been disrupted  
resulting in lost data, for instance when a participant’s 
head moved in a trial). After excluding the corrupted 
recordings, it was clear that observers were able to accurately 
select the intended target regardless of whether the virtual 
agent was static (95%), stepped (92.5%), or dynamic 
(94.2%) (see Table I). This would suggest that, in general, 
the type of virtual agent (in terms whether it was static, 
stepped, or fully animated) did not substantially impact upon 
how effective it was at communicating what the intended 
target was. 
A repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) was 
used to determine whether agent type had an effect on how 
long it took participants to look at and select the intended 
target square. The response times for static agent cues - 
which contained agents that were oriented towards the target 
960 ms earlier than both stepped and dynamic cues – were 
corrected to account for this difference. The analysis showed 
that the type of agent did have a significant effect on 
participant response time, F(2, 30) = 52.73, p < .001.  
Participants responded most quickly to the dynamic 
(fully animated) agent type (M = 1220, SE 95) than they did 
to either the stepped (2 frame) agent type (M = 1874, SE 61) 
or the static (1 frame) agent type (M = 2091, SE 59) (see Fig. 
4).  
Comparisons between agent types were assessed using a 
Bonferroni post-hoc test. The results showed that participants 
responded to the dynamic agent type significantly more 
quickly than both the static (Mean Deviation (MD) = 870, p 
< .001) and the stepped (MD = 654, p < .005) agent types. 
Furthermore, participants also responded to the stepped agent 
type significantly more quickly than the static agent type  
 
 
 
Figure 3: The eye tracking data of one participant, where the blue 
circles represent fixations. In image (a), the participant looks towards 
the cross before the agent appears in image (b). In image (c), the agent 
highlights the East target, at which point the participant looks towards 
this target, before fixating on the cross again in image (d). 
 
 
 
Figure 4: The mean gaze response times for static, stepped, and 
dynamic agents indicate that participants reacted most quickly to the 
fully animated, dynamic agents 
 
 
 
TABLE I.  
PARTICIPANT GAZE SELECTION OF TARGETS 
Type 
Correct 
Incorrect 
No 
Target 
selected 
Corrupt 
(Exclusions) 
Static  
93.5 % 
5.7 % 
0.8 % 
7 / 128 
Stepped 
92.5 % 
5.8 % 
1.7 % 
8 / 128 
Dynamic 
94.2 % 
5 % 
0.8 % 
7 / 128 
 
 
 
 

304
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(MD = 217, p < .005) (see Table II). These results not 
onlyunderline that static agent types are significantly less 
effective at cueing observer attention than either stepped or 
dynamic agents, but also that stepped agent types are 
significantly less effective than fully animated, dynamic 
agents. 
V. 
TOUCH-RESPONSE EXPERIMENT: METHOD 
The experiment method was as follows below. 
A. Task description 
The task to perform in this experiment was analogous to 
the described above (see Section 3 Gaze-Response 
Experiment), except this time hand-touch was the input 
modality instead of eye-gaze. Participants had to perform the 
object selection task using the same hand for all trials, on a 
series of twenty-four different agent animations. Agent 
animations were presented on a monitor at a resolution of 
1280 x 720. Each of the videos showed a virtual agent’s head 
in the centre of the screen, surrounded by eight different 
touchable square areas (see Fig. 5). Each agent was 
displayed on screen for 3000 ms and remained on the screen 
with the last frame shown till a target selection was made by 
participant. Orientation cues timing, type of agents and type 
of choices are identical as previously described in gaze 
experiment.  
Over the course of the video, the agent would orient its 
head and eyes aim at a particular target square. The point at 
which the agent oriented its head and gaze (and the nature of 
the agent’s movement) was determined by the type of agent 
cue. Of the eight possible target areas in each video, only one 
was the right choice in each trial – the one that was 
specifically indicated by the agent. If the participants 
selected that specific area, it was counted as a success. If the 
participant selected any of the other seven areas, it was 
counted as incorrect. 
The target areas were red squares of exactly 150 x 150 
pixels in size, and were all equidistant from the center of the 
screen. In comparison with gaze experiment, targets have the 
same area but with the slight difference in the layout, a grey 
border around the border to create a button similarity –giving 
a ‘push-able’ notion to the eight square items. 
B. Agent Cues 
The agent cues described in section III.B were also used 
in the current experiment. 
C. Participants 
A total of thirty-two participants were recruited from 
students and staff at the University of Abertay-Dundee. 4 
participants already participated in the gaze experiment. 
There was no compensation and all had normal or corrected-
to-normal vision and were able to use hands correctly for the 
purpose of this experiment. There were 29 right-handed, 1 
left handed and 2 ambidextrous. Both ambidextrous 
participants chose right hand to run the experiment. In one 
case choice was the participant’s dominant-hand and in the 
other it was their non-dominant hand. They were asked to 
use the same hand across all trials and all participants did so. 
D. Apparatus 
The trials were run in a Sony VAIO® L Series 
Touchscreen. It is an All-In-One PC multi-touch (two point) 
capacity on the screen (dimensions of 24 inches at 60 Hz; 
resolution of 1280x720; bright and contrast at 62%, graphic 
card default levels). Computer specifications were memory 
of 4 GB DDR2 SDRAM, processor Intel® Core™ 2 Duo 
CPU E7500@, 2.93 GHz and 2.94 GHZ. The OS was 
Microsoft® Windows 7 Home Premium 64 bits. The video 
card was an integrated GeForce G210M with a total graphics 
memory of 2271 MB (512 MB dedicated). The PC was 
securely placed on an office table and participants were 
seated on a chair with adjustable height. The PC was at a 
distance of approximately 25 cm from participant’s head and 
12 cm from participant’s hands, well within arm’s reach. All 
the trials were run in a quiet chamber in the Usability Lab of 
the University of Abertay-Dundee. During the experimental 
trials, the experimenter was observing the experiment in a 
separate twin room through a one-way mirror to minimize 
the disturbance or possible noises on participants. 
Participants were told they could raise their hand in any 
moment to request presence of the researcher. During the 
thirty-two runs, the researcher’s assistance was required only 
once due to equipment failure. All of this participant’s trials 
were removed from the analysis and all their response data 
discarded. 
 
 
Figure 5: The appearance of the virtual agent, 
surrounded by eight target squares, arranged on both 
the cardinal and oblique axes. 
 
TABLE II.  
MULTIPLE COMPARISON BETWENN AGENT TYPES (GAZE) 
Type 
Comparison 
Mean 
Deviation 
Std. 
Error 
Sig. 
Static 
Stepped 
 
Dynamic 
 
217 ms 
 
870 ms 
54.3 
 
85.8 
.004 
 
.000 
Stepped 
Static 
 
Dynamic 
 
-217 ms 
 
 654 ms 
54.3 
 
114.3 
.004 
 
.000 
Dynamic 
Static 
 
Stepped 
 
-870 ms 
 
-654 ms 
85,8 
 
114.3 
.000 
 
.000 
 
 
 
 
 
 

305
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
After the participant was comfortably sat in the chair and 
contented with the distance of PC, button-feedback training 
was run to make them confident with the button touch 
feedback. It was recommended to make at least one touch 
per target area (n = eight) to feel how the buttons worked. 
The experiment started with a ten second countdown video. 
Before each trial, a text indicated to participant to push space 
bar key to start. This assured that the participant was resting 
their hand at the same point before the start of each trial. The 
series of twenty-four videos (3 agent cue types x 8 target 
areas) were presented to participants in a randomized order 
and counter-balanced. The duration of each video was three 
seconds, and each video was shown one by one. Preceding 
each stimulus trial, a central black cross over a white 
background was shown for two seconds (similarly as seen in 
Fig. 3.a) to mirror gaze experiment task preamble. The last 
video frame from each trial remained on screen until the 
participant selected one of the eight touchable areas.  
E. Data analysis 
The participant response time data was stored using 
Adobe Flash CS5 (version 11.0.0.485). The data contained 
all the participants time responses (24 per participant) 
counted from the starting point of showed cue (video with 
the agent) till the participant selected a target area on the 
screen by their finger touch. Successful target selection was 
defined by the touch on the target area cued specifically by 
the agent. A touch in any of the other seven areas not cued 
by the agent was considered a mismatch. No responses 
outside the eight target areas were recorded during the 
experimental trials.  
The choice of Adobe Flash to measure Reaction Time 
(RT) was intentional. First, it gave a desired degree of 
freedom in the design of the interface layout. In contrast with 
gaze experiment where all elements on the interface where 
passive, here the touchable areas or buttons are external to 
the video and now become functional components 
themselves. Second, the decision was based on studies 
proving the validity of Flash as reliable software to measure 
RT, once that specific conditions were accomplished in the 
experiment. One condition is related with the device used in 
the time measurement, in this case the PC. The smaller the 
difference in RTs, the more critical it is to know the 
properties of the timing device used. Neath et al. [23] 
showed that the smallest difference in magnitude that a stock 
iMac 8.1 (April, 2008-March, 2009) using Flash (version 
10.0 r42) could detect under realistic conditions is 
approximately 5–10 ms, and this dictates the types of 
research that should use these systems: if a researcher tests 
all subjects using the exact same hardware, if the focus is on 
relative rather than absolute RTs, if the differences in RTs in 
the conditions to be examined are expected to be fairly large 
(e.g., at least 20–40 ms), if only certain software is used, and 
if many properties of the visual display are not of critical 
importance, then the conclusions drawn from RT data 
collected on a stock iMac are likely to be the same as those 
drawn from RT data collected on custom or high-end 
hardware. 
Reimers et al. [24] in 2007 studied on PC (processor 1.4 
MHz AMD Athlon, 256 MB of RAM, graphic card PCI 
NVidia GeForce 2MX and 32 MB of video RAM) the 
estimation of the average and the spread of RTs in the 
different conditions stating that RTs recorded with Flash are 
between 10 and 40 ms longer than those recorded in the 
Baseline condition (application on programming language C 
using the X Window System to display stimuli and a 
parallel port button box). Flash did not appear to add 
significant random error to RT measurements. 
VI. 
TOUCH-RESPONSE EXPERIMENT: RESULTS 
An unexpected operating system error resulted in data 
loss of one participant, due to a sudden failure of OS that 
invalidated the participant’s session. All of the participant’s 
trials were removed from the analysis and all his times 
discarded. Thus, 94.8% of the total number of responses 
were successfully stored. Of these stored answers, correct 
responses accounted for 98.48% and mismatches accounted 
for 1.51%. 
For each agent type a total of 24 time response recordings 
were made per participant. Recordings were then analyzed 
and allocated to one of three categories: Correct (where the 
observer selected the intended target), Incorrect (where the 
observer selected an unintended target), and Corrupted 
(where the file writing was corrupted or non-existent). After 
excluding the corrupted recordings, it was clear that users 
were able to accurately select the intended target regardless 
of whether the virtual agent was static (99%), stepped 
(99.7%), or dynamic (99.7%) (see Table III). This would 
suggest that, analogously as in the previous case of gaze-
interaction, the type of virtual agent (in terms whether it was 
static, stepped, or fully animated) did not substantially 
impact upon how effective it was at communicating what the 
intended target was. 
A repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) was 
used to determine whether agent type had an effect on how 
long it took participants to select by touch the intended target 
square. The response times for static agent cues - which 
contained agents oriented towards the target 960 ms earlier 
than both stepped and dynamic cues – were corrected to 
account for this difference. The analysis showed that the type 
of agent did have a significant effect on participant response 
time, F(2, 724) = 50.38, p < .001. Participants responded 
most quickly to the dynamic (fully animated) agent type (M 
TABLE III.  PARTICIPANT TOUCH SELECTION OF TARGETS 
Type 
Correct 
Incorrect 
 
Corrupt 
(Exclusions) 
Static 
99% 
1 % 
24 / 256 
Stepped 
99.7% 
0.3% 
24 / 256 
Dynamic 
99.7% 
0.3% 
24 / 256 
 

306
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
= 2423, SE 32) than they did to either the stepped (2 frame) 
agent type (M = 2900, SE 40) or the static (1 frame) agent 
type (M = 3007, SE 57) (see Fig. 6). 
 
Comparisons between agent types were assessed using 
the Bonferroni post-hoc test. The results showed that 
participants 
responded 
to 
the 
dynamic 
agent 
type 
significantly more quickly than both the static (Mean 
 
Deviation (MD) = 584, p < .001) and the stepped (MD = 
476, p < .001) agent types. In contrast to gaze case, 
participants responded to the stepped agent type not 
significantly faster than the static agent type (MD = 108, p 
>.005) (see Table IV). These results corroborate the gaze 
experiment results where static agent types are significantly 
less effective at cueing observer attention than dynamic 
agents, but also that stepped agent types are significantly less 
effective than fully animated, dynamic agents. 
VII. GAZE- AND TOUCH-RESPONSE EXPERIMENT: 
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Using a paradigm where the criterion for correct response 
to pictorial or animated agent gaze is the eye-gaze of the 
participant we found that the presence of full-motion in the 
gaze and head inducing agent drives the observer’s attention 
the fastest. Gaze recorded responses for 25 frame stimuli 
were 35% faster than stepped and 42% faster than static 
stimuli. This result is consistent with previous research on 
gaze cueing [10]. The current paradigm provides the most 
direct route to the establishment of the overt allocation of 
gaze location since it subverts the need for a translation to a 
device manual response. This confirms Ware and 
Mikaelian’s [2] assertion that participants eye-gaze itself can 
be used to indicate responses. 
By modifying the gaze cue paradigm from experiment to 
a touch-based target selection paradigm, we demonstrated 
that fully animated agent gaze and head cues drive user 
attention faster than static and 2-image agent cues. Touch 
recorded responses for 25 frame stimuli were 17% faster 
than stepped and 20% faster than static stimuli, confirming 
those obtained in eye-gaze interface experiments. Compared 
with the gaze response results, the decrease on the time 
differences suggests that the touch selection method alters, to 
some extent, the delay from when the participant correctly 
follows the cue to when the target selection is executed. It 
seems that the motor response reduces the time advantages 
gained with the fastest cue, suggesting that eye responses are 
much more rapid than hand responses. There is an aspect, 
clearly observed, of longer reaction times in touch modality, 
probably due to the translation of response into the sense of 
touch. This fact reinforces the idea of the complex process of 
motor response that reduces the time saved by the motion 
cue. Such a process should be greater in magnitude in order 
to explain those time save absorptions. Confirming that the 
introduction of hand locomotion does not invalidate the 
effectiveness of dynamic cue, results also showed that it was 
the difference on time response between 2-stepped and static 
was non-significant. 
Regarding whether the 2-image agent could be 
considered not completely a motion cue, this suggests that 
motion cues with a sufficient number of frames (25 tested in 
the experiment) are more necessary in context where human 
locomotion is involved. Probably the presence of touch 
involves more factors than those that we could control and 
include in the study, but at least one of them should be the 
higher impermeability to attention cues. The presence of 
movement in gaze cueing stimuli seems to drive the user’s 
attention more quickly. One prediction arising from this is 
that, when compared with 2D agents, 3D agents create an 
expectation of more believable behaviour. The combination 
of additional pictorial cues and natural motion may make the 
appearance of the agent more akin to that of a human 
conversation partner. The additional realism possible with 
modern computer animation techniques may make agents 
more believable and engaging [25]. 
The present study indicates how the animation of an 
agent can be linked to the sequencing of the social ‘script’ or 
‘narrative’ of a HCI interface experience. Previous 
investigators such as Kendon [26] observed a hierarchy of 
body movements in human speakers; while the head and 
hands tend to move during each sentence, shifts in the trunk 
and lower limbs occur primarily at topic shifts. They 
discovered the body and its movements as an additional part 
of the communication, participating in the timing and 
meaning of the dialogue. Argyle and Cook [27] discuss the 
use of deictic gaze in human conversation. They argued that 
during a conversation the eye gaze serves for information 
seeking, to send signals and to control the flow of the 
conversation. They explained how listeners look at the 
speaker to supplement the auditory information. Speakers on 
 
Figure 6: The mean touch response times for static, stepped, and 
dynamic agents indicate that participants reacted most quickly to the 
fully animated, dynamic agents 
 
TABLE IV.  
MULTIPLE COMPARISONS BETWEEN AGENT TYPES 
(TOUCH) 
Type 
Comparison 
Mean 
Deviation 
Std. 
Error 
Sig. 
Static 
Stepped 
 
Dynamic 
 
108 ms 
 
584 ms 
62.1 
 
62.1 
.249 
 
.000 
Stepped 
Static 
 
Dynamic 
 
-108 ms 
 
 476 ms 
62.1 
 
61.6 
.249 
 
.000 
Dynamic 
Static 
 
Stepped 
 
-584 ms 
 
-476 ms 
62.1 
 
61.6 
.000 
 
.000 
 
 
 
 
 
 

307
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the other hand spend much less time looking at the listener, 
partially because they need to attend to planning and do not 
want to load their senses while doing so. Preliminary work 
from our laboratory suggests that experience in the gaze task 
over time may lead to a learning effect whereby extended 
exposure to these stimuli leads to improved gaze allocation. 
This analysis will form part of a wider study including a 
sequence of guided navigation prompts in a naturalistic 
setting. Only by creating a natural sequence of user choices 
with a combination of gaze cues and items competing for 
attention (including distractors) can we fully confirm the 
efficacy of an agent-based cue in human computer 
transactions in the natural environment.  
The research presented here is consistent with the wider 
conclusions of other investigators [25], which indicate that 
vivid, animated emotional cues may be used as a tool to 
motivate and engage users of computers, when navigating 
complex interfaces. The results of this experiment provide 
guidance for agent design in consumer electronics such as 
computer games or animation. In order to avoid an 
unpleasant robotic awareness, natural motion and the correct 
presentation of the cue contribute to increase the deictic 
believability of the agent. Deictic believability in animated 
agents requires design that considers the physical properties 
of the environment where the transaction occurs. The agent 
design must take account of the positions of elements in and 
around the interface. The agent’s relative location with 
respect to these objects, as well as social rules known from 
daily life, are critical to create deictic gestures, motions, and 
speech that are both effective, efficient and unambiguous. 
All these aspects have an effect in addition to the core the 
response time measure. They easily trigger natural and social 
interaction of human users, reaching the right level of 
expectations. Furthermore, they make the system errors, 
human mistakes and interaction barriers more acceptable and 
navigable to the user [28].  
Fully animated agents have the potential to be a key new 
component into the assistive characteristic of interfaces, 
where an appropriate animated performance demonstrating a 
solution to a problem can be delivered. In principle, this 
study has demonstrated that agent guidance would be 
suitable both with gaze and touch interfaces, but its use could 
be extendable to general interfaces, where searching and 
selection tasks are dominant. Animated agents could become 
a new component in the salience characteristic of interfaces, 
where a synchronized movement can reinforce the 
perceptibility of relevant elements inside the interface. 
The concept of natural interfaces has been extensively 
discussed in the HCI literature [29]. The ‘naturalness’ is 
explained in terms of more familiarity, intuitive and 
predictable use, information retrieval and behaviour of the 
interface and the machine. In this context, the findings of the 
current study could be used to propose that more human-like 
interface components would be of practical use, particularly 
with agent behaviour synchronized with cues. The 
combination has a potential role in attention conflict 
situations, influencing significantly the overt allocation of 
user attention and, consequently, his responses and the 
interaction in general. In considering the graphical fidelity of 
agents, it is worth noting that natural realism can cause 
problems within interface design. Research examining 
expression animation by Zamitto et al. [30], highlights a 
valuable distinction between realism and believability. One 
of their conclusions was that the pursuit of realism in 
expression animation may risk falling into the ‘uncanny 
valley’ where increasing photo-realism results in a 
perception of falseness [31]. In the context of user 
interaction, we predict that such prioritization of realism on 
the 
agent 
could 
result 
in 
an 
inappropriate 
user 
disengagement. Instead, believability, suitability of the 
context and usefulness in their assigned task (i.e., timing 
regards the cues) should be the premises for the 
representation of the interface agent. 
In future work, it is planned to extend this study with a 
wide range of emotions on the agent cues, to evaluate their 
suitability on these interfaces, and compare with the results 
already obtained with fully animated non-emotional agents. 
With these set of studies, it is intended to draw a better and 
more complete picture of new ways of implementing 
guidance in interface design. This guidance strategy attempts 
to cover the ‘what to do next?’ situation for new or 
infrequent users, and it is specifically designed to resolve 
attention conflicts on environments with many distractors in 
number and type, such as those typically found in public 
space interaction.  
As an ultimate goal, this and future related work pursues 
the intention to effectively design methods of allocation of 
the attention of users to improve the interaction flow. It is 
crucial that we evaluate the cues used in a guidance system 
based on the principle of cueing that can anticipate user 
actions and help in ‘what to do next’ problems.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Martinez is grateful for support from the Alison 
Armstrong Studentship. Sloan is grateful for support from a 
University funded studentship. The authors gratefully 
acknowledge the supportive interdisciplinary research 
environment provided by Abertay’s Whitespace Research 
Group, Institute for Arts Media and Computer Games and 
Centre for Psychology. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Martinez, R. J. S. Sloan, A. Szymkowiak, and K. C. Scott-
Brown, “Using virtual agents to cue observer attention,” in 
CONTENT 2010, The Second International Conference on 
Creative Content Technologies, 21-26 November 2010, 
Lisbon, Portugal, 2010. 
[2] C. Ware and H. H. Mikaelian, “An evaluation of an eye 
tracker as a device for computer input”, SIGCHI Bull., 17, 
May. 1986, pp. 183-188, doi:10.1145/30851.275627. 
[3] J. M. Findlay and I. D. Gilchrist, “Active vision: the 
psychology of looking and seeing”, Oxford University Press, 
Oxford. 2003.S. R. H. 
[4] J. D. Eastwood, D. Smilek, and P. M. Merikle, “Differential 
attentional guidance by unattended faces expressing positive 
and negative emotion”, Perception & Psychophysics, vol. 63, 
2001, pp. 1004-1013. 
[5] I. Poggi and C. Pelachaud, “Signals and meanings of gaze in 
animated faces,”. In: S. Nuallain, C. Muhlvihill and P. 

308
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
McKevitt, eds, Language, Vision and Music. Amsterdam: 
John Benjamins, 2001 
[6] S. R. H. Langton and V. Bruce, “Reflexive visual orienting in 
response to the social attention of others”, Visual Cognition, 
vol. 6, 1999, pp. 541-567., doi:10.1080/135062899394939 
[7] M. I. Posner, “Orienting of attention”, Quarterly Journal of 
Experimental Psychology, vol. 32, 1980, pp. 3–25. 
[8] C. K. Friesen and A. Kingstone, “The eyes have it! reflexive 
orienting is triggered by nonpredictive gaze”, Psychonomic 
Bulletin and Review, vol. 5, 1998, pp. 490-495. 
[9] S. R. Langton, R. J. Watt, and V. Bruce, “Do the eyes have it? 
Cues to the direction of social attention”, Attention And 
Performance, vol. 4(2), 2000, pp. 50-59, ISSN 1364-6613, 
DOI: 10.1016/S1364-6613(99)01436-9 
[10] S. R. Langton, C. O’Donnell, D. M. Riby, and C. J. 
Ballantyne, “Gaze cues influence the allocation of attention in 
natural scene viewing”, Experimental Psychology, vol. 
59(12), 
2006, 
pp. 
2056- 
2064, 
doi: 
10.1080/17470210600917884. 
[11] D. Smilek, E. Birmingham, D. Cameron, W. Bischof, and A. 
Kingstone, “Cognitive ethology and exploring attention in 
real world scenes,” Brain Research, vol. 1080, Issue 1, 
Attention, Awareness, and the Brain in Conscious Experience, 
2006, pp. 101–119. 
[12] C. Peters, S. Asteriadis, and K. Karpouzis, “Investigating 
shared attention with a virtual agent using a gaze-based 
interface”, Journal on Multimodal User Interfaces, vol. 3, 
Dec. 2009, pp. 119-130. 
[13] L. E. Sibert and R. J. Jacob, “Evaluation of eye gaze 
interaction”, In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 00), ACM, 2000, 
pp. 281-288, doi: 10.1145/332040.332445. 
[14] A. Sears, “High precision touchscreens: design strategies and 
comparisons with a mouse”, International Journal of Man-
Machine Studies, vol. 34, Apr. 1991, pp. 593-613. 
[15] J. Pickering, “Touch-sensitive screens: the technologies and 
their application”, International Journal of Man-Machine 
Studies, vol. 25, Sep. 1986, pp. 249-269. 
[16] M. Platshon, "Acoustic touch technology adds a new input 
dimension", Computer Design, Mar. 1988, pp 89-93.  
[17] G. Schreder, K. Siebenhandl, E. Mayr, & M. Smuc, “The 
ticket machine challenge? Social inclusion by barrier-free 
ticket vending machines”. In Proceedings of the The good, the 
bad and the challenging: The user and the future of 
information and communication technologies (pp. 780-790), 
2009 
[18] N. P. Marcous, M. J. Brant, and M. J. Rosenzweig, System 
and method for electronic transfer of funds using an 
automated teller machine to dispense the transferred funds. 
Google Patents, 1997. 
[19] M.D. Stone, “Touch-Screens for Intuitive Input”, PC 
Magazine, 1986, 183-192. 
[20] R.L. Potter, L.J. Weldon, and B. Shneiderman, “Improving 
the accuracy of touch screens: an experimental evaluation of 
three strategies”, Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on 
Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’88, 1988, pp. 27-
32. 
[21] C. Forlines, D. Wigdor, C. Shen, and R. Balakrishnan, 
“Direct-touch vs. mouse input for tabletop displays”, 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in 
computing systems - CHI ’07, 2007, p. 647. 
[22] J. Hann’s TED talk 
http://www.ted.com/talks/jeff_han_demos_his_breakthrough_
touchscreen.html <retrieved: June, 2011>  
[23] I. Neath, A. Earle, D. Hallett, and A.M. Surprenant, 
“Response time accuracy in Apple Macintosh computers”, 
Behavior research methods, Mar. 2011, pp. 1-10-10. 
[24] S. Reimers and N. Stewart, “Adobe Flash as a medium for 
online experimentation: A test of reaction time measurement 
capabilities”, Behavior Research Methods, vol. 39, Aug. 
2007, pp. 365-370. 
[25] T. Vanhala, V. Surakka, H. Siirtola, K. Raiha, B. Morel, and 
L. Ach, “Virtual proximity and facial expressions of computer 
agents regulate human emotions and attention”, Computer 
Animation And Virtual Worlds, vol 21(3-4), 2010, pp. 215-
224, doi: 10.1002/cav.336. 
[26] A. Kendon, “Some relationships between body motion and 
speech: ana anlysis of an example”, In: A. Siegman and B. 
Pope, eds, Studies in Dyadic Communication, pp. 177-210, 
Elmsfor, NY: Pergamon Press, 1972. 
[27] M. Argyle and M. Cook, “Gaze and mutual gaze”, New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 1976, 221 pages, ISBN-13: 978-
0521208659. 
[28] E. M. Diederiks, “Buddies in a box: animated characters in 
consumer electronics”,IUI '03, 2003, pp. 34-38, doi: 
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/604045.604055. 
[29] W. Buxton, “Lexical and pragmatic considerations of input 
structures”, ACM SIGGRAPH Computer Graphics, vol. 17, 
no. 1, p. 31–37, 1983. 
[30] V. Zammitto, S. DiPaola, and A. Arya, 2008, “A 
methodology for incorporating personality modeling in 
believable game characters”, Arya, 1(613.520), p.2600. 
[31] M. Mori, “The uncanny valley”, Energy, vol. 7, no. 4, p. 33–
35, 1970. 

