104
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Towards Frictional 3D Object Shape Scanning and Reconstruction
by Means of Vibrissa-like Tactile Sensors
Lukas Merker
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Technische Universit¨at Ilmenau, Germany
e-mail: lukas.merker@tu-ilmenau.de
Abstract—Interacting with the environment, mobile robots could
beneﬁt from advanced tactile sensors complementing optical
sensors, consequently gathering overlapping information. In the
animal kingdom, there are numerous examples of tactile sensors
just as the vibrissae of rats. These tactile hairs enable the
animals, inter alia, to detect object shapes based on few contacts.
Vibrissae themselves consist of dead tissue and, thus, all sensing is
performed in the support of each vibrissa. This characteristic and
simple measuring structure provides an inspirational framework
for developing tactile sensor concepts. Within the present paper,
we take advantage of a recently developed mechanical model of a
vibrissa-inspired sensor for 3D object shape scanning and recon-
struction. It consists of a cylindrical, one-sided clamped bending
rod, which is swept along a 3D object surface undergoing large
deﬂections. Instead of assuming an ideal contact (no frictional
effects) as in previous publications, the contact model includes
Coulomb’s friction. Simulating frictional scanning sweeps, the
focus is on both generating the support reactions (observables)
at the base of the rod theoretically and subsequently using these
quantities in order to reconstruct a sequence of contact points
approximating the scanned object surface. Our investigation
reveals that (of course) the generated support reactions are
affected by friction, but (surprisingly) the reconstruction error
seems to be largely invariant against friction.
Keywords–Vibrissa; tactile sensor; surface sensing; surface
reconstruction.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Object shape detection and obstacle avoidance are key
topics in mobile robotics [1][2]. In nature, almost all species
solve these tasks by sensing overlapping information of the
environment, e.g., combining information provided by the
sense of vision and touch. However, in mobile robotics, the
majority of data is frequently gathered solely relying on optical
(vision) sensors – the NASA Rover Perseverance1 of the 2020
Mars mission serves as a striking example. In some cases,
completely dispensing with tactile sensing carries the risk of
missing information under poor visibility and impedes the
interaction with environmental objects. Therefore, advanced
tactile sensors hold great potential to complement optical
sensors. Developing tactile sensors, engineers often draw their
inspiration from biology. Besides the human skin, another
prominent and particularly well-researched tactile sense organ
are the mystacial vibrissae in the snout region of the rat. Based
on few contacts with an object of interest, these tactile hairs
allow for the detection of the object’s distance, orientation,
shape and texture [3]–[5]. Moreover, vibrissae are used for
sensing ﬂuid ﬂows [6].
1https://mars.nasa.gov/mars2020/spacecraft/rover/cameras/, June 09,2021
Basically, a vibrissa consists of a long and slender hair-
shaft with no receptors along its length, which is conically
and pre-curved shaped [7][8] and supported by the Follicle
Sinus Complex (FSC) [9][10]. Making contact with an object
of interest, mechanical stimuli are transmitted through the
hair-shaft to the FSC, where the actual sensing is realized
by a wide variety of mechanoreceptors. Despite the fact that
it is not conclusively clariﬁed how exactly animals manage
to determine object features, e.g., object shapes [11], the
remarkable structure of natural vibrissae has frequently been
transferred into technical sensor concepts over the last decades.
A variety of these approaches pursue the goal of scanning
and reconstructing object shapes. Basically, these approaches
all share a common structure: a slender, more or less ﬂexible
probe, mimicking the vibrissal hair-shaft, one-sided attached to
some kind of measuring device, representing the FSC. Besides
this basic structure, approaches differ considerably in modeling
the probe and its support, as well as in the evaluated signals
(observables) and the procedure of localizing contact points
in space. For the process of object scanning, two different
approaches have been established in literature [12]:
•
The tapping strategy: The object is scanned by repeat-
edly pushing the probe against various points of the
object. In doing so, the artiﬁcial vibrissa is retracted
from the object right after the very ﬁrst contact (small
pushing angles). Consequently, the deformations of
the probe remain small and a linear bending theory
is sufﬁcient to accomplish the localization of the
contact point [13]–[16] based on measurements of the
curvature or torque [16], angles and/or moments [13]–
[15] at the support of the probe.
•
The sweeping strategy: For object scanning, the probe
is pushed against an object far beyond the very ﬁrst
contact, consequently undergoing large deformations
and sliding over the objects surface [12][17]. There-
fore, a highly ﬂexible and elastic probe is mandatory.
The latter strategy is a particularly promising approach due to
its passive feasibility [12], e.g., using the robot movement as an
actuation without the need of repeatedly making and releasing
contact. Moreover, due to the high ﬂexibility of the used probe,
the sensor design offers high collision robustness. Passing an
object, the probe bends out of way, consequently sweeping
along the object and continuously transducing signals to the
measuring unit, see Figure 1. Due to these advantages, we fo-
cus on the sweeping strategy, which has received less attention
in the literature than the tapping one [12].

105
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 1. Schematic application example of a rover exploring a circular
object adapted from [20].
In [18], the authors used a steel probe attached to a six axis
hub load cell to measure the support reactions (three forces and
three moments) at the base of the probe. The whole assembly
was swept along several edged 3D objects while measuring the
support reactions. During scanning, lateral slip of the artiﬁcial
vibrissa was prevented by actively adjusting the scanning
direction w.r.t. the surface normal, which was continuously
determined exploiting the measured support reactions. An
initial-value problem based on a non-linear bending theory was
used to determine the contact position in space. Finally, the
authors successfully reconstructed a cloud of contact points
and, thus, provided a proof of concept. A similar approach
was used in [17] considering the process of object scanning and
reconstruction as a plane problem and focusing on an analytical
treatment. The presented sensor concept consists of a one-sided
clamped probe, which is swept along a 2D object contour.
Just as in [18], the sensing concept is based on the support
reactions, i.e., two forces and one moment at the clamping of
the probe. By analogy with [18], the deformation of the probe
is described using an arc-length parameterization of the rod
axis and using non-linear Euler-Bernoulli bending theory to
express its curvature. However, the major difference compared
to [18] is that the problem is sub-divided into two (inverse)
steps, which are both treated fully analytically and validated
using an experimental setup:
•
Step 1: simulating scanning sweeps in order to gener-
ate the support reactions (observables) at the base of
the rod theoretically, assuming the object contour to
be known, and
•
Step 2: using the generated support reactions from
the previous step in order to reconstruct a sequence
of contact points, ﬁnally approximating the original
object contour.
In contrast, [18] used a numerical approach and limited the
consideration to Step 2.
In [12], a sweeping-based reconstruction algorithm was
presented, which is based on repeatedly inferring from one
contact point to the next one by continuous measurement
of the moment and rotation angle at the base of the probe.
This method dispenses the need of force measurements, but
it is limited to tangential contacts along the probe and is not
suitable for 3D reconstruction.
In [19], the authors modeled an artiﬁcial vibrissa using a
multi-body system. There, the step of generating the support
reactions in 3D space was included, but only for a preset
(a priori known) impressed force. In addition, this force was
restricted to be always perpendicular to the probe tangent at
the contact point. Finally, focusing on the design of the probe
considering pre-curved and tapered shapes, the reconstruction
process was realized based on a neural network - in this way,
unique mappings between the input and output signals are
proven but without any analytical correlations.
Summarizing the mentioned approaches, the focus is fre-
quently on the reconstruction of the contact point location in
space based on different measured signals at the support of the
probe (Step 2). Thus, a theoretical generation of the support
reactions (Step 1) is rarely taken into account. However,
including the latter process into consideration holds great
potential to gain insights into the scanning process and to
provide a simulation tool, allowing for parameter studies to
investigate the sensor system without having to rely on a
large number of experiments. For instance, the theoretical
generation of support reactions allows us to provide a data
basis for different predeﬁned (well-known) friction parameters.
In practice, such parameters are mostly unknown and hard
to predeﬁne. Therefore, following [17] and [1], we focus on
both mentioned Steps 1 and 2. Our investigation differs from
previous works in using the sweeping scanning strategy for 3D
object reconstruction passively, i.e., without actively adjusting
the scanning direction w.r.t. surface normals of the object [18].
Moreover, as far as the authors know, it is the ﬁrst work to
consider frictional effects in that context. To date, it is an open
question how friction affects the 3D reconstruction result when
using the sweeping scanning strategy. For instance, imagining
two objects of the same shape made of different materials,
it is unclear if different friction pairings (probe/object) might
erroneously lead to different shape estimations.
In contrast to [18], our investigations are not limited to
edged 3D objects. Instead, objects with wide-ranging curvature
are scanned in the presence of lateral slip. The presented model
differs from [19] in considering a reaction force resulting
from the sweep of a rod along a mathematically described
object surface instead of a preset impressed force. Unlike
[12], our reconstruction method is suitable for 3D object
shapes. Moreover, it is not limited to tangential contacts, but
also includes tip contacts between the probe and the object.
Finally, we present a novel approach to approximate the micro-
mechanics of the contact during object scanning based on
Coulomb’s law of friction, which distinguishes the present
paper from similar works.
The remainder of the paper at hand is structured as follows:
In Section II, we present the mechanical model of the vibrissa-
inspired sensor for 3D shape scanning and reconstruction,
starting with the basic setup in Section II-A. In Section II-B,
we focus on the contact mechanics during object scanning
assuming Coulomb friction. After some preliminary geometri-
cal considerations, we derive the deformation equations of the
probe. Then, following the procedure of [17], we separately
analyze the above-mentioned Steps 1 and 2, respectively. In
Section III, we ﬁrstly demonstrate the general appearance of
the simulated scanning sweeps. Subsequently, the simulation
results of Steps 1 and 2 are analyzed with the overall goal of

106
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
clarifying the inﬂuence of the friction coefﬁcient on both, the
support reactions at the base of the probe and the reconstruc-
tion error. Finally, the results of the present paper are summed
up and some future research subjects are identiﬁed in Section
IV.
II.
MODELLING
Within this section, we build up and mathematically de-
scribe the mechanical model of the vibrissa-like tactile sensor
concept step by step, starting with the basic setup.
A. Basic setup
The mechanical model consists of two interacting compo-
nents in a ﬁxed Cartesian coordinate system (x, y, z) (global
frame), see Figure 2:
1.
a highly ﬂexible probe, one-sided clamped at it’s lower
end (“foot”, “base”) with constraint direction ⃗ez;
2.
a ﬁxed 3D target object.
The probe is modeled as a circular cylindrical rod with an
originally straight axial line. Its shape is characterized by the
length L and a constant circular cross-section, resulting in a
constant second moment of area I. Guided by the biological
paragon vibrissa, the cross-sectional dimensions of the rod are
extremely low compared to its length. Moreover, we assume
the rod to consist of a homogeneous and isotropic, linear elastic
Hooke’s material. Based on these assumptions, the mechanical
behavior of the rod is essentially determined by a constant
Young’s modulus E resulting in a constant bending stiffness
EI. From the outset, we introduce the following units of
measure in order to allow any kind of scaling [17]:
[length]
:= L,
[force]
:= EI
L2 ,
[moment]
:= EI
L .
(1)
Remark 1. We point out that, e.g., [lenght] := L denotes
that all lengths are measured in the unit and value of L.
The object is assumed as a rigid body with a strictly
convex, smooth surface z = C(x, y). Within the present paper,
we consider the example of an elliptic paraboloid
(x, y) 7→ C(x, y) = a x2 + b y2 + h,
(2)
with a, b > 0 and h ∈ (0, 1) and unit normal vector
⃗n(x, y) =
1
p
4a2x2 + 4b2y2 + 1
 −2ax
−2by
1
!
(3)
The scanning sweep of the rod along the object’s surface
is realized by a kinematic drive, i.e., the clamping position
P0(x0, y0, 0) of the rod (system input) is shifted incrementally
along a straight trail in the x-y-plane. This process is consid-
ered quasi-statically. Interacting with the object, the rod gets
bent in the inference of some unknown contact force ⃗f forming
an elastic line in R3. In doing so, the strict convexity of the
object ensures, that there is always only one contact point
P1(ξ, η, θ) between the rod and the object [21], see Figure 2.
Figure 2. Mechanical model for object shape scanning and reconstruction
rod in contact with an object’s surface adapted from [1].
B. 3D frictional contact model
It was concluded in [20], that (based on the assumptions
in Section II-A) the elastic line of the rod shrinks to one in
some deformation plane Eψ with (yet) unknown orientation ψ,
see Figure 2. However, this plane bending working hypothesis
was made assuming an ideal contact, i.e., in the absence of
friction. Here, we now analyze the problem using a more
realistic approach, roughly approximating the micro-mechanics
of the contact using Coulomb’s law of friction [22]. Therefore,
we assume the constraining force ⃗f, transmitted through the
object contact as composed of two components, see Figure 3:
⃗f = ⃗fn + ⃗ft
(4)
The component ⃗fn is aligned with the outer normal vector ⃗n1
of the surface C at P1.
⃗fn = |⃗fn| · ⃗n1,
(5)
In contrast, lying in the tangent plane at P1 of C, the com-
ponent ⃗ft still has an unknown orientation. Both components
are coupled by Coulomb’s law of friction:
⃗ft = −µ|⃗fn| ⃗v
|⃗v|,
(6)
where µ =
|⃗ft|
|⃗fn| = tan(ζ) is the coefﬁcient of friction with
friction angle ζ and ⃗v is the sliding velocity. Being restricted
to a quasi-static model, we cannot make any statements about
the sliding velocity ⃗v. However, according to (6), the tangential
force solely depends on the direction of sliding but not on
the actual speed of sliding. Therefore, the basic idea within
the present paper is to interpret a sequence of contact points
(P1,i)i∈N as the trajectory of P1 on C, see Figure 3. Then, the
direction opposing the sliding velocity at some point P1,k is
approximated using the previous contact point P1,k−1 in the
following way:
⃗f ∗
t = |⃗f ∗
t | · ⃗t∗,
with
⃗t∗ = P1,k−1 − P1,k
|P1,k−1 − P1,k|
(7)

107
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The distance P1,k−1 − P1,k of two successive contact points
decreases with decreasing step size of the system input and,
thus, using tiny incremental steps, (7) approaches a tangent
vector of C at P1,k, pointing from P1,k to P1,k−1.
Figure 3. Sequence of contact points between rod and object, representing
the trajectory of P1 on C with the constraining force at P1,k (see enlarged
section).
C. Preliminary geometrical considerations
Figure 4 shows the constraining force ⃗f acting at P1 for
both friction partners, i.e., for the object’s surface in Figure 4(a)
and for the bending rod in Figure 4(b). As can be seen from
Figure 4(b), all forces are considered to act at the center of
the rod’s cross-section for sake of simplicity and, thus, their
lines of action intersect the axial line of the rod. Otherwise,
the contact forces might create moments about the axial line,
possibly causing twist deformations, which are neglected in our
theory. This simpliﬁcation is justiﬁed by the extremely small
cross-sectional dimensions of the rod under consideration (and
the natural paragon vibrissa).
(a)
(b)
Figure 4. Components of the constraining force ⃗f at P1: (a) inﬁnitesimal
surface element; (b) inﬁnitesimal rod element.
Dropping twist deformations of the rod, Figure 2 and
Figure 4 clarify the following geometrical relationships: The
constraining force ⃗f deﬁnes the deformation plane Eψ in such
a way that the geometrical condition {P0, P1,⃗ez, ⃗f} ∈ Eψ is
fulﬁlled [20]. Introducing the local coordinate system (u,v,w)
(local frame), see Figure 2, we come up with the following
transformation rules [20]:
 ⃗eu
⃗ev
⃗ew
!
= T(ψ) ·
 ⃗ex
⃗ey
⃗ez
!
,
 ⃗ex
⃗ey
⃗ez
!
= T−1(ψ) ·
 ⃗eu
⃗ev
⃗ew
!
(8)
with
T(ψ) =
 cos(ψ)
sin(ψ)
0
0
0
1
sin(ψ)
− cos(ψ)
0
!
(9)
In the following, all considerations are restricted to the plane
Eψ (u-v-plane). This plane intersects the surface C in some
intersection curve Cψ = Eψ ∩ C, see Figure 2. The tangent
and normal directions
⃗tψ = ⃗ew × ⃗n1
⃗nψ = ⃗t1ψ × ⃗ew
(10)
of Cψ at P1 are used to split the constraining force ⃗f into
two orthogonal components ⃗fnψ, ⃗ftψ ∈ Eψ, see Figure 4.
The relation ⃗f = ⃗fn + ⃗ft = ⃗fnψ + ⃗ftψ is visualized by
means of a rectangular cuboid in Figure 4. There, the purple
diagonal plane is spanned by ⃗fn and ⃗ft, the brown diagonal
plane, namely Eψ, is spanned by ⃗fnψ and ⃗ftψ and the line of
intersection of these planes denotes the resulting force ⃗f.
D. The plane elastic line
The analysis within this section is largely analog with [20]
and therefore roughly outlined here. Within the deformation
plane Eψ (u-v-plane), the elastic line of the rod is described
parameterizing the axis of the rod by means of its slope angle ϕ
in dependence on its natural coordinate arc length s. Moreover,
using Euler’s constitutive law κ(s) = m(s) in dimensionless
representation (mind (1)) we ﬁnally end up in a system of
Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs) [20]:
u′(s) = cos(ϕ(s))
ϕ′(s) = κ(s)
v′(s) = sin(ϕ(s))
κ′(s) = f cos(ϕ(s) − α)
(11)
In (11), f is the magnitude of ⃗f and α is deﬁned as the signed
angle between ⃗f and −⃗ev, see Figure 2:
α = atan2(⃗eu · ⃗f, −⃗ev · ⃗f)
(12)
The ODE system (11) describes the plane elastic line of
the rod. Depending on the corresponding problem, Boundary
Conditions (BCs) or Initial Conditions (ICs) are to be adjoint
in Section II-E and II-F, respectively.
E. Step 1: Generating the support reactions theoretically
The preliminary process of theoretically generating the
support reactions at each particular clamping position P0 re-
ﬂects/replaces the actual experiment of sweeping the rod along
the object while measuring the support reactions (observables).
For Step 1, we assume
•
the object surface C,
•
the clamping position P0,
•
and the friction coefﬁcient µ
to be known (preset) in advance. In this way, Step 1 is used
as a valuable tool allowing for the generation of the support

108
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
reactions during scanning sweeps with different preset friction
coefﬁcients.
Following [1] and [20], we distinguish two different contact
phases, see Figure 5:
•
For tip contacts, the position of contact along the rod
s1 = 1 is known, but the angle ϕ1 = ϕ(1) > ˜α is
unknown.
•
In contrast, for tangential contacts, the position of
contact along the rod s1 is unknown, but instead, we
have the angular relationship ϕ = ˜α.
Figure 5. Comparison between tip and tangential contact with angular
relationships within the deformation plane Eψ.
Inspired by Figure 5, we deﬁne the angle ˜α as the tangent slope
angle of Cψ at P1:
˜α = atan2(⃗eu · ⃗nψ, −⃗ev · ⃗nψ)
(13)
Consequently, we ﬁnd the following BCs for tip (14) and
tangential contacts (15), respectively:
u(0) = 0
u(1) = u1
v(0) = 0
v(1) = v1
ϕ(0) = π
2
κ(1) = 0
(14)
u(0) = 0
u(s1) = u1
v(0) = 0
v(s1) = v1
ϕ(0) = π
2
ϕ(s1) = ˜α
κ(s1) = 0
(15)
In (14) and (15), u1 and v1 are the coordinates of P1 w.r.t. the
local frame. Finding equilibrium states of the rod in contact
with the object is achieved using a Matlab algorithm. Basically,
the algorithm repeatedly solves the Boundary-Value Problems
(BVPs) (11)&(14) and (11)&(15) for each clamping position
using shooting methods to determine the unknown parameters
s1, |⃗fn|, u1 and ψ.
Remark 2. More speciﬁcally, assuming reasonable start-
ing values for these unknown parameters, the used algo-
rithm proceeds using (2)–(15) in the following way:
For each clamping position P0...
(a)
... determine
-
the orientation of the local frame using (8),
-
the contact point P1 evaluating (2) and (8),
-
the coordinate v1 using (8),
-
the normal force ⃗fn using (3) and (5),
-
the tangential force ⃗ft using (6) and (7) ,
-
the resulting force ⃗f based on (4),
-
the components
⃗
fnψ and ⃗
ftψ of ⃗f using (10),
-
the angles α and ˜α using (12) and (13).
(b)
... try to ﬁnd a solution for the BVPs (11)&(14) or
(11)&(15), respectively.
(c)
... repeat A and B varying the parameters s1, |⃗fn|,
u1 and ψ until an equilibrium state has been
found.
Once all relevant parameters are known, the support reactions
f0u = −f sin(α),
f0v = −f cos(α)
(16)
m0w = f[u1 cos(α) + v1 sin(α)]
(17)
are calculated and expressed w.r.t. the global frame using (8):
⃗m0 = m0x⃗ex + m0y⃗ey + m0z⃗ez
(18)
⃗f0 = f0x⃗ex + f0y⃗ey + f0z⃗ez
(19)
Finally, this procedure results in a sequence of support reac-
tions for an entire scanning sweep, starting from the very ﬁrst
contact between the rod and the object and terminating with
the detachment of the rod.
F. Step 2: Reconstructing contact points
The process of reconstructing a sequence of contact points
in space based on the support reactions of Section II-E reﬂects
the actual sensor application. Of course, the shape of the
object, as well as the friction coefﬁcient, are unknown in this
context. Instead, only the following quantities are assumed to
be known in advance:
•
the support reactions (18)&(19) generated in Step 1
(or measured using a real experiment)
•
the clamping position P0
However, compared to Step 1, the mechanical problem of Step
2 is relatively simple, as the orientation of the deformation
plane Eψ is directly evident evaluating
ψ = −atan2(m0x, m0y)
(20)
Then, expressing (18)&(19) w.r.t. the local frame using (8), f
and α follow from (17)
f =
q
f 2
0u + f 2
0v,
α = −atan2(f0u, f0v)
(21)
and the curvature at P0 writes
κ(0) = −m0w
(22)
Using (22), we have the following ICs:
u(0) = 0
v(0) = 0
ϕ(0) = π
2
κ(0) = −m0w
(23)

109
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
In contrast to Step 1, including a BVP, Step 2 is characterized
by the IVP (11)&(23), which can be solved without shooting
methods. Instead, it is integrated numerically using an event
function, which cancels further computation if the termination
condition κ(s1) = 0 is fulﬁlled. This condition results from the
single contact point scenario due to the modeling assumptions,
in contrast to [21]. Then, the last step of the numerical
integration includes the solutions for s1, u1, v1 and ϕ1, see
Figure 5. Finally, the contact position in space is expressed
with respect to the global frame using (8).
III.
RESULTS & DISCUSSION
The following results are based on simulated scanning
sweeps of the probe along a 3D object, which are illustrated in
Section III-A. We analyze the theoretically generated support
reactions at the base of the probe in Section III-B. In Section
III-C, these support reactions are used to reconstruct sequences
of contact points.
A. Simulated scanning sweeps
Within the present paper we use (2) with the parameters
a = 0.5, b = 1 and h = 0.4 as an exemplary object surface.
The geometry parameters are chosen based on preliminary
studies. On the one hand, a ̸= b ensures, that the results are
not restricted to surfaces of revolution. On the other hand, the
chosen object distance h ensures the occurrence of both tip and
tangential contacts. The scanning trail is assumed to be parallel
to the x-axis. The clamping position P0(x0, y0, 0) of the rod is
displaced along this trail decreasing the system input x0 with
constant y0. In doing so, we simulated scanning sweeps for
y0 = −0.4 : 0.2 : +0.4 and µ = 0 : 0.1 : 0.4 resulting in a
total number of 25 scanning sweeps, of which four exemplary
sweeps are shown in Figure 6. There, the scanning sweeps are
represented by sequences of elastic lines (equilibrium states),
where tip contacts are colored in blue and tangential ones in
red for s ∈ (0, s1) and black for s ∈ (s1, 1). For reasons of
clarity, only one in ten calculated deformation states is shown
in Figure 6. Essentially, a scanning sweep may exhibit two
fundamentally different characteristics, see Figure 6:
•
For the special case y0 = 0, the scanning trail entirely
lies within a symmetry plane of the object (x-z-plane).
Regardless of the friction coefﬁcient, this arrangement
results in a special case of an entirely plane scan-
ning sweep, see Figure 6(a) (µ = 0) and Figure 6(b)
(µ = 0.4). Such a plane scanning sweep always
terminates with a “snap-off” (dynamical detachment)
of the deformed rod from the object [23]. It is to
be noted, that increasing friction coefﬁcients result
in slightly delayed “snap-offs” and, thus, increase the
scanning range, compare Figures 6(a) and 6(b).
•
For the more general case y0 ̸= 0, a completely
different scanning behavior is observed: As seen in
Figure 6(c) (y0 = 0.2, µ = 0) and Figure 6(d)
(y0 = 0.2, µ = 0.4) the rod bends around the object
and ﬁnally smoothly detaches from the object stress-
free, i.e., without any snap-off. In general, for the case
µ = 0, the symmetry of the object w.r.t. y-z-plane
results in a symmetric appearance of the elastic lines,
see Figure 6(c). This symmetry is not maintained with
increasing mu, see Figure 6(d). Instead, the orientation
of the bending plane Eψ in Figure 6(d) seems to lack
behind the one in Figure 6(c) as a consequence of the
frictional force.
Remark 3. The reason for showing Figure 6 at the very
beginning of this section is to create a ﬁgurative idea
about the scanning process. However, it is important to
highlight that Figure 6 actually results at the very end of
the simulation process after performing Steps 1 and 2.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6. Exemplary scanning sweeps in negative x-direction represented by
sequences of elastic lines: (a) y0 = 0, µ = 0; (b) y0 = 0, µ = 0.4; (c)
y0 = 0.2, µ = 0; (d) y0 = 0.2, µ = 0.4.
B. Step 1: Generating the support reactions
Figures 7 and 8 show the components of the support
reactions (18) and (19) resulting from ten exemplary scanning
sweeps plotted against the system input x0 in dependence
on different friction coefﬁcients µ. In both ﬁgures, the phase
transitions from tip to tangential contact and vise versa are
marked with an ’o’. Note that Figures 7 and 8 are to be read
from right to left due to the scanning direction (negative x-
direction). Figure 7 represents the plane special case (y0 = 0)
identiﬁed in Section III-A and, thus, the dark blue (µ = 0) and
yellow curves result from the scanning sweeps in Figures 6(a)
and 6(b). Regardless of the friction coefﬁcient, the components
f0y, m0x and m0z are zero during the entire scanning sweep
and therefore obscure each other for different values of µ.
This fact conﬁrms the observation that for y0 = 0 all scanning
sweeps entirely take place in the x-z-plane. It is striking
that the remaining components of the support reactions are
affected by the friction coefﬁcient, e.g., the component f0z
consistently increases with increasing µ. Moreover, comparing
the values x0 at the end of each scanning sweep (left side
of each curve), conﬁrms that an increasing coefﬁcient results
in a longer overall contact phase. It can be seen that the
phase transitions are characterized by discontinuities (kinks).
However, the friction coefﬁcient seems to have little impact on
these discontinuities and the location of the phase transitions
in general.

110
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 7. Components of the support reactions (observables) ⃗f0 and ⃗m0
resulting from simulated scanning sweeps with y0 = 0 plotted against the
system input x0 in dependence on different preset friction coefﬁcients µ.
Exemplary considering the case y0 = 0.2, Figure 8 rep-
resents the more general case y0 ̸= 0 of a scanning sweep,
see Section III-A. Again, the dark blue (µ = 0) and yellow
curves correspond to the scanning sweeps in Figures 6(a) and
6(b), respectively. In contrast to Figure 7, only the component
m0z is zero during the entire scanning sweep due to the
plane bending assumption (ignoring twist deformation), see
Section II-C. The remaining components are strongly affected
by the friction coefﬁcient. The dark blue curves (µ = 0) are
vertical or point symmetric as a consequence of the object’s
symmetry. For increasing friction coefﬁcients, the maximum
values of the support reactions are increasingly shifted in
the negative direction of x0. However, for y0 ̸= 0.2, the
friction coefﬁcient has no impact on the position of the rod
detachment. Moreover, all support reactions fall to zero at
the end of the scanning sweep. This conﬁrms the stress-free
detachment of the rod from the object. Finally, compared to
Figure 7, the phase transitions seem to be stronger affected
by the friction coefﬁcient. For instance, an increasing friction
coefﬁcient results in delayed phase transitions and causes
discontinuities (small jumps). These jumps might result from a
sudden change of the sliding trajectory (and, thus, the direction
of the frictional force), when the contact point s1, which is one
in case of tip contact, suddenly begins to move along the rod
axis in case of tangential contact.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 8. Components of the support reactions (observables) ⃗f0 and ⃗m0
resulting from simulated scanning sweeps with y0 = 0.2 plotted against the
system input x0 in dependence on different preset friction coefﬁcients µ.
Summarizing, the support reactions are strongly affected
by the friction coefﬁcient. Unfortunately, Figures 7 and 8 do
not yet allow us to draw further conclusions about the object’s
shape. Therefore, we consider Step 2 in the next section.
C. Step 2: Reconstructing contact points
Figure 9 shows 25 sequences of Reconstructed Contact
Points (RCPs) based on the generated support reactions of 25
simulated scanning sweeps. The isometric view in Figure 9(a)
shows the original object surface C alongside with the RCPs.
Moreover, a top view with hidden object surface is given in
Figure 9(b). In contrast to Figure 6, where only one in ten
calculated deformation states is displayed, the point sequences
in Figure 9 include the RCP of each single simulation step.
Consequently, each sequence of RCPs rather appears as a
line than a multitude of points. The high density of RCPs
ensures a good approximation of the tangent direction in (7).
Considering Figure 9 it becomes clear that the sequences of
RCPs depend on both the scanning trail position y0 and the
friction coefﬁcient µ. Mind: for each scanning trail y0 =
−0.4 : 0.2 : +0.4, ﬁve scanning sweeps with different friction
coefﬁcients µ = 0 : 0.1 : 0.4 were simulated. This results
in a bundle of ﬁve sequences of RCPs for each y0, marked
in Figure 9(b). For instance, considering Figure 9(b), scanning
the object on the red scanning trail (y0 = +0.2) results in
ﬁve sequences of RCPs (circled in red), depending on the

111
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
friction coefﬁcient, see color legend in Figure 9(a). For reasons
of clarity, only one scanning trail is shown in Figure 9(b), while
the others are simply pointed out giving the corresponding
values of y0 (gray).
(a)
(b)
Figure 9. Reconstructed sequences of contact points based on 25 simulated
scanning sweeps: (a) original object surface superimposed with reconstructed
contact points in dependence on the friction coefﬁcient µ; (b) top view
including information about the scanning trails.
Considering Figure 9, the following results must be high-
lighted:
•
For y = 0 it appears that the sequences of RCPs
coincide to a large extend regardless of the friction
coefﬁcient. However, this does not mean that the RCPs
are not affected by friction. Instead, for increasing
friction coefﬁcients, the RCPs shift along the object’s
surface within the x-z-plane. For instance, it can be
seen that for the largest friction coefﬁcient µ = 0.4,
the sequence of RCPs exceeds all others. This reﬂects
the fact that (for the plane special case) increasing
friction coefﬁcients increase the scanning range due
to a delayed “snap-off”.
•
For y ̸= 0, the sequences of RCPs do no longer coin-
cide for different friction coefﬁcients. While outermost
sequences (|y0| = 0.4) differ slightly for different
friction coefﬁcients, the inner ones (|y0| = 0.2) seem
to be stronger affected by friction. In this way, the
sequences of RCPs based on simulations with µ = 0,
are completely symmetric w.r.t. y-z-plane. In contrast,
for µ > 0 the frictional force causes asymmetries. For
the preset object distance h = 0.4, scanning sweeps
with |y0| = 0.4 do not include tangential contacts
in contrast to those with |y0| = 0.2. This statement
remains true regardless of the friction coefﬁcient. For
|y0| = 0.2, the transitions between tip and tangential
contacts and vise versa are clearly identiﬁable by the
discontinuities (kinks) of the sequences of RCPs. For
instance, considering the dark blue sequence (µ = 0,
y0 = 0.2), the ﬁrst discontinuity (at x ≈ 0.5) reﬂects
the transition from tip to tangential contact and the
second one (at x ≈ 0.5) the inverse transition, see
Figure 6(a). Increasing friction coefﬁcients weaken the
extent of the ﬁrst discontinuity and reinforce the extent
of the second one, see Figure 9(b).
Summarizing, increasing friction coefﬁcients affect the se-
quences of RCPs. This may falsely give the impression, that
increasing friction results in increased distortion of the recon-
struction result. For instance, in Figure 9(b), the reconstruction
result appears to be distorted in a way that the width of
the object in y-direction is underrated at the beginning and
overrated at the end of the scanning sweep. This seems to
be the case especially with the yellow sequences (µ = 0.4).
However, it is important to understand that such distortion does
not take place at all. Instead, the isometric view in Figure 9(a)
suggests that all reconstructed points lie perfectly on the
original object surface. To highlight and verify this suspicion,
the reconstruction error of each RCP is calculated and shown
by the color-bar in Figure 10. The reconstruction error is
deﬁned as the smallest (perpendicular) distance between a RCP
Prek and the original object surface C: Let P(a, b, c) ∈ C
be the point of C closest to Prek. Then ⃗e = −−−−→
PPrek is
collinear with ⃗n(a, b) and the error of Prek is |⃗e|. Obviously,
the maximum reconstruction error lies within the numerical
boundaries regardless of the friction coefﬁcient. This fact
conﬁrms an empirical observation and hypothesis originally
made in [20] and leads to the ﬁnal result of the present paper:
•
For each clamping position P0 during scanning, the
frictional force affects the deformation of the rod and,
thus, the contact point P1 on C.
•
Consequently, the support reactions at the base of the
rod are affected by friction
•
Evaluating the support reactions in order to reconstruct
the contact position in space, different friction coefﬁ-
cients would result in different locations of the RCP.
For instance, a point P ∗
1 , which is reconstructed in
the presence of friction (µ > 0) is different from the
point P1, which would have been reconstructed in the
absence of friction

112
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
•
However, both points P ∗
1 and P1 would lie on the
original object surface C.
•
Thus, friction leads (of course) to a shift of the RCPs
on the scanned 3D object surface itself, but does not
affect the reconstruction error. This is what we refer
to as friction invariant reconstruction.
(a)
(b)
Figure 10. Reconstructed sequences of contact points based on 25 simulated
scanning sweeps highlighting the reconstruction error using a color-bar: (a)
isometric view; (b) top view.
IV.
CONCLUSION
Within this paper, we presented a vibrissa-inspired tactile
sensor concept for 3D object surface scanning and reconstruc-
tion. For that purpose, a one-sided clamped rod was swept
along the object’s surface by incremental displacements of its
clamping position, relatively to the object. In contrast to other
publications, we ﬁrstly approximated the micro-mechanics of
the contact assuming Coulomb friction, instead of presuming
an ideal contact (no frictional effects). Being restricted to a
quasi-static model, the direction of the frictional force was
approximated inferring from one contact point to the next
one. Based on the novel modeling approach, two consecutive
processes were analyzed separately: Firstly, scanning sweeps
along a known object surface were simulated with a preset
friction coefﬁcient in Step 1. In this way, the support reactions
(observables) at the base (clamping) of the rod were generated
theoretically. Secondly, we demonstrated how to use the sup-
port reactions from Step 1 in order to reconstruct sequences of
contact points, ﬁnally approximating the surface of the scanned
object. Both steps were implemented in a Matlab algorithm
and simulated to demonstrate the general applicability. The
simulation results showed that friction (obviously) affects the
support reactions during object scanning. However, using these
support reactions to reconstruct contact points, it surprisingly
turned out that the reconstruction result is friction invariant,
i.e., friction does not affect the reconstruction error. This is a
novel and not self-evident ﬁnding, revealing a major advantage
of the vibrissa-inspired sensor concept. Thus, extending the
mechanical model including Coulomb friction yields new
insights compared to previous works. Instead of representing a
self-contained investigation, the present paper should be seen
as a preliminary concept study, indicating that the presented
measuring principle is highly suited to complement optical
sensors in the environmental exploration of robots. In doing so,
we aim to implement the presented concept into an intelligent
tactile sensor in the future.
Finally, it remains to mention that the results and hypothe-
ses of the present paper are based on a quasi-static model.
This means the scanning sweep is realized by incremental
displacements of the clamping, resulting in a sequence of
consecutive equilibrium states. Against this backdrop, only
static friction but no dynamical effects, e.g., stick-slip effects
can be discussed. However, instead of repeatedly stopping the
clamping position in order to wait for the stationary state, in
practice, the scanning sweep rather has to be thought of as a
continuous movement of the clamping and, thus, a continuous
sweep of the rod over the object surface. Therefore, dynamical
effects like stick-slip effects as observed in [20] are likely to
occur in reality. Therefore, it remains to verify the theoretical
results on practical examples by using an experimental setup,
which has already been attacked in the ﬁrst steps.
REFERENCES
[1]
L. Merker, M. Scharff, K. Zimmermann, and C. Behn, “Surface Sensing
of 3D Objects Using Vibrissa-like Intelligent Tactile Sensors,” INTELLI
2020, The Ninth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and
Applications, Porto, Portugal, October 18–22, 2020, pp. 18–23. ISBN:
978-1-61208-798-6.
[2]
J. Minguez, F. Lamiraux, and J. Laumond, “Motion planning and
Obstacle Avoidance,” In: Springer Handbook of Robotics. Ed. by B.
Siciliano; O. Khatib, Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, pp. 1177–1202,
2016.
[3]
M. Brecht, B. Preilowski, and M. M. Merzenich, “Functional architec-
ture of the mystacial vibrissae,” Behav. Brain Res., vol. 84, pp. 81–97,
1997.
[4]
E. Gui´c-Robles, C. Valdivieso, and G. Guajardo, “Rats can learn a
roughness discrimination using only their vibrissal system,” Behav.
Brain Res., vol. 31, pp. 285–289, 1989.
[5]
G. E. Carvell and D. J. Simons, “Biometric Analyses of Vibrissal Tactile
Discrimination in the Rat,” J. Neurosci., vol. 10, pp. 2638–2648, 1990.
[6]
T. J. Prescott, B. Mitchinson, and R. A. Grant, “Vibrissal behavior and
function,” Scholarpedia, vol. 6, p. 6642, 2011.

113
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[7]
H. M. Belli, A. E. T. Yang, C. S. Bresee, and M. J. Z. Hartmann,
“Variations in vibrissal geometry across the rat mystacial pad: Base
diameter, medulla, and taper,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 117, pp. 1807–
1820, 2016.
[8]
D. Voges et al., “Structural Characterization of the Whisker System of
the Rat,” IEEE Sens. J., vol. 12, pp. 332–229, 2012.
[9]
D. Campagner, M. H. Evans, M. S. E. Loft, and R. S. Petersen, “What
the whiskers tell the brain,” Neurosci. vol. 368, pp. 95–108, 2018.
[10]
S. Ebara, T. Furuta, and K. Kumamoto, “Vibrissal mechanoreceptors,”
Scholarpedia, vol. 12, p. 32372, 2017.
[11]
J. H. Solomon and M. J. Z. Hartmann, “Radial distance determination
in the rat vibrissal system and the effects of Weber’s law,” Phil. Trans.
R. Soc. B., vol. 366, pp. 3049–3057, 2011.
[12]
J. H. Solomon and M. J. Z. Hartmann, “Extracting object contours with
the sweep of a robotic whisker using torque information,” Int. J. Robot
Res. vol. 29, pp. 1233–1245, 2010.
[13]
J. H. Solomon and M. J. Z. Hartmann, “Artiﬁcial whiskers suitable for
array implementation: accounting for lateral slip and surface friction,”
IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 24, pp. 1157–1167, 2008.
[14]
D. Kim and R. M¨oller, “Biomimetic whiskers for shape recognition,”
Proceedings of the 1995 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation, Nagoya, Japan, 21-27 May 1995, pp. 1113–1119.
[15]
M. Kaneko, N. Kanayama, and T. Tsuji, “Active antenna for contact
sensing,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom., vol. 14, pp. 278–291, 1998.
[16]
A. E. Schultz, J. H. Solomon, M. A. Peshkin, and M. J. Z. Hartmann,
“Multifunctional Whisker Arrays for Distance Detection, Terrain Map-
ping, and Object Feature Extraction,” IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation, Barcelona, Spain, 18-22 April 2005, pp.
2588–2593.
[17]
C. Will, C. Behn, and J. Steigenberger, “Object contour scanning using
elastically supported technical vibrissae,” ZAMM J. Appl. Math. Mec.,
vol. 98, pp. 289–305, 2018.
[18]
T. N. Clements and C. D. Rahn, “Three-Dimensional Contact Imaging
With an Actuated Whisker,” IEEE Trans. Rob., vol. 22, pp. 844–848,
2006.
[19]
L. A. Huet, J. W. Rudnicki, and M. J. Z. Hartmann, “Tactile sensing with
whiskers of various shapes: determining the three-dimensional location
of object contact Based on mechanical signals at the whisker base.”
Soft Robot., vol. 4, pp. 88–103, 2017.
[20]
L. Merker, J. Steigenberger, R. Marangoni, and C. Behn, “A vibrissa-
inspired highly ﬂexible tactile sensor: scanning 3D object surfaces pro-
viding tactile images,” Sensors, vol. 21, 2021. DOI: 10.3390/s21051572.
[21]
L. Merker, S. J. Fischer Calderon, M. Scharff, J. H. Alencastre Miranda,
and C. Behn, “Effects of Multi-Point Contacts during Object Contour
Scanning Using a Biologically-Inspired Tactile Sensor,” Sensors, vol.
20, 2020. DOI: 10.3390/s20072077.
[22]
V. L. Popov, “Contact mechanics and friction,” Springer, 2010.
[23]
L. Merker, M. Scharff, and C. Behn, “Approach to the dynamical
scanning of object contours using tactile sensors,” IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Mechatronics (ICM), pp. 364–369, 2019. DOI:
10.1109/ICMECH.2019.8722882.

