Leveraging Blockchain, Analytics and Decision Support to Facilitate Qualifications’ 
Verification, Recruitment and Competency Management: The QualiChain Project 
and Initial Results
 
Christos Kontzinos 
Decision Support Systems Lab 
National Technical University of Athens 
Athens, Greece 
Email: ckon@epu.ntua.gr  
Panagiotis Kokkinakos 
Decision Support Systems Lab 
National Technical University of Athens 
Athens, Greece 
Email: pkokkinakos@epu.ntua.gr  
Panagiotis Kapsalis 
Decision Support Systems Lab 
National Technical University of Athens 
Athens, Greece 
Email: pkapsalis@epu.ntua.gr  
 
Ourania Markaki 
Decision Support Systems Lab 
National Technical University of Athens 
Athens, Greece 
Email: omarkaki@epu.ntua.gr  
Vagelis Karakolis 
Decision Support Systems Lab 
National Technical University of Athens 
Athens, Greece 
Email: vkarakolis@epu.ntua.gr  
John Psarras 
Decision Support Systems Lab 
National Technical University of Athens 
Athens, Greece 
Email: john@epu.ntua.gr
 
Abstract—In today’s society, digitisation is becoming the new 
norm for various facets and processes of everyday life, taking 
advantage of advancements in Information and Communication 
Technologies and other innovative and emerging technologies. 
The same cannot be said for higher education and the labour 
market that still operate with traditional techniques when it 
comes to the certification, issuance and verification of academic 
qualifications as well as recruitment and competency 
management respectively. Lack of technical competencies by 
supporting staff and security issues regarding personal data are 
strong disincentives when it comes to reengineering current 
processes. Under that context, this publication presents 
QualiChain, an European Union-funded project that aims to 
revolutionise the domain of public education, as well as its 
interfaces with the labour market, policy making and public 
sector administrative procedures by disrupting the way 
accredited educational titles and other qualifications are 
archived, managed, shared and verified. QualiChain’s technical 
solution leverages blockchain to improve overall security and 
data sovereignty and the computational intelligence found in 
analytics and decision support to develop value-adding 
components on top of a robust blockchain infrastructure. This 
publication presents the project concept as well as current 
progress and initial results relevant to the theoretical 
background of QualiChain, the development of the QualiChain 
platform and the scenarios that have been developed to validate 
the solution in specific pilot contexts. In fact, the first version of 
the platform proves that blockchain, semantics, and analytics 
can indeed disrupt higher education and the labour market and 
lead to substantial efficiency, productivity, and transparency 
impacts. 
Keywords- qualification verification; recruitment; competency 
management; blockchain; analytics; decision support. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
In an era that every single piece of information around us 
is digitised and being exploited via innovative technological 
solutions in a variety of value adding ways [1], education 
certificates are largely resisting the pull of technology, as they 
are still held in diverse formats in siloed databases, often 
involving time consuming manual processes for their 
verification [2]. In education, certificates verify the 
achievement of certain learning outcomes and are until today 
mostly issued on paper or other physical formats [3]. Paper 
certificates have their advantages, such as being easy to store 
and difficult to forge due to built-in security features. 
However, they also create several issues, such as dependence 
from accrediting authorities for their issuing and verification 
as well as vulnerability to loss and damage [4]. Additionally, 
lying about education and employment credentials is a 
common problem, as it has become very easy to counterfeit 
academic diplomas and certificates, or even “buy” degrees 
from fake degree websites [5]. According to a survey by 
CareerBuilder [6], a staggering 58% of employers have caught 
a lie on a resume, whereas 33% of them have seen an increase 
in resume embellishments and fabrications [7]. Similar 
findings arise from another survey by StatisticBrain [8], 
according to which over half of resumes and job applications 
contain falsifications and over three quarters are misleading 
[9]. Under these circumstances, and although fraud is not 
177
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

limited to educational awards, trust in the educational 
certification system is receiving significant blows [10][11].  
The aforementioned challenges create problems when 
education credentials are requested as a means of ratifying 
decisions 
regarding 
either 
personnel 
recruitment 
or 
individuals’ 
further 
admission 
in 
other 
educational 
programmes. The recruitment of personnel by an organisation 
is a lengthy process that comes along with combing through 
hundreds of candidates’ résumés, weeding out the unqualified 
ones and narrowing down the rest into a group of potential 
recruits’, whose qualifications and academic degrees have to 
be checked and validated on a case-by-case basis. These 
challenges do not limit to the actual task of recruiting but 
extend to a wider set of processes indicatively encompassing 
personnel allocation and re-allocation, staff mobility, and 
skills’ development and evaluation, most of which fall under 
the notion of competency management. 
Disruptive technologies, such as blockchain, algorithmic 
techniques, data analytics, and semantics and innovative 
concepts like gamification may offer solutions to these 
challenges. Particularly, blockchain technology, as a 
decentralised, permanent, unalterable store of information can 
help with the archiving and trust issues, as well as provide a 
frictionless method for transacting with others [12][13], 
whereas computational intelligence found in the technological 
domains of algorithmic techniques, data analytics, and 
semantic analysis may facilitate data interoperability, decision 
making and optimise work practices and procedures. 
Moreover, gamification practices can help with user 
engagement and in developing a more user-centric solution 
[14]. Under these circumstances, this publication presents 
QualiChain, a project targeting the creation, piloting, and 
evaluation of a distributed platform for storing, sharing, and 
verifying academic and employment qualifications that will 
focus on the assessment of the potential of the aforementioned 
combination of technologies for disrupting the domain of 
education.  
Section I of this publication introduces the scope of the 
document and describes the challenges revolving around the 
verification of education certificates. Section II provides a 
literature review on the two core domains of QualiChain, 
Qualifications’ certification issuance and verification and 
recruitment and competency management. Section III 
introduces the QualiChain concept and the high-level 
functionalities that it is projected to have. Section IV describes 
the platform’s components and introduces the pilot use cases, 
in which the platform will be applied. Section V describes 
current progress in the project and the most interesting results 
up to this point. Finally, Section VI concludes the document. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
This section presents the literature review of the two core 
domains of QualiChain, namely qualifications’ certification 
issuance and verification and recruitment and competency 
management. In order to perform the literature review and 
identify current state-of-the-art approaches and solutions the 
following methods and tools have been used. 
 
• 
Keyword search: Keyword search has been used so that 
search engines, such as Google, would suggest relevant 
resources. In particular, not only standalone keywords 
(e.g., blockchain, education) but also keyword phrases 
(e.g., innovation to education, blockchain and CVs, and 
recruitment analytics) were used. 
• 
Google Scholar: Searched Google Scholar for papers 
relevant to the objectives of the QualiChain project in 
order to better understand how blockchain, analytics, and 
decision support have already been leveraged to disrupt 
higher education and the labour market. 
• 
Scopus: Also searched Scopus for publications that 
would be relevant to blockchain, analytics, and decision 
support as well as the domains of higher education and 
the labour market. 
In order to decide whether a source should be taken into 
account, several filters were used. In particular, the usage of 
sources that are quite recent was considered to be of outmost 
importance. In addition, we also wanted to examine 
publications presenting applications that would facilitate the 
understanding of how the aforementioned technologies can 
be leveraged. 
A. Qualifications’ Certification, Issuance and Verification 
Certification is essential for the educational system as a 
way of validating and recognising the achievements of 
learners. Attainment is shown through a collection of 
certificates, which represent the knowledge that the learner 
has gained and the skills that they have acquired. The current 
state of the art in the certification of qualifications still 
follows traditional practices and manual processes in the 
general case. Specifically, upon achievement of some 
specified learning performance goals, formal qualifications 
are issued to a learner by an awarding educational institution, 
often subject to a regulatory framework of academic 
standards. Such certification is generally provided to learners 
in paper form. In order to prove the existence of a 
qualification, the paper document can then be provided to, 
e.g., employers or educational institutions. As an anti-fraud 
policy, such third parties can typically then verify its 
legitimacy with the relevant institution or trusted body. For 
example, the UK (United Kingdom) has already established 
the Higher Education Datacheck service [15]. The use of this 
service is chargeable, and the entire verification process can 
take up to seven days [16].  
This process can be applied effectively to receive and 
verify formal qualifications from institutions, albeit with 
slow results. However, when it comes to informal education 
and many Continuing Professional Development (CPD) 
scenarios, there may be little to no formal documentation of 
learning, or the ability to prove to third parties that learning 
activities have taken place. Recent developments in online 
learning have led to initiatives such as the OpenBadges 
standard [17], initially developed by the Mozilla Foundation, 
for informal learning recognition. Badges are verifiable, 
portable digital certificates with embedded metadata about 
178
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

skills and achievements [18]. They usually comply with some 
specification and are shareable across the Web. Badges 
received increased attention because of the mismatch 
between skills obtained through university degrees and those 
that are required in the workplace. By representing small 
segments of learning, badges reduce the granularity by which 
attainment can be captured and represented, thus providing a 
greater reward for achieving particular skills and gaining 
specific experiences. This can be used to help capture the 
diversity of activities, in which one may be involved with 
during any kind of educational course and, at the same time, 
provide validation to the learner that these activities are 
contributing to their skillset. There is no formal verification 
process built-in to the OpenBadges standard, although in 
principle it could be performed manually. Currently, 
thousands of organisations across the world issue badges in 
accordance with the Open Badges Specification, from non-
profits to major employers to educational institutions at all 
levels, including the free OpenLearn platform of the Open 
University [19]. 
To provide the verification component for online 
certification, there have recently been several approaches to 
using blockchains as stores for certification records. The first 
attempt at this was carried out by the University of Nicosia, 
which placed certifications for its Digital Currency course on 
the Bitcoin blockchain [20]. More recently, MIT collaborated 
with the company Learning Machine to develop Blockcerts 
to award diplomas, again using the Bitcoin blockchain, in a 
learner-controlled fashion [21]. “Blockcerts consists of open-
source libraries, tools, and mobile apps enabling a 
decentralised, standards-based, recipient-centric ecosystem, 
enabling 
trustless 
verification 
through 
blockchain 
technologies” [22]. Both of these approaches use custom 
(although open) representations for certification data. Since 
2015, the Open University has been conducting experiments 
with a generic framework for using blockchains to store and 
verify OpenBadges, as a means of making standards-
compliant 
educational 
certification 
available 
in 
an 
automatically verifiable manner [23]. Moreover, the 
Governement Technology Agency of Singapore has initiated 
OpenCerts [24], an academic certification standard that 
leverages the Ethereum blockchain [25] for the issuance and 
verification of OpenCerts certificates. OpenCerts certificates 
are JSON objects defined by the OpenCerts schema 
following the Open Attestation framework. Finally, the 
European Blockchain Service Infrastructure (EBSI) is 
developing standalone components based on blockchain for 
degree and other qualification certification and validation 
[26].  
B. Recruitment and Competency Management 
Competency management is a technique used by HR 
(Human Resources) departments in the process of 
identifying, further developing, improving, and evaluating 
the abilities and key skills required to fulfil the needs of every 
job position inside their organisation. Each position inside an 
organisation requires a set of key abilities, knowledge, 
experiences, and skills. A competency management system is 
composed of the following four step process: 
• 
Competencies’ acquisition that involves the recruitment 
and selection of personnel, both for internal and external 
purposes, based on the matching of job description 
requirements 
and 
individual 
demonstrated 
competencies.  
• 
Competencies’ evaluation, both in terms of actual and 
potential competencies that refer to the yearly/monthly 
evaluation of personnel, analysis of gaps in the 
competencies, and diagnosis of needs in terms of skills 
development.  
• 
Competencies’ development, which includes the training 
in and off-job that is used to overcome the gaps identified 
in the evaluation process.  
• 
Competencies’ retention, which relates to motivating the 
individual by compensation in terms of leadership, 
rewards, incentives, promotions, and carrier prospects.  
      Today’s modern HR suites, used in the process of 
competencies acquisition step collect applications from 
multiple 
locations, 
classify 
successful 
candidates 
automatically, and offer services such as onboarding, video 
interviewing, and many more. According to recent studies 
[27] “Recruitment Management software is expected to 
reinvent its capacity, boost efficiency with more personalised 
and candidate-centric recruiting, streamlined interfaces, and 
automation of more HR-related processes that are currently 
performed manually”. In this context, verifying job 
candidates’ learning certificates and achievements is still a 
challenging task, typically based on manually verifying 
information included in CVs and traditional degrees’ 
certificates awarded by recognised academic institutions. 
     The process of competency evaluation is usually a yearly 
process performed also manually by the person that is directly 
above the one that is being evaluated, in the hierarchy of a 
company, being most of the times a direct association 
between the ability of the person in executing his assigned 
tasks, and the evaluation of the individuals' behaviour when 
executing them. Also, a self-evaluation is required. These 
factors are quantitatively measured by some formulas used 
by HR departments and a grade is attributed to the worker. A 
positive grade is most of the times translated into a promotion 
or a bonus, and a negative one could be reason enough to fire 
the employee. The challenge that HR departments face in this 
process is the lack of transparency in the evaluation. It is a 
highly human influenced process, in which misleading 
feelings about a worker by its direct superior can lead to 
unfair situations. Individuals’ soft skills are also hard to 
measure, since these are not usually taken into consideration 
by the quantitative formulas used.   
     In order to improve the capabilities of the employees, 
learning is one of the fundamental methods used in the 
competency development process. Training not only 
improves the skills of the employees but also refreshes their 
knowledge and improves their performance in current 
179
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

positions. It also offers a means for progressing one’s career 
and thereby fulfilling a need inside the organisation. The 
training programs are usually designed according to the 
business goals of the organisation. The aim is to ensure that 
the organisation as a whole and its employees have consistent 
progress on competency improvement and their growth 
paths. But encouraging the employees to carry the training 
programming until the end is a challenge for organisations 
that require therefore creative ways to increase the 
engagement of the employees in training programs and to 
motivate them to continue the process. Another challenge 
with training programs is that they are oftentimes presented 
in such a way that it becomes too formal for the learner to 
use. The learners might not understand the objectives of the 
program or become bored of using it during the time. 
To keep employees motivated rewarding strategies have 
been used in the competency retention processes. A 
rewarding strategy includes the definition of ratings or 
evaluation measures for satisfying the required level of 
capabilities and skills for a certain competency. Five-star 
rankings are the most common rewarding systems used in 
evaluation methods as well as points, levels, badges and 
medals [28][29]. 
III. 
THE QUALICHAIN CONCEPT 
QualiChain is a project that aspires to investigate and 
provide evidence on the transformative impact of disruptive 
technologies, such as blockchain, semantics, data analytics, 
and gamification in the domain of public education, as well as 
the interfaces of the latter with the fields of private education, 
the labour market, and public sector administrative 
procedures. The concept and focus of the project lie more 
specifically in the design, implementation, piloting, and 
thorough evaluation in terms of benefits, risks, and other 
potential implications of the QualiChain technological 
solution, a distributed platform targeting the storage, sharing, 
and verification of academic and employment qualifications. 
At this point, attention has to be drawn to the fact that although 
originally inspired from the field of public education and the 
need to transform certificates’ archiving and management, as 
well as to fight fraud around education awards, QualiChain 
concept has practically a much larger scope, as its services 
transcend the mere validation of training certificates and bring 
forward solutions to major challenges of both public and 
private interest, such as those of lifelong learning, recruitment, 
mobility, better linking education with the labour market, etc., 
thereby accommodating the needs of several stakeholders (see 
Figure 1). 
 
Figure 1. The value of blockchain to QualiChain stakeholders [3]. 
In fact, QualiChain services will be structured along two 
main pillars.   
 
 
Figure 2. QualiChain Baseline Services 
 
The first pillar (see Figure 2) will be grounded upon 
QualiChain 
main 
technological 
foundations, 
namely 
blockchain and semantics, enabling educational awards’ and 
other 
qualifications’ 
archiving 
and 
storing, 
awards’ 
verification, the latter incorporating equivalence verification, 
as well as qualifications’ portfolio management.  
 
 
Figure 3. QualiChain Value Adding Services 
180
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The second pillar (see Figure 3) will build upon 
QualiChain baseline services to offer with the help of the 
computational intelligence, embodied in data analytics and 
decision support algorithms, as well as gamification 
techniques, a set of more advanced services, including career 
counselling, 
intelligent 
profiling, 
and 
competency 
management and within the context of the latter recruitment 
and evaluation support, and consulting. 
IV. 
FUNCTIONAL OVERVIEW AND PILOT CASES 
A. QualiChain Components Functional Overview 
QualiChain will deliver an open source solution, 
comprising of stand-alone components and an integrated 
environment to facilitate its adoption by the different 
stakeholders according to their needs. To deliver the services 
and functionalities prescribed in the QualiChain concept in 
the previous section, the envisaged QualiChain platform 
logic layer consists of 3 main components, namely a 
Validation and Verification Engine, a Profiling and  
Career Management Engine, and a Recruitment and  
Competency Management Engine, composed in turn by 11 
modules (see Figure 4).  
The Validation and Verification Engine will be 
responsible for registering from scratch newly awarded 
certificates and achievements as well as for ratifying claims 
around the possession of certain awards and qualifications. 
Thus, it will feature an Awards’ Registration Interface that 
will enable issuing and accrediting organisations to register 
new verified qualifications’ records in blockchain’s 
distributed ledger, as well as a Validation Query Builder, 
through which all issuing institutions, public and private 
organisations, as well as individual users can set up 
appropriate validation queries. In greater detail, the 
Validation and Verification Engine is made up of the 
following sub-components: i. an Equivalence Verification 
Module that supports the identification and verification of 
equivalent degrees (or even skills, achievements and training 
courses), issued by different institutions, ii. a Translation 
Module, capable of translating certificates from one language 
to another, in case a both validated and translated version of 
a certificate is required, and iii. a Credentials’ Auditing and 
Verification Module, responsible for accommodating new 
awards’ registrations and thus adding new blocks to the 
blockchain database, as well as for receiving users’ queries 
on the validation of awards and other qualifications. 
The Profiling and Career Management Engine will be 
responsible for the functionalities required for the 
management of individual users’ digital portfolio, aka digital 
learning ledger where the latter can archive and access their 
achievements, qualifications, and work experience with the 
purpose of showcasing them to third parties. The specific 
component’s functionalities are made accessible through a 
Portfolio Manager Interface and are brought to life with the 
help of the following modules: i. a Verification Request 
Module, enabling individuals to submit to accrediting 
organisations requests for the confirmation and formal 
verification of their achievements, ii. a Career Advisor 
Module, capable of crawling world wide web resources and 
applying data mining techniques with the goal of identifying
 
 
Figure 4. QualiChain Value Adding Services
181
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

and bringing into the individuals’ attention job vacancies that 
match their profile, and iii. an Intelligent Profiling Module, 
that leverages job vacancies’ elicited requirements and 
synthesises accordingly individuals’ base profile information 
to deliver multiple, customised versions of their curriculum 
vitae. 
Finally, the Recruitment and Competency Management 
Engine will include functionalities for competency 
management at both strategic and tactical level addressed to 
corporate users, the latter including not only education 
providing institutions, but also public authorities, private 
companies and policy makers. The Recruitment and 
Competency Management Engine exposes its functionality 
through the Competency Management Advisor Interface 
which makes up the entry point to the following sub-
components: i. a Recruits’ Profile Designer Module, enabling 
recruiters to designate the criteria that candidates should 
meet, and thereby specify the type and level education, work 
experience, and the rest of qualifications that they should 
possess as well as any other conditions and requirements they 
ought to fulfil, ii. a Qualifications’ Screening and Matching 
Module, capable of retrieving applicants’ credentials and 
juxtaposing these with recruiters’ criteria to sort out a subset 
of appropriate candidates, iii. a Selection and Recruiting 
Module, applying advanced decision support algorithms on 
the subset of qualified candidates, to optimise candidate 
selection and allocation in corporate positions, iv. a 
Competency 
Development, 
Evaluation 
and 
Gap 
Identification Module, responsible for keeping track of 
employees’ 
qualifications 
records 
and 
identifying 
competency deficit in relation to organisations’ mid and long-
term horizon goals and v. an Advanced Decision Support 
Module, featuring a variety of sophisticated data analytics, 
i.e., data mining, statistics’ calculation, pattern/trend 
recognition, data visualisation and other functionalities of 
both descriptive and prescriptive character, to support 
insights acquisition and informed decision making. 
From an end-user perspective and regarding the 
QualiChain platform presentation layer, the solution lays 
emphasis on intuitiveness and features beside the 
aforementioned 
management 
interfaces, 
appropriate 
authentication and authorisation interfaces for all targeted 
stakeholder 
groups, 
namely 
accrediting 
institutions, 
individuals and corporate users. Finally, the QualiChain data 
access layer envisages storage and retrieval of data from 
blockchain records regarding awards and qualifications, as 
well as from the web to the extent related statistics, job 
postings and other learning and career development 
opportunities are concerned. 
B. QualiChain Pilot Use Cases 
To test and validate the projected platform in its respective 
domains, it will be implemented in four distinct pilot use 
cases 
split 
between 
academia, 
private 
and 
public 
organizations. Specifically, the QualiChain pilots are the 
following: 
1) Cross University Degree Equivalence Verification   
  Within this pilot use case, QualiChain will develop a 
methodology for representing the semantics of educational 
credentials, to support cross-institution and cross-context 
mapping between different forms of certifications. Existing 
vocabularies that describe learning goals and topics will be 
reused and extended to build a detailed knowledge model 
describing the entities relevant to educational accreditation 
and their relationships to each other, in the form of an 
ontology. This pilot will engage lifelong learners, students, 
job seekers and educational institutions. 
2) Smart Curriculum Design and University Process 
Optimization  
This use case will be implemented in the School of 
Electrical and Computer Engineering of the National 
Technical University of Athens (NTUA). It will take 
advantage of QualiChain’s analytics and decision support 
capabilities to analyse the current skill level of students, the 
school’s curriculum, and the labour market’s requirements 
for the school’s graduates to provide decision support for 
optimizing the school’s curriculum. Additionally, this pilot 
will leverage the blockchain ledger to verify student skills 
and qualifications with smart badges. This pilot will engage 
undergraduate and Ph.D. students of the school as well as 
professors and administrative bodies. 
3) Staffing the Public Sector 
This pilot use case lies in using the QualiChain platform 
and services for supporting and simplifying public sector 
recruitment and competency management procedures. Given 
that recruitment in public administration must be based on the 
principles of impartiality, transparency, and fairness, this 
pilot will leverage the platform’s blockchain to manage and 
verify the applications and other supporting documents 
submitted by candidates. Additionally, the recruitment and 
competency management services of QualiChain will be used 
to automate applications’ checking and candidates’ 
assessment and selection procedures, and respectively for 
supporting decisions related to the allocation of human 
resources within the public sector or employee mobility 
issues. This pilot will engage public administrations, 
recruitment firms, employees, job seekers, and issuing 
organisations. 
4) Provision of HR Consulting and Competency 
Management Services 
This pilot will explore blockchain for easily checking and 
ensuring the availability of certain competencies in an 
individual curriculum. Also, data analytics methodologies 
and algorithms will be applied for the effective matching of 
skills, qualifications, and competencies with job description 
requirements, not only for external selection, but also for 
internal mobility. Semantic technologies will be used to 
support corporate training and career management, 
throughout the entire individuals’ job evolution. This pilot 
182
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

will engage public entities looking for new applicants, 
candidates, and public workers. 
V. 
PROGRESS AND RESULTS 
This section describes the progress and current results 
stemming from QualiChain’s operations up to this point. 
Since QualiChain is a multi-disciplinary project involving 
various partners from the education and employment sector, 
multiple technologies, pilots and actions, the current results 
will be split in four categories: theoretical results, legal and 
ethical landscape, technical results and development, and 
finally pilots’ execution and early feedback. The progress and 
results are presented in the following sub-sections. 
A. Theoretical background 
One of the main objectives of QualiChain entailed the 
performance of an extensive analysis of the socio-economic 
landscape and market, by reviewing and updating the state of 
practices in terms of technologies’ potential for QualiChain, 
and state of the art in qualifications certification and human 
resources management. The analysis entailed two levels 
regarding the aforementioned domains of interest: related 
national and European projects and initiatives and 
commercial tools and applications with both analyses 
yielding very interesting results. The criteria for both 
analyses were the following: target users, blockchain usage, 
personalisation approach, semantics usage, gamification 
approach, 
qualification 
certification 
and 
competency 
management. As expected, not every project/commercial tool 
included all the aforementioned functionalities. However, the 
results helped identify the state-of-play of current approaches 
and their usage of the aforementioned technologies to distil 
good practices, identify shortcomings, and ultimately assess 
the potential of QualiChain to address the challenges in both 
domains. 
The first analysis was performed on 14 projects from 
various European countries. The focus was mainly on 
European initiatives due to the common challenge of GDPR 
compliance and what lessons can be derived from existing 
approaches. While most projects that were reviewed are 
focused on specific applications and do not holistically 
address the needs and challenges in qualification certification 
and competency management, the analysis also helped 
uncover interesting approaches that are currently being 
developed. More specifically, the EscoBadges [30] and 
OPENSKIMR (Open European Skill Match Maker) [31] 
projects present great interest as they link user skills and 
qualifications to the ESCO ontology and offer added value 
services for matchmaking and recommendations of jobs and 
proper education, based on the talents' skill sets dynamics. In 
addition, the SEAL project [32] is unique in the domain as it 
implements trust management over blockchain via use of Self 
Sovereign Identities (SSI) and Verifiable Claims (VCs). 
These projects were thoroughly assessed to identify good 
practices and knowledge that can be extended under the 
context of QualiChain. In addition, QualiChain has 
synergized with the SEAL project in an official capacity for 
knowledge and technology exchange and also to leverage 
SEAL’s SSI infrastructure for QualiChain’s role-based 
authentication component.  
The second analysis was performed on 19 commercial 
tools/applications and yielded similar results. Most 
applications that were reviewed offer very specific 
functionalities that can be applied in specific EU countries 
(e.g., certification of teachers in the UK, certification of ICT 
employees on specific skills and qualifications etc.) and most 
of them do not leverage the possibilities that blockchain, 
semantics, data analytics, and gamification can offer. Despite 
the shortcomings of some of the approaches, the analysis also 
uncovered various interesting micro-services and solutions, 
such as the Higher Education Degree Datacheck [33] that 
provides advice and guidance on degree fraud, NOKUT [34] 
that performs periodic supervision of universities’ curricula 
as well as Blockcerts [22] and Diplome [35] that leverage 
blockchain to produce verifiable credentials that are managed 
by the holders of such certificates in a decentralised manner. 
The aforementioned analyses helped distil QualiChain’s 
potential in the domains tackled, focusing on advancements 
that will be based on blockchain, semantics, data analytics, 
and gamification, which also produced an analysis of those 
technologies’ potential to disrupt the field. In combination 
with feedback received from the project’s pilot partners the 
outcomes of these analyses were translated into user 
requirements and stories that have shaped the platform’s 
development. Another pertinent result of QualiChain’s 
theoretical framework was the development of an 
implications’ assessment framework that focuses on the 
short- and long-term implications stemming from the 
implementation of QualiChain and other similar solutions in 
the field of education and the labour market, in the form of 
PEST (political, economic, social, and technological) 
analyses for every stakeholder identified. Under this context, 
the recent Covid-19 pandemic was also taken into 
consideration to uncover additional challenges and 
opportunities that this new reality has created. The overall 
conclusion of QualiChain’s theoretical framework is that the 
project is ideally situated in terms of timing, technologies 
used, and challenges addressed, a fact has been validated 
numerous 
times 
with 
project 
partners 
(interviews, 
questionnaires, focus groups) and the research community 
(scientific conferences, project synergies). 
B. Legal and ethical landscape 
The QualiChain technical solution includes components 
that will store and process user data that are considered 
personal and are thus protected by the General Data 
Protection Regulation. As such, a comprehensive analysis of 
the European legal and ethical landscape was performed 
focusing mainly on the GDPR, national legislations 
(concerning pilot countries) and ethical aspects that need to 
be taken into consideration for the development of the 
QualiChain platform. The main GDPR articles and 
183
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

regulations that need to be taken into account under the 
context of QualiChain refer to users’ rights for data erasure 
and the right to restrict data processing. In addition, there are 
rules and obligations that QualiChain must adhere to such as 
the development of an informed consent form (for informing 
platform users on their rights concerning their data), a Data 
Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA) (risk assessment 
focusing on security and privacy issues) and the appointment 
of a Data Protection Officer (DPO). In addition, the analysis 
of the ethical landscape also uncovered various ethical 
requirements relevant to the platform development that need 
to be addressed. The most important of them include the data 
minimisation principle (only necessary user data will 
populate the system) as well as applying privacy-by-design 
principles during platform development. In other words, the 
analysis of the ethical landscape uncovered that all security 
and ethical aspects of the technical solution must be set out 
and addressed before platform development is underway, 
which is a rule that has been followed by the technical team.     
As already mentioned, one of the most important results of 
these tasks was the creation of the informed consent/assent 
form that informs users on the following: 
• 
Data collected 
• 
Usage of users’ data by third parties 
• 
Users’ rights concerning their data 
• 
Explanation of why QualiChain processes user data 
• 
Cookie details 
• 
DPO Contact details 
In fact, QualiChain’s consent form has been validated by 
the DPO of the project and the legal departments of every 
consortium partner and has already been used in an official 
legal capacity to bring in data from students, job seekers, 
professors, employers and so on. 
The general consensus stemming from the legal and ethical 
analysis is that QualiChain is a low-risk project when it 
comes to security issues and personal data. Despite that fact, 
it was considered imperative to perform a DPIA so that any 
security issues are identified and addressed from the early 
stages of the project, along the lines of the privacy-by-design 
principle. Security risks identified and resolved so far are the 
following: 
• 
Risk of compliance with the right-to-be-forgotten: Given 
that blockchain is immutable and no data can be deleted 
from it, most of the datasets that are either collected or 
generated by the QualiChain platform, including any 
personal data, will be stored in the platform’s non-
blockchain, database repository. In this way the project 
can ensure compliance with the “right-to-be-forgotten” 
requests by the research participants. The blockchain 
will only be intended to be used to provide guarantees 
that the non-blockchain data has not been tampered with 
or faked by utilising strong encryption mechanisms with 
multiple confirmations on each of the executed 
transactions that guarantee transparency, data privacy, 
and security. 
• 
Risk of malicious third-parties maintaining copies of 
user data even after users have requested their deletion: 
As also stated in the project’s consent form QualiChain 
is not liable for malicious third-party actions but will 
address any such issues that are uncovered by following 
the respective procedures (informing the organisation 
that the data must be deleted, informing the respective 
legal authorities). 
• 
Potential data breaches: QualiChain is based on 
blockchain, which is a decentralised approach, meaning 
that there is no single point of failure in the system and 
that each user is responsible for the safety of their 
personal data that they keep off-chain. 
All in all, the assessment of the legal and ethical landscape 
yielded very useful results for QualiChain and the 
deployment of its technical solution. While QualiChain is 
considered a low-risk project (no sensitive data will be stored 
and processed), every possible measure has been taken to 
ensure legal compliance. The analysis of the national 
legislations in addition to the GDPR resulted in the project’s 
declaration of compliance that was a unanimous decision 
validated by the DPO and other legal entities. One of the 
objectives of QualiChain is to produce a roadmap for legal 
and ethical compliance that can be extended beyond the scope 
of the project (and by extension education and the labour 
market) and applied in various other initiatives and 
development efforts that include one or more of QualiChain’s 
core technologies. This roadmap is projected to include step-
by-step instructions for assessing the risks associated with a 
project and achieving legal and ethical compliance under the 
context of EU regulations. 
C. Technical results and platform development 
The technical vision for the QualiChain technical solution 
can be seen in Figure 4, in Section IV and is the first approach 
to design the platform’s architecture. It illustrates a total of 
12 components grouped into categories of common 
functionalities. These modules and categories are functional, 
in the sense of reflecting the various activities required for the 
project 
pilots 
and 
vision. 
Regarding 
the 
actual 
implementation, however, common functionalities across 
these modules were abstracted to produce a simpler and more 
general-purpose global architecture, allowing the specific 
modules to be implemented as specialised instances of more 
general components. As such, the global architecture of 
QualiChain that leads the development includes five 
components which cover the functionalities of the more 
specific modules, indicated underneath: 
• 
Access Control and Identity Management 
o 
Authentication and Authorization Interface 
• 
Knowledge Graph Engine and Verification 
o 
Credential Auditing and Verification Module 
o 
Blockchain-based 
Registry 
of 
Verified 
Qualifications 
o 
Verification Request Module 
o 
Equivalence Verification Module 
184
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

• 
Knowledge Extraction 
o 
Recruit Profile Designer Module 
o 
Intelligent Profiling Module 
o 
Translation Module 
• 
Analytics and Decision Support 
o 
Career Advisor Module 
o 
Qualification Screening and Matching Module 
o 
Selection and Recruiting Module 
o 
Competency Development, Evaluation, and 
Gap Identification Module 
o 
Advanced Decision Support Module 
• 
Dashboard and Frontend 
o 
Separated from the above backed components 
to support decentralization and to encourage 
openness and reuse of platform components 
This distinction was done because the functionalities 
required to implement a Career Advisor module and a 
Selection and Recruiting Module (for example) are 
essentially the same - an analytics and decision support 
architecture making recommendations and suggestions based 
on data and a particular set of analytics questions and decision 
points. By providing the common analytics and decision 
support component with data related to education, career 
paths and job markets, or candidates, job requirements and 
employment criteria, the two distinct decision support 
modules can be implemented with essentially the same code. 
Similarly, for the various tasks related to querying verifiable 
knowledge and populating knowledge graphs with semantic 
data from various sources - the combination of common 
functionality 
into 
generic 
components 
makes 
the 
implementation more robust and efficient. The updated 
QualiChain architecture and the interconnections between the 
aforementioned components and their respective modules 
can be seen in Figure 5. That final architecture is the result of 
the following two actions: i) the technical contributors of the 
project participated in offline discussions and ii) a workshop 
took place, during which the technical partners designed the 
final architecture in detail and decided how the components 
would efficiently and effectively communicate with each 
other. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. QualiChain Global Architecture 
185
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Based on the architecture mentioned above, the 
components are structured as loosely coupled services. Every 
component constitutes a service, and all the services together 
comprise the entire functionality of the QualiChain platform. 
The fundamental flow is based on keeping knowledge and 
data relating to each stakeholder with that stakeholder 
wherever possible, using federated querying to create a 
“virtual knowledge graph” across the set, and with Access 
Control and Identity Management processes enforced locally. 
Distributed storage solutions are used for open (not private) 
or common knowledge and data. The Knowledge Graph 
Management Engine handles querying and insertion of 
knowledge from and to stakeholder sources while respecting 
access constraints and interacting with the blockchain to store 
and retrieve verification metadata. The Knowledge 
Extraction Module takes care of the semantification of data 
from multiple sources, via the Dashboard/Frontend or from 
elsewhere online, and passing them to the Knowledge 
Management Engine to be stored. The Decision Support and 
Analytics Module works on knowledge retrieved from the 
federated engine, analysing it on behalf of users, and using 
the results to provide them with decision support. This 
module utilizes several Multi-criteria Decision Support and 
Machine Learning methods in order to produce the desired 
results. In particular, it leverages the MAUT [36], Topsis 
[37], Electre I [38], and Promethee II [39] methods to create 
a general-purpose tool that facilitates decision making as well 
as Association Rules Mining [40] to discover interesting 
relations between variables in large datasets. The results of 
these may also constitute new knowledge relevant to affected 
stakeholders and may therefore be inserted into the relevant 
knowledge graph.  
 Finally, the Dashboard and Frontend provides task-
specific user interfaces dedicated to the various activities of 
users of the platform, interacting with every component: user 
and public knowledge stores, the Knowledge Extraction 
Engine, Decision Support module, and the Knowledge Graph 
Engine, as well as accessing the blockchain for, e.g., 
verification of retrieved data. 
Apart from updating the system architecture and 
developing each component, the project team has already 
released the first prototype version of the platform, in which, 
three basic back-end components have been integrated, 
namely, the Verification component, the Knowledge 
Extraction 
component, 
and 
the 
Knowledge 
Graph 
component. These functionalities leverage the blockchain 
solution for academic verification (the baseline functionality 
of the platform), as well as the QualiChain Knowledge Graph 
as the main knowledge base of the QualiChain solution. 
Additional value-adding services and a well-designed front-
end will be integrated at a later step of the development 
process. At the moment, the QualiChain platform prototype 
can support the following functionalities: 
• 
Qualification and Smart Badge Verification, 
• 
Qualification and Smart Badge Accreditation 
• 
Addition of new Qualifications and Smart Badges to the 
system  
• 
Job posting data acquisition, knowledge extraction from 
the acquired data, and storing the result to the 
Knowledge Graph 
• 
Querying the Knowledge Graph for specific skills, 
qualifications, smart badges, or job posting data. 
Regarding qualification and smart badge verification, a 
user interested in verifying if such an asset is valid, sends a 
verification request to QualiChain and provides a hash for 
this specific asset. The QualiChain backend via the Academic 
Verification and Accreditation component, searches for this 
hash in the blockchain and in case the hash exists, the verified 
qualification or smart badge is returned to the user (see Figure 
6). Otherwise, a message that the hash does not exist is sent. 
 
 
Figure 6. Qualification Verification via transaction hash 
 
 
Figure 7. Smart badge accreditation 
 
As far as accreditation is concerned, users authorised to 
award a badge or a qualification, can choose from the list of 
the ones available to them in the Knowledge Graph and award 
it to the user of their choice. The hash of the new asset will 
be stored in the blockchain and the verified qualification 
document will be stored in the distributed file storage. The 
user can also insert new assets into the Knowledge Graph.  
Specifically, an entity with the authority to create a new 
qualification or badge (e.g., a higher education institution, an 
issuing organisation, and a university professor), queries the 
186
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Knowledge Graph to find out if it already exists, and if not, 
requests its insertion via the QualiChain platform. The system 
stores the new asset into the Knowledge Graph and 
afterwards, the entity that introduced it can award it to other 
users. 
Except for the blockchain functionality of the QualiChain 
platform, the Knowledge Graph supports queries to the 
Knowledge Base. This functionality is not available to the 
users; however, it is the backbone of the QualiChain platform 
given that each component that requires data to work 
properly, must query the Knowledge Graph to acquire them. 
For now, such data consist of job postings, skills, 
qualifications, and smart badges. However, as the platform 
grows both in terms of functionality and variety of services, 
more types of data will be introduced. 
 
 
Figure 8. Knowledge graph recommended jobs 
 
The last functionality that is supported by the platform 
concerns the data acquisition and the ontology population. 
Data are extracted from job posting web sites, processed, and 
stored in the Knowledge Graph. Apart from already existing 
services that need this information, this functionality will also 
facilitate the Analytics services in the future, which will be 
able to provide meaningful suggestions based on large 
volumes of actual job market data and the required skills for 
specific job positions. 
D. Pilots’ execution and early results 
This sub-section provides a summary on the operation and 
execution status of each pilot case. After the initial stage of 
pilot preparation, in which all pertinent stakeholders for each 
pilot were identified, requirements were elicited based on 
bibliographic research and stakeholder engagement, and each 
pilot concept was validated, the pilot partners started working 
on specific scenarios that will be used to execute each pilot 
case, gather feedback, and ultimately assess its usefulness in 
addressing current challenges. In addition, pilot partners 
organized various workshops, stakeholder interviews and 
questionnaires to gather early feedback on each pilot case as 
well as the QualiChain solution as a whole.  
1) Cross University Degree Equivalence Verification   
The use case for this pilot can be summarized as follows. 
Lifelong learners are earning smart badges upon reaching 
certain milestones in their studies, e.g., completing part of a 
course or a whole course. Smart badges are stored on the 
Blockchain, thus ensuring the validity of the awarded 
accreditation and eliminating the risk of fabricated 
qualifications. Smart Badges include data about the key skills 
that learners have acquired upon obtaining these badges. As 
learners continue to earn these badges, they start receiving 
personalized recommendations about the latest job offers that 
match their skills. They also receive recommendations about 
what to study next, based on the skills needed for the job 
market. The process workflow designed for the scenario of 
this pilot case can be seen below in Figure 9. 
 
 
Figure 9. Workflow for lifelong learners 
 
2) Smart curriculum design and university process 
optimization 
The use case and respective scenarios developed for this 
pilot can be summarized as follows. In the first scenario that 
is tailored for university students, they use the QualiChain 
Intelligent Profiling mechanism (IPM), which draws data 
from the platform’s database and the web to help them create 
their personal profile that is then saved in QualiChain. When 
the student’s profile is created, the analytics and Decision 
Support System (DSS) modules of the QualiChain platform 
will analyse the student’s personal data, course-related data, 
job market data etc. to provide recommendations and 
suggestions to the student concerning courses, seminars, 
hackathons etc. The overall process flow can be seen in 
Figure 10. 
 
187
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 10. Workflow for university students 
 
The second scenario is tailored for university professors 
who will first sign in QualiChain with their school credentials 
and create their profile that will include information about 
them and their courses. Such data will then be analysed in 
conjunction with labour market data, technological 
developments and popular professions for the school’s 
graduates to identify gaps in courses (and by extension the 
entire curriculum) and provide recommendations for filling 
those gaps. The updated course is then saved in QualiChain 
and the recommendations that the DSS mechanism provides 
are updated (based on the needs that were covered in this 
specific course). When professors update a course based on 
such recommendations, QualiChain will update the 
suggestions to take into account more general curriculum 
gaps that were addressed. In the end, the sum of updated 
courses, knowledge gaps, similar subjects taught in different 
courses etc. are synched with the Advanced Decision Support 
Module (ADSM) tool which will in turn produce 
recommendations for the school’s curriculum as a whole. The 
workflow of this specific scenario can be seen in Figure 11. 
 
 
Figure 11. Workflow for university professors 
 
The final scenario of this pilot describes the process of 
smart badge accreditation in a university setting. In 
QualiChain smart badges can be awarded in the following 
ways: 
• 
Professors to students: Given that some courses have 
group/personal assignments that assign students a 
number of points, professors of a course can choose to 
award smart badges of their choice to the students or 
groups of students that achieved the best results. Such 
results can include but are not limited to the most 
efficient algorithms in software related courses, the best 
results in courses, in the context of which students split 
into groups and compete with each other etc. 
Additionally, smart badges can be awarded for the 
involvement of students in hackathons, special lectures 
and other activities organized by a professor. 
• 
Lecturers/Ph.D. Students: Several courses are being 
taught not only by the professors, but also by lecturers 
(usually Ph.D. candidates) who are not being recognized 
for their involvement in the course. QualiChain, through 
this pilot, proposes the following solution: a professor 
will first verify with a smart badge the lecturer’s 
involvement in the course. During the course, students 
will be able to award the lecturer with tokens, e.g., for 
being communicative during teaching. Thus, the 
lecturers of such academic institutions can also get 
recognized for their efforts and contributions and 
improve their profile in QualiChain as well. A suitable 
ratio of token to smart badges will be set out to better 
reflect the skills of the Ph.D. student as a lecturer.  
The workflow for the use case described above can be 
seen in Figure 12. 
 
 
Figure 12. Workflow for smart badge accreditation 
 
3) Staffing the public sector 
The scenario developed for this pilot case represents a 
generic hiring process to fill in a given position in a public 
sector organization. The process is initiated after a 
qualification component (e.g., a degree) is published by an 
issuing organization (e.g., a university) and saved in 
QualiChain upon obtaining the citizen’s consent. In addition, 
a 
public 
entity 
will 
be 
able 
to 
announce 
job 
positions/vacancies along with the job description and 
required qualifications on QualiChain. QualiChain users will 
receive notifications for new vacancies via the analytics 
188
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

capabilities of the platform and will be able to fill in their 
qualifications, upload the relevant proof of qualifications 
declared (e.g., university degree), and apply for the vacancy 
they are interested in. With the help of QualiChain, the public 
entity will confirm the validity of the qualifications declared 
and use the DSS module of the platform to receive an initial 
ranking of candidates, based on custom criteria set for the 
specific job position. Based on this initial ranking, the public 
entity will then proceed to the stage of interviews. The 
workflow for this scenario can be seen below in Figure 13. 
 
 
Figure 13. Workflow for public sector staffing 
4) Provision of HR consulting and competency 
management services 
The scenario developed for the final pilot case aims to 
facilitate hiring, human resources, and internal competency 
management processes for private and public organizations. 
In this use case, private and public entities will create new job 
postings or initiate internal competency management 
processes on the QualiChain portal, either describing a job 
position or an internal reallocation process and setting the 
required competencies including experiences, degrees, and 
hard (technical) and soft skills that they are seeking from 
candidates and employees. A competency management 
component will be developed for the purposes of this scenario 
that will be based on the already implemented decision 
support capabilities of the platform. The workflow of this 
scenario can be seen in Figure 14.  
 
 
Figure 14. Workflow for competency management 
 
As in the previous pilot cases, job seekers and employees 
will create a profile in the QualiChain platform and fill it with 
personal information, work experiences, and qualifications. 
The competency management system will validate a profile’s 
contents, matching them with the job requirements and 
ranking the applicants according to the semantic similarity of 
their CVs to the job posting in order to facilitate candidate’s 
selection and speed-up the recruitment and reallocation 
process. 
After 
the 
recruitment 
process 
is 
over, 
candidates/employees will be provided with course 
recommendations based on their skills to further develop 
their competencies in their career path or their intra or inter 
department mobility. Competencies, courses, and evaluation 
results in an employee’s current position will be used by the 
competency management system to suggest other career 
paths and potential positions at any time, including required 
and missing skills for the next job opening. 
 
It is of outmost importance to clearly define how the 
performance of the pilots will be measured and how they are 
going to be evaluated. In particular the evaluation of each of 
the four aforementioned pilots includes the following steps 
(that are also presented in Figure 15): 
• 
Documentation of the evaluation framework and 
validation methodology, which will define the practices 
that will be used in order to obtain feedback from the 
end-users 
• 
Documentation of the set of scenarios that will run 
during each pilot, including the involved actors, the key 
performance indicators, and the time plan 
• 
Reporting of the pilots’ operation and execution  
• 
Documentation of the lessons learnt that could constitute 
methodological adoption guidelines for the utilization of 
the QualiChain platform. 
189
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 15. Steps for pilots’ evaluation 
 
Currently all QualiChain pilots are on the phase of alpha-
testing the QualiChain individual services. Thus, the use case 
results are focused on: a) (successful) validation of the 
concept and procedural / methodological aspects; b) data 
availability and data flows; c) (successful) validation of the 
complete 
coverage 
of 
use 
case 
aspects 
by 
the QualiChain individual services.  
 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS & NEXT STEPS 
 This publication presented QualiChain, a project aiming 
to develop a decentralized platform for storing, sharing, and 
verifying academic and employment qualifications. A 
literature review in qualifications’ certification, recruitment 
and competency management is included to assess current 
approaches and solutions and showcase the added value 
offered by the QualiChain concept. QualiChain aims to 
address the challenges of the sectors tackled holistically, by 
meeting the needs of all possible stakeholders, a fact that is 
also reflected in the complexity of QualiChain’s technical 
solution and the number of distinct pilot cases in which it will 
be implemented. When it comes to project results, 
QualiChain has set up a robust theoretical framework by 
combining desk research and stakeholder engagement that 
does not only guide the technical efforts but can also act as a 
solid foundation for similar projects in the domain. In 
addition, and given that QualiChain deals with personal data, 
great effort has been given to analyse the current legal and 
ethical landscape and perform the necessary actions to remain 
compliant with European and national legislations, mainly 
focusing on the GDPR.  When it comes to technical results, 
the first version of the platform has already been released, 
including the blockchain and semantic infrastructure of the 
solution as well as a number of components that facilitate 
smart badge accreditation, qualification verification, and 
recommendations based on decision support algorithms. The 
validation of the platform is also underway by the project’s 
four pilots that have already defined the methodology that 
will be used for the validation of the platform, developed 
specific scenarios, and began engaging end users. The next 
steps include the release of the second version of the platform 
that will include more value-added services as well as the 
final validation of the platform. All in all, the innovation 
potential of QualiChain is very strong, as it focuses on a 
domain, that of education credentials, that has largely resisted 
the pool of technology and where the improvement potential 
in the processes of certificates’ archiving, management and 
verification, the information flow amongst stakeholders and 
the opportunity for offering value adding services on top of 
the aforementioned processes and developing new business 
and education models is literally huge. Disrupting any (or 
even more than one) of the aforementioned aspects can lead 
to substantial efficiency, productivity and transparency 
impacts, which should in turn have noticeable positive 
societal, economic, political and cultural effects.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been co-funded by the European Union’s 
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the 
QualiChain project (https://qualichain-project.eu/), Grant 
Agreement No 822404. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
C. Kontzinos, O. Markaki, P. Kokkinakos, V. Karakolis, S. 
Skalidakis, and J. Psarras, “Decentralised Qualifications’ 
Verification and Management for Learner Empowerment, 
Education 
Reengineering 
and 
Public 
Sector 
Transformation: The QualiChain Project,” Mobile, Hybrid, 
and On-line Learning (eLmL 2020), 2020. 
[2] 
M. Turkanović, M. Hölbl, K. Košič, M. Heričko, and A. 
Kamišalić, 
“EduCTX: 
A 
blockchain-based 
higher 
education credit platform,” IEEE Access, 2018, doi: 
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2789929. 
[3] 
W. Gräther, S. Kolvenbach, R. Ruland, J. Schütte, C. F. 
Torres, and F. Wendland, “Blockchain for Education: 
Lifelong Learning Passport,” Proc. 1st ERCIM Blockchain 
Work. 2018, Reports Eur. Soc. Soc. Embed. Technol., 2018. 
[4] 
A. F. Camilleri, A. Grech, and A. Inamorato dos Santos, 
“Blockchain in education,” Publ. Off. Eur. Union, 
Luxemb., 2017, doi: 10.31145/1999-513x-2019-6-32-35. 
[5] 
J. Bear, “Degree mills: The billion-dollar industry that has 
sold over a million fake diplomas.” 2012. 
[6] 
“CareerBuilder.” 
https://www.careerbuilder.com/ 
(accessed Dec. 03, 2020). 
[7] 
“Liar, liar! You won’t get hired | CareerBuilder.” 
https://www.careerbuilder.com/advice/liar-liar-you-wont-
get-hired (accessed Dec. 04, 2020). 
[8] 
“STATISTIC BRAIN RESEARCH INSTITUTE - Statistic 
Brain.” https://www.statisticbrain.com/ (accessed Dec. 04, 
2020). 
[9] 
“StatisticBrain: 
Resume 
Falsification 
Statistics.” 
https://www.statisticbrain.com/resume-falsification-
statistics/ (accessed Dec. 03, 2020). 
[10] 
G. Mohamedbhai, “The Scourge of Fraud and Corruption 
in Higher Education,” Int. High. Educ., pp. 12–14, 2016, 
doi: 10.6017/ihe.2016.84.9111. 
[11] 
D. W. Chapman and S. Lindner, “Degrees of integrity: the 
threat of corruption in higher education,” Stud. High. 
Educ., 
pp. 
247–268, 
2014, 
doi: 
10.1080/03075079.2014.927854. 
[12] 
M. Sharples and J. Domingue, “The blockchain and kudos: 
A distributed system for educational record, reputation and 
reward,” in European conference on technology enhanced 
190
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

learning, 2016, pp. 490–496, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-
45153-4_48. 
[13] 
P. Devine, “Blockchain learning: can crypto-currency 
methods be appropriated to enhance online learning?,” ALT 
Online Winter Conf., pp. 7–10, 2015. 
[14] 
A. Darejeh and S. S. Salim, “Gamification Solutions to 
Enhance Software User Engagement—A Systematic 
Review,” Int. J. Hum. Comput. Interact., vol. 32, no. 8, pp. 
613–642, 
Aug. 
2016, 
doi: 
10.1080/10447318.2016.1183330. 
[15] 
“Prospects HEDD.” https://hedd.ac.uk/ (accessed Dec. 03, 
2020). 
[16] 
D. Mathiews, “What blockchain technology could mean 
for 
universities.” 
https://www.timeshighereducation.com/news/what-
blockchain-technology-could-mean-for-universities 
(accessed Dec. 03, 2020). 
[17] 
“IMS Open Badges.” https://openbadges.org/ (accessed 
Dec. 03, 2020). 
[18] 
K. Carey, “A Future Full of Badges’. The Chronicle of 
Higher Education.” https://www.chronicle.com/article/a-
future-full-of-badges/ (accessed Dec. 03, 2020). 
[19] 
http://openllearn.edu (accessed Aug. 01, 2020). 
[20] 
https://digitalcurrency.unic.ac.cy/free-introductory-
mooc/self-verifiable-certificates-on-the-bitcoin-
blockchain/academic-certificates-on-the-blockchain/ 
(accessed Aug. 01, 2020). 
[21] 
“Digital Diploma debuts at MIT | MIT News | 
Massachusetts 
Institute 
of 
Technology.” 
https://news.mit.edu/2017/mit-debuts-secure-digital-
diploma-using-bitcoin-blockchain-technology-1017 
(accessed Dec. 03, 2020). 
[22] 
“Blockcerts : The Open Standard for Blockchain 
Credentials.” https://www.blockcerts.org/ (accessed Dec. 
03, 2020). 
[23] 
“Open 
BlockChain.” 
https://blockchain.open.ac.uk/ 
(accessed Dec. 03, 2020). 
[24] 
“OpenCerts - An easy way to check and verify your 
certificates.” https://www.opencerts.io/ (accessed Dec. 04, 
2020). 
[25] 
“Home | ethereum.org.” https://ethereum.org/en/ (accessed 
Dec. 04, 2020). 
[26] 
“Verifiable credentials in European Blockchain Services 
Infrastructure 
– 
Smart 
Degrees.” 
https://www.smartdegrees.es/en/verifiable-credentials-in-
european-blockchain-services-infrastructure/ 
(accessed 
Dec. 03, 2020). 
[27] 
J. Bersin, “The HR Software Market Reinvents Itself,” 
2016. 
https://www.forbes.com/sites/joshbersin/2016/07/18/the-
hr-software-market-reinvents-itself/?sh=6f95c4695d0a 
(accessed Dec. 03, 2020). 
[28] 
Y.-K. Chou, Actionable gamification: Beyond points, 
badges, and leaderboards. 2019. 
[29] 
L. E. Ellis, S. G. Nunn, and J. T. Avella, “Digital badges 
and micro-credentials: Historical overview, motivational 
aspects, issues, and challenges,” in Foundation of Digital 
Badges and Micro-Credentials: Demonstrating and 
Recognizing Knowledge and Competencies, Springer, 
Cham, 2016, pp. 3–21. 
[30] 
“ESCO badges.” http://escobadges.eu/ (accessed Dec. 03, 
2020). 
[31] 
“OpenSKIMR.” http://openskimr.eu/ (accessed Dec. 03, 
2020). 
[32] 
“2018-EU-IA-0024 | Innovation and Networks Executive 
Agency.” https://ec.europa.eu/inea/en/connecting-europe-
facility/cef-telecom/2018-eu-ia-0024 (accessed Dec. 03, 
2020). 
[33] 
“Higher Education Funding COuncil for England 
(HEFCE): Higher Education Degree Datacheck (HEDD).” 
https://hedd.ac.uk/#section-what-we-offer (accessed Dec. 
01, 2020). 
[34] 
“Nokut.” https://www.nokut.no/en/ (accessed Dec. 03, 
2020). 
[35] 
“CIMEA: 
Diplome.” 
http://www.cimea.it/en/projects-
list/diplome-blockchain4people/home-page-blockchain-
2.aspx (accessed Dec. 01, 2020). 
[36] 
J. S. Dyer, “MAUT-multiattribute utility theory,” in 
International Series in Operations Research and 
Management Science, 2005. 
[37] 
Y. Çelikbilek and F. Tüysüz, “An in-depth review of theory 
of the TOPSIS method: An experimental analysis,” J. 
Manag. 
Anal., 
pp. 
281–300, 
2020, 
doi: 
10.1080/23270012.2020.1748528. 
[38] 
J. Figueira, V. Mousseau, and B. Roy, “ELECTRE 
methods,” Mult. Criteria Decis. Anal. State Art Surv., pp. 
133–153, 2005, doi: 10.1007/0-387-23081-5_4. 
[39] 
B. Mareschal, “The Promethee Methods for MCDM,” 
Readings Mult. Criteria Decis. Aid, Springer, pp. 216–252, 
1990. 
[40] 
Q. Zhao and S. S. Bhowmick, “Association Rule Mining: 
A Survey,” 2003. 
 
 
 
191
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

