 New Technologies in Human-Driven Professions:  
The Impact of Digital Transformation for Tourist Guides 
 
Christian Bourret 
DICEN-IdF – Gustave Eiffel University 
Marne-la-Vallée, France 
Email: christian.bourret@univ-eiffel.fr 
 
Claudia Da Re 
DICEN-IdF – Gustave Eiffel University 
Marne-la-Vallée, France 
Email: claudia.da-re@univ-eiffel.fr 
Denis Juillière 
IFIS – Gustave Eiffel University 
Marne-la-Vallée, France 
Email: denis.juilliere@univ-eiffel.fr 
 
Karim Fraoua 
DICEN-IdF – Gustave Eiffel University 
Marne-la-Vallée, France 
Email: karim.fraoua@univ-eiffel.fr 
 
 
Abstract—Qualified tourist guides are professionals in cultural, 
technical, and scientific mediation and they work mainly in 
public spaces, museums, and historical monuments. The digital 
transformation of the 2010s has revolutionised the approach to 
knowledge and has led to a change in the role of qualified 
tourist guides. By this we mean the explosion of Wikipedia and 
social networks, as well as the introduction of multimedia in 
museums. The effects of the current health crisis (Covid) have 
been added to all this to impose profound changes and 
irreversible developments. Our reflection is about, on one 
hand, the way in which the qualified tourist guides can rely on 
digital technology during a tour and, on the other hand, the 
new skills that student guides must acquire during their 
scholarship. We seek to understand where and how digital 
technology can be an ally of qualified tourist guides without 
replacing them. We will rely on the professional degree of 
qualified tourist guides (in French: guides-conférenciers), 
prepared in our Gustave Eiffel University, as well as on our 
connections with the National Federation of Qualified Tourist 
Guides, to analyse the digital approach of future professionals 
in the sector. We also propose perspectives for future works. 
 
Keywords – Tourist Guide; digital tools; cultural mediation; 
museums; situational iceberg. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
Since 2010, the tourism sector has been facing a 
profound digital transformation and has also hit the shock of 
a health crisis. This is particularly true for qualified tourist 
guide’s profession [1]. We propose to analyse the evolution 
of the profession of qualified tourist guide, or in French 
guide-conférencier [2], in the global context of digital 
transformation 
and 
Covid 
pandemic. 
The 
digital 
transformation represents both a threat and a great 
opportunity for the profession in the perspective of J. Ellul's 
"ambivalence of technology" analysis [3]. A threat because, 
as we shall see in Section III, it can be seen as a new 
competitor to the tour guides as long as the digital replaces 
the human. At the same time, digital transformation 
becomes an opportunity to develop new skills to broaden 
the scope of business or to increase one's own customer 
base. 
After an introduction (Section I), we explain our 
scientific positioning (Section II), our methodology (Section 
III) and we give an overview of human mediation (Section 
IV). Then, we outline the use of digital new tools in the 
mediation (Section V). Finally, we analyse the future of 
qualified 
tourist 
guides 
facing 
Information 
and 
Communication Technology (ICT) (Section VI) and we give 
a conclusion with perspectives for future works (Section 
VII). Observing our students over the last few years and 
following the experience of a qualified tourist guide, we 
realised that it became necessary to re-think the profession 
of tourist guide by integrating digital tools. Through their 
master’s dissertations and their internships, our students 
reflect on how to integrate digital tools in their job. We 
intend to analyse their approach of this subject during their 
studies and also after, when they will start to work. We want 
to understand in which way digital technology can be an 
ally of a qualified tourist guide and will try to provide an 
overview of the current situation. 
The decree n. 2011-930 of August 1st 2011, relating to 
persons qualified to conduct guided tours in museums and 
historical monuments [4], has modified the status of the 
qualified tourist guide. From now on, the law recognises 
only one professional figure that groups together the four 
professions that existed until 2011 (regional guide-
interpreter, national guide-interpreter, guide-lecturer of the 
Cities and Countries of Art and History, national lecturer): 
the qualified tourist guide or in French guide-conférencier. 
Obtaining the professional license (Fig. 1), which is valid 
throughout France, is subject to the validation of a 
professional bachelor’s degree or a master's degree if the 
following courses units have been validated: tourist guide 
skills, professional practice, and modern foreign language. 
The professional bachelor’s degree is characterised by its 
multidisciplinary approach. The bachelor’s degree proposed 
at the Gustave Eiffel University, for example, focuses on 
93
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

three fundamental aspects: history of art, cultural heritage 
and general knowledge; practical aspects with guiding 
techniques and oral mediation of the public; professional 
aspects of communication, marketing and occupational 
integration. The aim is to provide students with tools 
allowing to deal with any type of situation and being able to 
practice their profession independently or in collaboration 
with tourist offices and other tourist 
or cultural 
establishments, as well as connecting and networking with 
professionals of the National Federation of Qualified Tourist 
Guides [5].  
The profession of qualified tourist guide is in constant 
evolution. It requires constant adaptation to the various 
audiences and the context or subject of the visit. This is 
especially true with the arrival of new technologies in the 
2010s, which have revolutionised the approach to 
knowledge and have led to a change in the role of the 
qualified tourist guides. Three stages in the evolution of the 
profession of qualified tourist guide allow us to better 
understand its link with the evolution of the Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT). The first one is about 
the operating mode of the mediation of the public in general 
and is related to the evolution of public’s expectations. The 
second is more specific to the content of the tourist guide's 
presentation, which has evolved with the availability of 
online information. The last stage combines the two 
previous ones, gathered in the digital solutions developed in 
the field of public mediation. 
In the following sections, we will detail these three 
stages in order to understand how the profession of qualified 
tourist guide must evolve and adapt to the new socio-
cultural context. We will analyse the context of the 
professional bachelor’s program of Guide-Conférencier at 
Gustave Eiffel University, and more specifically the 
relationship of future guides to the digital world. These 
analyses will be carried out using an information and 
communication sciences approach. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Exemple of profesionnal license for qualified tourist guides. 
Credits: photo taken on the website of Ancovart https://www.ancovart.fr/la-
profession/reglementation 
II. 
SCIENTIFIC POSITIONING: CONVERGENCE BETWEEN 
LINK, MEANING ACTION AND KNOWLEDGE 
 
This communication associates two teacher-researchers, 
one in information and communication sciences, the other in 
computer science, a research engineer working on cultural 
heritage and a qualified tourist guide, teacher in the same 
University. They constitute a large part of the supervision 
and teaching staff of the Guide-Conferencier professional 
bachelor’s degree at Gustave Eiffel University. This work is 
placed 
in 
a 
perspective 
of 
research-action 
and 
transdisciplinarity, with the construction of knowledge for 
action starting from new uses of socio-technical devices. 
Our scientific position is in the field of information and 
communication sciences (Fig. 2), within a research team: 
DICEN-IdF (Information and Communication Devices in 
the Digital Era). We therefore have an approach that 
integrates the dimensions of communication (exchanges, 
interactions), uses and production of data and the use of 
socio-technical devices. We position according to F. 
Bernard [6] insisting on the convergence of link, meaning, 
action and knowledge.  
Our work is mainly action research, in particular to 
analyse activity situations, with the dimension of social 
constructivism: construction of social reality by the actors. 
We thus integrate the "situational and interactionist 
semiotics" approach proposed by A. Mucchielli [7], with the 
dimension of feelings, emotions and the body as social 
media, as proposed by F. Martin-Juchat [8], which is 
particularly important in times of health crisis. 
From a methodological point of view, we are depending 
on the context, in situations of "participant observation", but 
more often in "observer participation", by being very 
involved in the follow-up of students in professional 
situations or in professional activities (all range of touristic 
and cultural structures). 
This double positioning, which is also a positioning of 
theoretical reflection and strong practical involvement, 
allows us to be particularly proactive in a reflection on the 
employability of new graduates and the evolution of this 
profession of mediation for the development of cultural and 
tourist heritage in the territories. In an approach of 
economic and territorial intelligence (Bourret-Fabry-Da Re, 
2020 [9]), we insist on the reliance (links, interactions) to 
participate in the resilience of territories, in the double 
context of digital transformation and health crisis. As in idea 
to search for new ways in Competitive or Economic 
Intelligence [10]. 
Reliance and resilience by insisting on the informational 
and communicational stakes of activity situations, to 
improve the added value and employability of the qualified 
tourist guides for a better adaptability to meet the 
expectations of new audiences, and to be much more active 
in their stays and visits and much more sensitive to the 
authenticity 
of 
the 
territories 
and 
to 
personalised 
experiences. 
 
94
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 2.  Diagram representing key words of Information and 
Communciation Sciences. Credits: Sidonie Gallot, « Les enjeux d’une 
cartographie des SIC pour la discipline et les unités de recherché », Revue 
française des sciences de l’information et de la communication [on line], 5 | 
2014, DOI : https://doi.org/10.4000/rfsic.1191 
 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
 
The arrival of new technologies has rapidly interested 
the tourism sector by making it enter "the era of hyper 
connectivity, but also of hyper socialisation"(Safaa, 
Oruezabala and Bidan, 2021 [11]). In this context, the 
tourist has everything to gain. Increasingly technophile, 
learning and enterprising, he seizes the technological 
context to gain freedom of action. The digitisation of 
tourism has de facto enabled tourists to construct their 
journeys autonomously, "thanks to shared content on the 
Internet and social networks of billions of users" (Salomone, 
Haddouche 2021 [12]).  
This development has also opened the door to 
individuals wishing to provide tourism services. Beyond 
Airbnb, we have a number of practices such as 
couchsurfing, home exchange, free accommodation for 
services, etc.  
The qualified tourist guide is also affected by this 
personalisation of tourism. On the one hand, the Internet 
allows us to have access to all types of information, to build 
our own tour and to have access to the information that 
interests us. In this way, the tourist selects only what he or 
she wants to know, with the risk of missing out on important 
or even fundamental notions for understanding the place 
visited. On the other hand, the development of slow tourism 
has encouraged the multiplication of greeters. These are 
local people who offer guided tours, often free of charge. 
So, if for a certain public, a guide can be considered useless, 
for another it can be seen as not authentic.  
“Alternative tourism" seeks out places that are less well 
known, far from the traditional tourist circuits and therefore 
considered more authentic. In general, the choice of 
destination or tour is closely linked to the experience that a 
place or site is able to offer.  
Finally, qualified tourist guides are seeing new 
competitors appear in the panorama of guided tours. A 
constant search for authenticity may lead to a preference for 
an experience with locals or non-professionals, rather than 
the knowledge of an experienced guide. Concerning the 
digital aspect, there are not only audio guides and digital 
technology in museums or historical monuments, but also 
and above all the Internet. The tourist, accustomed to 
checking every piece of information, will not lose the 
opportunity to question the guide's discourse, or even to cast 
doubt on it, more or less cordially. We can consider all this 
to be part of the problems of the guiding profession which 
are difficult to identify, or even recognise, but which are 
increasingly forcing professionals to rethink their approach 
to the client.  
When we talk about new technologies associated with 
cultural activities, we should not think only of online 
booking platforms, tourism promotion websites, etc. In the 
age of the "intelligent tourist", making oneself known and 
knowing how to promote oneself is fundamental. Being 
present on social networks, having an interactive and always 
updated website, becomes then mandatory. This applies to 
tourist sites, heritage sites, museums, but also to 
professionals who provide services to tourists and, in 
particular, qualifies tourist guides.  
We believe that qualified tourist guides should not only 
think about digital in the context of tour construction, but 
also as a tool to promote themselves (putting themselves on 
a show) and find new clients. Qualifies tourist guides often 
have a self-employed status which allows them to work with 
companies or tourist offices and, at the same time, have 
their own clientele. If we think about our "intelligent 
tourist", he builds his trip thanks to the information found 
on the internet and by consulting the reviews. Similarly, the 
"alternative tourist" may not choose an agency that offers 
tours for mass-market tourists.  
These types of visitors based their choices on the idea of 
having a unique and personalised experience. A qualified 
tourist guide must therefore know how to master social 
networks in order to make his offer known and enlarge his 
audience. In a context that has been able to quickly 
appropriate new technologies, guide-lecturers must now 
integrate into their skills those related to digital uses.  
The National Federation of Qualified Tourist Guides 
carried out a survey of guides holding a professional card in 
2020, in order to "establish a general profile of the 
professional and social situation of qualified tourist guides 
in France before the Covid-19 epidemic and to have real and 
recent data for a year of normal activity" (Fromont, 
Villepelet, 2021 [13]), that is 2019. The number of active 
qualified tourist guides was estimated to be between 3500 
and 4500, but the answers were only 1360. This survey 
shows that the profession is predominantly female (79%) 
and that about half of the respondents have been in the 
profession for less than 10 years (Fig. 3). On the other hand, 
this does not translate into relatively young professionals, as 
the average age was estimated at 46 years (Fig. 4). 
However, this study does not ask the question of the use of 
digital technology within a guide's activity. Similarly, a 
95
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

second survey carried out in 2021 [14] to show the situation 
of precariousness due to Covid-19, does not attempt to see 
whether qualifies tourist guides have used digital technology 
to continue their work. Indeed, it seems that the National 
Federation of Qualified Tourist Guides does not really 
consider the approach to new technologies as an essential 
aspect of the guiding profession, nor a skill to be acquired.  
In order to confirm or refute this hypothesis, we would 
like to finance a survey among qualified tourist guides on 
the use of digital technology. We would also like to check 
whether the Covid crisis has been a driving force for change 
in this direction or whether the use of certain practices is 
considered to be limited to the crisis period.   
More specifically, we would like to work on the 
invisible side of work activities from the perspective of 
"actor-network theory", "sociology of translation" [15] and 
"dark side studies" [16] by considering an "iceberg of 
activity" approach, in our case "tour guide’s situational 
iceberg", in order to highlight the invisible or dark side of 
these situations, using a participatory research methodology 
currently being developed.  
The national survey among practising qualified tourist 
guides will enable us to build a reliable and up-to-date 
framework of the use of digital technology and the 
difficulties they encounter in their work. 
Then, based on interviews and participant observations, 
we plan to study the invisible, i.e. non-formalised, side of 
the guides' interactions in an activity situation, interactions 
with their clients, but also with the socio-technical devices, 
such as tablets or touch screens. We will also be interested, 
in the perspective notably traced by V. Carayol and A. 
Laborde [17], to study the resistances of the guide-lecturers 
to the use of new technologies by proposing a typology 
ranging from enthusiastic users to radical refractors.   
We want to establish a grid of user types that will serve 
as a comparison throughout our research. At the same time, 
we will survey our students every year for at least 5 years. 
This will allow us to see how the new generations relate to 
the new technologies and whether there are any changes in 
the pyramid of user types.  
At the end of these surveys, we will have the situation of 
qualified tourist guides in activity and that of the students, 
future guides; this will allow us to advance reflections in a 
comparative way. 
Concerning the new generations, we will also deploy a 
participant observation approach by following four students 
of the class of 2021-2022 in the first years of their activity 
as qualified tourist guides. As with the survey, each year we 
will follow between two and four new guides in their 
profession. From this perspective, we will draw on the work 
of A. Mucchielli on "situational and interactionist 
semiotics" [7] and of M. Zacklad on the "semiotics of 
cooperative transactions" [18] by proposing to add this 
hidden dimension of the activity. In our analysis of the 
'situational iceberg' of guiding activity, we will attach 
particular importance to trying to understand the issue of 
emotions which, largely invisible, contributing to the 
construction of the visiting situation as a whole.  
To summarise, our study is developed in several stages:  
1. Survey on the use of digital technology by active 
qualified tourist guides and drafting of a typology 
grid of digital users.  
2. Analysis of the existence of digital resistances and 
their typologies.  
3. Situational iceberg and participant observation of 
guiding activity.  
4. Survey of LP Guide-Conférencier students on their 
relationship with digital technology (5 year period).  
5. Question of emotions in a visiting situation. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.   
Figure 3. Years of professional activity. Credits 2021 survey of the 
National Federation of Qualified Tourist Guides (FNGIC), carried out on 
the initiative of FNGIC. https://www.fngic.fr/fr/actualites/enquete-
nationale-sur-metier-guide-conferencier 
 
Figure 4.  Age range of the respondents. Credits 2021 survey of the 
National Federation of Qualified Tourist Guides (FNGIC), carried out on 
the initiative of FNGIC. https://www.fngic.fr/fr/actualites/enquete-
nationale-sur-metier-guide-conferencier 
 
 
IV. 
OVERVIEW AND EVOLUTION OF HUMAN MEDIATION 
 
The scope of intervention of a qualified tourist guide is 
very vast and covers the whole of the French cultural and 
natural heritage. 
In France, qualified tourist guides are the only ones 
allowed by the law to conduct visits and lectures in 
museums and historical monuments (except for curators and 
teachers in a certain extend). We therefore chose to focus on 
96
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

museums and historical monuments where the digital 
element is increasingly important.  
The functions of the museum, as we recall, are 
exhibition, conservation, scientific study and animation. 
Museums bring their collections to life and offer different 
approaches to reading them for different types of visitors. 
Animation acts as a driving force in the museum institution 
and can take various forms: educational activities, guided 
tours, 
lectures, 
concerts, 
workshops, 
events 
and 
demonstrations of all kinds [19]. Consequently, mediation 
approaches, whether human or digital, are based on the 
knowledge of public’s expectations. In fact, the modus 
operandi of mediation professionals has evolved to adapt to 
the expectations of the public by moving from the simple 
discourse (from "saying") to action (to "doing"), with the 
rise of performative and participative interventions. As 
Stéphanie Airaud reminds us, "The mediator's discourse 
proposes to go beyond the guided tour to play on the springs 
of aesthetic experience.  Embodied by the lecturer for an 
audience, this speech uses taste, sound, imagination, fiction, 
the illusion of image and word to invent a performative 
maieutic. It therefore seems possible to move from saying to 
doing" [20]. We consider here “dire” (say) as an oral 
transmission of a discourse on the artistic works, and “faire” 
(do) as the creation of a situation, a space for play and the 
advent of a form. Many guides and lecturers then invented 
new forms of mediation, in which the public more easily 
speaks up during debates, physically invests the tour 
framework in artistic forms (dance, poetry, meditation, etc.) 
or playful forms (photo rally, treasure hunt). The most 
important thing is to become an actor (or "spect-actor") of a 
new type of participative visit.  
The development of digital technologies has made it 
possible to go further in the reflection on mediation, making 
it possible to offer immersive tours. Exhibitions designed in 
this way help visitors to immerse themselves in the artwork 
and to contemplate it by mobilising several senses (100% 
immersive). 
The interactive content supports the exhibited object and 
offers easier and more dynamic access to information than 
the classic panels. It is undeniable that this type of 
installation facilitates the approach to culture, but when the 
pedagogical element is absent, the risk (for a non-educated 
public) is that the experience is focused entirely on emotions 
and not also on reflection and knowledge. 
The discourse of tour guides has also evolved with the 
increasing access of the public to information. From the 
mid-2000s onwards, Wikipedia revolutionised public access 
to online information. As its diversity and reliability grew, 
tourist guides gradually lost their status as knowledge 
holders. They questioned the content of their discourses and 
sought to offer more reflection and perspective in addition 
to the raw information. Since the explosion of social 
networks in the mid-2010s, the youngest users now rarely 
consult traditional media and instead lock themselves into 
information loops. For these audiences, the discourse of the 
qualified tourist guide has evolved further with the return of 
popularisation content combined with increased vigilance 
on discernment since the explosion of fake news from 2016.  
Qualified tourist guides therefore find themselves having 
to justify their discourse and their competence to a public 
that believes itself to be increasingly prepared and much 
better informed thanks to the Internet. 
 
 
V. 
DIGITAL, NEW TOOLS FOR MEDIATION IN THE 
MUSEUM AND PUBLIC SPACE: THE THIRD STAGE IN THE 
EVOLUTION OF THE TOURIST GUIDE PROFESSION 
 
Our reflection here is about the way in which the 
qualified tourist guide can rely on digital technology during 
a guided tour. We therefore exclude the use of digital 
technology for communication and marketing purposes [21]. 
The same applies to creative content of a cultural and 
immaterial nature which excludes de facto human mediation 
(e.education/EdTech, video games, digital publishing, 
digital press, 3D animation, virtual reality, augmented 
reality, music, audiovisual, radio, television, cinema). 
We will try to show how digital can be a complementary 
tool for guides without trying to replace them. The Covid 19 
pandemic and its many lockdowns have proved the need of 
human relationships and interactions in education and 
leisure activities. Hence the importance of closely 
associating and balancing the level of intervention of the 
digital world and the human in the mediation with the 
public. We can define three levels of intermediation in 
which digital takes a more or less important place. 
In 100% immersive (fig. 5), the public wanders through 
spaces with high level of scenography which use interactive 
digital tools in different contexts and for different purposes 
and where guides don’t have a lot of opportunities for their 
intervention. The first type offers immersive exhibitions of 
digital creations on artistic themes, such as the Atelier des 
Lumières [22] in Paris. The second type offers a tour 
combining immersive content and varied interactive digital 
content with the aim of facilitating the understanding of a 
subject. This is the case of the Château d'Auvers sur Oise 
[23] focusing on 19th century art. In a constrained tour, 
visitors wander from room to room interacting with various 
contents and operating modes. It should be noted that this 
type of mediation can be very useful for people with motor 
or visual and hearing disabilities...  
Finally, the third type makes use of new technologies as 
an innovative positioning in terms of product, which enables 
it to stand out in the cultural offer of a destination. This is 
the case of the Hôtel de la Marine in Paris [24], which 
opened in 2021 and offers an immersive tour within highly 
planned environment and constrained pathway using various 
devices to enhance the visitor experience. 
Some cultural places offer interactive or immersive 
contents while allowing the guide to intervene at key 
moments in the visit. This is the case at the Cité des 
Sciences et de l’Industrie in Paris (Fig. 6) [25], where 
permanent and temporary exhibitions are accessible on their 
own or with a guide. In this case, it is necessary for the 
guide or scientific mediator to be aligned with the imposed 
scenography by becoming familiar with contents and 
97
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

operating modes of the digital tools in order to integrate 
them into his tour and its discourse. Consequently, he must 
be a specialist in the subjects covered in order to be able to 
deliver the necessary information, answer to certain 
questions from the public and achieve an optimal customer 
experience. 
The third level of intermediation takes place in 
environments with lesser scenography and leaves much 
more opportunities to the guide to integrate digital 
technology into his visit. This is the case of the Sainte 
Chapelle in Paris [26], which has a freely accessible 
interactive digital table offering 3D reconstructions of the 
place and its surroundings during the history. It is large 
enough for a dozen of people to gather around and can 
easily be used during the visit to support the guide's 
presentation. Augmented reality offers a significant 
cognitive support in understanding and reinforcing the 
content delivered by the guide. Here again, the guide must 
be familiar with the contents and functionalities of the tool 
in order to be able to integrate them perfectly into his tour 
scenario. Similarly, the Conciergerie in Paris offers its 
visitors histopads [27] (Fig. 7), which provide 3D 
reconstructions of the site, also in augmented reality, 
accompanied by written information. These can easily be 
integrated into a tour in which the guide will find in this tool 
an ally enabling him to evoke the atmosphere of a place that 
is now not so furnished and decorated. 
In these places, the digital visit materials are very often 
designed and produced without taking the guide into 
account, not involving him into the creative, design and 
planning process. Even if, for some museums, guided tours 
represent a less important part in terms of attendance than 
the self-guided tours for which these tools are designed, we 
can only encourage a dialogue in which museums consults 
its guides or mediators for the selection of digital tools and 
the drawing up of specifications for the contents and 
operating methods. The objective is to meet the needs of the 
public in a guided tour situation and to offer the guide a 
better appropriation and a more relevant integration of the 
tool in his visit according to contents and operating methods 
that are adapted to his visit. 
The emergence of digital technology must be integrated 
into a perspective of human interaction to encourage the 
creation of new services. The 100% immersive, in 
particular, obliges the actors of cultural and scientific 
mediation to a new approach of service definition and 
guides more precisely to an in-depth reflection on how to 
give a new added value to their profession. 
Despite the interest and progress brought by the variety 
of digital tools, we do not think that 100% digital is the 
most relevant approach in terms of services, public 
mediation, and product. In the same way that we have 
integrated the hybrid into professional, medical or relational 
perspectives, human mediation must remain at the centre of 
these approaches, and this is why we propose to integrate 
the expertise of qualified tourist guides into the design of 
digital tools. In the graph below (Fig. 8) we show the 
difference between opportunities of mediation and easiness 
of mediation according to the degree of digitization: 
- The opportunities (dotted line) exist as soon as there is 
at least one digital tool, and they decrease with the 
intervention of immersive content and scenography 
- The easiness for the guide is optimal when he has more 
variety of choice of digital supports as he is not forced to 
use the one and only available which may not be relevant 
for his visit. 
Easiness starts to drop as soon as the content is 
immersive (histopad for example with its predetermined 
immersive scenario), and collapses in an immersive 
scenographic environment. 
Note that the difficulty of mediation also depends on the 
complexity of the scenario of the digital tool, which the 
guide should manage and be comfortable with to integrate it 
in his visit. 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Atelier des lumières, Paris. Credits: photo taken on the Atelier 
des lumières’ website https://www.atelier-lumieres.com/fr 
 
 
Figure 6.  View of the permanent exposition of the Cité des Sciences et de 
l’Industrie Museum in Paris. Credits: photo taken on the museum’s website 
https://www.onetwotrips.com/cite-des-sciences-la-villette/ 
 
98
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 7.  Histopad of the Conciergerie Palace in Paris. Credits Musée de 
la Conciergerie http://www.paris-conciergerie.fr/Actualites/Decouvrez-la-
Conciergerie-avec-l-Histopad 
 
Figure 8.  Difference between opportunities of mediation and easiness of 
mediation according to the degree of digitization. 
 
 
VI. 
FUTURE TOURIST GUIDES-FACING ICT 
 
The digital media present in the museums are designed 
to accompany an individual visit and provide in-depth 
information that the visitor must be able to use 
independently. The mediation offered by the museum is not 
necessarily intended to use these media either. At the same 
time, within the framework of our bachelor’s degree, we 
have noticed that until now future qualified tourist guides 
have not shown a significant interest in new technologies, 
but this is changing very quickly with the renewal of 
generations. The profession of guide is still largely 
perceived in a purely interactional reading without 
measuring the interest and need of the integration of new 
technological tools. The relationship with digital technology 
is still limited to treasure hunts or to a complementary 
communicative role, which may raise questions about the 
employability of future tourist guides, particularly regarding 
the acquisition of new segments of the public who are 
increasingly equipped with tools and applications that can 
be used to carry out a tour otherwise perceived as basic. 
Furthermore, appropriating new technologies would allow 
guides to position themselves in the market of 3D 
reconstructions and 100% immersive, thus ensuring the 
continuity of the profession. A qualified tourist guide, in 
addition to his cultural background and knowledge of the 
various audiences, could show and additional knowhow in 
technical skills that would be useful for the design of digital 
products offering progressive interpretating frameworks 
required by the different stages of a well-prepared visit.  
As for qualified tourist guides already in activity, we 
have the impression that the new generations are still not at 
ease with the digital world and that they continue to 
consider the profession with a very traditional approach. We 
are therefore going to carry out surveys among our students, 
in order to verify our hypothesis and possibly understand 
what types of skills should be integrated into their 
scholarship. From the perspective defined by Laborde and 
Soubiale [17], we will analyse the resistance to the 
appropriation of digital technology for the guiding 
profession. We believe that, while the development of 
digital technology presents mortal dangers for the traditional 
approach to guiding, it also opens up great opportunities for 
those who will be able to adapt to the irreversible digital 
transformation taking place. We will start with the students 
of this academic year 2022-2023, and will carry out one 
survey per year for a minimum of five years. This will allow 
us to see the evolution of the new generations. 
For the moment, to fill this gap in the integration of 
qualified tourist guides in the design of public mediation 
projects, Gustave Eiffel University encourages a close 
collaboration between touristic sites and guides to involve 
them in the creation of digital tours. For example, in 2018, a 
student of our professional degree developed a tour of the 
Gallo-Roman site of Le Fâ (Barzan, Charente-Maritime) 
using geocaching [28]. The visitors were offered to walk 
through the site on their own with the aim of finding caches 
according to an itinerary planned by the management and 
the guide. The scenario of visit foresaw that the guide would 
be near strategic caches to offer additional information on 
the history, archaeology, the site, etc., and to answer to 
visitors' questions. This twofold interpretative approach 
responds to the issue of the types of discourse explained in 
part 2: to propose a framework of information completed by 
exchanges in the form of questions. 
Gustave Eiffel University and IFIS [29] are currently 
setting up exchanges between student guides and students of 
the Tourism and New Technologies professional degree in 
order to allow exchanges on each other’s practices, and also 
to help our future guides to integrate an ICT dimension into 
their end-of-study projects in order to better prepare 
themselves to accompany publics who make increasing use 
of tools, applications and digital practices. 
Some students from the Guide-Conférencier degree 
2021-2022 carried out a project for a guided tour of the 
Louvre Museum in Paris in the form of a treasure hunt using 
digital tablets. They prepared specifications for the 
99
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

developers to work together on the content, ergonomics and 
functionalities of the application in order to make this 
treasure hunt fun, by integrating immersive and participative 
solutions. The didactic content has been provided by the 
qualified tourist guides who will be positioned at strategic 
points to offer additional information and answer questions.  
In the past class (2021-22), we also had students who 
brought up reflections on the use of digital technology by 
qualified tourist guides. Each of them developed the subject 
from a different angle:  
 
The use of social networks to sell their tours. 
This dissertation focuses on the benefits that the 
use of social networks can bring to the 
profession of qualified tourist guides; in 
particular, how to use social networks for free 
in order to start and/or expand one's activity. 
The study considers several platforms, with a 
particular focus on Facebook and Instagram. 
 
 
Virtual tours to reach remote audiences. During 
the Covid-19 pandemic, cultural sites and 
museums developed more virtual tours and 
some qualified tourist guides conducted virtual 
tours in order to build customer loyalty. 
However, this type of activity does not allow 
for interaction between the tourist guide and the 
public to the extent that, in most cases, these 
practices are considered to be limited to the 
crisis period. One of our students wondered 
how to take advantage of these good practices 
in times of crisis. It turns out that there is a 
potential market that is very little exploited by 
guide-lecturers: that of remote audiences. 
People with disabilities, the very old or sick 
who cannot travel. Or secondary school classes 
that have to limit their outings for budgetary 
reasons. With the help of digital media, the 
qualified tourist guide can go to the client's 
home and take a virtual tour. The human side, 
as well as the interactions, are preserved 
because the qualified tourist guide is physically 
with the client. In addition, new technologies 
make it possible to create immersive scenarios 
and to offer fun activities, such as treasure 
hunts or quizzes. 
 
 
The contribution of a tourist guide in the 
creation of serious games for museums. This is 
a reflection on the usefulness of serious games 
in the learning activity and for the appropriation 
of contents through the setting in situation, in 
particular for young people. The student asks 
himself how to build a guided tour around 
game and what it may be the contribution of a 
qualified tourist guide to this type of activity 
often carried out by mediators. 
 
 
The activity of tourist guides in the service of 
the development of a territory. Based on a case 
study, the town of Cap d'Agde, the dissertation 
proposes a strategy of action to make seaside 
tourists interested in the cultural heritage of the 
territory. More generally, this study allows us 
to reflect on an important role of a qualified 
tourist guide, that of being an “ambassador” for 
a territory. This is particularly true when we 
think of local qualified tourist guides who work 
outside the major tourist destinations. Through 
his knowledge of the territory, of local life, and 
through the passion that he can transmit, a 
qualified tourist guide contributes to the 
promotion of a territory through his guided 
tours. 
 
From this year onwards, we are going to follow these 
students, who are now qualified tourist guides, in their 
activity to see how they develop their professional projects. 
We are also going to set up a working group that can 
integrate researchers, teachers and young professionals to 
reflect on the scope of digital technology in this profession 
and propose new practices. 
 
 
VII. CONCLUSION – PERSPECTIVES 
 
 
We have traced here, although in a synthetic way, the 
evolution that the profession of tourist guides has undergone 
over the years and with the arrival of digital technology.  
We have shown how much the new uses of digital 
technology condition the evolution of this profession of 
mediation facing of audiences that are increasingly using 
digital technology. To ensure the sustainability of their 
profession, guides must know how to adapt to this new 
context and give added value to their interventions. All 
these developments in the digital transformation take on an 
additional significance in times of the Covid pandemic, 
which reminds us how essential and necessary human 
interaction is. This new perspective has moreover imposed a 
major reinvention of the profession of qualified tourist 
guides, notably towards new remote services now integrated 
into their service offer. It is therefore not a question of 
putting ourselves in opposition to digital media, but rather 
of learning to use them so that they become our allies.   
It is now clear that qualified tourist guides can no longer 
deny that new technologies have changed their working 
environment, yet the approach to digital is still limited and it 
is not seen as an opportunity either.  
Our study then becomes necessary to outline the current 
context, although it would be the first study in this sense, in 
order to understand where the resistance of working 
qualified tourist guides to digital technology lies, despite the 
fact that it is essential to integrate it into the evolution of 
their profession and its use has become unavoidable. 
We also wish to conduct research among the students of 
our professional bachelors’ degree to better understand their 
approach to digital technology and to propose an 
100
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

educational pathway that meets the requirements of the 
market. Secondly, we would like to develop collaborations 
between guides and computer scientists to make the tour app 
even more effective [30], [31].  
Research of this kind will help to identify the hidden 
difficulties of the qualified tourist guide’s profession but 
also to understand the future of this job.   
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  C. Bourret, C. Da Re, D. Juillière et K. Fraoua “Integrating 
New Technologies in Human-Driven Professions: How Can 
Tourist Guides Leverage Digital Transformation?”, in 
Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on 
Human and Social Analytics (HUSO), 2022, pp. 5-9. 
[2]   L. Uzlyte, “The profession of guide-lecturer in the service of 
heritage and tourism. Identity, training and professional 
situation”/« Le métier de guide-conférencier au service du 
patrimoine et du tourisme. L’identité, la formation et la 
situation professionnelle », In Situ – Cultural Heritage journal 
/In 
Situ 
– 
Revue 
des 
patrimoines, 
30/2016. 
http://journals.openedition.org/insitu/13654. 
Retrieved 
January 2021. 
[3]  Ellul J., Technique or the challenge of the century, 2e éd., 
Paris Economica, 1999 / Ellul J., 1999, La technique ou 
l’enjeu du siècle, 2e éd., Paris Economica 
[4]  Decree n. 2011-930 of 1 August 2011, on the skills required 
for the issue of the professional guide card to holders of a 
professional or a master degree. / Arrêté du 9 novembre 2011 
relatif aux compétences requises en vue de la délivrance de la 
carte professionnelle de guide-conférencier aux titulaires de 
licence professionnelle ou de diplôme conférant le grade de 
master. 
https://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/loda/id/JORFTEXT00002481
3610/. Retrieved january 2022.  
[5] French National Federation of Qualified Tourist Guides/ 
Fédération Nationale des Guides Interprètes et Conférenciers : 
https://www.fngic.fr/ 
[6]  F. Bernard, “CIS: a discipline of openness and release”/« Les 
SIC une discipline de l’ouverture et du décloisonnement », in 
A. Bouzon. Organizational communication in debate. Fields, 
concepts, perspectives / La communication organisationnelle 
en débat. Champs, concepts, perspectives, Paris, L’Harmattan. 
pp. 33 – 46, 2008  
[7] A. Mucchielli, Situation and communication/Situation et 
communication, Nice, Les éditions Ovadia, 2010. 
[8] F. Martin-Juchat The adventure of the body. Body 
communication, a way to emancipation/L’aventure du corps. 
La communication corporelle, une voie vers l’émancipation, 
PUG/ Presses Universitaires de Grenoble, Grenoble, 2020. 
[9]  C. Bourret, N. Fabry and C. Da Re, "Economic intelligence, 
data, resilience and territories"/« Intelligence économique, 
données, résilience et territoires », I2D - Information, data & 
documents/ I2D - Information, données & documents, 2020/3 
(n°3), p. 8-12. DOI : 10.3917/i2d.203.0008. URL : 
https://www.cairn.info/revue-i2d-information-donnees-et-
documents-2020-3-page-8.htm. Retrieved January 2022. 
[10] M.-A. Duval. The New Territories of Economic Intelligence/ 
Les nouveaux territoires de l’intelligence économique, aris: 
ACFC - IFIE Editions, 2008. 
[11] Larbi Safaa, Gwenaëlle Oruezabala and Marc Bidan, Tourism 
in the age of digital technologies/Larbi Safaa, Gwenaëlle 
Oruezabala and Marc Bidan, « Le tourisme à l’ère des 
technologies numériques », Téoros [Online], 40-2 | 2021, 
Online since 15 October 2021, connection on 30 October 
2022. URL : http://journals.openedition.org/teoros/10710   
 [12] Christine Salomone and Hamed Haddouche, Discourse on 
social networks and the tourism experience: a new deal for 
heritage site managers and tourism stakeholders/Christine 
Salomone and Hamed Haddouche, « Discours sur les réseaux 
sociaux et expérience touristique : une nouvelle donne pour 
les 
gestionnaires 
de 
sites 
patrimoniaux 
et 
acteurs 
touristiques », Téoros [Online], 40-2 | 2021, Online since 24 
July 2021, connection on 31 October 2022. URL : 
http://journals.openedition.org/teoros/10400 
[13] Charlotte Fromont, Armelle Villepelet, National survey on the 
Qualified Tourist Guides, 2021. www.fngic.fr  
[14] National survey n.3 on the resumption of qualified tourist 
guides’activity. July 2021’s activity and forecast for the 
following three months/Enquête nationale n°3 sur la reprise 
d’activité des guides-conférenciers. Activité de juillet 2021 et 
prospective sur les trois mois suivants. Réalisée par FNGIC, 
ANCOVART, SNG-C et SPGIC. www.fngic.fr 
[15] Akrich M., Callon M., Latour B., 2006, Sociology of 
Translation: Foundational Texts/ Akrich, M., Callon, M., & 
Latour, B. (Eds.) 2006. Sociologie de la traduction : Textes 
fondateurs. 
Paris 
: 
Presses 
des 
Mines. 
doi 
:10.4000/books.pressesmines.1181 
[16] Linstead (S.),  Maréchal (G.), Griffin (R.W.), 2014, 
Theorizing and Researching the Dark Side of Organization, 
Organization 
Studies, 
35 
 
(2), 
164 
– 
168 
https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/0170840613515402 
[17] Carayol V., Lépine V., Morillon L., 2020, The dark side of 
organisational communication, MSH Aquitaine edition/ 
Carayol V., Lépine V., Morillon L., 2020, Le côté obscur de 
la communication des organisations, Presses de la MSH 
Aquitaine.   Laborde A. & Soubiale N., 2007, A micro-social 
approach to Internet non-use, Internet Symposium and 
network of knowledges, Bordeaux/Laborde A. & Soubiale N., 
2007, Approche micro-sociale de la non utilisation d’Internet, 
Bordeaux, Symposium Internet et réseaux de connaissance.  
[18] M. Zacklad Collective action according to the semiotics of 
cooperative transactions (SIC), SFSIC Workbooks (on line) / 
Manuel Zacklad, « L’action collective selon la sémiotique des 
transactions coopératives (STC) », Les Cahiers de la SFSIC 
[En ligne], Collection, 9-Varia, DOSSIER, > Axe 1,mis à jour 
le 
: 
22/04/2020,URL 
: 
http://cahiers.sfsic.org/sfsic/index.php?id=74 
[19] A. Gob & N. Drouguet, N., “Museums for which purpose? 
Roles and Functions of the Museum”/« Des musées pour 
quoi ? Rôles et fonctions du musée », chapter 3, in A. Gob éd 
Museology: 
History, 
development, 
present 
issues/La 
muséologie : Histoire, développements, enjeux actuels, Paris, 
Armand 
Colin, 
pp. 
69-97, 
2021. 
https://doi.org/10.3917/arco.gob.2021.01.0069. 
Retrieved 
January 2022. 
[20] « Le discours du médiateur se propose d’aller au-delà de la 
visite guidée pour jouer à son tour des ressorts de 
l’expérience esthétique. Mis en corps par le conférencier pour 
un public, cette parole utilise le goût, le son, l’imaginaire, la 
fiction, l’illusion de l’image et du verbe pour inventer une 
maïeutique performative. Il apparait dès lors envisageable de 
passer du dire au faire ». S. Airaud, The performative 
statements of the guided tour/« Les énoncés performatifs de la 
visite guidée », conference catalogue event/catalogue du 
colloque événement « du dire au faire », MACVAL, Dcember 
2011. 
[21] Webinaire CLIC France-Atout France "Maintaining the 
Relationship in 2021 with International Visitors via Digital 
Tools: Feedback and Perspectives/Entretenir la relation 2021, 
avec les visiteurs internationaux via les outils numériques : 
retours d’expériences et perspectives, 14 December 2021. 
101
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

http://www.club-innovation-culture.fr/event/webinaire-clic-
france-atout-france-visiteurs-internationaux-dec-2021/. 
[22] https://www.atelier-lumieres.com/ 
[23]https://www.chateau-auvers.fr/2878-la-visite-vision-
impresssionniste-.htm 
[24] https://www.hotel-de-la-marine.paris/ 
[25] https://www.cite-sciences.fr/fr/accueil/ 
[26] http://www.sainte-chapelle.fr/ 
[27]http://www.paris-conciergerie.fr/Explorer/Decouvrez-la-
Conciergerie-avec-l-HistoPad  
[28] K. Meinau, How to enhance the Gallo-Roman museum and 
site of Le Fâ/Comment mettre en valeur le musée et site gallo-
romains du Fâ ?, professional degree’s dissertation, directed 
by Denis Juillière, 2018.    
http://www.sudoc.abes.fr/cbs/xslt/DB=2.1//SRCH?IKT=12&
TRM=233522298. 
[29] IFIS : Institut Francilien d’Ingénierie des Services/Ile-de-
France Services Insitute. 
[30] K.E. Fraoua, C. Bourret, “City 2.0 and Tourism 
Development”, in Ozok A.A., Zaphiris P. (eds) Online 
Communities and Social Computing, OCSC 2013 Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science, vol 8029, Springer, Berlin, 
Heidelberg, 2013, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-39371-
6_31. Retrieved January 2022 
[31] K.E. Fraoua, S. Michelin, “Is Tourist Markovian Under 
Asymmetric Information?”, in C. Stephanidis, M. Antona 
(eds) HCI International 2019 HCII 2019. Communications in 
Computer and Information Science, vol 1088. Springer, 
Cham, 2019, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-30712-7_52 
Retrieved 
January 
2022
 
102
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

