36
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Analysis of Short-term and Long-term Effects on
Mental State of Suggestions Given by an Agent
using Impasse Estimation
1st Yoshimasa Ohmoto
Department of Informatics
Graduate School of Integrated Science
and Technology
Shizuoka University
Shizuoka, Japan
ohmoto-y@inf.shizuoka.ac.jp
2nd Hanako Sonobe
Department of Intelligence Science
and Technology
Graduate School of Informatics
Kyoto University
Kyoto, Japan
sonobe@ii.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp
3rd Toyoaki Nishida
Department of Informatics
Faculty of Informatics
The University of Fukuchiyama
Kyoto, Japan
toyoakinishida@gmail.com
Abstract—For an agent to teach a person a problem-solving
attitude by giving him advice that does not directly contribute
to solving the problem, a strategy that considers changes in the
person’s long-term attitude must be designed. This study aimed
to investigate how the mental state of participants performing
a task is affected during short-term and relatively long-term
periods when they are advised either based on their conditions
or mechanically at regular intervals. We focused on metacognitive
suggestions during insight problem-solving as an example of
advice that would be effective even if given by the agent. By these
means, the effect on the human mental state over a relatively
long period of time when the agent gives advice is examined. We
conducted an experiment using two types of suggestion agents
and observed that participants were likely to accept metacognitive
suggestions provided by an agent when the suggestions were given
based on an inner-state estimation of the participant. An analysis
of mental state changes based on physiological indices suggested
that the use of metacognitive suggestions by agents based on
participants’ conditions affected the mental state in problem-
solving activities in the short and long term. It is also suggested
that if the advice is not given depending on the situation,
the effect of the advice in mitigating the impasse reduces as
the task progresses. These ﬁndings will contribute towards the
implementation of a tutoring agent.
Index Terms—Human-agent interaction; metacognitive sugges-
tion; insight problem solving.
I. INTRODUCTION
This article is an extended version of the authors’ paper
“Difference in Attitudes toward Suggestions Given by an
Agent using Impasse Estimation” [1], presented at the Twelfth
International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and
Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services (CEN-
TRIC2019). In this paper, based on the temporal changes in
the participants’ physiological indices measured during the
experiment, we analyzed in detail the changes in mental state
throughout the experiment, the changes in mental state for
each task with different properties, and the changes in mental
state due to the intervention by the agent. In this way, we
investigated not only the effect on the mental state immediately
after the agent’s intervention, but also the long-term effect on
it due to the repetition of the interventions of the agant. In
addition, we described details of the speciﬁc interventions of
the agents and the tasks performed in the experiment, which
were omitted in the proceedings of CENTRIC2019 due to
space limitations.
In learning and teaching situations, when learners are work-
ing on problem-solving, those who are knowledgeable about
the task are often encouraged to develop an attitude toward
learning. This is a way of thinking about problem-solving itself
by encouraging them to broaden their horizons and learn via
trial and error rather than by giving them direct advice to help
solve the problem. This teaching strategy does not contribute
directly to the solution of the problem. Therefore, if you do not
consider the condition of the person you are communicating
with, you may not be able to convey your intentions correctly
or you may not be able to be considered your opinions. For
example, if you repeatedly give advice about something that
the listener does not perceive to be a problem, they may ignore
the advice. Such problems become more pronounced when
systems such as agents provide advice. One of the reasons for
this is that agents’ ability to grasp the situation seems to be
relatively low from a human standpoint.
In order to avoid such issues, the agent needs to understand
the human state and give advice. However, even a human
often fails to estimate the mental state of the person they are
communicating with. When you have a trustful relationship
with the communication partner, this is not necessarily a fatal
problem. However, in a human-agent interaction, the human
often needs to infer the agent’s behavior model based on a
small number of interactions. Therefore, it is expected that a
small number of failures in interaction will cause errors in
the behavioral model of the agent constructed by humans.
For example, one approach to getting people to accept an
agent’s advice is to show that the agent has expertise by having
the agent consistently provide the appropriate advice [2]. The
human often accepts the advice of the agent when the agent
provides appropriate advice depending on the task situation.

37
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
However, if the agent fails early in the interaction because
of misunderstandings, the human may stop accepting further
advice. In addition, it is often difﬁcult to determine whether or
not the advice is appropriate when the advice does not directly
lead to the correct answer for the task being performed. In such
instances, effective advice cannot be given without considering
the situation and intention of the person performing the task. In
order for an agent to teach a person something like a problem-
solving attitude by giving him advice that does not directly
contribute to solving the problem, it is necessary to consider
an advice-dispensing strategy that takes changes in the long-
term attitude of the person into account.
Metacognitive suggestions are useful for problem-solving,
although they do not lead to the direct outcome of the task
being performed. Several previous studies had attempted to
improve task performance using pre-training to induce meta-
cognition. Patrick et al. [3] reported the impact of general
metacognitive training on performance. Metacognitive sug-
gestions may convey knowledge of how participants solve
problems and can facilitate changes in their way of thinking
during insight problem-solving (e.g., [4]). In this study, we
consider metacognitive suggestions during insight problem-
solving as an example of advice that would be effective even
if the agent gave it. The effect of an agent’s metacognitive
suggestions on the human mental state over a relatively long
period of time is then examined.
We tried to encourage the acceptance of metacognitive
suggestions from agents by controlling the contents and timing
of suggestion presentation as per the state of the participant.
In many previous studies (e.g., [5] [6]), the agent advises a
participant when there is a pause in the conversation. In this
study, in order to provide convincing advice to humans, we
focused not on the content of the problem, but on the state
of thinking about the problem and the awareness of problems.
The advantage of this method is that it does not recognize
the content of the task and can provide advice based on how
difﬁcult the person is feeling the task at an appropriate time.
On the other hand, it takes a relatively long period of time
for the learners to develop an attitude toward learning and
toward problem-solving. In this study, participants were asked
to repeatedly perform a similar task that became progressively
more difﬁcult. The purpose of this study was to investigate
how the mental state of the participants in performing a
task is affected when the participants are given advice either
depending on their conditions or mechanically at regular
intervals. If it is important to be able to customize the timing
of providing advice as per the condition of the participant in
order for the agent’s advice to be understood with long-term
effect, the method proposed in this paper may be useful when
developing a tutoring agent.
The present paper is organized as follows. The Suggestion
system using impasse estimation section contains an explana-
tion of a system developed to give metacognitive suggestions
based on the estimated state of the person performing the
insight problem-solving task. The Experiment section de-
scribes the results of an experiment to evaluate the system
implemented on the agent. In the Discussion section, the
achievements of this research and some future works are
described. The conclusions are presented in the Conclusion
section.
II. SUGGESTION SYSTEM USING IMPASSE ESTIMATION
Insight problem-solving contains four steps: impasse, incu-
bation, illumination, and validation [7]. We focus on the im-
passe step in which people repeatedly searches inappropriate
problem space that does not include a solution. In the impasse
step, advice from other perspectives is useful for constraint
relaxation and a switch of problem space. Metacognitive
suggestion is one method of providing acceptable advice for
the constraint relaxation [3] [8] [9] [10]. The metacognitive
suggestion is conﬁrmed to be effective even if it is presented
at random timing. This is because the insight problem-solving
task is prone to fall into the impasse state, and therefore there
is a certain probability of being in the impasse state when
presented at random.
In order to conﬁrm the appropriate timing of advice in
an insight problem-solving task, we conducted a preliminary
experiment in which an experimenter determined the content
and timing of the agent’s metacognitive suggestions using
the Wizard of Oz (WoZ) and presented them to the person
performing the task. The task in the preliminary experiment
was an “escape room game” in which players were often at a
stalemate because they were required to think from a different
perspective to win this game. In this game task, the participant
must escape from a virtual room using various game objects.
After this preliminary experiment, some participants reported
that they were “given proper advice”, so we thought that the
advice of the agent by WoZ operation was accepted. When
we observed the behavior of the participants and advice of the
experimenter in the preliminary experiment, the experimenter
provided suggestions when the participant seemed to be at a
stalemate. We regarded this state of stalemate as an impasse.
We consider that the state of stalemate is one of the appropriate
clues to provide metacognitive suggestions. In accordance with
this concept, we developed a system to provide advice by
estimating whether the interaction partner is in an impasse
state while working on an insight problem-solving task.
A. Estimation of strategies to perform the insight problem
solving task
In order to ﬁnd typical strategies to perform the insight
problem-solving task, we observed the behavior of the par-
ticipants in the preliminary experiment. As a result, it was
expected that the participants switched two strategies: depth-
ﬁrst search and breadth-ﬁrst search. In the state of depth-ﬁrst
search, participants focused on a particular object and looked
for ways to use it successfully. In the state of breadth-ﬁrst
search, participants saw the overall situation of the task to
search whether there were any missing or untried methods.
Since it is conceivable that a stalemate may occur while
executing each strategy, human inner states in insight problem-
solving can be classiﬁed into 4 states (table in Figure 1). In

38
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Impasse?
Yes / No
Task
Suggestion management
State estimation
SCR
Operation history
Breadth-first or 
Depth-first
Progressive or Impasse
Breadth-first
Depth-first
Progressive
waiting
waiting
Impasse
Convergent
Divergent
BDI-architecture
Fig. 1. Outline of the system architecture.
the advice by the experimenter, there were many suggestions
that urged the participant to look for other ways to solve the
task in the depth-ﬁrst search, and there were many suggestions
that encouraged the participant to look back on his/her own
behavior and to focus on the speciﬁc object in the breadth-ﬁrst
search.
It is difﬁcult to infer the inner state of thinking from the
participant’s behavior, speciﬁcally the inner state of thinking
whether the participant is at a stalemate. To estimate this inner
state, we analyzed physiological indices obtained during the
preliminary experiment. In our previous work, we reported
to estimate the feeling of difﬁculty of the task by using
physiological indices [11]. As a result, it was frequently
observed that Skin Conductance Response (SCR) was often
activated, when the unfamiliar object was discovered during
the task and when the situation in the task was changed. In
addition, even when the situation did not change, the SCR was
often responsive when with repeated trial and error such as
looking for hints or checking previous information. Therefore,
we regard the state as a non-impasse state (the participant is
not at a stalemate) when the responses of SCR are frequently
observed, and we regard the state to have shifted to the impasse
state (the participant is at a stalemate) when the response of
SCR is not observed for a certain time.
We also measured the electrocardiogram. However, we
have not been able to obtain a useful feature for estimat-
ing task impasse from the electrocardiogram. Therefore, no
electrocardiogram data was input to the system. We used
electrocardiographic data to assess participant’s mental states
to tasks.
B. The outline of the suggestion system using impasse estima-
tion
Figure 1 shows an outline of the agent design. This agent
basically decides own behavior based on the Belief-Desire-
Intention (BDI) architecture. This agent estimates two kinds
Monitoring
SCR
SCR > 
threshold?
Monitoring 
operation
Moving > 
50%
Impasse / 
breadth-first
Impasse / 
depth-first
Progressive
Operate item or 
object in last 60s 
several times
Operate item or 
object > 40%
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Fig. 2. Outline ﬂowchart of the thinking-mode estimation.
of user states: a thinking mode (depth-ﬁrst or breadth-ﬁrst)
and a state of the stalemate (impasse or progressive). The
user’s overall states are categorized into one of four combina-
tions: depth-ﬁrst/progressive, breadth-ﬁrst/progressive, depth-
ﬁrst/impasse, and breadth-ﬁrst/impasse. The agent provides
a metacognitive suggestion when the estimated user’s state
includes “impasse.” A convergent suggestion is provided in
the state of breadth-ﬁrst/impasse. A divergent suggestion is
provided in the state of depth-ﬁrst/impasse.
The user’s physiological index and behavior are measured to
estimate the user’s state. The state of the stalemate is estimated
using the measured SCR. The agent estimates the user’s state
as impasse when the SCR does not respond during a deﬁned
time window. The time window and the threshold to estimate
the state of the stalemate are decided based on the measured
data for two minutes from the start of the task. To estimate the
thinking mode, the operation history log of the user is used.
When the user repeatedly operates a game object (such as, a
key, a scissors, a piece of paper, a door, a dial plate, a drawer
of a desk, a closet, a button and a safe) in high frequency, the
agent estimates the thinking mode to be depth-ﬁrst search. The
outline ﬂowchart of the thinking-mode estimation is shown in
Figure 2.
Ten convergent and ten divergent suggestions were pre-

39
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
pared. The suggestions were not dependent on a particular
task because they were metacognitive suggestions. One of the
suggestions is selected randomly when the agent provides an
advice. In general situations, it is necessary to give advice
considering the context of the task though it is a metacognitive
suggestion. In this study, we focused on the effect of con-
trolling the timing of the metacognitive suggestions provided
based on the state of the user. Therefore, the agent advised only
considering whether the context was divergent or convergent
in our experiment. The following is a list of metacognitive
suggestions we prepared.
Divergent suggestions
• Why don’t you look at something a little different?
• Don’t stick to the way you’ve been doing things, think
about different ways.
• Why don’t you consider some other ways to proceed?
• Think of a way that’s different from the way you failed.
• Is there anything else you can do?
• Why don’t you think about something different from what
you have been looking at?
• Please try to look at the situation from a different point
of view.
• Let’s think about what else you can do.
• Is there anything else you haven’t done yet?
• Try to get rid of your assumptions.
Convergent suggestions
• Let’s think about what’s important in what you have seen.
• Let’s try what comes to mind.
• Try to sort out what you have been doing.
• Think about what you need to do to escape.
• Have you missed anything so far?
• Let’s think about what’s been the inspiration so far.
• What element do you think is involved in the escape?
• Let’s think back to what you have done so far.
• If you think you can do something, try it.
• Why don’t you narrow down what you’re focusing on?
III. EXPERIMENT
When we try to intervene in the behavior or decision-making
of the other person by providing advice, especially during
interaction with a less socially related interaction partner,
it is important to provide appropriate advice based on the
estimation of the partner’s inner state. We considered the
metacognitive suggestion in the insight problem-solving task
as an example of the useful advice that the agent can provide.
Then we proposed the suggestion system based on the impasse
state estimation of the partner in order to accept the suggestion
by the agent. We used two types of suggestion agents in this
experiment. One was a state-considering agent that estimated
the user’s state before providing a metacognitive suggestion
(sc-group). Another was a ﬁxed-interval agent that provided a
metacognitive suggestion in three-minute intervals (ﬁ-group).
A. Task
Participants played an “escape from the room” game. The
objective of this game is to escape from a closed space such
Task control 
PC
Operation data
Measured 
data
Display the game state
Measuring 
PC
Participant
Game object area
Suggestion 
area
Operation result 
area
Send Suggestion
Fig. 3. The experimental setting.
as a room by utilizing game objects and items that are placed
in that space. In most escape games, the player cannot escape
from a room in a simple way, such as unlocking the door. The
player escapes by searching for keys that are hard to ﬁnd, by
manipulating game objects in speciﬁc steps, and/or by using
items in ways that are different from their common uses. In
this game, players were often at a stalemate because they are
required to think from a different angle to escape from a virtual
room using various game objects.
The player can see images representing the four directions
of the room, as well as partial enlargements of the images.
If the player can explore the room and is able to move to
the other side of the wall by opening a door or making a
hole in the wall, the escape is successful. There are several
non-movable game objects in the room (desk, chair, window,
safe, etc.) and movable items (hammer, key, notepad, etc.).
Descriptions of the game objects or items are displayed in the
description display area in the game screen. The player can use
the keyboard and mouse to change his/her viewing direction,
zoom in on objects of interest, and use items.
The participants are asked to escape from three rooms. As
the number of game objects and items and the steps to escape
increase, the difﬁculty of escaping gradually increases. The
order of the rooms that the participant escaped from was ﬁxed.
There was a 15-minute time limit to escape from each room.
The suggestion agent explained the procedure for escaping
from the room when the participant exceeded this time limit.
After escaping from a room, the participant was allowed to
rest. Participants were able to continue the game by pressing
the start button when they wanted to resume.
B. Exprimental setting
Figure 3 shows the experimental setting. Each participant
sat in front of a 27-inch monitor that displayed the game.
A video camera was placed behind the participant to record
his/her behavior and the game playing screen. The partici-
pant’s voice was recorded using microphones. Polymate was
used to measure SCR and the electrocardiogram (heart rate
variability). SCR was measured with electrodes attached to the
ﬁrst and third ﬁngers of the participant’s non-dominant hand.

40
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The electrocardiogram was measured by connecting electrodes
with paste to the participant’s left side, the center of the chest,
and both ears for ground and reference. The experimenter sat
out of view of the participant and observed the participant’s
behavior. The suggestions by the agent were provided using
audio and text. The participants performed the task using a
mouse.
C. Procedure
First, each participant was brieﬂy instructed on the experi-
mental procedure. Electrodes for measuring SCR and the elec-
trocardiogram values were then attached to the participant’s
left hand and chest. After the installation, each participant
played a practice game to conﬁrm the operating method
and basic ﬂow of the game. The experimenter instructed the
participant on the basic operation method. In addition, the
participant was given an overview of the agent providing
metacognitive suggestions. After receiving questions from the
participant and conﬁrming his/her understanding, the partici-
pant started the “escape from the room” experiment. After the
experiment, the participant answered NASA Task Load Index
(NASA-TLX) to measure the mental workload.
Forty-two undergraduate students, 27 males and 15 females,
participated in the experiment. The average age was 20.8 years
with a standard deviation of 1.9 years. We eliminated 13 par-
ticipants because they did not need suggestions to escape from
one of the rooms. Therefore, we used data of 29 participants
(sc-group: 14 participants, ﬁ-group: 15 participants).
D. Results
We analyzed the frequency of metacognitive suggestions,
operation history log, mental workload, and physiological in-
dices. For the frequency of metacognitive suggestions, we an-
alyzed how many times each of the participants in each group
provided metacognitive suggestions to encourage divergence
and convergence in each room. From the operation history log,
it was analyzed whether the state transition was carried out
within a ﬁxed time. The analysis range was 10 seconds after
the suggestion. In the analyses of the physiological indices,
we used heart rate variability (this is converted to cardiac
sympathetic index (CSI) and cardiac vagal index (CVI)), and
SCR. In the analysis of mental workload of the task, we used
the Japanese version of the NASA-TLX, which represents the
physical and psychological load of the task.
1) The frequency of metacognitive suggestions : We an-
alyzed whether there was a difference in the frequency of
metacognitive suggestions provided in the sc-group compared
with the ﬁ-group. There were two types of the metacognitive
suggestions (divergent and convergent), so we performed a 2
(group: state-considering or ﬁxed-interval) x 3 (room: ﬁrst,
second or third) analysis of variance (ANOVA) separately.
Since each participant spent different amounts of time in each
room, we compared the number of suggestions per minute.
Logit transformed values were used in ANOVA to test for
differences. The results are shown in Figure 4, Figure 5, Table
I, Table II, Table III, and Table IV. In the tables, “SS” means
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
first room
second room
third room
Frequency of divergent suggestion
Number of the room
sc-group
fi-group
*
[num. / min.]
Fig. 4. The frequency of divergent metacognitive suggestions per minute.
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
first room
second room
third room
Frequency of convergent suggestion
Number of the room
sc-group
fi-group
*
[num. / min.]
Fig. 5. The frequency of convergent metacognitive suggestions per minute.
the sum-of-squares, “df” means the degrees of freedom, “MS”
means the mean squares, “F” means the F ratio, and “p” means
the p-values.
In the divergent suggestions, there were signiﬁcant dif-
ferences between groups (sc-group < ﬁ-group) and between
rooms (ﬁrst and second > third). The interaction was also
signiﬁcant. When tested for simple main effects, there were
signiﬁcant differences between groups in second room and
third room (sc-group < ﬁ-group). There was also a signiﬁcant
difference between the rooms in the sc-group (ﬁrst > second
and third). This result indicates that, in the sc-group, a rel-
atively large amount of divergent suggestions was provided
in the ﬁrst room where the task execution method is unclear
for the participants, and that trial and error is encouraged. In
addition, in second room and third room where people seem
to be used to the task, suggestions were reduced.
In the convergence suggestions, there was no signiﬁcant dif-
ference between groups, but there were signiﬁcant differences
between rooms (ﬁrst and second < third). The interaction
was also signiﬁcant. A simple main effect test showed a
signiﬁcant difference between groups in ﬁrst room (sc-group
< ﬁ-group). It was also found that there were signiﬁcant
differences between the rooms in the sc-group (ﬁrst < second
and third). This result shows that the convergent suggestions in

41
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE I
RESULT OF THE ANOVA ON THE FREQUENCY OF DIVERGENT
METACOGNITIVE SUGGESTIONS.
source
SS
df
MS
F
p
A: group
6.50
1
6.50
14.83
<0.001 ****
error[S(A)]
11.84
27
0.44
B: room
1.81
2
0.90
5.13
0.0091 **
AB
1.17
2
0.58
3.32
0.044 *
error[BS(A)]
9.49
54
0.18
+ p < .10; * p < .05; ** p < .01; *** p < .005; **** p < .001
TABLE II
THE SIMPLE MAIN EFFECT OF THE ANOVA ON THE FREQUENCY OF
DIVERGENT METACOGNITIVE SUGGESTIONS.
effect
SS
df
MS
F
p
A(ﬁrst)
0.38
1
0.38
1.43
0.235
A(second)
4.32
1
4.32
16.39
<0.001 ****
A(third)
2.98
1
2.98
11.30
0.0012 ***
error
81
0.26
B(state-considering)
1.90
2
0.95
5.42
0.0072 **
B(ﬁxed-interval)
1.07
2
0.53
0.04
0.056 +
error
54
0.18
+ p < .10; * p < .05; ** p < .01; *** p < .005; **** p < .001
the sc-group was reduced in ﬁrst room, which was a relatively
simple.
Overall, the control of metacognitive suggestions was rea-
sonable to some extent.
2) Operation history log: After the metacognitive sugges-
tion was provided, we analyzed from participants’ operation
history log to determine whether they were acting in line with
the suggestion. From the operation history log, we checked
whether the transition to another state occurred within 10
second after the suggestion was given. In divergent sugges-
tions, if a state transition was made, it was considered that the
suggestion was accepted. In convergent suggestions, if no state
transition was made, the suggestion was accepted. The result
is shown in Figure 6 and Figure 7. The chi-squared test was
applied to determine whether there was a difference between
the groups in the acceptance rate of divergent suggestions and
the acceptance rate of convergent suggestions.
We compared the acceptance rate of all suggestions between
groups. As a result, the acceptance rate of all suggestions
in the sc-group was signiﬁcantly higher than that in the ﬁ-
group (p = 0.0013). We compared the acceptance rates of
divergent suggestions and convergent suggestions between
groups. Although there was no signiﬁcant difference in diver-
gent suggestions (p = 0.01), the acceptance rate of convergent
suggestions in the sc-group was signiﬁcantly higher than that
in the ﬁ-group (p = 0.0061). We compared the acceptance
rates of divergent suggestions and convergent suggestions in
each group between rooms. In third room, the acceptance rates
of both divergent suggestions and convergent suggestions in
the sc-group were signiﬁcantly higher than those in the ﬁ-
group (divergent: ﬁrst room p = 0.72, second room p = 0.16,
third room p = 0.005, convergent: ﬁrst room p = 0.44, second
room p = 0.36, third room p = 0.014). In addition, in the sc-
TABLE III
RESULT OF THE ANOVA ON THE FREQUENCY OF CONVERGENT
METACOGNITIVE SUGGESTIONS.
source
SS
df
MS
F
p
A: group
0.77
1
0.77
2.03
0.165
error[S(A)]
10.21
27
0.38
B: room
1.15
2
0.57
4.10
0.022 *
AB
3.17
2
1.58
11.30
<0.001 ****
error[BS(A)]
7.57
54
0.14
+ p < .10; * p < .05; ** p < .01; *** p < .005; **** p < .001
TABLE IV
THE SIMPLE MAIN EFFECT OF THE ANOVA ON THE FREQUENCY OF
CONVERGENT METACOGNITIVE SUGGESTIONS.
effect
SS
df
MS
F
p
A(ﬁrst)
3.83
1
3.83
17.42
<0.001 ****
A(second)
0.015
1
0.015
0.067
0.796
A(third)
0.099
1
0.099
0.45
0.50
error
81
0.26
B(state-considering)
3.19
2
1.60
11.39
<0.001 ****
B(ﬁxed-interval)
1.12
2
0.56
4.01
0.024 *
error
54
0.14
+ p < .10; * p < .05; ** p < .01; *** p < .005; **** p < .001
group, the acceptance rates in third room were higher than
those in ﬁrst room, and the acceptance rates seems to be
gradually increasing. It is not clear whether this is because the
difﬁculty of the room is increasing or because the reliability
of the agent’s suggestions is increasing. In any case, the
results showed that the participants were likely to accept the
metacognitive suggestions provided by the agent when the
suggestions were given based on the inner state estimation
of the participant.
3) Mental workload: We measured mental workload using
NASA-TLX. This is major method to measure the mental
workload. Figure 8 shows the results. With the exception of
“performance,” the sc-group reported an overall lower mental
workload than the ﬁ-group. We performed Welch’s t-test on the
total score between the two groups and there is no signiﬁcant
difference (t(27)=-1.42, p=0.17). We also performed Welch’s
t-test on each individual score between the sc-group and
the ﬁ-group. There was a signiﬁcant difference regarding the
data of “temporal demand” (sc-group < ﬁ-group, t(27)=-2.18,
p=0.038). The results suggest that advice based on human
internal state estimation reduces some of the human mental
workload. At the same time, it shows that the overall effect is
not signiﬁcant.
4) Analysis of changes in mental state based on physiolog-
ical indices: To investigate whether a change that was not
apparent from the human’s behavior occurred in their mental
state, we analyzed physiological indices. The physiological
indices used in this study are heart rate variability (this is
converted to CSI and CVI), and SCR.
CSI is one of the indices of sympathetic nerve activity. The
sympathetic nervous system’s primary function is to stimulate
the body’s ﬁght-or-ﬂight response, in terms of perceptible
reactions such as tension and excitement. The CVI is one of

42
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
first room
second room
third room
Number of the room
sc-group
fi-group
Acceptance rate of divergent suggestions
*
[ratio]
Fig. 6. Acceptance rates of divergent metacognitive suggestions.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
first room
second room
third room
Number of the room
sc-group
fi-group
Acceptance rate of convergent suggestions
*
[ratio]
Fig. 7. Acceptance rates of convergent metacognitive suggestions.
the indices of parasympathetic nerve activity. The parasym-
pathetic system is responsible for stimulating the ”rest-and-
digest” activities that occur when the body is at rest and
relaxed. We used the geometric Lorenz plot method [12] to
calculate the CVI and CSI.
SCR is a kind of electro-dermal activity that includes skin
potential activity and skin conductance activity. People sweat
during exercise but their palms have only a few sweat glands
for body temperature adjustment. Therefore, by measuring the
electrical resistance on the palms, it is possible to check for the
presence or absence of emotional perspiration [13]. Given that
the underlying mechanisms of SCR and electrocardiograms are
different, we assumed that they could be used to distinguish
between different responses from different sources of stress.
Sweating is controlled by the sympathetic nervous system [14]
and can be induced by emotional stimuli, intellectual strain,
or painful cutaneous stimulation. The underlying mechanisms
of SCR are related more to anticipation, expectation, and
attention concentration [15]. We thus expected that the SCR
could be used to tell when someone is dealing with an
unexpected or thrilling situation.
a) Analysis of changes in mental state in each room: In
order to analyze the changes in the mental state of participants
who tackled a difﬁcult task while receiving advice from an
agent, we analyzed the state in which they started working on
the task and the state before they reached a solution in each
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Mental
demand
Physical
demand
Temporal
demand
Performance
Effort
Frustration
sc-group
fi-group
*
Score
Fig. 8. Results of mental workload measurements.
room. For this purpose, the time required for escaping from
each room was divided into three for each participant and the
early and last data were extracted. For this data, CSI, CVI,
and SCR were calculated. The results are presented in Table
V. Paired t-test was performed on these data for each group.
In ﬁrst room, the sc-group showed a signiﬁcant increase
in CSI as problem-solving progressed (CSI: t(13)=-2.56,
p=0.024), but there was no signiﬁcant difference in CVI and
SCR. In the ﬁ-group, there were no signiﬁcant differences in
CSI and CVI, but there was a marginally signiﬁcant increase
in SCR (SCR: t(14)=-2.10, p=0.054).
In second room, the sc-group showed a marginally sig-
niﬁcant increase in CSI as problem-solving progressed (CSI:
t(13)=-2.03, p=0.063) but there were no signiﬁcant differences
in CVI and SCR. In the ﬁ-group, there were no signiﬁcant
differences in CSI and CVI but there was a signiﬁcant increase
in SCR (SCR: t(14)=-2.38, p=0.032).
In third room, the sc-group showed a marginally signiﬁcant
increase in CSI as problem-solving progressed (CSI: t(13)=
-1.94, p=0.074), but there were no signiﬁcant differences in
CVI and SCR. In the ﬁ-group, there were no signiﬁcant
differences in CSI, CVI, and SCR.
Overall, the sc-group was adaptively advised via metacog-
nitive suggestions and the sympathetic nervous system was
more active in the late phase of problem-solving than in the
early phase of problem-solving, suggesting that they had been
working diligently on the problem-solving until escape. In
other words, it can be suggested that by providing advice
based on the condition of the participants, they were able
to increase their involvement in the problem-solving efforts.
In the ﬁ-group, effects on SCR are observed in ﬁrst room
and second room. SCR tends to be lower when a person is
absorbed in repeating tasks and higher when they are engaged
in various trials and errors [16]. As the difference seems to
be caused by the low SCR when they started working on the
problem-solving, it is presumed that the ﬁ-group might have
fallen into an impasse and repeated the same action in that
time. We think that the reason here were no differences in any
of the physiological indices when the participants were in third
room is that the problem-solving became more complicated,
so the problem space became wider, and impasse in the form
of repeating the same action was less likely to occur.

43
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE V
THE AVERAGES OF CSI, CVI AND SCR IN EACH ROOM.
CSI
CVI
SCR
room
group
early part
last part
early part
last part
early part
last part
ﬁrst
sc
1.18
1.29
3.22
3.26
15.03
15.20
ﬁ
1.18
1.26
3.27
3.32
14.79
15.30
second
sc
1.29
1.38
3.29
3.30
14.78
14.97
ﬁ
1.42
1.36
3.38
3.36
14.00
14.96
third
sc
1.43
1.54
3.33
3.37
14.78
14.97
ﬁ
1.40
1.52
3.39
3.40
14.99
15.21
Averages of CSI values in the early part 
of the each room
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
first room
second room
third room
Number of the room
sc-group
fi-group
Fig. 9. The averages of CSI in the early part of the problem-solving in each
room.
Averages of CVI values in the early part 
of the each room
2.9
3
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
first room
second room
third room
Number of the room
sc-group
fi-group
Fig. 10. The averages of CVI in the early part of the problem-solving in each
room.
b) Analysis of changes in mental state in three con-
secutive rooms: In the early part of the problem-solving,
differences between sc-group and ﬁ-group seem to appear.
Therefore, we analyzed the effect of the three rooms. A one-
way analysis of variance was performed on the CSI, CVI, and
SCR data in each group. The averages of each data in the early
part of the problem-solving in each room are listed in Figure
9, Figure 10, and Figure 11.
The results indicate that there were no signiﬁcant differences
in CSI, CVI, and SCR in the sc-group, but there was a
signiﬁcant difference in CSI in the ﬁ-group (F(2, 14)=3.40,
p=0.048). There was a signiﬁcant difference between ﬁrst
Averages of SCR values in the early part 
of the each room
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
first room
second room
third room
Number of the room
sc-group
fi-group
[μS]
Fig. 11.
The averages of SCR in the early part of the problem-solving in
each room.
TABLE VI
MULTIPLE COMPARISONS IN THE MAIN EFFECT OF CSI BY RYAN’S
METHOD.
pair
r
nominal level
t
p
sig.
second - ﬁrst
3
0.33
2.33
0.027
s.
third - ﬁrst
2
0.66
2.17
0.038
n.s.
second - third
2
0.66
0.16
0.874
s.
room and second room as well as between ﬁrst room and
third room (Table VI). The participants in the ﬁ-group were
more engaged in the problem-solving from the beginning in
second room compared to ﬁrst room, while participants from
the sc-group demonstrated a gradual increase as they moved
through the rooms. These differences may reﬂect the different
attitudes toward problem-solving that were learned during the
problem-solving trials in the previous room(s).
c) Analysis of changes in mental state after advice was
given: The CSI, CVI, and SCR were calculated and compared
for 10 seconds before and after giving the advice in each room
to investigate the effect on the mental state of the participants
immediately after the advice was given. Averages of values
before and after advice are presented in Table VII. Paired t-
tests were performed on these data for each group.
In ﬁrst room, the sc-group showed a signiﬁcant increase in
SCR immediately after advice was given (SCR: t(34)=-4.51,
p<0.0001) but there were no signiﬁcant differences in CSI and
CVI. In the ﬁ-group too, there was a signiﬁcant increase in
SCR immediately after advice was given (SCR: t(45)=-4.41,

44
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE VII
THE AVERAGES OF CSI, CVI AND SCR BEFORE AND AFTER SUGGESTIONS IN EACH ROOM.
CSI
CVI
SCR
room
group
before
after
before
after
before
after
ﬁrst
sc
1.21
1.20
3.25
3.26
13.26
16.56
ﬁ
1.23
1.25
3.31
3.29
14.11
19.14
second
sc
1.44
1.42
3.32
3.32
13.59
16.88
ﬁ
1.41
1.33
3.36
3.36
15.00
18.43
third
sc
1.48
1.44
3.34
3.34
13.44
16.41
ﬁ
1.35
1.38
3.36
3.37
15.02
16.73
p<0.0001) but again there were no signiﬁcant differences in
CSI and CVI.
In second room, the sc-group demonstrated a signiﬁcant
increase in SCR immediately after advice was given (SCR:
t(39)=-3.64, p=0.00039) but there were no signiﬁcant differ-
ences in CSI and CVI. In the ﬁ-group, there was a signiﬁcant
increase in SCR (SCR: t(37)=-3.10, p=0.0019) but no signiﬁ-
cant differences in CSI and CVI.
In third room, the sc-group demonstrated a signiﬁcant
increase in SCR immediately after advice was given (SCR:
t(57)=-4.30, p<0.0001), but there were no signiﬁcant differ-
ences in CSI and CVI. In the ﬁ-group, there was a marginally
signiﬁcant increase in SCR (SCR: t(55)=-1.88, p=0.065) but
no signiﬁcant differences in CSI and CVI.
Observing the overall trend, the sc-group appears to demon-
strate that there is a relatively consistent and strong inﬂuence
of advice on the participants, whereas the ﬁ-group appears to
be less inﬂuenced by advice as the task progresses.
IV. DISCUSSION
We hypothesized that participants would be likely to accept
the advice based on the estimation of the inner state of
the human even when the agent provided advice. In this
research, we focused on metacognitive suggestions in an
insight problem-solving task, which is one of the examples
of useful advice that the agent can provide. We investigated
the effects of metacognitive suggestions that controlled the
timing of presentation based on human inner state. We im-
plemented an agent that estimated two kinds of user states:
a thinking mode (depth-ﬁrst or breadth-ﬁrst) and a state of
stalemate (impasse or progressive). The agent categorized the
participant’s overall state as one of four combinations: depth-
ﬁrst/progressive, breadth-ﬁrst/progressive, depth-ﬁrst/impasse,
and breadth-ﬁrst/impasse. The agent provided a metacognitive
suggestion with the goal of getting humans out of the impasse
state.
We conducted an experiment using two suggestion agents.
One was a state-considering agent that estimated the user’s
state before providing a metacognitive suggestion. The other
was a ﬁxed-interval agent that provided a metacognitive sug-
gestion at three-minute intervals. Based on results from the
analysis of the operation history log, the acceptance rate of
suggestions in the sc-group was signiﬁcantly higher than that
in the ﬁ-group. In other words, the attitude to the metacognitive
suggestions given by the agent was different between the
participants in ﬁ-group and those in sc-group. The partici-
pants in sc-group believed that the content of the suggestions
given by the agent should always be considered. By contrast,
participants in the ﬁ-group typically thought that the agent’s
suggestions presented general knowledge and tended to accept
useful ones regardless of the task status. The results of the
mental workload suggest that participants in the ﬁ-group might
interpret the agent’s suggestions as a kind of facilitation of the
task execution rather than human assistance.
An analysis of mental-state changes based on physiological
indices suggested that the use of metacognitive suggestions by
agents based on participants’ conditions affected the mental
state in problem-solving activities in the short as well as long
term. Overall, changes in mental state were mainly reﬂected
in CSI and SCR. While working on a single problem-solving
task, it was suggested that when the agent’s advice was given
based on the participant’s condition, the participants worked
more diligently on the problem-solving task. In multiple tasks
in succession, especially in situations where participants were
beginning to tackle a new problem, they tended to be less
likely to fall into the impasse of trying the same solution over
and over again when they received advice that was provided
based on their condition. As a short-term effect, a comparison
of physiological indices before and after advice was provided
suggested that both groups responded to such advice by trying
new trial-and-error activities. However, it was also suggested
that if the advice was not given depending on the situation,
the effect of the advice in mitigating the impasse would be
reduced as the task progressed.
During one room trial, the effect of advice based on the
participant’s condition appeared in the CSI. By contrast, the
direct effect of the advice appeared in the SCR, while there
was no change in the CSI. In addition, the direct effect of the
advice was basically unaffected by the timing of the advice.
The direct effect of advice on participants is providing a
speciﬁc way of problem-solving. Therefore, it is suggested that
the change in the current way of problem-solving by receiving
the advice itself affects the mental state of the participants.
It also suggests that mitigating the susceptibility to falling
into impasses and changing attitudes toward the problem-
solving requires appropriate advice based on the participant’s
condition. This is consistent with the different interpretations
of the sc-group and ﬁ-group advice described above. In other
words, advice on actual task performance is considered to be
acceptable to the person by providing appropriate advice on

45
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the status of the task, regardless of the state of the person.
However, if we expect to improve the attitude toward the task
through advice, such as to make the person have a broader
perspective and be less likely to fall into an impasse, it is
important to understand the person’s condition at the time of
giving the advice. The advice provided by the agent in this
study was not directly helpful in solving the problem, but was
a metacognitive suggestion that indirectly suggested how to
solve the problem. Nonetheless, it is interesting to note that the
immediate effect of the advice differed from the overall effect
of the task execution. This is a ﬁnding that will contribute
to the implementation of a tutoring agent. It suggests that an
agent supporting active learning, which needs to maintain a
positive attitude toward learning tasks, should provide advice
and intervention based on an understanding of the human’s
current condition.
V. CONCLUSIONS
The aim of this study is to investigate how the mental
state of participants performing a task is affected in the short
term and for relatively long-term periods when the participants
are given advice based on their conditions as opposed to
mechanically at regular intervals. We implemented an agent
that estimated two kinds of user states: a thinking mode
(depth-ﬁrst or breadth-ﬁrst) and a state of stalemate (impasse
or progressive). Based on experiments using two types of
suggestion agents, we suggest that participants are more likely
to accept metacognitive suggestions provided by agents when
the suggestions are provided based on an inner-state estimation
of the participant. With respect to the participant’s mental state,
an analysis of mental-state changes based on physiological
indices suggests that the use of metacognitive suggestions by
agents according to participants’ conditions affects the mental
state in problem-solving activities in the short and long term.
As a short-term effect, a comparison of physiological indices
before and after advice suggests that both groups responded
to advice by trying new trial-and-error activities. It is also
suggested that if the advice is not given depending on the
situation, the effect of the advice in mitigating the impasse
reduces as the task progresses. These ﬁndings will contribute
towards the implementation of a tutoring agent.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is supported by Grant-in-Aid for Young
Scientists (B) (KAKENHI No. 16K21113), and Grant-in-Aid
for Scientiﬁc Research on Innovative Areas (KAKENHI No.
26118002) from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports,
Science and Technology of Japan.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Ohmoto, H. Sonove, and T. Nishida, “Difference in attitudes toward
suggestions given by an agent using impasse estimation,” in The Twelfth
International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and Personal-
ized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services. IARIA, 2019, pp. 11–16.
[2] R. G. Hass, “Effects of source characteristics on cognitive responses in
persuasion,” Cognitive Responses in Persuasion, pp. 141–172, 1981.
[3] J. Patrick, A. Ahmed, V. Smy, H. Seeby, and K. Sambrooks, “A cognitive
procedure for representation change in verbal insight problems,” Journal
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, vol. 41,
no. 3, p. 746, 2015.
[4] Y. Hayashi, “Social facilitation effects by pedagogical conversational
agent: Lexical network analysis in an online explanation task,” Interna-
tional Educational Data Mining Society, 2015.
[5] S. T. Iqbal and B. P. Bailey, “Leveraging characteristics of task structure
to predict the cost of interruption,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
ACM, 2006,
pp. 741–750.
[6] K. Isbister, H. Nakanishi, T. Ishida, and C. Nass, “Helper agent:
Designing an assistant for human-human interaction in a virtual meeting
space,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems.
ACM, 2000, pp. 57–64.
[7] S. Ohlsson, “Information-processing explanations of insight and related
phenomena,” Advances in the Psychology of Thinking, vol. 1, pp. 1–44,
1992.
[8] T. Okada and H. A. Simon, “Collaborative discovery in a scientiﬁc
domain,” Cognitive Science, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 109–146, 1997.
[9] H. Shirouzu, N. Miyake, and H. Masukawa, “Cognitively active exter-
nalization for situated reﬂection,” Cognitive Science, vol. 26, no. 4, pp.
469–501, 2002.
[10] Y. Hayashi, “Togetherness: Multiple pedagogical conversational agents
as companions in collaborative learning,” in International Conference
on Intelligent Tutoring Systems.
Springer, 2014, pp. 114–123.
[11] Y. Ohmoto, T. Matsuda, and T. Nishida, “Experimentally analyzing
relationships between larner’s status in the skill acquisition process
and physiological indices,” International Journal on Advances in Life
Sciences, vol. 9, no. 3 and 4, pp. 127–136, 2017.
[12] M. Toichi, T. Sugiura, T. Murai, and A. Sengoku, “A new method of
assessing cardiac autonomic function and its comparison with spectral
analysis and coefﬁcient of variation of r–r interval,” Journal of the
Autonomic Nervous System, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 79–84, 1997.
[13] R. Edelberg, “Electrical activity of the skin: Its measurement and uses
in psychophysiology,” Handbook of Psychophysiology, vol. 12, p. 1011,
1972.
[14] E. F. Bartholomew, F. Martini, and W. B. Ober, Essentials of Anatomy
& Physiology.
Benjamin Cummings, 2007.
[15] K. Hugdahl, Psychophysiology: The Mind-Body Perspective.
Harvard
University Press, 1995.
[16] Y. Ohmoto, S. Takeda, and T. Nishida, “Effect of visual feedback
caused by changing mental states of the avatar based on the operator’s
mental states using physiological indices,” in International Conference
on Intelligent Virtual Agents.
Springer, 2017, pp. 315–324.

