17
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Making Context Specific Card Sets - A Visual Methodology Approach 
Capturing User Experiences with Urban Public Transportation  
Alma Leora Culén and Maja van der Velden 
Department of Informatics  
Design of Information Systems 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
{almira, majava}@ifi.uio.no 
 
 
 
Abstract - The paper discusses the use of visual methodologies 
in the sense-making phases of Human Computer Interaction 
(HCI) design processes. The discussion is illustrated through 
development of a card set, a visual tool, to explore context 
specific issues related to experiences with urban public 
transportation. The card set was intended for an open 
exploration of users’ experiences during different phases of a 
typical commute, from preparing for traveling to arriving at 
the destination. The paper argues in favor of increased use of 
visual methodologies in HCI and presents a framework for 
visual methodology in the production of a card set. The 
framework consists of seven concepts that support visual 
reasoning: visual immediacy, impetus, impedance, association, 
abduction, blending, and analogy. Our results show that these 
concepts were useful for finding out what types of images were 
communicating precisely the intended meaning and what types 
inspired associations, blending, and abduction.  
 
Keywords - visual methodologies; visual methods; card sorting; 
service design; experience ecologies. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
This paper extends our previous work on making and 
using cards for capturing user experiences in public 
transportation [1], in which we described how a card set 
intended to capture user experiences with urban public 
transportation was designed.  
Card sorting is a simple and frequently used method in 
human-computer-interaction 
(HCI). 
There 
are 
many 
examples of how and when cards are used in order to 
provide structure and guidance to design processes, e.g., [2], 
[3]. While card sorting is one of the basic tools in HCI, the 
making of card sets for an open, or semi-open, exploration 
within specific contexts is less frequently discussed.  
This latter point, in conjunction with increasing 
popularity of visual methodologies as an epistemological 
tool in anthropology and social science [4], inspired us to 
look deeper into the use of visual methodologies for making 
card sets. 
This paper, then, extends the previous work by focusing 
on concerns of methodology: 1) how to design a context-
specific, card set usable in start phases of participatory 
design processes, i.e., for group-based sense-making based 
on open or semi-open sorting; 2) how to make use of visual 
methodology in the process of the card making; and 3) what 
are useful concepts that support the use of visual 
methodologies for card sorting. 
The paper is structured as follows. In Section II, we 
provide some background on card-based tools and their use 
in HCI. In Section III, we discuss visual methodologies and 
visual reasoning, introducing the framework consisting of 
seven concepts that support visual reasoning. In Section IV, 
we discuss the service experience design, which is the 
context for our specific case of card set development. 
Section V shows how we developed the cards for use in 
participatory, context-driven workshops exploring user 
experiences in public transportation. In Section VI, our 
findings are presented and discussed. Section VII concludes 
the paper and addresses future work. 
II. 
THE USE OF CARDS IN HCI 
Card sorting is a knowledge elicitation method, initially 
used to find appropriate categories in the design for the web 
[5]. The cards typically represented menu entries and 
hyperlinks, and users were asked to sort them into 
meaningful categories. The cards could be produced 
manually, or automatically using software such as that in 
[6].  
Wölfel and Merritt provide a survey of often used card-
based design tools [7]. They analyzed their use and found 
five categories that highlight differences among the 
attributes of the various tools. The categories included the 
intended purpose and scope for the tool, duration of use and 
placement in the design process, methodology of use, 
customization, and formal qualities. Furthermore, the tools 
were classified as generic, customizable, or context specific. 
The purpose of the cards may vary from explorative, 
inspirational purposes challenging designers to think in 
another way, to an inquiry into a very specific use context. 
They may be utilized in any phase of the design process, for 
quick insights or deeper context inquiries through, for 
example, workshops. The use methodology has to do with 
how the cards are used and results analyzed. ‘Open sort’ 
does not impose any rules while the ‘closed sort’ uses pre-
determined categories. There is also an in-between variant, 
semi-open sorting, where some suggestions on how the 
cards are to be used are given. Furthermore, the cards may 

18
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
not allow any customization, allow optional, or require full 
customization in order to be useful. The latter is often the 
case when working in a specific context, such as the service 
experience design for a particular type of service.  
The last category, formal qualities of cards, enables 
researchers or designers to determine the aesthetics (colors, 
moods etc.), visual appearance of cards (type of 
representation featured on the card, such as images, graphs, 
text), and physical qualities (e.g., size, material, and 
texture). In addition, formal qualities also encompass 
concerns related to how many cards one should have, if 
there should be multiple cards, or multiple sets of cards, 
different categories of cards, and so on. 
We have used many card sets in own work, in diverse 
design settings and purposes, such as future workshops, 
explorative workshops [8], interviews [9], etc. IDEO [10], 
PLEX [11] and Design with Intent [12] cards were among 
favorites, in particular, for reminding users of diverse design 
and evaluation methods. For this research, though, AT-ONE 
service design cards [13] were particularly inspiring. 
In addition to card-based tools, there are good resources 
explaining how to use the cards. For instance, Spencer [14] 
shows how to plan and run a card sort, analyze the results, 
and apply the outcomes to various projects. The book has 
also a chapter dedicated to making of cards. However, the 
approach presented is different from the one we present in 
this paper.  
The purpose of the cards made through this research is 
to inspire, re-imagine and inquire into experiences within 
the context of urban public transportation. The cards needed 
to be made in a way that best facilitates the inquiry. But it is 
the method of making them that is the main outcome of the 
research. Thus, visual reasoning and visual methodologies 
were seen as helpful to the endeavor.  
In the next section, we provide a short background on 
visual methodologies and what makes them now into 
accepted research methodology. 
III. 
VISUAL METHODOLOGY 
Visual methodologies are becoming more acceptable, 
and central, in research within social sciences and 
humanities. Several books on visual methodologies, such as 
those by Rose and Pink [15]–[17], were recently published. 
They advocate the need for better understanding and further 
development of visual methodologies and consider the 
research within the field as “an area of academic and 
applied research that demonstrates particularly powerfully 
that the relationship between theory, technology and method 
should not be separated” [16, p. 3].  
The link between the technology and visual methods has 
become highly relevant with the widespread use of mobile 
phone cameras that enable easy production of large amounts 
of visual material on one hand, and general availability of 
technological platforms that support search, manipulation, 
design, and analysis of visual contents on the other hand. 
Researchers, thus, have powerful tools at their fingertips 
that enable them to make sophisticated decisions based on 
visual materials. These, in turn, support the emergence of 
new theories on how the new knowledge emerges when 
using visual tools and materials.  
A. Visual methodologies, methods, and HCI 
Methodology is concerned with comprehending how 
research is done and how chosen ways of doing it (methods, 
tools and techniques) lead to knowledge production. 
Methodology is also concerned with how the environment 
in which it is applied supports knowledge generation 
processes. According to Rose [17], visual material is always 
embedded in the social world and can only be understood 
when that embedding is taken into account. In HCI, 
technology becomes part of this relation, leading to both 
social and technological embedding. 
In HCI, images, video, sketching, drawing, paper 
prototyping, and card sorting have long been used as visual 
methods, tools or techniques, e.g., participatory video [18], 
card sorting [2], Photovoice [19], collaborative drawing 
[20], photo-documenting and visual ethnography [21], [22]. 
However, a Google Scholar search with keywords “visual 
methodology” (ies) AND HCI does not give many relevant 
results, indicating that, perhaps, there is room within HCI to 
discuss visual methodologies, both from a theoretical and a 
practice perspective.  
Thus, while visual methods are widely used, visual 
methodologies are not widely discussed. The two terms, 
method and methodology, are often, inaccurately, taken to 
mean the same thing.  For example, the card sorting is a 
visual method for achieving some pre-set goal. Visual 
methodology has to do with principles that guide research 
practices, how the research with card sorting is, or could be 
done.  It is concerned with questions such as how are 
images that are used on cards made, understood and 
interpreted, how are cards put in use, and how one generates 
knowledge through their use. 
In line with Pink [16], we consider visual materials to be 
part of the knowledge-producing processes in HCI, in which 
methods that inform the process, tools, people that created 
the visual material, technology that supports its use, and 
research aims cannot be separated. This stance is also in 
accord with theoretical shifts within HCI, towards more 
qualitative research including phenomenology, senses, 
ecologies, experiences, and practices [23], [24].  
B. Visual reasoning 
It is often said that images (and other types of visual-
spatial materials) augment cognition [25]. In [26], Hegarty 
provides arguments from cognitive science as to why this is 
so: 1) images are external representations, freeing the 
working memory for other aspects of thinking; 2) grouping 
related information is a natural property of perceptual 
organization, often reflecting Gestalt principles; 3) allows 
for  the offloading of cognitive processes onto perceptual 
processes; and 4) with interactivity, people can offload 
internal mental computations on external manipulations of 
images. 
In proposing a visual methodology for making card sets 
for inquiry into specific contexts, we propose a framework 
consisting of seven concepts that support visual reasoning. 

19
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
These seven concepts are immediacy, impetus, impedance, 
association, blending, analogy and abduction. They all 
support visual reasoning and augment cognition utilizing 
one or a combination of arguments presented above. We 
now provide definitions and use examples.  
In [27], we discussed the role of information visibility in 
public transportation ticket systems. By contrasting the 
visibility of the ticket information of paper tickets and smart 
card tickets, we found that what people really appreciated 
about paper tickets was the availability of ticket information 
‘at a glance’, i.e., the paper ticket had visual immediacy. 
What they liked the least regarding smart cards was the lack 
of such information. Much of our design efforts 
consequently focused on how to design for visual 
immediacy in the smart card based transport system. 
Diverse issues related to visibility of ticket information were 
considered, and diverse solutions proposed. An augmented 
reality application for a smart phone was prototyped, with 
which one could see all the information stored on the smart 
card ‘at a glance’, just like on the paper ticket, see Fig. 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Giving visual immediacy property to smart tickets using an app. 
A language that effectively supports visual reasoning is 
still not sufficiently developed [28], [29]. Even common 
agreement on a vocabulary of concepts that are relevant for 
visual thinking and reasoning is lacking. An initial 
vocabulary for talking about visual reasoning was offered in 
[30]. It included concepts such as visual immediacy, 
impetus, 
impedance, 
and 
blending, 
analogies 
and 
associations. Visual immediacy, unlike the much discussed 
concept of affordance [31]–[33], facilitates reasoning and 
does not necessarily call for action other than the reasoning 
itself. Impetus nudges action and impedance, in line with 
affordance, is responsible for instinctual negative response 
to visual input. In [34], these concepts were applied to web 
design. A website that, at a glance, enables a user to 
understand what the site is about and how to navigate it has 
visual immediacy. It has impetus if it nudges a user to 
engage with the site, and impedance if there are hindrances 
to engagement. These three design characteristics may also 
be used in a wide variety of sense-making situations in HCI. 
Association can be defined as “the representation of a 
familiar system by means of visual attributes corresponding 
to a different system, in order to make the user associate the 
two systems” [35]. This is different from visual analogy, 
which is defined as “the representation of a new system by 
means of visual attributes corresponding to a similar 
system, familiar to the user [35]. Abduction refers to a 
reasoning process in which a pre-condition is inferred from 
a consequence, but the pre-condition is not necessarily the 
only one or the right one. Lastly, blending is about blending 
two dissimilar concepts. These concepts are perhaps easier 
explained 
using 
images 
from 
Absolute 
advertising 
campaigns [36], see Fig. 2.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Absolute Vodka ads make great use of visual association, 
analogy, abduction and blending.  
IV. 
THE ECOLOGY OF EXPERIENCE 
Service Design (SD) is a multidisciplinary field that 
gained momentum with the introduction of design thinking 
[37]–[40], where visual thinking is an important attribute of 
design thinking processes [41].  Service design draws often 
on methods familiar to HCI researchers, such as card 
sorting, scenarios, role-playing, personas, focus groups and 
observations. 
The term customer experience design in SD is 
understood as a holistic concept, which integrates all aspects 
of a service. In other words, design for good customer 
experience implies good service design using user-centered 
design methods. The service may include several providers, 
but is considered as one service as long as customers 
experiences the service as one [42].  
Service Design may also be defined in terms of 
experiences as a “design for experiences that happen over 
time, and across different touch points”, a definition given 
by Clathworthy [43]. A touch point is one of the central 
concepts in SD, together with customer journeys, touch 
points, ecology of experiences, and service design cards. 
We now define these concepts. 
A. Customer Journeys 
Customer journey is one of the most effective visual tools 
in service design. It is similar to storyboards and use cases in 
HCI, helping to visualize a service in an organization or a 
company. In [44], Koivisto explains customer journeys as 
follows: “Services are processes that happen over time, and 
this process includes several service moments. When all 
service moments are connected, the customer journey is 
formed. The customer journey is formed both by the service 
provider’s explicit action as well as by the customer’s 
choices”.  

20
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
We consider customer journeys to be formed not only by 
service moments, but also include all the experiences within 
and between those moments and user’s responses to those 
experiences.  
B. Touch Points 
A customer journey is comprised of touch points, the 
service moments as described by Koivisto [44], or nodes in 
a visual, graphical representation of a journey. A touch point 
forms a link between the provider and a customer, and as 
such is the origin of customer experiences with the service 
in question. Touch points form one of the three pillars of 
service design [44, p. 142]. 
While touch points are a fundamental part of service 
design and a starting point in re-design of services, we 
consider the intervals between them to be important for user 
experience design. 
C. Ecology of experiences 
 An approach to understanding experiences may be that 
of Nardi and O’Day [45], who use the term ‘information 
ecology’ to describe an interrelated system of people, 
practices, values, and technologies within a particular local 
environment.  This ecology approach, applied to service 
ecology [46], and the framework for studying user 
experiences while interacting with technology developed by 
Forlizzi and Battarbee [47], shaped our theoretical 
perspective. “Experiences and emotions are not singular 
events that unfold without a relationship to other 
experiences and emotions”, [47]. 
Building forth on these understandings, we define 
ecology of experiences as an interrelated, scalable set of 
experiences along a particular customer journey. In this 
paper, the context for creating customer journeys is that of 
travelling with public transportation. 
D. Service Design Cards 
A tool to address the touch points in the initial stages of 
service development is a set of service design cards, see 
[43]. Clathworthy provides six different use contexts for his 
all-purpose card set and evaluates the cards based on their 
intended function.  The cards were found to be helpful in 
team-building activities in cross-functional teams. Further, 
they were found to be helpful in assisting with the analysis 
and mapping of existing situations, generating ideas for new 
solutions or approaches, needs elicitation and facilitation of 
communication.  
V. 
DEVELOPMENT OF THE TRAVEL EXPERIENCE CARDS 
Tangible objects, such as cards, and the images depicted 
on them, are known to facilitate visual reasoning and help 
with finding a common language for communication among 
people with diverse backgrounds [2], [14]. The common 
understandings are built through negotiation and discussion 
of associations and concepts related to images.  
The Service Design AT-ONE cards described earlier, 
[43], provided the initial inspiration for the Travel 
Experience Cards (TEC). In this section, we will describe 
the design of the TEC card set for working with experiences 
in public transportation, and some of the ways in which the 
card set can be used. 
A. Making the TEC Card Set 
We used participatory observation and photographic 
documentation [48] to record our own and other travellers’ 
experiences, collecting a large number of relevant 
photographic images, representing touch points and 
experiences while commuting, using public transportation.  
All users of urban public transportation plan their trips in 
some way. Perhaps the starting touch point for a commute is 
a smart phone app, or a web-based service. The next touch 
point may be purchasing the ticket on the smart phone, or on 
the machine at the station. Digital boards may show 
information on trains or other means of transportation. 
Whatever the touch points on a particular trip are, they are 
part of some phase of the commute, as shown in Fig. 3. 
These phases are: planning the trip, making sure one has a 
valid ticket, arriving to a stop, embarking, traveling (this can 
be interrupted by, for example an accident, a ticket control, 
or other forms of disruption), disembarking, perhaps 
repeating some of the steps if transfer was needed, arriving 
to a final station and arriving to a final destination.  
The images for the cards in Fig. 3 were not home-made, 
rather they were found on the net, intentionally different in 
style than the images we collected. A purple colored stripe 
was used to further differentiate these cards and formed the 
background to the description on the card. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Cards with a purple stripe represent phases of a typical trip from 
one destination to another.  
The images collected as representations of touch points 
and user experiences in public transportation were then 
sorted into pre-determined categories corresponding to the 
phases of a typical commute. We initially had too many 
cards in each category and those images were selected that 
best represented the user experience.  As most cards used in 
card sorting, ours consisted of the image and the text. 
Inspired by the Absolut concept [36] of using two words, 
our text was just one or two words long. The words were 
chosen for each image and typed on a red background. The 
first set of TEC cards was thus made, consisting of two 
different types of cards, those representing phases of the 

21
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
customer’s trip, and a mixture of cards representing touch 
points and experiences, see Fig. 4.  
In order to ensure that images convey appropriate 
experiences and that the text is suitable, we have done 
quick-and-dirty user testing: we have simply shown the 
cards and asked two students  (who also are the public 
transportation users) what they see on cards and if words 
match what the image conveys.  At this stage, we did not 
want a perfect set of cards, but rather, the one that that was 
open for modifications and additions. For example, we 
chose not to make separate cards for embarking and 
disembarking, even though one of our testers suggested it. 
We wanted to see if distinctions in experiences between 
these two segments were important for users. If they were, 
separate cards would be designed for the final set. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Touch point cards related to the ‘Station’ segment, such as an e-
ticket or a mobile app ticket, and experience cards, e.g., feeling safe, having 
an access to a convinience store, coffee, somewhere to place a bike.  
B. The Initial Use Methodologies  
There are two components to the TEC card set: the TEC 
cards and the TEC use modes. The latter are ways in which 
cards are used with users during testing or workshops. We 
have worked with two use modes, both of which used 
association as a way to elicit information on experiences. 
The first TEC use mode was based on a forced association 
concept. This use mode was employed in relation to every 
card representing a phase of the commute. Focus event was 
our second TEC use mode. A specific, significant event in 
person’s life, related to the use of public transportation, was 
the focus of the discussion. By significant, we meant an 
event that is out of the ordinary, either positive or negative. 
For example, losing a wallet on a city bus, with driver’s 
license and a whole lot of other important documents, would 
be 
en 
example 
of 
such 
event. 
The 
cards, 
both 
experience/touch points and journey phases, relevant for a 
focus event were selected from the card set, and their 
influence on the event discussed. The focus event was based 
on the same experiences as the rest of the workshop (e.g., 
safety, joy, being on time).  
The first workshop was a pilot workshop, in which three 
researchers tried different use modes, and how they elicit 
information. For example, concern was whether working 
with touch points and customer journeys was better than 
using phases of the commute in order to understand diverse 
user experiences. The use mode that we agreed worked best 
was a forced association. The experience of safety in urban 
public transport was used as a test case, see [1] for details. 
In the second workshop, forced association using the 
experience of joy in public transportation was implemented 
with two of the authors and three users of public transport. 
Two of the users were PhD candidates and the third a master 
student in the design, use and interaction study program. 
The last workshop, on the experience of arriving on time 
included the authors, and two students, one PhD and one 
master student in the same program. These two workshops 
required about an hour each time, see Fig. 5. We used 
convergent and divergent conversations, opening up for 
stories, reflections and memories, but also sense making of 
these, now collective, experiences, see [1]. 
The purpose of the workshops was to work with the use 
methodologies, in order to gather and understand information 
that could serve as the basis for designing better travel 
experiences. We did not study these experiences themselves.  
 
 
Figure 5.  A whorkshop where cards are used in conjunction with every 
segment of the trip, addressing just one kind of experience at the time. 
In the workshops we focused on the first research 
question: how to design a good, context specific card-based 
tool. In order to address the second and the third question, 
how to make use of visual methodologies to discuss user 
experiences and which concepts support well these 
discussions, we have conducted two additional workshops.  

22
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
C. Exploring the Visual Reasoning Framework 
We engaged two professional designers with long 
experience with visual materials and user experience design, 
in an hour-long session. The aim of the session was to 
evaluate some of the images used for cards using all seven 
concepts for each image, and to discuss the findings.  
The designers were asked to look at each card, first 
without any text, in turn, for couple of seconds. Then, they 
wrote down what their understanding of the card was, were 
there any associations with the image, any impetus, 
impedance, and other concepts. When done, the cards with 
text were shown. The cards were then discusses in the light 
of the intended meaning, and usefulness of concepts 
evaluated. The cards chosen for this purpose are shown in 
Fig. 6, and findings presented in the discussion section. 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Images were first shown without text, then with text to two 
professional designers. All seven concepts were tried on just images.  
Further, a workshop was organized to find out if an 
explicit focus on the framework could add value, e.g., 
generate other use modes, produce richer set of data on 
experiences when traveling, evaluate the quality of cards 
and, most importantly, how it supports knowledge 
production.  
During the workshop we used a TEC card set consisting 
of 68 cards. Five participants took part: the authors and three 
colleagues or PhD students. The cards were placed face 
down on a table and the workshop participants were 
instructed by one of the authors. During the first hour, we 
used seven concepts for visual reasoning, immediacy, 
association, analogy, impetus, impedance, abduction, and 
blending, to talk about the cards. Thus the question the 
participants needed to answer after looking at a card was: 
“Does this card enables … (immediacy, association, analogy, 
impetus, impedance, abduction, and blending) (see Fig. 7). 
The participants had 10 seconds to describe the first concept, 
immediacy, and 30 seconds for the other six concepts. Each 
participant wrote down the answers on a piece of paper and 
the results were discussed in the group. We started with each 
participant taking three cards from the pile and describing 
each card using the immediacy concept.  
This was repeated with the concepts association, 
analogy, impetus, and impedance. Each participant used only 
one card for the last two concepts, abduction and blending. 
During the second part of the workshop, each participant 
took one card only, but applied all seven concepts to this 
card, registering their findings, similar as in the session with 
professional designers. This was followed by the discussion 
of findings. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Which of the images provokes more associations, allows for 
abduction and blending, minimizes impedance? 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
All four workshops had a small number of participants, 
the smallest one just 3 and the largest 5. However, all 
participants had a solid background in both user experience 
design and various methods of working with users, including 
co-design, participatory design, and user-centered design. 
This is relevant because most of them have worked with 
similar methods before and could give qualified opinions 
about the use methodologies. All participants were at the 
same time also users of public transportation. We felt that 
workshops with a small number of participants worked well 
at this phase of the project. Participants with such 
background provided good feedback on the TEC Card Set, 
the use modes (the forced association and the focus event), 
and work with the visual reasoning framework. 
A. Working with images and visual reasoning concepts 
Diverse insights were gained from the user session with 
professional designers. In the discussion after working with 
concepts, the two participants both said that visual 
immediacy was very interesting, and should be further 
explored. At the same time, their interpretation matched 
only 75% intended meanings of images that they worked 

23
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
with. For example, one participant interpreted the image of 
laud speakers as a surveillance camera, Fig. 6, and the other 
interpreted the mobile app ticket as a generic app. When the 
text was added, the interpretations became clear. The 
participants, however, suggested that a shorter text reading 
simply ‘ticket’ or ‘mobile ticket’ should replace ‘mobile app 
tickets’.  
Two images were seen as giving impetus to action, 
‘press the button’ and ‘turn right for the train’. There were 
no hindrances to understanding images perceived, even 
though, as mentioned, the images were not always 
interpreted correctly. All images allowed for associations, 
positive or negative, as well as analogies (with street lights, 
other apps, separation, big cities and others). Abduction was 
needed in conjunction with a mobile app ticket, as well as 
with the image of a yellow line that signifies attention. The 
participants felt that blending was not represented in any of 
chosen images, and that the use of two or three provided 
images together, was also difficult.  
B. Vocabulary 
It was important for the participants to understand the 
TEC cards. Only then could they really engage in working 
creatively with them. As it was not possible to have a card 
representing each individual experience, the terms describing 
the cards were chosen with care. We found out that some 
cards needed to be broad enough to allow for several 
different interpretations.  Others, as for example ticket 
needed further specification: valid ticket and price of ticket 
were the requests from our participants. There was also a 
suggestion to further specify attributes relevant to the 
validity of the ticket, such as the visibility of information.  
C. On the use the cards in workshops 
The workshops with our participants started with 
explanation of the purpose of the workshop, the TEC set, and 
how we were going to use the data in the future. We then 
asked the participants to focus on what gives them, as users 
of public transportation, the experience of joy or arriving on 
time. During the workshop on joy, it became clear that we 
were missing several experience cards: weather, space, valid 
ticket, toilet, charging battery, time, and price of ticket. 
During the workshop on arriving on time, experiences that 
help users or are a hindrance to reaching their final 
destination on time were considered. During this exercise 
two new experience cards were proposed: ticket control and 
event. Ticket control was perceived as both a segment card 
and an experience card, experience of control of the ticket 
validity. The event experience card refers to large events, 
such as sports championships and matches, in which large 
crowds of people use public transportation. During these 
events it is often impossible to arrive on time.  
By constructing common understanding and meaning 
giving to the cards, for the entire length of the trip, we found 
that a number of combinations of experiences have emerged 
as important.  For example, a card with a term ‘crowd’ was 
used extensively. It was related to several segments (station, 
ticket, embarking and disembarking and traveling) to both 
feeling of lack of safety, lack of joy and danger of being late. 
One of the participants then mentioned that there is really 
nothing one can do with this knowledge. This started a whole 
discussion on the strategies that people use to avoid crowds. 
At the end of the discussion, all participants agreed that, 
actually, there are opportunities for making things better by 
design.  
The same conclusion was reached regarding the use of 
cards to address focus events. We illustrate this with two 
examples. One participant told a story of a woman who had a 
very unpleasant experience on the train. She never enjoyed 
taking public transportation again, and never took trains very 
early in the morning or late in the night. The card that she 
held while talking about the experience depicted a station in 
dusk, empty, and not giving the feeling of being safe (see 
Fig. 2). 
 The second example had to do with embarrassment over 
being caught without valid ticket and blaming several touch 
points involving technology that were not working properly 
at the time. In both cases, cards representing related 
experiences were found and participants considered 
frequency of such events, their impact on people’s lives, 
possible design solutions, etc.  
The seven concepts were very useful in evaluating the 
cards, because they invite a particular kind of visual 
reasoning that is more comprehensive than discussing the 
meaning of the card. The design of the TEC Card Set is as 
such that the keyword printed on the card provides the 
meaning of the card in cases where the image is unclear or is 
perceived as for decorative only. The visual reasoning 
framework focused us on the image; each concept became a 
lens that both explored and mediated the meaning of the 
image. 
 
 
Figure 8.  The card on the left uses green to point to the emergency exit. 
To some people, green is not a colour that infers emergency. In the picture 
to the right, it is not possible to infer anything about the conductor. 
Using the framework we found some cards that are 
strong candidate for replacement, such as the image in Fig. 8, 
on the right. On the other hand, the quality of a card was not 
based on a direct translation between the image and the 
keyword, but on how the image itself triggered visual 
reasoning. The combination image and concept was crucial 
here. We did not evaluate the seven possible combination of 
each card, but our initial findings do encourage us to 
continue this line of thinking in the next step of our research. 

24
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The main challenge will be how to weigh each concept. For 
example, is immediacy a more important concept than 
association? The concepts immediacy and association were 
easy to engage with. Visual immediacy is an important 
characteristic of a design card in general, as it is about first 
impression and meaning making, which may have a direct 
affect on further work with the cards. Association plays a 
similar role, but is based on interference from one conceptual 
domain to another. Association focuses us on what is 
possible and thus broaden the field of possible positive and 
negative situations and experiences. The best use modes we 
found so far, were building on associations. 
D.  User’s comments 
After each workshop, a few minutes were set aside for 
asking the participants about their experiences of working 
with the TEC cards. One of the participants (male, 39) said: 
They were good to get the conversation going and explore 
different topics in a quick and easy manner. Another 
participant told us: The images put you kind of into a 
memory lane. When I look at the station card, I remember 
my own station and I can feel the experiences. They make 
me more aware of the things I should think of. I would never 
come up with as many examples of experiences as we jointly 
did (female, 27). Asked whether it was boring to repeat 
forced association technique, the participants agreed that it 
was a good experience, connecting the detailed pictures 
around each segment card into a larger picture, which was 
more relevant: This was actually a learning experience for 
me. Cards with good quality images and nice colours made 
association easier (female, 26). 
E.  Reasoning with visual concepts 
We found that the concepts immediacy and association 
were easy to use. All participants could use these concepts 
to talk about the cards as well as to give feedback on the 
quality of the cards. For example, the card showing a nice 
cup of coffee had high visual immediacy, while a card 
portraying a recycling trashcan had low immediacy. 
Evaluation of the cards used for immediacy showed that the 
number of objects on a card and the organisation of these 
objects affected visual immediacy. Association was a good 
concept to bring out different understandings of the quality 
of images, and colours in particular.  
 
 
Figure 9.  Cards with good quality images and nice colours made 
association easier.  
For example, if the colours were bright and beautiful 
(Fig. 9), participants found it easier to make associations 
and these associations tended to be the positive ones. We 
found out that in general, all cards used for association were 
easy to use for this purpose. 
The impetus and impedance concepts were helpful in 
establishing if the general meaning of a card was 
communicated well. On the other hand, we found that some 
of the cards seem too abstract to support the concepts 
analogy and abduction. Working with these concepts 
resulted in a focus on particular aspects of a card, such as 
colour. Participants established that the use of red and green 
was often problematic, as some of the people assigned the 
meaning to these colours based on the traffic light analogy, 
while others considered the actual context.  Some cards did 
not have sufficient visual information in order to infer (use 
abduction) to understand the meaning, see Figure 8, the 
‘conductor’ card. 
Conceptual blending was a creative way to work with 
the cards, as it enabled a better understanding of the context. 
For example, blending immediacy with impetus was a good 
match and easy to explain, e.g., ‘what is the first thing you 
want to do when you see this card’? Since we used only four 
cards for blending, we did not explore its potential fully. But 
we could see the indications that it would be beneficial for 
design of new experiences, as it enables discussions over 
more complex domains, visually. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Understanding user experience is important in the design 
of interactive products and services. People’s experiences 
with public transportation, even with a single touch point, 
such as ticket validation, are very different. This 
heterogeneity makes working with user experiences 
challenging.  
The TEC set was found to respond to this challenge 
adequately. Heterogeneity remained visible, yet a common 
understanding of an experience emerged during the 
workshops, when working with safety, joy and being on 
time.  
The size and the feel of cards were found to be 
satisfactory. Part of their appeal was attributed to the images. 
The images were taken out in the field, thus from users 
actual context, but were generic enough to easily evoke 
memories of many diverse experiences. The other part of the 
appeal was tangibility of the cards. They served as tangible 
pointers to experiences, evoking memories and facilitating 
conversation 
about 
experiences. 
They 
enabled 
rich 
communication, in depth when working with focus events, 
and in breadth when working with forced associations across 
all segments of a customer journey. Our focus was not on re-
designing services at this time, yet many ideas and thoughts 
that emerged on during the workshops would be worth 
pursuing further. The number of cards could be reduced. At 
times, it was overwhelming to search the set of 68 different 
cards. In later work, we have used about half of that number.  
While these conclusions are in line with previously 
published work and thus not new, we hope that we have 
explained the process of creating the tool and its evaluation 

25
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(by users of public transportation, with good understanding 
of design processes) in such a manner that it is inspirational. 
This methodology of creating a set of cards for studying user 
experiences is rather fast and fun. The set can be used to 
understand a range of experiences in a given context of use, 
both in breadth and in depth, identifying clear design and 
innovation opportunities. 
We have tested a small number of TEC use modes 
(forced association and focus event). While doing that, new 
possibilities based on the framework concepts have opened 
up, and future work will explore them further. Visual 
immediacy and conceptual blending appear to be two strong 
candidates as the bases for new use modes.  
Finally, we brought this visual methodology further into 
other context specific application areas, such as service 
innovation and customer experiences in the library and the 
experiences related to transition of young patients from 
children’s hospitals to adult ones. The card sets developed 
for these purposes have worked very well in sense-making, 
exploratory phases of design processes and helped shape 
further design efforts. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. L. Culén, M. van der Velden, and J. Herstad, “Travel 
Experience Cards: Capturing User Experiences in Public 
Transportation,” in The Seventh International Conference on 
Advances in Computer-Human Interactions, 2014, pp. 72 -
 78. 
[2] K. Halskov and P. Dalsgaard, “Inspiration Card Workshops,” 
in Proceedings of the 6th Conference on Designing 
Interactive Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2006, pp. 2–11. 
[3] J. Brucker, “Playing with a Bad Deck: The Caveats of Card 
Sorting as a Web Site Redesign Tool,” Journal of Hospital 
Librarianship, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 41–53, Jan. 2010. 
[4] S. Pink, “Interdisciplinary agendas in visual research: re-
situating visual anthropology,” Visual Studies, vol. 18, no. 2, 
pp. 179–192, Oct. 2003. 
[5] W. Hudson, “Playing Your Cards Right: Getting the Most 
from Card Sorting for Navigation Design,” interactions, vol. 
12, no. 5, pp. 56–58, Sep. 2005. 
[6] “The World leader in Card Sorting Tools | Optimal 
Workshop.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.optimalworkshop.com/optimalsort. 
[Accessed: 
10-Mar-2015]. 
[7] C. Wölfel and T. Merritt, “Method Card Design Dimensions: 
A Survey of Card-Based Design Tools,” in Human-Computer 
Interaction – INTERACT 2013, P. Kotzé, G. Marsden, G. 
Lindgaard, J. Wesson, and M. Winckler, Eds. Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 479–486. 
[8] A. L. Culén and A. Gasparini, “Find a Book! Unpacking 
Customer Journeys at Academic Library,” in The Seventh 
International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human 
Interactions, 2014, pp. 89–95. 
[9] A. L. Culén, “Later Life: Living Alone, Social Connectedness 
and ICT,” in 6th International Conference on Digital Human 
Modeling and Applications in Health, Safety, Ergonomics and 
Risk Management, 2015. 
[10] “Method 
Cards 
| 
IDEO.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.ideo.com/work/method-cards/. 
[Accessed: 
10-
Mar-2015]. 
[11] “PLEX CARDS · Playful Experiences Cards.” [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.funkydesignspaces.com/plex/. 
[Accessed: 10-Mar-2015]. 
[12] “Design with Intent | Design patterns and human behaviour.” 
[Online]. Available: http://designwithintent.co.uk/. [Accessed: 
12-Mar-2015]. 
[13] S. Clatworthy, "The AT-ONE touch-point cards [Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.academia.edu/7288723/The_AT-
ONE_touch-point_cards_for_printing. [Accessed: 10-Mar-
2015]. 
[14] D. Spencer, Card Sorting: Designing Usable Categories, 1st 
edition. Brooklyn, NY: Rosenfeld Media, 2009. 
[15] S. Pink, Doing Visual Ethnography. SAGE Publications, 
2007. 
[16] S. Pink, Advances in visual methodology. Sage, 2012. 
[17] G. 
Rose, 
Visual Methodologies: An Introduction to 
Researching with Visual Materials. SAGE, 2012. 
[18] S. Lindsay, D. Jackson, G. Schofield, and P. Olivier, 
“Engaging older people using participatory design,” in 
Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2012, 
pp. 1199–1208. 
[19] “PhotoVoice  : About PhotoVoice.” [Online]. Available: 
http://www.photovoice.org/about/. [Accessed: 10-Sep-2014]. 
[20] H. Ishii and M. Kobayashi, “ClearBoard: A Seamless Medium 
for Shared Drawing and Conversation with Eye Contact,” in 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA, 1992, pp. 525–
532. 
[21] A. L. Culén, H. N. Mainsah, and S. Finken, “Design Practice 
in Human Computer Interaction Design Education,” in The 
Seventh International Conference on Advances in Computer-
Human Interactions, 2014, pp. 300–306. 
[22] S. Finken, A. L. Culen, and A. A. Gasparini, “Nurturing 
Creativity: Assemblages in HCI Design Practices,” in 
Proceedings of DRS 2014, Umeå, 2014, pp. 1204–1217. 
[23] S. Bødker, “When second wave HCI meets third wave 
challenges,” in Proceedings of the 4th Nordic conference on 
Human-computer interaction: changing roles, New York, 
NY, USA, 2006, pp. 1–8. 
[24] S. Harrison, D. Tatar, and P. Sengers, “The three paradigms 
of HCI,” in Alt. Chi. Session at the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, San Jose, California, 
USA, 2007, pp. 1–18. 
[25] S. K. Card, J. D. Mackinlay, and B. Shneiderman, Readings in 
Information Visualization: Using Vision to Think. Morgan 
Kaufmann, 1999. 
[26] M. Hegarty, “The Cognitive Science of Visual-Spatial 
Displays: Implications for Design,” Topics in Cognitive 
Science, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 446–474, Jul. 2011. 
[27] M. van der Velden and A. L. Culen, “Information Visibility in 
Public 
Transportation 
Smart 
Card 
Ticket 
Systems,” 
International Journal On Advances in Networks and Services, 
vol. 6, no. 3 and 4, pp. 188–197, Dec. 2013. 
[28] R. E. Horn, Visual Language: Global Communication for the 
21st Century, 1 edition. Bainbridge Island, Wash: MacroVU 
Press, 1998. 
[29] E. R. Tufte, Visual Explanations: Images and Quantities, 
Evidence and Narrative. Cheshire, Conn: Graphics Press, 
1997. 
[30] A. Karabeg and N. Akkøk, “Towards a language for Talking 
about Visual and Spatial Reasoning,” in Visual Literacy And 
Development: An African Experience, R. Griffin, S. Chandler, 
and Cowden, Belle Doyle, Eds. The International Visual 
Literacy Association, 2005, pp. 109 – 115. 
[31] V. Kaptelinin and B. Nardi, “Affordances in HCI: Toward a 
Mediated Action Perspective,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, New 
York, NY, USA, 2012, pp. 967–976. 

26
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[32] D. A. Norman, “Affordance, conventions, and design,” 
Interactions, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 38–43, 1999. 
[33] J. J. Gibson, “The concept of affordances,” Perceiving, 
acting, and knowing, pp. 67–82, 1977. 
[34] A. Karabeg and N. Akkøk, “Visual Representations and the 
Web,” in Visual Literacy And Development: An African 
Experience, R. Griffin, S. Chandler, and Cowden, Belle 
Doyle, Eds. The International Visual Literacy Association, 
2005, pp. 115–123. 
[35] A. Karabeg, M. N. Akkok, and K. Kristensen, “Towards a 
language for talking about information visualization aimed at 
presentation on the Web,” in Eighth International Conference 
on Information Visualisation, 2004. IV 2004. Proceedings, 
2004, pp. 930 – 937. 
[36] “Absolut 
Ad.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.absolutad.com/. [Accessed: 10-Sep-2014]. 
[37] R. L. Martin, Design of business: Why design thinking is the 
next competitive advantage. Harvard Business Press, 2009. 
[38] T. Brown, “Design Thinking,” Harvard Business Review, vol. 
86, no. 6, p. 84, 2008. 
[39] T. Brown, Change by design: how design thinking can 
transform organizations and inspire innovation. New York, 
NY: Harper Collins Publishers, 2009. 
[40] A. Culén and M. Kriger, “HCI in IT-facilitated Business 
Innovation: a Design Thinking Perspective,” presented at the 
16th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Human-Computer 
Interaction, Crete, 2014. HCI in Business Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, pp. 492 - 503. 
[41] G. Goldschmidt, “On visual design thinking: the vis kids of 
architecture,” Design Studies, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 158–174, 
Apr. 1994. 
[42] L. G. Zomerdijk and C. A. Voss, “Service Design for 
Experience-Centric Services,” Journal of Service Research, 
vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 67–82, Feb. 2010. 
[43] S. Clatworthy, “Service innovation through touch-points: 
Development of an innovation toolkit for the first stages of 
new service development,” International Journal of Design, 
vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 15–28, 2011. 
[44] S. Miettinen and M. Koivisto, Designing Services with 
Innovative Methods. University of Art and Design Helsinki, 
2009. 
[45] B. A. Nardi and V. L. O’Day, Information ecologies: using 
technology with heart. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1999. 
[46] A. Polaine, L. Løvlie, and B. Reason, Service design: From 
insight to implementation. Brooklyn, N.Y.: Rosenfeld Media, 
2013. 
[47] J. Forlizzi and K. Battarbee, “Understanding experience in 
interactive systems,” in Proceedings of the 5th conference on 
Designing interactive systems: processes, practices, methods, 
and techniques, 2004, pp. 261–268. 
[48] M. Crang and I. Cook, Doing ethnographies. Los Angeles; 
London: SAGE, 2007. 
 
 

