385
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
From Multi-disciplinary Knowledge Objects to Universal Knowledge Dimensions:
Creating Computational Views
Claus-Peter R¨uckemann
Westf¨alische Wilhelms-Universit¨at M¨unster (WWU),
Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover,
North-German Supercomputing Alliance (HLRN), Germany
Email: ruckema@uni-muenster.de
Abstract—Creating
and
deploying
long-term
knowledge
resources requires research on content as well as on application
side. This paper presents the results on high-end structure
and classiﬁcation, being the base for an improved long-term
documentation and providing advanced computational views.
Content
and
application
context
cover
factual,
conceptual,
procedural, and metacognitive knowledge. The core elements
are multi-disciplinary knowledge objects, which carry attributes
allowing for the creation of various dimensions inside the
knowledge
resources.
The
attributes
are
accompanied
by
references to ﬂexible multi-lingual universal classiﬁcations. The
discussion presents the fundamental results having contributed
to the knowledge resources. The organisational structure of
the knowledge resources supports Big Data integration by
a sustainable knowledge deﬁnition. The outcome are multi-
disciplinary knowledge bases linked with any context, which
have led to generate knowledge matrices and which can be used
to create computational views. The case studies implemented
content and structure as well as workﬂows for creating knowledge
matrices. The implementation deploys dynamical, interactive,
and batch computing and storage resources in an Integrated
Information and Computing System environment exploiting High
End Computing (HEC) and High Performance Computing (HPC)
resources and references to the Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation
(UDC). The paper discusses the new practical results from the
accompanying long-term projects and implementation.
Keywords–Knowledge Resources; Computational views; Multi-
disciplinary documentation; Advanced Computing; Sustainability;
Information Systems; Classiﬁcation; UDC; Natural Sciences.
I.
INTRODUCTION
This article is build on the work performed on advanced
computing for the processing of complex knowledge-based
information [1]. It has been shown that knowledge processing
considerably beneﬁts from employing universal classiﬁcation.
The demand for long-term sustainability of the resources
increases with the complexity of content and context. The
organisation and structure of the resources are getting essen-
tially important, the more important the more the data sizes
and complexity as well as their intelligent use are required
[2]. The article therefore introduces and discusses the back-
ground, a comprehensive knowledge deﬁnition, including the
systematics and methodologies required for an advanced long-
term documentation, which can be deployed in most ﬂexible
ways. The general requirements have to consider the condition
that it is not sufﬁcient to support only an isolated or special
methodology. The knowledge requires special qualities in order
to be usable as well as the quantities of knowledge counts. A
suitable general conceptual handling and a universal knowl-
edge deﬁnition is required in this environment for supporting
a high quality of resulting context and matrices.
The results are the outcome of the case studies conducted
over the last years. The article discusses the fundamental com-
ponents developed and employed for enabling a systematical
processing for arbitrary disciplines. It presents examples for
complementary knowledge and sectional views, which can
be considered from the knowledge dimensions. Examples for
generator workﬂows and considerations on statistics are the
base for several case studies in geosciences and archaeology
knowledge. The main new contribution of this research is the
implementation of using a universal classiﬁcation for multi-
disciplinary and multi-lingual knowledge classiﬁcation, for
example, for dynamical and computational views.
This paper is organised as follows. Section II introduces with
the qualities and quantities, especially with the implemented
knowledge resources and organisational structures, data in-
tegration, and the concrete practical knowledge deﬁnition
used. In this context, this section shows how others address
challenges of classiﬁcation, knowledge, and Big Data. Sec-
tion III discusses the previous work and components employed,
Section IV presents the systematics and classiﬁcation used
for the processing, Section V shows the conceptual base for
the knowledge dimensions and examples for practical section
views. Section VI introduces in the resulting matrix genera-
tors and computational consequences. Section VII delivers a
discussion of the results from the extended implementation
case study. Section VIII shows the results from an external
knowledge integration from web resources. Sections IX and
X evaluate main results, and summarise the lessons learned,
conclusions and future work.
II.
KNOWLEDGE QUALITIES AND QUANTITIES
The essential base for any implementation is the creation
of suitable content comprising all aspects of knowledge. We
have to discuss the consequences of a systematical use, the
data itself as well as the basic deﬁnition resulting from this
work and providing the fundaments for future developments.
A. Knowledge and organisational structures
The systematical use of knowledge resources has led to
organising the resources in structures allowing objects and

386
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
containers. The application of conceptual knowledge on these
elements has led to the creation of knowledge dimensions,
which can be used with references to the universal classiﬁca-
tion.
A practical application is the generation of computational
views. Example cases studies presented for this extended
research are from two different disciplines, volcanological
features and meteorite impact structures, whose attributes
and features provide criteria for classiﬁcation, indicators, and
multi-disciplinary research. Adding structures, classiﬁcation,
and other qualities to large knowledge resources implicitly
increases the computational and storage requirements for the
factual knowledge resources. But at the same time the addi-
tional conceptual, procedural, and metacognitive knowledge
drastically contributes to the optimisation of workﬂows, to the
documentation and integration of knowledge resources, and the
quality of applications and results.
These knowledge dimensions effectively reduce the compu-
tational and storage requirements for complex and integrated
knowledge, supporting really Big Data scenarios. At the same
time the requirements for the conceptual knowledge services,
the classiﬁcation, are high regarding width and depth.
For the referenced classiﬁcation, which has shown up
being most important with complex multi-disciplinary long-
term classiﬁcation with practical simple and advanced ap-
plications of knowledge resources is the Universal Decimal
Classiﬁcation (UDC) [3]. According to Wikipedia currently
about 150,000 institutions, mostly libraries and institutions
handling large amounts of data and information, e.g., the
ETH Library (Eidgen¨ossische Technische Hochschule), are
using basic UDC classiﬁcation worldwide [4], e.g., with doc-
umentation of their resources, library content, bibliographic
purposes on publications and references, for digital and realia
objects. Regarding the library applications only, UDC is used
in more than 144,000 institutions and 130 countries [5]. Further
operational areas are author-side content classiﬁcations and
museum collections.
UDC allows an efﬁcient and effective processing of knowl-
edge data. UDC provides facilities to obtain a universal and
systematical view on the classiﬁed objects. UDC in com-
bination with statistical methods can be used for analysing
knowledge data for many purposes and in a multitude of ways.
With the knowledge resources in this research handling
70,000 classes, for 100,000 objects and several millions of
referenced data then simple workﬂows can be linear but
the more complex the algorithms get the workﬂows will
mostly become non-linear. The workﬂows allow interactive
use, dynamical communication, computing, decision support,
management, and pre- and postprocessing, e.g., visualisation.
Besides the content there are reasons from the application
side, which introduce non-linear behaviour. If going into real
application cases, as the ones presented here, the linearity de-
pends on the workﬂow and data. Any real workﬂow is subject
of limitation, e.g., time, resources, generation of excerpts, and
amount of ergonomically practical matrix elements. Creating
and exploiting growing knowledge resources regulary goes far
beyond the growth of many end-user scenarios. Nevertheless,
the growing resources provide excellent means for improving
workﬂows end results. Therefore, the source matrices and
the number of references grow much faster than the result
matrices, which inevitably make these processes non-linear.
The meaning of knowledge management changed with the
extended use, especially when covering the development from
“information society” to “knowledge society”. The reasons
for the change are resulting from advances in quality, efﬁ-
ciency, precision, consistency and a systematical long-term
use, which in combination can contribute reducing digital gaps.
In consequence this also promotes new technologies with used
resources, e.g., in knowledge management [6] and Library
Information Systems (LIS) [7]. The advances in creating new
resources pushes the features for integration of resources and
for the development of advanced views.
B. Knowledge and Big Data
Many critical reﬂections on Big Data activities [8] argue
that most of the data [9] is unstructured, which is a central
issue against an efﬁcient handling of the content. On the other
hand, examples of the fundamental aspects of classiﬁcation
in traditional library-focussed context show large beneﬁts of
applying even a small extend of knowledge in a well deﬁned
environment [10]. The multi-disciplinary aspects from science,
economy, society [11] as well as the attribution of “Big
Wealth” [12] have triggered new perspectives.
On the one hand, new visions in research [13] and edu-
cation [14] focus on intelligent and smart environments and
components [15]. Not surprisingly, the industry view on the
optimisation of “cognition” from Big Data is more or less
short term and application centric [16].
On the other hand, the wealth of data implies consequences
for anyone handling data and developing applications, which
especially results in increased potential [17] and also in chal-
lenges [18]. with technologies, methodologies, and systemat-
ics.
The overview reveals that there are differences when work-
ing with “Big Data” for various academic research on the
one hand and use in industry and economy on the other
hand. Besides science and industry, assessing knowledge loss
risks [19] resulting from departing personnel [20] can be
summarised by the risk of knowledge loss, the probability for
loss of employees, the consequences of human knowledge loss,
and the quality of knowledge resources.
Quality and risks of knowledge loss are correlated with
the assessment of management positions [21]. Especially the
desintegration of knowledge is hand in hand with the desinte-
gration of workﬂow and system components. The importance
of external auditing for the casting of management and de-
cisions increases with the size of centers and with mission
critical services. Exactly the knowledge loss with Big Data
then means “big loss of knowledge”, especially as the loss in
mostly quality, which can even be worse as the quantity of
less quality data is increasing at the same time.
The overall big data challenges, data intensive volume, vari-
ability, velocity and for future scenarios especially data vitality,

387
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
meaning long-term documentation, usability, and accessibility
can be handled in a scalable, modular way. The often publicly
proposed three “V” for Big Data, namely volume, variability,
velocity have been exended by volatility, and veracity in
the last years. All of these a primarily describing technical,
non-content related issues. For long-term relevant Big Data,
especially if the share in structure is signiﬁcant and even
increasing, then the vitality is of critical value.
The approach for coping with Big Data starts with the appli-
cation of conceptual knowledge. Hence, conceptual knowledge
as with an implementation on universal classiﬁcation provides
a “Knowledge as an Infrastructure” solution.
Practical examples are knowledge integration for scientiﬁc
classiﬁcation and computation [22], ﬂexible general object en-
velopes [23], and the management of knowledge and resources,
e.g., for environmental information and computation, which
has become a focus application [24] in environmental and
disaster management. Research conducted on environmental
protection and climate change, integrating multi-disciplinary
and multi-lingual knowledge resources [25] on an interna-
tional and trans-national base has shown that sustainable
collaboration and governance requires long-term knowledge,
classiﬁcation, and standards as well as management system
components.
C. Knowledge deﬁnition and understanding
The World Social Science Report 2013 [26] deﬁnes knowl-
edge as “The way society and individuals apply meaning to
experience . . .”. Accordingly, the report proposes that ”New
media and new forms of public participation and greater access
to information, are crucial” for open knowledge systems.
In general, we can have an understanding, where knowledge
is: Knowledge is created from a subjective combination of
different attainments as there are intuition, experience, infor-
mation, education, decision, power of persuasion and so on,
which are selected, compared and balanced against each other,
which are transformed and interpreted.
The consequences are: Authentic knowledge therefore does
not exist, it always has to be enlived again. Knowledge must
not be confused with information or data, which can be stored.
Knowledge cannot be stored nor can it simply exist, neither in
the Internet, nor in computers, databases, programs or books.
Therefore, the demands for knowledge resources in support of
the knowledge creation process are complex and multifold.
There is no universal “deﬁnition” of the term “knowledge”,
but UDC provides a good overview of the possible width,
depth, and facets. For this research the classiﬁcation references
of UDC:0 (Science and knowledge) deﬁne the view on uni-
versal knowledge.
1) Big Data: Knowledge Top Level: The question “What
is knowledge?” in the conceptual knowledge dimension is
best answered by the appropriate classiﬁcation used with the
knowledge resources’ application scenarios (Table I). For this
case the table shows an excerpt of the knowledge top level
classiﬁcation (Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation, UDC) used
with the knowledge resources.
TABLE I. UNIVERSAL DECIMAL CLASSIFICATION: KNOWLEDGE
TOP LEVEL CLASSIFICATION WITH KNOWLEDGE RESOURCES.
UDC Code
Description (English, excerpt)
UDC:0
Science and knowledge. Organization. Computer science. . . .
UDC:00
Prolegomena. Fundamentals of knowledge and culture . . .
UDC:001
Science and knowledge in general. Organization . . .
UDC:002
Documentation. Books. Writings. Authorship
UDC:003
Writing systems and scripts
UDC:004
Computer science and technology. Computing
UDC:004.2
Computer architecture
UDC:004.3
Computer hardware
UDC:004.4
Software
UDC:004.5
Human-computer interaction
UDC:004.6
Data
UDC:004.7
Computer communication
UDC:004.8
Artiﬁcial intelligence
UDC:004.9
Application-oriented computer-based techniques
UDC:005
Management
UDC:005.1
Management Theory
UDC:005.2
Management agents. Mechanisms. Measures
UDC:005.3
Management activities
UDC:005.5
Management operations. Direction
UDC:005.6
Quality management. Total quality management (TQM)
This classiﬁcation reﬂects the conceptual dimension and is
intended to be used with the full bandwidth of knowledge and
knowledge resources.
2) Knowledge processing and application:
Geoscientiﬁc
knowledge processing is traditionally focussed on process-
ing and analysis of data resulting from geophysical or ge-
ological measurements. Examples are processing based on
seismological, seismic, magnetic, or gravimetric data. The
amount of information and documentation from geosciences
and natural sciences based methods and features as well as
their complexity has steadily increased for decades. Efﬁciency
and economical practice forces to long-term document and
exploit this pool of multi-disciplinary information. Spatial
and chronological data and classiﬁcation are an indispensable
component. It is becoming increasingly important that with
most professional analysis different geophysical methods and
results have to be used in combination.
Common means of application and knowledge discovery,
e.g., isolated batch or interactive application scenarios or string
based search routines on plain data cannot even approximately
integrate the required higher complexity of real environments.
The knowledge gathered during generations should be con-
sidered the most valuable component, the more important for
long-term results from geosciences. The universal knowledge
resources require long-term documentation as well as universal
classiﬁcation and structuring, beyond traditional collections
[27], digital libraries [28] and isolated content. With the
long-term multi-disciplinary resources the high end process-
ing and computing aspects are essential for sustainability
and discovery. Therefore, it is recommended to implement
scientiﬁc supercomputing resources supporting advanced in-
formation systems and creating and improving workﬂows as
recommended [29] with Integrated Information and Computing
System (IICS) components [30] and High End Computing
(HEC) [31]. This paper presents the results from creating

388
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
and managing long-term knowledge resources for knowledge
processing by employing a universal classiﬁcation like the
Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation (UDC) [3]. It discusses the
experiences handling systematics and classiﬁcation as well
as the methodological use of “Object Carousels”. The paper
points out the demands and challenges as resulting from the
case studies within the GEXI collaborations [32] concentrating
on integrating knowledge from geosciences, volcanology, and
spatial sciences disciplines.
III.
COMPONENTS EMPLOYED
The data used here is based on the content and context
from the LX Foundation Scientiﬁc Resources [33] and cor-
responding case studies [34]. The LX structure and UDC
[3] with its features [35] are an essential means for the
processing workﬂows and evaluation of the knowledge objects
and containers. The applied workﬂows and processing are
based on the data and extended features developed for the
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz resources [36]. Although shown in
detail with previous publications, the following terms may be
useful when discussing the knowledge resources and applica-
tion components.
•
Object: An entity of knowledge data being part of knowl-
edge resources. An object can contain any documenta-
tion, references, and other data. Objects can have an
arbitrary number of sub-objects. Example: Description
and location of an archaeological site, locations being
part of the location may be handled as sub-objects.
•
Container: A collection of knowledge objects in a con-
joint format. Example: Volcanological features database.
•
Matrix: A subset of the entirety, the “universe”, of
knowledge. A workﬂow can consist of many subwork-
ﬂows each of which can be based on an arbitrary number
of knowledge matrices. The output of any subworkﬂow
or workﬂow can be seen as an intermediate or ﬁnal result
matrix. Example: The output elements of a discovery or
search request.
•
Qualities: The entirety of documentation including at-
tributes and data being part of knowledge objects.
•
Quantities: The number of objects available.
•
Systematics: The systematics, a plan based strategy, used
for creating knowledge resources for disciplines as well
as the systematical use of knowledge resources, e.g.,
with conceptual knowledge.
The classiﬁcation, the result of assigning and arranging in
classes, is state-of-the-art within the knowledge resources,
which implicitly means that the classiﬁcation is not created
statically or even ﬁxed. It can be used and dynamically be
modiﬁed on the ﬂy, e.g., when required by a knowledge dis-
covery workﬂow description. Representations and references
can be handled dynamically with the context of a discovery
process. So, the classiﬁcation can be dynamically modelled
with the context of the workﬂow.
The context is made up from all the properties and qualities,
which have been added to a resource. These properties and
qualities can be references, text, bibliographic data, content of
publications, links, classiﬁcation, keywords, factual, concep-
tual or procedural knowledge and so on.
The granularity must be ﬂoating, it depends on the efforts
a research community wants to invest for a speciﬁc documen-
tation and application. This repeatedly depends on the type of
data, the purpose, the actuality and so on. Any of these objects
can be evaluated. It depends on the decision of a group or
service, which criteria or automatism to take into account.
The LX resources can provide any knowledge documen-
tation and additional information on objects as well as, e.g.,
geo- and knowledge references. The volcanological data used
in the examples is embedded into millions of multi-disciplinary
objects, dynamical and spatial information and data ﬁles.
The knowledge objects are under continuous development
for more than twenty-ﬁve years. The classiﬁcation information
has been added in order to describe the objects with the ongo-
ing research and in order to enable more detailed documenta-
tion in a multi-disciplinary context. The knowledge resources
can make sustainable and vital use of Object Carousels [37] in
order to create knowledge object references and to modularise
the required algorithms [38]. This provides a universal means
for improving coverage, e.g., dark data, and quality within the
workﬂow.
This research focusses on the organisation of knowledge
resources and computational views. The general aspects of
components and algorithms are focus of different research
studies as they mostly belong into the task of the different
services and disciplines. The architecture of the components
for the purpose of advanced scientiﬁc computing and multi-
disciplinary documentation is described (starting with Fig-
ure 1) in [39]. An example for a workﬂow, algorithm, and
result matrix scenario on knowledge integration for scientiﬁc
classiﬁcation and computation is given in [22].
Therefore, for the cases presented in this research paper we
had to concentrate on the structure of the knowledge objects,
georeferencing, and references data. As secondary compo-
nents, besides IICS applications and interfaces are available,
allowing parallel workﬂows [40] and intelligent components
[41] on HEC and HPC resources. With the IICS, the Generic
Mapping Tools (GMT) [42] have been used to visualise geo-
referenced data wherever a spatial representation is reasonable.
IV.
DISCIPLINES, SYSTEMATICS, AND PROCESSING
In geosciences, there is no globally unique stratigraphy.
Different continents and regions require different and detailed
stratigraphies. Therefore, it is not practicable to have a ﬂat
unique global standard due to the regional differences in ge-
ological development. Present common stratigraphy concepts
[43] fail on general use as well as on a consistent universal
classiﬁcation required. Implementing a universal long-term
use we further need to consider appropriate systematics, e.g.,
lithostratigraphical, chronological, biostratigraphical, chrono-
metrical, chronostratigraphical systematics. For example when
it comes to plants, animals, and genotype “-zoic”, “-phytic”
or “-gen” often mix without distinction. This is the case
with many languages, for example, “Mesozoic / Mesophytic”
respective “Mesozoikum / Mesophytikum”.

389
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Instead of a mix-up of terminology, for systematical use
the alignment of the Eonothems / Eons, Erathems / Eras, Sys-
tems / Periods, Series / Epochs, and Stages / Ages and so on
should be handled consistently and consequently. In addition,
the multi-regional dimension should be available for these,
showing correspondence with the appropriate absolute ages,
as available on-site.
For an efﬁcient and effective processing the knowledge
data requires a ﬂexible structure and a universal systematic
classiﬁcation. Any knowledge resources documenting complex
multi-disciplinary reality for discovery applications require
features for exact documentation on the one hand and they
require soft criteria on the other hand.
UDC is a classiﬁcation complying with the classiﬁcation
criteria. Together with the content, which may deliver more
detail or differing perspectives UDC provides a universal view
on the classiﬁed objects. When requiring facetted classiﬁcation
for multi-disciplinary knowledge the universal UDC cannot be
ignored as it is the most comprehensive and ﬂexible means
available and supported.
The classiﬁcation deployed for documentation [44] is able
to document any object with any relation, structure, and level
of detail as well as intelligently selected nearby hits and
references. Objects include any media, textual documents,
illustrations, photos, maps, videos, sound recordings, as well
as realia, physical objects such as museum objects. UDC is a
suitable background classiﬁcation, for example:
The objects use preliminary classiﬁcations for multi-
disciplinary content. Standardised operations used with UDC
are coordination and addition (“+”), consecutive extension
(“/”), relation (“:”), order-ﬁxing (“::”), subgrouping (“[]”), non-
UDC notation (“*”), alphabetic extension (“A-Z”), besides
place, time, nationality, language, form, and characteristics.
V.
DIMENSIONS AND CREATING COMPUTATIONAL VIEWS
The dimensions available mostly depend on the features
and complexity of the available data. Therefore, a number of
essential aspects have been considered when creating content
with the knowledge resources. Regarding the views many new
arrangements and visualisations are possible.
Nevertheless, it can be quite challenging for application
developers to create representations, which can be visualised
and to implement suitable components. In many cases so called
“Section Views” can be computed, which use n-dimensional
sections from ‘n+m’-dimensional knowledge context.
A. Implementation of knowledge dimensions
The implemented knowledge resources integrate factual,
conceptual, procedural, and metacognitive knowledge. Table II
shows the major types of knowledge as complementary parts
of the knowledge resources. The table shows some practical
examples, which illustrate the beneﬁts of the integration. The
data itself is represented in knowledge objects containing
any kind of information and collections, including content,
classiﬁcations, and references.
TABLE II. COMPLEMENTARY KNOWLEDGE IN THE KNOWLEDGE
RESOURCES, TYPES AND EXAMPLES.
Knowledge
Examples
Factual knowledge
Terminologies
Factual details
Conceptual knowledge
Classiﬁcations, categorisations
Principles, generalisations
Theories, models, structures
Procedural knowledge
Algorithms, workﬂows, skills
Methods, techniques
Determination on procedures, decision making
Metacognitive knowledge Strategies
Self-knowledge
Cognitive tasks, contexts, conditions
With the content and context documentation the knowledge
objects describe the integrated knowledge space, for which any
dimensions can be interconnected.
B. Section views
The implemented structure and content enable to create
section views based on the knowledge dimensions, which can,
e.g., be physical or contextual dimensions. Table III shows
some section views, which can be based on the combination
of contextual and factual knowledge.
TABLE III. SECTION VIEWS BASED ON THE KNOWLEDGE
DIMENSIONS. SECTION VIEWS AND EXAMPLES IN PRACTICE.
Section Views
Examples
Attributes
colour, size, ...
extremes ...
Space and location spatial distributions
geo-references
depth distribution
Time
timelines
time index
Cultures
context
history
time
location
society
inventions
art
Disciplines
physics
geophysics
archaeology
Multi-disciplines
geosciences
natural sciences – humanities
Multi-lingual
English
German
Romanic language
Combinations
depth distribution - timelines
location-ﬁxed: Objects over time
time-ﬁxed: Objects over space/locations
culture-ﬁxed: Objects over space and time
Generators can access the knowledge resources and their
workﬂows can apply any appropriate components and algo-
rithms, e.g., classiﬁcations, phonetics [45], associations, refer-
ences, keywords, and statistics.

390
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
VI.
GENERATORS BASED ON THE DIMENSIONS
The knowledge resources are the base for extended modular
matrix generators. Examples are report generators. Neverthe-
less, report generators can become arbitrarily complex, they
are only simple compared with matrix generators in complex
environments. A generator can access any data from any
requested knowledge resources available. An implementation
can integrate different sources as well as applications for
various purposes. An example for a simple standard generator
can be summarised as
1)
Workﬂow description,
2)
Knowledge resources interface,
3)
Context selection,
4)
Regular expressions,
5)
Matrix generation,
6)
Result ⇒ Term-based matrix.
The knowledge dimensions are considered in 1), their re-
sources are chosen in 2), the context of the dimensions is
selected in 3), and the objects are selected in 4). A simple
advanced generator can integrate external core interfaces for
extended capabilities:
1)
Workﬂow description,
2)
Knowledge resources interface,
3)
Context selection,
4)
Container interface,
5)
Section view selection,
6)
LATEX core interface,
7)
Makeindex generation,
8)
lxchaidx and further special conﬁguration,
9)
Index formatting / index style,
10)
Result ⇒ Index-structured matrix.
This example workﬂow integrates a core interface for the
creation of index-structured result matrices. The result matrices
contain cross referenced objects integrated from the resources
and the selected containers.
The structure of the content is important for the interfaces
and for the generation of the results. Besides other factors, the
structure and organisation of the content is responsible for the
universal deployment of features and therefore an important
factor for the quality of result matrices. The workﬂows can
integrate plausibility checks depending on the scenario. These
include consideration of structure, content, and knowledge.
Currently, one Central Processing Unit (CPU) can handle
sizes of reasonably comprehensive atomic context. A 100,000
object base requires about 1 hour per run per index, includ-
ing formatting and references. For interactive and dynamical
applications where no huge index-structured matrices may be
required the object base for an atomic context can be about 100
objects. Any of these scenarios can require parallel instances
on available resources instead of consecutive runs before the
matrix or index generation is done.
The data herewith can be extended with these steps refer-
encing different sources, creating synopsis matrices, collecting
registers, and processing of source data.
Proceeding this way, long-term beneﬁts can accumulate by
a sustainable re-use of referenced and source data. Generators
based on core knowledge resources, which are being evolved
can deliver results-at-a-time. This means that the results can
depend on the actual state of the resources (content, context,
references and so on).
For a re-use, these results-at-a-time can be preserved. It
depends on the scenario, which context data have to be kept
for intelligent reports based on the preserved results. For
example, the results might be usable with the original sources
or snapshot of the objects so that these might be reasonable
to be preserved, too.
If knowledge resources are extended this regulary goes
ahead with the wish to increase the computing capacities.
Contributing conceptual knowledge delivers essential beneﬁts
for the knowledge resources but it is also an add-on to the
overall data sizes and requirements [46]. This is a classical case
for using High End Computing resources, improving results
by deploying advanced complex knowledge resources and still
reducing computing times.
Even more important is the fact that the use of classiﬁcation
can support the creation of very scalable solutions. The reason
for this is that rigid structures are replaced by a matrix of
ﬂexible and elastic objects allowing references and a multitude
of methods.
The main reasons for the implementation is that the knowl-
edge resources allow
•
ﬂexible and dynamical matrix formation, e.g., groups
and subgroups and
•
to displace the implementation focus from a relatively
primitive increase of computational power into the di-
rection of the improvement of structures and workﬂows.
Example: Adding some of the simplest classiﬁcation (dis-
cipline A and discipline B) to 500 knowledge objects of
discipline A and B each adds 1,000 classiﬁcation entries but at
the same time searching for A reduces the number of objects to
be handled with their content by half. Even in a slightly more
complex workﬂow the efﬁciency improvement can easily be
in the range of thousands of percents.
Computing result matrices is an arbitrary complex task,
which can depend on various factors. Applying statistics and
classiﬁcation to knowledge resources has successfully provided
excellent solutions, which can be used for optimising result
matrices in context of natural sciences, e.g., geosciences,
archaeology, volcanology or with spatial disciplines, as well
as for universal knowledge.
The method and application types used for optimisation
imply some general characteristics when putting discovery
workﬂows into practice regarding components like terms, me-
dia, and other context (Table IV). Regarding the computational
views the table lists some representative numbers for Section
Views (SV) in addition.

391
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE IV. RESULTING PER-INSTANCE-CALLS FOR METHOD AND
APPLICATION TYPES ON OPTIMISATION WITH KNOWLEDGE DISCOVERY.
Type
Terms
Media
Workﬂow
Algorithm
Combination
Mean
500
20
20
50,000
3,000
Median
10
5
2
5,000
50
Deviation
30
5
5
200
20
Distribution
90
40
15
20
120
Correlation
15
10
5
20
90
Probability
140
15
20
50
150
Phonetics
50
5
10
20
50
Regular expr.
920
100
50
40
1,500
References
720
120
30
5
900
Association
610
60
10
5
420
UDC
530
120
20
5
660
Keywords
820
100
10
5
600
Translations
245
20
5
5
650
Corrections
60
10
5
5
150
External res.
40
30
5
5
40
SV time
1,100
25
6,000
15
2,400
SV space
850
10
2,500
15
1,800
SV attribute
20
4
70
15
1,200
SV discipline
55
8
5
15
1,500
SV culture
5
4
5
15
760
Statistics methods have shown to be an important means
for successfully optimising result matrices. The most widely
implemented methods for the creation of result matrices are
intermediate result matrices based on regular expressions and
intermediate result matrices based on combined regular expres-
sions, classiﬁcation, and statistics, giving their numbers special
weight.
Based on these per-instance numbers this results in demand-
ing requirements for complex applications –
•
On numerical data: Millions of calls are done per algo-
rithm and dataset, hundreds in parallel/compact numeric
routines.
•
On “terms”: Hundred thousands of calls are done per
sub-workﬂow, thousands in parallel/complex routines,
are done.
Most resources are created for one application scenario
or are used for one application scenario only. Only 5–10
percent overlap between disciplines – due to mostly isolated
use. Large beneﬁts result from multi-disciplinary multi-lingual
integration, which is a major contribution enabling to create
SV from resources.
The multi-lingual application adds an additional dimension
to the knowledge matrix, which can be used by most discovery
processes. As this implemented dimension is of very high
quality the matrix space can beneﬁt vastly from content and
references.
Section Views show a section through any of the dimensions
in the knowledge resources. However, a limited number of
possible views is commonly used. The table lists some more
regulary used SV based on time, space, attribute, discipline,
and culture. Section View reduces the dimensions to a number
that can be further used, for example, analysed or visualised.
The interesting aspect is that the means of time and space
are most widely used in workﬂows and combined methods and
they are mostly associated with terms, which implies the fact
that terms are handled with means like regular expressions.
Other types like attributes, discipline, and culture are more or
less represented, which results from the fact that the awareness
of this context is still not widely spread.
VII.
CASE STUDY IMPLEMENTATION AND RESULTS
The following sections discuss the work done for using
knowledge resource objects with processing and computing
from within IICS. For knowledge resources it is necessary that
any classiﬁcation can be added while the content is developed,
over long period of time, more than decades. With the cases
presented the content has been created over more than twenty-
ﬁve years.
•
Methodologically, in a ﬁrst phase, objects have been
documented without classiﬁcation.
•
In a second phase, all objects describing volcanic fea-
tures have been classiﬁed as volcanic features.
•
In a third phase, volcanic features’ objects have been
classiﬁed into separate classes as required with ongoing
extended description of objects in a multi-disciplinary
context.
The case study presents a state-of-the-art selection of vol-
canological and geological features. An evaluation of the
association that users have, showed that the criteria “date” and
“location” are most prominent with objects if the workﬂow
approaches from the “surface (of the earth)” view [32]. Map-
ping and timelining with all the respective views will be the
natural result.
The small unsorted excerpts of the knowledge resources
objects only refer to main UDC-based classes, which for this
part of the publication are taken from the Multilingual Uni-
versal Decimal Classiﬁcation Summary (UDCC Publication
No. 088) [47] released by the UDC Consortium under the
Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 3.0 license [48]
(ﬁrst release 2009, subsequent update 2012).
As with any object, algorithms, phonetics, regular expres-
sions, statistics, complementary translation or transliteration
objects, and other features and discovery processes can be
combined for facets and views for any classiﬁcation subject.
Complementary, objects on arbitary algorithms, e.g., process-
ing or statistics, can be included in the knowledge resources
and provisioned and applied for further use.
1) Time: Table V shows an excerpt of the resulting UDC
classiﬁcation of spaces of time practically used with the
knowledge resources. Instead of the earlier UDC editions the
classiﬁcations are composite UDC:551.7 mappings referring to
historical geology and stratigraphy for all the spaces of time.

392
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE V. UNIVERSAL DECIMAL CLASSIFICATION OF SPACES OF TIME
USED WITH THE KNOWLEDGE RESOURCES (EXCERPT).
UDC Code
Description (English)
UDC:”0/2”
Dates and ranges of time (CE or AD) ...
UDC:”0”
First millennium CE
UDC:”1”
Second millennium CE
UDC:”2”
Third millennium CE
UDC:”3/7”
Time divisions other than dates in Christian ...
UDC:”3”
Conventional time divisions and subdivisions ...
UDC:”4”
Duration. Time-span. Period. Term. Ages ...
UDC:”5”
Periodicity. Frequency. Recurrence at ...
UDC:”6”
Geological, archaeological and cultural time divisions
UDC:”61/62”
Geological time division
UDC:”63”
Archaeological, prehistoric, protohistoric periods ...
UDC:”67/69”
Time reckonings: universal, secular, non-Christian ...
UDC:”67”
Universal time reckoning. Before Present
UDC:”68”
Secular time reckonings other than universal and ...
UDC:”69”
Dates and time units in non-Christian ...
UDC:”7”
Phenomena in time. Phenomenology of time
UDC:551.7+”61”
Cryptozoic aeon. Precambrian. 600+ MYBP ...
UDC:551.7+”616”
Archaean. Ur-gneiss formation. Ur-schiefer formation
UDC:551.7+”618”
Eozoic. Algonkian
UDC:551.7+”62”
Phanerozoic aeon. 600 MYBP - Present
UDC:551.7+”621”
Palaeozoic. 600-180 MYBP
UDC:551.7+”621.2”
Cambrian. 600-490 MYBP
UDC:551.7+”621.3”
Ordovician. 490-430 MYBP
UDC:551.7+”621.4”
Silurian. Gothlandian. 430-400 MYBP
UDC:551.7+”621.5”
Devonian. 400-350 MYBP
UDC:551.7+”621.6”
Carboniferous. 350-270 MYBP
UDC:551.7+”621.7”
Permian. 270-220 MYBP
UDC:551.7+”622.2”
Triassic. 220-180 MYBP
UDC:551.7+”622.4”
Jurassic. 180-135 MYBP
UDC:551.7+”622.6”
Cretaceous. 135-70 MYBP
UDC:551.7+”628”
Cenozoic (Cainozoic). Neozoic
UDC:551.7+”628”
Tertiary. 70-1 MYBP
UDC:551.7+”628.2”
Palaeogenic. Nummulitic
UDC:551.7+”628.22” Palaeocene
UDC:551.7+”628.24” Eocene
UDC:551.7+”628.26” Oligocene
UDC:551.7+”628.4”
Neogene
UDC:551.7+”628.42” Miocene
UDC:551.7+”628.44” Pliocene
UDC:551.7+”628.6”
Quaternary. 1 MYBP - Present
UDC:551.7+”628.62” Pleistocene in general. Diluvium
UDC:551.7+”628.64” Holocene. Postglacial in general
2) Space: Table VI shows an excerpt of the resulting UDC
classiﬁcation practically used for spatial features and place.
TABLE VI. UNIVERSAL DECIMAL CLASSIFICATION OF SPATIAL FEATURES
AND PLACE USED WITH THE KNOWLEDGE RESOURCES (EXCERPT).
UDC Code
Description (English)
UDC:(1)
Place and space in general. Localization. Orientation
UDC:(1-0/-9)
Special auxiliary subdivision for boundaries and spatial ...
UDC:(1-0)
Zones
UDC:(1-1)
Orientation. Points of the compass. Relative position
UDC:(1-19)
Relative location, direction and orientation
UDC:(1-2)
Lowest administrative units. Localities
UDC:(1-5)
Dependent or semi-dependent territories
UDC:(1-6)
States or groupings of states from various points of view
UDC:(1-7)
Places and areas according to privacy, publicness ...
UDC:(1-8)
Location. Source. Transit. Destination
UDC:(1-9)
Regionalization according to specialized points of view
UDC:(2)
Physiographic designation
UDC:(20)
Ecosphere
UDC:(21)
Surface of the Earth in general. Land areas in particular. ...
UDC:(23)
Above sea level. Surface relief. Above ground generally. ...
UDC:(24)
Below sea level. Underground. Subterranean
UDC:(25)
Natural ﬂat ground (at, above or below sea level). ...
UDC:(26)
Oceans, seas and interconnections
UDC:(28)
Inland waters
UDC:(29)
The world according to physiographic features
UDC:(3)
Places of the ancient and mediaeval world
UDC:(32)
Ancient Egypt
UDC:(36)
Regions of the so-called barbarians
UDC:(37)
Italia. Ancient Rome and Italy
UDC:(38)
Ancient Greece
UDC:(4/9)
Countries and places of the modern world
Classiﬁcation references of that kind have been implemented
with knowledge resources and geo-coordinates.
Any of the classiﬁcation can be mapped to speciﬁc content
data. The workﬂows and processing handle different dates
and speciﬁcation between classiﬁcation and content as well as
using equal classiﬁcation elements for different absolute dates,
e.g., as required for different regions or cultures.
3) Creation of knowledge objects: The following examples
are taken from astrophysical, volcanological, and geoscientiﬁc
context, all referring to a large number of natural sciences’
disciplines and humanities. Especially, types of meteorites and
types of volcanoes do have different origin but the context
links them in arbitrary ways in space and time. Examples
are their linkage in geological time scale, location, geological
attributes as well as their association with cultural events and
secondary use of their material in many objects or buildings.
An object carousel generated for impact craters, shows the
different types present in the knowledge resources groups and
their crater categories (Figure 1).
Impact
crater type
Micro
crater
Simple
crater
Complex
crater
Elongate
crater
Multi-
ring
basin
Figure 1. Object Carousel computed for impact crater categories.
Any objects in the categories can carry attributes like time
and space as well as objects in other categories, which allows
to have dimensions across disciplines like in the following
example with impact craters and volcanoes.
4) Results of systematical use: Suitable views for volcanic
features are: Type (of volcano, coarse categories), date on
timeline, size (height). For craters respective views are: Type
(of crater, fragmentary), date on timeline, size (diameter). Two
Object Carousels have been computed. Figure 2 shows the
knowledge resources groups for volcano types, and Figure 3
provides the geological spaces of time references.

393
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Volcano
type
Complex
volcano
Compound
volcano
Somma
volcano
Submarine
volcano
Subglacial
volcano
Unspeciﬁed
type
Strato
volcano
Shield
volcano
Explosion
crater
Caldera
Tuff cone
Scoria
cone
Pyroclastic
cone
Cinder
cone
Lava dome
Volcanic
ﬁeld
Hydroth.
ﬁeld
Fumarole
ﬁeld
Maar
Fissure
vent
Figure 2. Object Carousel for volcano and type references computed for
terrestrial volcanism, providing volcano type references.
Geological
time type
Quarternary
Tertiary
Cretaceous
Jurassic
Triassic
Permian
Carboniferous
Devonian
Silurian
Ordovician
Cambrian
Precambrian
Figure 3. Object Carousel on geological spaces of time for computed refer-
ences (terrestrial volcanoes, impact craters, and geological processes).
For simplicity only the main groups are shown, subgroups
like for Quarternary “Holocene” and “Pleistocene” create
separate carousels (Figure 4). Most geological objects have
references into some instance of these carousels. This enables
to create numberless links to additional information.
Quarternary
Holocene
Pleistocene
Figure 4. Object Carousel “Quarternary”.
The colour coding for Carousels is symbolic and can
be deﬁned to represent any grouping as decided within the
workﬂow. It can result from the grade of detail required for the
description. In this case, the colour red links the three shown
Object Carousels with the information referring to a requested
object like “Vesuvius”. The subgroup Object Carousels, e.g.,
“Quarternary” (Figure 4), opens additional references to
volcanological feature objects. The listing in Figure 5 shows
context replacement deﬁnitions and corrections.
1
Cretacious :: Cretaceous
2
Kreide :: Cretaceous
3
Trias :: Triassic
4
Carbon :: Carboniferous
5
Karbon :: Carboniferous
6
Silurium :: Silurian
7
Silur :: Silurian
8
Ordovicium :: Ordovician
9
Ordovizium :: Ordovician
10
Cambrium :: Cambrian
11
Kambrium :: Cambrian
12
Precambrium :: Precambrian
13
Pr¨akambrium :: Precambrian
Figure 5. Replacement deﬁnition for relevant terms (LX resources).
The example lists an excerpt of relevant terms and types of
notation that can be considered equal for the target context.
5) Processing media citation references: Figure 6 shows
an excerpt of a media citation set used with UDC classiﬁed
knowledge objects, here with a Vesuvius reference.
1
cite: YES 20070000 {LXK:Pompeii; Vesuvius; reconstruction
; 3D; animation; Holocene} {UDC:...} {PAGE:----..----}
LXCITE://Bonaventura:2007:My_DVD
2
cite: YES 20130000 {LXK:Pompeii; Vesuvius; Vesuvio;
Holocene; postcard} {UDC:...} {PAGE:----..----} LXCITE:
//Guardasole:2013:Vesuvio_1270m
3
cite: YES 20070000 {LXK:Pompeii; Vesuvius; reconstruction
; diorama} {UDC:...} {PAGE:----..----} LXCITE://
Bonaventura:2007:Pompeii
4
cite: YES 20070000 {LXK:Pompeii; Vesuvius; bakery; mill
stones; material; stone; volcanic lava; basalt; Holocene
; diorama} {UDC:...} {PAGE:--56..--59} LXCITE://
Bonaventura:2007:Pompeii
Figure 6. Media citation set excerpt used with the UDC classiﬁed
knowledge object “Vesuvius” (LX resources).
The examples are part of the “Vesuvius” and “volcanic mill
stone” object references. The media citations refer to 3D video
animations and dioramic reconstructions as well as even to
postcards. These references resolve to [49] (animation), [50]
(postcard), [51] (diorama).

394
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Objects can carry an arbitrary number of classiﬁcations
views, e.g., from automated classiﬁcation to individual classi-
ﬁcation by different groups of experts. The facets itself are to
be built from a base of universal classiﬁcation, which is under
continuous development and fully consistent in its editions.
For example, knowledge can be created by a single re-
searcher, a research institute, a collaborative effort or any other
process. Knowledge resources can therefore be created by a
single group or they may be created by larger organisations.
Taking library and museum scenarios as examples, then the
practice is to have editions representing classiﬁcation states as
well as instances of objects. The resources and objects can use
any number of these editions and instances.
6) Classiﬁcation development: All classiﬁcations are subject
of a continuous development, review, and auditing process.
This is also true for the UDC itself, independent from its
use for different disciplines or scenarios. Table VII shows an
example in different UDC editions.
TABLE VII. DEVELOPMENT OF “TERTIARY” CLASSIFICATION WITH UDC
EDITIONS AND KNOWLEDGE RESOURCES (EXCERPT).
UDC Code (a)
UDC Code (b)
Description
UDC:”623”
UDC:”628”
Tertiary (70-1 MYBP)
UDC:”623.1”
UDC:”628.2”
Palaeogene (70-25 MYBP)
UDC:”623.5”
UDC:”628.4”
Neocene (25-1 MYBP)
UDC:551.77
UDC:551.7+”628”
Cenozoic (Cainozoic). Neozoic
UDC:551.78
UDC:551.7+”628”
Tertiary. 70-1 MYBP
UDC:551.781
UDC:551.7+”628.2”
Palaeogenic. Nummulitic
UDC:551.781.3
UDC:551.7+”628.22”
Palaeocene
UDC:551.781.4
UDC:551.7+”628.24”
Eocene
UDC:551.781.5
UDC:551.7+”628.26”
Oligocene
UDC:551.782
UDC:551.7+”628.4”
Neogene
UDC:551.782.1
UDC:551.7+”628.42”
Miocene
UDC:551.782.2
UDC:551.7+”628.44”
Pliocene
The example is the “Tertiary” classiﬁcation development
within different UDC editions. The table shows that the target
not only moved (a) → (b) within the classiﬁcation but
was also adapted to a new subgrouping (lower block). The
currently ﬁnal result is a composite classiﬁcation, composing
from geology and time, holding both Tertiary and Cenozoic.
UDC still not considers different stratigraphies in plain.
Further, respective editions can be used or references to
respective editions and entries. The editions are fully consistent
in themselves, so it is natural that the overall consistency of
workﬂows using different editions has to be cared for by the
disciplines or providers.
Figure 7 shows Object Carousels computed for a complete
common system (top) as well as for an alternative system
(below) used for some purposes [43] after the year 2000,
missing “Tertiary”. The colours represent the term levels
within the respective system.
Cenozoic
Tertiary
Neogene
Pliocene
Miocene
Palaeogene
Oligocene
Eocene
Palaeocene
Cenozoic
Neogene
Pliocene
Miocene
Palaeogene
Oligocene
Eocene
Palaeocene
Figure 7. Object Carousel “Tertiary”: Common (top) and alternative (below).
Moved items have to be considered “persistent” within long-
term knowledge resources appropriately with all consequences.
It is possible to support any number of instances or versions
within the knowledge resources as long as each is handled
consistently. In this case, the consistency can refer to the clas-
siﬁcation, the content, as well as to the references. The UDC
can reﬂect the developments in classiﬁcation with editions,
which can be used consistently with the resources.
7) Result matrix: Table VIII shows the results from the
computation of a systematical classiﬁcation of volcanological
features, short “volcano types”.

395
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE VIII. COMPUTED SYSTEMATICAL CLASSIFICATION OF
VOLCANOLOGICAL FEATURES FROM THE KNOWLEDGE RESOURCES.
Volcano Type
Group References Data Examples
Complex volcano
A
Vesuvius VNUM:0101-02=
UDC:[551.21+911.2+55]:[902]”63”(4+23+24)...
GPS:40.821N14.426E Quarternary VEI:VEI5
Compound volcano
A
Cayambe VNUM:1502-004
UDC:[551.21+911.2+55]:(8+23+24)...
GPS:... Holocene ...
Somma volcano
A
Ebeko VNUM:0900-38=
UDC:... GPS:... Quarternary ...
Submarine volcano
A
Campi Flegrei Mar Sicilia VNUM:0101-07=
UDC:... GPS:... Quarternary ...
Subglacial volcano
A
Katla VNUM:1702-03=
UDC:... GPS:... Quarternary ...
Unspeciﬁed type
A
– VNUM:– GPS:... – ...
Strato volcano
B
Vulcano VNUM:0101-05=
UDC:... GPS:... Quarternary ...
Shield volcano
C
Etna VNUM:0101-06=
UDC:... GPS:... Quarternary ...
Explosion crater
D
Larderello VNUM:0101-001
UDC:... GPS:... Quarternary ...
Caldera
D
Campi Flegrei VNUM:0101-01=
UDC:... GPS:... Quarternary ...
Tuff cone
E
Tutuila VNUM:0404-02-
UDC:... GPS:... Holocene ...
Scoria cone
E
Antofagasta de la Sierra VNUM:1505-124
UDC:... GPS:... Holocene ...
Pyroclastic cone
E
Anunciacion, Cerro VNUM:1405-032
UDC:... GPS:... Holocene ...
Cinder cone
E
Chiquimula Field VNUM:1402-20-
UDC:... GPS:... Holocene ...
Lava dome
E
El Chichon VNUM:1401-12
UDC:... GPS:... Quarternary ...
Volcanic ﬁeld
F
Holotepec VNUM:1401-07-
UDC:... GPS:... Quarternary ...
Hydrothermal ﬁeld
F
Musa River VNUM:0503-02=
UDC:... GPS:... Quarternary ...
Fumarole ﬁeld
F
Kos VNUM:0102-06=
UDC:... GPS:... Pleistocene ...
Maar
F
West Eifel Volcanic Field VNUM:0100-01-
UDC:... GPS:... Quarternary ...
Fissure vent
F
Quetena VNUM:1505-074
UDC:... GPS:... Holocene ...
It compiles a small excerpt of computed data from the LX
resources [33]. The table delivers comprehensive information
for the volcanological topics integrated here: Volcanic feature
types, computed groups, UDC mappings, and examples of
computed references, e.g., Volcano Number (VNUM) the
volcanic reference ﬁle number, geo-coordinates and spatial
data, and spaces of time, as well as referenced data, e.g., the
Volcanic Explosivity Index (VEI) [52]. The full result matrix
for this request contains several hundreds of computed objects
with tenthousands of references.
The selection of the most relevant objects is not an issue
of the documentation or the view itself. The selection must be
handled by the algorithms and workﬂows from the disciplines
handling the speciﬁc resources, e.g., for providing a ranking.
Disciplines can be any, therefore the algorithms can comprise
statistics as well as ranking algorithms or image processing
techniques, depending on the objects and their features.
In this case the most relevant elements are deﬁned by the
objects in the volcanological feature container. In addition, in-
depth completion within object containers has been enabled
for the case of volcanological features. A container represents
a collection of equally structured groups of related objects on
a certain topic. Examples for available containers are:
•
Volcanological object container,
•
Earthquake object container,
•
Meteoric impact object container,
•
Astronomy object container,
•
Mineral object container.
The in-depth completion allows additional data, e.g., spatial
data, processing, and media object references.
The resources further allow for a ﬂexible mapping of
attributes, e.g., container relations, classiﬁcation, keywords,
numbers, references, media samples, material samples, spatial
data, and geological spaces of time. With these references the
volcanological features can be associated with a VEI, e.g.,
Vesuvius (Pompeii) VEI5, Krakatau VEI6, Tambora VEI7,
Thera (Santorini) VEI7, Toba (Sumatra) VEI8, whereas a
“Caldera” object itself being a crater does not have a VEI.
With existing models used in simulation and modelling there
is no consideration of references between disciplines, e.g.,
volcanoes and weather. With the knowledge resources, vol-
canological features can be referred to volcanological events,
seismological events, and weather phenomenon events or
biology. The larger the data base is the more correlatable
events get available in space and time. In comparison to
mono-disciplinary information the multi-disciplinary context
of the knowledge resources supports an improved knowledge
description. Further, even indirect correlation, e.g., in the above
case between volcanic features and meteorite impact features
can be investigated.
8) Knowledge generation, combination, and visualisation:
The following visualisation (Figure 8) paradigmatically illus-
trates the results from the compute requests. An on-location
attribute has been chosen for the relations in order to compute a
distribution map for volcanic features using the lxlocation
workﬂow. The location attribute is suitable for referring to
an unlimited number of multi-disciplinary information in this
case.
Figure 8. Volcanomap – computed worldwide spatial distribution of
classiﬁed terrestrial volcanological features from resulting object entries.

396
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The distribution is computed from the result matrix of re-
lated object context of several hundred classiﬁed terrestrial vol-
canic features via the knowledge resources research database.
The result matrix is the result of the present content, references,
and workﬂow. In all examples only an excerpt of these can
be shown. Several modules have been used for this exam-
ple: select_knowledge_environment, lxgrep_udc,
lxkwgrep, generateCarousel, lxvolcanoes2gmt,
cprgmt_world_cprvolcanoes_separated, as well
as pscoast, pstoraster, and psxy. System interfaces
can be created via instructions, programming interfaces, or any
kind of interface the disciplines working on implementations
and suggested workﬂows want to built on top of the knowledge
resources. The workﬂow allows any feature supported by the
deployed components, e.g.,
•
Association by classiﬁcation weighting,
•
Association by grouping,
•
Association by colourisation,
•
Association and by symbolisation.
Any association and context that can be described and ex-
pressed for any objects can be realised with the knowledge
resources. In this example, colour groups have been computed
via the result matrix (Table VIII): A: green, B: red, C: blue, D:
lighter blue, E: grey, F: dark green. The volcanic features are
classiﬁed and several classiﬁcation groups have been chosen
for the result. The map shows the present situation according
to the present state of the available volcanological data.
If we want to generate an according section view on data
from the geo-related knowledge resources, we can choose from
a number of topics and disciplines. A comparable section view
regarding the dimensions and attributes can be described on
content base (object classiﬁcation) by a set of
•
Planetary surface objects,
•
Geological / geophysical context,
•
Geo-coordinates,
•
Spatial distribution.
The creator of the overall workﬂow can deﬁne what to do with
the data and how to present it. This includes adding a suitable
application component for representing the knowledge for the
the intended purpose. From application component base, in
this case GMT, it can be described by
•
Mapping,
•
Projection,
•
Grid parameters,
•
Label attributes / size,
•
Colours.
The component speciﬁc description will most probably be
placed with the workﬂow implementation but if required it
might also be integrated with the objects. The result is shown in
the associated sample distribution of terrestrial impact features
(meteorite) as depicted in Figure 9.
Figure 9. Impactmap – computed worldwide spatial distribution of classiﬁed
terrestrial impact features (meteorite) from resulting object entries.
The map is computed from the related object context
(lxlocation workﬂow) contained in a meteorite impacts
features research database of the knowledge resources. It
is possible to combine any information, e.g., computing a
map animation varying in time, showing the development of
volcanic features. Therefore, a temporal sequence of spatial
distributions can be used as a simple example for variations
over time.
On base of a physical view (criteria classiﬁcation) the
criteria for impact crater classiﬁcation are:
•
Size of the impacting object,
•
Speed of the impacting object,
•
Material of the impacting object,
•
Composition and structure of the target rock,
•
Angle that the impacting object hits the target,
•
Gravity of the target object respective planet,
•
Porosity and other ... of the impacting object,
•
Age of the impact,
•
Size of the impact,
•
Structure of the crater.
Further associated phenomena (indicator classiﬁcation) are
impact crater indicators on the other hand, which are:
•
Planar fractures in quartz,
•
Shocked quartz,
•
Glass fragments.
When approaching from the “catastrophe” view it has shown
that the most prominent relation is the “size”. This mostly
correlates with “diameter” and still mapping and timelining
will come natural.
9) Processing and computational numbers and issues:
Table IX shows the processing and computational demands
per instance resulting from the presented scenarios.

397
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE IX. PROCESSING AND COMPUTATIONAL DEMANDS.
Item
Value / Description
UDC, number of classiﬁcation items
70,000
Number of classiﬁcation languages
50
Number of classiﬁcation variations (50×70,000)
3,500,000
Knowledge object subset, number of items
100,000
Number of terms
10,000,000
Number of object languages
2
Operations, number per subset result entry
50,000,000
Number per subset result entry, incl. keywords
500,000,000
Parallelisation (subset), wall time / num. of nodes
7,500 s / 1
Wall time / number of nodes
1,300 s / 10
Wall time / number of nodes
220 s / 100
Wall time / number of nodes (extrapolated)
4 s / 10,000
Besides the large requirements per instance with most work-
ﬂows there are signiﬁcant effects by parallelising even within
single instances. The following issues have shown to lead to
advanced challenges and increased processing and computa-
tional times. Nomenclature, terms, and attributes tend to be
at least partially different in different cultures and languages.
For many discovery workﬂows as well as efforts to increase
the quality of the result matrices it is necessary to consider
more than one culture and language. Processing a classiﬁca-
tion numbering in decreasing numbering with increasing age
or following in different directions is less consequent. For
example, in geosciences it is natural to start spaces of time
with Quarternary, followed by older stratigraphy. In addition
to the existing singular spaces of time mapping most objects
require appropriate different mappings to absolute dates, e.g.,
with Bronze Age having different absolute dates for different
regions or cultures. The calculation with extensive composite
classiﬁcations, facets, and respective ranges instead of native
classiﬁcations can increase the computational requirements
drastically as has been shown with the knowledge content from
the Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz resources [36].
VIII.
KNOWLEDGE INTEGRATION: CONCEPTUAL
CONTRIBUTION
Integrating referenced knowledge resources can essentially
contribute valuable content, both on quantity and depth.
Knowledge dimensions as well as computational views can
beneﬁt from these contributions.
Nevertheless, references to unstructured or differently struc-
tured knowledge objects will contain a number of deviations,
which may need to be uniﬁed, either for contributing to
manifoldness or to intensiﬁcation of resulting statements.
Utilising the classiﬁcations and facets for collecting refer-
ences to material can vastly enrich the matrices and results,
which has already been proposed [53] for solutions coping with
Big Data resources [54]. This procedure can help to overcome
conceptual deﬁcits of unstructured material as well as language
aspects. The procedure delivers a high percentage of relevant
otherwise unstructured conceptual knowledge and allows for
an efﬁcient uniﬁcation and integration of the results.
One of the largest resource of references to unstructured,
heterogeneous, multi-lingual data are services like Google
[55]. Table X shows the results resolved from references of
a Google search done for the topics “volcano, udc, classiﬁ-
cation”. This means references for classiﬁcations and other
conceptual knowledge can be used, in any combination, in
order to trigger search requests. The results contain the UDC
classiﬁcation found with the request as well as the terms
associated with this in the text.
TABLE X. VOLCANO RESULTS FROM PUBLICLY AVAILABLE INFORMATION,
GOOGLE SEARCH, STATUS OF JANUARY 2013 (EXCERPT).
UDC Classiﬁcation
In-text Terms
UDC:551.442(437.6)
Volcano phreatic
UDC:631.4
Volcano
UDC:553.405
Uranium deposit volcano
UDC:551.31:551.44(532)
Volcano
UDC:(*764)
Volcano
UDC:(*7)
Volcano
Table XI shows the results resolved from references of a
Google search done for the topics “cenote, udc, classiﬁcation”.
TABLE XI. CENOTE RESULTS FROM PUBLICLY AVAILABLE INFORMATION,
GOOGLE SEARCH, STATUS OF JANUARY 2013 (EXCERPT).
UDC Classiﬁcation
In-text Terms
UDC:930.85(726.6) 551.435.8:528.9
Sinkhole cenote maya
UDC:551.44
Doline sinkhole
UDC:556.34:519.216
Sinkhole drainage
UDC:551.435.82(234.41)
Sinkhole collapse
UDC:624.153.6:699.8:551.448
Sinkhole collapse
UDC:551.44(450.75)
Karst sinkhole collapse
UDC:551.44(045)=20
Groundwater surfacewater
UDC:551.44:001.4
Grotte H¨ohle
UDC:551.44(450.75)
Karst Apulia
UDC:551.44(437.2)
Geology karst
All documents found from public external sources have been
identiﬁed to contain academical and scientiﬁc content. Even as
this example is intended to provide a lower depth of knowledge
mapping than available in specialised knowledge resources,
it provides an excellent spectrum of related information for
the respective disciplines. First, the unstructured “Big Data”
Google is using is currently not classiﬁced and, second, Google
cannot search using a universal classiﬁcation up to now. This
means that up to now most conceptual information request
cannot be expressed directly via search engines.
Digital sources can be consistently classiﬁed in groups as
well as single objects. Groups or objects and their associated
references can refer to a classiﬁcation. The examples show
the possible bandwidth within a topic. They show that there is
much more in-depth knowledge in the data. The classiﬁcation
support can extract focussed knowledge even if the data is
only available in different languages as in this case. Therefore,
internal as well as external sources have been used for the
examples.

398
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
IX.
DISCUSSION AND EVALUATION
The results presented here have several scientiﬁc and tech-
nical aspects. The following passages discuss some major
contributions to the content and scientiﬁc results as well as
to the knowledge resources and features.
A. Knowledge resources
The Knowledge Oriented Architecture (KOA) of the re-
sources is based on a ﬂexible integration of the documentation
and development architecture utilising the Collaboration house
framework for disciplines, services, and resources [34]. The
knowledge objects, here the geological and volcanic feature
objects, can be used with any of their attributes. Therefore,
any references to objects belonging or referring to any other
objects can be computed from this. For an object referred to a
timescale of periods other objects can be associated with the
respective object, even beyond direct references. For example,
“geological time type” can refer from “volcano type” to any
other suitable for a geological or comparable spaces of time
classiﬁcation. For example, this will be true for geophysical,
palaeontological or archaeological objects. Further, volcanic
objects from the Quarternary can be associated to meteorite
impact events from the Quarternary. The more, they can be
restricted to associated objects of a certain attribute, e.g., from
the same region. With secondary steps further information can
be integrated. This can include geophysical data, media data
or associated objects. The resulting quality depends on an
intelligent use of context and classiﬁcation. A strong classiﬁ-
cation support is essential, the more as object and even many
citations, media, and publications are not explicitly aware of
the nomenclature of spaces of time used with speciﬁc content
can, e.g., to express that the spaces of time refer to plants
or animals. Employing a universal classiﬁcation with multi-
disciplinary content this way, e.g., with volcanological content,
expedites knowledge discovery as well as it targets on scientiﬁc
discovery.
Regarding methodology it further allows to
•
Support a systematic documentation,
•
Deﬁne a normative classiﬁcation,
•
Deﬁne cognitive interfaces.
Regarding architecture and implementation it allows to
•
Support decision making in complex systems,
•
Implement learning system components and
•
Support components by intelligent systems.
Creating classiﬁed knowledge resources objects has proven
to be most sustainable for a signiﬁcant period of operation
and implementation. It has been efﬁcient and portable with
all application scenarios and environments for more than
two decades, used with ten different operating system envi-
ronments, with different editing components, processing lan-
guages, and compute and storage resources. From classiﬁcation
side it is suggested to have advanced computing support, e.g.,
for spaces of time as well as for the complementary systematics
for disciplines. In addition, a methodological framework for
UDC supporting the required processing and computation
would add immense beneﬁts to its universal applicability.
Some new types of stratigraphies have not widely been adopted
and should again become subject of modiﬁcation regarding
a long-term use. In many cases, the consequence of claims
on consistency has been to use one dedicated edition of
the classiﬁcation. This shall ensure consistency within the
application. Using a small subset of classiﬁcation can help to
reduce the appearent work that has to be done for classiﬁcation
but it cannot ensure to avoid variances in different editions.
Consistent version management support for the classiﬁcation
has shown to become necessary as soon as knowledge re-
sources are using modiﬁed classiﬁcations over time.
B. Content: Case lessons learned
Besides the detailed results and references, the overall
results for the discussed cases are:
•
Volcanic features are well known above and below sea-
level and are more often long-term processes.
•
Known impact features show a concentration in highly
populated and industrialised areas.
•
Impact features have been reduced by morphological
processes and are mostly only available above sea-level.
•
Both impact and volcanic features are related to social
and archaeological ﬁndings.
•
Both impact and volcanic features are publicly known.
•
Compared with impacts and volcanic features, archae-
ological sites and results are not known to the same
amount in order to protect the sites.
C. Classiﬁcation expenses and beneﬁts
Classiﬁcation support, e.g., via UDC, does require intensive
work and can be expensive if used in non automated ways.
Nevertheless, this can make a difference as classiﬁcation
views very much proﬁt from professional experiences. The
application of UDC with complex knowledge context requires
ﬂexibility of the resources as wells as a ﬂexible handling
regarding extendability. The challenges with the distributed use
of UDC are, e.g., the use of private catalogues, like external
codes or author abbreviations. In addition, the sustainability
of knowledge objects beneﬁts from the use of methods like
facetted versioning, universal dates (e.g., ISO dates), and
georeferencing.
D. Complementary information and classiﬁcation
Text information and classiﬁcation information are comple-
mentary. This is important for knowledge resources as well
a for application scenarios, e.g., search algorithms. Using
classiﬁcation supported search algorithms can improve the
result drastically. The quality of results improves from below
ﬁve percent to up to over ninety percent.
With the presented Object Carousels an undeﬁned number
of practical workﬂows can be created on the knowledge re-
sources. Examples, which have been investigated for gathering
complementary results are regular expression and string search,
classiﬁcation search (UDC), keyword search, sort support
search, references search or phonetic search (Soundex).

399
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
E. Knowledge and views
UDC can be used with any object in any context and
can help to reduce compute requirements with knowledge
discovery.
The application of a universal classiﬁcation and knowledge
resources can drastically reduce the computational require-
ments, as well as it supports the parallelisation of instances
within workﬂows due to the large numbers of representations
in common per-instance calls (Table IV). The classiﬁcation
views and facets enable to reduce the amount of object analysis
required for discovery and reuse workﬂows. The algorithms
beneﬁtting from this are on the algorithm side (for example,
object and references search, content string comparisons, and
knowledge based associations) on the hardware and resources
side (for example, input/output requests including read/write
processes, compute resources’ and memory requirements, and
communication requirements).
X.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
It has been demonstrated that multi-disciplinary knowledge-
based objects can be successfully used in order to create com-
putational views. The knowledge processing employing UDC
classiﬁcation has shown to be a universal and most ﬂexible
solution for creating long-term multi-disciplinary knowledge
resources and providing a base for universal knowledge di-
mensions.
The implemented knowledge resources as well as deployed
conceptual knowledge, demands on processing and resources,
and examples for the computational views have been presented,
delivering components that can be used with future develop-
ments. In addition, the examples present content and references
on about more than 1,000 objects (volcanological features and
terrestrial impact features), which delivered a base for new
discovery after having been integrated with the knowledge
resources.
The resources and framework can be used even with basic
attributes and cross-references, and assure support for subse-
quent use and knowledge procurement processes. Structuring
and classiﬁcation with long-term knowledge resources and
UDC support have successfully provided excellent solutions,
which can be used for natural sciences, e.g., geosciences,
volcanology or with spatial disciplines as well as for universal
knowledge. The knowledge resources can provide any kind
of Object Carousel and object references. Decisions can be
computed with support of the UDC classiﬁcation. Due to the
universal long-term multi-disciplinary knowledge gathering,
the knowledge resources are a general universal decision
support base.
Besides these, a major beneﬁt of the extensive support
of UDC language translations is that regarding discovery
workﬂows it can also be used for improving the quality as
well as the quantity of elements and references in the result
matrices. Employing a universal classiﬁcation when creating
knowledge resources has provided substantial beneﬁt for both.
The workﬂow procedures build for special purposes are prop-
erty of the researchers and disciplines creating, developing,
and operating their implementations. The data used by them is
intended to be part of the respective collaboration. Currently,
if someone creates data, he or she can use the data and share
it with others, creating agreements and policies.
As knowledge resources have been proven to be a valu-
able means for research in many disciplines, components are
candidates for community tasks as well as for open access
development and licensing models. Currently, the policies with
many collaborations, funding, and services (as comparable
with the UDC model) do not allow to make sources and content
of the knowledge resources public.
Because the process of creating long-term sustainable con-
tent is quite pretentious and will never be completed there
might be support by a sustainable funding in the future, too. No
discipline should commonly be funded because it is possible
to increase the disciplines’ requirements for associated tasks.
Generally, the priority should be on knowledge “content and
result” and not merely on the quantity of background resources
required.
On the other end, the operation for disciplines, services, and
resources providers can be accompanied by licensing models,
supporting a sustainable long-term development and operation
on all three sections. Factual and conceptual knowledge, e.g.,
information collections and classiﬁcation editions, web ser-
vices and interfaces, e.g., discovery and section views, as well
as compute and storage services can be provided, developed,
and priced that way.
As presented, the knowledge processing can base on a solid
and sustainable long-term resource, which allows to create any
kind of workﬂows, dynamical discovery, and IICS components
and facilitate the use of High End Computing resources. Based
on this research, in the future further features for a high end
technical integration of data interfaces and resources and more
intelligent learning components can be developed.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to all national and international partners in
the GEXI cooperations for the innovative constructive work.
We thank the Science and High Performance Supercomput-
ing Centre (SHPSC) for long-term support of collaborative
research since 1997, including the GEXI developments and
case studies on archaeological and geoscientiﬁc information
systems. Special thanks go to the scientiﬁc colleagues at the
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Bibliothek (GWLB) Hannover, es-
pecially Dr. Friedrich H¨ulsmann, for proliﬁc discussion within
the “Knowledge in Motion” project, for inspiration, and prac-
tical case studies. Many thanks go to the scientiﬁc colleagues
at the Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, especially Mrs. Birgit
Gersbeck-Schierholz, to the Institute for Legal Informatics
(IRI), Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, and to the Westf¨alische
Wilhelms-Universit¨at (WWU), for discussion, support, and
sharing experiences on collaborative computing and knowledge
resources and for participating in fruitful case studies as well
as to the participants of the postgraduate European Legal
Informatics Study Programme (EULISP) for proliﬁc discussion
of scientiﬁc, legal, and technical aspects over the last years.

400
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
REFERENCES
[1]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Knowledge Processing for Geosciences, Vol-
canology,
and
Spatial
Sciences
Employing
Universal
Classiﬁca-
tion,” in Proceedings of The Sixth International Conference on
Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Ser-
vices (GEOProcessing 2014), March 23–27, 2014, Barcelona, Spain.
XPS Press, 2014, pp. 76–82, ISSN: 2308-393X, ISBN: 978-1-
61208-326-1, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=
geoprocessing 2014 4 10 30044 [accessed: 2014-11-30].
[2]
A.
Woodie,
“Forget
the
Algorithms
and
Start
Cleaning
Your
Data,”
Datanami,
2014,
March
26,
2014,
URL:
http://www.datanami.com/datanami/2014-03-26/forget the
algorithms and start cleaning your data.html [accessed: 2014-11-30].
[3]
“Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation Consortium (UDCC),” 2014, URL:
http://www.udcc.org [accessed: 2014-11-30].
[4]
“Universal
Decimal
Classiﬁcation
(UDC),”
2014,
Wikipedia,
URL:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation
[accessed: 2014-11-30].
[5]
A.
Slavic,
“UDC
libraries
in
the
world
-
2012
study,”
uni-
versaldecimalclassiﬁcation.blogspot.de,
2012,
Monday,
20
August
2012, URL: http://universaldecimalclassiﬁcation.blogspot.de/2012/08/
udc-libraries-in-world-2012-study.html [accessed: 2014-11-30].
[6]
“Wissensmanagement
in
Bibliotheken,”
library
essentials,
LE Informationsdienst, April 2014, 2014, pp. 9–11, ISSN: 2194-
0126, URL: http://www.libess.de [accessed: 2014-11-30].
[7]
S. Yadagiri and T. K. Gireesh Kumar, Knowledge Management: Chang-
ing Role of LIS in the Digital Environment.
B. R. Publishing
Corporation, Delhi, 2014, in: Libraries in the Changing Dimensions
of Digital Technology, Commemorative Publication in Honour of Prof.
D. Chandran, 2013, pp. 476–481, URL: http://eprints.rclis.org/22813
[accessed: 2014-11-30].
[8]
C. Sherman, “What’s the Big Deal About Big Data?” Online Searcher,
2014, pp. 10–16, March/April, 2014.
[9]
“Was
ist
so
”Big”
an
Big
Data?”
library
essentials,
LE Informationsdienst, April 2014, 2014, pp. 6–8, ISSN: 2194-
0126, URL: http://www.libess.de [accessed: 2014-11-30].
[10]
Fundamentals of Library of Congress Classiﬁcation, Developed by the
ALCTS/CCS-PCC Task Force on Library of Congress Classiﬁcation
Training, 2007, Robare, L., Arakawa, S., Frank, P., and Trumble, B.
(eds.), ISBN: 0-8444-1186-8 (Instructor Manual), ISBN: 0-8444-1191-
4 (Trainee Manual), URL: http://www.loc.gov/catworkshop/courses/
fundamentalslcc/pdf/classify-trnee-manual.pdf [accessed: 2014-10-30].
[11]
O. G¨unther, “Big Data: Was ist das? Und was bedeutet es f¨ur Wissen-
schaft, Wirtschaft und Gesellschaft?” Informatik Spektrum, “Big Data”,
Springer Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, vol. 37, no. 2, Apr. 2014, pp. 85–
86, DOI: 10.1007/s00287-014-0783-7.
[12]
C. Leng, “Die Vorstandsperspektive: Big Data = Big Wealth?” Informa-
tik Spektrum, “Big Data”, Springer Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, vol. 37,
no. 2, Apr. 2014, pp. 88–89, DOI: 10.1007/s00287-014-0780-x.
[13]
J.-C. Freytag, “Grundlagen und Visionen großer Forschungsfragen im
Bereich Big Data,” Informatik Spektrum, “Big Data”, Springer Verlag,
Berlin, Heidelberg, vol. 37, no. 2, Apr. 2014, pp. 97–104, DOI:
10.1007/s00287-014-0771-y.
[14]
C. Meinel, “Big Data in Forschung und Lehre am HPI,” Informatik
Spektrum, “Big Data”, Springer Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, vol. 37,
no. 2, Apr. 2014, pp. 92–96, DOI: 10.1007/s00287-014-0773-9.
[15]
P. Liggesmeyer, J. D¨orr, and J. Heidrich, “Big Data in Smart Ecosy-
stems,” Informatik Spektrum, “Big Data”, Springer Verlag, Berlin, Hei-
delberg, vol. 37, no. 2, Apr. 2014, pp. 105–111, DOI: 10.1007/s00287-
014-0772-x.
[16]
IBM,
“Wie
man
Erkenntnisse
aus
Big
Data
optimiert,”
2014,
URL: http://www.ibm.com/smarterplanet/de/de/madewithibm/stories/#!
story/18?ref=home&cmp=333ab&ct=333ab02w&cr=google&cm=
k&csr=41429analytics and big data-astron&ccy=de&ck=big
data storage&cs=broad&S PKG=-&S TACT=333ab02w&mkwid=
sRUgxqgp6-dc 41984993492 432i044571 [accessed: 2014-11-30].
[17]
S. Fischer, “Big Data: Herausforderungen und Potenziale f¨ur deutsche
Softwareunternehmen,” Informatik Spektrum, “Big Data”, Springer
Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, vol. 37, no. 2, Apr. 2014, pp. 112–119,
DOI: 10.1007/s00287-014-0770-z.
[18]
G. Dueck, “Bigger Data – Bigger Trouble?” Informatik Spektrum, “Big
Data”, Springer Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, vol. 37, no. 2, Apr. 2014,
pp. 139–143, DOI: 10.1007/s00287-014-0774-8.
[19]
M. E. Jennex, “A Proposed Method for Assessing Knowledge Loss Risk
with Departing Personnel,” vol. 44, no. 2, 2014.
[20]
“Wissensverlust vermeiden beim Abgang von Wissensarbeitern,” li-
brary essentials, LE Informationsdienst, Juni/Juli 2014, 2014, pp. 9–11,
ISSN: 2194-0126, URL: http://www.libess.de [accessed: 2014-11-30].
[21]
“International Expert Panel on Quality and Risk Assessment in
Telecommunications Services, July 22, 2014, The Tenth Advanced
International Conference on Telecommunications (AICT 2014), The
Tenth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and Protec-
tion (ICIMP 2014), July 20–24, 2014, Paris, France,” 2014, URL:
http://www.iaria.org/conferences2014/ProgramAICT14.html [accessed:
2014-11-23], URL: http://www.iaria.org/conferences2014/ﬁlesAICT14/
AICT2014 EXPERT PANEL.pdf [accessed: 2014-11-23].
[22]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Knowledge Integration for Scientiﬁc Classiﬁcation
and Computation,” in The Fourth Symposium on Advanced Computa-
tion and Information in Natural and Applied Sciences, Proceedings of
The 12th International Conference of Numerical Analysis and Applied
Mathematics (ICNAAM), September 22–28, 2014, Rhodes, Greece,
Proceedings of the American Institute of Physics (AIP), AIP Conference
Proceedings.
AIP Press, 2014, ISSN: 0094-243X.
[23]
C.-P. R¨uckemann and B. F. S. Gersbeck-Schierholz, “Object Security
and Veriﬁcation for Integrated Information and Computing Systems,”
in Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
(ICDS 2011), Proceedings of the International Conference on Technical
and Legal Aspects of the e-Society (CYBERLAWS 2011), February 23–
28, 2011, Gosier, Guadeloupe, France / DigitalWorld 2011. XPS, 2011,
pp. 1–6, ISBN: 978-1-61208-003-1, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/
download.php?articleid=cyberlaws 2011 1 10 70008 [accessed: 2014-
11-30].
[24]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, Sustainable Knowledge and Resources Management
for Environmental Information and Computation.
MacMillan, 2014.
[25]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Fostering Environmental Protection via Sciences and
Society: Key Knowledge and Climate Change,” May, 2014, Contribu-
tion to ISSC, 2014.
[26]
World Social Science Report 2013, Changing Global Environments,
1st ed.
Published jointly by the United Nations Educational, Scientiﬁc
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), the International Social Science
Council (ISSC), the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development (OECD), 2013, DOI: 10.1787/9789264203419-en, OECD
ISBN 978-92-64-20340-2 (print), OECD ISBN 978-92-64-20341-9
(PDF), UNESCO ISBN 978-92-3-104254-6 (PDF and print).
[27]
“The Digital Archaeological Record (tDAR),” 2014, URL: http://www.
tdar.org [accessed: 2014-11-30].
[28]
“WDL, World Digital Library,” 2014, URL: http://www.wdl.org [ac-
cessed: 2014-11-30].
[29]
Wissenschaftsrat, “ ¨Ubergreifende Empfehlungen zu Informationsinfra-
strukturen, (English: Spanning Recommendations for Information Infra-
structures),” Wissenschaftsrat, Deutschland, (English: Science Council,
Germany), Drs. 10466-11, Berlin, 28.01.2011, 2011, URL: http://www.
wissenschaftsrat.de/download/archiv/10466-11.pdf [accessed: 2014-11-
30].
[30]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Implementation of Integrated Systems and Re-

401
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
sources for Information and Computing,” in Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation
(INFOCOMP 2011), October 23–29, 2011, Barcelona, Spain, 2011,
pp. 1–7, ISBN: 978-1-61208-009-3, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/
download.php?articleid=infocomp 2011 1 10 10002 [accessed: 2014-
11-30].
[31]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, Queueing Aspects of Integrated Information and
Computing Systems in Geosciences and Natural Sciences.
In-
Tech, 2011, pp. 1–26, Chapter 1, ISBN-13: 978-953-307-737-6, DOI:
10.5772/29337.
[32]
“Geo Exploration and Information (GEXI),” 1996, 1999, 2010, 2014,
URL:
http://www.user.uni-hannover.de/cpr/x/rprojs/en/index.html#
GEXI [accessed: 2014-10-26].
[33]
“LX-Project,”
2014,
URL:
http://www.user.uni-hannover.de/cpr/x/
rprojs/en/#LX (Information) [accessed: 2014-10-26].
[34]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Enabling Dynamical Use of Integrated Systems and
Scientiﬁc Supercomputing Resources for Archaeological Information
Systems,” in Proceedings of The International Conference on Advanced
Communications and Computation (INFOCOMP 2012), October 21–26,
2012, Venice, Italy.
XPS, 2012, pp. 36–41, ISBN: 978-1-61208-226-
4, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=infocomp
2012 3 10 10012 [accessed: 2014-11-30].
[35]
“UDC Online,” 2014, URL: http://www.udc-hub.com/ [accessed: 2014-
11-30].
[36]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Archaeological and Geoscientiﬁc Objects used with
Integrated Systems and Scientiﬁc Supercomputing Resources,” Inter-
national Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol. 6,
no. 1&2, 2013, pp. 200–213, ISSN: 1942-261x, LCCN: 2008212470
(Library of Congress), URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?
articleid=sysmea v6 n12 2013 15 [accessed: 2014-11-23], URL: http:
//lccn.loc.gov/2008212470 [accessed: 2014-11-23].
[37]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Sustainable Knowledge Resources Supporting Sci-
entiﬁc Supercomputing for Archaeological and Geoscientiﬁc Infor-
mation Systems,” in Proceedings of The Third International Con-
ference on Advanced Communications and Computation (INFO-
COMP 2013), November 17–22, 2013, Lisbon, Portugal.
XPS
Press, 2013, pp. 55–60, ISSN: 2308-3484, ISBN: 978-1-61208-310-
0, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=infocomp
2012 3 10 10012 [accessed: 2014-11-30].
[38]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “High End Computing for Diffraction Amplitudes,”
in The Third Symposium on Advanced Computation and Information
in Natural and Applied Sciences, Proceedings of The 11th Interna-
tional Conference of Numerical Analysis and Applied Mathematics
(ICNAAM), September 21–27, 2013, Rhodes, Greece, Proceedings of
the American Institute of Physics (AIP), AIP Conference Proceedings,
vol. 1558.
AIP Press, 2013, pp. 305–308, ISBN: 978-0-7354-1184-5,
ISSN: 0094-243X, DOI: 10.1063/1.4825483.
[39]
C.-P.
R¨uckemann,
“Advanced
Scientiﬁc
Computing
and
Multi-
Disciplinary Documentation for Geosciences and Archaeology In-
formation,”
in
Proc.
of
The
Int.
Conf.
on
Advanced
Geo-
graphic Information Systems, Applications, and Services (GEO-
Processing 2013), February 24 – March 1, 2013, Nice, France.
XPS Press, 2013, pp. 81–88, ISSN: 2308-393X, ISBN: 978-1-
61208-251-6, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=
geoprocessing 2013 4 10 30035 [accessed: 2014-11-30].
[40]
U. Inden, D. T. Meridou, M.-E. C. Papadopoulou, A.-C. G. Anadiotis,
and C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Complex Landscapes of Risk in Operations
Systems Aspects of Processing and Modelling,” in Proceedings of
The Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and
Computation (INFOCOMP 2013), November 17–22, 2013, Lisbon, Por-
tugal.
XPS Press, 2013, pp. 99–104, ISSN: 2308-3484, ISBN: 978-1-
61208-310-0, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=
infocomp 2013 5 10 10114 [accessed: 2014-11-30].
[41]
P. Leit˜ao, U. Inden, and C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Parallelising Multi-agent
Systems for High Performance Computing,” in Proceedings of The
Third International Conference on Advanced Communications and
Computation (INFOCOMP 2013), November 17–22, 2013, Lisbon,
Portugal.
XPS Press, 2013, pp. 1–6, ISSN: 2308-3484, ISBN: 978-1-
61208-310-0, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=
infocomp 2013 1 10 10055 [accessed: 2014-11-30].
[42]
“GMT - Generic Mapping Tools,” 2014, URL: http://imina.soest.hawaii.
edu/gmt [accessed: 2014-11-30].
[43]
International Commission on Stratigraphy, “International Chronos-
tratigraphic Chart,” 2014, URL: http://www.stratigraphy.org/ICSchart/
ChronostratChart2013-01.pdf [accessed: 2014-11-30].
[44]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Integrating Information Systems and Scientiﬁc
Computing,” International Journal on Advances in Systems and
Measurements,
vol.
5,
no.
3&4,
2012,
pp.
113–127,
ISSN:
1942-261x,
LCCN:
2008212470
(Library
of
Congress),
URL:
http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=sysmea
v5 n34 2012 3/ [accessed: 2014-11-30].
[45]
“LX SNDX, a Soundex Module Concept for Knowledge Resources,”
LX-Project Consortium Technical Report, 2014, URL: http://www.
user.uni-hannover.de/cpr/x/rprojs/en/\lattenkreuZ{} [accessed: 2014-
11-30].
[46]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Computing Optimised Result Matrices for the
Processing of Objects from Knowledge Resources,” in Proceedings
of The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Communications
and Computation (INFOCOMP 2014), July 20–24, 2014, Paris, France.
XPS Press, 2014, iSSN: 2308-3484.
[47]
“Multilingual Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation Summary,” 2012, UDC
Consortium, 2012, Web resource, v. 1.1. The Hague: UDC Consortium
(UDCC Publication No. 088), URL: http://www.udcc.org/udcsummary/
php/index.php [accessed: 2014-11-30].
[48]
“Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 3.0 license,” 2012, URL:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/ [accessed: 2014-11-30].
[49]
M. My, Pompeii Reconstructed (DVD).
ArcheoLibri, produced by
MyMax, in: Bonaventura, Maria Antonietta Lozzi (2007): Pompeii
Reconstructed, 2007.
[50]
Guardasole, Vesuvio 1270 m.
Guardasole SRL, Napoli, Via Argine,
313, Italia, 2013, Postcard, 40067, Description: 1944 eruptions and
present day crater, Collection: LX, Provider: BGS, Entry date: 2013.
[51]
M. A. L. Bonaventura, Pompeii Reconstructed.
ArcheoLibri, 2007,
ISBN: 978-88-95512-23-5.
[52]
C. G. Newhall and S. Self, “The Volcanic Explosivity Index (VEI):
An Estimate of Explosive Magnitude for Historical Volcanism,” JGR,
vol. 87, 1982, pp. 1231–1238.
[53]
Achievements and Successful Solutions with Big Data and Com-
puting Challenges: National and International Perspectives.
In-
ternational
Expert
Panel,
July
23,
2014,
The
Fourth
Interna-
tional Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation
(INFOCOMP 2014), DataSys, July 20–24, 2014, Paris, France,
2014, URL: http://www.iaria.org/conferences2014/ﬁlesINFOCOMP14/
INFOCOMP2014 EXPERT PANEL.pdf.
[54]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Big Data – Bigger Knowledge – Biggest Cog-
nition: Optimising Organisation & Structure for Exa-Scale,” Inter-
national Expert Panel on Achievements and Successful Solutions
with Big Data and Computing Challenges: National and Interna-
tional Perspectives, July 23, 2014, The Fourth International Con-
ference on Advanced Communications and Computation (INFO-
COMP 2014), DataSys, July 20–24, 2014, Paris, France, [Lecture],
2014, URL: http://www.iaria.org/conferences2014/ﬁlesINFOCOMP14/
INFOCOMP2014 EXPERT PANEL.pdf [accessed: 2014-11-23].
[55]
“Google,” 2014, URL: http://www.google.com [accessed: 2014-11-30].

