519
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
USEM: A Ubiquitous Smart Energy Management
System for Residential Homes
Masood Masoodian∗, Elisabeth Andr´e†, Michael Kugler†, Florian Reinhart†, Bill Rogers∗, and Kevin Schlieper†
∗Department of Computer Science
The University of Waikato
Hamilton, New Zealand
Email: {masood, coms0108}@waikato.ac.nz
†Human Centered Multimedia
Augsburg University
Augsburg, Germany
Email: andre@informatik.uni-augsburg.de,
{michael.kugler, ﬂorian.reinhart, kevin.schlieper}@student.uni-augsburg.de
Abstract—With the ever-increasing worldwide demand for energy,
and the limited available energy resources, there is a growing need
to reduce our energy consumption whenever possible. Therefore,
over the past few decades a range of technologies have been
proposed to assist consumers with reducing their energy use.
Most of these have focused on decreasing energy consumption
in the industry, transport, and services sectors. In more recent
years, however, growing attention has been given to energy use
in the residential sector, which accounts for nearly 30% of
total energy consumption in the developed countries. Here we
present one such system, which aims to assist residential users
with monitoring their energy usage and provides mechanisms
for setting up and controlling their home appliances to conserve
energy. We also describe a user study we have conducted to
evaluate the effectiveness of this system in supporting its users
with a range of tools and visualizations developed for ubiquitous
devices such as mobile phones and tablets. The ﬁndings of this
study have shown the potential beneﬁts of our system, and have
identiﬁed areas of improvement that need to be addressed in the
future.
Keywords–Building energy management, energy usage monitor-
ing; energy usage visualization; information visualization; mobile
user interfaces; user evaluation; persuasive technology.
I.
INTRODUCTION
People use energy not only for their basic everyday needs
such as cooking, cleaning, warming or cooling their houses,
transport, etc. but also to make their lives more comfortable
and enjoyable. The worldwide energy consumption is therefore
increasing rapidly as the world population grows, and more and
more of us demand higher standards of living with better life
styles.
However, as the worldwide energy resources are limited,
and the available fossil-fuel as our primary source of energy
is rapidly dwindling, we need to ﬁnd alternative means of gen-
erating energy through renewable resources, as well as saving
energy whenever possible. Since the 1970s, when the ﬁrst oil
crisis happened, many technologies have been proposed and
developed to assist consumers with saving energy by, for in-
stance, using it more efﬁciently. In the past, most technologies
have focused mainly on energy consumption by the industry,
transport, and service sectors. In more recent years, however,
increasing attention has being given to residential energy use.
Strategy adopted by existing systems for management and
control of energy consumption in residential homes can be
divided into two categories, automated and non-automated
(manual). Automated systems use mechanisms for controlling
home appliances, so that energy-wasting behavior by users can
be partly mitigated (e.g., automatically turning off the heating
when windows are left open). Non-automated approach to
energy saving in private households, on the other hand, can
be broken down into two main parts. First, the residents must
identify saving potentials in their household, which requires
them to be aware of the energy consumption of individual
appliances. Second, once they know how and where energy is
actually being used, they need to be assisted and persuaded to
change their behavior to reduce their energy usage. Unfortu-
nately, however, there are some challenges in achieving both
of these two parts. In relation to the ﬁrst part, usually people
know their overall energy consumption (aggregated for the
entire household), because that is what their energy providers
bill them for. On the other hand, ﬁnding out how much
energy each device actually uses or how much of the overall
consumption each individual person in a house has consumed
(i.e., disaggregated consumption data), is very difﬁcult. As
challenging as solving this essentially technical problem may
be, overcoming the challenge of changing people’s behavior to
save energy while still living a comfortable life is even harder.
In this article, we expand on our research work presented
at ENERGY 2014 conference [1], which introduced a system
called Ubiquitous Smart Energy Management (USEM). This
system not only provides an automated solution for reduction
of electricity usage, but also caters for the non-automated
approach by providing detailed energy consumption informa-
tion to users, and incorporating various tools to assist and
encourage them to change their energy consumption behavior.

520
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
We start this article with a review of existing building energy
management systems, and related research, with a particular
focus on residential homes (Section II). We then describe the
design of our Ubiquitous Smart Energy Management system
(Section III), its client applications (Section IV), and the
current prototype (Section V). This is followed by discussion
of a laboratory-based study we have conducted to evaluate
the usability of the client applications of USEM (Section VI).
Finally, we brieﬂy provide the results of an analysis of the
capabilities of USEM against existing guidelines for the de-
sign of persuasive technology (Section VII), and draw some
conclusions (Section VIII).
II.
ENERGY MANAGEMENT IN RESIDENTIAL HOMES
There are many existing technologies that target saving
energy in residential and commercial buildings. These sys-
tems are broadly categorized as Building Energy Management
Systems (BEMS). They generally consist of two types of
components: the physical hardware used to monitor and control
energy consuming devices, and the software components that
allow various levels of user interaction with the hardware.
The hardware components can further be categorised into
either monitoring, or control hardware. Energy monitoring
systems can be single-point or distributed. Single point systems
usually provide aggregated consumption data for the entire
building, while distributed systems are generally wireless,
connect to each energy consuming device at the plug level,
and therefore provide disaggregated energy usage data for
the individual devices they are connected to. Examples of
energy monitoring systems for the residential market include
systems such Current Cost [2], the Energy Detective [3] and
Wattson [4]. However, these systems only show users how
much energy they have consumed in the past, and at best make
some general suggestions about how to reduce energy usage
in the future. Generally, these types of systems cannot actively
control appliances to put energy saving tips into practice.
Control hardware, on the other hand, are mainly used by
Building Automation Systems (BAS) to actively control energy
consuming devices in a building, usually in combination with
a range of sensors that react to their environment (e.g., an
air-conditioning system can be automatically switched on/off
based on temperature sensor data). Examples of such systems
include HomeMatic [5], Gira [6], Intellihome [7], Z-Wave [8],
and HomeKit [9].
It should however be noted that the distinction between
monitoring and control hardware is gradually diminishing.
For instance, the Wattson [4] monitoring system works with
Optiplug [10] intelligent sockets to switch on/off devices
connected to them depending on the availability of surplus
electricity.
Kazmi et al. [11] provide an excellent review and compari-
son of hardware technology used by existing Building Energy
Management Systems. They also discuss how BEMS aim
to support users with monitoring their energy consumption,
providing real-time feedback to them, and allowing users to
automatically or manually control their energy consuming
devices. Of particular interest here is the role of feedback in
encouraging and supporting residential households in reducing
their energy consumption.
Although various studies have shown the importance of
feedback in reducing energy consumption [12], [13], [14],
[15], [16], there are not many systems to support domestic
users with managing and visualizing their energy consumption
details, and therefore, easily understandable and persuasive
feedback systems are likely to appeal to domestic users [11].
There are however a range of issues that feedback systems need
to take into account to make them successful, including those
resulting from theoretical frameworks that deﬁne consumer
behavior (e.g., goal-setting, feedback intervention, etc.) [17],
[18], [19].
Based on such theoretical frameworks, Fischer [15] empha-
sizes that feedback should: be based on accurate consumption
data, be provided frequently, involve interaction and choice
for households, involve appliance-speciﬁc breakdown (i.e.,
disaggregated), be given over a longer period, involve historical
or normative comparisons, be presented in an understandable
and appealing way. Similarly, based on their review of inter-
vention studies of residential energy conservation, Abrahamse
et al. [12] identify the importance of feedback as an effective
strategy for reducing energy consumption, particularly if it
is given frequently, is combined with goal-setting, allows
comparison, and is supported with rewards.
An important factor to take into account is the presentation
of feedback, which is crucial in motivating and altering users’
behavior to save energy [11]. In addition to conventional forms
of feedback (e.g., in textual format, printed records, etc.),
technology can be used to provide feedback in a number
of other forms, including graphical visualizations, ambient
devices, games and social media. These are brieﬂy reviewed
below (also see [20], [21], [22]).
A. Graphical Visualizations
Graphical (statistical) visualizations are widely used for
presentation of energy consumption data (for a review see
[23]). Vine et al. [24] present a summary of the studies, which
have investigated the visualization techniques that are used to
present users with information on their energy consumption.
They report that the most popular visualization techniques
include pie and bar charts. However, the preference for one
technique or the other seems to be both user- and context-
speciﬁc, with different visualization having different effects
on inﬂuencing users’ behavior [25].
B. Ambient Devices
Kim and colleagues [26] outline design requirements for
ambient devices to create effective persuasion. In a study
they identify ten stages from raising awareness to behavior
change and the maintenance of behavioral changes. Based on
their ﬁndings, they then propose several persuasion methods,
including subtle indicators for ambient tracking and visually
appealing rewards.
The Energy AWARE Clock [27] is an example of an ambient
device that visualizes current and past energy usage of a

521
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
household. The three design principles of complexity, visibility
and accessibility are used to reduce the complexity of con-
sumption data, make visible “hidden” or “not directly obvious”
electricity consuming devices, and have the consumption data
easily accessible. A three month user study of nine households
showed that the users developed a better awareness of their
energy use, and thought about changing their behavior to save
energy.
Other ambient devices have been developed to help users
save other resources such as water. Examples of these include
UpStream [28] and Shower Calendar [29]. Studies of these
systems have shown that they lead to reduction in water
consumption.
Ham and colleagues [30] conducted a study to see if
ambient technology has the capability of persuading people
subconsciously. In this study, the participants were asked to
rate the energy usage of three devices. The three groups of
participants either received supraliminal feedback (presentation
of a smiling or sad face for 150 ms), subliminal feedback
(presentation of a smiling or sad face for 25 ms) or no feedback
at all on their given answers. The feedback was given in the
form of smiley faces directly after rating the consumption of
a device. The results indicated that both groups with feedback
gave more correct answers on average than the group without
any feedback. Furthermore, the subliminal feedback group
gave comparable answers to the supraliminal feedback group,
and they also stated that they had not consciously seen any
feedback.
C. Games and Social Media
Several systems have been developed to encourage people
to conserve energy and increase their energy use awareness
through games and social media. The Power Explorer [31]
game tries to help teenagers save energy. This mobile phone
game takes into account the changes in energy consumption
at home by the players. There are different game elements:
habitat, pile and duels. The habitat shows the user’s avatar in
a virtual climate environment, in which energy usage causes
CO2 clouds to appear, which is bad for the avatar. In the pile
view, players can see how they are ranked compared to other
players, and in the duels players compete directly against each
other. The goal of the duels is to increase the energy awareness
about appliances, since players have to adjust their household
energy consumption to win. A study of Power Explorer showed
that a group of players consumed about 20% less energy than
a reference group of non-players.
Other research has focused on integration of home en-
ergy feedback into social networks. For instance, Mankoff
and colleagues [32] demonstrated integration of energy usage
feedback to the MySpace social network to motivate people
to conserve energy. Similarly, Foster and colleagues [33] have
developed a Facebook application, and have shown in a study
that energy consumption can be reduced through social encour-
agement and competition. Petkov and colleagues [34] expand
the idea of social comparison with their social application
EnergyWiz, in which users can compare their energy usage
with their own history and that of others.
Midden and Ham [35], on the other hand, performed a
laboratory-based experiment, in which participants could save
energy while using a simulated washing machine. This study
showed that social feedback provided by an embodied agent
was more effective than just factual feedback about the energy
savings made.
These types of social network related systems rely on
surveillance and self-monitoring techniques. However, they
generally only provide feedback at the household level and
not at the individual user’s level.
III.
UBIQUITOUS SMART ENERGY MANAGEMENT
Based on the ﬁndings of the reviewed studies, and various
recommendations made for designing effective feedback sys-
tems for supporting energy conservation in residential homes,
as discussed in the previous section, we have iteratively
designed and developed our Ubiquitous Smart Energy Man-
agement (USEM) system. The aim of this system has been
to support the monitoring of energy consumption data, and
utilizing this data to allow users to set realistic goals. USEM
then attempts to encourage users to achieve these goals by
providing them with accurate, real-time, and disaggregated
feedback. USEM also aims to provide manual, as well as
automatic, control of devices based on users’ choices, and to
allow them to intervene in operation of the system based on
the feedback they receive.
The design of USEM has followed a user-centred design
approach. This started by developing a set of personas, and
scenarios of use, which allowed us to then identify a set of
user requirements for USEM. We used the following personas
in our scenarios:
•
Frank is 38 years old. He works as a clerk in a local
car rental company. He has two children and is married
to Franny. Frank drives an electric car.
•
Franny is 35 years old. She used to be a receptionist,
but is not working currently so that she could take care
of her two children.
•
Max is a 12-year-old boy. He usually goes to school
from 8am to 1pm.
•
Fabienne is a 5-year-old girl. She usually goes to
kindergarten from 9am to 1pm.
Because of the two children, it is important for the family
to maintain a comfortable temperature level in the house while
the children are at home. They all get up at about the same
time and they all need warm water to shower. They have solar
panels installed on their roof, but they also rely on energy from
the local energy provider in case the panels cannot generate
enough energy for an autonomous power supply.
From several scenarios that we developed, we identiﬁed the
following requirements for USEM, which include a combi-
nation of automated and non-automated strategies for energy
usage management:
•
Controlling devices: The system must be capable of
controlling devices. For example, turning them on and
off, or changing their operating mode.
•
Continuously active tasks: USEM must support contin-
uously active tasks, such as maintaining a certain room

522
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
or water temperature, or recharging an electric car to a
certain level.
•
One-time tasks: One-time tasks run only once when
initiated by the user, and have a deﬁned end time. Such
tasks include, for examples, washing the laundry, or pre-
heating the oven.
•
Task scheduling: The system has to provide a mecha-
nism for intelligent scheduling and execution of one-time
and continuously active tasks based on speciﬁc criteria,
such as the time-of-use energy prices, energy availability,
etc.
•
Measuring consumption: In order to provide detailed
statistics on the energy use of the household, and manage
scheduling and execution of tasks, USEM must be able
to measure and monitor the energy consumption of all
the connected devices.
•
Conditional rules: The system must support the pos-
sibility of deﬁning conditional rules, for instance to
perform actions when certain conditions are met. An
example of such a rule is turning off the heating when
nobody is at home.
•
Remote control: To control devices remotely, USEM
has to provide a mobile interface to access various
functions of the system. This would allow users to
schedule tasks ahead of time, and then react to any
problems, which may occur when tasks are executed by
the system.
•
User deﬁned settings: USEM must provide mechanisms
for deﬁning user settings. For examples, keeping a
comfortable room temperature level, or saving as much
energy as possible.
A. Architecture of USEM
USEM has a modular system architecture [36], consisting
of three layers as shown in Figure 1.
•
The Ubiquitous Components Layer consists of all the
individual sensors, actuators and devices connected to
the system. Sensors are used to measure environmental
factors and energy consumption data, while the actuators
are used by the system to control the connected devices.
•
The USEM Middleware Layer combines the various
third-party systems connected to the Ubiquitous Compo-
nents layer, and exposes a uniﬁed platform-independent
interface to all the layers above it. It provides basic
functionality to control devices and retrieve energy con-
sumption data for speciﬁc appliances. Additionally, it
can also retrieve information from external sources (e.g.,
energy prices and weather forecasts).
•
The USEM Client Applications Layer contains all
external applications that communicate with the schedul-
ing component or directly with the USEM middleware.
Examples of such applications are provided below.
Figure 2 shows the UML component diagram of the internal
structure of the USEM middleware layer. As can be seen, the
middleware layer consists of ﬁve modules:
•
Hardware Interface Components: are used to com-
municate with, and control, physical, as well as virtual,
        USEM Client Applications
        Ubiquitous Components
        USEM Middleware
Mobile
Sensors
Actuators
Devices
Web
Figure 1: Architecture layers of USEM.
 
Hardware Interface Components
 
 
Measurement
Component
Actuator
Component
 
Scheduling Component
 
Sensor
Component
Simulator
Component
 
 
 
 
 
 
Software Interface Components
 
Event Manager Component
 
JSON-RPC
 
REST
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Persistency Components
 
 
History
Component
Database
Component
Figure 2: Structure of the middleware components of USEM.
parts of the system connected to the Ubiquitous Com-
ponents layer. There are four types of such components:
energy use measurement devices, actuators, sensors, and
simulators.
•
Software Interface Components: are used by client
applications to access the functionality of USEM. We
provide two such interfaces. JSON-RPC API [37] can
be used to establish a two-way socket connection with
the USEM middleware when socket connections are sup-
ported. Alternatively, the RESTful API [38] can be used
for HTTP communication with the USEM middleware.
•
Persistency Components: include a history manager,
which periodically stores energy consumption data for
each device, as well as its operating mode, who has used
it, and where it is located in the building. USEM also
keeps a database of its devices and hardware components
(e.g., which device is plugged into which socket). To
better deal with the large amount of data generated,

523
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
USEM uses the object-relational mapping framework
EclipseLink, which stores the data in a local MySQL
database. EclipseLink is an implementation of the Java
Persistence API [39] that allows to easily map Java
objects to relational database tables.
•
Event Manager Component: deals with the large num-
ber of events generated by different parts of the system.
Events are generated, for instance, when the current
energy consumption of an appliance changes, when a
sensor measures a change in the environment, or when a
user manually switches a device on or off, etc. There are
also many components that are potentially interested in
such events. The history component, for example, must
be notiﬁed about every change in the consumption value
of a device in order to keep track of its consumption
history. To deal with all this complexity, we implemented
an event handling system based on the observer design
pattern [40]. This allows every component interested
in receiving a certain event to register for it with the
central event manager. Whenever an event occurs, the
event manager is notiﬁed, so that it can then forward the
event and its attached information to any components
registered for it. In addition to the original observer
design pattern, we not only provide the possibility to
register for a single event but also for a whole group of
events. For example, a component might be interested in
changes that occur in all devices in the living room. With
our approach it is possible to register for all devices in
the living room at once.
•
Scheduling Component: is responsible for managing
the schedule of all the tasks users have created in
USEM. It always tries to ﬁnd the optimal task execution
order. The scheduling component has been implemented
using JBoss Drools [41], which allows the creation of
rules, as well as workﬂows and event-processing. USEM
uses the JBoss Drools Expert framework to manage
the execution of all its rules. The task scheduling and
optimization is done by using the JBoss Drools Planner
component. Rules and tasks are directly converted into
the Drools Rule Language (DRL) format, readable by
these components. The scheduler receives commands
directly from client applications to create new tasks and
to change the calculation parameters. When a scheduled
task is due, the scheduling component interacts with
the associated appliance through the hardware interface
components to set the appropriate operating mode. The
scheduler also manages continuously running devices
like air-conditioning or water-heating and adheres to the
user-deﬁned levels for these devices.
B. The underlying technology
As mentioned earlier, USEM relies on various sensors and
actuators connected to its ubiquitous components layer, to
manage all the household devices its users would like to
control. To do this, we utilize a combination two existing
technologies: HomeMatic [5] and Current Cost [2], which are
described below.
•
HomeMatic: is a home automation system designed
to control off-the-shelf home appliances and devices. It
consists of a central base station (Figure 3, left), which
wirelessly communicates with and controls all its power
socket adapters (Figure 3, right), to which individual
home appliances are connected. The base station also
wirelessly communicates with all its sensors. There are
different kinds of sensors available: temperature sen-
sors, motion detectors, light sensors, door and window
sensors, etc. For controlling off-the-shelf devices, the
appliance must be plugged into a HomeMatic adapter
socket. There are simple on/off as well as dimmable
sockets. Obviously, the limitation of simply cutting the
power supply of devices is only suitable for simple
devices like lamps, and is insufﬁcient for more complex
devices like a washing machine. Such devices must be
controlled with a more advanced solution that provides
the capability to set different operating modes. The
HomeMatic central base station can be controlled either
manually using a complex web-based user interface, or
automatically through an XML-RPC API [42]. USEM
uses this API to communicate with HomeMatic.
•
Current Cost: was originally designed to monitor and
record energy consumption data for an entire household.
It can however also be used to monitor individual
devices, by attaching a Current Cost jaw device around
the power cord of each device (Figure 4, right). The
consumption data can then be transmitted wirelessly
by each jaw to a Current Cost base station (Figure 4,
left). More recently Current Cost has launched a new
product (called Individual Appliance Monitor) designed
to measure the consumption of individual appliances,
which looks similar to a HomeMatic adapter socket.
Using either of these tools, energy consumption by each
appliance can be measured every six seconds, and stored
on the base station. The energy consumption history can
be viewed on the display of the base station, or retrieved
automatically using a serial data connection via USB.
USEM uses this mechanism to access energy use data
by devices connected to its ubiquitous components layer.
IV.
DESIGN OF THE CLIENT APPLICATIONS OF USEM
Based on the requirements speciﬁed in the previous section
we identiﬁed a range of functionality to be supported by
USEM. To make people aware of their energy usage, USEM
would provide detailed statistics about the household’s past
energy consumption. For example, the overall consumption
could be displayed for individual rooms, devices, or occupants
of the house. These statistics would allow the users to analyse
their consumption history and, thus, identify saving potentials.
In some cases USEM might also be able to suggest actions
that would lead to a decrease of energy consumption. Fur-
thermore, USEM would support the user in putting theoretical
energy saving ideas into practice. For instance, the user could
schedule appliances to run when varying energy rates are the
cheapest, or USEM could switch off devices when they are
not needed (e.g., turning off the printer whenever the PC

524
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 3: HomeMatic base station (left) and socket adaptor
for power outlets (right).
Figure 4: Current Cost base station (left) and jaw connected
to a power-board (right).
is switched off). By providing an intelligent scheduling for
energy consuming tasks USEM would also able to use energy
when it is available from off-grid sources (e.g., when the solar
panels are generating electricity). Using a combination of these
techniques USEM would attempt to ensure that energy usage
peaks are avoided, maximum renewable energy is used when
available, and overall power usage reduced in an intelligent
manner without necessarily reducing comfort levels.
To interact with USEM we designed three different user
interfaces: 1) a web interface for performing more complex
tasks such as managing manual and automatic task scheduling,
2) a tablet interface to act as a control unit that could be used
from around the house, and 3) a mobile phone interface that
could be used to interact with USEM while on the go.
For each of these interfaces we identiﬁed speciﬁc function-
alities that they would support. These were then used to design
paper prototypes for the three interfaces.
We conducted an expert review of the paper prototypes with
four experts, to evaluate the proposed interface designs and
functions of USEM. This evaluation resulted in a number of
suggestions for improvements, which were used to modify the
subsequent versions of the designs used for development of a
working prototype.
V.
USEM PROTOTYPE SYSTEM
We have developed a functional prototype system based
on the modular architecture described earlier. Due to the
limitations of currently available home appliances, however,
it has been necessary to manually modify some aspects of the
interaction between USEM with such appliances. For instance,
most existing washing machines cannot be automatically pro-
grammed to perform various types of wash cycles, so at this
stage we can only turn them on/off, once the user has manually
chosen their desired wash cycle. Similarly devices cannot be
automatically recognized when connected to USEM, so we
print and attach our own barcodes to devices and use these to
identify individual devices.
As part of our prototype system, we have also developed
three client applications based on the designs discussed in the
previous section. These applications allow individual users to
login to USEM, not only to interact with the underlying sys-
tem, but also to allow USEM to monitor energy consumption
by individual users, and to provide user-speciﬁc controls and
information to individual users. Here we present an overview
of each of these client applications and their functionalities.
A. Web interface
As mentioned, the web interface of USEM provides higher-
level access to the functionality of the system. It allows conﬁg-
uration, scheduling, and visualization of relevant information.
Figure 5 shows an example screen of the web interface used for
creation of a new task, which will be scheduled and executed
automatically by the system. The web interface, along with
the more intelligent components of USEM required for the
automated energy consumption management strategies (e.g.,
task scheduling, etc.) have been described more fully elsewhere
[43] and will not be discussed further here.
B. Tablet interface
The tablet interface acts as a control and access unit for
USEM. Although the current application has been developed
for an Apple iPad, it is envisaged that it could also in the future
be installed in ﬂat-panel displays incorporated into furniture,
picture frames or walls to act as an ambient device interface.
Figure 6 shows the home screen of the tablet interface,
which is visible when the device is not being controlled
by a user. This allows users to have a constant view of
the most important information about their household, which
encourages them to monitor their energy use. The home screen
is customizable with several widgets to display information
such as a list of currently running devices, up-to-date energy
prices when available, etc. This screen also shows the energy
usage target set by the user, and the current usage level, to
motivate the user to keep their usage below their set target. If
the target is being threatened, for instance when the user turns

525
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 5: Web interface of USEM, showing a new task being
created.
Figure 6: Home screen of the tablet interface of USEM.
on a device, they get a warning from the system giving them
the option of turning off another device, which is not being
used (if any) or not going ahead with their scheduled activity.
This interface also allows users to view their energy con-
sumption information over the past year, month, or day. Figure
7 illustrates one of the energy usage visualizations. This
information can be viewed in several different chart formats,
and in various categories, such as for the entire house, different
rooms, all users, different users, all devices, different category
of devices, etc. This is another important element of the user
interface in terms of encouraging energy usage awareness.
In addition, the tablet interface gives energy saving recom-
mendations, based on past and current energy consumption
data, to help users reduce their energy use. Figure 8 presents an
example energy saving tips screen. On this screen the system
Figure 7: Usage information screen of the tablet interface
showing a pie chart.
Figure 8: Energy saving recommendations and their
consequences if applied.
suggests actions that would decrease the household’s energy
consumption, as well as calculating the savings that could be
made if the advice is followed.
C. Mobile phone interface
The mobile phone interface, developed for Apple iPhone,
can be used to retrieve the status of home appliances or to
interact with them remotely. It also notiﬁes the user about
energy usage events that occur while the user is away (e.g.,
a scheduled task cannot be undertaken because there is not
enough renewable energy available). In such cases, the mobile
phone interface provides suggestions (Figure 9) about how the
problem could be resolved and gives the user the opportunity
to decide what to do (e.g., cancel a scheduled task, or turn off
another device).
Of course, the mobile phone interface can also be useful
while the user is at home. For instance, it can be used

526
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 9: Event notiﬁcation screen of the mobile phone
interface.
Figure 10: USEM devices (left) and new device set-up (right)
screens of the mobile phone interface.
to remotely access any of the devices connected to USEM
(Figure 10, left). Users can also directly interact with home
appliances by scanning the unique barcode that is attached to
each device when they are added to USEM. For example, this
allows creating a new task for the washing machine right after
the user has put the laundry into the machine. The mobile
phone application also simpliﬁes the initial set-up procedure
for new devices, by mapping the barcode tags attached to
power sockets with those of devices connected to them through
a simple scanning process (Figure 10, right).
VI.
USER STUDY OF USEM
We conducted a user study to evaluate the usefulness of
USEM and gauge if people would actually use a system like
USEM to save energy if they had access to it. In the following
sections, we describe this study and discuss some of its main
ﬁndings.
Figure 11: The set-up used for the user evaluation.
A. Methodology
The study was conducted at a usability lab, where the
participants performed a series of tasks using the web, tablet,
and mobile phone interfaces. To do the tasks the participants
were provided with a laptop, an iPad, an iPhone, and model
of a dryer and a computer as two home appliances (each with
a barcode attached), as shown in Figure 11. We also attached
a barcode to a power socket to make it recognizable by the
mobile phone interface of USEM.
Each session started with a tutorial, which included some
sample tasks similar to the actual tasks that the participants
would perform after the tutorial. Participants were allowed to
spend as much time as they needed to complete the tutorial.
The actual study session took about an hour in total, and was
divided into three parts covering the use of the three interfaces
of USEM. The sessions started with the web interface, as this
was the most general part of the system and gave the user
a comprehensive overview of USEM (for details of this part
of the study and its ﬁndings see [43]). This was followed by
tasks that users performed using the mobile phone and tablet
interfaces.
At the end of each task the participants answered several
questions related to the task and the tool they had just used.
At the end of the session the participants completed a ﬁnal
questionnaire covering some questions about the users’ overall
impression of USEM.
B. Study Participants
Twenty participants took part in this study. They were
between 20 and 62 years old, with an average age of 35.
Five of them were female and 15 male; 11 were students,
two researchers, two managers, two ofﬁce administrators and
a housewife. Thirteen of the participants (65%) had previous
experience using a multi-touch screen; 11 (55%) owned a
smart phone and 4 (20%) owned a tablet device. All of the
participants used a computer daily, none had any previous

527
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE I: Demographic of the study participants.
No. of Participants
Percentage
Gender
Male
15
75.00 %
Female
5
25.00 %
Occupation
Student
11
55.00 %
Researcher
2
10.00 %
Other
7
35.00 %
Experience
Multi-touch screen
13
65.00 %
Daily PC usage
20
100.00 %
Own device
Smart phone
11
55.00 %
Tablet
4
20.00 %
knowledge of USEM or experience with any other energy man-
agement system. Table I shows a summary of the participants’
demographic data.
C. Study Tasks
As mentioned earlier, the study participants had to perform
speciﬁc tasks using each of the different client applications
of USEM. We asked the participants to perform the following
tasks using the mobile phone interface on the iPhone given to
them.
1)
m1: adding a new home appliance to USEM. In this
task the participants were asked to connect a computer
given to them to USEM, by physically plugging it into
the appropriate power socket, and naming it as “Private
PC”.
2)
m2: controlling a home appliance remotely. In this task
the participants had to turn off the television remotely.
3)
m3: creating a new scheduled task to let USEM execute
it at a later time. In this task the participants had to
create a new task for a given dryer (see Figure 11)
by scanning its barcode, and then scheduling the task
to be completed by 8am the next morning using the
“Delicate” dryer setting.
4)
m4: sending users a demo notiﬁcation and asking them
to react accordingly. For this task the participants were
sent a message (to the iPhone they were using) telling
them that there was not enough energy available to
perform a dryer task they had previously set up. To
resolve this problem they were asked to turn off a
device they did not need at that moment (in this case the
computer) to make enough energy available for drying
the clothes.
The participants then performed the following tasks using
the tablet interface on the iPad given to them.
1)
t1: controlling a home appliance remotely. In this task
the participants had to turn on the television. USEM
warned the users that they might not achieve their
weekly saving goal because some other devices were
already turned on. USEM recommended turning off
other devices, which the participants then had to do
in order to successfully complete the task.
2)
t2: exploring energy consumption statistics using a bar
chart visualization. In this task the participants were
Figure 12: Usage information screen of the tablet interface
showing a slopegraph.
asked to use the bar chart to identify the week, in which
the household had consumed the highest amount of
energy. They also had to specify the amount of energy
used during that week.
3)
t3: exploring energy consumption statistics using a pie
chart visualization. This task required the participants
to use the pie chart to identify the device category that
accounted for the most energy usage during week 4.
They also had to specify the amount of energy used by
that category.
4)
t4: exploring energy consumption statistics using a
slopegraph visualization. In this task the participants
had to ﬁnd out which device category had the largest in-
crease in energy consumption during week 4 compared
to the week before. They also had to specify the amount
of this increase. To complete this task, the participants
were asked to use the slopegraph. Figure 12 shows an
example of type of slopegraph [44], [45] used in this
study.
D. Task Questionnaires
As mentioned earlier, after the completion of each task
the participants were asked to answer a questionnaire. Two
questions were common to all the task questionnaires. These
were:
1)
How easy was it to perform this task?
2)
How useful would it be to have this functionality?
The participants answered these questions using a Likert
scale of 1-7, with 1 being the least positive and 7 the most
positive.
E. Final Questionnaire
Once the participants had completed all the study tasks, they
were asked to complete a ﬁnal questionnaire, which aimed to
measure their overall subjective impression of USEM. Table II
lists the questions of this questionnaire, along with the 7-point

528
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE II: Questions of the ﬁnal questionnaire.
No.
Question
Rating
Q1
How easy were the visualizations on the iPad interface to understand?
1: very difﬁcult
7: very easy
Q2
How likely do you think it would be that you would decrease your energy consumption with the help of the
visualizations on the iPad?
1: very unlikely
7: very likely
Q3
Would you want visualizations like on the iPad to be a permanent part of your home?
1: deﬁnitely not
7: absolutely
Q4
How easy would it be for you to adapt using USEM for tasks where you do not have to change your daily routine
very much? (e.g., create tasks for doing the laundry, instead of just switching the washing machine on manually?)
1: very difﬁcult
7: very easy
Q5
Would you adapt your daily routine in order to use more renewable energy? (e.g., start cooking dinner an hour later?)
1: very unlikely
7: very likely
Q6
How often would you control a device directly or retrieve information about it using the bar code scanner on
your mobile phone?
1: very rarely
7: very often
Q7
How often would you use your mobile phone to control your appliances remotely while you are away from home?
1: very rarely
7: very often
Q8
How often would you like to be notiﬁed on your mobile phone about what is going on in your household in terms
of energy consumption?
1: very rarely
7: very often
Q9
How useful do you ﬁnd the overall system with regard to efﬁcient energy usage?
1: not useful
7: very useful
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Task m1
Task m2
Task m3
Task m4
Ease of use
Usefulness
Figure 13: The average ratings given by the participants for
the tasks performed using the mobile phone interface.
Note: error bars show the standard deviations.
Likert scales used for each question. The ﬁnal questionnaire
also asked the participants to provide any additional comments
or ideas the might have had about USEM.
F. Study Results
1) Results for the mobile phone interface: Figure 13 pro-
vides a summary of the average ratings given by the study
participants for each of the two questionnaire questions for
each of the four tasks performed using the mobile phone
interface. As the results show, the participants generally found
the tasks easy to perform, and the functionality provided by
the interface useful.
Task m3 was considered as being more challenging than the
other tasks. However, the functionality needed to perform this
task was still rated as being useful. It is also important to note
that this task was the most abstract task, which relied on the
intelligent scheduling components of USEM.
The ratings given to the difﬁculty of the tasks is further
supported by the number of people who completed each of
the tasks successfully. As can be seen in Figure 14, everyone
completed tasks m2 and m4 successfully, while 18 people
completed Task m1, and 17 people completed Task m3 (this
being the most difﬁcult task). Overall the results are very good,
considering the fact that the study participants had never used
an energy management system previously.
0
4
8
12
16
20
Task m1
Task m2
Task m3
Task m4
Figure 14: Number of successful completions for the tasks
performed using the mobile phone interface.
2) Results for the tablet interface: Figure 15 shows a
summary of the average ratings given by the study participants
for each of the two questionnaire questions for each of the four
tasks performed using the tablet interface. Since the difﬁculty
of the tasks steadily increased, the ease-of-use rating for the
tasks decreased slightly from Task t1 to Task t4.
However, in general all tasks have been rated as easy to
perform with average ratings ranging from 6.30 to 6.75. The
ratings given to the usefulness of the functionality provided by
the tablet interface for performing each of the tasks showed
a trend similar to that observed for the difﬁculty of the tasks.
Once again, overall the participants found the functionality
provided very useful.
In terms of the task completion, all the study participants
completed all the tasks successfully (see the bars for Part 1
in Figure 16). However, three of the tasks (t2, t3, t4) also had
a second part, which asked the participants to report an exact
value (in kWh) for energy consumption using one of the three
visualizations provided (bar chart, pie chart, slopegraph). As
can be seen in Figure 16 (bars for Part 2), all the visualizations
were less than perfect in terms of allowing the users to identify
the correct energy consumption value, with the pie chart (Task
t3) being the worst in accuracy.
3) Results of the ﬁnal questionnaire: Figure 17 shows the
average ratings given by the study participants to each of
the questions of the ﬁnal questionnaire. The results show that
the participants had a generally positive view of the various

529
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Task t1
Task t2
Task t3
Task t4
Ease of use
Usefulness
Figure 15: The average ratings given by the participants for
the tasks performed using the tablet interface.
Note: error bars show the standard deviations.
0
4
8
12
16
20
Task t1
Task t2
Task t3
Task t4
Part 1
Part 2
Figure 16: Number of successful completions for the tasks
performed using the tablet interface.
Note: Task t1 had only one part.
components of USEM, its client interfaces, and its likely
effect in their potential behaviour changes. In particular the
participants found the visualizations of the tablet interface easy
to use (Question 1), thought these would help them decrease
their energy consumption (Question 2), and would like to have
them in their homes (Question 3). Although still very positive,
the participants were however less committed to using the
mobile phone interface to remotely interact with their devices
while away from home (Question 7), or receive information
about their energy consumption (Question 8). Perhaps the most
important ﬁnding we can conclude from the ﬁnal questionnaire
is that the participants thought that USEM would be useful in
helping them use energy more efﬁciently (Question 9). It is
also important to note that the participants thought they would
use USEM to change their daily routines (Question 4) and
adapt them in order to use more renewable energy (Question
5).
As mentioned earlier, the ﬁnal questionnaire also invited
the study participants to provide any comments and ideas they
might have had about USEM. The following is a summary
of some of the main points made by the participants in their
comments.
•
Many of the participants stated that they would like
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5
Q6
Q7
Q8
Q9
Figure 17: The average ratings given by the participants for
the questions of the ﬁnal questionnaire.
Note: error bars show the standard deviations.
to be able to determine what events they should be
notiﬁed about. They feared that they would get annoyed
or distracted by notiﬁcations if they did not have some
control over the notiﬁcations sent to their mobile phone.
•
Most of the participants especially liked the possibility
of controlling all the appliances using a single interface,
rather than using a variety of different user interfaces
for controlling different home appliances.
•
The participants conﬁrmed that they do not know
how much energy each of their appliances uses. They
rate their energy usage awareness as relatively low.
They liked the energy usage visualizations provided by
USEM, and thought that these would assist them to
better understand the power usage of their appliances.
•
Several participants stated that they do not have a good
understanding of the kWh measurement unit. Instead
they would prefer some kind of visualization, which is
easier to understand and does not require any techni-
cal knowledge. They also suggested to display dollar
amounts, and setting the saving goal in dollars as well.
•
One participant commented that he would like rec-
ommendations for a saving goal. In this participant’s
opinion, it is difﬁcult to set a saving goal, since it might
be hard to determine a realistic energy consumption
limit. So, the system could provide a recommendation
for a feasible saving goal based on previous usage data.
Further to these comments, which are directly related to the
functionalities and client application interfaces of USEM, one
of the participants raised the issue of security concerns over
unauthorised people accessing and controlling their household
appliances. Although USEM has not at this stage dealt with
the issue of security, in other related research [46] we are
investigating security of systems such as USEM.
VII.
PERSUASIVE ASPECTS OF USEM
It is important to note that tools and technologies, such
as USEM, which aim to assist people with changing their
behavior need to be “persuasive” in their approach. The idea
of computers as persuasive technology, or “captology”, was
introduced by Fogg [47] to deal with the question of how

530
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Functional
Roles
Tool
capabilities
• Target behavior easier to achieve
• Process leading people
• Motivating calculations/measurements
Medium
experiences
• Cause-and-effect relationships
• Motivating experiences
• Rehearsing of behaviors
Social Actor
relationships
• Rewards through positive feeback
• Deﬁne target behavior
• Social support
Figure 18: The roles computer technology can play in
persuasive context, as deﬁned by Fogg [48].
interactive computer technology could be used to persuade
people to change their behavior or attitude. The functional
triad, as deﬁned by Fogg [48], is a framework that illustrates
three roles computers can play in a persuasive context (Figure
18). These roles are categorized as tool, medium and social
actor.
In the context of the work presented in this paper, we
are mainly concerned with computers as persuasive tools.
Tools increase capabilities by making the desired behavior
easier to achieve, by guiding people through processes, or by
calculations and measurements that motivate people to reach
their goals. There are seven different categories of persuasive
technology tools [48], which can be combined together in a
single system or application.
1)
Reduction: People can be persuaded by reducing com-
plexity. A good example of a reduction is the one-
click buy functionality provided by Amazon [49], which
reduces the ordering process to a simple button click.
2)
Tunneling: This is the process of leading a user step-
by-step through a speciﬁc procedure. An example of
tunneling is the ordering process of online shopping
sites. Such a guided process can provide opportunities
for persuasion along the way. For instance, an online
shopping site can suggest other items of interest to the
buyer during the ordering process.
3)
Tailoring: This approach persuades through custo-
mization, by providing only the type of information
which is relevant and interesting to the user. An ex-
ample of this is customized newsletters sent to users
offering them products that match their buying proﬁles.
4)
Suggestion: This means providing suggestions at the
right moment. An example of this is advertisements
along a highway, that for instance place an advert for a
restaurant near its physical location and not miles away.
5)
Self-Monitoring: People like to control themselves and
check whether they have reached a predetermined goal.
An example of this is a heart rate monitor that can be
used to monitor the heart rate during exercise.
6)
Surveillance: People tend to change their behavior
when they know that they are being observed. An
example of this is messages like “How am I driving?”
at the back of some delivery trucks, to ensure that
the drivers know people can complain about their bad
driving, so they drive more carefully.
7)
Conditioning: Giving positive, or negative, reinforce-
ment can have a persuasive effect. An example of
positive reinforcement is being on the high scorers list
in a computer game, which can persuade people to play
the game longer to improve their placement on the list.
To measure the success of a system as a persuasive tech-
nology clearly requires a long-term study of the use of the
system in real-life settings to see if it indeed assists its users
with changing their behavior. Although we are yet to conduct
such a study of USEM, we have attempted to analyze the ways,
in which USEM might be able to play the role of persuasive
technology listed above. Below, we provide a summary of this
analysis.
1)
Reduction: USEM reduces the complexity of the large
volume of energy usage data, collected for many de-
vices over an extended period, by categorizing it, and
allowing the user to view it in a variety of forms.
2)
Tunneling: USEM provides step-by-step guidance for
dealing with the process of adding new appliances to
the system, dealing with notiﬁcations, managing energy
saving targets when they are breached, etc.
3)
Tailoring: Energy usage information provided is tai-
lored to individual users (i.e., their personal data),
energy saving recommendations provided are tailored to
each speciﬁc USEM installation and are always relevant
to the context.
4)
Suggestion: When USEM warns users about missing
their targeted saving goals, it suggests what actions
could be taken, for instance by giving a list of devices
that could be turned off. Also, when USEM sends
notiﬁcations to the mobile phone interface when sched-
uled tasks cannot be undertaken, it provides a list of
suggestions that the user can select from.
5)
Self-Monitoring: By measuring energy usage of each
individual (when possible), USEM allows them to
monitor their own current performance against targeted
saving goals, as well as allowing them to monitor their
past usage history in various statistical visualization
forms.
6)
Surveillance: Due to the ﬁne granularity of energy
usage data that USEM collects, the user knows (even
when living in a house with others) that their consump-
tion behavior is recorded and can be tracked by others
when allowed.
7)
Conditioning: By allowing users to compare their own
energy usage behavior to others, as well as their set
targets, USEM provides users with positive or negative
reinforcements depending on their performance.
VIII.
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have discussed the design and development
of USEM, a system that aims to support the inhabitants
of residential homes with the process of monitoring their
energy usage, and making energy savings possible without
necessarily reducing their comfort levels. USEM allows its
users to connect and control their home appliances, as well
as analyze and understand energy consumption information by

531
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
those appliances using a range of scheduling, notiﬁcation, and
visualization tools.
Our laboratory-based user evaluation of USEM has shown
the potential beneﬁts of its client applications, designed for
web-browsers, mobile phones, and tablet devices, in providing
the necessary means of assisting people with saving energy, as
well as encouraging them to monitor and change their energy
use behavior.
We have brieﬂy analyzed the capabilities of USEM as a
persuasive technology, by examining some the features of its
mobile interface components against existing guidelines for
the design of persuasive technology. Although this analysis
shows that USEM satisﬁes these guidelines, it is important
to conduct a more formal real-life user evaluation of the
persuasive capabilities of USEM.
Our study has also identiﬁed a range of improvements that
could be made to USEM, particularly in improving the type
of visualizations it provides to allow the users to effectively
access, analyze and compare their energy consumption data.
This is an area of interest, which we are investigating further
[23].
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The user study presented in this paper was approved by
the Ethics Committee of the Faculty of Computing and Math-
ematical Sciences, The University of Waikato. We would
like to gratefully acknowledge the contributions of our study
participants.
This research has been supported by the IT4SE project,
funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and
Research (Grant number NZL 10/803 IT4SE) under the APRA
initiative. More information about the IT4SE project can be
found at http://www.it4se.net.
REFERENCES
[1]
F. Reinhart, K. Schlieper, M. Kugler, E. Andr´e, M. Masoodian, and
B. Rogers, “Fostering energy awareness in residential homes using
mobile devices.” in Proceedings of the 4th International Conference
on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-aware Tech-
nologies, ser. ENERGY 2014.
IARIA, 2014, pp. 35–43.
[2]
Current Cost Ltd., “Current Cost,” http://www.currentcost.com, [re-
trieved: December, 2014].
[3]
Energy
Inc.,
“The
Energy
Detective
(TED),”
http://www.
theenergydetective.com, [retrieved: December, 2014].
[4]
DIY Kyoto, “Wattson,” http://www.diykyoto.com, [retrieved: December,
2014].
[5]
eQ-3 AG, “HomeMatic,” http://www.homematic.com, [retrieved: De-
cember, 2014].
[6]
Gira Giersiepen GmbH, “Gira,” http://www.gira.de, [retrieved: Decem-
ber, 2014].
[7]
Intellihome
Automatisierungstechnik
GmbH,
“Intellihome,”
http://
www.intellihome.com, [retrieved: December, 2014].
[8]
Sigma Designs Inc., “Z-Wave,” http://www.z-wave.com/, [retrieved:
December, 2014].
[9]
Apple
Inc.,
“HomeKit,”
https://developer.apple.com/homekit/,
[re-
trieved: December, 2014].
[10]
DIY Kyoto, “Optiplug,” http://www.diykyoto.com/uk/aboutus/optiplug,
[retrieved: December, 2014].
[11]
A. H. Kazmi, M. J. O’grady, D. T. Delaney, A. G. Ruzzelli,
and G. M. P. O’hare, “A review of wireless-sensor-network-enabled
building energy management systems,” ACM Transactions on Sensor
Networks, vol. 10, no. 4, 2014, pp. 66:1–66:43. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2532644
[12]
W. Abrahamse, L. Steg, C. Vlek, and T. Rothengatter, “A review
of intervention studies aimed at household energy conservation,”
Journal of Environmental Psychology, vol. 25, no. 3, 2005, pp.
273–291. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S027249440500054X
[13]
——,
“The
effect
of
tailored
information,
goal
setting,
and
tailored feedback on household energy use, energy-related behaviors,
and behavioral antecedents,” Journal of Environmental Psychology,
vol.
27,
no.
4,
2007,
pp.
265–276.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0272494407000540
[14]
S. Darby, “The effectiveness of feedback on energy consumption:
a review for DEFRA of the literature on metering, billing and
direct displays.” Environmental Change Institute, University of Oxford,
Tech. Rep., 2006. [Online]. Available: http://www.eci.ox.ac.uk/research/
energy/electric-metering.php
[15]
C. Fischer, “Feedback on household electricity consumption: a tool for
saving energy?” Energy Efﬁciency, vol. 1, no. 1, 2008, pp. 79–104.
[Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s12053-008-9009-7
[16]
G. Fitzpatrick and G. Smith, “Technology-enabled feedback on
domestic energy consumption: Articulating a set of design concerns,”
IEEE Pervasive Computing, vol. 8, no. 1, 2009, pp. 37–44. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MPRV.2009.17
[17]
L. McCalley and C. J. Midden, “Energy conservation through
product-integrated feedback: The roles of goal-setting and social
orientation,” Journal of Economic Psychology, vol. 23, no. 5, 2002, pp.
589–603. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0167487002001198
[18]
L. McCalley, “From motivation and cognition theories to everyday
applications and back again: the case of product-integrated information
and feedback,” Energy Policy, vol. 34, no. 2, 2006, pp. 129–137,
reshaping Markets for the Beneﬁt of Energy Saving Reshaping
Markets for the Beneﬁt of Energy Saving. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S030142150400268X
[19]
S.
Darby,
“Literature
review
for
the
energy
demand
research
project,”
Environmental
Change
Institute,
University
of
Oxford,
Tech. Rep., 2010. [Online]. Available: https://www.ofgem.gov.uk/
ofgem-publications/59113/sd-ofgem-literature-review-ﬁnal-081210.pdf
[20]
T. G. Holmes, “Eco-visualization: Combining art and technology to
reduce energy consumption,” in Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCHI
Conference on Creativity &Amp; Cognition, ser. C&C ’07.
New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2007, pp. 153–162. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1254960.1254982
[21]
J. Froehlich, L. Findlater, and J. Landay, “The design of eco-
feedback technology,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ser. CHI ’10.
New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2010, pp. 1999–2008. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1753326.1753629
[22]
J. Suppers and M. Apperley, “Developing useful visualizations of
domestic energy usage.” in Proceedings of the 7th International Sympo-
sium on Visual Information Communication and Interaction, ser. VINCI
2014.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2014, pp. 139–148.
[23]
M. Masoodian, B. Endrass, R. B¨uhling, P. Ermolin, and E. Andr´e,
“Time-pie visualization: Providing contextual information for energy
consumption data,” in Proceedings of the 17th International Conference
on Information Visualisation, ser. IV ’13.
IEEE Computer Society,
2013, pp. 102–107.
[24]
D. Vine, L. Buys, and P. Morris, “The effectiveness of energy feedback
for conservation and peak demand : a literature review,” Open Journal
of Energy Efﬁciency, vol. 2, no. 1, 2013, pp. 7–15. [Online]. Available:
http://eprints.qut.edu.au/58017/

532
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[25]
G. Wood and M. Newborough, “Energy-use information transfer for
intelligent homes: Enabling energy conservation with central and
local displays,” Energy and Buildings, vol. 39, no. 4, 2007, pp.
495–503. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0378778806002271
[26]
T. Kim, H. Hong, and B. Magerko, “Design requirements for ambient
display that supports sustainable lifestyle,” in Proceedings of the 8th
ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems, ser. DIS ’10,
December 2010, pp. 103–112.
[27]
L. Broms et al., “Coffee maker patterns and the design of energy
feedback artefacts,” in Proceedings of the 8th ACM Conference on
Designing Interactive Systems, ser. DIS ’10, December 2010, pp. 93–
102.
[28]
S. Kuznetsov and E. Paulos, “UpStream: Motivating water conservation
with low-cost water ﬂow sensing and persuasive displays,” in Proceed-
ings of the 28th international conference on Human factors in computing
systems, ser. CHI ’10, April 2010, pp. 1851–1860.
[29]
M. Laschke, M. Hassenzahl, S. Diefenbach, and M. Tippk¨amper, “With
a little help from a friend: A shower calendar to save water,” in CHI
’11 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ser.
CHI EA ’11, May 2011, pp. 633–646.
[30]
J. Ham, C. Midden, and F. Beute, “Can ambient persuasive technology
persuade unconsciously? Using subliminal feedback to inﬂuence energy
consumption ratings of household appliances,” in Proceedings of the 4th
International Conference on Persuasive Technology, ser. Persuasive ’09,
April 2009, pp. 29:1–29:6.
[31]
A. Gustafsson, M. B˚ang, and M. Svahn, “Power explorer: A casual game
style for encouraging long term behavior change among teenagers,” in
Proceedings of the International Conference on Advances in Computer
Enterntainment Technology, ser. ACE ’09, October 2009, pp. 182–189.
[32]
J. Mankoff, D. Matthews, S. R. Fussell, and M. Johnson, “Leveraging
social networks to motivate individuals to reduce their ecological
footprints,” in Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Conference
on System Sciences, ser. HICSS 2007, January 2007, pp. 87–96.
[33]
D. Foster, S. Lawson, M. Blythe, and P. Cairns, “Wattsup?: Motivating
reductions in domestic energy consumption using social networks,”
in Proceedings of the 6th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer
Interaction: Extending Boundaries, ser. NordiCHI ’10, October 2010,
pp. 178–187.
[34]
P. Petkov, F. K¨obler, M. Foth, and H. Krcmar, “Motivating domestic
energy conservation through comparative, community-based feedback
in mobile and social media,” in Proceedings of the 5th International
Conference on Communities and Technologies, ser. C&T ’11, June
2011, pp. 21–30.
[35]
C. Midden and J. Ham, “The persuasive effects of positive and nega-
tive social feedback from an embodied agent on energy conservation
behavior,” in Proceedings of the AISB 2008 Symposium on Persuasive
Technology, ser. AISB 2008, vol. 3, April 2008, pp. 9–13.
[36]
M. Kugler, F. Reinhart, K. Schlieper, M. Masoodian, B. Rogers,
E. Andr´e, and T. Rist, “Architecture of a ubiquitous smart energy
management system for residential homes,” in Proceedings of the 12th
Annual Conference of the New Zealand Chapter of the ACM Special
Interest Group on Computer-Human Interaction. New York, NY, USA:
ACM, 2011, pp. 101–104.
[37]
JSON-RPC Working Group, “JSON-RPC 2.0 Speciﬁcation,” http://
www.jsonrpc.org/spec.html, [retrieved: December, 2014].
[38]
R. T. Fieldings, “Representational State Transfer (REST). architectural
styles and the design of network-based software architectures,” Ph.D.
dissertation, University of California, Irvine, 2000.
[39]
Oracle Corporation, “Java Persistence API 2.0 Speciﬁcation,” http://
jcp.org/aboutJava/communityprocess/ﬁnal/jsr317/index.html, [retrieved:
December, 2014].
[40]
E. Gamma, R. Helm, R. Johnson, and J. Vlissides, Design Patterns:
Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software.
Addison-Wesley
Professional, 1994.
[41]
JBoss Drools, “Drools – the business logic integration platform,” http:
//drools.jboss.org/, [retrieved: December, 2014].
[42]
UserLand Software, Inc., “XML-RPC speciﬁcation,” http://xmlrpc.
scripting.com/spec.html, [retrieved: December, 2014].
[43]
M. Kugler, E. Andr´e, M. Masoodian, F. Reinhart, B. Rogers, and
K. Schlieper, “Assisting inhabitants of residential homes with man-
agement of their energy consumption,” in Proceedings of the The 4th
International Conference on Sustainability in Energy and Buildings, ser.
KES series in Smart Innovation, Systems and Technologies, vol. 22.
Springer Verlag, 2013, pp. 147–156.
[44]
E. Tufte, “Slopegraphs for comparing gradients: Slopegraph theory
and practice,” http://www.edwardtufte.com/bboard/q-and-a-fetch-msg?
msg id=0003nk&topic id=1, [retrieved: December, 2014].
[45]
C.
Park,
“Edward
Tufte’s
“Slopegraphs”,”
http://charliepark.org/
slopegraphs, [retrieved: December, 2014].
[46]
S. Wendzel, T. Rist, E. Andr´e, and M. Masoodian, “A secure
interoperable architecture for building-automation applications,” in
Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on Applied Sciences
in Biomedical and Communication Technologies, ser. ISABEL ’11.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2011, pp. 8:1–8:5. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2093698.2093706
[47]
B. J. Fogg, “Captology: The study of computers as persuasive technolo-
gies,” in CHI ’97 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems: Looking to the Future, ser. CHI EA ’97, March 1997, p. 129.
[48]
——, Persuasive Technology: Using Computers to Change What We
Think and Do.
Morgan Kaufmann, 2003.
[49]
P. Hartman, J. P. Bezos, S. Kaphan, and J. Spiegel, U.S. Patent 5960411:
Method and system for placing a purchase order via a communications
network.
Amazon.com, Inc., September 1999.

