349
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Interactive Lectures: Encouraging Student Interaction Using Quick Response Codes  
 
Robert Law 
Computer, Communications and Interactive Systems 
Glasgow Caledonian University 
Glasgow, Scotland 
e-mail: robert.law@gcu.ac.uk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— This article presents an ongoing project to 
encourage student interaction during lectures through the use 
of Quick Response (QR) codes and Google forms to generate 
rapid response polls and quizzes. Audience Response Systems 
(ARS) are generally expensive to purchase, require students to 
purchase a clicker and need to be installed in a dedicated 
room. This article proposes the use of Google applications 
(Apps) software combined with the students’ own smartphone 
as a viable free alternative to the current clicker systems. An 
investigation into the pedagogical issues associated with such a 
project will be explored and an attempt made to incorporate 
these into the student experience. The overall process from the 
creation of the software to the roll out and use of the software 
in an interactive lecture, the issues encountered and 
participant feedback will also be described. 
Keywords- QR Codes; Student Interaction; Feedback. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The initial paper of this work [1] outlined the 
combination of readily available, and to certain extent, free 
technologies that could be combined to enhance the students’ 
and lecturers lecture experience. 
Smartphones in the UK, and elsewhere, have seen a surge 
in popularity over the last few years evidenced by recent 
figures showing "Over half of the British population (50.3%) 
now owns a smartphone" [2]. A survey conducted by 
Deloitte [3] in the UK during the early part of 2014 points to 
a quite considerable rise in smartphone ownership. Deloitte’s 
survey indicates that smartphone ownership is up 10% 
between 2013 and 2014 leading to almost 80% of households 
in the UK owning at least one smartphone. This surge in 
ownership strengthens the belief that the smartphone has 
become a ubiquitous technology. 
Edinburgh University recently conducted a survey of 
their student population determining that 67% had ownership 
of a smartphone "an increase of seventeen percent from those 
students surveyed seven months earlier" [4]. This uptake in 
smartphone ownership within the student population opens a 
new dimension for interaction. 
A tangible increase and use of Quick Response (QR) 
codes by many companies as a form of marketing has ensued 
on the back of this increase in smartphone popularity. This 
has allowed many companies to develop new and engaging 
ways for their customer base to interact with products in situ 
reinforcing brand presence. This potential has already been 
harnessed by Education to extend learning materials through 
the use of QR codes. Learning materials have been enhanced 
by providing "just in time support materials" [5] such as 
videos, explanatory text, Uniform Resource Indicators (URI) 
and staff details. 
Using this as a platform to build from the next logical 
step is to combine the technologies to allow students to 
interact during lectures through quick multiple choice based 
questions. The students’ responses can be compiled to show 
the result in a timely manner [6]. 
The remainder of this article is organized as follows: 
Section II gives information about pedagogical issues related 
to interactive lectures, Section III introduces the technology 
used for implementing interactive lectures; this covers both 
hardware and software. Section IV discusses the author’s 
experience of implementing interactive lectures, while 
Section V discusses issues encountered during the interactive 
lectures. Section VI discusses selected feedback garnered 
from a student survey. Section VII offers a summary of our 
experience of interactive lectures, and concludes the article 
giving proposals for future work. 
 
II. 
PEDAGOGICAL ISSUES 
Take a typical lecture; what does this encompass? 
Information is imparted upon the student in a relatively one 
way passive communication format. This traditional didactic 
approach is a format that has been used for centuries. This 
research intends to explore the possibility of improving and 
enhancing the lecture experience through the use of 
technology, and in particular, Audience Response Systems 
(ARS). The ability of such systems to encourage active 
learning through student participation and engagement 
provides an opportunity for enhancing the passive lecture 
format by introducing two way interactions with the student 
audience [9].  
Murphy and Sharma further suggest that the research 
literature available for the topic of interactive lectures and 
the related pedagogical issues are “almost non-existent, with 
major issues waiting to be examined… inadequate research 
on the pedagogical implications of the emerging interactive 

350
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
forms of learning” [9]. With this in mind there appears to be 
an opportunity to examine and suggest how ARS technology 
could be used to not only enhance lecturer-student 
interactions, but also develop the underlying pedagogical 
issues inherent with lectures. 
The concept of “Deep and lasting learning” as postulated 
by Boyle and Nicol [10] is enhanced when students have the 
ability to “actively engage” with what they are learning, 
allowing them to “construct their own understanding”. 
The theory of punctuating a lecture is not new as 
evidenced by Angelo and Cross [11] and the concept of the 
“minute paper” whereupon the student body is asked to 
answer the question "What was the most important thing you 
learned during this class?". The students take the last few 
minutes of the lecture to answer this question giving the 
lecturer important written feedback. This method allows the 
lecturer to gage how well the students have understood the 
delivered content but the timeliness of the feedback is not 
effective for the student. 
ARS technology provides a means for the lecturer to 
engage and interact with the students using the responses to 
offer the student audience immediate feedback. This should 
lead to further discussion and the opportunity for student 
reflection. Other research, reported in Murphy and Sharma 
[9], identifies two pedagogical aspects of interactive 
lecturing: dialogic form of learning and active learning. 
The project intends to examine these issues and the 
resultant effects that they have on the student audience. The 
primary concern is that the interactive lecture will stimulate 
engagement and interaction with the student audience and 
the lecturer through the use of instant feedback. This 
feedback will engender in both the student audience and the 
lecturer the need for reflection on many aspects of the 
material delivered and possibly the module in general. 
Through the use of relevant and targeted questions the 
students can be cajoled into discussions that will help expand 
their understanding of the topic area. Through these 
discussions both the students and the lecturer will be able to 
better understand the level of the students understanding of 
the subject area. 
Gannon-Leary et al. [7] reported a number of other 
positive aspects to arise from interactive lectures including 
improved concentration, greater enjoyment and improved 
attendance. Simpson and Oliver [14] also noted that the 
anonymity provided by ARS technology played an important 
part in encouraging students to contribute to answering 
questions but suggests, as does Gannon-Leary et al. [7], that 
the design of the questions is very important to the process. 
Saravani and Clayton [15] have developed a conceptual 
framework referred to as A.C.E. This framework is 
composed of the three A’s: Awareness, Action, and 
Accomplishment; 
three 
C’s: 
Context, 
Content, 
and 
Capability; and the three E’s: Enabled, Engaged, and 
Empowered. The three E’s aspect of the framework fits the 
concept driving interactive lectures as the use of mobile 
technology enables, engages and empowers both the student 
body and the lecturer. 
Devon and Law [21] have mooted a framework of five 
stages which they believe are required “to maximize the 
benefit of the technology”. 
Table I shows the framework noting the “Process”, the 
participant “Who” and the point at which each step takes 
place. This table highlights the need to prepare the question 
prior to the lecture. The preparation of a carefully crafted 
question will maximize the benefit of its use for both the 
student’s understanding and the lecturer’s ability to ascertain 
relevant feedback. 
TABLE I. 
DEVON AND LAW FRAMEWORK 
Process 
Who 
When 
BUILDing the question 
Lecturer 
Before 
ASKing the question 
Lecturer/Student 
During 
CONSIDERing the question 
Student 
During 
DISCUSSing the question 
Lecturer/Student 
During 
EVALUATEing the question 
Lecturer/Student 
After 
 
The framework proposed by Devon and Law [21] is 
influenced by Beatty et al. [22] question driven instruction 
(QDI). QDI suggests that the process of crafting a question 
that elicits the maximum benefit for the learner, asking this 
question, allowing the learner time to process the question 
and answer the question before facilitating a discussion 
based around the answers given is a “key vehicle for 
learning”. 
Sandhu, Afifi, and Amara [23] assert the need to grab the 
learner’s attention and subsequently hold their attention is a 
key aspect of any interactive lecture. They continue to 
propose that questioning, discussion and timely feedback are 
core to effective lectures. 
A common theme highlighted by a number of researchers 
[7] and [14] is the need for well-designed questions and their 
correct placement within the lecture. If the questions are 
poorly construct and or badly placed within the lecture this 
will negate any perceived benefit from the use of the 
interactive system. 
Ramsden [5] suggests, amongst other things, that Quick 
Response (QR) codes can be used for “just in time 
information in a face to face lecture”; drawing on this point 
allows for the expansion of the concept to include feedback 
for both the student and the lecturer. Mooted by Law and So 
[17] is the idea that QR codes can facilitate a “trinity of 
"location 
independence," 
"time 
independence" 
and 
"meaningful content"”. Of interest in this “trinity” is the idea 
of “location independence”; being able to deliver and receive 
feedback to and from the students in the lecture hall. 
Both Dufresne et al. [12] and Crouch and Mazur [13] 
indicate the use of interactive lecture systems, whether as 
clickers or the system proposed here, can help facilitate 
opportunities for in lecture student discussion and as such 
improve the students’ retention and understanding of the 
topic delivered. 
III. 
TECHNOLOGY 
ARS systems are available in many forms and price 
points. A typical classroom package can cost $1000 or more 

351
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
for software, receiver and 12 clickers [18]. Some systems 
require the student to purchase a clicker and yearly 
registration at a cost of $20/$15, respectively [17]. This 
project developed a “no cost in-house” system that was 
based on three key components: smartphones, QR codes and 
a Google spreadsheet. No proprietary software for the phone 
is required simply a standard browser and bar code reader. 
The “back-end” is relatively simple to create as the 
implementation interface is supplied by Google. 
A. Hardware 
The student participants referred to in Section IV were 
surveyed to determine the spread of handset manufacturers 
and phone operating systems. Around 50 students were 
surveyed. 
Figure 1 shows the spread of handset manufacturers and 
Figure 2 shows the spread of phone operating systems with 
the surveyed population. 
With such a range of manufacturers and operating 
systems an “app” based solution would be time consuming 
and prohibitive. With further investigation, it was discovered 
that third party barcode reading software was available for 
all the platforms, thus allowing the students to use their own 
phones for participation in the lectures. 
 
Figure 1. Spread of manufacturers 
 
Figure 2. Spread of operating systems 
 
B. 
Software 
The software can be split into three categories: third 
party barcode reading software, third party browser software 
and the development of the interactive engine software 
using Google spreadsheets. It was up to the students 
themselves to decide on a suitable third party barcode 
reading software, although some phones did have such 
software preinstalled. 
Three components of Google spreadsheets were used in 
the creation of the software application: the spreadsheet, the 
form and Google Script. 
The spreadsheet itself is used as a repository for the 
student responses and also to house a summary sheet which 
keeps a running total of the number of responses for each 
possible answer to the question. The work horse of the 
system is the form and the scripts generated to process the 
responses at the back end. When a spreadsheet is created 
using Google Drive, a unique identifier is generated to 
identify the spreadsheet. When the subsequent form is 
created for the spreadsheet, another unique identifier is 
generated. 
Although Google forms can handle a number of 
different inputs, the decision was taken to keep the question 
to a simple multiple choice style question, thus presenting 
the student with two or three QR codes per question. To 
create the QR codes requires the compilation of an http 
request based on the URI for the Google spreadsheet and the 
data to be sent to the spreadsheet. Once the http request was 
constructed and tested an online QR code generator was 
used to generate the required QR codes. These QR codes 
were subsequently saved as image files for insertion into the 
lecture slides. 
Google script was used to create code that processed the 
student responses as they were received to generate a 
response summary that was visible to the student audience. 
C. Code Explanation 
This section will provide an examination of the code 
used to build the application. Before coding the application 
began an understanding of how Google compiles and uses 
query strings to transfer data between the application and its 
servers is required. The application hinges on the query 
string being built correctly. 
Automating the process to build the QR code means that 
no prior knowledge of how to use or create QR codes is 
required, thus, widening the access of the tool.  
Google provides a number of Application Programming 
Interfaces (api's), one of which, is the chart api. This api is 
accessible in a number of different ways, but for this 
application a direct call will be made to the chart api which 
is located at Google.com. 
A bit of reverse engineering is required to understand the 
composition of the Uniform Resource Locator (URL) 
generated by entering data in the Google form. An example 
URL is shown in Figure 3. 
The string contained in the spreadsheet at cell C6 uses 
the spreadsheet, concatenate function, to combine a number 
of strings and data from different cells. The first part of the 
string 
that 
forms 
the 
URL, 
"https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/formResponse?formke
y=", has two distinct parts. The "https://docs.google.com/" 
refers to the location that Google stores it's "docs" suite of 
apps. The "spreadsheet/" refers to the particular application 
from the suite that will be used. The next part is important, 

352
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
this is the query string that tells Google the required 
processing that its server needs to perform. The 
"formResponse?formkey=" indicates that the subsequent 
data following the question mark comprises the response to 
a form. This is the data that would be generated and sent if 
the user had to fill in a Google Form. The first parameter 
after the question mark is "formkey"; this is vitally 
important as it refers to the unique identifier given to the 
spreadsheet by Google when it was created. This value is 
stored in cell B1. Each parameter is always separated by an 
ampersand. The next parameter "&entry.0.single=" indicates 
that a single entry of data is required. This means that the 
data has been limited to a single piece of information. The 
value of this data is stored in cell B6. The final parameter 
"&submit=Submit" is used to signify that the data entry is 
complete and is now ready for processing. The URL 
generated by this process will subsequently be used to 
generate a QR code that the user will scan using their phone. 
The composition of the formula to produce the QR Code 
is based on the nesting of spreadsheet commands. 
 
 
Figure 4. Example Spread sheet function to create QR Code. 
 
The CONCAT command is used to join two strings 
together. The first string is the reference to the Google chart 
api; it is a parameterized string containing the minimum 
parameters required by Google to correctly generate the 
specified 
chart 
type. 
Breaking 
down 
the 
string, 
"chart.apis.google.com" points to the location online where 
Google stores it's chart api code. The following part of the 
string specifies the parameters required chart for generating 
the desired chart type. The "/chart?" indicates that a chart is 
required. The parameters that follow make up the response 
string that will indicate the desired chart type, size and data 
to be encoded in the qr code, each separated by the use of an 
ampersand. The "cht=qr" indicates that the chart type will 
be QR. The "chs=350x350" indicates the size of the QR 
code to be generated. In this instance the size will be 350 
pixels by 350 pixels. The "chl=" indicates the data that will 
be encoded as part of the QR code. This will be determined 
by the concatenation of the second string. The second string 
is contained the spreadsheet at cell C6. The string stored at 
this location will be used as a web address; it is advisable, 
therefore, to use the function encodeURL to ensure the 
correct encoding of the string as this will have a crucial 
affect when the QR code is subsequently scanned and an 
attempt to access the web address is made. 
The scripts for the prototype are relatively simple in 
their construction. The example in Figure 5 shows the use of 
six global variables and a controlling method called 
runChart(). 
 
 
Figure 5. Variable Declarations and Controlling Method. 
 
The global variables are used to make the code more 
concise. These variables rely on Google script commands to 
access various aspects of the spreadsheet. The first variable 
on line 2 determines the active spreadsheet; the second 
variable on line 3 determines the active sheet within the 
active spreadsheet. The variables on lines 4 and 5 are used 
to target specific sheets in the active spreadsheet. Line 4 
refers to the sheet containing the data returned by scanning 
 
Figure 3. Example URL 

353
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the QR code and line 5 refers to the summary sheet used to 
keep track of the running totals for each possible response. 
See Figure 7 for an example of possible data. 
Line 6 looks at a specific range of cells on the summary 
sheet to find out the final totals for each possible response. 
Line 7 sets the sheet that will be used to draw the chart. 
Lines 9 to 19 form the controlling method that is 
activated each time a response is received. This method 
checks for the presence of an existing chart, if no chart is 
present then a new chart will be generated by making a call 
to the method createChart(). The code for this method is 
shown in Figure 6. 
 
Figure 6. createChart() method. 
The code in Figure 6 makes use of Googles newChart() 
builder command to create a new chart to be displayed on 
the active sheet. The command takes as parameters the type 
of chart to be built, the data to be used to build the chart and 
a number of optional parameters used to configure titles, 
labels, and axes. The last command in the method, line 70, 
is used to insert the newly created chart in the active sheet. 
If the chart is already in existence then a call is made to 
the method updateData(). This method is used to recalculate 
the running totals on the summary sheet. 
 
Figure 7 shows the code used to recalculate the summary 
sheet values. In summary the process involves traversing 
each row of the data sheet determining the response and 
updating the running total accordingly. 
The number of rows in the data sheet will vary by the 
number of responses received and as such will be different 
each time the method is activated. Google script provides a 
command, getLastRow(), which enables the method to 
determine the last row in the sheet (Figure 7, line 24). Line 
25 shows how the data range can subsequently be built by 
combining the last row with the string “a2:b”. This can then 
be used to grab the data range for processing (Figure 7, line 
26). 
Lines 28 to 31 simply set the summary counters to zero 
to ensure that the totals are correctly determined. Lines 33 to 
47 implement a for loop that checks the contents of each cell 
in the data range and increments the corresponding 
summary total. Lines 50 to 53 then update the summary 
sheet with the newly calculated totals. 
After the summary sheet has been recalculated the chart 
must be redrawn to reflect the new data. The code in Figure 
8 makes use of the chart modify command to update the 
chart. 
 
Figure 8. modifyChart() Method. 
Essentially this method removes the previous data range 
from the chart before adding the new, updated, data range to 
the chart. These updates are then built before the Google 
command, updateChart(chart), is issued to update the 
existing chart. 
 
D. Process 
The students used their smartphones to scan the QR code 
of their choice, submitting the data request via their phones 
browser. This, in turn, populated the spreadsheet with the 
students’ choices, activating the script, allowing the results 
to be observed in near real time. 
The QR Code is an encoded representation of the Google 
URI and data that will be sent to the spreadsheet when 
student scans it. As can be seen in Figure 9 below, once 
scanned, the information encoded in the QR code is 
decrypted and becomes visible to the phone’s user. At this 
point, the participant has the ability to accept or decline the 
invite to send the data request. When the participant accepts 
the request to send the data, the next step is to invoke the 
phone’s browser (this can work in different ways, depending 
on the phone/operating system), which will send the http 
request to Google for processing. Once processed, a “thank 
you” message is displayed in the browser indicating the data 
request has been received. 
Figure 7. Method for updating summary sheet. 

354
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 9. The interactive process 
 
Once the data request has been received, the data is 
placed in the spreadsheet; the data will be based on the URI 
encoded in the QR Code. An example is shown below in 
Figure 10. 
It is noticeable from Figure 10 that the spreadsheet date 
and time stamps the entries as it receives them. The only data 
that the spreadsheet records is the data encoded in the QR 
Code and the date and time stamp it generates on receipt of 
the data. Hence, all entries are anonymous. 
 
Figure 10. Data sent to the spreadsheet 
 
Figure 11. Summary sheet 
 
Figure 12. Generated bar chart 
 
As each entry is received, a script is triggered, which 
counts the entries based on the predefined data set and 
populates a summary sheet which is used to generate the 
“near real time” bar charts. 
An example of a summary sheet is shown in Figure 11 
and an example of the bar chart displayed to the students is 
shown in Figure 12. 
IV. 
EXPERIENCE 
A set of initial tests were developed to examine the 
viability of the technology and gauge the reaction of the 
students to the use of this technology within the lecture 
environment. The aim of the tests was to introduce the 
interaction concept in a gradual staged manner that would 
not over burden the student or detract from the lecture.  
A. Test Setup 
The process used to create this interactive lecture was 
based on designing a set of suitable questions that could be 
used to strategically punctuate the lecture to gain maximum 
benefit for the students [17] [22]. 
The desired effect was to integrate the technology within 
the lecture while stimulating interaction with the students 
[17]. As such, the first set of tests was built to increase in a 
systematic manner the number of questions within the 
lecture and the number of QR codes within the questions. 
The structure of the first set of tests was designed to build 
from one question with one QR code in the lecture to four 
questions with three codes per question in the lecture. 
Suitable points within the lecture were identified such that 
the questions could be inserted to maximise their impact. An 
attempt was made to define suitable points through natural 
break points within the lecture, e.g., end of a topic, end of the 
lecture, worked example. Using this principal, questions 
could be deployed with the aim of giving both the student 
and the lecturer instant feedback on the comprehension of 
the material delivered. 
B. Participants 
Both sets of participants were studying on the Games 
Software Development Degree. The first group to undertake 
the interactive lectures was a second year cohort of around 
30 students and the second group to undertake the interactive 
lectures was a final year cohort of around 20 students. 
 

355
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The second year cohort had three consecutive lectures. 
The first of the three lectures had one question with two QR 
codes positioned at the end of the Lecture. The second 
Lecture had three questions, each with two QR codes 
positioned at appropriate points within the Lecture and the 
final Lecture had four questions, each with three QR codes 
again positioned at appropriate points within the Lecture. 
The final year cohort had two lectures which were non-
consecutive. The first of the two lectures had two questions 
each with three QR codes positioned at appropriate points 
within the Lecture and the second Lecture had two questions 
each with three QR codes positioned at appropriate points 
within the Lecture. 
At the appropriate point in the lecture, the slide would be 
displayed. To help minimize issues with scanning, article 
copies of the slide were also distributed. This allowed for the 
difference within the quality of phone cameras to focus on 
the projected QR codes. It was fully explained to the students 
the nature of the experiment and the procedure which should 
be followed to correctly participate in the experiment. 
C. Feedback 
Initial feedback from both test groups has been positive 
and very informative. Feedback ranged from the ease of 
operation of the process to the size of the QR codes. In 
general a “buzz” was created within the participant groups 
generating a positive reaction from the students. This 
reaction must be tempered by the fact that the students are 
open to the “Hawthorne effect” [20]. 
In order to ascertain a clearer picture of the systems use 
and acceptability with students subsequent testing was 
planned and undertaken. 
It was decided that the most consistent course of action 
would be to replicate the tests outlined in Section IV B with 
another Year 2 and Year 4 cohort.  
V. 
ISSUES 
Although the overall outcome of the first set of 
experiments was positive, a number of issues were 
highlighted that require further polishing prior to the next set 
of experiments being run. 
This section will be divided into two subsections dealing 
with issues that are prevalent to students and to staff. 
A. Issues related to Students 
An issue flagged up by the participants centered on the 
size and positioning of the QR codes as this can have an 
impact on the accuracy of the scanning process. 
The student participants indicated that the size of the QR 
codes on a projected slide proved difficult to scan directly. 
Not all students were able to scan it directly. This had been 
anticipated and article based copies of the slides were issued 
to counter that problem. 
 
Which tree structure is used for 
subdividing space in 3D?
• Octree
• Quadtree
24
 
Figure 13. Two QR Code Stack 
 
 
Figure 14. Three QR Code Stack 
 
 
Figure 15. Two QR Codes Side by Side 
 

356
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 16. Three QR Codes Side by Side 
Positioning of the QR Codes on the slide raised debate 
with the participants as some indicated that the barcode 
scanner software could find it difficult to focus on the 
required code. Figures 13 to 16 illustrate a number of 
variations tried out in order to find a balance between size 
and positioning. 
When the question posed had only two available choices 
there was more leeway to arrange the text and QR codes for 
both on screen and printed formats. Dealing with two QR 
codes was relatively straight forward with regard to size and 
positioning although the student preference was for the 
stacked vertically display. 
Dealing with three QR codes was more problematic as 
can be seen between the textual difference seen in Figure 14 
and Figure 16. Questions that required a more substantial 
descriptive answer were neigh on impossible to position in a 
usable manner. The number of QR codes on the slide also 
influenced the ease of scanning, with three codes per slide 
proving more challenging for the phone’s barcode scanner. 
This was not insurmountable, but merely added a small time 
overhead as the participants positioned their camera phone to 
optimize the scan. Again students opted for the stacked 
vertically approach. 
The overarching problem that affected scanning the QR 
codes was the quality and abilities of the smartphones 
camera to focus on the codes. 
Camera focusing on the paper based codes generally was 
satisfactory but a small number of cameras had problems 
focusing when the QR Codes were small and closely 
grouped together. 
In large lecture theatres none of the students could 
manage to scan the codes directly from the slides. However, 
in the small lecture theatres a number of students who had 
iPhone 5’s were able to scan the codes directly. This 
appeared to be related to the cameras ability to zoom in 
focusing on a particular area. 
B. Issues related to Staff 
Time management of both the interactions and the 
subsequent discussions should be built into the lecture 
timings allowing for leeway should anything go awry with 
the technology. Although the technology is improving it is 
always worth allowing for small technical glitches and 
having a cutoff point at which no more tinkering will be 
done to make the phone scan the QR code. 
Some of the issues that have become apparent while 
trialing the system are not insurmountable but can eat into 
the time available.  
The most common issue faced was the number of 
students who, on the first exposure to the system, did not 
have a QR code reader installed on their phone. On the very 
first run on the system a mistake assumption was made that 
all student’s phone’s would have QR code readers and as 
such time was not allocated for the downloading and 
configuring of the QR code software on the phones. To a 
certain degree this can be negate by asking all students to 
have the relevant software installed on their phones prior to 
the lecture. 
Another technical issue that can cause consternation and 
affect the resultant graph being displayed is the possibility of 
multiple scans by the occurring from the same device. 
This can be due to the barcode scanner software the 
students were using. Students should be advised to check the 
settings of the QR Code software that they are using and 
where 
possible 
set 
the 
software 
to 
require 
an 
acknowledgement or conformation prior to sending the 
scanned web address.  
On one or two occasions during the trial of the system the 
graph being displayed did not update itself as quickly as 
might have been expected. 
Refreshing the chart manually will help reset the graph 
but it does have an effect on the desired impact of the 
interactivity of the lecture. 
This approach relies on all the students in the lecture 
having a smartphone and it is conceivable that a small 
percentage of the student audience may in fact not have a 
smartphone or even a mobile phone. The perception would 
be that this student would be disadvantaged by not being 
able to take part in the interaction. This would be, of course, 
true. However, it could be mooted that the student is still 
engaged in the wider discussion that will come from viewing 
the generated graph. Another possibility is to rely on the 
goodwill of a fellow student to share access to their phone.  
Currently, the whole process required to create and 
integrate the QR codes into a lecture are quite cumbersome 
and may prove challenging for a non-computing subject 
specialist. Since the first trial run outlined in the original 
paper [1] the system has been significantly restructured to be 
more user friendly and have a better user interface. The 
system now has a menu based approach to allow the lecturer 
to create the question and answers they would like to use. 
Once the question and answers have been created and 
submitted the automated process creates a Google form, 
Google spreadsheet and the QR codes. 
The Google form will be used to collect the student’s 
submissions via the QR code scanned and the spreadsheet 
with attached script will process the data to produce the near 
real time graph. 
 
 

357
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 18 shows the form that is presented to the lecturer 
to help them build their question. The form collects the 
question, and answers and when submitted starts the 
automated process of creating the data repository and QR 
codes required. 
 
 
Figure 17. Form used to collate data required to build Q&A 
 
Figures 3 and 4 help to illustrate how the automated 
process of creating the QR code is achieved by combining 
the data in the various cells and using Google’s chart API to 
automatically generate the QR code. 
This was not an inconsiderable amount of work to 
develop but as can be the problem with the reliance on a 
third party API based system Google has revised their API’s 
requiring that the system undergo another rewrite to comply 
with Google’s new spreadsheet, forms and graph generation 
tools. The new version of the system will be developed as a 
Google web based app. The upside to this is the fact that the 
user interfaces can be developed using standard HTML5 and 
CSS, thus more control over the look and feel of the system 
can be gained. 
VI. 
STUDENT FEEDBACK 
The students from each cohort were surveyed to 
ascertain some form of feedback to gage their thoughts on 
the system and pedagogical theory underpinning the system. 
Selected results from the survey are presented within 
this section with accompanying thoughts and rational. The 
survey was split into three main sections; section 1 asking 
about hardware and software, section 2 asking about views 
on interactive lectures and section 3 asking for suggestions 
with regard to improvements to the system. 
Figure 17 gives a flavor of the questions asked in section 
2 of the survey. This section of the survey was used to try to 
build a picture of the students thoughts on interactive 
lectures and how likely they would be to interact with the 
lecturer under normal circumstances, i.e., answering 
questions by raising their hand and how likely they would 
be to answer a question using their smartphone. 
The first question asked to the students in this section 
was “In a normal lecture situation when posed with a 
question from your Lecturer would you be likely to 
contribute an answer?”. From the research outlined in 
Section II the expected answer was that few students if any 
would be tempted to offer an answer. 
 
Figure 17. Survey Section 2 
 

358
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The chart in Figure 19 shows the result of the answer to 
the question. The question made use of a Likert scale rather 
than a straight yes or no to try and gage how adamant the 
students’ answer would be. 
 
 
Figure 18. Intention to offer an answer in normal lecture situation 
 
The percentages shown in Figure 19 indicate that the 
hypothesis expounded in Section II that students are 
reluctant to answer questions during lectures appears to be 
justified. Although 55% of respondents indicated that they 
would defiantly not answer a question the remaining 45% 
contained an interesting split. The two interesting 
percentages are the 23% who may possibly contribute an 
answer and the 12% who seemed ambivalent. It would be 
interesting to find out what would make the 23% possibles 
become probables or even definites. 
The second question asked to the students in this section 
was “In lectures using QR Codes and Smartphones for 
interaction would you be likely to contribute an answer?” 
From the research outlined in Section II the expected answer 
was that almost all students would be tempted to contribute 
an answer. 
The chart in Figure 20 shows the result of the answer to 
the question. Again the question made use of a Likert scale 
rather than a straight yes or no to try and gage how adamant 
the students’ answer would be. 
As can be seen from the results almost 90% of the 
students surveyed indicated that they would offer an answer. 
This was close to what was expected based on the research 
undertake for Section II. Interesting to note the 8% of 
respondents who had no opinion; further work will be 
required to ascertain why students opt for “no opinion”. 
The third question asked to the students in this section 
was “In the Lectures using QR Codes and Smartphones did 
you contribute an answer?” This question, on the surface, 
may seem a strange question to ask but it was an attempt to 
try to judge the accuracy of the scanned QR code data from 
the actual lectures. 
 
 
Figure 19. Suggested participation rates for interactive lectures using QR 
codes and Smartphones 
 
 
 
Figure 20. Participation rates for Interactive Lectures 
 
 
Thankfully, the result to this question was an almost 
perfect match to the actual data gathered from the 
interactive lectures and had been the expect result. 
Again, reflecting on the literature reviewed for Section II 
the author’s interested was piqued as to why 95% of 
respondents felt that using the QR code system they would 
offer an answer. The obvious candidate was anonymity as 
cited by [14]. 
The fourth question asked to the students in this section 
was “If you did contribute an answer, what was your 
reasoning for doing so?” This question required the 
respondent to give a text based short answer. This was 
preferred to using any list based technique in order not to 
elude to answer of anonymity. 
 

359
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 21. Anonymity plays a part on interaction 
After sifting through and collating the responses to this 
question it became clear that hypothesis of anonymity was 
indeed a realistic prospect. Further questioning to gain a 
deeper insight into the students’ thought process will be 
required in order to better understand the pedagogical issues 
underlying student contribution during lectures. 
This section of the questionnaire more or less fitted with 
the ideas postulated in Section II, however, some of the 
results were not as clear cut as expected. 
In the final section of the questionnaire, suggestions for 
improvements were sought to enhance the system and 
processes involved with using the system. One recurring 
improvement was to have more varied charts for displaying 
the results. This indicates that the students were paying a 
level of attention to the results more than superficial. It 
would be interesting to discover what the students think 
they can elicit from displaying the results as different charts 
and which chart types they would like to see and why. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Overall, the interactive lectures trialed with various 
cohorts have been generally well received by the students 
and the staff contributing to positive interaction between the 
lecturer and the students. 
Students appeared to enjoy the break in the lecture and 
the feedback and discussion generated by the visual charting 
of their responses. It also created a focus point for the 
students to reflect on their understanding of the material 
taught and to apply that understanding. By the same token, it 
proved to be beneficial to the lecturer indicating the level of 
understanding of the delivered material to the students. 
The anonymity of the whole process was cited by a 
number of students as positive and this has been borne out by 
the survey. The students gave the impression that they were 
comfortable with the fact that they could answer the 
questions freely, getting them wrong and not feeling 
awkward in front of their peers. 
With regard to performance, this prototype system works 
well, producing the column chart of responses in near real 
time. Chart production will be expanded in line with 
suggestions made in the student survey to include line, pie 
and scatter charts. Advantages this system offers is the fact it 
is free, flexible, easily tailored to suit the lecturer’s needs and 
platform independent. 
A further avenue for investigation will be the correct 
utilization and positioning of the interactive lectures within 
the overall module lecture delivery schedule. Over or under 
use will have an impact on their effectiveness. 
Further investigation will be made with regard to the 
sizing, positioning and visibility of QR Codes from projected 
and paper based slides. The rapidly changing hardware of 
smartphones and ever improving cameras suggests that the 
current inability of the majority of phones to scan a QR code 
from a projected slide may be at a demise within a couple of 
phone generations. 
The use of the technique within the tutorial/seminar 
setting to encourage more debate on theoretical and social 
subjects is path that will be followed. 
Further investigation will be undertaken into the relative 
pros and cons of storing complex responses in the 
spreadsheet, as evidenced in Figure 10, and simplistic 
responses in the form A, B, C, etc. The outcome of this 
investigation will have an impact on the future development 
of the software. 
A significant proportion of future work will be involved 
in redeveloping the system to utilize HTML5 and CSS for 
the user interface to the software to allow cross discipline 
use. The script code will continue to be hidden from the user 
allowing them to concentrate on the development of their 
question bank and will be revised to comply with Google’s 
criteria for use. 
The project is ongoing and the positive feedback received 
from the students indicates that it is a worthwhile pursuit for 
both the lecturer and the students. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Law, “Using Quick Response Codes For Student Interaction 
During Lectures,” in ICCGI 2013, The Eighth International Multi-
Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology, 
2013, pp. 29–33. 
[2] Kantar Worldpanel, The smartest way to communicate: over half of 
the 
GB 
population 
owns 
a 
smartphone. 
Available: 
http://goo.gl/Z1n7u. [retrieved:  July , 2013]. 
[3]  Deloitte, “Media Consumer Survey 2014 The Digital Divide,” 2014. 
Available 
http://www.deloitte.co.uk/mediaconsumer/ 
[retrieved 
September 2014]. 
[4] EUSA, Campus app now available for download. Available: 
http://www.eusa.ed.ac.uk/news/article/6001/290/. [retrieved:  July , 
2013]. 
[5] A. Ramsden, “The use of QR codes in Education: A getting started 
guide for academics,”  Working Article, University of Bath, 2008. 
[6] R.Law, Using Quick Response Codes for Student Interaction During 
Lectures, ITiCSE, ACM 978-1-4503-1246, 2012. 
[7] P. Gannon-Leary, C. Turnock, and M. McCarthy, "RECAP series 
article 15,”  2007. 
[8] Lowery, Roger C. "Teaching and learning with interactive student 
response systems: A comparison of commercial products in the 
higher-education market," In annual meeting of the Southwestern 
Social Science Association, New Orleans, LA. 2005. 

360
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[9] Murphy, Roger, and Namrata Sharma. "What don’t we know about 
interactive lectures," In Seminar. net–International Journal of Media, 
Technology and Lifelong Learning, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 111-119. 2010.  
[10] D. J. Nicol and J. T. Boyle, “Peer instruction versus class-wide 
discussion in large classes: A comparison of two interaction methods 
in the wired classroom,” Studies in Higher Education, vol. 28, no. 4, 
pp. 457–473, 2003. 
[11] Angelo, Thomas A., and K. Patricia Cross. "Classroom assessment 
techniques: A handbook for faculty," Ann Arbor, MI: National Center 
for Research to Improve Postsecondary Teaching and Learning, 1993. 
[12] R. J. Dufresne, W. J. Gerace, J. P. Mestre, and W. J. Leonard, “ASK-
IT/A2L: Assessing student knowlede with instructional technology,” 
arXiv preprint physics/0508144, 2005. 
[13] C. H. Crouch and E. Mazur, “Peer instruction: Ten years of 
experience and results,” American Journal of Physics, vol. 69, no. 9, 
pp. 970–977, 2001. 
[14] V. Simpson and M. Oliver, "Electronic voting systems for lectures 
then and now: A comparison of research and practice,” Australasian 
Journal of Educational Technology, vol. 23, no. 2, 2007. 
[15] S.A Saravani and J.F. Clayton, “A conceptual model for the 
educational deployment of QR codes. In Same places, different 
spaces,” Proceedings ascilite Auckland, 2009.  
[16] V. Yfantis, P. Kalagiakos, C. Kouloumperi, and P. Karampelas, 
“Quick response codes in E-learning,” Education and e-Learning 
Innovations (ICEELI),  International Conference, 2012. 
[17] C.Y. Law, and W.W.S. So, "QR codes in education,” Journal of 
Educational Technology Development and Exchange, vol. 3, no. 1, 
2010, pp. 85-100. 
[18] E. Bojinova and J. Oigara, “Teaching and learning with clickers: Are 
clickers good for students,” Interdisciplinary Journal of E-Learning 
and Learning Objects, vol. 7, 2011, pp. 169-183. 
[19] A.P. Fagen, C.H. Crouch, and E. Mazur, “Peer instruction: Results 
from a range of classrooms,” Physics Teacher, vol. 40, no. 4, 2002, 
pp. 206-209. 
[20] S.R. Jones, “Was there a Hawthorne effect?,” American Journal of 
Sociology, 1992, pp. 451-468. 
[21] J. Devon and R. Law, “Action Research Project Looking At 
Providing An Environment To Improve Student Engagement Using 
Audience Response System Considerations And Smartphone 
Technology,” ICERI2013 Proceedings, pp. 969–978, 2013. 
[22] I. D. Beatty, W. J. Gerace, W. J. Leonard, and R. J. Dufresne, 
“Designing effective questions for classroom response system 
teaching,” American Journal of Physics, vol. 74, no. 1, pp. 31–39, 
2006. 
[23] S. Sandhu, T. Afifi, and F. Amara, “Theories and practical steps for 
delivering effective lectures,” J Community Med Health Education, 
vol. 2, no. 158, pp. 2161–0711, 2012. 
 
 

