Using Mobile Technologies for Situating Bite-Sized Learning at the Workplace  
Concepts and Recommendations for Implementation in Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises 
 
Katharina Frosch 
Department of Business Management 
Brandenburg University of Applied Sciences 
Brandenburg an der Havel, Germany 
email: frosch@th-brandenburg.de 
Niek Zuidhof 
Research group Employability Transition, Research group 
Technology, Health & Care 
Saxion University of Applied Sciences 
Enschede, The Netherlands 
e-mail: e.n.zuidhof@saxion.nl
 
 
Abstract— Learning in the workplace is crucial for updating 
and upskilling the workforce to both new and existing 
employees. Given the limited opportunities for informal 
learning due to solitary work conditions or off-site locations, 
mobile devices like smartphones and wearables such as smart 
glasses can play a significant role. The aim of this paper is to 
investigate the extent to which mobile micro-learning can 
enhance work-related education, with a focus on lightweight, 
practical applications in learning-deprived environments. 
Comparative analyses are presented for mobile micro-learning 
approaches for smartphones and smart glasses based on recent 
studies, specifically examining their impact on learning and 
modes of interaction. Based on good practices of recent MML 
implementations, we present principles for implementation and 
offer lightweight proof-of-concept models for both handheld 
devices and smart glasses. This knowledge might be relevant for 
researchers, small and medium-sized enterprises, practitioners, 
and others involved in knowledge transfer. 
Keywords-work-based learning; informal learning; mobile 
micro-learning; smartphone; smart glasses; QR code; peer 
collaboration. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Learning within the workplace plays a vital role in 
keeping today's workforce updated and improving their 
skills. However, in numerous occupations, chances for 
informal learning are limited. One example is remote 
working at the customer site or solitary tasks such as goods 
delivery. Mobile Micro-Learning (MML), which refers to 
bite-sized lessons accessed via mobile devices, can serve as a 
potent tool to boost informal learning in fields where 
learning opportunities are scarce [1]. While this previous 
research set the focus on classical MML based on handheld 
devices such as smartphones and tablets, we now extend our 
research and compare it against the potential that wearables, 
in particular smart glasses, offer for informal learning at the 
workplace.  
The power of work-based learning for continuously 
updating workers’ qualifications on the job [2]  is a well-
known fact, with the lion’s share of learning being informal 
[3]. Informal learning takes place outside a prescribed 
learning framework (no organized event or package) and 
without a professional trainer [4]–[6]. It may be conceived as 
learning in work [7]: Embedded (“situated”) in daily work 
routines [1][5], informal learning is initiated in a self-
directed manner by workers and triggered by “an internal or 
external jolt” [5], i.e., on-demand when a specific work task 
is requiring it. Typical examples are observing, seeking help 
or feedback from others, discussing, trial and error, 
reflecting, or searching the intra- or Internet for information 
[2][5]. Informal learning can hence rely on the interaction 
with others (“social learning”), or on self-initiated study, 
practice, and experimentation (“learning by doing”) [5]. 
However, in many occupational fields, the conditions for 
informal learning at work may be limited: In decentralized 
work settings (e.g., trains, trucks or delivery drivers, mobile 
care workers there is little direct interaction between 
workers). The same is true in highly mechanized settings 
with large physical distances between workers as well as in 
settings contexts where a product, such as a fire sprinkler 
system [8], must be maintained by a specialist working alone 
at the customer site, and in work environments with a lot of 
noise or high language diversity among workers – all of 
which is rather typical for blue-collar work [9], [10]. This 
hampers learning by observing, asking questions, and 
receiving feedback [11].  
Due to tight schedules or high degrees of automation, 
many jobs offer little autonomy, which is seen as a crucial 
condition for experimentation on the job or other self-
directed learning activities [10], [12]. Finally, access to 
codified organizational or external knowledge from the 
Internet [13] is difficult for those who have no permanent 
access to a stationary desktop computer. “Learning-
deprived” jobs [11] typically suffer from reduced speed and 
intensity of informal learning at the workplace and 
jeopardize workforce upskilling. 
This paper shows to what extent MML, i.e., learning 
based on bite-sized learning nuggets delivered by mobile 
devices [14], can help to improve work-related learning in 
learning-deprived environments. Learning based on bite-
sized learning nuggets has been termed micro-learning or 
MML as it is typically delivered by mobile devices [14]. 
We propose a lightweight MML approach that integrates 
learning units into daily work tasks across both handheld and 
wearable devices, utilizing self-directed and peer-based 
learning methods. In this context, we also discuss the role of 
asynchronous and synchronous forms of MML. This paper 
surpasses the scope of previous work in [1], with respect to 
89
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the devices and learning methods used, providing valuable 
additional insight into the capabilities of mobile-micro-
learning at work. First, wearables allow a more seamless 
experience as learners do not necessarily have to interrupt 
their workflow while learning. Second, incorporating 
synchronous forms of learning facilitates direct interactions 
within the workplace or with experts, which is considered 
one of the main pillars of informal learning at work. The 
remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section II 
illustrates existing concepts and good practices of micro-
learning at the workplace, develops a typology of MML at 
the workplace, and explores the potential of different types 
of MML for informal learning. We then sketch design 
principles for lightweight approaches to anchor informal 
MML at the workplace and illustrate it with proofs-of-
concept for both handheld devices and wearables such as 
smart glasses (Sections III and IV). In Section V, we discuss 
our findings, critically reflect on our approach and conclude 
with an outlook.            
II. 
RELATED WORK AND GOOD PRACTICES 
A. Mobile Micro-Learning 
Micro-learning typically consists of short learning 
nuggets (1-5 minutes) that are focused on one narrow topic 
and that are provided in rich, interactive media formats [14]–
[16], e.g., (animated) videos, podcasts, job aids, cheat sheets, 
flashcards, quizzes or even gamified elements [17] and 
virtual reality nuggets [18]. Micro-learning is undertaken 
just-in-time when needed (“on demand”) [14]. In this 
context, mobile technologies are found to naturally match the 
concept of micro-learning and play an important role in its 
delivery [19], [20]. The use of mobile devices (e.g., 
smartphones, tablets, wearables) for learning anytime 
without being tied to a tightly-delimited physical location 
[21] is termed mobile learning  [20][21]. In what follows, we 
subsume the above-mentioned learning practices under 
MML [16], [17]. Note that in the context of informal 
learning at the workplace, the concepts of micro-learning and 
micro-training are often used interchangeably, as both refer 
to short, often digital training or learning activities that can 
be easily integrated into daily work routines [24], [25]. In 
this paper, we stick to the term (mobile) micro-learning 
because it favors somewhat more the notions of self-directed 
learning that go beyond the mere acquisition of knowledge 
and skills.    
MML has been found to increase learners’ motivation 
and improve knowledge retention thanks to reduced 
cognitive load and repetition [16], [20], [26]. At the same 
time, it is an efficient strategy to integrate learning into busy 
schedules, as well as for employees working in distributed 
settings [26], [27].  
MML seems appropriate for and is widely used in 
informal learning settings [17], also if implemented at the 
workplace [16]. It stimulates self-directed learning, allowing 
learners to consume learning nuggets on-demand when they 
become aware of a problem or question in a specific situation 
[28], [29]. MML can be easily embedded in daily work 
routines and allows for informal work-related learning, also 
in deprived work settings as described in Section I 
(decentralized work, limited opportunities for interaction, 
lack of access to desktop computers). If properly designed, 
MML is not limited to the acquisition of narrow knowledge 
or skills, but may also enable higher-order learning such as 
analysis of a certain topic [28], which is particularly relevant 
for the experimental and reflective dimensions of informal 
work-related learning [30]. 
B. Typology of Mobile Microlearning at the workplace 
Classical 
e-learning 
theory 
differentiates 
between 
synchronous and asynchronous forms of learning  [31], [32]: 
Synchronous learning happens in real time, with learners and 
instructors participating simultaneously in activities such as 
live webinars, virtual classrooms, video conferences, and 
instructor-led training sessions. It fosters immediate 
interaction, feedback, and collaboration among participants. 
On the other hand, asynchronous learning is self-paced and 
doesn't require real-time involvement of others. Learners 
access pre-recorded lectures, online courses, reading 
materials, and assignments at their convenience, offering 
flexibility in managing their time and progress [ibid.].  
In previous research and applications of MML, 
asynchronous settings dominate [22]. In many settings, it is 
even the expressed desire to partly or fully replace 
synchronous forms of learning with MML units [14, p. 792].  
 In this paper, we suggest the MML Matrix to broaden 
our perspective and differentiate between different modes of 
MML, depending on delivery mode and delivery device. 
Delivery mode depicts whether learning contents are 
delivered synchronously or asynchronously. Delivery device 
refers to either handhelds or wearables such as smart glasses 
which allow one to learn without having to interrupt manual 
work activities (hands-free). Figure 1 shows the MML 
matrix.  
We do obtain a typology with four variants on how to 
implement MML. Please note that as this paper deals with 
the opportunities and challenges of MML for workplace 
learning, we strictly stick to the concept that MML units 
should not be longer than 5 minutes and that they should be 
situated in actual work routines.  
As described above, (1) handheld-MML refers to MML 
based on handhelds such as smartphones or tablets. This is 
the most common type of MML. Synchronous (2) mobile 
micro training (MMT) where learners and trainers directly 
interact via handheld mobile devices is less frequent. Two 
potential explanations for this phenomenon are as follows: 
On the one hand, it may be simply too complex to organize a 
synchronous micro-training session that ultimately lasts less 
than 5 minutes – in particular, on-demand when employees 
need a certain learning bite. On the other hand, handhelds 
offer much less comfort and functionality for the users when 
interacting virtually as compared to a classical stationary 
desktop computer.   
 
90
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 1.  MML Matrix 
 
As compared to handhelds, wearables, especially smart 
glasses, allow seamless integration of digital information and 
learning content into the user's working environment. A great 
benefit is that they enable on-demand access based on 
allowing hands-free interaction with digital devices so that 
learners can simultaneously continue with manual operations 
in their actual work task [33]–[35]. Smart glasses are 
frequently used for synchronous (3) mobile micro-
interactions (MMI) between experts and employees with 
training on-the-job needs [36]. A prominent and widely used 
example hereby is the remote assistance of technicians 
maintaining machines and equipment at the customer’s site 
[37]. As interactions are on-demand and normally consist of 
short instructions for the technicians, the definition of MML 
holds in these cases [36].  
The last type, (4) hands-free MML refers to learning 
snippets that are delivered through a wearable such as a 
smart glass without synchronous interaction with a trainer. 
Many applications of Augmented Reality (AR) are based on 
this approach and can be found in diverse fields such as 
industrial assembly [38], healthcare or logistics, and supply 
chain management [39]. Note that it depends on the length 
and instructional design of learning snippets whether these 
applications fall under hands-free MML or not.  
In what follows, we first study the most common type of 
MML, which is handheld MML, and evaluate its potential 
for informal learning in learning-deprived work settings 
(Subsection C). In the next step (Subsection D), we then 
study the chances of hands-free asynchronous MML as well 
as synchronous micro-interactions (MMI) for informal MML 
at the workplace based on smart glasses and discuss whether 
they also can be implemented in learning-deprived work 
settings.  
Four aspects are central to our analysis: 
 
To what extent can learners self-direct their learning 
activities? 
 
Are forms of higher-order learning such as practice, 
experimentation, 
feedback, 
and 
reflection 
sufficiently triggered?  
 
How are learning activities “situated” in actual work 
routines? 
 
Do media formats and instructional strategies enable 
learning among workers who are not used to 
consuming longer verbal explanations or engaging in 
self-directed learning?   
C. Examples of handheld-MML at the Workplace 
Researchers and practitioners highlight the potential of 
MML for onboarding, ongoing professional qualification, 
and just-in-time learning [40]–[43]. Typical applications of 
MML at the workplace are compliance training in 
occupational safety [44] or information system security 
[34][35], building knowledge on new and existing products 
[47]–[49], or improving customer service [43]. Other, albeit 
less frequent are providing procedural work instructions, 
e.g., for installing or technical equipment [48] or in medical 
care [50], and machine use [51]–[53], as well as improving 
soft skills such as team management or goal setting [44][45]. 
Prominent examples from the industry are micro-learning 
initiatives 
for 
occupational 
safety 
at 
Walmart 
or 
Bloomingdale’s that came with high participation rates and 
considerable savings [26] or the case of InterContinental 
Hotels Group to improve the management of complex 
customer service requests based on micro-learning which 
helped to reduce onboarding time for new employees from 
five to two weeks [56].  
Recent scientific cases and evaluation studies on MML in 
real-life work settings cover a great variety of topics, e.g., 
how to keep costs in large building projects [57], dementia-
friendly approaches for staff in neighborhood convenience 
stores 
[48][49], 
methods 
and 
approaches 
in 
pharmacovigilance [60] as well as a great number of 
examples from health and medical care [40][51]. Further 
attempts have been made in the hospitality sector [43], in 
logistics [62], in ICT [53][54], for public administration and 
NATO staff [30][55], for librarians [66], for school and 
university teachers [57][58] as well as for childcare workers 
[69], and even for employees of dairy farms [70]. 
Unfortunately, these examples are either not validated in a 
real-world setting, contain little information about the actual 
approach, rely on relatively lengthy learning units, or were 
published before 2020. Recent topical reviews provide even 
more examples of MML [17][21][24][29][57][61]–[63]. 
Still, the great majority of these studies were tested in an 
educational setting, only. In particular, empirical evidence on 
industrial applications of MML remains rare in this context 
[73].  
Six studies were analyzed in-depth (S1 – S6, see Table 1) 
to investigate how companies and public organizations 
implement MML. All were conducted in real-work settings, 
underwent scientific evaluation with at least 20 participants, 
and contained sufficient details about implementation.  
 
91
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE I.  
SELECTED MML STUDIES IN REAL WORKPLACE SETTING 
Study 
Country 
no. of learners 
Topic and learners 
S1  
[60] 
>100 countries 
(N>2000) 
Pharmacovigilance (pharmacists, 
medical doctors, others) 
S2  
[57] 
 
Norway  
(N=334) 
Cost-efficiency in construction 
projects (project managers, 
engineers, architects and other) 
S3 
[47][48] 
 
Japan  
(N=62) 
Dementia-friendly customer care” 
(employees in neighborhood 
convenience stores) 
S4 
[50] 
 
Australia  
(N>2000)  
Clinical care and no-clinical topics 
(nurses, medical staff, non-clinical 
staff) 
S5 [67] 
USA 
(N/A) 
Teaching skills and learning science  
(faculty at academic health centers)  
S6 [61] 
 
USA  
(N=26) 
Point-of-care training for high-risk, 
low volume therapies (nurses) 
 
The examples chosen rely on short learning nuggets (< 5 
min) and primarily draw on rich, interactive media. Looking 
at studies published not later than 2020 allows us to get an 
overview of the state-of-the-art. 
Three of the six examples analyzed come with a 
prescribed 
learning 
curriculum 
to 
improve 
specific 
competencies. S1 to S3 fall in this category. S1 consists of 
four modules, each comprising 6 to 8 short (2-3 min) videos 
and a final quiz at the end of every module [60]. Here, 
learning nuggets are not self-contained as content, practice, 
and quizzes are separated from each other [48][50]. In such a 
setting, learners are less expected to engage in self-directed 
learning but directed toward the predefined learning 
objectives in small steps, just as in classical e-learning 
courses [60, p. 1171]. 
The three other studies, both from the medical and health 
care field, allow for more self-directed learning: In S4 [50], a 
group of Australian hospitals provides the micro-learning 
format “Take 5 – learning for busy people” to their care, 
medical and non-clinical staff. Learners go through slide 
decks with condensed information about clinical and non-
clinical topics. A learning nugget could explain the 
procedure in case of a “code blue” (a patient having a 
medical emergency such as cardiac arrest). Delivery happens 
browser-based by the internal website so that staff can search 
for learning nuggets whenever a problem or question arises 
during the work process. S5 applies an almost identical 
approach ("Take 5" on teaching skills and learning science 
for faculty members in academic health centers [67]): A 
website contains 41 Take-5 videos, jointly with other 
resources for learning and development. The videos were 
professionally 
recorded, 
prepared 
in 
conversational 
language, and not longer than 800 words. A blueprint suited 
for just-in-time learning was suggested and used: A teaser 
catching attention followed by expert advice. Animations 
were used to improve the retention of central issues.  
However, searching indexes of available learning nuggets 
using a mobile phone as in S4 and S5 is unlikely to be 
effective in settings where workers tend to be less savvy in 
the self-directed use of large amounts of digital information.  
In S6 [61], nurses can access point-of-care training for 
high-risk, low-volume therapies based on Quick Response 
(QR) codes affixed to work equipment. Scanned with a 
smartphone, they link to short training videos (2-3 minutes).  
The preferred format used in the five examples of MML 
is slide desks, short video clips (sometimes animated), and 
quizzes. Only one study additionally uses animated videos 
and mini-simulation games [58]. Text-based information still 
plays an important role, as in some work situations, learners 
cannot play the audio, and videos have to come with 
transcripts, then [60].  
The focus of the analyzed MML seems to be more on 
information 
and 
learning 
and 
less 
on 
practice, 
experimentation, and reflection. In study 1 [60], learners 
explicitly point out that they see included quizzes as a 
valuable instrument for self-assessment, feedback, and 
reflection, but would like to get more opportunities to 
practice. In S4 to S6, MML primarily relies on static 
microsites and video clips and does not offer quizzes or other 
activities related to reflection or practical exploration.   
To sum up, up to now, the potential of MML for 
informal, work-related learning depicted in Subsection II is 
realized only very selectively. Instead of offering self-
directed learning, MML is often implemented according to 
the same principles as classical e-learning courses that follow 
a prescribed path. Repositories of learning nuggets without 
QR tags in the working environment do offer a higher degree 
of self-direction in learning but still lack the anchor to actual 
working routines. Apart from using quizzes to self-assess 
learning progress, the examples analyzed do not offer 
strategies to enhance practice, experimentation, and 
reflection beyond the mere acquisition of knowledge and 
skills. Finally, as written or spoken text still is the main pillar 
of 
micro-learning 
units, 
learners 
with 
difficulties 
comprehending written texts and spoken language may be 
left behind. 
D. Examples of wearable MML at the Workplace 
The discussed research on MML above appears to 
predominantly focus on the handheld mobile devices of 
choice, and asynchronous learning without a trainer. 
However, in the context of small and medium-sized 
enterprises (SMEs), there are practical scenarios where 
employees need to maintain hands-free operations. This is 
particularly relevant in physically demanding environments, 
such as cramped technical spaces that necessitate specific 
postures, or in settings with hygiene constraints where 
workers handle substances like oil, which may not be 
compatible with handheld devices. 
Smart glasses are emerging products in the field of 
wearable computing and have the potential to revolutionize 
jobs [74]. The features of smart glasses that are particularly 
useful 
for 
professionals 
include 
overlaying 
digital 
information on the physical environment and providing 
hands-free operation, which can offer task guidance, real-
time information, and real-time collaboration. The use of 
smart glasses for workplace learning has been observed 
across multiple sectors, for instance in the food industry [75], 
healthcare [76], and dentistry [77]. 
Similarly to handheld-MML (see previous Section) 
publications specifically focused on on-demand MML in a 
92
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

practical setting are still limited, there are nevertheless 
results to be gleaned from the intersection of workplace 
learning and smart glasses. Databases were searched for in 
the title and abstract with the search string "workplace 
learning AND smart glasses." The databases included Web 
of Science (7 hits), ERIC–Ebsco (3 hits), IEEE Xplore (4 
hits), and PubMed (0 hits) A narrower search string yielded 
no or fewer results. Most of the studies located using this 
search string were either conceptual or lab experiments. 
Other publications that were found focused on requirements 
and conceptual design, as well as a few publications that 
have also conducted practice-oriented research. 
 
Hands-free MML. The learning outcomes from recent 
research involving smart glasses and MML are varied. 
Learning systems for training have been developed for 
example for procedural knowledge [78], [79]. Similar to 
MML with handheld devices, there is the possibility for self-
directed learning, allowing personalized learning through 
scanning QR codes [79]. In a comparative study between 
handheld mobile devices and smart glasses in museum 
learning activities, wearable mixed-reality learning activities 
generally yielded better results than mobile handheld 
activities in terms of situational interest [80]. This result is 
promising due to the short-term engagement of situational 
interest, but the context of the workplace is often more 
constrained than a museum visit, warranting further research. 
Another example from the food industry showed that the use 
of smart glasses led to worse results than traditional video 
instruction [75]. However, this also seems to depend on the 
type of task and the form of training. 
More practical examples are found in healthcare. In 
nursing, a pilot study was conducted using speech commands 
related to tasks such as: “Please select wound treatment”, and 
all tasks were achieved and experienced as supportive and 
helpful [8]. Smart glasses were also used as a tool to record 
real-life situations and used for remote education by 
synchronous live streaming or watching the recorded 
material at a later stage. Although the image and audio 
quality were sufficient, participants in the medical sector felt 
uneasy diagnosing clinical situations. Also, the connectivity 
of smart glasses and other devices remains a challenge [78], 
[80]. 
These studies indicate that both research and practical 
application are in the early stages. At the same time, it is 
clear that promising methods like scanning QR codes in 
handheld mobile learning can also be applied with smart 
glasses. However, learning outcomes via smart glasses need 
to be further examined in a specific context with clear task 
descriptions to compare results across different contexts and 
tasks. User perspectives also merit further investigation. 
While we see positive results in the medical field, remote 
observation was experienced as uncomfortable by students. 
This could be due to the specific patient situation concerning 
privacy, or the students' position having less experience 
compared to more experienced practitioners. 
In summary, in the area of workplace learning with smart 
glasses as a form of MML, there is a need for more 
knowledge due to: 1) a lack of studies conducted in practice, 
2) sectors in which it is being used, 3) the type of learning 
tasks, 4) functionalities of smart glasses being used, such as 
the screen, camera, or a combination thereof, 5) demands on 
the user, and 6) the objective and subjective learning 
experience. 
 
Mobile micro interaction (MMI). While voice and video 
calling via smartphones or other handheld devices are no 
longer considered exceptional, smart glasses offer these 
functionalities in a hands-free manner. Smart glasses also 
allow camera use so that the receiver can view a first-person 
perspective or the user of smart glasses can receive screen-
based instruction. Remote experts can assist smart glasses 
users via voice or video calling, offering task guidance and 
real-time information displayed on the screen. This paves the 
way for remote collaboration between experts and field 
workers. Remote guidance and collaboration have been 
developed for both augmented reality and virtual reality [81], 
such 
as 
assistance 
through 
visualization 
and 
3D 
environmental reconstruction [82], or through remote 
observation and telepresence or teleconferencing as applied 
in healthcare [83]. 
The majority of examples in the literature on the 
application of smart glasses for remote collaboration are 
found in healthcare. The applications of smart glasses 
usually involve remote learning or collaboration via a video 
call [83] or screen-based instruction [84]. In a feasibility 
study involving teleconferencing, where an intervention team 
makes a video call with a remote expert paramedic, no 
differences were found compared to conventional on-site 
triage by paramedics [83]. This indicates in this specific use 
case that smart glasses yield results comparable to traditional 
methods 
of 
assessing 
clinical 
situations. 
Beyond 
teleconferencing, the use of the screen for instructions during 
the call has been also explored. By using WebRTC, a real-
time communications framework for internet browsers and 
mobile devices, both video calls and custom data, such as 
drawings, can be facilitated [84] and WebRTC is open-
source and available on GitHub [85]. 
Although proposals for applications have been made and 
several technical papers are available, there still exists a gap 
in knowledge focusing on 1) practical application with smart 
glasses 2) learning focus, 3) the use of smart glasses, and 4) 
lightweight requirements for implementation, which is 
particularly important for SMEs. 
 
III. 
IMPLEMENTATION APPROACH FOR HAND-HELD 
MML 
Based on our findings in Section II and general design 
principles for MML [17], [28], [29], we provide 
recommendations on instructional strategy and technical 
implementation for a lightweight approach for MML that 
fosters informal work-related learning in learning-deprived 
occupational contexts. In this Section, we focus on classical 
forms of handheld MML. Additional recommendations for 
designing MML based on wearable devices will be 
elaborated on in Section IV. 
93
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A. Suggestions for Design and Implementation 
A good point of departure for designing and 
implementing MML is the four principles for MML design 
summarized from earlier research by [28] and validated in a 
pilot test by [29].  
 
MML content should fit on the small screens of 
mobile devices. 
 
MML should address learners at the moment they 
feel the need to learn something. Connected to this, 
MML content should be short (no longer than 5 
minutes). 
 
MML 
learning 
nuggets 
should 
be 
designed 
following an instructional flow that starts with an 
information snippet to provide an aha moment about 
the relevance (step 1), followed by instructional 
snippets with short exercises (quizzes, microgames, 
ideas for practice and experimentation at the 
workplace) and instant feedback (step 2). This 
instructional flow is based on an earlier model of 
Gagne [86], as cited in [29].  
 
MML content should be designed in a way that 
triggers interaction between the learner and the 
content (e.g., using practical and/or gamified 
activities). 
These principles are an excellent starting point for 
designing MML for informal work-related learning. To make 
them even more suited to support and trigger informal 
workplace-related MML in learning-deprived occupational 
contexts, the following clarifications and additions are put 
forth:  
 
We favor short learning nuggets covering a single 
topic (1-2 minutes) to fit tight schedules, meet a 
single, specific question arising from the work 
context, and reduce cognitive load for learners. This 
is particularly important in the workplaces we focus 
on as they are often characterized by high time 
pressure (e.g., in health and care services) or a noisy 
work environment [53].  
 
To trigger learning from within work processes, 
several approaches [51], [87], [88] have found QR 
codes affixed to work equipment and locations to be 
a good practice to link to learning nuggets that might 
be useful in the respective work context (mobile 
tagging system). 
 
The instructional flow suggested helps to design 
learning nuggets that go beyond the mere acquisition 
of knowledge and that are still self-contained. 
However and as pointed out already by [28], besides 
opportunities for experimentation and practice, 
learning nuggets for effective workplace learning 
should also contain practices for reflection, which 
further enhances higher-order learning.   
 
Animated videos or visual, interactive work aids 
should be preferred over text-based and verbal 
information to enable learners who are less used to 
consuming large amounts of text or speaking another 
language.   
Revising and complementing the original principles for 
designing MML content by [28] makes MML more 
lightweight: First of all, short videos preferably with 
visualizations and animations lower the barrier for learning 
for those with less favorable prerequisites for effective 
informal workplace learning. Second, self-contained learning 
nuggets that also comprise reflective activities help to 
enhance higher-order learning processes that are vital for 
successful workplace learning. Third and last, mobile 
tagging based on QR codes is a strong trigger to engage in 
informal learning activities when encountering questions and 
challenges in the work process.  
However, we want to point out that due to its anytime-
anyplace nature, asynchronous MML offers by nature only 
limited potential for learning through experimentation and 
practice at the workplace (“learning-by-doing”) and even 
fewer opportunities for “social learning” through direct 
interaction in terms of observation, feedback, or help-
seeking. Some authors point out that it is still an open 
question of how this can be best achieved [28], and our 
lightweight approach does not solve this problem, either.  
Similarly, implementing MML for informal workplace 
learning should be also lightweight from a company 
perspective. 
This 
is 
captured 
in 
two 
additional 
recommendations:  
Recommendation 1 refers to an easy-to-use authoring 
tool: Learning managers should be able to generate learning 
nuggets without too much effort, as studies show that time 
constraints, a lack of technical skills, and inadequate 
infrastructure are major barriers to the implementation of 
digitally-supported learning activities [89]. Content types 
should support the instructional scheme suggested above and 
support mobile display. H5P allows the user to create 
HTML5 interactive content and publish it in learning or 
content management systems such as Moodle, Canvas, 
WordPress, or Drupal [90]. It is free and open source, 
appears easier to use than most commercial e-learning 
authoring tools, and offers many predefined interactive 
formats that support active learning [91]. Moreover, H5P 
content can be shared and reused, and open licensing is 
encouraged [90]. An example of MML that uses H5P to 
implement interactive content is [63], whereas others use 
authoring tools such as Articulate Storyline 360 [51] or 
iSpring Suite [49], or simple video recording and editing 
software [40][51][57]. 
Recommendation 2 refers to a secured platform to 
manage, store, and distribute learning nuggets: In most 
cases, developing a custom micro-learning platform will not 
be viable. Instead, many companies use a Learning 
Management Tool (LMS) with support for eLearning [92]. 
Most LMS support the authoring and distribution of H5P 
content. However, introducing and operating a fully-fledged 
LMS exclusively for MML might be perceived as too high 
an investment. This will often be the case for SMEs. As an 
alternative, a more lightweight Content Management System 
(CMS) such as WordPress seems to be sufficient: It supports 
H5P content generation and storage, comes with user 
authentication, and offers an appropriate structure to manage 
modular learning nuggets [68][69]. 
94
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

To 
conclude, 
the 
proposed 
principles 
and 
recommendations are considered effective in supporting our 
learners: They need short learning nuggets anchored in the 
work process that foster engagement in knowledge 
acquisition, practice, experimentation, and reflection. The 
low-threshold approach benefits learners in learning-
deprived work contexts who may be less adept at self-
directed learning. Similarly, creating and distributing 
learning nuggets is kept simple so that barriers to adoption 
are low, even for SMEs or companies with little experience 
with digital learning.  
B. Proof-of-Concept 
As a proof-of-concept, we use a simple website based on 
WordPress with an H5P plugin as a micro-learning platform. 
It comes with role-based authentication to protect learning 
nuggets against unauthorized viewing or editing. With the 
proof of concept, we demonstrate that implementing MML 
for informal workplace learning based on a lightweight 
approach is viable. The proof-of-concept can kick-start 
further refinements based on stakeholder feedback and 
lowers adoption barriers for institutions with limited 
resources to introduce MML at the workplace. 
Figure 2 shows how learning managers would generate a 
learning nugget and attach the automatically generated QR 
code to a physical object in the work environment, where 
learners “Scan to learn” with their smartphone camera.  
An exemplary learning nugget has been developed and 
automatically equipped with a QR code. Hereby, an H5P 
content type “interactive video” is wrapped into an H5P 
element “KewAR Code” which auto-generates a QR code 
linking to the readily designed learning nugget when saved. 
Note that to reference H5P content instead of a URL or other 
text content, the content type “KewAR Code” has to be 
extended as suggested by [71]. The H5P plugin in 
WordPress offers this combination of content types by 
default and provides comfortable authoring for such learning 
nuggets.  
The learning nugget has been structured as suggested 
above, following a blueprint that allows triggering higher-
order learning (see Figure 3). The example refers to using a 
car polishing machine in a garage. The starting point is a 
short video where learners see an employee operating the 
machine and explaining the most important do’s and don’ts, 
which comes close to “learning by observing”. Visual 
overlays to the video present key aspects, so that verbal or 
written text is not a main mode of presentation. The video 
integrates quiz questions with immediate feedback to allow 
learners to assess their progress. The example you see in 
Figure 3 is a visual true and false activity the angle at which 
the machine must be placed on the coating surface. Learners 
provide their answers by dragging the correct and the wrong 
options to their respective places.  
A sidebar with four activity buttons was added to the 
video. The first refers back to the relevance of the topic. In 
our example, an infographic provides an aha moment, 
showing how expensive it can be if workers apply the 
polishing machine to the car at the wrong angle and cause 
scratches to the paint. 
 
Figure 2.  Scan-to-learn system 
  
Figure 3.  Example of micro-learning nugget 
 
The second button contains ideas for practice and 
experimentation at the workplace. The third button offers 
starting points to reflect on the topic of the learning content. 
Workers can hit the last button to provide feedback on the 
learning nugget (optional). The activity buttons remain 
displayed throughout the video, and learners can freely 
decide whether and when to use them.  
The exemplary learning nugget has been produced in less 
than one hour (excluding video recording) thanks to the 
existing blueprint and the user-friendly authoring tool in the 
H5P plugin. We are aware of the fact that commercial micro-
learning platforms like EdApp [94] offer all needed 
functionality for our lightweight approach for handheld 
MML even in its cost-free version (authoring tool for 
interactive micro-content, automated generation of QR 
codes). However, as shown in [1], they come with several 
drawbacks (limited video upload, mandatory registration, 
95
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

and more click-work for learners). To conclude, our H5P-
based approach for handheld MML meets the design 
recommendations for effective MML at the workplace at a 
higher level than most existing implementations described in 
Subsection II.C and offers improved opportunities for 
digitally-supported activities of informal workplace learning.  
 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION APPROACH FOR SYNCHRONOUS 
MML BASED ON SMART GLASSES 
While the suggestions discussed above in Section III are 
also applicable to MML with wearable devices, there are 
additional, specific considerations for smart glasses that 
warrant attention. In light of the insights gathered from 
Section II, we offer guidelines for both implementation 
approaches and technical execution aimed at promoting 
informal learning in the workplace through a streamlined 
wearable MML system. 
A. Additional 
Suggestions 
for 
the 
Design 
and 
Implementation based on Smart Glasses 
In practice, the following aspects are important to 
consider in advance: 
 
The use of smart glasses for MML must be either 
necessary or beneficial, such as for hands-free use, 
first-person perspective camera use, and/or digital 
overlay through the screen. Refer to the literature on 
smart glasses adoption for more details [76], [95]. 
 
Reliable connectivity with other devices and the 
internet is essential. Consider interference from other 
devices, the space where the user is located, or remote 
areas [78], [80]. 
 
The task should be compatible with the capabilities 
and limitations of the specific type of smart glasses 
being used. Factors to consider include battery life, 
open or closed screen, video/audio quality, and ease of 
use [83], [83]. 
 
The cognitive demands of the task must be mapped out 
and weighed against the cognitive load imposed by 
using smart glasses [75], [77]. 
This means that a thorough exploration is essential between 
the work task, the most suitable wearable devices or type of 
smart glasses, as well as the anticipated acceptance by 
future users, to increase the likelihood of successful 
implementation. 
B. Proof-of-Concept 
Based on an authentic case study, we aim to demonstrate 
that smart glasses can be effectively utilized for the purpose 
of remote collaboration in a lightweight manner. There are 
three ways to implement this namely 1) purchasing a 
solution from a software developer that is tailored to the 
needs of the company, 2) using widely available software, 
and 3) building an Android-based app using open source. 
Two use cases in healthcare and education will be discussed 
below. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Illustrative example of smart glasses usage in wound care 
(shared with permission) 
 
Use case: A patient with a complex wound requires 
regular visits to a hospital specialist and receives at-home 
nursing care for wound management. By integrating smart 
glasses into the home-care regimen, a connection can be 
established with a remote medical expert located at the 
hospital.  
This allows the expert to evaluate the wound remotely, 
instruct the community nurse on specific treatments, and 
ultimately save both the patient (and their caregiver) a trip to 
the hospital. Additionally, it saves time for the hospital-based 
expert and provides a direct learning experience for the 
community nurse [36]. See Figure 4 for an illustrative 
example using Google Glass. As a proof-of-concept, the 
Vuzix M400 smart glasses were used in practice instead of 
Google Glass due to EU regulations. Furthermore, in the use 
case in wound care, additional software from an external 
provider was used because of the ease of use. In another use 
case involving remote assessments of students, Microsoft 
Teams was utilized.  
Another example of this use case also involves Android-
supported smart glasses like the Vuzix M400. On this 
platform, applications can be manually installed as discussed 
in Section II. With that software, in addition to video 
broadcasting, it is also possible to selectively share data: for 
example, drawings on a captured photo or forms. Software 
for remote expert viewing can be acquired from partners 
selling smart glasses or through platforms like Microsoft 
Teams. The rapid and increasing implementation of 
Microsoft Teams since the COVID-19 pandemic has 
demonstrated its capability for hosting virtual meetings or 
broadcasting live video streams [96]. 
V. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 
In the future, we need even more informal learning to 
support a tremendous level of workforce upskilling as we 
face major transformation processes related to climate 
change, population aging, as well as ongoing digitization and 
automation. However, many jobs offer limited opportunities 
for informal learning, in particular, if human-human 
96
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

interaction is scarce, access to stationary desktop computers 
is difficult, and workers are less experienced in self-directed 
learning.  
In Section II, we have shown that the concept of MML 
closely overlaps with the characteristics of informal learning. 
Variations of MML (hand-held vs. hands-free and 
synchronous vs. asynchronous) have been described 
suggesting the MML matrix as a novel classification 
approach.  
To conclude, Table II evaluates how much informal 
workplace learning can be enhanced by two common types 
of MML that we studied in detail: classical handheld MML 
and mobile micro-interactions (MMI) using smart glasses as 
an example of wearable devices. For handheld MML, we 
additionally differentiate between current implementations 
(column 1), and our novel lightweight approach based on 
open-source technologies and an H5P instructional blueprint 
following the design recommendations for MML (column 2). 
Best practices analyzed (Section II.C) have shown that 
MML based on handheld devices and following an 
asynchronous approach without a trainer is the most broadly 
used approach to offer mobile micro-learning nuggets at the 
workplace.  
The proof-of-concept for handheld MML in Subsection 
III shows that based on a lightweight approach using a 
website with a simple CMS system, H5P interactive 
technology, and QR codes, the design and distribution of 
short but engaging MML nuggets are achievable even for 
novices in the field of micro-learning and SMEs with limited 
resources for workforce training. Our novel approach 
reduces the effort needed for content creation – often 
perceived as time-consuming and cumbersome – to a 
minimum (see also [1]). 
Good practices to overcome the pitfalls of existing 
implementations of handheld MML (see Subsection II.C) 
are: Using short videos as a basis, placing visuals and 
animations over “verbals”, designing stand-alone learning 
nuggets for self-directed learning with integrated quizzes and 
other activities that foster experimentation and reflection.  
TABLE II.  
MML TYPES AND POTENTIAL FOR INFORMAL LEARNING 
Criteria 
handheld 
MML 
handheld-
MML  
(H5P) 
MMI 
(hands-
free) 
 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
Self-directing learning activities 
 
 
 
Forms of higher-order learning  
 
 
 
Learning units situated in work 
process 
 
 
 
Media formats and instructional 
strategies suited for learning-
deprieved settings  
 
 
 
Lightweight implementation 
(suited for SMEs) 
 
 
 
Overall potential for informal 
workplace learning  
6 
11 
11 
 
Legend:  some potential  medium potential  high potential for informal workplace learning 
with respect to the criteria evaluated 
 
To sum up, the improved approach to handheld MML 
based on an H5P-based instructional blueprint fosters the 
effectiveness of MML for informal workplace learning 
concerning all the criteria evaluated in Table II. Still, keep in 
mind that the anytime-anyplace nature restricts the 
opportunities for the social part of learning at the workplace 
(see also Section III.a). 
The use case presented in Subsection IV depicts how 
smart glasses as an example of assisted reality wearables 
allow to smoothly offer hands-free synchronous learning 
based on micro-interactions (MMI) with experts, without 
interrupting learners’ manual work. Using wearables to bring 
learning content to the learner tremendously improves the 
degree learning units are situated in actual work routines as 
compared to classical handheld. 
MML. Moreover, higher-order learning based on practice 
and experimentation may be fostered when a remote expert 
guides the learner step-by-step through the respective work 
routine and provides real-time feedback. Albeit at a distance, 
MMI even provides some opportunities for social learning. 
As the main communication modes are verbal and visual 
when implementing MMI based on smart glasses, access for 
learners with restricted reading comprehension is somewhat 
improved as compared to current implementations of 
handheld MML where understanding written text is often 
more important. Still, synchronous MMI highly relies on 
verbal communication which imposes learning barriers for 
those with limited linguistic abilities. 
A major drawback so far for using wearables such as 
smart glasses for MML at the workplace is however, that it is 
a rather complex technology, which often pushes back small 
companies with a high share of blue-collar workers or other 
occupations outside classical office spaces. Moreover, smart 
glasses are still in an early phase of diffusion and are 
currently mainly used for synchronous MMI. This 
necessitates the involvement of a remote expert. If the expert 
is from within the company, this can be managed through 
remote work. However, consulting an external expert is often 
too costly for small businesses. Asynchronous, hands-free 
MML where learners can access learning snippets on-
demand without interrupting their manual work processes are 
still rare in publications to date. The reader may object that 
smart glasses are broadly used for augmenting real work 
settings with additional information based on AR and VR 
technologies. We consciously have abstained from including 
this approach in our paper as authoring AR and VR content 
demands high investment in terms of time, competency, and 
money that in most cases, small companies are not able to 
cover.  
 In conclusion, both methods discussed in this paper - the 
enhanced handheld MML approach and the hands-free MMI 
approach - perform similarly well in promoting informal 
workplace learning. Table II overview shows that these two 
methods have complementary strengths and weaknesses. An 
encouraging avenue for future research could be to combine 
them: Creating an evidence-based, reusable digital blueprint 
using interactive, open-source technologies like H5P and 
adapting them for smart glasses as a hands-free delivery 
method. 
97
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

In a broader sense, each of these two feasible methods, 
when considered individually, still requires further in-depth 
research, especially in terms of learning outcomes and 
applying the training to real-world settings with non-
academic learners, instead of relying solely on evidence from 
academic 
educational 
environments. 
Therefore, 
we 
recommend generating and implementing more use cases for 
the improved handheld MML approach and MMI with smart 
glasses in a real-world context, with a focus on making the 
implementation easier and reducing barriers to learning in 
environments that may not yet have ideal informal learning 
conditions. Knowledge and practical experience in this area 
are crucial for taking the next steps and are relevant for 
researchers, 
small 
and 
medium-sized 
enterprises, 
practitioners, and other stakeholders in knowledge transfer. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
K. Frosch, “Scan to Learn: A Lightweight Approach for 
Informal Mobile Micro-Learning at the Workplace,” The 
Fifteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and 
On-line Learning (eLmL 2023) IARIA, Apr. 2023, pp. 53–
61, ISBN: 978-1-68558-081-0. 
[2] 
K. Smet, I. Grosemans, N. D. Cuyper, and E. Kyndt, 
“Outcomes of Informal Work Related Learning Behaviours: 
A Systematic Literature Review,” Scandinavian Journal of 
Work and Organizational Psychology, vol. 7, pp. 1–18, 
2022, doi: 10.16993/sjwop.151. 
[3] 
A. Clardy, “70-20-10 and the Dominance of Informal 
Learning: A Fact in Search of Evidence,” Human Resource 
Development Review, vol. 17, pp. 153–178, 2018, doi: 
10.1177/1534484318759399. 
[4] 
M. Eraut, “Informal learning in the workplace,” Studies in 
Continuing Education, vol. 26, pp. 247–273, 2004, doi: 
10.1080/158037042000225245. 
[5] 
A. Manuti, S. Pastore, A. F. Scardigno, M. L. Giancaspro, 
and D. Morciano, “Formal and informal learning in the 
workplace: a research review,” International Journal of 
Training and Development, vol. 19, pp. 1–17, 2015, doi: 
10.1111/ijtd.12044. 
[6] 
M. Le Clus, “Informal learning in the workplace: A review 
of the literature,” Australian Journal of Adult Learning, vol. 
51, pp. 355–373, 2011. 
[7] 
S. Sambrook, “Factors Influencing the Context and Process 
of Work-Related Learning: Synthesizing Findings from 
Two Research Projects,” Human Resource Development 
International, 
vol. 
8, 
pp. 
101–119, 
2005, 
doi: 
10.1080/1367886052000342591. 
[8] 
Sobral, J. and Ferreira, L., “Maintenance of fire sprinkler 
systems based on the dynamic assessment of its condition,” 
Process 
Safety 
Progress, 
pp. 
84–91, 
2016, 
doi: 
10.1002/prs.11740. 
[9] 
D. Hovens, “Workplace Learning through Human-Machine 
Interaction in a Transient Multilingual Blue-Collar Work 
Environment,” Journal of Linguistic Anthropology, vol. 30, 
pp. 369–388, 2020, doi: 10.1111/jola.12279. 
[10] 
J. Decius, N. Schaper, and A. Seifert, “Work Characteristics 
or Workers’ Characteristics? An Input-Process-Output 
Perspective on Informal Workplace Learning of Blue-Collar 
Workers,” Vocations and Learning, vol. 14, pp. 285–326, 
2021, doi: 10.1007/s12186-021-09265-5. 
[11] 
S. Skule, “Learning conditions at work: a framework to 
understand and assess informal learning in the workplace,” 
International Journal of Training and Development, vol. 8, 
pp. 8–20, 2004, doi: 10.1111/j.1360-3736.2004.00192.x. 
[12] 
C. P. Cerasoli et al., “Antecedents and outcomes of informal 
learning behaviors: A meta-analysis,” Journal of Business 
and Psychology, vol. 33, pp. 203–230, 2018. 
[13] 
D. Song and C. J. Bonk, “Motivational factors in self-
directed informal learning from online learning resources,” 
Cogent Education, vol. 3, publication no. 1205838, 2016, 
doi: 10.1080/2331186X.2016.1205838. 
[14] 
J. Thillainadesan, D. G. Le Couteur, I. Haq, and T. J. 
Wilkinson, “When I say … microlearning,” Med Educ, vol. 
56, pp. 791–792, 2022, doi: 10.1111/medu.14848. 
[15] 
T. Hug, “Mobile Learning as ’Microlearning’: Conceptual 
Considerations 
towards 
Enhancements 
of 
Didactic 
Thinking,” International Journal of Mobile and Blended 
Learning, 
vol. 
2, 
pp. 
47–57, 
2010, 
doi: 
10.4018/jmbl.2010100104. 
[16] 
Y.-M. Lee, “Mobile microlearning: a systematic literature 
review 
and 
its 
implications,” 
Interactive 
Learning 
Environments, 
pp. 
4636-4651, 
2021, 
doi: 
10.1080/10494820.2021.1977964. 
[17] 
A. Taylor and W. Hung, “The Effects of Microlearning: A 
Scoping Review,” Education Tech Research Dev, vol. 70, 
pp. 363–395, 2022, doi: 10.1007/s11423-022-10084-1. 
[18] 
R. Horst, R. Naraghi-Taghi-Off, L. Rau, and R. Dorner, 
“Bite-Sized Virtual Reality Learning Applications: A 
Pattern-Based Immersive Authoring Environment,” JUCS, 
vol. 26, pp. 947–971, 2020, doi: 10.3897/jucs.2020.051. 
[19] 
K. Leong, A. Sung, D. Au, and C. Blanchard, “A review of 
the trend of microlearning,” Journal of Work-Applied 
Management, 
vol. 
13, 
pp. 
88–102, 
2020, 
doi: 
10.1108/JWAM-10-2020-0044. 
[20] 
M. S. Shail, “Using Micro-learning on Mobile Applications 
to Increase Knowledge Retention and Work Performance: A 
Review of Literature,” Cureus Journal of Medical Science, 
vol. 
11, 
publication 
no. 
e5307, 
2019, 
doi: 
10.7759/cureus.5307. 
[21] 
C. Pimmer and N. Pachler, “Mobile learning in the 
workplace: Unlocking the value of mobile technology for 
work-based education,” in M. Ally and Tsinakos, A., 
Mobile Learning Development for Flexible Learning: 
Athabasca: AU Press, pp. 193–203, 2014. 
[22] 
M. M. Grant, “Difficulties in defining mobile learning: 
analysis, 
design 
characteristics, 
and 
implications,” 
Education Tech Research Dev, vol. 67, pp. 361–388, 2019, 
doi: 10.1007/s11423-018-09641-4. 
[23] 
D. Yu, Z. Yan, and X. He, “Capturing knowledge 
trajectories of mobile learning research: A main path 
98
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

analysis,” Educ Inf Technol, vol. 27, pp. 7257–7280, 2022, 
doi: 10.1007/s10639-021-10869-6. 
[24] 
R. C. Peebles, I. K. Nicholson, J. Schlieff, A. Peat, and D. J. 
Brewster, “Nurses’ just-in-time training for clinical 
deterioration: 
Development, 
implementation 
and 
evaluation,” Nurse Education Today, vol. 84, publication 
no. 104265, 2020, doi: 10.1016/j.nedt.2019.104265. 
[25] 
H. Lukosch and P. de Vries, “Supporting Informal Learning 
at the Workplace,” International Journal of Advanced 
Corporate Learning (iJAC), vol. 2, pp. 39–44, 2009. 
[26] 
R. Sankaranarayanan, J. Leung, V. Abramenka-Lachheb, G. 
Seo, and A. Lachheb, “Microlearning in Diverse Contexts: 
A Bibliometric Analysis,” TechTrends, vol. 67, pp. 260-276 
2022, doi: 10.1007/s11528-022-00794-x. 
 [27] Y. Y. Ho et al., “Turning Coffee Time into Teaching 
Moments Through Bite-Sized Learning for Adult Learners,” 
The Journal of Continuing Higher Education, pp. 1–16, 
2022, doi: 10.1080/07377363.2021.2024000. 
[28] 
I. Jahnke, Y.-M. Lee, M. Pham, H. He, and L. Austin, 
“Unpacking the Inherent Design Principles of Mobile 
Microlearning,” Tech Know Learn, vol. 25, pp. 585–619, 
2020, doi: 10.1007/s10758-019-09413-w. 
[29] 
Y.-M. Lee, I. Jahnke, and L. Austin, “Mobile microlearning 
design and effects on learning efficacy and learner 
experience,” Education Tech Research Dev, vol. 69, pp. 
885–915, 2021, doi: 10.1007/s11423-020-09931-w. 
[30] 
R. Helyer, “Learning through reflection: the critical role of 
reflection in work-based learning (WBL),” Journal of 
Work-Applied Management, vol. 7, pp. 15–27, 2015, doi: 
10.1108/JWAM-10-2015-003. 
[31] 
H. Alzahrani et al., "Students’ Perception of Asynchronous 
versus Synchronous Distance Learning during COVID-19 
Pandemic in a Medical College, Southwestern Region of 
Saudi Arabia," BMC Medical Education, vol. 23, 2023. doi: 
10.1186/s12909-023-04034-5. 
[32] 
S. 
Z. 
M. 
Osman, 
“Combining 
Synchronous 
and 
Asynchronous Learning: Student Satisfaction with Online 
Learning using Learning Management Systems,” Journal of 
Education and e-Learning Research, vol. 9, pp. 147–154, 
2022, doi: 10.20448/jeelr.v9i3.4103. 
[33] 
B. Kress, “See through optical architectures for wearable 
displays,” Imaging and Applied Optics, publication no. 
JTu1A.1, 2014, ISBN: 978-1-55752-308-2.  
[34] 
G. O. Klein, K. Singh, and J. von Heideken, “Smart 
Glasses–A New Tool in Medicine,” Studies in health 
technology and informatics, vol. 216, pp. 901–901, 2015. 
[35] 
M. Tsubosaka et al., “Additional visualization via smart 
glasses improves accuracy of wire insertion in fracture 
surgery,” Surgical Innovation, vol. 24, pp. 611–615, 2017. 
[36] 
N. Zuidhof, O. Peters, P.P. Verbeek, and B. Allouch, 
“Appropriation of smart glasses: a qualitative study from 
multiple perspectives on long-term use of smart glasses in 
healthcare", 2023 (submitted, under review). 
[37] 
A. Hariharan, M. Risling, A. Felic, and T. Ostertag, 
“Integration of Smart Glasses for Knowledge Transfer in 
Industrial Remote Maintenance: Learnings from Practice,” 
in Extended Reality and Metaverse, T. Jung, M. C. tom 
Dieck, and S. M. Correia Loureiro, Eds. Cham: Springer 
International 
Publishing, 
pp. 
297–308, 
2023, 
doi: 
10.1007/978-3-031-25390-4_26. 
[38] 
O. Danielsson, M. Holm, and A. Syberfeldt, “Augmented 
reality smart glasses in industrial assembly: Current status 
and future challenges,” Journal of Industrial Information 
Integration, vol. 20, publication no. 100175, 2020, doi: 
10.1016/j.jii.2020.100175. 
[39] 
A. Rejeb, J. G. Keogh, G. K. Leong, and H. Treiblmaier, 
“Potentials and challenges of augmented reality smart 
glasses in logistics and supply chain management: a 
systematic literature review,” International Journal of 
Production Research, vol. 59, pp. 3747–3776, 2021, doi: 
10.1080/00207543.2021.1876942. 
[40] 
Y.-M. Lee, “Mobile microlearning: a systematic literature 
review 
and 
its 
implications,” 
Interactive 
Learning 
Environments, vol. 31, pp. 1–16, Sep. 2021, doi: 
10.1080/10494820.2021.1977964. 
[41] 
A. Dolowitz, J. Collier, A. Hayes, and C. Kumsal, “Iterative 
Design and Integration of a Microlearning Mobile App for 
Performance Improvement and Support for NATO 
Employees,” TechTrends, vol. 67, pp. 143–149, 2023, doi: 
10.1007/s11528-022-00781-2. 
[42] 
P. S. Hogle, “Microlearning in Corporate Settings,” in 
Microlearning in the Digital Age, J. R. Corbeil, B. H. Khan 
and M. E. Corbeil, Eds. New York: Routledge, pp. 139–
154, 2021. 
[43] 
M. J. Dolasinski and J. Reynolds, “Microlearning: A New 
Learning Model,” Journal of Hospitality & Tourism 
Research, 
vol. 
44, 
pp. 
551–561, 
2020, 
doi: 
10.1177/1096348020901579. 
[44] 
A. M. Selko, “Is Micro Learning a Better Way to Train Our 
Workforce?” 
Jul. 
2019. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.industryweek.com/talent/article/22027877/is-
micro-learning-a-better-way-to-train-our-workforce 
(last 
accessed: Dec 1, 2023). 
[45] 
J. Kävrestad and M. Nohlberg, “Context-Based Micro 
Training: A Framework for Information Security Training,” 
in Human Aspects of Information Security and Assurance, 
N. Clarke and S. Furnell, Eds. Cham: Springer International 
Publishing, pp. 71–81, 2020. 
[46] 
J. Kävrestad, “Context-Based Micro-Training: Enhancing 
cybersecurity training for end-users,” University of Skövde, 
School of Informatics, Skövde, 2022. [Online]. Available 
from: 
http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:his:diva-
21819 (last accessed: Dec 1, 2023). 
[47] 
K. Govender and M. Madden, “The effectiveness of micro-
learning in retail banking,” South African Journal of Higher 
Education, vol. 34, pp. 74–94, 2020. 
[48] 
A. Hoberg, C. Piele, and J. Veit, "Mobile Learning for 
Smart Home/Smart Grid" [“Mobiles Lernen für Smart 
Home/Smart 
Grid,”] 
HMD 
Praxis 
der 
Wirtschaftsinformatik, vol. 50, pp. 80–94, 2013. 
99
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[49] 
G. Dutton, “Game To Train.” 2018. [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://pubs.royle.com/article/Game+To+Train/3177437/52
3001/article.html (last accessed: Dec 1, 2023). 
[50] 
N. May, J. Young, and L. Gillman, “Take 5: Designing and 
evaluating 5-minute eLearning for busy hospital staff,” 
Focus on Health Professional Education, vol. 22, pp. 60–71, 
2021, doi: 10.3316/INFORMIT.120475124591839. 
[51] 
S. Jaschke, “Mobile learning applications for technical 
vocational and engineering education: The use of 
competence snippets in laboratory courses and industry 
4.0,” in 2014 International Conference on Interactive 
Collaborative Learning (ICL), Dec. 2014, pp. 605–608. doi: 
10.1109/ICL.2014.7017840. 
[41] 
M. 
S. 
Billert 
et 
al., 
“Vocational 
Training 
With 
Microlearning—How Low-Immersive 360-Degree Learning 
Environments Support Work-Process-Integrated Learning,” 
IEEE Transactions on Learning Technologies, vol. 15, pp. 
540–553, 2022, doi: 10.1109/TLT.2022.3176777. 
[53] 
T. Weinert, M. Billert, M. T. de Gafenco, A. Janson, and J. 
M. Leimeister, “Designing a Co-creation System for the 
Development of Work-process-related Learning Material in 
Manufacturing,” Comput Supported Coop Work, vol. 32, 
pp. 5–53, 2023, doi: 10.1007/s10606-021-09420-5. 
[54] 
I. Goller, C. Kobe, R. Tscharner, S. Jud, and C. Hertach, 
“Using 
Micro 
Interventions 
to 
Develop 
Team 
Competencies,” Conference of the International Society for 
Professional Innovation Management (ISPIM), Jun. 2021, 
pp. 1–9. 
[55] 
Zavvy, “Creating a training routine for leaders at 
Freeletics.” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.zavvy.io/case-studies/freeletics (last accessed: 
Dec 1, 2023). 
[56] 
RapL, 
Streamlining 
Employee 
Onboarding 
with 
Microlearning. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:   
https://getrapl.com/blog/streamlining-employee-
onboarding-with-microlearning/ (last accessed: Dec 1, 
2023). 
 [57] T. Beste, “Knowledge Transfer in a Project-Based 
Organization Through Microlearning on Cost-Efficiency,” 
The Journal of Applied Behavioral Science, 2021, doi: 
10.1177/00218863211033096. 
[58] 
H. Matsumoto, Y. Hagiwara, N. Yamamoto-Mitani, and A. 
Igarashi, “A randomized control trial for ReDeSign: A 
dementia-friendly mobile microlearning training for store 
workers in Japan,” The Gerontologist, vol. 20, pp. 1–11, 
2023, doi: 10.1093/geront/gnac182. 
[59] 
H. Matsumoto, A. Igarashi, Y. Hagiwara, and N. 
Yamamoto-Mitani, “Relational Design for Dementia and 
Job Significance (ReDeSign): Study protocol for a 
randomized controlled trial of an online dementia training 
for 
retail 
workers,” 
Contemporary 
Clinical 
Trials 
Communications, vol. 26, publication no. 100896, 2022, 
doi: 10.1016/j.conctc.2022.100896. 
[60] 
A. Hegerius, P. Caduff-Janosa, R. Savage, and J. Ellenius, 
“E-Learning in Pharmacovigilance: An Evaluation of 
Microlearning-Based Modules Developed by Uppsala 
Monitoring Centre,” Drug Saf, vol. 43, pp. 1171–1180, 
2020, doi: 10.1007/s40264-020-00981-w. 
[61] 
M. Robalino, “Intervention Development: Quick Response 
Code Implementation for Point-of-Care Training Needs in 
the Emergency Department,” Journal of Emergency 
Nursing, 
vol. 
47, 
pp. 
938–943, 
2021, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.jen.2021.08.003. 
[62] 
H. Lukosch, S. Kurapati, D. Groen, and A. Verbraeck, 
“Microgames for Situated Learning: A Case Study in 
Interdependent Planning,” Simulation & Gaming, vol. 47, 
pp. 346–367, 2016. 
[63] 
U. Zandbergs, J. Judrups, E. Plane, and R. Uscins, 
“Improvement of microlearning with help of learning 
analytics in enterprises,” presented at the 20th International 
Scientific Conference Engineering for Rural Development,  
pp. 1584–1589, 2021 doi: 10.22616/ERDev.2021.20.TF338. 
[64] 
L. Butgereit, “Gamifying mobile micro-learning for 
continuing education in a corporate IT environment,” in 
2016 IST-Africa Week Conference, May 2016, pp. 1–7. 
doi: 10.1109/ISTAFRICA.2016.7530597. 
[65] 
J. I. Criado, C. Herranz, and J. Villodre, “Informal Virtual 
Learning in the Public Sector: Educating Public Servants in 
Digital Social Innovation Environments,” in The Palgrave 
Handbook of the Public Servant, H. Sullivan, H. Dickinson, 
and H. Henderson, Eds. Cham: Springer International 
Publishing, pp. 1–18, 2020. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-03008-
7_46-1. 
[66] 
I. Isibika and C. Zhu, “Microlearning training intervention 
for librarians: design and development," 16th annual 
International Technology, Education and Development 
Conference (INTED2022), pp. 7432–7440, 2022. 
[67] 
L. N. Dyrbye, A. L. Bergene, A. N. L. Hunderfund, and H. 
A. 
Billings, 
“Reimagining 
Faculty 
Development 
Deployment: A Multipronged, Pragmatic Approach to 
Improve Engagement,” Acad. Med., vol. 97, pp. 1322–
1330, 2022, doi: 10.1097/ACM.0000000000004688. 
[68] 
T. Shamir-Inbal and I. Blau, “Micro-learning in designing 
professional development for ICT teacher leaders: The role 
of self-regulation and perceived learning,” Professional 
Development in Education, vol. 48, pp. 734–750, Oct. 2022, 
doi: 10.1080/19415257.2020.1763434. 
[69] 
E. Pölzl-Stefanec and C. Geißler, “‘Micro-steps’ on the 
route to successful online professional development for 
Austrian Early Childhood Educators,” International Journal 
of Educational Research, vol. 115, publication no. 102042, 
2022, doi: 10.1016/j.ijer.2022.102042. 
[59] 
A. Hesse et al., “Short communication: Microlearning 
courses are effective at increasing the feelings of confidence 
and accuracy in the work of dairy personnel,” Journal of 
Dairy Science, vol. 102, pp. 9505–9511, 2019, doi: 
10.3168/jds.2018-15927. 
[71] 
S. Nanjappa, V. Ghosh, S. Acharya, H. S. Mukerjee, and V. 
Stl, “Microlearning in Corporate Settings: Practitioner 
Perspectives,” Human Resource Development International, 
pp. 1–8, 2022, doi: 10.1080/13678868.2022.2160688. 
100
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[72] 
C.-L. Lai, “Trends and research issues of technology-
enhanced self-regulated learning in the mobile era: a review 
of SSCI journal articles,” International Journal of Mobile 
Learning and Organisation, vol. 16, pp. 150–172, 2022, doi: 
10.1504/IJMLO.2022.121879. 
[73] 
E. Roth, M. Moencks, G. Beitinger, A. Freigang, and T. 
Bohné, “Microlearning in Human-centric Production 
Systems,” 
2022 IEEE 
International Conference on 
Industrial Engineering and Engineering Management 
(IEEM), 
2022, 
pp. 
0037–0041, 
doi: 
10.1109/IEEM55944.2022.9989589. 
[74] 
L. Kolodzey, P. D. Grantcharov, H. Rivas, M. P. Schijven, 
and T. P. Grantcharov, “Wearable technology in the 
operating room: a systematic review,” BMJ Innovations, 
vol. 3, pp. 55–63, 2017, doi: 10.1136/bmjinnov-2016-
000133. 
[75] 
J. Clark, P. Crandall, R. Pellegrino, and J. Shabatura, 
“Assessing Smart Glasses-Based Foodservice Training: An 
Embodied Learning Theory Approach," Canadian Journal 
of Learning & Technology, vol. 45, pp. 1-19, 2019, doi: 
10.21432/cjlt27838. 
[76] 
N. Zuidhof, S. Ben Allouch, O. Peters, and P.-P. Verbeek, 
“Perspectives on the Acceptance and Social Implications of 
Smart Glasses: A Qualitative Focus Group Study in 
Healthcare,” International Journal of Human–Computer 
Interaction, 
pp. 
1–11, 
2022, 
doi: 
10.1080/10447318.2022.2111046. 
[77] 
J. Kuhn, P. Lukowicz, M. Hirth, A. Poxrucker, J. Weppner, 
and J. Younas, “GPhysics-Using Smart Glasses for Head-
Centered, 
Context-Aware 
Learning 
in 
Physics 
Experiments,” 
IEEE 
Transactions 
on 
Learning 
Technologies, 
vol. 
9, 
pp. 
304–317, 
2016, 
doi: 
10.1109/TLT.2016.2554115. 
[78] 
S. Hobert and M. Schumann, “LearningGlasses App-A 
smart-glasses-based learning system for training procedural 
knowledge," 16th European Conference on e-Learning, 
2017, pp. 185-194. 
[79] 
Y.-B. Lin, D.-J. Deng, I. You, and C.-C. Lin (Eds.), “IoT as 
a Service”, Proceedings of the Third International 
Conference IoTaaS, Cham: Springer, 2017. 
[80] 
A. Sridhar, J. Burrows, C. Nameth, and Y. M. Huang, “Real 
Time, Remote, and Recorded: Medical Student Experiences 
with Smart Glasses in Obstetrical Simulation,” Southern 
Medical Journal, vol. 116, pp. 686–689, 2023, doi: 
10.14423/SMJ.0000000000001585. 
[81] 
J. Venerella, T. Franklin, L. Sherpa, H. Tang, and Z. Zhu, 
“Integrating AR and VR for mobile remote collaboration,” 
Adjunct Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE International 
Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR-
Adjunct, 2019, pp. 104–108. doi: 10.1109/ISMAR-
Adjunct.2019.00041. 
[82] 
M. Tait and M. Billinghurst, “The Effect of View 
Independence in a Collaborative AR System,” Computer 
Supported Cooperative Work: CSCW: An International 
Journal, vol. 24, pp. 563–589, 2015, doi: 10.1007/s10606-
015-9231-8. 
[83] 
M. X. Cicero et al., “Do You See What I See? Insights from 
Using Google Glass for Disaster Telemedicine Triage,” 
Prehospital and Disaster Medicine, vol. 30, pp. 4–8, 2015, 
doi: 10.1017/S1049023X1400140X. 
[84] 
M. Spitzer, I. Nanic, and M. Ebner, “Distance learning and 
assistance using smart glasses,” Education Sciences, vol. 8, 
2018, doi: 10.3390/educsci8010021. 
[85] 
Muaz-khan, “RTCMultiConnection - WebRTC JavaScript 
Library”, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://github.com/muaz-khan/RTCMultiConnection 
(last 
accessed: Dec 1, 2023). 
[86] 
R. M. Gagne, L. Briggs, and W. W. Wager, Principles of 
Instructional Design Fort Worth, San Djego: HBJ College 
Publishers, 1992. 
[87] 
S. M. Hirsch, E. Bueno, and K. C. Tenure, “Quick 
Response Codes: An Innovative Approach to Just-in-Time 
Education,” Journal of Neuroscience Nursing, vol. 52, pp. 
308–310, 2020, doi: 10.1097/JNN.0000000000000550. 
[88] 
C. T. Karia, A. Hughes, and S. Carr, “Uses of quick 
response codes in healthcare education: a scoping review,” 
BMC Med Educ, vol. 19, 2019, doi: 10.1186/s12909-019-
1876-4. 
[89] 
D. O’Doherty, M. Dromey, J. Lougheed, A. Hannigan, J. 
Last, and D. McGrath, “Barriers and solutions to online 
learning in medical education – an integrative review,” 
BMC 
Medical 
Education, 
vol. 
18, 
2018, 
doi: 
10.1186/s12909-018-1240-0. 
[90] 
M. Fischer, M. Rohweder, and P. Dewan, “H5P (product 
review),” vol. 42, pp. 178–180, 2021. 
[91] 
G. Kiryakova, “Engaging Learning Content for Digital 
Learners,” TEM J., vol. 11, pp. 1958–1964, 2022, doi: 
10.18421/TEM114-65. 
[92] 
R. P. Díaz Redondo, M. Caeiro Rodríguez, J. J. López 
Escobar, and A. Fernández Vilas, “Integrating micro-
learning content in traditional e-learning platforms,” 
Multimed Tools Appl, vol. 80, pp. 3121–3151, 2021, doi: 
10.1007/s11042-020-09523-z. 
[93] 
T. Javorcik, “Content Management System for Creating 
Microlearning Courses,” in 2021 International Symposium 
on Educational Technology (ISET), 2021, pp. 223–227. doi: 
10.1109/ISET52350.2021.00053. 
[94] 
S. Bratt, “Essential strategies for developing mobile-based 
micro-learning,” presented at the EdMedia+ Innovate 
Learning, Association for the Advancement of Computing 
in Education (AACE), 2020, pp. 17–25. 
[95] 
M. John-Otumu and S. Amadi, “Issues on Smart Glasses 
Technology Adoption,” International Journal of Advanced 
Trends in Computer Applications (IJATCA), vol. 7, pp. 6–
11, 2020. 
[96] 
J. Mehta, T. Yates, P. Smith, D. Henderson, G. 
Winteringham, and A. Burns, “Rapid implementation of 
Microsoft Teams in response to COVID-19: One acute 
healthcare organisation’s experience,” BMJ Health and 
Care 
Informatics, 
vol. 
27, 
e100209, 
2020, 
doi: 
10.1136/bmjhci-2020-100209. 
101
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

