1
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Green Hydrogen Production, Transportation,
Securitization, and Tokenization using
Graph-Neural-Network AI-Automated Control
W. Bernard Lee
HedgeSPA Pte. Ltd.
1 Kay Siang Road #12-02
Singapore, 248922
bernard.lee@hedgespa.com
Anthony G. Constantinides
Financial Signals Processing Lab.
Imperial College London
London, UK SW7 2AZ
a.constantinides@imperial.ac.uk
Abstract—HedgeSPA is launching a pilot project for green
electricity and hydrogen production in collaboration with a
consortium including the Fraunhofer Institute for Reliability and
Microintegration (IZM), part of Germany’s leading applied R&D
institute Fraunhofer Institute. Using IZM’s high-temperature
and high-pressure sensors designed for the German chemical
industry, HedgeSPA will deploy its graph-theoretic AI engine on
some of the most advanced hardware supplied (with validation)
by Amazon Web Services (AWS) and Nvidia to control the green
electricity and hydrogen production processes from the cloud
using solar-thermal generation, which can continue generating
electricity for up to 12 hours after sunset. While solar-thermal
technologies are proven, past deployments required large sites
to achieve economies of scale from centralized human support
and data centers. Large sites are more difﬁcult to ﬁnd and as
such their regulatory approval processes can be arduous. For the
economics of smaller sites to work, they need to minimize or even
eliminate human support and data centers from full automation
with an AI engine that can adapt to different topographies
and respond to weather and environmental challenges using
reinforcement learning. In the future, we may further upgrade
electricity generation from turbine engines to thermophotovoltaic
(TPV) cells, while using the residual heat to superheat water
molecules for high-temperature electrolysis, or to Stirling engines
(used in conventional-powered submarines built by countries
such as Japan and Singapore) with fewer moving parts and
no dependency on a water source to produce steam. Today’s
market has plenty of ready buyers of any green electricity,
green hydrogen, or synthetic natural gas produced. The key
challenge appears to be ﬁnancing for the supply side, which
can be addressed by securitizing buyers’ cash ﬂows to pay for
any upfront investments, similar to how homeowners can pay for
mortgages instead of rents when an efﬁcient ﬁnancing mechanism
is available to ﬁnance the upfront investments for construction
companies to build residential homes. We propose to facilitate the
ﬁnancing with a classic waterfall structure under a tokenization
mechanism to issue back-to-back tokens against the asset-back
securities with high-integrity carbon tokens attached. All of the
above ﬁts with a widely-adopted international legal framework
for renewable power plants, with only a few new elements that
appear manageable based on qualiﬁed legal opinions.
Index Terms—Graph Neural Network; AI Process Control;
Green Energy; Solar-Thermal Generation; Securitization; Tok-
enization
Note: This paper is the revised and expanded version of [1].
I. INTRODUCTION
While commercial photovoltaic (PV) panels have now
achieved efﬁciencies exceeding 20%, typically such efﬁciency
is achieved under optimal radiation conditions [25] [30]. Using
PV panels to generate the type of high-voltage, steady-output
electricity or hydrogen by electrolysis still faces technical
unknowns with low efﬁciency being the biggest hurdle to
wider commercialization [6]. The Ashalim Power Station in
Israel [24], the Ivanpah facility in Mojave Desert, California
[27], and the Planta Solar 10 in Andalusia, Spain [29],
have demonstrated the commercial feasibility of solar-thermal
electricity production with efﬁciencies starting from the 20s
and reaching the 30s or even more when the plants can operate
for up to another 12 hours after sunset [2] [15]. Steam-
based turbine generators as well as other heat engines such
as Stirling engines are proven, reliable, and cost-effective, and
minimize inefﬁcient downtime due to PV panels not being
able to operate under optimal solar radiation conditions at all
times, especially after sunset.
The project consortium consists of senior researchers in the
relevant technical ﬁelds, proven professionals in energy project
ﬁnance, as well as private ﬁrms with industrial process control
expertise. While typical solar-thermal installations require 150
hectares (or 1,500,000 square meters) to 320 hectares (or
3,200,000 square meters, or 1,789 meters, exceeding 1 mile
on each side in a square conﬁguration), we propose to build
smaller production sites starting from about 10 hectares (or
100,000 square meters, or 316.2 meters on each side in a
square conﬁguration), or at
1
32 to
1
15 of typical solar thermal
sites today. Such smaller sites are much easier to ﬁnd and
win environmental approvals, and we bring the cost down by
controlling a cluster of these production sites on the cloud and
servicing them with a technical staff centrally located at one or
a couple of locations. More importantly, recent press reports
suggest that giant renewable energy plants are at risk from
single-point failures that destabilize production and quality
[32]. From the buyer’s perspective, a single incident at a giant
production site may mean writing off millions in anticipated

2
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
revenues, while the damages from an accident at one plant
of a more practical size can be contained. The following is a
8-point summary of this proposed project:
1) Pilot. The proposed pilot plant is a ∼5-megawatt facility
targeted to meet customary demonstration requirements
to secure the form of ﬁnancing that we intend to pursue.
We are aiming for extraction sites with high solar
radiation. Green electricity will be either consumed or
sent to the power grid where feasible, or it will be used to
produce green hydrogen or synthetic natural gas during
low-demand hours. Besides traditional turbine engines,
we are also exploring other types of heat engines with
fewer moving parts or no moving parts to convert heat
into electricity.
2) Production. The idea is to replicate these extraction
sites within reasonable transportation distance from a
centralized engineering and transportation hub, with
access to fresh, mixed, or seawater, so that, for instance,
the produced hydrogen or synthetic natural gas can
be shipped to a port for blending with ﬁeld-produced
natural gas for shipment to its ﬁnal destination. Once
proven, this “hub and spoke” production method can be
implemented at more than one or two hubs. We will
prefer locations with reasonable protection from natural
calamities such as hurricanes.
3) Financing. The form of ﬁnancing will be similar to how
Tesla uses third-party ﬁnancing to install photovoltaic
panels on roofs across homes in California, where those
solar electricity generation units are controlled from
the cloud. We are proposing a similar setup because
many farms, aquafarms, or ranches can use up to certain
portions of unused land for renewable energy without
making rezoning applications. Process control will be
driven by HedgeSPA’s graph-theoretic AI engine work-
ing with AWS IOT Core to connect to microcontrollers,
as a setup that has been validated by AWS’ technical
team. This is intended to be a relatively carefree solution
for the landowners, who will beneﬁt from access to
cheap renewable energy, and potentially steady income
streams while complying with government policies of
deriving minimum percentages of energy supplies from
renewable sources. As standard practice, the annual
ﬁnancing program will cover the cost of construction
each year, and the maturity period will be driven by
cashﬂows secured from deliveries.
4) Buyers. At least one buyer in Asia has indicated interest
to take delivery of up to 2 metric tonnes of hydrogen
per day under a highly achievable delivery price target.
Other utilities and energy users in Asia have posted tariff
schedules on renewables. Today’s market challenge is
about ﬁnding reliable supplies, not about identifying de-
mands for renewable energy. Our assessment of current
demand is that we can deliver as much green energy to
corporate buyers as we can practically produce, provided
that we deliver below a certain reasonable price target.
Of course, we must account for any additional process-
ing costs and logistics of getting the end product to
buyers. We plan to use high-quality cashﬂows to support
asset-backed securities and attach high-integrity carbon
offset tokens to them.
5) Securitization. Just like in Tesla’s photovoltaic panel
use case in California, the smooth ﬁnancing of the
generation units will be the key to the success of the
program after our initial pilot project. We plan to ﬁnance
these projects with asset-backed securities and issue the
securities as digital assets to investors, to be custodied
using an independently-veriﬁable ledger. The current
legal opinion is that the entire process can be completed
within a single jurisdiction if desired. If a third-party
jurisdiction is considered desirable, we have discussed
a potential issuance with the Hong Kong Securities and
Futures Commission, but we are actively exploring other
alternatives, such as Dubai, Japan, and Singapore.
6) Tokenization. With economies of scale, we are projecting
our costs and required investments to be consistent with
industry estimates published by Goldman Sachs [26].
To lower the overall costs of ﬁnancing, we also plan to
attach high-integrity carbon offset tokens to these digital
assets based on the non-fungible feature of tokens. Given
the nature of digital ledgers, with our framework the
same one ton of carbon offset credits cannot be sold
more than once. Doing so discourages the prevalence of
widespread fraud among issuers of carbon offset credits
in certain markets today, which often prevents carbon
credits in those markets from fetching their fair market
values in markets known for high integrity.
7) Delivery/Shipment. If the energy is not consumed di-
rectly, delivery and shipment can be done using one
or more of the following methods: a) Pumping any
electricity to the power grid, after using an Automatic
Transfer Switch (ATS) to convert to alternating current
or by using direct current if the receiving utility can
accept direct current, or put the electricity into battery
storage ﬁrst. b) Using green electricity to produce hy-
drogen for speciﬁc applications such as a fuel cell plug-
in unit to extend the range for battery-based electrical
vehicles. c) Blending either green hydrogen or synthetic
natural gas (which can be produced from hydrogen via
the proven Sabatier reaction) with ﬁeld-produced natural
gas for power generation. Synthetic natural gas can be
injected directly into preexisting liqueﬁed natural gas
infrastructure, while shipping hydrogen is a much more
complex technical challenge since hydrogen liqueﬁes at
the formidable temperature of -253◦ Celsius and has
boil-off rate of at least 1% per day. d) The ﬁnal option is
to deliver hydrogen as ammonia which is a jet fuel/petrol
substitute, once a more environmentally friendly process
instead of relying exclusively on the current Haber-
Bosch process (which is taking more than 1% of the
global energy consumption) can be implemented on an
industrial scale.

3
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Foreign 
Equity
Domestic 
Equity
Holding Company 
of one or more 
Power Porivders
Power 
Provider
EQUITY
DEBT
Export Credit Agency or 
Government-backed loans to 
finance equipment purchases
Domestic 
Bank Term 
Loans
Sustainable Bonds 
or International 
Investment Funds
Fig. 1. Typical International Private Power Generation Financing Scheme
8) All of the above ﬁts with a widely-adopted international
legal framework for renewable power plants, with only
a few new elements that appear manageable based on
qualiﬁed legal opinions. See Figure 1.
II. DETAILED DESCRIPTIONS
This section provides detailed descriptions of the proposed
project:
A. Background Technologies
HedgeSPA has a proven graph-theoretic AI engine with
a successful track record in application to investment man-
agement and related domains in machine learning [4]. In
particular, some of our latest R&D projects have won global
recognition by appearing in scientiﬁc publications of respected
publishers such as Springer-Nature [12]. This proposal aims
to deploy this AI engine to control chemical processes for the
green energy demonstration plan.
AWS IoT Greengrass device driver can support Web Sockets
and MQTT protocols. HedgeSPA’s AI engine, already running
on AWS, supports Web Sockets, with plans to integrate with
MQTT eventually.
The planned collaboration model is for
IZM to load Greengrass to drive their hardware sensors so
that HedgeSPA developers can read the digital outputs from
the UNIX ports on sensor microcontrollers. Thereafter, the
HedgeSPA technical team can perform the rest of the integra-
tion tasks from the microcontrollers to the AI engine.
AWS has also reduced the absolute minimum RAM require-
ments to 1 megabyte to support light microcontrollers such
as the ARM Cortex M-class microcontrollers. Based on the
sensor design proposed by IZM, we aim to package the sensors
and its microcontroller into a single unit. The microcontrollers
can initiate orderly shutdowns in the event that connectivity to
the AI engine on AWS is lost due to rare breakdowns, such as
peak coronal mass ejections or solar ﬂares which are expected
to peak in this decade.
How can this new setup revolutionize the production of
green energy? In the past, energy plants had to be large in order
to support the cost of a data center to manage the equipment
and personnel. This meant that reaching a certain scale was the
only ﬁnancially viable option. However, with the use of an AI
engine, we can now create more ﬂexible setups that control the
production process from the cloud. For example, commercial
farms, aquafarms, and ranches often have unused land that
can be leased to build smaller solar-thermal plants, which
can then be consolidated at a transportation and maintenance
hub for export shipment. By using sensors that can withstand
high temperatures and pressure, the AI engine can collect and
analyze data more effectively. Additionally, the sensors can be
easily relocated within the reaction chambers to optimize AI
training without requiring new custom-built chambers, since
the sensors are packaged with microprocessors and require
only thermalcouple wiring for power supply, which is rated
for 1200◦ Celsius off-the-shelf.

4
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
B. Project Objectives
The proposed project’s objectives include the following:
1) Reduction in the cost of renewable energy:
• We expect our hydrogen production cost to eventu-
ally get closer to the US Administration’s ambitious
target of 1 US dollar per kilogram of hydrogen
under the economy of scale. The current design
is based on the proven technology of Polymer
Electrolyte Membrane (PEM) Electrolysis coupled
with a Solar-Thermal Steam Turbine and feeding
the efﬂuent steam to the electrolysis surface. Both
improving the efﬁciency of the membrane surface
using more advanced electrode materials (such as
those developed by South Korea at 20 times the
efﬁciency of platinum electrodes) and heating the
water (instead of superheating to 2,600 degrees to
ionize water molecules into their plasma state under
High-Temperature Electrolysis, which may not be
energy efﬁcient even when the solar-thermal setup
is in a location with very hot weather) will allow
a steam turbine or another heat engine to produce
the electricity to electrolyze heated water molecules.
The pilot plant will allow us to collect experimental
data and ﬁne-tune system control parameters to
achieve the most efﬁcient temperature/electricity
combination given the simulation models and the
characteristics of the sites.
• Active investigation of other safe methods of de-
livery, such as hydrogenation and dehydrogenation
aiming to achieve more practically realizable objec-
tives on such aspects as heat/pressure required in
the Methylcyclohexane (MCH) process, including
transportation of hydrogen without the signiﬁcant
amount of energy required to liquefy hydrogen at
-253◦ Celsius to transport it in liquid form.
2) Increase in the value delivered by renewable energy:
• The proposed setup can be augmented by other
methods to generate green electricity at non-sunlight
hours to maximize the usage of the electrolyzer,
which is a ﬁxed-cost investment. For example, there
can be a higher attitude wind farm feeding green
electricity to the electrolyzers to produce hydrogen
at night (slopes cool faster, and cool air rushes
down), and all such control mechanisms can be
driven by the AI engine on the cloud. This is anal-
ogous to how Tesla chooses to sell more expensive
electricity to the State of California grid during
peak consumption hours during the day but draws
cheaper electricity from the public grid to charge
vehicles at night.
• Part of our testing efforts will ﬁne-tune the most
efﬁcient temperature-pressure-source combinations
based on physical characteristics such as the unique
topology of each production site. With such dy-
namic management, we expect our hydrogen pro-
duction cost to eventually get closer to the Biden
Administration’s ambitious target of 1 US dollar per
kilogram of hydrogen under the economy of scale.
• Eventually, our process control engine can consider
other factors such as access to consolidated dis-
tribution units to optimize production and delivery
methods based on the most up-to-date market prices.
3) Improvement in technology readiness and commercial
readiness of renewable energy technologies:
• We start with proven technology and modify the
temperate/electricity mix to achieve higher efﬁ-
ciency. This may include using the pilot plant to
adapt to lower-temperature techniques tested in lab-
oratories before rolling out such technology in new
plants:
– Sulfur Iodine Cycle
– Cerium (IV) oxide-cerium (III) oxide cycle
– Copper-chlorine cycle
– Hybrid sulfur cycle
– Iron oxide cycle
– Zinc-zinc oxide cycle
• The testing of materials that can stand up to 2,600◦
Celsius for constructing the reaction chamber in
high-temperature electrolysis (likely candidates are
ceramics – with some candidate materials already in
use in Japan for hybrid-hydrogen power generation),
or more efﬁcient materials for PEM electrolysis.
Part of our R&D efforts will ﬁne-tune the most
efﬁcient temperature-pressure combinations based
on the physical characteristics of each production
site. There are modeling solutions available for such
temperature optimization today [16].
4) Reduction in or removal of barriers to renewable energy
uptake:
• Integration of the AI engine with solar-thermal
mirror and control algorithms to focus solar rays
on the reaction chamber and with actual testing of
the thermal efﬁciency on the demonstration plant
means that any control software updates can be
deployed directly from the cloud. While we expect
to staff support professionals servicing multiple sites
around each major delivery center to meet health
and safety requirements, these plants should no
longer require large data centers and large crews to
run. Just like Tesla in California, we are proposing
a smart solution that can be deployed ﬂexibly by
any farm or aquafarm owner with a low barrier to
entry.
• The proposed computational control architecture has
already been validated by AWS to work with AWS
IOT Core, while the AI engine is already working
with WebSockets as required by AWS. Deploying
the control mechanism on the cloud will mean that
many farms or aquafarms with at least 5∼10% of
unused land will have access to cheap renewable

5
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
energy as well as income streams while contribut-
ing to the global ﬁght against climate change by
delivering green energy to a transportation hub for
domestic consumption or exporting.
• Finally, one key to success in the world’s sustainable
energy transformation is the availability of ﬁnanc-
ing. We are proposing an innovative way to ﬁnance
these projects using digital tokens based on the
fact that ample demands and supplies exist, but the
upfront investment simply needs to be made.
5) Increased skills, capacity, and knowledge relevant to
renewable energy technologies:
• Physical testing of all chemical steps to ﬁne-tune
the chemical simulations already completed on the
Chem-CAD software ASPEN – In particular, future
upgrades will follow the path of simulation to lab-
scale testing to demonstration-scale testing. Where
feasible, the pilot plant can be used to test some
of the lower temperature cycles in electrolysis. This
will also involve the future construction of lab-scale
demonstration units that will allow a continuous
ﬂow of chemical processes rather than the hitherto
batch mode operations. These activities will include
the practical training of scientists, engineers, and
technicians.
• The world cannot migrate away from fossil fuels
based on batteries alone because the use of batteries
in commercial transportation such as buses and
trucks has the known problem of low energy-to-
weight ratio with the need to transport the heavy
weight of batteries. In fact, batteries ﬁnish dead
last in an energy density chart published by the
top American manufacturer of locomotives. In the
same chart, the manufacturer suggests that hydro-
gen can be one solution to this problem. Hydro-
gen fuel cell supplement is one attractive solution
for mid-distance commercial vehicles with its far
more attractive energy-to-weight ratio, but voltage
stabilization and heat mitigation are necessary to
avoid the overheating of batteries and therefore
potential explosions. Moreover, HICE (hydrogen in-
ternal combustion engine) or the practice alternative
of mixing fossil fuels with ammonia requires no
to extremely simple modiﬁcations to the existing
gasoline-powered vehicles, e.g. HICE has been de-
ployed on buses in California for over a decade.
As we need to target our capacities based on end
customer demand, we will also devote resources
either to test the downstream technology directly or
work collaboratively with relevant R&D institutes.
III. PROPOSAL IMPLEMENTATION
The generation of hydrogen via electrolysis is well under-
stood by scientists. We will start with a proven setup and
explore other alternatives to improve efﬁciency and lower
reactor temperature:
A. Proposed Hydrogen Production Technology
The typical consumption rate of hydrogen by a passen-
ger vehicle has been estimated to be slightly above 10
grams/kilometer. Assuming that commercial vehicles travel
200 kilometers/day, the average daily consumption of each
vehicle will be ∼2 kilograms of hydrogen. One source of
hydrogen demands that we have identiﬁed is from a ﬂeet
of 1,000 vehicles, which will consume 2 metric tons per
day or about 700 metric tons/year (assuming 350 operating
days/year, allowing for downtime due to public holidays and
maintenance). The demand volume is expected to increase
dramatically over the next few years. We expect the aggregate
demand that we can serve can eventually exceed the yield of
2,000 metric tons/day.
We propose to produce hydrogen in scale using solar-
thermal electrolysis, which can be either based on a) High-
Temperature Electrolysis or one of its lower-temperature vari-
ants based on a different chemistry cycle, b) Polymer Elec-
trolyte Membrane (PEM) Electrolysis coupled with a Steam
Turbine or a Stirling Engine (a heat engine design that does
not require steam, see Figure 3) and feeding the efﬂuent steam
to the electrolysis surface, as illustrated in Figure 4. Both
modifying the electrode membrane and heating the water will
allow a steam turbine to produce electricity to electrolyze
vaporized water molecules. The high-level design is to produce
steam in a solar-thermal plant, convert the thermal energy
into electricity, and then use the efﬂuent to feed steam to the
electrolyzer surface to produce hydrogen. Part of our R&D
efforts will ﬁne-tune the most efﬁcient temperature-pressure
combinations based on the physical characteristics of each
production site. There are many simulation models available
for temperature optimization [16].
Nature reported that MIT achieved 40% efﬁciency (compa-
rable to turbines) with a heat engine with no moving parts
by reﬂecting any unconverted photons back to the emitter.
This technology is known as Thermal Photovoltaic (TPV) cell
[11]. While the high efﬁciency was gained by preserving heat,
the process of conversion may still be slow especially if it
must be ﬂow-based or the heat circuit may overheat. Practical
application is still a challenge because ceramic materials such
as zirconium must be used to construct a heating/reaction
chamber without the risk of its melting and then connected to
a ”cooling” coil with Gallium Arsenide (GaAs) multi-junction
devices and back reﬂectors to convert infrared radiation into
electricity. The coil can be ﬁlled with molten salt or a heat
transfer ﬂuid, and then reheated. Any residual heat can be
used to plasmarize water molecules for high-temp electrolysis.
In summary, the building up and maintaining of such high
temperatures for efﬁcient conversion do present practical chal-
lenges to developing a practical heat engine with no moving

6
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Fig.
2.
PEM
Electrolysis
Process
(Davidlfritz,
CC
BY-SA
3.0
<https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0>,
via
Wikimedia
Com-
mons.)
parts or deployable thermal energy grid storage (TEGS). The
high cost of GaAs fabrication is also a potential roadblock
but it has been reduced thanks to new fabrication techniques.
This can be an interesting supplement to the next phase of
our R&D program after starting with steam turbine or Stirling
generators.1
For solar-thermal generation, the most desirable region to
run such productions will be hot and dry desert areas with
over 3,000 sun-hours per year and access to water. Any
location with over 2,000 sun-hours per year can still be a
reasonable location for demonstration purposes. The steam
will be extracted by solar-thermal distillation and the high
temperature will be generated by AI-controlled solar mirrors.
The currently proposed design will be based on a triple-
heat-circuit solar-thermal design, as shown in Figure 4. TPV
cells can supplement and eventually replace the turbine engine
in the heat circuit.
In the future, besides TPV cells, such a setup can be
augmented by wind, photovoltaic or tidal methods to generate
green electricity, and with the following lower temperature
1The
list
of
GaAs
foundries
with
the
capacities
to
launch
any
volume
production
of
TPV
cells
is
available
from
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List of semiconductor fabrication plants.
Fig. 3. Cut-away diagram of a rhombic drive beta conﬁguration Stirling en-
gine design: 1 - Hot cylinder wall; 2 - Cold cylinder wall; 3 - Coolant inlet and
outlet pipes; 4 - Thermal insulation separating the two cylinder ends; 5 - Dis-
placer piston; 6 - Power piston; 7 - Linkage crank and ﬂywheels Not shown:
Heat source and heat sinks. In this design, the displacer piston is constructed
without a purpose-built regenerator. (BetaStirlingTG4web.jpg: Togoderivative
work: Ionutzmovie, CC BY-SA 3.0 <http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
sa/3.0/>, via Wikimedia Commons).
chemical cycles than high-temperature electrolysis to produce
hydrogen:
• Sulfur Iodine Cycle
• Cerium (IV) oxide-cerium (III) oxide cycle
• Copper-chlorine cycle
• Hybrid sulfur cycle
• Iron oxide cycle
• Zinc-zinc oxide cycle
B. Delivery
Most sites will be of dual use. Feeding electricity to a power
grid involves the proven technology of using an Automatic
Transfer Switch. When hydrogen is produced, the harder
technical challenge is the shipping of hydrogen to its ﬁnal
delivery sites, which can be complex and dangerous. When the
cost of and access to land is not an issue (e.g. Australia), then
we should produce the renewable energy as inexpensively as
possible and then create the hydrogen. Then, one can afford
a more expensive method to ship the green energy over a
longer distance. On the other hand, when the cost of and access
to land is an issue (e.g. an industrial park in Asia to supply
energy next door, where land is allocated), then we can focus
on creating maximum yield from whatever land available and
using the electrolyzer only when there is no immediate demand
for the green electricity. The possible methods of transporting
hydrogen are described as follows:

7
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Fig. 4. Solar-Therma Hydrogen Production Plant Schematic
1) For shorter distances (within 3,000 kilometers, we pro-
pose that we ship with Type 3 or Type 4 compressed
hydrogen tanks. This is most likely the solution when the
primary goal of a renewable energy plant is to feed green
electricity to an electric grid. Hydrogen is produced
to capture the surplus green energy, and shipped to
other ﬂexible demand buyers such as hydrogen fuel cell
distributors. As an example, this is a good solution when
limited land is allocated adjacent to an industrial site,
with the goal of delivering green energy for direct and
immediate consumption.
2) For mid-distance deliveries of about 3,000∼7,000 kilo-
meters, one solution is to use bulk carriers to ship
methylcyclohexane (MCH). This method involves the
hydrogenation of toluene, a colorless and odorless liq-
uid, into methylcyclohexane. After arriving at a receiver
port, the MCH can be dehydrogenated (under heat and
pressure) to release the hydrogen for local consumption.
Currently, hydrogen delivered with this method can be
delivered to locations such as the Port of Kawasaki in
Japan. This is seen as a temporary workaround because
unused reﬁneries can be converted into MCH hydro-
genation and dehydrogenation plants, thus lowering the
cost of the remewable energy supply chain using this
solution.
3) For delivery over longer distances, we propose to con-
vert the hydrogen into synthetic natural gas using the
Sabatier reaction ﬁrst and then ship the liqueﬁed natural
gas (LNG). Some utilities in Asia have been given
explicit targets to blend synthetic natural gas with LNG
by 2030. Hydrogen has a liqueﬁcation point of -253◦
Celsius, while LNG liqueﬁes at -161.5◦ Celsius at
atmospheric pressure. Moreover, liquid hydrogen has a
boil-off rate as high as 1% per day, meaning that 20 ∼
30% of a shipment may be dissipated before reaching
a long-distant destination. Synthetic natural gas is a far
more practical method to ship to long-distant locations
of over 10,000 kilometers. This is the likely solution
when there is an existing LNG infrastructure and plenty
of land for generating renewable energy, such as the
Middle East or parts of Malaysia, with plenty of carbon
feedstock from their natural gas ﬁelds.
4) The problem with synthetic natural gas is that the carbon
feedstock will still be released into the atmosphere. To
address such a problem, we propose to use ammonia as a
subsequent-stage solution for transportation fuels, since
it liqueﬁes at the easily achievable temperature of -33◦
Celsius. Ammonia can be deployed as a direct substitute
for gasoline and jet fuel in certain applications, often
requiring no to relatively simple modiﬁcations to the
power plant. Upon combustion, ammonia emits nitrogen
and water. Neither of them causes any harm to the
environment. Unlike MCH which requires the shipment
of toluene back to the production site, ammonia does
not require any dehydrogenation at the delivery point
and the “return shipment” of toluene, resulting in more
cost savings.
Today, the industrial conversion of hydrogen to am-
monia is based on the extensively-used Haber-Bosch
process. The mixture of nitrogen and hydrogen will be
compressed to 100 ATM but cooled to 450◦ Celsius
using a cooling coil. The resulting gas will be fed into

8
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
an absorber column ﬁlled with water. The ammonia
is extracted from the bottom of the absorber column.
Any unreacted gas will be recycled from the top of
the absorber column. This needs to be done as a batch-
based process because of the extreme pressure required.
A more pragmatic strategy in the future is to use a bio-
catalyst, such as using nitrogenase to combine hydrogen
with nitrogen to make ammonia, which is signiﬁcantly
”greener” than the Haber-Bosch process with a much
lower excitation energy threshold. In other words, hydro-
gen is pumped into holding tanks containing organisms
with the enzymes to convert hydrogen into ammonia.
The issue is how to do so beyond lab-scale experiments
given that ammonia is highly solvable in water.
Common methods of removing ammonia from the out-
put solution either oxidizes the ammonia (thus defeat-
ing the purpose) or uses heat and pressure, leading
some to question how green the produced ammonia
is. Nonetheless, ammonia is a possible solution when
there is an abundance of land for generating cheap
renewable energy, and therefore the commercial ob-
jective is to make the renewable energy as cheaply
as possible from locations such as North Africa, the
Middle East or Australia. Then, it is a matter of turning
green hydrogen into green ammonia, even by using a
relatively slow ammonia removal pathway that requires
large holding tanks, to be delivered for use in say
commercial shipping, where the ammonia is burnt so
a tiny percentage of impurities is considered acceptable.
When there is sufﬁcient volume, the high minimum
cost of building a Haber-Bosch plant, to be eventually
replaced by biochemical processes with lower excitation
energy thresholds, can become commercially justiﬁable.
C. Securitization and Tokenization
This subsection contains the implementation details of the
securitization and tokenization piece of the project, to create
the so-called “high integrity” carbon offset tokens.
1) Token-based Financing Use Case:
1) Investors can buy digital assets on renewal energy using
an authorized central bank digital currency (CBDC) or
a stablecoin backed by a ﬁat currency.
2) Their local regulators can conﬁrm the eligibility of the
investors to invest (instead of relying on payment apps or
commercial banks to do KYC/AML) according to local
regulations.
3) The identity of the qualiﬁed buyer can be lodged in a
“custody” ledger at a brand-name custodian that will be
kept under the watchful eyes of the issuance jurisdic-
tion’s central bank or securities regulator.
4) The issuance does not need to be for any speciﬁc
jurisdiction such as Hong Kong. We are using Hong
Kong as one example because of a Green Bond program
already in existence, but we may choose to do so under
the CBI program in Australia or any other relevant
jurisdiction such as Singapore, in case Hong Kong may
require complicated licensing for issuing digital tokens.
5) If the security is redeemed (either at maturity or by the
market maker), the proceeds can be converted back to
the CBDC based on the prevailing exchange rate.
6) If working with one speciﬁc regulator may take too
long, then a similar idea can be applied to another
jurisdiction, e.g. Japanese investors provided that the
tokens comply with ERC-721 requirements. We have
been working with one of Japan’s top two securities law
ﬁrms to determine how we can meet the exempt status
for selling to Japanese investors. For a simpler proof of
concept without excessive regulatory concerns, another
possibility is to issue the paper securities while running
the digital token ledger in the same jurisdiction.
7) The HedgeSPA core investment platform will integrate
with Hyperledger Fabric and offer the users of our
solution a secure way to manage both the tokens and
the underlying carbon assets. Doing this should create
no unwarranted security concern from investors in that
the actual ledger sits with a brand-name custodian.
8) We also intend to move some of our non-asset-backed
securities investment products to such a ledger to create
digital ETFs. This way, we attract more traditional
investors to use digital tokens as an asset class for
ﬁnancing different sustainable energy projects. The more
precise technical details are given below and further
illustrated in Figure 8:
• Construct an investor portal2 for an investor to
transact on one unit of security.
• API
calls
working
with
CBDC
portal
to
buy/subscribe to the asset-backed security:
– investor transfers the quoted CBDC amount to
the CBDC account of the custody bank
– local regulator allows the custody bank to conﬁrm
investor eligibility (preferably electronically);
– log one unit of the security under the investor’s
name in the bank ledger;
– custody bank to issue one token (on the Hyper-
ledger Fabric blockchain) to the investor.
• API
calls
working
with
investor
portal
to
sell/redeem asset-backed security:
– investor to give instructions to the custody bank
to sell one unit of the token on the portal;
– conﬁrm investor instruction to sell based on the
latest bid price quoted by the market maker;
– conﬁrm account details and double-check that
the account has no KYC issues (based on local
regulatory requirements);
– sell or redeem one unit of security; reverse one
unit of the security under the investor’s name in
2The initial version can be based on a subset of our ﬁntech terminal
interfacing with the API of a digital market such as Coinbase, with a
subsequent version upgraded to API calls to an in-house marketplace running
the Hyperledger Fabric chaincode.

9
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Fig. 8. Asset Tokens in Custodian Ledger
the bank ledger;
– custody bank to deposit proceeds to the investor’s
CBDC account.
• API calls to detach carbon offset token from com-
bined security:
– investor to surrender token on the portal and
give instructions to detach carbon token from
security3;
– reverse one unit of the combined security under
the investor’s name in the bank ledger;
– add one unit of the standalone security and one
unit of carbon credit token under the investor’s
name in the bank ledger;
– sends one unit of the standalone security and
one unit of carbon credit back to the investor’s
account.
2) Beneﬁts from Token Financing Proposal:
1) Financial inclusion – CBDC does not receive any in-
terest payment unless it is deposited. Today, inﬂation is
driven heavily by surging energy prices, and the world
is getting ready for its expected transformation to adopt
renewable energy. The creation of straightforward ways
to convert CBDCs into renewable energy-linked securi-
ties allows the ﬁnancially “less involved” population to
participate in the upside of adopting renewable energy.
2) Minimize fraud and develop high-integrity carbon mar-
ket in Asia – The regional carbon credit market in
Asia has not been able to fetch international carbon
prices to date due to the (mis)perception of widespread
3Once detached investors cannot reattach based on industry practice, similar
to detaching a warrant.
fraud. Attaching non-fungible serial numbers to digital-
ized carbon credits is one solution toward developing
a high-integrity carbon market since the same one ton
of veriﬁed carbon credits on the blockchain can no
longer be sold more than once. Selling the same one
ton of carbon offset credits more than once is how
certain Asian carbon markets has lost the trust among
international investors.
3) A mechanism to settle cross-border transactions in se-
curities issued in one jurisdiction for other CBDC and
stablecoin investors – This is expected to become a
highly credible test case for interoperability with large-
value transactions under delivery-versus-payment (DvP)
in a shorter settlement timeframe than t+2 via a brand-
named custodian, in the following two ways:
• Settlement on a programmable CBDC can be made
as soon as a digital asset is received and the ledger
entries are updated. There is no other reason for
this transaction to require T+2 settlement. As and
when both the custodian and the investor agree, this
can be settled based on even end-of-day or T+0
settlement. Please note that in a typical setup like
this, the paper security will be held by the custo-
dian in “street name”. This mechanism should be
done inside the custodian and does not require any
designated “oracle” unless required by regulators.
• Similarly, a digital bond can release its coupons as
programmable CBDC automatically when certain
pre-deﬁned conditions (identiﬁed by a designated
oracle) are met. Without the cost of servicing agents
to send out coupon checks, digital bonds can be easy

10
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Input
1. Graph Sturcture
2. Node and Edge Properties
GNN 
Layer
GNN 
Layer
GNN 
Layer
Output
Reward
3. Reward and
Learning
Parameters
4. Build 
Computational 
Modules
………
E.g. Convolution or Recurrent Operators
Node
Embedding
Edge
Embedding
Graph 
Embedding
Loss 
Functions
Training 
Sets
Control 
Parameters
Fig. 9. Typical Steps in Designing a GNN
to manage to accommodate more retail investors,
especially retirees. Today, one reason for the high
minimum on most bond investments is that issuers
are unwilling to pay for the high costs of servicing
retail investors (e.g. sending coupons, and manual
corrections of common book entry mistakes).
3) Initial Use Case: For our initial test case, we have
attracted the interest from one ﬁnancial institution in Asia
which has secured certain ability to issue digital wallets for
their local investors. We are in discussion with that institution
because our tokens may ﬁt their investors’ interest in more
diversiﬁed investments and are safer than equities. This may
be an effective test case by offering digital securities directly
to local investors without the explicit requirement to involve
a third-party jurisdiction. Simultaneously, we are also in dis-
cussion with other potential issuance parties in that we are
interested in identifying a general solution that is not limited
to any speciﬁc country, e.g. one country offers potential test
sites, on-site green energy demands as well as the off-shore
exchange to issue the asset-backed tokens. We are also aware
of that one major technology giant is actively involved in
the development of Non-Fungible Tokens. We are agnostic
about which base technology to use to develop the necessary
blockchain mechanism. It is primarily about doing so in the
most cost-effective way without creating strong dependency
on a single technology/provider.
IV. CONTROL MECHANISM BY AI ENGINE
In this section, we present our proposed method for pro-
duction control using an AI engine based on graph theory,
which has been developed and proven by HedgeSPA. The
approach involves creating a graph model with nodes and
edges that represent M stages, N processes, and M − 1
holding tanks involved in the production process. This type of
model has been previously used by organizations like NASA
for automated control applications, and has been proposed by
various sources, including [9], [7], and [21]. To explain our
approach clearly, we break it down into four steps, which are
depicted in Figure 9.
The ﬁrst step involves modifying the framework presented
in [9] for manufacturing automation to create the graph
structure that accommodates the complexity of chemical pro-
cesses. The second step involves specifying the properties of
nodes and edges in the graph structure using Graph Neural
Network, with nodes representing reaction chambers and links
representing ﬂuid ﬂows. In the third step, we design reward
and learning parameters, including real-time sensor states and
system-wide loss functions, and apply smoothing functions
to increase the robustness of estimates. Finally, in the fourth
step, we build computational modules using the graph abstrac-
tion of the green energy production process, integrating the
HedgeSPA graph-theoretic AI engine with IZM sensors for
optimal control. We apply multiple computational methods,
such as Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) and

11
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
spectral techniques based on graph Fourier transforms, to solve
for the optimal solution.
A. Graph Neural Network (GNN)
The proposed approach utilizes a standard graph notation,
where G = (V, E), with V representing the set of nodes xi ∈
X and E representing the set of links between nodes eij =
(xi, xj) ∈ E. The adjacency matrix A is deﬁned as an n ×
n matrix where Aij = 1 if nodes vi and vj are connected,
represented by eij ∈ E, and Aij = 0 if they are unconnected,
represented by eij /∈ E. The hidden states and output vector
of a node v are denoted by hv and ov respectively, following
standard graph-based learning notation.
To represent a node, the proposed approach uses a
two-step process under the spatial method, as suggested
by [9]. In the Aggregate step, the hidden states of im-
mediate neighbors of node i are aggregated, i.e. al
i
=
Aggregate
(
hl−1
j
: j ∈ N (i)
)
. In the Combine step, the node
embedding for the l-th GNN layer is generated, i.e. hl
i =
Combine
(
hl−1
i
, al
i
)
. The node embedding is represented by
hl
i, where l denotes the number of layers of aggregation, and
N (i) denotes the set of immediate neighbors of node xi. The
proposed approach allows for l layers of aggregating the node
embedding, while weight matrices are not explicitly used in
the Combine step, according to [9].
Different standardized notations have been suggested by
other researchers across multiple training methods, as dis-
cussed in survey and review publications on GNN. However,
the notation used by [9] is primarily followed in the approach
proposed here to allow for easy comparison and contrast
between different types of applications, and to ensure con-
sistency in variable indexing among developers. It’s important
to note that the deﬁnitions of the graph, nodes, and edges
described in the subsequent subsections are speciﬁc to the
chemical engineering problem being addressed, rather than the
manufacturing problem presented by [9].
B. Production System-Level Modeling
This subsection explains how the production system is mod-
eled to account for the interactions between the different stages
and processes involved. The system has multiple stages, each
with one or more reaction chambers, as well as intermediate
holding tanks between each stage. The level of each holding
tank is tracked, and the capacity of each tank is limited.
First, the system is assumed to have M stages, N processes,
and M −1 holding tanks. Each reaction chamber in the system
processes one step of the chemical process. However, one stage
may have one or more reaction chambers before feeding into
a holding tank. A quality inspection is carried out in the ﬁnal
stage of the full chain of chemical reactions.
Intermediate holding tanks are present between every two
consecutive stages because each stage may have varying
throughputs during different stages of its chemical reactions.
The level of the m-th holding tank is denoted by bm, where
n ∈ [2, ..., M]. The holding tanks have ﬁnite capacities, with
Bm representing the capacity of the m-th holding tank. Thus,
bm ≤ Bm.
If a reaction chamber is operational but its upstream holding
tank is empty, it is considered ”starved”, which can cause
downstream delays and disruptions. If a reaction chamber
is operational but its downstream holding tank is full, it
is considered ”blocked”, which can also cause delays and
disruptions upstream. These conditions are undesirable and can
signiﬁcantly reduce system yield if not managed properly.
The decisions made regarding process control and the condi-
tions of each reaction chamber directly affect the system-level
dynamics of the production system. The resulting output can
be highly non-linear and characterized by step-function-like
behavior, highlighting the importance of effective management
and control of the system.
C. Reaction Chamber-Level Modeling
This subsection explains how the sensor states and ob-
servation uncertainties are modeled at the reaction chamber
level, which is essential for making decisions at both the
system-level and process-level. To capture the sensor state,
discrete values are used as sensors send digital outputs. A
scalar representation is used to simplify notations, although
multiple sensors attached to a single reaction chamber can be
treated as a vector.
The sensor state of process n after processing k chemical
steps is denoted as xt
n,k, where T is the maximum number of
possible sensor states, and the superscript t is used to identify
a speciﬁc sensor. The observation of the sensor state at the k-th
pass is denoted as ˜zt
n,k ∈ Z ≡ [1, 2, ..., T ]. The superscript t
denotes a speciﬁc sensor. The transition model of the sensor
state is the probability of the sensor state transitioning from
state xt
n,k−1 at the (k − 1)-th pass to state xt
n,k at the k-
th pass, and can be written as the conditional probability
p(xt
n,k|xt
n,k−1), and the observation model of the sensor state
is the probability of observing zt
n,k given the underlying sensor
state is xt
n,k, or the conditional probability p(zt
n,k|xt
n,k).
The transition model can be derived through chemical engi-
neering modeling or experimentation to account for practical
losses and sensor delays. The observation model, which is
independent of speciﬁc sensor placements or machine learning
models, can be obtained from sensor data calibration and
machine learning error analysis.
D. Process-Level Modeling
This subsection discusses the process-level modeling which
involves creating desired compounds from raw materials using
chemical engineering processes. As each chemical process can
be unique, it may not be practical to include all processes
and constraints in a single graph. To address this, a general
mathematical model is presented that focuses on multi-level
integrated control.
First, a chemical substance is characterized by its key
properties, which are denoted as qi
m, where m represents the
stage of the process ranging from 1 to M. These properties
can be represented as a vector.

12
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The process model is represented by the equation qi
m =
p(qi
m−1, xt
n,k, ui
n, ϵ). Here, qi
m−1 is the chemical or physical
feature before the current stage, ui
n is the process control
parameters applied to the chemical, xt
n,k is the sensor state
of the reaction chamber at the current time, and ϵ represents
random factors within the process.
The ﬁnal feature of the chemical after the last stage, M, is
qi
M. To ensure quality, the ﬁnal feature qi
M is compared with
a quality standard Q∗, such as purity. If qi
M is within Q∗, the
chemical is compliant with the qualify standard; otherwise, it
is non-compliant.
In summary, the process model describes how a chemical’s
properties change from one stage to another, depending on the
process control parameters ui
n and sensor state xt
n,k. The ﬁnal
feature of the chemical is compared with a quality standard to
ensure it meets the required quality.
E. Objective Function of Overall System
This subsection explains the objective function of the overall
system, which aims to ﬁnd the optimal sequence of control
actions for each process and reaction chamber to maximize the
expected production yield of the system. The objective is to
solve for the maximum value of the expected production yield,
denoted by π∗, by adjusting the process parameters while
considering the system constraints, denoted by C. The total
production yield during a speciﬁc time horizon, y(T; π), is af-
fected by the control actions, ui
n, which follow the control ac-
tion sequence, π. In mathematical form, the objective function
can be expressed π∗ = argmax
π
Eπ[y(T; π)], subject to C.
The system constraints include the chemical and physical
properties and limitations, as well as the system, reaction
chamber, and process-level models described in the previous
subsections.
F. Graph Modeling of the Production System
In order to model the production system, a graph is
constructed where each node represents a reaction chamber,
and the edges represent the ﬂuid ﬂows between them. The
integrated control problem requires that each node is charac-
terized by a set of features denoted as xn = [bm, Bm+1 −
bm+1, xt
n,k, wn, αn, qi
m, un, n, m]. These features include var-
ious parameters, such as the immediate upstream holding
tank level (bm) and the downstream holding tank vacancy
(Bm+1 − bm+1), which is used instead of the holding tank
level to account for any blockages caused by the downstream
holding tank.
Other features include the sensor state of the reaction
chamber (xt
n,k), the operating status of the reaction chamber
(wn and αn), the chemical or physical characteristics of the
chemical being processed by the reaction chamber (qi
m), and
the current process control parameters applied to the reaction
chamber (ui
n), among others.
In addition, each reaction chamber is uniquely identiﬁed
by the parameters n and m, which facilitate the sharing
of parameters in the neural networks. It’s worth noting that
the proposed computational framework is based on a spatial
technique, but its extension to spectral techniques will be
discussed further in subsection H.
G. Smoothing Functions for Sensors
There are various established techniques for improving and
smoothing the signals obtained from electronic sensors, such
as exponential smoothing and Recursive Bayesian Estimation
(RBE), mentioned in [9]. Exponential smoothing eliminates
noise and local shocks from the raw signals, while RBE is a
more advanced method for recursively estimating the sensor
state and obtaining our belief about the true sensor state.
In the RBE process, the sensor state belief at the
previous (k − 1)-th pass is used to predict the cur-
rent
sensor
state
at
the
k-th
pass
using
the
transi-
tion model deﬁned in subsection C: p(xt
n,k|˜zt
n,1:k−1)
=
∑T
xt
n,k−1=1 p(xt
n,k|xn,k−1)p(xt
n,k−1|˜zt
n,1:k−1) We can update
this sensor state belief using the observed sensor state and
our knowledge of observation uncertainty, such as cutting
off negative temperature readings at 0◦ Celsius or ambient
temperature.
To obtain the embedding of node n, we set h0
n = xn
and use the updated Aggregate and Combine rule hl+1
n
=
σ
(∑
j∈(n′∪n) αl
njhl
jW l
V
)
. Here, σ(∗) is an activation func-
tion, n′ denotes all immediate neighboring nodes to node n,
W l
V is a learnable weight matrix applied to the embedding
hl
j from the previous layer, and αl
nj is the weight assigned
to node j. This process is similar to exponential smoothing
and other signal processing ﬁlters but can incorporate domain
knowledge of observation uncertainty based on the chemical
processes.
H. Computatonal Model for Learning
To efﬁciently train any GNN to achieve the theoretical yield
of a chemical process, an effective computational model must
be created. This can be achieved through supervised or semi-
supervised learning, with labeled data mixed with unknown or
unlabeled components representing deviations from theoretical
yields. The MARL algorithm proposed in [9] can be used to
optimize the learnable parameters of the GNN and complete
the training process.
The MARL approach is advantageous over a single-agent
scheme for two main reasons. Firstly, the combined actionable
space for the system grows exponentially with the number
of reaction chambers, making the problem computationally
intractable if formulated as single-agent reinforcement learn-
ing. Secondly, non-linearity often arises from blockages and
starvations, which can be managed at the individual agent level
using penalty functions triggered by blockages and starvations.
The control actions in MARL are responsible for setting
the appropriate process control parameters for each reaction
chamber represented by an agent. The control action sequence
is denoted as π(un|hL
n), where L is the number of layers in
the GNN and hL
n is the ﬁnal node embedding output from
the GNN. The reward function evaluates the effectiveness of
the joint action given the system state and drives the agents

13
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
to improve their control policy actions, aiming to improve
system-level yield. The reward function is generally deﬁned
as rt = yt − dt, where yt is the discretized production
yield, and dt is the discretized penalty function used to
measure non-compliance of the ﬁnal output with the required
quality standard. The reward function aligns with the problem
objective of maximizing production yield while minimizing
non-compliance with required quality standards.
In summary, implementing the MARL algorithm is a re-
liable computational model for learning the theoretical yield
of a chemical process. This involves deﬁning control actions,
discretizing the continuous timeline and chemical volume,
deﬁning the policy and reward functions, and optimizing the
learnable parameters of the GNN to improve the system-wide
expected production yield.
I. Computational Framework for Training
To
train
the
spatial
neural
network
described
earlier,
the
control
policy
action
gradient
for
each
agent
can
be
optimized.
This
gradient
is
deﬁned
by
∇J = Eπ
[∑
n ∇ log π(un|hL
n)(Q(s, u) − Vtot(s))
]
, where
Q(s, u) − Vtot(s) is the advantage function associated with
the neural network’s learnable parameters.
To differentiate the learnable parameters for each agent
during the training process in a multi-agent spatial framework,
the conjugate gradient method can be used. However, if J is
highly nonlinear, a gradient-based solution can be inefﬁcient
and inaccurate due to the tendency of the algorithm to circle
around local optima.
J. Spectral Techniques and Other Training Methods
The previous subsection explained a computational frame-
work for training to achieve the theoretical maximum yield
of the control process, using a process similar to that shown
in Figure 9. This framework can be retrained as needed to
get closer to the theoretical maximum yield. The multi-agent
reinforcement learning (MARL) algorithm is advantageous for
achieving an optimal solution to this problem because its
structure is generally consistent with the problem’s structure.
Other possible computational modules for training include
sampling and pooling operators, and several open-source im-
plementations of GNN solvers are available, such as PyTorch,
MPNN, and GraphRNN.4
Although spatial techniques have their advantages, they are
limited because they are variants of the conjugate gradient
method and are often restricted to working with the ﬁrst and
at most second-order derivatives. Therefore, other techniques,
such as spectral techniques, may be useful for stabilizing or
speeding up speciﬁc steps in the learning process. Spectral
techniques are based on a spectral representation of the graph
Laplacian L = D − A, computed from the degree matrix D
and adjacency matrix A of the graph. They are interesting
from a computational efﬁciency point of view, especially when
the system graph gets bigger and more complicated from
4The most recently updated list of relevant papers and implementation of
GNN is available from https://github.com/thunlp/gnnpapers.
the use of multiple sensors for each reaction chamber. In
essence, a graph signal x is ﬁrstly transformed to the spectral
domain by the graph Fourier transform F(x) = UT x, then
the convolution operation is conducted. After the convolution,
the resulting signal is transformed back using the inverse
graph Fourier transform F −1(x) = Ux. U is the matrix of
normalized eigenvectors on the graph Laplacian L = UΛUT
of the system graph. The graph Fourier transform is based on
the eigenfunctions of the one-dimensional Laplace operator
and was proposed by [17]. This technique has been further
developed in subsequent research papers, such as [3] and [8].
Overall, spectral techniques provide a different computational
approach from spatial techniques and can be useful for training
in the presence of a complex system graph.
K. Section Conclusion
The primary aim of this section is to suggest relevant
computational techniques for integrating a proven computation
module with an AI engine that is already in production.
Modifying a preexisting implementation may be a more robust
and supportable solution compared to building from scratch.
Spatial techniques, such as MARL, offer several preexisting
implementations to choose from. However, ﬁnding a global
optimum becomes more difﬁcult as the number of agents
representing processes grows larger, especially if the global
objective function contains higher-order effects or piece-wise
linear features. On the other hand, spectral techniques, based
on the graph Fourier transform, can compress the learning so-
lution to a more tractable size and tend to be more explainable
based on the ﬁrst few Fourier coefﬁcients. Spatial techniques
tend to come with “explainability” issues, as opposed to
spectral techniques which are more “explainable” based on
the ﬁrst few Fourier coefﬁcients. However, robust preexisting
implementations may not be readily available for spectral
techniques due to numerical issues when solving eigensystems
for sparse matrices on large graphs. Certain computational
heuristics may be required to work with graph Laplacian
matrices containing a small number of extremely tiny negative
eigenvalues due to the imprecisions in machine numerical
representations. The net outcome is that, while spectral tech-
niques appear to have certain computational advantages, using
them to solve industry-sized problems may require customized
implementations.
In practice, sacriﬁcing certain computational gains and
elegance from spectral techniques for a more practical initial
implementation with fewer unexpected numerical issues may
be worth the effort. Once the AI engine is trained, there
is no requirement to continuously retrain it. Taking 10 or
more times longer to train a GNN using spatial techniques
may not be a showstopper, considering the overall gains from
a much simpler integration of a preexisting implementation
module. Eventually, the goal is to perform a spectral technique
implementation as the problems of interest become bigger and
more complicated.5
5The
precise
implementation
details
will
be
available
from
https://www.hedgespa.com.

14
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
V. PROJECT ANALYSIS
This section will discuss expected outcomes and risk and
mitigation methods.
A. Expected Outcomes
Theoretical yield computation equations for a PV Panels
to Converter to Electrolyzer system have been documented in
detail by [14], which can be used to estimate the electrolyzer
outputs based on various parameters such as the current,
voltage, and operating temperature, as follows:
I = PEZ
U
U = Vcell · nc
Vcell =
(
r1+r2TEZ
AEZ
I
)
+ s log
(
t1+
t2
TEZ +
t3
T 2
EZ
A
I + 1
)
+ 1.229
.n
H2 = ηF (ncI/2F)
ηF =
(I/AEZ)2
f1+(I/AEZ)2 f2(1)
These equations involve several parameters, including the
electrolyzer current, voltage, Ohmic resistance parameters,
electrode overvoltage coefﬁcient, overvolt coefﬁcients, number
of cells, electrolyzer area, operating temperature, Faraday
efﬁciency, and Faraday constant, as follows:
• I is the electrolyzer current;
• U is the electrolyzer voltage;
• r1 is the Ohmic resistance paramter at 8.05 × 10−5Ωm2;
• r2
is
the
Ohmic
resistance
paramter
at
−2.5 ×
10−7Ωm2/◦C;
• s is the electrode overvoltage coefﬁcient at 0.185V ;
• t1 is the overvolt coefﬁcient at −0.1002m2/A;
• t2 is the overvolt coefﬁcient at 8.424m2◦C/A;
• t3 is the overvolt coefﬁcient at 247.3m2◦C2/A;
• nc is the number of cells in the electorlyzer, e.g. 6;
• AEZ is the electrolyzer area, e.g. 0.25m2;
• TEZ is the electrolyzer operating temperature, e.g. 80◦C;
• ηF is the Faraday efﬁciency, which typical values range
from 70% to 90% [13]; and
• F is the Faraday constant at 96, 485C/mol.
The Faraday efﬁciency is a crucial parameter that depends
on the speciﬁc chemistry of the system. Similar equations
approximating theoretical production yields can be found in
references such as [10] and [20], some of which may be based
on modiﬁed assumptions on the equipment set. We can train
a GNN with a simulation based on the chemical equations
ﬁrst before moving on to a physical system. This approach
can have the added beneﬁt of ensuring that the GNN is better
equipped to handle rare out-of-sample “incidents” where even
a physical system may not produce enough data to train the
GNN effectively. It’s also worth noting that the closer the
implied graph of the GNN resembles the chemical equations,
the more likely the GNN will be able to produce sensible
results.
An AI-driven control system is expected to push operating
accuracy to well over 80% of theoretical limits, as discussed in
[31]. Any consistent performance gaps should be explainable,
such as material inputs that cannot be fed in continuously due
to supply issues. The maximum yield should be deﬁned as
a limit that is achievable by the AI engine once all system
frictions are removed. In other words, the maximum yield
max
π Eπ[y(T; π)] from the previous section should be deﬁned
as a limit that is achievable by the AI engine once all solvabe
system frictions such as supply chain issues of process input
materials are removed.
The proposed project aims to demonstrate that the theo-
retical results can be achieved via physical experimentations.
A demonstration unit will be built to provide evidence to the
ﬁnanciers, such as underwriters of asset-backed securities with
tokenization of carbon credits, that the proposed technical
setup will work in a physical plant, not purely based on
simulations. The expected outcomes of the demonstration
plant include verifying the theoretical yield, demonstrating the
effectiveness of the AI-driven control system, and providing
objective evidence for ﬁnanciers. Its expected outcomes are
summarized as follows:
1) Generator Size: According to one manufacturer’s spec-
iﬁcations [28], a 5-megawatt commercial PEM electrolyzer
can yield 83.75 kilograms of 99.999% high-purity hydrogen.
Such equipment can be ordered based on a more customized
speciﬁcation. In other words, a 6-megawatt electrolyzer is
expected to generate 100.5 kilograms of 99.999% high-purity
hydrogen per hour.
In Asia today, solar mirrors and panels are regularly built
on top of aquaculture ponds to generate electricity and lower
evaporation. Any location receiving more than 2,000 sun-hours
per year can be a potentially interesting target site.
While the generators may take 0.5 hour of warming up
to reach operational efﬁciency, solar-thermal towers (with the
right type of molten salt or thermal transfer oil) have the ability
to continue operations for hours after sunset due to the very
high temperature already accumulated in the heat circuit to
generate steam. Therefore, it is conservative to assume that we
have at least 12 hours of production per day, although some
literature has suggested that the solar tower can continue to
run for up to another 12 hours after sunset, allowing close to
24-hour production during the summer months [15].
As a result, the yield for a 6-megawatt PEM electrolyzer
in one year is 328,599 kilograms or 328.6 metric tonnes of
hydrogen if the plant can only run for 12 hours per day
on average, but the yield can reach as much as 657,000
kilograms or 657 metric tonnes if the plant can run 24 hours
per day. 329∼657 metric tonnes per year is consistent with our
production target of 1∼2 metric tonnes per day of hydrogen.
It should be noted that this is the maximum yield assuming all
electricity produced is used to generate hydrogen. Depending
on the pricing, some electricity may be sent to the power grid.
2) Water Intake: The amount of water required to produce
100.5 kilograms of hydrogen is 804 kilograms of pure water,
which is roughly equivalent to 804 liters at ambient temperate.

15
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Fig. 10. Solar Two Power Plant (National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Public domain, via Wikimedia Commons).
However, even if pure water is fed into the electrolyzer, there
should be an allowance for a 10% loss due to production
factors such as evaporation. So, we estimate 893 liters of pure
water or roughly 15 liters per minute. This is comparable to the
manufacturer’s recommendation of 1,000 liters per hour, which
typically includes an additional buffer to avoid commercial
liabilities.
Do note that the ﬂow rate of 15 liters of water per minute
is similar to the intake ﬂow rate of a large-capacity washing
machine. In the worst case, even taking treated city water at
such a ﬂow rate is unlikely to draw signiﬁcant environmental
objections. Besides mixed water, we are exploring using either
used industrial water or sewage after primary treatment, since
a distillation step can be performed using the residual heat to
extract the pure water. If we are allowed to extract 10% of
pure water from any mixed water, we will require an intake
of 10,000 liters of mixed water per hour to extract 1,000 liters
of pure water per hour.
3) Heliostat Mirror Site Size: At the Solar Two Power Plant
site near Barstow, California (as shown in Figure 10), a 10-
megawatt solar plant requires a ﬁeld size of 82,750 square
meters. For 6 megawatts, we estimate the ﬁeld size required
to be 49,650 square meters.
Do note that Solar Two is using older technology from the
1980s. The efﬁciency of solar-thermal technology has since
improved signiﬁcantly so it is reasonable to treat this as an
upper bound on the ﬁeld size. Moreover, Bartow’s latitude is
34.9 degrees north while most target sites are closer to the
equator, which means that the solar radiation will be stronger
in those locations due to their proximity to the equator. We
expect to require fewer mirrors to achieve the same thermal
output.
A ﬁeld size of 49,650 square meters will require 2,758
solar mirrors in a standard 18-square-meter conﬁguration. In a
rectangular site conﬁguration, that will take roughly 53 × 52
mirror units. Typical 18 square-meter mirrors come as a pair
of 3 meters by 3 meters solar reﬂectors. Allowing 2 meters
of margin for each mirror pair to minimize blockage from
each other means that each mirror pair requires 5 meters by
8 meters of space, or roughly 110,240 square meters in total,
translating to 332 meters on each side of a square conﬁguration
and 374.7 meters in diameter in a circular conﬁguration. In
other words, any regularly-shaped demonstration site of 1∼2
square kilometers for both hydrogen production and shipment
consolidation will meet the commercial requirements, and
still leaves plenty of room for safety margins and other
environmental considerations such as settlement and cooling
ponds if mixed water is used; typically, we are allowed to
extract only 10∼15% of pure water and return the rest to
the source “as close to ambient temperate as reasonable”.
Finally, NASA’s Surface Meteorology and Solar Energy (SSE)
6.0 provides 1-degree latitude by 1-degree longitude grid-cell
data over the globe, which is reasonably accurate as a starting
point for the azimuth and elevation angle control software to
calibrate the reﬂecting directions of mirrors.
4) Technical Goals of the Pilot Project: Our primary goal
is to ﬁne-tune the optimal production parameters based on
physical experiments. For instance, is it better to maintain a
higher temperature and aim for 24-hour production? Given
that our goal is to implement smaller, self-running plants that
may sit on different sites, there may be fewer maintenance
issues (e.g. accelerated metal fatigue due to continuous high
temperatures and pressure) by running the plants at lower
temperatures with regular cooling down periods. While there
is a large body of similar performance studies based on
simulations in the scientiﬁc literature, there is no substitute
for collecting the empirical physical data to ﬁne-tune our
performance models before replicating the plant design en
masse at other locations.

16
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Fig. 11. Heliostat Schematic for Typical 3m×3m Solar Reﬂector Pairs.
5) Costs and Beneﬁts: To meet all of our objectives above,
our budget worksheet is estimating a total cost of ∼14 million
US dollars over 3 years, primarily to pay for the equipment
and construction, as well as local costs such as permits, water
access rights, and environmental assessments. We target either
producing up to 5∼10 megawatts of power or exporting 8∼13
metric tons of green ammonia/day or 1.4∼2.3 metric tons of
green hydrogen/day, or a combination of both depending on
the tariff rate offered by the utility company. This is expected
to satisfy up to 2 kilograms/day of hydrogen demands per
vehicle for a ﬂeet of 1,000 hydrogen vehicles based on a
highly achievable delivery price target and similar industrial
uses.
We will start with the blueprints based on standard
and proven technologies with Technology Readiness Level
(TRL) 7 or TRL8. The key innovation is how we put highly
proven components together: for instance, by introducing
the latest German high-temperature and high-pressure sensor
technologies running with the HedgeSPA AI engine to drive
the chemical processes to improve efﬁciencies and yield.
6) Work Packages: The speciﬁc collaboration with the
Fraunhofer Institute will include the following R&D collabo-
ration areas to address immediate needs for the initial demon-
stration facility. In most energy plants, sensors are usually
placed at equal distances or in a topologically regular pattern
to detect “fault signatures”. Our goal for the First Phase is to
place the sensors outside the pipelines and reaction chambers.
Our goal for the Second Phase is to place some of them inside
the pipelines and reaction chambers. Each time we shall start
with a lab-scale setup, primarily to avoid unnecessary changes
and potential damage to the demonstration plant.
1) First Phase – Classic approach to set Project baseline:
• Ready-made components;
• Some microcontrollers outside reaction chambers
(from AWS’ approved list);
• Aiming for 4-pin connections with insulated con-
nections;
• Liquid/air cooling of microcontrollers and connec-
tions;
• Ensure that the combination of sensors/actuators
(pressure, temperature, viscosity, movements); and
can meet the AI control and safety shutdown re-
quirements.
2) Second Phase – R&D approach to improve efﬁciency
and reliability:
• More specialized, bespoke components;
• Microcontroller embedded into the sensor package;
• Insulate the entire unit with insulation materials;
• Study temperature/failure characteristics as well as
heat mitigation procedures; and
• Where feasible, upgrade speciﬁc components in
the overall design with the more advanced sensor
packages.
This project is exciting to the Fraunhofer Institute in that we
will be a good showcase to deploy IOT-style sensors and
actuators controlled by our AI engine on AWS using Web
Sockets or MQTT protocols. With a solid collaboration model,
we may explore further collaboration with the Fraunhofer
Institute on advanced high-temperature coating materials for
solar-thermal applications and the use of their Graph Neural
Network library to enhance the HedgeSPA AI engine.
7) Post-Demonstration Phase:
After the demonstration
phase, the ﬁnanciers are interested in funding the full-scale
production to meet up to 1 gigawatt in expected green energy
demands that have expressed tentative interest and can begin
delivery as soon as possible. As one example, we have
identiﬁed a signiﬁcant pool of institutional assets that will be
interested in placing meaningful AUM into this project.
B. Risk and Mitigation
The technical processes involved are hazardous by nature.
Considering this, our team members have identiﬁed the risks
expected and possible risk management solutions as well as
areas of minimum impact during operation to be:
1) Solar-thermal electrolysis – No known challenges, ex-
cept for ﬁnding suitable sites with high solar radiation

17
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
that are not too far from a delivery hub and without
unmanageable cyclone risks.
2) Similarly, while Polymer Electrolyte Membrane (PEM)
is a proven technology, there may be issues gaining
access to state-of-the-art polymer membranes currently
manufactured by primarily Western companies for a
plant targeting certain Asian buyers. Efﬁcient produc-
tion is the key to project success. Due to the current
geopolitical environment, we must account for a non-
zero probability that this project can be denied access
to the most advanced electrode materials unless we agree
not to deliver to potential customers in certain countries.
3) Alternative ways to transport/store hydrogen – We are
looking at potentially using methylcyclohexane as the
transfer agent, or using a carbon source to create syn-
thetic natural gas. Successful delivery will depend on a
solution to transport/store hydrogen at reasonable costs.
4) Green-bond Issuance – As mentioned, we do not have
to issue in Hong Kong if the regulatory process is too
complex. There is plenty of interest in such issuance
in other jurisdictions, such as Australia, Singapore, or
Japan.
5) Hyperledger Fabric Tokenization – No known challenges
except for the need to deploy time/resources. Hyper-
ledger Fabric is a public domain platform.
VI. FINAL CONCLUSIONS
The key drivers of success behind this proposed project are
as follows:
1) Our team starts with a fully functional AI/GNN engine
that has generated investment outperformance (positive
returns and positive skewness) across 5 different markets
or an outcome with less than 0.1% probability based on
pure luck [12]. That means users of our attractive ﬁntech
platform can also be natural investors in our private
investment projects in sustainable energy.
2) Scientiﬁc research linked to our AI algorithm has ap-
peared at and was validated by top academic venues
such as American Statistical Association and Associa-
tion for Computing Machinery and will be published
by the venerable scientiﬁc publisher Springer-Nature
[12]. In particular, we are known for advanced research
on predicting higher-order tail loss. These sophisticated
risk management tools that were proven in managing
energy assets should give additional conﬁdence to future
consumers who are interested in a total sustainability
management solution.
3) The team has experience in energy investment projects at
BlackRock and energy majors such as Chevron-Texaco.
Several regulators have indicated that they are ready to
approve digital assets related to sustainable energy faster
than other asset classes, increasing the probability of
project success.
4) We have several seasoned and proven investors in sus-
tainable energy acting as our investors and advisors.
The tokenization project was a ﬁnalist in the Tokenized
Assets and Digital Securities (TADS) Award in 2020
and the Hydrogen Impact Investment Awards in 2022.
These awards and name recognitions should build the
conﬁdence among future investors, without them it will
be difﬁcult to pull off sustainability projects on a large
scale.
5) We work with identiﬁed demands of investors interested
in our sustainability projects and demands of renewable
energy customers keen to take delivery at or below cer-
tain achievable price targets, especially after government
subsidies. In the current environment, investors are keen
on sustainability projects, and consumers are required
by their own regulator(s) to have a portion of their
energy supply coming from renewables. These facts lend
credibility to our green bonds which will be sweetened
by a tokenization mechanism to attach high-integrity
carbon offsets, increasing the chances of project success.
Einstein once said, “Insanity is doing the same thing over
and over and expecting different results.” Global organizations
have been driving green energy solutions for at least 2 decades.
Adoption is often driven by former bureaucrats and project
engineers from the energy majors, who are naturally biased
toward doing things in the traditional way that they are
comfortable with. We present a fresh if not disruptive approach
that will hopefully drive adoption faster to reverse worrisome
trends.
Instead of waiting for ground-breaking green technologies
to emerge to make an impact, the most obvious bottlenecks
seen today are integration and ﬁnancing. We can start with
proven components and put them together in innovative ways.
Our engineers work side by side with ﬁnanciers to work out
the most innovative way to remove each and every roadblock
with “divide and conquer”. There is now a once-in-a-lifetime
opportunity to pull this off due to the dramatic change in
attitudes among heavy users of fossil fuels, as a result of global
geopolitical developments.
Finally, the carbon market in Asia failed due to a
(mis)perception of widespread fraud. We can try the traditional
way of ﬁxing such a problem with heavy-handed regulations,
which may kill off the nascent carbon market completely,
or we can try to address this “trust issue” by using smarter
technologies to create high-integrity carbon offsets. We have
chosen the second approach and welcome other aspiring
ﬁnancial technology professionals to share any related and
perhaps even better suggestions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank the Fraunhofer Institute for Reliability and Mi-
crointegration or IZM (Dr. A. Ostmann, Dr. D. Manessis, Dr.
M. Hempel), ILFA (Mr. T. Cramer), SignalGeneriX (Dr. T.
Kounoudes) for the concept development of the electronic
monitoring system, as well as Mr. E. Lee of Olympus Capital
Asia for his insights on sustainable energy project ﬁnance.

18
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 1 & 2, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
REFERENCES
[1] W. Bernard Lee, Anthony G. Constantinides, and Tasos Kounoudes,
“Green Hydrogen Production, Transportation, Securitization, and To-
kenization”, Presentation at IARIA Green 2022.
[2] Ahmet
Aktas¸,
Yaˇgmur
Kirc¸ic¸ek,
“Solar
System
Characteristics,
Advantages,
and
Disadvantages”,
Chapter
1,
Solar
Hybrid
Sys-
tems: Design and Application, Academic Press, 2021, Pages 1-24,
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-88499-0.00001-X.
[3] Joaquin Bruna, Wojciech Zaremba, Arthur Szlam, and Yann LeCun,
“Spectral networks and locally connected networks on graphs,” in:
Proceedings of ICLR, 2014.
[4] Nicos Christoﬁdes, “Bounds for the Travelling Salesman Problem”,
Operations Research, Vol. 20, No. 5 (Sep. - Oct., 1972), pp. 1044-1056
(13 pages). https://www.jstor.org/stable/169166?seq=1.
[5] Edward Farhi, Jeffrey Goldstone, and Sam Gutmann, “A Quantum
Approximate Optimization Algorithm”, MIT-CTP/4610, MIT Center for
Theoretical Physics, 2014. https://arxiv.org/pdf/1411.4028.pdf.
[6] Thomas L. Gibson, and Nelson A. Kelly, “Predicting Efﬁciency
of
Solar
Powered
Hydrogen
Generation
Using
Photovoltaic
Electrolysis
Devices”,
International
Journal
of
Hydrogen
Energy,
Volume
35,
Issue
3,
February
2010,
Pages
900-911.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0360319909018448.
[7] Yongqing Fan, Zhan Zhu, Zhen Li, and Chenguang Yang, “Neural
Adaptive with Impedance Learning Control for Uncertain Cooperative
Multiple Robot Manipulators”, European Journal of Control (2023), doi:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejcon.2022.100769.
[8] Mathieu Henaff, Joaquin Bruna, and Yann LeCun, “Deep Convolutional
Networks on Graph-Structured Data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1506.05163,
2015.
[9] Jing Huang, Jianyu Su, and Qing Chang, “Graph neural network and
multi-agent reinforcement learning for machine-process-system inte-
grated control to optimize production yield”, Journal of Manufacturing
Systems, Volume 64, 2022, Pages 8193.
[10] Hassan Ishaq, Owais Siddiqui, Ghaleb Chehade, and Ibrahim Dincer, “A
solar and wind driven energy system for hydrogen and urea production
with CO2 capturing,” International Journal of Hydrogen Energy, 2021;
46: 4749-60. DOI: 10.1016/j.ijhydene.2020.01.208.
[11] Alina LaPotin, Kevin L. Schulte, Myles A. Steiner, Kyle Buznitsky,
Colin C. Kelsall, Daniel J. Friedman, Eric J. Tervo, Ryan M. France,
Michelle R. Young, Andrew Rohskopf, Shomik Verma, Evelyn N. Wang,
and Asegun Henry, “Thermophotovoltaic efﬁciency of 40%”, Nature, 13
April 2022.
[12] W. Bernard Lee and Anthony G. Constantinides, “Quantumized Graph
Cuts in Portfolio Construction and Asset Selection”, forthcoming in
Springer-Nature Transactions on Computational Science and Compu-
tational Intelligence, 2022.
[13] N. Aaron Kelly, “Hydrogen Production by Water Electrolysis”, Chapter
6 in Advances in Hydrogen Production, Storage and Distribution, 2014,
Pages 159-185.
[14] Mohamed Nasser, Tamer F. Megahed, Shinichi Ookawaram, and Hamdy
Hassan, “Techno-economic assessment of green hydrogen production
using different conﬁgurations of wind turbines and PV panels”, Journal
of Energy Systems, 2022, 6 (4). DOI: 10.30521/jes.1132111.
[15] Salahuddin
Qazi,
“Solar
Thermal
Electricity
and
Solar
Insolation”,
Chapter
7,
Standalone
Photovoltaic
(PV)
Systems
for
Disaster
Relief
and
Remote
Areas,
Elsevier,
2017,
https://www.sciencedirect.com/book/9780128030226/standalone-
photovoltaic-pv-systems-for-disaster-relief-and-remote-areas.
[16] Fabian Scheepers, Markus St¨ahlera, Andrea St¨ahler, Edward Rauls,
Martin M¨ullera, Marcelo Carmo, and Werner Lehnert, “Temperature
optimization for improving polymer electrolyte membrane-water elec-
trolysis system efﬁciency”, Applied Energy Volume 283, 1 February
2021, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.116270.
[17] David I. Shuman, Sunil K. Narang, Psacal Frossard, Antonio Ortega,
and Pierre Vandergheynst, “The emerging ﬁeld of signal processing on
graphs: extending high-dimensional data analysis to networks and other
irregular domains”, IEEE SPM 30 (2013), pages 83-98.
[18] Abishek Sriramulu, Nicolas Fourrier, and Christoph Bergmeir, “Adaptive
dependency learning graph neural networks”, Information Sciences,
Volume 625, May 2023, Pages 700-714.
[19] Ljubiˇsa Stankovi´c, Danilo Mandic, Miloˇs Dakovi´c, Miloˇs Brajovi´c,
Bruno Scalzo, Shengxi Li and Anthony G. Constantinides, “Chapter
13: Portfolio Cuts”, Data Analytics on Graphs Part III: Machine
Learning on Graphs, from Graph Topology to Applications, Founda-
tions and Trends® in Machine Learning: Vol. 13: No. 4, pp 499-511.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/2200000078-3.
[20] Erik Van der Roest, Lennart Snip, Tak Fens, and Ad van Wijk,
“Introducing Power-to-H3: Combining renewable electricity with heat,
water and hydrogen production and storage in a neighbourhood.” Applied
Energy 2020; 257: 114024. DOI: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.114024.
[21] Fei Tan, Lili Zhou, Junwei Lu, Hongzheng Quan, Kaiyue Liu, “Adaptive
quantitative control for ﬁnite time synchronization among multiplex
switched nonlinear coupling complex networks”, European Journal of
Control (2023), pages 23-37.
[22] Jie Zhou, Ganqu Cui, Shengding Hu, Zhengyan Zhang, Cheng Yang,
Zhiyuan Liu, Lifeng Wang, Changcheng Li, Maosong Sun, “Graph
neural networks: A review of methods and applications”, AI Open 1
(2020), Pages 57-81.
[23] “Average monthly hours of sunshine in Darwin (Northern Territory)”,
Weather and Climate, https://weather-and-climate.com/average-monthly-
hours-Sunshine,Darwin,Australia.
[24] “Ashalim
Power
Station”,
Wikipedia,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ashalim Power Station.
[25] “Best
Research-Cell
Efﬁciency
Chart”,
NREL,
2021.
https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efﬁciency.html.
[26] “Carbonomics:
The
Clean
Hydrogen
Revolu-
tion”,
Goldman
Sachs
Research,
07
Feb
2022.
https://www.goldmansachs.com/insights/pages/carbonomics-the-clean-
hydrogen-revolution.html.
[27] “Ivanpah
Solar
Power
Facility”,
Wikipedia,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ivanpah Solar Power Facility.
[28] “High
purity
99.999%
green
energy
powered
ALK
PEM
wind
solar
hydrogen
generator
with
electrolyzer”,
Alibaba,
https://www.alibaba.com/product-detail/High-purity-99-999-green-
energy 1600557711970.html.
[29] “PS20
solar
power
plant”,
Wikipedia,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PS20 solar power plant.
[30] “SunShot
Vision
Study”,
US
Department
of
Energy,
2022.
https://www.energy.gov/eere/solar/sunshot-vision-study.
[31] “What
is
Accuracy”,
IGI
Global,
2023.
https://www.igi-
global.com/dictionary/accuracy/329.
[32] “Wind
Turbines
Taller
Than
the
Statue
of
Liberty
Are
Falling
Over”,
Bloomberg,
23
January
2023.
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2023-01-23/wind-turbine-
collapses-punctuate-green-power-growing-pains.

