 
Potential and Evolving Social Intelligent Systems in a Social Responsibility 
Perspective in French Universities: Improving Young Unemployed People’s 
Motivation by Training for Business Creation  Integrating Emotions around 
Mediator Artifacts  
 
Christian BOURRET 
Research Team DICEN IDF (Information and Communication Devices in the Digital Era) 
University of Paris East Marne-la-Vallée (UPEM) 
Marne-la-Vallée, France 
e-mail: christian.bourret@u-pem.fr 
 
 
Abstract - In France, with the economic crisis and the huge rate 
of unemployment, the role of Universities has changed in the 
recent years with a new challenge of social responsibility. They 
try to promote the creation of new economic activities to 
attract new people, especially coming from disadvantaged 
areas in great town suburbs, particularly unemployed young 
people. We present the experiment of Creators of Activities 
University Degrees (DUCA) around cooperative devices or 
Creators’ Groups (GC). These DUCA / GC correspond to an 
individual project, part of a global dynamics in a collective 
approach. In a perspective of helping disadvantaged people to 
rebuild their life in a project dynamics of creation of economic 
activity, information and communication issues are central.  
These DUCA / GC areas of interactions and cooperations 
constitute socio-technical devices progressively evolving to 
potential Social Intelligent Systems. We propose to analyze 
these cooperative devices through two Mediator Artifacts 
developed in the DUCA / GC areas of cooperations: the 
business plan of the activities’ creators and the training serious 
game “Solutia”. They help to better master the emotions and 
feelings of activities’ creators to develop their self-confidence, 
their motivations, their entrepreneurship skills and their 
individual and collective knowledge. These areas of projects 
constituting potential and evolving Social Intelligent Systems 
correspond to a specific way of sustainable development to try 
to build “democratic solidarity” on territories. 
Keywords – intelligent systems; socio-technical devices; 
unemployed people; social responsibility; economic activities 
creation; entrepreneurship; mediator artifacts;  disadvantaged 
areas. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
 
 
In a period of social crisis and of huge unemployment, 
particularly 
for 
non-graduated 
young 
people 
in 
disadvantaged areas [1], Serge Paugam pointed the 
importance of “social links” [2] and of solidarity. These 
evolutions correspond to the need of repositioning the 
Universities in a new perspective of Social Responsibility 
(RSU) but also other organizations with public service 
missions, such as Local Missions / Missions Locales (ML) or 
Centre 
for 
Information 
and 
Orientation 
/ 
Centres 
d’Information et d’Orientation (CIO) in National Education 
Ministry. 
According to Hervé Azoulay [3], “there are talents in the 
suburbs but they need to be discovered and developed in 
different manners”. We must give confidence to potential 
activities’ creators and enable their talents to flourish, and 
also to promote “innovation in everyday life” according to 
Norbert Alter [4] and especially social innovations.  
The first Creators’ Groups (GC) and Creators of 
Activities University Degrees (DUCA) have been created in 
2000 by a partnership between the University Institute of 
Technology (IUT) of Melun-Sénart belonging to the 
University of Paris East Créteil (UPEC) and the Local 
Mission (Mission Locale) of Melun-Sénart. A Local 
Mission is an intervention space to help young people under 
25 years of age. Each young person is given a personalized 
follow-up, to help him on employment, on training but also 
on housing or health problems. 
The University of Paris East Marne-la-Vallée (UPEM,) 
through its component IUT has managed since 2006 several 
groups of Creators of Activities University Degrees (DUCA) 
recently become TPE  (Very Small Business) Entrepreneur, 
supported by training partnerships devices, the Creators’ 
Groups (GC). These GC (15 in 2016) are federated in a 
national association: National Association of Creators’ 
Groups (ANGC). 
We first present the global context of the unemployment 
challenges in France, Social Responsibility of the 
Universities (RSU) and Social and Solidarity Economy 
(SSE), particularly for young people in disadvantaged areas. 
Then we explain our researcher’s position and the 
methodology used.  We show the specificity of the DUCA / 
GC devices, pointing particularly on their Information and 
Communication issues and the question of emotions and 
feelings to improve their motivation. We present two 
81
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

emotions’ Mediator Artifacts: first a training “serious game” 
(Solutia) and a second, the Business Plan used as the 
framework of the economic activity project. We explain how 
DUCA / GC devices may be considered as potential and 
evolving Social Intelligent Systems. Finally, we show the 
importance of the DUCA / GC in a Social Solidarity 
Economy perspective before giving some examples of 
success stories of activities’ creations and mention some 
possibilities of evolution of the DUCA / GC.  
 
II. 
UNEMPLOYMENT CHALLENGES, SOCIAL 
RESPONSIBILIY OF UNIVERSITIES IN A SOCIAL AND 
SOLIDARITY ECONOMY 
 
The challenge of unemployment is particularly strong in 
France. At the end of November 2016, there were 6,238,400 
people registered in the Unemployment Office (Pôle 
Emploi) in mainland France (without overseas areas), 
including 3,447,000 people without any activity. France also 
has about 8,000,000 people living below the poverty level. 
The situation is particularly worrying for young people. 
Nearly 2 million young people are unemployed, without a 
diploma or training and, in particular, 19% of young people 
under the age of 25: the "neets" (not in education, 
employment or training), according to the Anglo-Saxon 
expression [5]. 
The situation has worsened since 2008. For the Minister 
of Labor, Myriam El Khomri (DUCAs’ Graduation 
Ceremony, Paris, December 12, 2016): "we cannot miss no 
skill or talent". 
In this context, in the recent years, the role of University 
has changed. It is no longer just only to build and transfer 
knowledge, but also to welcome new people and promote 
their vocational integration, including the creation of new 
economic activities. We speak of Social Responsibility of 
Universities (RSU). There is also the new position of 
“entrepreneur student” [6], concerning all the students and 
not only those coming from disadvantaged areas or being 
unemployed.  
Eric Dacheux defined Social and Solidarity Economy 
(SSE) as "seeking to develop links, rather than making 
profits" [7]. In the same seminar, Florine Garlot, 
highlighting the work of Jean-Louis Laville and Alain 
Yvergniaux (2009), stressed the difference between two 
types 
of 
solidarity: 
"philanthropic" 
solidarity 
and 
"democratic" solidarity. With the profound changes of 
capitalism over the last thirty years and in particular the 
financialization of the economy, Laville and Yvergniaux 
propose another project based on “democratic solidarity”. 
While for them philanthropic solidarity corresponds to a 
liberal political project aimed at calming the tensions of a 
system by nature egalitarian, democratic solidarity is 
centered on emancipation and the reduction of inequalities 
[8]. 
Our approach to the RSU corresponds to this social and 
solidarity economy perspective, thus articulating the notions 
of link or interaction (reliance) to promote the sustainable 
development of territories through the interactions and 
solidarity of all the actors, and especially in disadvantaged 
areas (resilience). 
 
 
III. 
RESEARCHER’S POSITION AND METHODOLOGY 
 
The author of this paper manages DUCAs in the IUT / 
UPEM and is also member of GC Coordination 
Committees.  
From a methodological perspective, the author of this 
article belongs to the French University’s interdisciplinary 
field of Information and Communication Sciences, 
according to the approach proposed by Françoise Bernard 
[9] with the convergence of four aspects:  meaning, link 
(relationships, interactions), knowledge and action. He 
positions in a research action perspective mixing theory and 
practice to build knowledge for action. His analysis 
corresponds to the research position described by Françoise 
Bernard as “engaging communication”  [10].  
Insisting on the primacy of action, Françoise Bernard 
proposed the paradigm of "engaging communication" to 
organize communication of societal action and utility, which 
is the case of the social and solidarity economy, as defined 
by Eric Dacheux. It is a question of apprehending the 
change in actions and the complex time of the various 
actors. Information corresponds to the time of knowledge, 
the urgency of action to the time of change. The articulation 
of the four major issues of action, link, knowledge and 
meaning, makes it possible to reconcile these different times 
to build a new civic responsibility. F. Bernard outlines the 
dimensions of “engaging position” and that of projects, 
which is the case for DUCA / GC.  
According to Nicole D'Almeida [11], organizations move 
“between projects and stories.” The projects correspond to 
two types of devices: first is the organizational one, and the 
second she calls “symbolic narrative” part where “stories” 
(symbolic 
devices) 
are 
essential. 
Organizations 
or 
organizational devices build their own imaginary stories. To 
take an example in a presentation’s leaflet of Val de Marne 
Creators’ Group: “Creators’ Groups help to switch from 
dream to reality.” They are based on two core values: 
“everyone is an asset for the territory”, “everyone 
expressing the desire to create an activity is heard”. 
   In this work, we met several concepts. The first concept 
met is that of “device” (in French, “dispositif”), that we 
consider, according to Michel Foucault [12], with all its 
socio-technical dimensions.  For him, “What I'm trying to 
identify with that name, is first a decidedly mixed space, 
with speeches, institutions, architectural arrangements, 
regulatory 
decisions, 
laws, 
administrative 
measures, 
scientific statements, philosophical propositions, moral, 
82
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

philanthropic, in short: the words, as well as the unspoken, 
are mere elements of the device. The device in itself is the 
network that can be established between all these elements. 
Secondly, that I would identify in the device, is precisely the 
nature of the relationship that may exist between these 
heterogeneous elements.” 
In a socio-constructivist perspective, we also rely on the 
concept of “mediator artifact”: “the tools provided by the 
environment do not only play a role of mediator but also of 
artifact in that they organize (or reorganize) cognitive 
functioning” [13] with all the importance of project 
dynamics as especially developed by Jean-Pierre Boutinet 
and Gino Gramaccia [14] [15]. We also rely on the concepts 
of situations and interactions [16], defined by Manuel 
Zacklad as a logic of “cooperative transactions” [17]. 
Afterwards we analyze these DUCA / GC socio-technical 
devices as potential and evolving social Intelligent Systems 
[18] built by the cooperative knowledge of all their actors. 
 
 
IV. 
THE DUCA – GC AS SOCIO-TECHNICAL DEVICES 
 
In this section, we will show how DUCA / GC 
correspond to socio-technical devices as interactions’ areas 
with important Information and Communication Issues.   
  
A. DUCA and GC as interactions‘ areas  
 
According to ANGC, “The Creators Groups seek 
autonomy and professional integration of unemployed 
people, including school leavers, based on their desires to 
undertake as a catalyst”. The main goal of the DUCA / GC 
devices is to restore confidence, especially for young school 
leavers by leveraging their creativity in a project approach 
from an individual project based on training (DUCA), 
developed in training and group work, but also with an 
individual coaching (GC).  
The GCs (Creators’ Groups) aim to transform the desire 
for 
entrepreneurship 
into 
catalysts 
for 
professional 
integration through support and coaching based on 
entrepreneurship and project pedagogy. And this coaching is 
proposed without judging on the feasibility of the idea of the 
potential creator of activity or on the capacity to create or 
rescue an activity. 
So this is an individual project, part of global dynamics, 
in a collective approach. 
We have pointed the two key values of the DUCA / GC: 
“everyone is an asset for the territory”, “everyone wanting 
to develop an economic activity is heard”. These values are 
highlighted by the National Association of Creators’ Groups 
(ANGC). 
The potential creator of activity is in the center of the 
DUCA / GC devices, initiator and co-constructor of his 
project. Integration and autonomy are the aims of the 
coaching. The support or coaching correspond to a public 
service approach and the GC services are offered free of 
charge [19]. 
Since 2006, UPEM / IUT proposed several DUCAs in 
partnership with different Creators Groups: Val de Marne 
Department (94), Val Maubuée (Torcy, 77) and, during three 
years, with the Paris 20th  GC. 
We will analyze how a new kind of training (DUCA) is 
based on cooperative processes and may be regarded as a 
“device” or an “organizational form” created by all the 
interactions between all the actors, to develop new 
opportunities for job seekers coming from disadvantaged 
areas, especially young school leavers. This process creates a 
new dynamics among all the actors, combining the 
individual dimension of each project with a collective 
dynamics. 
A DUCA / GC device brings together partners including: 
1) A federative structure (Mission Locale, Local Plan for 
Economic Insertion (PLIE), House of Employment (Pôle 
Emploi), other associations, etc.), 2) a University, often 
through an IUT, 3) a consultancy team in business creation 
(management shop or boutique de gestion, cooperative, 
industry and trade chambers, etc.). 
 
B. Importance of Information and Communication Issues 
 
Eric Dacheux, already mentioned [7], characterized 
Social and Solidarity Economy (SSE) as "seeking above all 
to build links". This approach corresponds to the main goals 
of Communication Sciences, as stressed by both Françoise 
Bernard [10] and Daniel Bougnoux [20], emphasizing the 
importance of the links and the relationship. It is the question 
of "living connected" or "reliance" that, for us, joins that of 
the "resilience" of territories in difficulty. 
In a perspective of helping people to rebuild their life 
[21] in a project dynamics, information collect and 
communication issues are central. Their analysis will 
constitute a main part of our grid to consider awareness and 
management of emotions and feelings as levers of creating 
economic activities. And so their management included in 
these activities’ creation may help people in difficult 
situations to rebuild their life. 
Firstly, candidates to DUCA / GC are searching in 
leaflets on business and crafts, books and numerous 
documents offered by the Local Missions and Centre for 
Information and Orientation (CIO), specialized websites, 
etc., information to better formalize their projects. They are 
helped in their information and documentation work by 
members of ML or of CIO. 
The personal reconstruction of the learner / creator is 
based on an innovative process of creating an activity that is 
formalized in an oral mid-term and an end-of-year 
presentation. This process involves many exchanges and a 
strong research activity for information and documentation 
with the help of people resources belonging to Local 
Mission, CIO, or different local associations. It is driven by 
Mediator Artifact such as Business Plan of each student or 
meetings around a training “serious game”. 
83
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

This paper corresponds to a complementarity of views. 
We have met, observed and interviewed: DUCA teachers, 
GC leaders, trainers, facilitators from Local Missions, 
members of boutiques de gestion, psychologists, and, of 
course, students-learners and potential creators of their 
economic activity. 
We propose some ways to analyze emotions and feelings 
of these actors, especially of young people creating activities 
around two Mediator Artifacts: a training serious game 
(Solutia) and the business plan of each activity’s creator. In a 
first step, these two Mediator Artifacts constitute for us 
socio-technical devices. 
 
 
V. 
TWO EMOTIONS’ MEDIATOR ARTIFACTS 
 
DUCA / GC devices correspond to societal innovative 
areas to promote interactions. Two Mediator Artifacts may 
act to reveal emotions and feelings and so help to improve 
activities creators’ skills and their creativity. 
A. A training “Serious Game” (Solutia) as first Mediator 
Artifact to develop ludic interactions 
  The main goal of DUCA / GC is to help increase 
creativity spirit and skills of creators of potential economic 
activity and especially young people. The DUCA / GC 
training teams try to invent new ways to interest the 
potential activities’ creators in being involved and so 
changing their life. One specific way consists in a training 
game: “Solutia”. It is actually a form of “serious game”, but 
not developed on Internet interactions but on real exchanges 
in face-to-face situations between some creators (five to 
eight) with the help (a form of coaching) of a ML member.  
This game constitutes a Mediator Artifact to develop 
ludic interactions to improve interest for cooperation and to 
create a project dynamics. This training “serious game” may 
also help converge the representations and develop 
confidence by creating collective dynamics and some form 
of pride around a personal project which may be also that of 
a whole family and, sometimes, of a larger community. 
First, this game has been thought and created by Marie 
Beauvais – Chevalier, member of ML of Marne-la-Vallée / 
Torcy, coordinator of the GC in Val Maubuée. Solutia’s 
game corresponds to a sort of Monopoly and Game of the 
Goose (Jeu de l’Oie) for learning how to manage company’s 
creation and its traps and opportunities.  
In a second step, Solutia has been developed and 
marketed by a student of UPEM University with the creation 
of a new company through a new device “Students poles for 
Innovation, Transfer and Entrepreneurship” (PEPITE) [22].  
This business creation by a student around Solutia’s 
serious game illustrates the important evolution of the French 
Universities, and especially UPEM University. UPEM 
University tries to develop a new spirit of entrepreneurship 
through various devices and especially with times of 
exchanges and interactions between teachers and students 
such as the “All Creative Day, Tous Créatifs” (this year on 
June 22 th). It also corresponds to interactions between civil 
society and local actors and Universities members. 
B. A second Mediator Artifact: the Business Plan of the 
creators’ projects 
 
We have also observed the emotions and feelings of the 
actors of DUCA / GC Devices around another Mediator 
Artifact, the Business Plan of each creator of potential 
economic activity. The business plan is the main framework 
of the entire process of monitoring the development of the 
economic activity of the potential creator. It is a crystallizer 
of interactions from the beginning of the process (emergence 
phase) to the final presentation of the project. 
The emergence phase allows the potential activity 
creators to better define their ideas and formalize them. It 
includes four steps: 1) better knowing their potentiality as 
project’s leaders, 2) better defining the main idea of activity 
to develop, 3) discover the environment of the project, 4) 
define the suitability of their personality to the project and its 
environment. After this phase, the future creator formalized a 
file, which is the basis for presentation and is defending 
before a jury for admission to the DUCA degree. The 
interview is always conducted sympathetically to give 
confidence to the future creator and help to validate his idea. 
The training phase (DUCA) allows future creators to 
receive specific knowledge to develop skills necessary to 
manage 
any 
activity 
(company, 
association, 
etc.): 
management, information and communication, legal and tax 
information, sales management, market survey, project 
management, etc., and to check the feasibility of the 
proposed project, specifying the business plan (market 
survey, financing, cost calculations, etc.). The “case” is 
finalized and presented before a jury. Pedagogy emphasizes 
the collective dimension and the practical application of the 
teachings around creative projects. 
 
VI. 
INTERACTIONS ANALYSIS AROUND MEDIATOR 
ARTIFACTS INTEGRATING EMOTIONAL DIMENSIONS 
 
The two presented Mediator Artifacts enable us to 
observe the emotions and feelings expressed in particular by 
young potential entrepreneurs: a phase of interactions 
between them in a playful position (Solutia Game) and also 
with interactions with the teaching team: the Business Plan. 
Both Mediator Artifacts converge to help to build an 
individual project in a collective dynamics. 
Finally, our findings highlight an analysis process with 
the transition from the initial and spontaneous emotions of 
the actors, especially young creators of economic activity, to 
more lasting feelings, attitudes and behaviors over a long 
period, in relation with their personality. 
We promote a dynamic dimension of integration 
(integrative approach) of changing emotions and feelings in 
the situation analysis and interactional approach proposed by 
Alex Mucchielli (Situational and Interactionist Semiotics) 
[23] for economic activity creativity, apprehended in a grid 
84
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

of informational and communicational integration of actors’ 
views. Different contexts constituting a situation for the 
actors are considered: respective positions, goals, references 
or norms, interactions, values, etc. The set of meanings 
found provides access to the "global meaning" of the 
phenomenon, which is therefore the synthesis of the 
meanings taken in the different contexts and for the different 
actors. 
For us, it is also the challenge of development of a 
dynamics (process) around control of emotions and feelings 
on a rather long term process. 
Alain Caillé presented the quest for recognition as a new 
total social phenomenon in the second half of the XXth 
century, notably for minorities or some social groups, but 
also for populations of sensitive areas. For him, until the 
1980s, the emphasis was rather on levels of remuneration, 
(wages), social protection and working conditions, in 
particular with the development of trade unions [24]. 
Recognition by others and the reconstruction of self-esteem 
are very linked according to Gerard Lefebvre [21]. 
The DUCA / GC devices are also a space for converging 
management of project approaches [14], [15], and quality 
approaches. We propose to consider this convergence 
through three types of processes that exists in any 
organization or project: the objective to compliance 
(control), the desire to implement changes and so the 
commitment to promote creativity and innovation [25]. For 
us, DUCA / GC devices constitute interesting areas of 
cooperation to observe this convergence. The challenge is to 
promote a culture of change and innovation in the French 
society based for example on validated and reproducible 
experiments. It can be first developed betting on the capacity 
for innovation and creativity in small structures that promote 
initiatives. But it is also a question of answering the reality of 
markets and needs of local consumers or funding institutions. 
The emotional skills of young creators are the central 
element of an emotional intelligence, in our opinion, not 
sufficiently taken into account. The human body is both the 
mediator from which the individual can sensitize his affects 
and constitutes a communication support of them, according 
to Fabienne Martin-Juchat [26].  
By helping to set the individual project of business 
creation in a collective dynamics, the two studied Mediator 
Artifacts may help to favor a first awareness among activity 
creators; they are never completely alone and there are 
levers, networks that they must know how to use to get the 
right information at the right time and in the right place 
(informational and communicational skills). This awareness 
may help activities’ creators to restore their confidence and 
to overcome their shyness.  
The serious game Solutia also promotes situational skills: 
it allows students to discover a number of problem situations 
they can find in their creative activity and so help to overpass 
them. It can give awareness of their personal evolution,   
especially of their new skills and some pride of their 
activity’s project: importance of self-esteem, often built 
through the eyes of others, especially their friends and their 
families.    
The goal of the Mediator Artifacts, particularly Solutia 
serious game is to (re) give confidence, to raise awareness 
that everyone has met difficulties in his entrepreneurship’s 
pathway and that they can be overcome. It is good to know 
how to go beyond emotions such as fear of failure, 
withdrawal, frustration, anger, etc. Understanding and better 
managing emotions by relativizing them may help to recreate 
a positive dynamics of trust. It is also important to train the 
activities’ creators to be aware of their emotions and 
feelings, so they are not paralyzed by them, and, therefore, to 
better manage them and to succeed in their creation of 
activity process. 
 
VII. FROM SOCIO-TCHNICAL DEVICES TO POTENTIAL AND 
EVOLVING SOCIAL INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS 
 
 
DUCA / GC constitute spaces for cooperation in order to 
develop an individual project in a collective process of 
building knowledge based on Mediator Artifacts fostering 
exchanges and cooperation among all their actors, notably 
creators of economic activity. 
As a first step, we proposed to consider them as socio-
technical devices based in particular on interactions around 
two Mediator Artifacts. In a second step, we propose to 
consider the  DUCA / GC as potential and evolving Social 
Intelligent Systems by placing us notably in the 
constructivist approach (the social reality is “construct” by 
the actors) of the complexity analysis proposed by Edgar 
Morin [27] and Jean-Louis Le Moigne [28]. Particularly, 
Jean-Louis Le Moigne proposes an approach to the 
elaboration of a General System, which gradually emerged 
from the 1950s with the cybernetic, structuralist and 
structural-functionalist approaches ([18]. 
J.-L. Le Moigne stresses the importance of modeling: 
"modeling a complex system is modeling a system of 
actions". In the formalisms of the systemic modeling, he 
relies on Edgar Morin, who proposed the concept of 
organiz-action corresponding to principles of eco - auto - re 
- organization with information, communication and 
computational dimensions. 
For J.-L. Le Moigne, it is an organizational or informed 
system: "the information forming the organization that 
forms it", with all the importance of documentation and 
information resources, as we have pointed out for the 
DUCA / GC [28]. 
From the communicational point of view, Alex 
Mucchielli proposed [29] a "Systemic and Communicational 
Approach of Organizations" (2002). He presents an 
Information and Communication Sciences approach based 
on the paradigm of complexity in relation with systemism 
and constructivism, referring to the works of the invisible 
college at Palo Alto, where "communication is always 
conceived as a participation in a communicative ensemble 
or a system of relations (the "orchestra" model). It is a 
matter of bringing to light the meaning of the different 
interactions in a global system, in order to create a collective 
sense of the relational system itself for all actors. It proposes 
85
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

a method leading to model the relations. It begins with an 
observation of relations, and continues with an effort to 
diagram the exchanges (including implicit communications) 
of the actors and to finish with the description of the 
functioning of the whole system. The final analysis must 
reveal the emerging "values" of the system, which, 
implicitly, can be regarded as "leading the game", almost 
unknown to the actors. 
He will confirm and extend these propositions a few 
years later in his "situational and interactional semiotic" 
approach (2010) already mentioned in an interactionist 
analysis of the DUCA / GC [23]. This perspective joins that 
of the Communication as Constitutive of Organizations 
proposed by Linda L. Putnam and Anne M. Nicotera [30], 
considering organizations as organizational systems as 
Edgar Morin. 
After 
the 
informational 
and 
communicational 
dimensions of his modeling approach, J.-L. Le Moigne 
evokes a third "computational" dimension. In this 
perspective of computational analysis of players’ relations 
in the case of game situations, such as for the Mediator 
Artifact Solutia game, we can refer for example to the works 
of Mossakowski and Mandziuk in the case of the bridge 
game [31]. 
At this stage of our analysis, we are at the first two 
levels of modeling information and communication 
situations around interactions between DUCA / GC actors in 
a perspective of social systemic approach in a shared 
knowledge building perspective. 
DUCA / GC considered as potential social Intelligent 
Systems correspond also to an approach of building 
collective intelligence in specific situations. We are then in 
the perspective of management of collective intelligence 
(CI) proposed by Olivier Zara [32]. According to him,  
"Collective Intelligence is the intelligence of the link, of the 
relationship defined by some as a connective intelligence or 
"global brain"... The heart of the collective intelligence is 
the harmony in the links... These links induce the 
cooperation and collective intelligence would ultimately be 
the 
consequence 
of 
intellectual 
co-operation, 
their 
materialization. He refers to Pierre Lévy, for whom "the 
best thing that can be done with new technologies is not 
Artificial Intelligence (AI), but, on the contrary, Collective 
Intelligence … Computers do not mimic humans, but help 
them to think and collectively evolve their ideas. CI helps 
people to think together, while AI seeks to substitute for 
humans to limit their mistakes ". 
All this from a perspective of social systemic that J.C. 
Lugan proposes to develop in a pragmatic approach 
"concerned to confront the available systemic tools with 
concrete social formations" [18], for us DUCA / GC. 
 
VIII. THROUGH 
AN 
INDIVIDUAL 
DYNAMICS 
IN 
A 
COLLECTIVE APPROACH 
 
To use a formula coming from an ANGC document: "To 
dare it is already to move forward". It is a question of 
helping to "overcome the preconceived ideas that prevent 
change": "I have no money", "I am too young", "It is too 
complicated", "I have no idea", "I feel alone ","I have a 
disability", "I do not have a diploma", etc. [19]. 
We think that learning to better manage the emotions can 
become a collective goal to develop cooperation and 
improve skills. It is on this aspect that we propose to the 
other partners of the DUCA / GC to insist with a view of 
continuous improvement of existing devices. 
Social sharing of emotions is also important for 
encouraging awareness of group membership [16]. This 
group is essential to promote the personal development of 
each potential creator. This integration of emotions and 
feelings can help to better integrate an individual project of 
creation of activities in a collective dynamics of exchange of 
experiences and feelings (Group of Creators) to better 
understand and support in times of doubt and (re) motivate 
them. We wish to analyze their mechanisms to best promote 
these periods of interactions and information sharing for 
improvement of their projects. 
Our observations lead us to propose a broadening of 
perspectives of Situational and Interactionist Semiotics 
defined by Alex Mucchielli [23] with the integration of the 
experiences of the actors and their emotions and feelings 
according to Daniel Goleman [33], particularly for creators 
of activity. 
Another approach to consider is the Sociology of Actor-
Network (SAR) proposed by Michel Callon [34], even if the 
business plan and the serious game Solutia are not full 
technical devices, but rather social and managerial devices. 
The idea that the collective activity (“acting elements”) can 
be considered as a “black box” (“boîte noire”) seems to 
match our approach of the business plan as the idea of 
“hybrid reality composed of successive translations” and the 
fact that the SAR “has been designed to follow the collective 
in their making process”, which is the case of DUCA / GC 
devices. 
In the perspective developed by Aurélia Dumas and 
Fabienne 
Martin-Juchat 
[35], 
through 
situations 
of 
participatory observations or interviews with young creators 
of activities, in particular around the uses of the two 
mediating artifacts, we tried to understand their emotional 
culture, their emotional language and their mechanisms of 
emotional regulation. By privileging the vision of these 
actors, in a rather ethnographic approach, we considered the 
two mediating artifacts as "communicative objects". 
We can then consider a dynamic relational semiotics 
approach to a certain length: global (approach by the 
complexity theory in a constructivist way), based on the 
search for meaning in the interactions’ situations between all 
the actors (including socio-technical artifacts), and of course 
also including emotions, feelings, experiences of all the 
actors in a dynamic approach (convergence of the 
management of project approaches and the process 
approaches of quality management) to create a dynamic of 
change, creativity and innovation, mixing individual and 
collective dimensions. 
 
86
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

IX. 
A SUCCESS TO BETTER SOCIALLY INTEGRATE PEOPLE 
BY CREATING NEW ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES  FOR THE 
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT OF DISADVANTAGED 
TERRITORIES 
 
A very recent study on Creators' Groups [36] clearly 
highlights the impact of GCs, corresponding to "an 
integration program through project pedagogy". DUCA / GC 
students are both better paid (29 % more than other young 
unemployed people) and can take back studies in better 
conditions and with motivation. By enabling young people to 
rebuild themselves, to regain their confidence and to think 
about a project, the DUCA / GC are thus two-fold integration 
mechanisms: both by activity (60% of DUCA graduates) and 
by training. 
Since 2000, the GCs, mostly through Local Missions, 
have received over than 15,000 people, mainly young 
people, coached 7,500 people in the project emergence phase 
and more than 1,300 people in the training phase or DUCA 
[19] 
For the University of Paris East Marne-la-Vallée (UPEM), 
since 2006, 305 activity creators and, especially, young 
people, have been trained in the IUT of UPEM and 157 
graduated, that is to say more than 50%, which is considered 
as a very positive result by the Ile-de-France Regional 
Council (CRIF), the main public collectivity giving funds to 
the DUCA / GC devices.  
More globally, nearly 500 people, especially young 
people, have been sensitized to business creation and reality 
of the economic constraints of companies. Nearly 35% of the 
graduated students have created their business or taken over 
an existing activity; others have been inserted as employees 
in existing companies (often trade or food activities). 
Activities creations successes particularly concern the 
services sector in very different aspects. First, we have food 
activities such as free gluten bakeries, food to all tastes and 
cuisines possible, particularly Afro-Asian. Secondly, we 
have clothes manufacturing companies corresponding to 
different countries (Japan and Asia fashion, North Africa, 
etc.) and shops of different types of clothes. We have also 
organic cleaning companies, communication companies to 
organize special events (marriage, etc.), production of video 
games, jewelry creations, home automation companies, etc. 
We have also more usual activities such as nurseries, 
gardening, public writers, different ways of home help, 
beauticians, hairdressers, sometimes with itinerant projects. 
But also, with the reform of school times (2013), we have 
animation’s projects to provide stimulating activities or 
sports for children after school time, etc. 
A great satisfaction during the graduation ceremonies for 
the DUCAs in December 2015 and 2016 was to see some 
graduated of previous years come to offer jobs to those who 
had just come into training. 
DUCA / GC can also correspond to an intergenerational 
perspective that may be part of the Silver Economy (markets 
linked to ageing and well-ageing). Young retired volunteers 
could thus help young creators or young rescuers of activities 
to develop their activity: aids in management but also 
according to the different types of jobs (baker, car repair, 
gardener, etc.) giving a sense of solidarity and transmission 
in the early years of the often difficult transition from an 
intense activity to the breaking, not always wanted, to retired 
new life. These retired people may act as supports or coaches 
for young and inexperienced creators of activities. This form 
of intergenerational solidarity on the territories also 
corresponds to the articulation of the challenges of "reliance" 
and "resilience". 
 
X. 
CONCLUSION   
 
Since 2006, DUCA / GC socio-technical devices 
developed in UPEM / IUT, in cooperation with federated 
partners in the DUCA / GC have progressively constituted 
potential and evolving Social Intelligent Systems. They have 
trained over than 500 students in the creation of activity, 
including a majority of young school leavers. The challenge 
is now finding additional funding to the specific aid the 
Regional Council of Ile-de-France. We hope in European 
subsidies. 
In the cooperation areas developed around DUCA / GC 
devices, the position of “committed researcher” has really, 
for us, taken all its meaning and corresponds to a personal 
approach to the RSU, revisited as “societal responsibility of 
the 
researcher”, 
in 
a 
perspective 
of 
“engaging 
communication” proposed by Françoise Bernard for societal 
responsibility [10]. We have gradually become convinced 
that the future can be built from micro actions on the 
territories and on daily innovative practices. 
For us, beyond the figures and examples of activities 
successes creations in various sectors (gardening, personal 
computers, clothing, cleaning, food, restaurants, personal 
services, etc.), the more important part  is to have renewed 
hope through a project dynamics  to allow potential creators 
of economic activities, especially school young leavers, to 
take charge of their destiny, in taking the risk of action for 
hope to promote a new business vision, resolutely different 
from “destructive innovation” discussed by Luc Ferry [37], 
with the disasters of the financial and speculative capitalism. 
We insist on a first goal, that people dare to do the first step 
and also meeting the words of George Mallory starting to 
climb to Everest Mountain (1924): “Where there is a will, 
there is always a way.” We also meet Stéphane Hessel and 
Edgar Morin who proposed new paths towards "the way of 
hope" in the same perspective of Economic Social and 
Solidarity where we try also to walk [38].  
This 
approach 
focuses 
on 
the 
integration 
and 
management of emotions and feelings of all the actors of 
DUCA / GC devices, particularly those of the potential 
creators of economic activities. It also incorporates the 
concepts of “resilience” (ability to move again in a crisis 
situation), both with individual and collective aspects, of 
“sustainable development” of territories. Territories are then 
considered as built by a synergy of local projects, both 
individual and collective, all these projects building new 
links 
or 
interactions 
and 
solidarity, 
especially 
in 
disadvantaged areas [39] in order to create a collective 
87
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

dynamics and give capacity for innovation and creativity 
[40]. For us, they constitute potential and evolving Social 
Intelligent Systems progressively built by all the knowledge 
and skills of all their actors and especially the creators of 
activity.  
It is a question of trying to "catalyze" the energies to 
contribute to a new territorial dynamics, training being an 
essential element in helping to broaden territorial social 
capital by relying on projects of motivated young people. It 
is also in a certain manner an element of the perspective 
proposed by B. Carayon [41] of the French Economic 
Intelligence 
approach 
insisting 
on 
associating 
competitiveness of companies and social cohesion in a new 
territorial dynamics linking stakes of economic or 
competitive intelligence and territorial intelligence.  
Potential and Evolving Social Intelligent Systems, 
DUCA / GC also correspond to new ways of “democratic 
solidarity” on territories, promoting new links between 
unemployed 
people 
with 
existing 
companies, 
local 
authorities or retired people acting as supports or coaches to 
invent new ways of local citizenship. They then contribute to 
the "relationship economy" proposed by Nicole D'Almeida 
in a communication perspective [42] and the "economies of 
conviviality and transactions" defined by Manuel Zacklad 
[17]. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
 
[1] C. Bourret, “Tracks to Analyze Emotions around Mediator 
Artifacts to Improve Training and Business Creation for 
Unemployed People in French Universities,” Proceedings / 
The Second International Conference on Human and Social 
Analytics, HUSO 2016 – IARIA, Barcelona November 13 – 
16, pp. 9-13, ISBN : 978-1-61208-517-7 
[2] S. Paugam, The social link / Le lien social, Paris: PUF, 2010. 
[3] H. Azoulay, "Social Intelligence. The case of suburbs : use 
networks to go gout crisis / L’intelligence sociale. Le cas des 
banlieues : utiliser les réseaux pour sortir de la crise,"  in M.-
A.Duval dir., New territories of Business Intelligence / Les 
nouveaux territoires de l’Intelligence Economique, Paris: 
ACFCI – IFIE Ed., pp. 119-146, 2008. 
[4] N. Alter,  Ordinary Innovation / L’innovation ordinaire, Paris: 
PUF, Coll. Quadrige, 2005. 
[5] Available 
on: 
http://www.lefigaro.fr/social/2015/03/25/09010-
20150325ARTFIG00325-pres-de-2-millions-de-jeunes-sont-
sans-emploi-ni-diplome-en-france.php. 
Retrieved 
2017, 
February 5th.  
[6] Available 
on : 
http://www.enseignementsup-
recherche.gouv.fr/cid79926/statut-national-etudiant-
entrepreneur.html. Retrieved 2016, June 26th. 
[7] Seminar  “New forms of cooperation for the Digital Age / 
New Civic Sociability”, ISCC, Paris, December 1st,  2016. 
[8] J.L. Laville and A. Yvergniaux, “Tags for a left project. 
Democratic solidarity, sustainable development, plural 
economy / Balises pour un projet de gauche. Solidarité 
démocratique, développement durable, économie plurielle," 
Institut 
Polanyi 
/ 
France, 
2009, 
Available 
on: 
http://institutpolanyi.fr/balises-pour-un-projet-de-gauche-
solidarite-democratique-developpement-durable-economie-
plurielle/. Retrieved 2017, February 5th. 
[9] F. Bernard, "The SIC, a Disciplinary of Openness and 
Decompartmentalization /  Les SIC, une discipline de 
l’ouverture et du décloisonnement ", in A. Bouzon dir., op. 
cit., Paris : L’Harmattan,  pp. 33 – 46, 2006. 
[10] F. Bernard, “Organize communication for societal action and  
utility. 
The 
paradigm 
of 
engaging communication / Organiser la communication 
d’action 
et 
d’utilité 
sociétales. 
Le 
paradigme 
de 
lacommunication 
engageante,” 
Communication 
and 
Organization / Communication et organisation , 29 | 2006. 
Available 
on 
http://communicationorganisation.revues.org/3374. Retrieved 
February 2017, 6th. 
[11] N. D’Almeida, "Organizations between projects and stories / 
Les organisations entre projets et récits", in A. Bouzon dir., 
Organizational Communication in debates. Fields, Concepts 
and Prospects / La communication organisationnelle en 
débats. 
Champs, 
concepts 
et 
perspectives, " 
Paris : 
L’Harmattan,  p. 145 – 158, 2006.   
[12] "The game of Michel Foucault / Le jeu de Michel Foucault" 
(interview), Ornicar ?, n° 10, July, pp. 62-93, 1977.  
[13] Available 
on : 
http://www.edu-tice.org/approche-
th%C3%A9orique/glossaire/concepts-5/. 
Retrieved 
2016,  
June 26th.  
[14] J.-P. Boutinet, Psychology of Project Conducts / Psychologie 
des conduites à projet, Paris: PUF, 1999. 
[15] G. Gramaccia, “Quality, Project, Digital : three symbolic 
variations of Managerial Effectiveness / Qualité, projet, 
numérique : trois variations symboliques de l’efficacité 
gestionnaire,” 
in 
C. 
Batazzi 
dir., 
Communication, 
organisation, 
symboles, 
Revue 
MEI, 
n° 
29, 
Paris : 
L’Harmattan, pp. 55-67, 2008.   
[16] L. Bègue and O. Desrichard dir., Treaty of Social Psychology. 
Science of Human Interactions / Traité de psychologie 
sociale. La science des interactions humaines, Bruxelles: De 
Boeck, 2013. 
[17] M. Zacklad, "Economies of Conviviality in Information and 
Services Societies / Les économies de la convivialité dans les 
sociétés de l’information et des services," Inaugural Lecture / 
Leçon inaugurale, Paris: CNAM, 2009 June 17 th.  
[18] J.-C. Lugan, Social Systemic / La systémique sociale, Paris : 
PUF, 2012. 
[19] Creators Groupments Network / Le réseau Groupement de 
Créateurs, Undertake his future / Entreprendre son avenir, 
Paris, Available on: www.groupement-de-createurs.fr  
[20] D. Bougnoux, Introduction to sciences of communication, 
Paris: La Découverte, 2006. 
[21]  G. Lefebvre, Identitary Reconstruction and Insertion / 
Reconstruction identitaire et insertion, Paris: L’Harmattan, 
1998. 
[22] Available 
on : 
http://www.enseignementsup-
recherche.gouv.fr/cid79223/pepite-poles-etudiants-pour-
innovation-transfert-entrepreneuriat.html. 
Retrieved 
2016, 
June 26th. 
[23] A. Mucchielli, Situation and Communication, Nice : Les 
éditions Ovadia, 2010. 
[24] A. Caillé dir., The quest for recognition new total social 
phenomenom / La quête de reconnaissance nouveau 
phénomène social total, Paris : La Découverte, 2007. 
[25]  J.-P. Caliste and C. Bourret, "Contribution to a Typological 
Analysis of Processes : From Conformity to Agility / 
Contribution à une analyse typologique des processus : de la 
conformité à l’agilité," UTC Quality Notebooks / Les Cahiers 
de la Qualité de l’UTC, Vol 2, G. Farges and al.., Lexitis 
éditions,  pp. 113-116, 2015. 
[26] F. Martin-Juchat, The body and the media. The flesh 
experienced by the media and social spaces / Le corps et les 
88
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

médias. La chair éprouvée par les médias et les espaces 
sociaux, Bruxelles: De Boeck, 2008. 
[27] E. Morin, Introduction to Complex Thought / Introduction à 
la pensée complexe, Paris : ESF, 1990, rééd., Points-Seuil, 
2005. 
[28] J.-L. Le Moigne, Formalisms of Systemic Modelling / Les 
formalismes de la modélisation systémique, 2005, Available 
on :www.intelligence-
complexite.org/fileadmin/docs/0505formalismesvfr.pdf, 
Retrieved May 2017, 1st. 
[29] A. Mucchielli, Systemic and Communicationnal Approach of 
Organizations / Approche systémique et communicationnelle 
des organisations,  Paris : Armand Colin, 2002. 
[30] L. L. Putnam, A.M. Nicotera, Building Theories of 
Organization. The Constitutive Role of Communication, New 
York / London : Routledge, 2009. 
[31] K. Mossakowski and J. Mandziuk, “Learning without human 
expertise. A case study of the Double Dummy Bridge 
Problem,” Transactions on Neural Networks, IEEE, vol. 20, 
Issue 
2, 
pp. 
1-23, 
Available 
on 
: 
ieeexplore.ieee.org/iel5/72/4776562/04749256.pdf 
– 
Retrieved May 2017, 1st. 
[32] O. Zara, Management of Collective Intelligence / Le 
Management de l’intelligence collective, Paris : M21 
Editions, 2008. 
[33] D. 
Goleman, 
Working 
with 
Emotional 
Intelligence, 
Bloomsbury: London, 1998. 
[34] M. Callon,  " Sociology of the Network Actor / Sociologie de 
l’Acteur Réseau," in M. Akrich, M. Callon and B. Latour.,  
Sociology of the Translation :  Founding Texts / Sociologie de 
la Traduction : Textes fondateurs, Presses de l’Ecole des 
Mines de Paris, pp. 267-276, 2006.  
[35] A. Dumas and F. Martin-Juchat, “Communication approach to 
emotions in organizations: questions and methodological 
implications / Approche communicationnelle des émotions 
dans les organisations : questionnements et implications 
méthodologiques ,” French Review of Information and 
Communication Sciences / Revue française des sciences de 
l’information et de la communication, 9/ 2016, Available on: 
http://rfsic.revues.org/2103 ; 
DOI : 
10.4000/rfsic.2103 
. 
Retrieved 2017, February 5th. 
[36] Y. Algan, B. Crépon, E. Huillery and W. Parienté, “Impact of 
Creators' groups: teaching a controlled experiment / Impact 
des Groupements de Créateurs : enseignement d’une 
expérience contrôlée”, J-PAL et CREST Laboratories, Paris, 
2016. 
Available 
on: 
http://www.lesechos.fr/economie-
france/social/0211576808894-jeunes-le-dispositif-
groupement-de-createurs-a-fait-ses-preuves-2049670.php. 
Retrieved 2017, February 5th. 
[37] L. Ferry, Destructive Innovation / L’innovation destructrice, 
Paris: Plon, 2014. 
[38] S. Hessel and E. Morin, The Way of Hope / Le Chemin de 
l’Espérance, Paris :Fayard, 2011. 
[39] C. Bourret, "Elements for an Approach of Territorial 
Intelligence as a Synergy of Local Projects to Develop a 
Collective Identity /  Eléments pour une approche de 
l’intelligence territoriale comme synergie de projets locaux 
pour développer une identité collective," International Journal 
of Projectics, n° 1, Bruxelles: De Boeck, pp. 79-92, 2008. 
[40] M. Godet, P. Durance and M. Mousli, Unleashing innovation 
in the territories / Libérer l’innovation dans les territoires, 
Paris : Conseil d'Analyse Economique - La documentation 
Française, 2010. 
[41] B. Carayon, Economic Intelligence, Competitiveness and 
Social Cohesion, /  Intelligence économique, compétitivité et 
cohésion sociale, Paris : La Documentation française, 2003. 
Available 
on 
 : 
http://www.ladocumentationfrancaise.fr/rapports-
publics/034000484/index.shtml. Retrieved 2017, May 1st. 
[42] N. D’Almeida, The Promises of Communication / Les 
promesses de la communication, Paris : PUF, 2001. 
 
 
 
 
89
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

