275
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Automotive User Experience Design Patterns: An Approach and
Pattern Examples
Alexander G. Mirnig, Tim Kaiser, Artur Lupp, Nicole Perterer,
Alexander Meschtscherjakov, Thomas Grah, Manfred Tscheligi
Christian Doppler Laboratory for ”Contextual Interfaces”
Center for Human-Computer Interaction, University of Salzburg
Salzburg, Austria
Email: {ﬁrstname.lastname}@sbg.ac.at
Abstract— Patterns are a methodology for capturing best
practices and solutions to reoccurring problems in certain ﬁelds
or disciplines. Applied to automotive interaction design they
can combine empirical data, industry knowledge, and experts
experience for state-of-the-art design solutions. In this paper,
we present the patterns approach and its application to the
automotive interaction domain, together with a newly generated
set of eight in-vehicle user experience (UX) design patterns that
describe answers to problems in automotive interaction design
and engineering. These patterns are part of an ongoing project
with the aim of providing a comprehensive, user experience
focused, collection of design solutions for contemporary and
future automotive designs. We present the pattern approach in
general, the speciﬁc automotive approach and methodology, the
patterns themselves, and ﬁnally discuss the beneﬁts, drawbacks,
and future work regarding patterns in the automotive domain.
Keywords— design patterns; pattern identiﬁcation and extrac-
tion; pattern reuse.
I. INTRODUCTION
This paper is an extended version of a full paper presented
at PATTERNS 2016 [1]. The term ‘pattern’ has a wide
range of meanings, both in everyday and academic language.
Generally speaking, the term can be said to refer to a set of
attributes that are common among a speciﬁc set of objects. In
the context of this paper, however, it refers to a knowledge
capturing and transfer method, ﬁrst developed in the 19th
century for the architecture domain [2]. One key idea behind
this method was that the solutions gained via said method
should be reusable to solve similar and recurring problems;
hence the term ‘patterns’.
The use of this method is well established in contempo-
rary Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) and is considered
advantageous for various reasons. First, patterns are a method
to capture proven design solutions to reoccurring problems.
Second, the use of patterns improves the design process
(regarding both, time and effort spent) to a considerable
degree [3][4]. Moreover, scientiﬁc research in HCI also
strongly relies on communicating scientiﬁc ﬁndings to the
industry. By translating these ﬁndings so that they convey
relevant and useful information to designers and developers,
patterns can help facilitate the design process by reducing
time and effort that has to be put into it. Designing for a
positive User Experience (UX) has become an increasingly
important topic in academia and industry [5][6][7]. User
Experience can be deﬁned as ”the users sensory, emotional
and reﬂective response to the interaction with a system in
a context” [8]. The car industry in particular has become a
fast-paced global market that can draw substantial beneﬁts
from a modular and ﬂexible documentation of best practices.
Automotive interface and interaction design is a complex
and constantly evolving area. Driven by scientiﬁc ﬁndings
and industrial progress, the number of interfaces and inter-
action devices, together with ways to interact with them,
increases. The automotive domain, and the driver interaction
space in particular, is a challenging environment to design
in, given its emphasis on safety, minimizing distraction,
and generally restrictive nature. There are no one-size-ﬁts-
all solutions for driver space design, and the challenge of
providing contemporary solutions, which combine techno-
logical state of the art as well as driver and trafﬁc needs,
can be difﬁcult. Due to the rapid progress in technology that
is currently observable in the automotive domain, virtually
every new day presents a new set of problems and challenges
for designing novel interaction solutions.
Based on this consideration, we are in the process of
creating a set of Contextual User Experience patterns for
driver space design in the automotive domain, of which
we present the eight most recent ones in this paper. In the
following section, we will give an overview on the state of
the art on Contextual UX patterns in general, and introduce
our speciﬁc approach in Section III. In Section IV, we show
each of the eight patterns and discuss these in Section V. We
conclude the paper with a summary in Section VI.
II. RELATED WORK
In the original publication [1], we presented the eight auto-
motive design patterns but outlined the pattern approach only
very brieﬂy and with no proper discussion. This extension
aims to lend more context to the automotive patterns via a
more extensive related work embedding, show our approach
in greater detail, and discuss the initial pattern set, lessons
learned, and remaining challenges. In this section, we will
ﬁrst introduce the original pattern approach and then talk
about the relevance of patterns for User Experience design
and research. After that, we introduce a number of existing

276
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
pattern approaches in Human-Computer Interaction, which
our approach draws from. We conclude this section with a
brief overview of knowledge transfer and design information
sources in the automotive domain.
A. Patterns
Patterns were ﬁrst introduced by Christopher Alexander
[2][9] as a way to capture and document solutions to re-
curring problems in the architecture domain. His work was
adopted and expanded upon in several disciplines and, as a
result, patterns have evolved towards a more widely applied
means to capture problem solutions. HCI is among these
disciplines and the pattern approach has been adopted in
order to provide best practices and state of the art knowledge
in this multi-disciplinary ﬁeld [10][11]. Pattern approaches
vary between disciplines, and, while attempts have been
made, there is no widely accepted uniform cross-discipline
pattern approach yet [12].
K¨ohne [13], who based his work on Quibeldey-Cirkel [14],
presents a pattern ﬁnding process in several steps. The ﬁrst
step in this process is the so-called pattern mining, which
consists of ﬁnding a solution and deciding whether or not it is
adequate to solve a certain problem, after which it is written
down, according to a predeﬁned pattern structure. During the
next step, the so-called shepherding, a domain expert (the
shepherd) provides feedback regarding writing, formatting,
and contents of the initial pattern to the pattern writer, who
then iterates the pattern based on this feedback. This version
is then discussed in a collaborative setting together with other
pattern writers, after which the writer prepares the last non-
public version of the pattern. This version is then put into a
public online pattern repository, in which it is peer-reviewed.
After any ﬁnal edits to the patterns themselves have been
made and the collection is deemed to be of good quality, it
is published as a document and fully made available to the
public.
Pattern mining is usually done by looking at actually
implemented design solutions. But practical knowledge is
not the only potential source for patterns - they can also
be gained from scientiﬁc research. Martin et al. [15] mined
patterns from ethnographical study results and then tried to
generalize the observed phenomena and provide and/or apply
them to other domains.
B. User Experience and the Need for Consolidated Solutions
In HCI, User Experience (UX) design is considered to
be an important topic with relevance in both academic and
industrial aspects [16][6]. In its most general meaning, User
Experience research and design is a shift from a system-
centered to a user-centered paradigm, in which the expected
effects on the user are the focus of implementation and
design decisions. However, putting this paradigm shift into
practice is not a simple process and there are a vast number
of UX approaches in academically oriented HCI studies
alone. Reference to industry norms and standards can be
helpful in such cases and mediate between the academic
and practical sides of a multidisciplinary area such as HCI.
For example, according to the ISO DIS 9241-210 standard,
User Experience can be deﬁned as “a person’s perceptions
and responses resulting from the use and/or anticipated use
of a product, system or service.” [17]. This speciﬁes the
concept of UX somewhat but more can be done. There
is a need for a way to consolidate the information and
recommendations from academia, standards, guidelines, and
practical experience into realizable solutions.
C. Contextual User Experience Patterns
Recently, speciﬁc domains in HCI, such as UX research,
employed patterns to collect and structure their knowledge
based on empirical ﬁndings [4][11][18]. This is illustrated,
e.g., by Martin et al. [19] and Crabtree [20] who use patterns
for organizing and presenting ethnographic material. In 2010,
Blackwell and Fincher [7] suggest adopting the idea of
patterns and UX in the form of Patterns of User Experi-
ence (PUX). Such patterns should help HCI professionals
to understand what kind of experiences people have with
information structures.
In the same year, Obrist et al. [4] developed 30 UX
patterns for audiovisual networked applications based on a
wide range of collected empirical data, which was further
categorized into main UX problem areas. An extension
of these UX patterns, are the so-called Contextual User
Experience (CUX) patterns. Accordingly, patterns are used
to describe the knowledge on how to inﬂuence the users
experience in a positive way by taking context parameters
during the interaction with a system into account. Within
their work, the authors provide a detailed description of
how to structure CUX patterns in the car context. Three
years later, Krischkowsky et al. [18] presented a step-by-
step guidance for HCI researchers for generating patterns
form HCI study insights. In particular, they intended to
support User Experience (UX) researchers in converting their
gathered knowledge from empirical studies into patterns. The
structural foundation for the intended patterns is the so-
called Contextual User Experience (CUX) patterns format,
as mentioned before.
Following in the footsteps of Obrist et al. [11], we decided
to pursue a three pronged approach towards driver space
design and cover three major UX factors via appropriate
design patterns.These factors are:
• Mental Workload Caused by Distraction [21]: Safety is
paramount in an automotive environment, and distrac-
tion is one of the major contributing factors to accidents
on the road [22][23]. Especially in UX, where function-
alities and interface complexities are ever increasing,
this is one of the most important factors to consider
regarding driver safety.
• Perceived Safety [24]: The increased safety gained by
designing for decreased mental workload and less dis-
traction needs to be communicated to the driver. The
difference between objective and perceived safety can
be relatively large. For many situations, it has to be
evaluated if car interfaces should increase or decrease
perceived safety.

277
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
• Joy of Use [25][26]: Cars have more and more become
instruments that are not simply means of transportation
but are also used for entertainment. Thus, it becomes
important that car interfaces can be used not only
without frustration, but also in a way that makes using
them a joyful experience.
We choose to focus on each of these factors for speciﬁc
reasons. Mental Workload Caused by Distraction was chosen
because it has been identiﬁed as one of the most safety-
critical factors in trafﬁc safety and because in-vehicle inter-
active systems bear particular inherent distraction potential.
Perceived Safety was chosen because the communication of
safety measures to the driver, which are not only limited
to reducing in-vehicle distraction, needs to be ensured for
successful interaction, thus complementing the ﬁrst UX
factor. Lastly, Joy of Use was chosen to make sure the
eventual solutions are still suitable for a consumer-driven
market, which the automotive domain is. We consider it
important to keep in mind that the safest car is of little use
if nobody has any intention to buy it.
D. Norms and Guidelines in Automotive Design and Engi-
neering
The importance of norms and standards for the automotive
domain has been stressed by Green in 2012 [27]. He argues
that it should be required to include references to norms and
standards when conducting experiments in the automotive
domain, such as [28] or [29], in order to improve replicability
and applicability of driver interface research.
There are several norms, standards, and guidelines that can
supplement existing domain knowledge and aid automotive
designers and engineers to follow basic human factors and
usability rules. On one hand, there are norms and guidelines
for the the general design of interactive systems. An example
is the ISO 9241-110 [30], which provides general dialogue
design principles and is part of the ISO 9241 standards
family, which is a multi-part standard from the International
Organization for Standardization covering different aspects
of ergonomics of human-computer interaction. On the other
hand, there are guidelines for automotive designs often
provided by automobile stakeholders, such as the AAM
principles on Automotive User Interface (AUI) design [31],
the JAMA guideline for in-vehicle display systems [32],
the EU recommendation on safe and efﬁcient in-vehicle
information and communication systems [33], or the ISO
15005 norm on ergonomic aspects of dialogue management
principles in road vehicles [34]. These often contain rather
high level recommendations, which leaves a broad range of
interpretation space for a designer. Yet, there are also very
speciﬁc standards, such as the ISO 15008 [35], in which
recommendations for alphanumerical character dimensions
are given.
III. THE AUTOMOTIVE PATTERN FINDING PROCESS
The pattern ﬁnding process for car user experience patterns
is described in detail by Mirnig et al. [36] and shall be
reproduced here brieﬂy and concisely; an illustrated overview
can be found in Figure 1. In general, the process proceeds
with the following ﬁve steps:
1) Problem ﬁnding and knowledge transfer workshop:
The pattern ﬁnding process begins with an initial workshop,
in which a small number (2-4 each) of both HCI researchers
and automotive engineers and/or design experts participate.
In this initial workshop, the focus is on knowledge transfer
between the areas of academic HCI and automotive industry.
The engineers are introduced to the pattern approach and the
granularity of problems pattern solutions can be applied to. In
a following discussion, the HCI researchers gather common
and reoccurring problems, which the engineers face in their
work. This happens in a top-down discussion, where overall
issues or problem sources are deﬁned ﬁrst and are then
broken down and reﬁned during the course of the discussion.
At the end of the workshop, the identiﬁed problems are
compiled in a list and rated on 3-point priority scale (high,
medium, and low priority).
2) Initial pattern mining: The initial pattern mining is
done by HCI researchers, who are each assigned a number of
problems with high to medium priority ratings. The number
of patterns per researcher varies, depending on the number of
researchers available, time constraints (if any), and number
of high priority problems. In general, three to ﬁve problems
(keeping in mind that one problem might result in more than
one pattern) is a good number to aim for and keeps the
workload for the individual at a manageable level. Naturally,
the researchers should be competent regarding the academic
aspect of the problems they are assigned. In the case of
the UX automotive pattern collection, this meant that all of
them should be familiar with UX and interface design, with
specialization in the automotive domain being an additional
plus, although not absolutely necessary. The ﬁrst step is
deciding whether or not the problem is a low or high level
problem and whether or not its level of granularity is such
that it requires one or several patterns. Each researcher
then mines publications, demos, prototype presentations,
and other available sources for solutions to the problem in
question. These solutions can be partial, so that the researcher
then combines all partial solution into one full solution for
the eventual pattern. The pattern is written according to the
structure outlined in the previous section and is then handed
to another researcher for a ﬁrst internal iteration. After this,
the initial pattern or pattern draft is complete.
3) First iteration workshop: The initial patterns are pre-
sented to a group of automotive engineers in another work-
shop. Ideally, this workshop consists of some of the partic-
ipants from the initial knowledge transfer workshop as well
as participants who were not involved previously, in order to
have a varied amount of viewpoints. The patterns are then
read thoroughly by each participant and rated via a rating
sheet based on the rating system developed by Wurhofer
et al. [37]. Each pattern subcategory (Name, solution, etc.)
is rated individually on a 5-point scale. When a pattern
receives a rating of around or lower than 3 in any given
subcategory, then it is marked for iteration. The workshop
concludes with a discussion, in which the overall quality and

278
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 1.
Overview of the Pattern Finding and Iteration Process.
cohesiveness of the pattern collection is discussed and any
particular problematic patterns are identiﬁed.
4) Second iteration and workshop: After the workshop,
the patterns undergo a second round of iterations, based
on the ratings and feedback from the workshop. This time,
they are iterated by at least one HCI researcher and at least
one automotive engineer, in order to improve and ensure
their practical relevance. The automotive engineer puts par-
ticular focus on supplementing the pattern with additional
implementation examples (if available) and industry best
practices. Like in the initial pattern writing, each pattern is
cross-iterated by another researcher or engineer for typos,
minor errors, structure, etc., before the second iteration
is complete. The aim of the second iteration is content
completion, i.e., the pattern solutions should be complete and
fully described – all further iterations should only serve to
improve structure, readability, and understandability. Once
this iteration is completed, a second pattern workshop is
conducted. The workshop proceeds like the ﬁrst workshop,
with the same rating system and discussion structure. In order
to provide a fresh and unbiased view on the patterns and
potentially identify new issues, the second workshop should,
if possible, have some participants who were not part of the
ﬁrst workshop.
5) Final Iteration and Validation: After the workshop,
the patterns are once again reworked based on the issues
identiﬁed in the workshop. These should mostly be minor
issues, although it is possible that major issues are found,
which need to be dealt with. In that case, the pattern in
question needs a content rework and is then put back in
the loop for another content iteration workshop. Since it is
usually not very efﬁcient to schedule a workshop for only a
handful of problematic patterns, these patterns are put aside
temporarily. They are taken up again when a new batch of
patterns is created and the appropriate iteration phase (and
workshop) is reached. Once the patterns are reworked, the
collection is provided to the industry experts for rating. Each
pattern is rated individually, using the same rating system as
before, and there is no need to do this in a workshop setting.
In case a pattern receives a rating of around 3 or below at
this stage, it is reworked and re-rated. It should be noted that
this rarely, if ever, happens, since problematic patterns are
usually identiﬁed before this stage. Once the patterns are all
validated, the pattern collection is considered complete.
The resulting reﬁned pattern structure consists of 9 parts:
Name (a description of the solution of the pattern), Intent (a
short abstract to allow quick judgment whether the pattern
can be applied in a certain context), Topics (problem scope
and addressed automotive user experience factor), Problem
(a short but more detailed description of the problem which
should be solved by the pattern), Scenario (an example
application context of the pattern), Solution (the proposed
solution), Examples (concrete examples of best practices),
Keywords (other topics related to the pattern), and Sources
(origin of the pattern).
IV. PATTERN COLLECTION
We developed a list of design problems together with
designers and engineers working in the automotive industry
and applied the aforementioned pattern generation approach,
involving the industry stakeholders at several stages in the
process. The following is one part of a resulting collection of
patterns, which combines scientiﬁc and industry know-how
into concrete problem solutions for UX-centered driver
space design problems in the automotive domain. These
patterns were edited regarding formatting and keywords as
well as sources were removed for this publication. They
are otherwise content-identical to the internally developed
versions.
A. Pattern 1: Menu Depth and Number of Options
Intent: This pattern is about reducing distraction caused
by navigating visual menus as a secondary task.
Topics: Workload caused by distraction, driver, haptic,
input

279
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Problem: While driving, navigation of in-vehicle user
interface menus causes distraction. Given the safety implica-
tions of visual distraction, it is important to minimize visual
demand of these menus.
Scenario: Drivers interact with visual menus to access in-
formation, communication and entertainment systems. Nav-
igating menus with high visual demand severely distracts
the driver and can thus lead to road deviations and crashes.
Visual demand of menus is determined by a depth/breadth-
trade-off. The deeper a menu, the less menu options per page
there should be. A National Highway Trafﬁc Safety Agency
(NHTSA) guideline based on current research recommends
that a driver should be able to complete a task in a series
of 1.5 second glances with a cumulative time spent glancing
away from the roadway of not more than 12 seconds [38].
Solution: Designing menus with limited depth allow
drivers to complete secondary tasks in a relatively short
time period. With the help of an empirically derived formula
provided by Burnett et al. [39], it is possible to calculate
different menu structures that comply with design guidelines:
T = D(0.87 + 1.24 ∗ log(B)
where T = time to complete the task, D = depth of menu
where B = number of menu options. Table I shows acceptable
menu structures that comply with maximum task completion
time according to the NHTSA guideline, as calculated using
this formula.
TABLE I
MENU DEPTH AND NUMBER OF OPTIONS FOLLOWING NHTSA
GUIDELINES
Menu Depth
Menu Breadth
3
12
4
5
5
3
6
2
Examples: see Figures 2 and 3.
B. Pattern 2: Display Touch Field Size
Intent: This pattern is about determining the optimal touch
screen target size.
Topics: Workload caused by distraction, driver, touch
screen, visual, haptic, input
Problem: Navigating in-vehicle displays while driving
causes distraction, leading to road deviations and possibly
to crashes. Thus, visual demand of touch screen menus has
to be minimized while preserving maximum usability.
Scenario: Because they are easy to use and to understand,
touch-screen interfaces are more and more used for operating
in-vehicle systems. Drivers use them to control entertainment
and navigation features provided by these systems as a
Figure 2.
BMW iDrive - accessing vital information requires only three
navigation steps.
Figure 3.
BMW iDrive - changing the radio station requires only two
steps.

280
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
secondary task. The key factor for navigating these displays
easily is the size of the touch target like a menu button [40].
Subjective usability ratings, as well as objective measures
like task completion time and error rate heavily depend on
this factor.
Solution: Touch targets need to be large enough in order
to minimize task completion time and error rate. Design
guidelines suggest a minimum contact surface area of 80
mm [38]. However, in a recent driving simulation study
that focused on touch target size for in-vehicle information
systems, the authors determined that a touch key size of at
least 17.5x17.5 mm minimizes navigation error rate, lane
deviations, driving speed variation and glance time while
maximizing subjective usability ratings [41]. While touch
screen size and overall visual complexity of the menu always
have to be taken in consideration, the recommended touch
key size may serve as a starting point for menu design.
Examples: See Figure 4.
Figure 4.
Apple Car Play menu.
C. Pattern 3: Auditory Information and Warnings
Intent: This pattern is about designing auditory informa-
tion and warnings that are quick to capture and easy to
comprehend.
Topics: Perceived safety, driver, acoustic, output
Problem: When using only visual warnings, driver distrac-
tion can occur. Still, drowsiness and inattentiveness increase
the risk of trafﬁc accidents. Thus, it is still necessary to direct
the drivers attention to potential dangers by different means.
Scenario: Well-designed auditory warning systems can
serve this purpose. Perceptibilty of auditory warnings de-
pends on loudness, background noise and complexity. Also,
the driver needs to know which actions have to be taken to
react appropriately.
Solution: Different warning techniques are appropriate
for different situations. According to Bliss and Acton [42],
verbal speech notiﬁcations and auditory icons (sounds with
real-world representations, e.g., the sound of a car engine)
are equally efﬁcient when it comes to response accuracy
and reaction time. Auditory warnings also have to convey
enough information to be accurately understood. Due to
driving comfort reasons, warnings of low urgency should
not be annoying and can even be quite pleasant, while high-
urgency warnings are bound to be annoying [43].
Examples: Table II shows auditory warnings for some
common situations of varying urgency. Empirical work on
the perceived urgency of speech based warnings has been
done [44].
D. Pattern 4: Choosing the Best Modality for Warning
Displays
Intent: This pattern is about choosing the right warning
display modality for different situations, combining different
modalities if adequate.
Topics: Perceived safety, driver, multimodal, output
Scenario: In-vehicle information system (IVIS) informa-
tion needs to be delivered effectively while minimizing the
interference with driving. Display modality has a signiﬁcant
impact on the performance of in-vehicle information systems.
Visual, auditory and tactile displays all have their advantages
and disadvantages [45]: Visual warnings can be inspected
at the drivers own pace and can be viewed multiple times.
However, they cause visual distraction from the driving task
and can be overlooked. Auditory warnings can be picked up
without causing visual distraction, but they require the drivers
full attention when they are displayed. Tactile warnings are
highly noticeable, not inﬂuenced by noise and have no visual
demand, but they are limited to a few types of information,
such as simple alerts. In order to maximize IVIS efﬁciency,
designers have to choose carefully between the different
modalities.
Solution: When choosing between auditory and visual
presentation, Table III offers decision guidelines based on
current empirical research for a variety of cases. Some of
these cases will probably beneﬁt if combined with another
display modality.
Examples: Figure 5 shows combined auditory and visual
warnings. See [46] for a live demonstration.
E. Pattern 5: IVIS System Response Time
Intent: This pattern addresses the role of system response
time while operating in-vehicle information systems by touch
interfaces or hardware keys and its inﬂuence on driver
distraction and comfort.
Topics: Workload caused by distraction, joy of use, driver,
keys, visual, haptic, input
Problem: While getting more and more complex, many
modern in-vehicle information systems possess signiﬁcant
delays when using them because of the sheer amount of
information that they have to process. The inﬂuence of
system response time - the delay of a systems response after
user input until it is ready to take new commands - has

281
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE II
RECOMMENDED WARNINGS FOR COMMON SITUATIONS OF VARYING URGENCY
Urgency
Speech Based Warnings
Auditory Icons
Appropriate Situation
Informational (low)
Signal words that convey
low urgency:
”Notice”, ”Information”
Pouring water,
steam, released air
Low petrol and oil levels, low tire pressure
Warning (moderate)
Signal words that convey
medium urgency:
Warning, Caution
Shutting car door,
Roaringmotor sound,
squeaking sound
Car door opened, speed limit exceeded, hand brake on
Critical (high)
Signal words that convey
high urgency:
Danger
Car horn, car crash,
alarm siren
Blind spot overtaking, car drifting off road, collision possible
Figure 5.
Audi A8 Distance Warning through a combination of auditory
and visual warning displays.
been discussed as a potential source of driver distraction and
annoyance [47].
Scenario: Drivers use in-vehicle information systems for
a wide variety of functions. While navigating their menus,
the IVIS processes large amounts of information, which may
lead to long and uncertain loading times.
Solution: Keep system response time below 250 ms.
According to current design guidelines [38], control feedback
should be given within 250 ms after the input. A study
by Utesch and Vollrath [48] showed that longer feedback
delays (500 or 1000 ms) did not impair driving performance
but caused signiﬁcant annoyance in drivers. Keep system
response times constant. It has also been shown in this
study that delays that vary in their length distract the driver,
while constant delays cause less off-road glances. It can be
concluded that feedback delays should be kept constant so
that waiting times for system response are predictable. For
longer delays, use additional feedback modalities. According
to guidelines of the European Commission [49], if system
responses take longer than 250 ms, the system should inform
the driver that it has recognized the input. If longer delays
(500 ms and above) are inevitable, Utesch and Vollrath [48]
recommend using acoustic or tactile feedback to indicate
system readiness, as this will reduce off-road glances.
Examples:
1. Demonstration of a 2015 Audi MMI System, showing
constant and short system response times [50].
2. Demonstration of a BMW 5 Series iDrive, showing long
but constant delays [51].
3. Demonstration of an Apple CarPlay IVIS in the Ferrari
FF showing long and variable delays. This might cause
distraction and annoyance [52].
F. Pattern 6: In-Vehicle Display Icon Size
Intent: This pattern addresses recommended IVIS icon
sizes.
Topics: Joy of use, driver, icons, visual
Problem: IVIS displays transport various pieces of infor-
mation, some of which require quick and accurate recogni-
tion. However, as in-vehicle displays have to convey more
and more information, available space on in-vehicle displays
becomes sparse.
Scenario: Icons are a way of presenting information in a
spatially condensed, yet clearly understandable way. When
relying on icons, the driver needs to be able to quickly grasp
and process information, which in turn requires that icons
can be easily recognized.
Solution: According to Zwaga [64], icons perform better
than text displays only if they are well designed. According
to FHWA guidelines [65], choosing the adequate size for an
icon can be determined with the following set of formulæ.
See Figure 6 for an illustration of visual angle, distance
and symbol height (where Symbol Height = the height of
the symbol; Distance = distance from viewers eyepoint to
the display; Visual Angle = angle in degrees. Height and
Distance use the same unit of measure).
Figure 6.
Relationship between Viewing Distance, Symbol Height and
Visual Angle.
1. If viewer distance and Symbol Height are known,

282
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE III
RECOMMENDED WARNINGS FOR COMMON SITUATIONS OF VARYING URGENCY
Case
Primary Modality
Reason
Combine with...
High priority messages
Auditory [53][54]
Visual warnings alone
are likely to be overlooked
Tactile [55] for
decreased reaction times
Complex secondary task
Auditory [56][57][58]
Further distraction due
to increased glance duration
Visual [59] for reduced
reaction times and less navigation errors
Driving task is highly demanding,
e.g., high driving speed
Auditory [56][57][58]
Divided visual attention
poses a security risk
Displaying instructions, commands,
warnings or alarms
Auditory [60]
Speech is more suitable
for this information type
Tactile [61]
Auditory message cannot be kept
short and precise
Visual [62]
Auditory messages that are
too long cause severe distraction
Driver performs auditory tasks
Visual [44]
Auditory perception is
partially or completely blocked
Tactile [63] for reduced lane
deviations and annoyance,
increased pleasantness
the following formulæ will calculate the distance.
arctan(Symbolheight
Distance
)
(1)
or
3438 Height
Distance
60
(2)
2. If distance and visual angle are known.
Distance[tan(V isualAngle)]
(3)
3. If visual angle and symbol height are known, the
following formulæ will calculate the distance.
Symbolheight
tan(V isualAngle)
(4)
Examples: See Figure 7.
Figure 7.
Audi A4 2008 Dashboard Icons, taken from the users manual
[66].
G. Pattern 7: Visual Display Colour Choices
Intent: This pattern is about choosing adequate colours
for visual displays.
Topics: Joy of use, driver, colors, visual
Problem: IVIS displays transport various pieces of infor-
mation, some of which require quick and accurate recogni-
tion. However, as in-vehicle displays have to convey more
and more information, they still need to be processed quickly.
Scenario: IVIS displays have to display information in a
clear and efﬁcient way. One way to achieve this is picking
adequate colors for displays, so that reading and recognizing
symbols can be accomplished without delay.
Solution: According to NHTSA guidelines, visual display
colors should comply to a number of standards.
• Avoid using red/green and blue/yellow combinations so
that color blind drivers can process the display easily.
• According to a survey conducted by Lee and Park
[67], senior people prefer combinations with distinc-
tive brightness contrasts between foreground and back-
ground color because of their better legibility.
• Displays that are too colorful distract the driver in
various ways. Excluding black and white, a maximum
of ﬁve different colours should be used.
• Use different colours for different priorities, e.g., red
for critical alerts, amber for warnings, white for infor-
mation.
Visual displays are easier to process if high color contrasts
are used. A driving simulation study showed that inefﬁciently
designed car displays strongly increase reaction times in
driving tasks. They also increase reading errors [68]. Table
IV shows color contrasts that guarantee high legibility.
TABLE IV
RECOMMENDED COLOR CONTRASTS FOR IVIS DISPLAYS
Black/yellow
Black/yellow
Black/white
Black/white
Black/orange
Black/orange
Blue/white
Blue/white
Green/white
Green/white
Red/white
Red/white

283
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Examples: See Figure 8. This dashboard relies on white-
on-black and orange-on-black contrasts which are highly
visible. Orange is the only color used (beside black and
white).
Figure 8.
Dashboard with color contrasts that are highly visible.
Figure 9.
BMW iDrive screen, showing blue-on-white contrasts with an
orange highlight.
H. Pattern 8: Physical Buttons versus Touch Screen Inter-
faces
Intent: This pattern addresses the question whether touch
screens or physical buttons should be used.
Topics: Workload caused by distraction, driver, touch
screen, visual, haptic, input
Problem: Current touch-screen devices provide no tactile
feedback concerning control orientation, location, separation
from one another. While driving, they can not be operated
with eyes on the road, which in turn leads to long off-
road glances. NHSTA guidelines [38] suggest that touch
interfaces should not be operated while driving. On the other
hand, touch screen devices provide much more ﬂexibility,
which is needed to operate modern, feature-rich in-vehicle
information systems.
Scenario: Drivers use in-vehicle information systems for
a wide variety of functions. Ways to navigate through the
increasing number of functions are getting more and more
complex. Touch screen interfaces are getting more and
more popular, but navigating them while driving is highly
distracting.
Solution:
1) While driving, limit the amount of time spent to
interact with touch devices. NHTSA recommends a
maximum of six touches for every 12 seconds period
[69]. Physical buttons do not require such strict reg-
ulations as their functionality is limited and they are
not as visually distracting. Thus, functions that must be
available to the driver while the car is moving should
be represented by physical buttons or clearly identiﬁ-
able, big touch buttons. Recommended limitations are
as follows
• For touch devices without haptic feedback, limit
touch screen interactions to six touches for every
12 seconds.
• For touch devices with haptic feedback, limit
touch screen interactions only to certain functions.
• No restrictions apply to physical buttons while
driving.
• No restrictions apply while standing.
2) Equip touch devices with haptic feedback. According
to Harrison and Hudson [70], touch screens lead to a
high number of off-road searching glances and require
long periods of operation time. They also found that
this could be mitigated by provide touch screens with
haptic feedback, which is conﬁrmed by other studies
[71]. Studies suggest that this kind of feedback greatly
increases performance and reduces operation time. If
haptic feedback is used, touch devices still should to
be limited to the functionality provided by traditional
physical buttons.
3) Also, consider alternative input methods that do not
require visual attention (e.g., voice interaction).
Examples: See Figure 10.
Figure 10.
VW Passat dashboard which combines few physical buttons
with a well-readable touch display.

284
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
V. DISCUSSION
A. Patterns in Use
The approach presented in this paper covers the pattern
generation process from its initial problem ﬁnding stages up
until the ﬁnal validation of the eventual patterns. However,
one thing the approach does not cover is something, which
could be considered one of the more important metrics of
the quality of a pattern - the successful application of a
pattern. The evaluation phases all rely on the informed,
but still subjective, judgments of industry experts. It can be
assumed that these judgments are reliable due to the expertise
of those making them. Still, an improved pattern approach
would include an actual application or re-application of a
pattern’s described solution and another evaluation of the
pattern, based on that implementation’s success.
B. The Rule of One-Two-Three
A solution described in a pattern is expected to satisfy
certain conditions. One of these is that the solution should
be a proven one, meaning that it has worked or success-
fully been implemented in more than just one instance. A
commonly applied rule in pattern writing is the so-called
Rule of Three [72], which – when summed up roughly –
considers a solution as proven if it has been successfully
implemented at least three times. But is rather unusual to
ﬁnd the exact same information in two or more independent
publications. In addition, the beyond state of the art nature
of a good number of our solutions made it difﬁcult to ﬁnd
an appropriate number of full solution implementations with
adequate documentation. However, the combination of all
sources yielded a substantial enough body to lend a certain
degree of support to the viability and reproducibility of the
described solutions. The fact remains, however, that many
of the solutions described in our patterns do not satisfy the
Rule of Three in a strict sense.
C. Experts vs. Novices
In our approach, we opted for more concise and shorter
patterns in order to meet our industry partner’s needs. The
idea was to provide an eventual “patterns handbook”, which
could be consulted on-demand and at any time during their
work. In doing so, we omitted deeper scenario descriptions,
optional references and source material, and kept the number
of illustrative examples to a minimum. This restructuring
brought the desired increase in efﬁciency, but we expect that
it is not without its drawbacks. In this case, our patterns are
very likely to be less useful for novices than for experts,
since they contain only the most essential information, in
order to implement the described solution, which negates this
one important beneﬁt of patterns. Thus, we recommend for
anyone who intends to adopt the pattern approach to decide
whether or not increased efﬁciency or a broader pattern
audience are more important, as it is unlikely that both goals
can be realized at once.
D. Academia and Industry Access
Lastly, we should note that the approach we pursue is a
rather particular one, with input taken from not only working
implementations but also other sources, and integrated with
industry stakeholders – both to enrich the pattern content and
to better ﬁt the eventual patterns to the stakeholders’ needs.
Pursuing such an approach requires sufﬁcient available re-
sources as well as access to both academic and industry
experts, which is not always possible. Thus, the approach we
pursue and brieﬂy outlined in this paper is likely not suitable
for everyone. The resulting patterns, however, should be.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a collection of patterns, which
deals with recurring questions of automotive design as re-
ported by designers working in that area. By relying on
design guidelines as well as empirical research, the collec-
tion tries to bridge the gap between regulations, standards,
scientiﬁc ﬁndings, and industry knowledge. These patterns
are intended to be of direct practical use for automotive
designers. The pattern structure and length, which we de-
scribed in earlier work [36], has been further adapted to ﬁt
automotive industry stakeholder needs, resulting in patterns
with an increased emphasis on brevity and conciseness.
The automotive User Experience patterns proposed in
this paper constitute a small part of a constantly growing
collection of design knowledge. The speed of innovations,
the complexity, and the range of functions of car inter-
faces is increasing constantly. In addition, even if there are
more and more connections between single car interfaces,
innovations do not necessarily occur in parallel. Thus, an
equally dynamic approach to document best practices in
design is required. As stated before, pattern collections are
less holistic than guidelines and never really ﬁnished. New
problems arise, new solutions to old problems are found,
and sometimes proven solutions are found to not work as
well as initially thought. This makes patterns arguably less
suitable for traditional publishing as paper volumes, since
these can, once printed, not be updated, save for issuing a
new edition and print run. A database solution would be the
obvious answer. A good example for such an online pattern
resource is the Portland Pattern Repository Wiki [73]. Unlike
a paper volume, however, such a database requires constant
maintenance, dedicated moderation in case of crowdsourced
editing and commenting functions and, of course, the initial
infrastructure and server capacity.
Thus, the ﬁnal pattern collection is still envisioned as a
printed document, with the possibility of a later database
conversion. While it is less dynamic than the more resource
intensive database variant, this pattern collection shows how
a pattern approach to car UX design can meet the demands of
at least contemporary and near-future automotive design and
the collection will continue to grow into a substantial body of
car UX design knowledge. The goal of the ﬁrst “complete”
version of the pattern collection is expected to encompass
50 patterns, which cover some of the more important UX
factors for driver space design [10].

285
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The ﬁnancial support by the Austrian Federal Ministry of
Science, Research and Economy and the National Founda-
tion for Research, Technology and Development and AU-
DIO MOBIL Elektronik GmbH is gratefully acknowledged
(Christian Doppler Laboratory for ”Contextual Interfaces”).
REFERENCES
[1] T. Kaiser, A. G. Mirnig, N. Perterer, A. Meschtscherjakov, and
M. Tscheligi, “Car user experience patterns: A pattern collection in
progress,” in PATTERNS 2016, The Eighth International Conference
on Pervasive Patterns and Applications.
IARIA, 2016, pp. 9–16.
[2] C. Alexander, The Timeless Way of Building.
New York, USA:
Oxford University Press, 1979.
[3] A. Dearden and J. Finlay, “Pattern languages in hci: A critical
review,” Human-Computer Interaction, 2006, pp. 49–102, Shefﬁeld
Hallam University. [retrieved: 02, 2016] URL: http://research.cs.vt.
edu/ns/cs5724papers/dearden-patterns-hci09.pdf.
[4] M.
Obrist,
D.
Wurhofer,
E.
Beck,
A.
Karahasanovic,
and
M.
Tscheligi,
“User
experience
(ux)
patterns
for
audio-visual
networked applications: Inspirations for design,” in Proceedings
of the 6th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction:
Extending
Boundaries,
ser.
NordiCHI
’10.
New
York,
NY,
USA:
ACM,
2010,
pp.
343–352.
[retrieved:
02,
2016]
URL:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1868914.1868955
[5] J. O. Borchers, J. C. Thomas, A. Sutcliffe, J. Coplien, and R. N.
Grifﬁths, “Patterns: What’s in it for hci?” in Extended Abstracts of
the CHI 2001 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
ACM, 2001.
[6] M. Hassenzahl and N. Tractinsky, “User experience-a research
agenda,” Behaviour & information technology, vol. 25, no. 2.
Taylor
& Francis, 2006, pp. 91–97.
[7] A. F. Blackwell and S. Fincher, “PUX: Patterns of User Experience,”
Interactions, vol. 17, no. 2.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2010, pp.
27–31.
[8] M. Tscheligi, “User experience design for vehicles,” in Christian
doppler laboratory: contextual interfaces. Tutorial for conference AUI.
ACM, 2012.
[9] C. Alexander, S. Ishikawa, and M. Silverstein, A Pattern Language:
Towns, Buildings, Construction.
New York, USA: Oxford University
Press, 1997.
[10] A. G. Mirnig, A. Meschtscherjakov, N. Perterer, A. Krischkowsky,
D. Wurhofer, E. Beck, A. Laminger, and M. Tscheligi, “User
experience patterns from scientiﬁc and industry knowledge: An
inclusive pattern approach,” International Journal On Advances in
Life Sciences, vol. 7, no. 3 and 4.
IARIA, 2015, pp. 200–215.
[retrieved: 02, 2016] URL: https://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?
view=article&articleid=patterns 2015 2 30 70011.
[11] M.
Obrist,
D.
Wurhofer,
E.
Beck,
and
M.
Tscheligi,
“Cux
patterns approach: Towards contextual user experience patterns,”
in Proceedings of the 2nd International Conferences on Pervasive
Patterns and Applications, PATTERNS, vol. 10.
IARIA, 2010.
[retrieved:
02,
2016]
URL:
http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?
view=article&articleid=patterns 2010 3 20 70079
[12] A.
G.
Mirnig
and
M.
Tscheligi,
“Introducing
a
general
multi-purpose
pattern
framework:
Towards
a
universal
pattern
approach,” International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems,
vol.
8,
no.
1
and
2.
IARIA,
2015,
pp.
40–56.
[retrieved:
02, 2016] URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&
articleid=intsys v8 n12 2015 4.
[13] S. K¨ohne, A Didactical Aproach towards Blended Learning: Concep-
tion and Application of Educational Patterns. Orig. title: Didaktischer
Ansatz f¨ur das Blended Learning: Konzeption und Anwendung von
Educational Patterns.
Hohenheim, Germany: University of Hohen-
heim, 1995.
[14] K. Quibeldey-Cirkel, Design Patterns in Object Oriented Software
Engineering. Orig. title: Entwurfsmuster: Design Patterns in der ob-
jektorientierten Softwaretechnik.
Berlin, Germany: Springer, 1999.
[15] D. Martin, T. Rodden, M. Mark Rounceﬁeld, I. Sommerville, and
S. Viller, “Finding patterns in the ﬁeldwork,” in Proceedings of the
Seventh European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative
Work.
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2001, pp. 39–58.
[16] J. O. Borchers, “A pattern approach to interaction design,” AI &
SOCIETY, vol. 15, no. 4, 2001, pp. 359–376.
[17] I. O. for Standardization, “Iso dis 9241-210. ergonomics of human
system interaction - part 210: Human-centred design for interactive
systems,” Tech. rep., Switzerland, 2010.
[18] A. Krischkowsky, D. Wurhofer, N. Perterer, and M. Tscheligi,
“Developing patterns step-by-step: A pattern generation guidance
for hci researchers,” in PATTERNS 2013, The Fifth International
Conferences on Pervasive Patterns and Applications.
IARIA, 2013,
pp. 66–72. [retrieved: 02, 2016] URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/
index.php?view=article\&articleid=patterns 2013 3 30 70053
[19] D. Martin, T. Rodden, M. Rounceﬁeld, I. Sommerville, and S. Viller,
“Finding patterns in the ﬁeldwork,” in Proceedings of the Seventh
European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work.
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2001, pp. 39–58.
[20] A. Crabtree, T. Hemmings, and T. Rodden, “Pattern-based support
for interactive design in domestic settings,” in Proceedings of
the 4th Conference on Designing Interactive Systems: Processes,
Practices, Methods, and Techniques, ser. DIS ’02.
New York,
NY, USA: ACM, 2002, pp. 265–276. [retrieved: 02, 2016] URL:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/778712.778749
[21] K. Young, M. Regan, and M. Hammer, “Driver distraction: A review
of the literature,” Distracted driving.
Australasian College of Road
Safety, 2007, pp. 379–405.
[22] M. A. Recarte and L. M. Nunes, “Mental workload while driving:
effects on visual search, discrimination, and decision making.” Journal
of experimental psychology: Applied, vol. 9, no. 2.
American
Psychological Association, 2003, p. 119.
[23] J. Engstr¨om, E. Johansson, and J. ¨Ostlund, “Effects of visual and
cognitive load in real and simulated motorway driving,” Transportation
Research Part F: Trafﬁc Psychology and Behaviour, vol. 8, no. 2.
Elsevier, 2005, pp. 97–120.
[24] R. Buchner, D. Wurhofer, A. Weiss, and M. Tscheligi, “Robots in
time: How user experience in human-robot interaction changes over
time,” in Social Robotics.
Springer, 2013, pp. 138–147.
[25] R. Buchner, P. M. Kluckner, A. Weiss, and M. Tscheligi, “Assisting
maintainers in the semiconductor factory: Iterative co-design of a
mobile interface and a situated display,” in Proceedings of the 12th In-
ternational Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia. ACM,
2013, p. 46.
[26] G. Stollnberger, A. Weiss, and M. Tscheligi, “”the harder it gets”
exploring the interdependency of input modalities and task complexity
in human-robot collaboration,” in RO-MAN, 2013 IEEE. IEEE, 2013,
pp. 264–269.
[27] P. Green, “Using standards to improve the replicability and applicabil-
ity of driver interface research,” in Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and Interactive Vehicular
Applications, ser. AutomotiveUI ’12.
New York, NY, USA: ACM,
2012, pp. 15–22.
[28] S. International, “Operational deﬁnitions of driving performance mea-
sures and statistics,” Tech. rep., 2015.
[29] N. H. T. S. Administration, “Visual-manual nhtsa driver distraction
guidelines for in-vehicle electronic devices,” Tech. rep., 2010.
[30] I. O. for Standardization, “Iso dis 9241-110. ergonomics of human
system interaction - part 110: Dialogue principles,” Tech. rep., Switzer-
land, 2006.
[31] A. of Automobile Manufacturers, “Statement of principles, criteria and
veriﬁcation procedures on driver interactions with advanced in-vehicle
information and communication systems,” Tech. rep., 2006.
[32] J. A. M. Association, “Guidelines for in-vehicle display systems,”
Tech. rep., 2004.
[33] C. of the European Communities, “European statement of principles
on human-machine interface,” Tech. rep., 2006.
[34] I. O. for Standardization, “Iso dis 15005. road vehicles - ergonomic
aspects of transport information and control systems - dialogue man-
agement principles and compliance procedures (draft),” Tech. rep.,
Switzerland, 2006.
[35] ——, “Iso dis 15008. road vehicles - ergonomic aspects of transport
information and control systems - speciﬁcations and test procedures for
in-vehicle visual presentation (draft),” Tech. rep., Switzerland, 2006.
[36] A. G. Mirnig et al., “Generating patterns combining scientiﬁc and
industry knowledge: An inclusive pattern approach,” in PATTERNS
2015, The Seventh International Conference on Pervasive Patterns and
Applications.
IARIA, 2014, pp. 38–45.

286
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[37] D. Wurhofer, M. Obrist, E. Beck, and M. Tscheligi, “A quality criteria
framework for pattern validation,” International Journal On Advances
in Software, vol. 3, no. 1 and 2.
IARIA, 2010, pp. 252–264.
[38] A. Stevens, A. Quimby, A. Board, T. Kersloot, and P. Burns, NHTSA
Design Guidelines for Safety of In-Vehicle Information Systems.
National Highway Trafﬁc Safety Administration, 2002.
[39] G. E. Burnett, G. Lawson, R. Donkor, and Y. Kuriyagawa, “Menu
hierarchies for in-vehicle user-interfaces: Modelling the depth vs.
breadth trade-off,” Displays, vol. 34, no. 4.
Elsevier, 2013, pp. 241–
249.
[40] M. Pfauth and J. Priest, “Person-computer interface using touch screen
devices,” Proceedings of the Human Factors Society 25th Annual
Meeting, no. 1, 1981, pp. 500–504.
[41] H. Kim, S. Kwon, J. Heo, H. Lee, and M. K. Chung, “The effect of
touch-key size on the usability of in-vehicle information systems and
driving safety during simulated driving,” Applied ergonomics, vol. 45,
no. 3.
Elsevier, 2014, pp. 379–388.
[42] J. P. Bliss and S. A. Acton, “Alarm mistrust in automobiles: how col-
lision alarm reliability affects driving,” Applied ergonomics, vol. 34,
no. 6.
Elsevier, 2003, pp. 499–509.
[43] A. Guillaume, L. Pellieux, V. Chastres, and C. Drake, “Judging the
urgency of nonvocal auditory warning signals: perceptual and cognitive
processes.” Journal of experimental psychology: Applied, vol. 9, no. 3.
American Psychological Association, 2003, p. 196.
[44] J. Edworthy and E. Hellier, Complex Nonverbal Auditory Signals and
Speech Warnings.
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers, 2006,
pp. 199–220.
[45] Y. Cao and M. Theune, “The use of modality in in-vehicle
information presentation: A brief overview,” in Proceedings of the
2nd International Workshop on Multimodal Interfaces for Automotive
Applications (MIAA), in conjunction with IUI.
ACM, 2010, pp.
1–5. [retrieved: 02, 2016] URL: https://www.ec-moan.org/∼theune/
PUBS/miaa2010-cao.pdf
[46] “Collision warning systems at the test track,” 2012, [retrieved: 02,
2016] URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=rYckJqp4XTc#t=45.
[47] P. Burns and T. Lansdown, “E-distraction: the challenges for safe and
usable internet services in vehicles,” in Internet Forum on the Safety
Impact of Driver Distraction When Using In-Vehicle Technologies,
2000.
[retrieved:
02,
2016]
URL:
http://www-nrd.nhtsa.dot.gov/
departments/Human%20Factors/driver-distraction/PDF/29.PDF
[48] F. Utesch and M. Vollrath, “Do slow computersystems impair driving
safety?” in European Conference on Human Centred Design for
Intelligent Transport Systems, 2nd, 2010, Berlin, Germany. Humanist
Publications, 2010.
[49] T. F. HMI, “European statement of principles on human machine
interface for in-vehicle information and communication systems,”
Tech. rep., Commission of the European Communities, Tech. Rep.,
1998.
[50] “2015 Audi MMI Infotainment Review in the 2015 Audi A3 Sedan,”
2014, [retrieved: 02, 2016] URL: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
xadb1vSXw7Q.
[51] “BMW 5 Series Connected-Drive (iDrive) Full Demo - including
Head-Up Display,” 2013, [retrieved: 02, 2016] URL: https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=Ulcgm-GN M.
[52] “Apple CarPlay Demo,” 2014, [retrieved: 02, 2016] URL: https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=TQz64rhefqY.
[53] C. Kaufmann, R. Risser, A. Geven, and R. Sefelin, “Effects of
simultaneous multi-modal warnings and trafﬁc information on driver
behaviour,” in Proceedings of European Conference on Human Cen-
tred Design for Intelligent Transport Systems. Humanist Publications,
2008, pp. 33–42.
[54] B. Seppelt and C. Wickens, “In-vehicle tasks: Effects of modality,
driving relevance, and redundancy,” Tech. Rep., 2003. [retrieved: 02,
2016] URL: http://www.aviation.illinois.edu/avimain/papers/research/
pub pdfs/techreports/03-16.pdf
[55] C. Ho, H. Z. Tan, and C. Spence, “Using spatial vibrotactile cues to
direct visual attention in driving scenes,” Transportation Research Part
F: Trafﬁc Psychology and Behaviour, vol. 8, no. 6.
Elsevier, 2005,
pp. 397–412.
[56] J. B. Hurwitz and D. J. Wheatley, “Using driver performance measures
to estimate workload,” in Proceedings of the Human Factors and Er-
gonomics Society Annual Meeting, vol. 46, no. 22. Sage Publications,
2002, pp. 1804–1808.
[57] S. G. Klauer, T. A. Dingus, V. L. Neale, J. D. Sudweeks, and D. J.
Ramsey, “The impact of driver inattention on near-crash/crash risk:
An analysis using the 100-car naturalistic driving study data,” Tech.
Rep., 2006.
[58] R. Srinivasan and P. P. Jovanis, “Effect of selected in-vehicle route
guidance systems on driver reaction times,” Human Factors: The
Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, vol. 39, no. 2.
Sage Publications, 1997, pp. 200–215.
[59] Y.-C. Liu, “Comparative study of the effects of auditory, visual and
multimodality displays on drivers’ performance in advanced traveller
information systems,” Ergonomics, vol. 44, no. 4.
Taylor & Francis,
2001, pp. 425–442.
[60] K. Stanney, S. Samman, L. Reeves, K. Hale, W. Buff, C. Bowers,
B. Goldiez, D. Nicholson, and S. Lackey, “A paradigm shift in
interactive computing: Deriving multimodal design principles from
behavioral and neurological foundations,” International Journal of
Human-Computer Interaction, vol. 17, no. 2. Taylor & Francis, 2004,
pp. 229–257.
[61] J. B. Van Erp and H. A. Van Veen, “Vibrotactile in-vehicle navigation
system,” Transportation Research Part F: Trafﬁc Psychology and
Behaviour, vol. 7, no. 4.
Elsevier, 2004, pp. 247–256.
[62] Y. Cao, S. Castronovo, A. Mahr, and C. M¨uller, “On timing and modal-
ity choice with local danger warnings for drivers,” in Proceedings of
the 1st International Conference on Automotive User Interfaces and
Interactive Vehicular Applications.
ACM, 2009, pp. 75–78.
[63] D. Kern, P. Marshall, E. Hornecker, Y. Rogers, and A. Schmidt,
“Enhancing navigation information with tactile output embedded into
the steering wheel,” in Pervasive Computing.
Springer, 2009, pp.
42–58.
[64] H. Zwaga and T. Boersema, “Evaluation of a set of graphic symbols,”
Applied Ergonomics, vol. 14, no. 1.
Elsevier, 1983, pp. 43–54.
[65] J. L. Campbell, J. Richman, C. Carney, and J. Lee, “In-vehicle display
icons and other information elements. volume i: Guidelines, technical
report,” Tech. Rep., 2004.
[66] Audi A4 2008 Owner’s Manual, http://www.alkivar.com/AUDI/Audi
A4 2008 Owner s Manual.pdf [retrieved: 02, 2016].
[67] M. Lee and J. Park, “Senior users color cognition and color sensitivity
features in visual information on web-interface,” in Universal Access
in Human-Computer Interaction. Aging and Assistive Environments.
Springer, 2014, pp. 129–137.
[68] E. S. Wilschut, G. Rinkenauer, K. A. Brookhuis, and M. Falkenstein,
“performance in a lane-change task is vulnerable to increased sec-
ondary task complexity.”
TNO Publications, p. 5.
[69] Authors unknown, “Visual-manual nhtsa driver distraction guidelines
for in-vehicle electronic devices,” Washington, DC: National Highway
Trafﬁc Safety Administration (NHTSA), Department of Transportation
(DOT), 2012.
[70] C. Harrison and S. E. Hudson, “Providing dynamically changeable
physical buttons on a visual display,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems.
ACM, 2009,
pp. 299–308.
[71] H. Richter, R. Ecker, C. Deisler, and A. Butz, “Haptouch and the
2+ 1 state model: potentials of haptic feedback on touch based in-
vehicle information systems,” in Proceedings of the 2nd international
conference on automotive user interfaces and interactive vehicular
applications.
ACM, 2010, pp. 72–79.
[72] A. Osmani, Learning JavaScript Design Patterns: A JavaScript and
jQuery Developer’s Guide.
O’Reilly Media, 2012.
[73] C. . C. (C2), “The portland pattern repository wiki,” Online, 2016.
[retrieved: 02, 2016] URL: http://c2.com/cgi/wiki

