Decentralized Energy in the Smart Energy Grid and Smart Market –  
How to master reliable and secure control  
 
Steffen Fries, Rainer Falk 
Corporate Technology 
Siemens AG 
Munich, Germany 
e-mail: {steffen.fries|rainer.falk}@siemens.com 
Henry Dawidczak, Thierry Dufaure 
Energy Management 
Siemens AG 
Berlin, Germany 
e-mail: {henry.dawidczak|thierry.dufaure}@siemens.com
 
 
Abstract—The reliable integration of decentralized energy 
resources and loads into the smart energy grid and into a 
smart energy market is gaining more importance to cope with 
the increasing energy demand and the installation of renewable 
energy sources. Ideally, the load on the energy transmission 
network shall not be affected by direct energy exchange 
between 
local 
generation 
and 
consumption 
within 
a 
distribution network. Characteristic for the involved control 
systems is the data exchange between intelligent electronic 
devices (IEDs) that are used to monitor and control the 
operation. For the integration of Decentralized Energy 
Resources (DER), these IEDs provide the data for obtaining a 
system view of connected (decentralized) energy resources. 
This system view builds the base to manage a Virtual Power 
Plant (VPP) by combining a number of DER, reliably. In 
substation automation, the standard IEC 61850 is used to 
enable communication between IEDs to control the central 
energy generation and distribution. This standard is being 
enhanced with web services, features and mappings to support 
its application also for DER. One difference to the classical 
application in substations is the integration of IEDs residing on 
a customer network, most likely to be operated behind 
Firewalls 
and 
Network 
Address 
Translation 
(NAT). 
Nevertheless, end-to-end secured communication between DER 
and control center also over public networks must be ensured 
to maintain a consistent security level. Here, adequate IT 
security measures are a necessary prerequisite to prevent 
intentional manipulations, affecting the reliable operation of 
the energy grid. This paper investigates into the currently 
proposed 
security 
measures 
for 
the 
communication 
architecture for DER integration. In addition to the original 
paper, the contributions to the International Electrotechnical 
Commission (IEC) for enhancements of the security for the 
standard IEC 61850 are elaborated more deeply with the focus 
not only on pairwise connections but also for multicast 
communication. Besides that, this paper also investigates into 
open issues related to the secure integration of DER.  
 
Keywords–security; device authentication; pairwise security; 
multicast security; firewall; decentralized energy resource, 
substation automation; smart grid; smart Market, IEC 61850, 
IEC 60870-5, IEC 62351, XMPP 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
As described in [1], renewable energy sources like the 
sun or wind power are becoming increasingly important to 
generate environmentally sustainable energy and thus to 
reduce greenhouse gases leading to global warming. 
Integrating these decentralized energy resources (DER) into 
the current energy distribution network poses great 
challenges for energy automation: DER need to be 
monitored and controlled to a similar level as centralized 
energy generation in power plants to keep the stability of the 
power 
network 
frequency. 
As 
DER 
are 
typically 
geographically dispersed, widely distributed communication 
networks are required for exchanging control communication 
not only between the DER and the control center but also 
between DER. Multiple DER may also be aggregated on a 
higher architecture level to form a so-called virtual power 
plant. Such a virtual power plant can be controlled from the 
overall energy automation system in a similar way as a 
common centralized power plant with respect to energy 
generation capacity. But due to its decentralized nature, the 
demands on automation and communication, necessary to 
control the virtual power plant are much more challenging.  
Furthermore, the introduction of controllable loads on 
residential level requires enhancements to the energy 
automation communication infrastructure as used today. It 
allows network operators to control more fine grained the 
amount and time of energy consumption. This is typically 
supported by mechanisms provided by a smart energy 
market allowing the exchange of information about energy 
prices and demand. Clearly, secure communication between 
a control station and DER equipment or energy loads of 
users as well as with decentralized field equipment must be 
achieved to avoid unauthorized access or manipulation of the 
data exchanged. Standard communication technologies based 
on IEC 61850 [2], which are used today for substation 
automation, 
cannot 
directly 
be 
applied 
and 
need 
enhancements.  
Figure 1 below depicts the integration of DER into the 
Smart Grid and Smart Market from an abstract view. The 
lower part of the figure shows the distributed generators and 
loads, which shall be managed by the control function shown 
in the upper part. All peers are connected via a 
communication network and shielded by firewalls to avoid 
unauthorized inbound or outbound connections. The control 
function may be located at a Distribution Network Operator 
(DNO), a VPP operator, or a smart energy market operator.  
65
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 1. DER Integration based on IEC 61850 over XMPP 
For the description of use cases in a smart grid 
environment the so called traffic light concept has been 
introduced by the regulation. This concept subdivides use 
cases into three different scenarios. The green phase allows 
using all market mechanisms, while yellow and red traffic 
light scenarios are defined by electrical network constrains 
due to problems like critical power unbalancing or power 
flow congestion in the electrical network.  
The requirements of communication between DNO and 
DER Systems regarding for instance transfer times may 
differ compared to a pure market-driven use cases. It may be 
necessary to request a larger number of DER systems to 
change their generating or consuming power in a short time 
with a high priority. Group communication can be a required 
option for such use cases.   
Grouping (sometimes called clustering) is a function of 
the DER management that consists in defining and using lists 
of DER systems by special characteristics (e.g., size of 
power, location in the topology of the network, type of 
connected DER units). Groups are created by each DER 
management entity for a special purpose. Using groups for a 
fast communication can require special means of the 
communication protocol. 
Also shown are typical security infrastructure elements – 
Firewalls – which shield the different sub-networks. 
Communication is realized by applying IEC 61850 
transmitted over the eXtensible Message and Presence 
Protocol (XMPP) [1][3]. XMPP is a well-known protocol 
standardized in the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) 
as RFC 6120 and is used for instance in chat applications. It 
supports Firewall and NAT traversal and also device 
registration and discovery. As XMPP, IEC 61850 itself is a 
client-server protocol. In the scenario shown in Figure 1, the 
IEC 61850 server part resides at the DER sides. Thus, a 
direct connection to control the DER may not be possible 
due to blocked inbound connections at the Firewall of the 
network the DER is connected to. This is the part where 
XMPP is utilized, as the XMPP client resides on the DER 
and starts establishing a connection with the XMPP server, 
that can be used to facilitate the IEC 61850 communication.  
Note that this paper is an extended version of [1] that 
describes the environment in more detail, and also takes 
recent advancements in the definition of the IEC standard as 
well as the underlying scenarios and technology into 
account. The remaining part of this paper is organized as 
following: Section II provides an introduction to IEC 61850 
and also investigates into missing parts for the integration of 
DER into Smart Grids. Section III analysis the security 
requirements and also potential security measures, by 
applying existing technology as far as possible. Section I 
discusses the resulting security approach, which is also 
proposed for standardization. Compared to [1], this section is 
66
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

enhanced with the discussion of multicast communication 
security. This functionality has been identified in the original 
paper as being required to better control a larger number of 
IEDs individually, but provides a combined view at the 
control center level. Section V concludes the paper and 
provides an outlook for further work.   
This paper targets the identification of existing security 
means as well as existing gaps for the concept of secure DER 
integration. Implementations as proof of concept have not 
been finished, yet. 
II. 
IEC 61850 OVERVIEW 
A. The IEC 61850 principles 
While the first edition of the IEC 61850 series[2], 
published in 2003 focused on standardizing communication 
between applications within a Substation Automation 
Domain, the second edition published in 2010 extends its 
domain of application up to the Power Utility Automation 
System (see also [3]).  
The IEC 61850 series specifies: 
 An Abstract Communication Service Interface (ACSI), 
 A semantic model based on an object oriented 
architecture, 
 Specific Communication Service Mappings (SCSM), 
 A 
project 
engineering 
workflow 
including 
a 
configuration description language (SCL) based on the 
XML language. 
Using the IEC 61850 philosophy, i.e., decoupling the IEC 
61850 object model and associated services from the 
communication technologies, allows the standard to be 
technology independent, that is, specifying new technologies 
when a set of new requirements is being processed by the 
standardization 
body 
without 
modifying 
the 
system 
architecture.    
Services in IEC 61850 include:  
 Client and Server communication within the scope of a 
Two Party Application Association (or session), for 
discovering, 
controlling 
and 
monitoring 
objects 
implemented in the device model, 
 Peer to peer communication within the scope of a 
Multicast Application Association, for providing a 
unidirectional information exchange from one source to 
one or many destinations.  
The IEC 61850-8-1 SCSM part has specified the mapping 
of IEC 61850 object model and associated services to the 
Manufacturing Message Specification (MMS, ISO 9506 
series [4]). While IEC 61850-8-1 SCSM has proven to be a 
very efficient communication technology within the 
substation, i.e., within a private network, new challenges 
appear with the integration of the DER. A current effort in 
the standardization has gathered the requirements for an IEC 
61850 SCSM to Web technologies. 
Public network/infrastructure are neither administered by 
the DER owners nor by the control function operator; the use 
of public network represents therefore a major change in 
comparison 
to 
the 
way 
IEC 
61850 
Systems 
and 
communication have been deployed within the substation. 
The gathered requirements [5] show also that the response 
times are less critical than they are in the substation 
environment. Both the number of devices connected to the 
Smart Grid as well as the dynamic changes of the system 
(continuous integration of new resources) encourage the use 
of a technology that supports the volatility of the system.  
The decision criteria used in the standardization committee 
lead to the election of XMPP [6] technology as a network 
layer in the SCSM. 
B. The  XMPP principles 
XMPP is a communication protocol enabling two entities 
(XMPP clients) to exchange pieces of XML data called 
stanzas. As shown in Fig.1, both the DER (IEC 61850 
servers) and the VPP or DNO control center (IEC 61850 
client) are then exposed as XMPP clients. They are not 
directly connected together but can exchange XML messages 
over the XMPP server(s) they are connected to. Each XMPP 
client is responsible for initiating a TCP/IP connection to the 
XMPP server of the domain the XMPP client belongs to. The 
XMPP servers are located in the WAN and their location can 
either be statically configured in the DER or can be 
discovered by the DER via DNS-SRV records [7].  
Since DER will be located behind (most of the time 
unmanaged) 
firewalls, 
the 
XMPP 
servers 
cannot 
reach/connect to them (requirement – blocked inbound 
connection); nevertheless, DER can reach/connect to the 
XMPP server of their domain over the stateful firewall of 
their infrastructure. 
As soon as the TCP/IP connection to its XMPP server is 
established, each XMPP client starts a bi-directional XML 
stream with its XMPP server. 
Each XMPP client has a unique system identifier, a so-
called JIDs (Jabber Identification), whose format is quite 
similar 
to 
the 
well-known 
mail 
addresses 
format: 
entity@domain.tld. 
Communication between XMPP clients occurs over the 
XML streams, each client has negotiated with their XMPP 
server, the server acting then as router forwarding the 
message exchange. 
The XMPP series define three different XML message 
formats called stanza. Similar to the mail message, each 
stanza contains an attribute “from” (from=”JID of the source 
of the message”) and an attribute “to” (to=”JID of the 
destination of the message”). The message formats are: 
 of type <iq> (dedicated for request/response exchange - 
solicited service),  
 of type <message> (dedicated for push-exchange - 
unsolicited communication),  
 or of type <presence> (dedicated for presence 
announcement).  
C. Mapping of IEC 61850 to XMPP 
IEC/CDV 61850-8-2 foresees XER encoding of MMS 
using following mapping of the services to the XMPP stanza: 
67
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 request/response services will be mapped to the <iq> 
stanza 
(e.g., 
initiate-RequestPDU, 
initiate-
ResponsePDU, writeRequestPDU, …) 
 reporting services will be mapped to the unsolicited 
<message> stanza (e.g., informationReportPDU, …) 
 monitoring of association connectivity will use the 
<presence> stanza 
The 
monitoring 
of 
the 
IEC 
61850 
association 
connectivity is a crucial part in an XMPP environment as the 
two ends of the IEC 61850 two party associations are not 
directly connected with means of a TCP socket. The XMPP 
Server monitors the connectivity to each of the two XMPP 
Clients, and informs the remaining one with mean of a 
presence (unavailable) stanza when the other end has 
disconnected (e.g., due to communication outage). 
Through the mapping of MMS to XMPP, the MMS 
defined security measures are directly applicable as outlined 
in the next section. 
D. Additional XMPP feautures for solving system 
management use cases  
The XMPP standard provides protocol extensions (so 
called XEPs [8]), i.e., optional technical specifications to 
solve additional communication requirements (e.g., group 
communication). The developments of the specifications are 
hosted and coordinated by the XMPP foundation [9]. For 
example, the XEP-0045 specifies the Multi-User Chat 
(MUC) environment, with which XMPP clients can 
exchange messages in the context of an administrated room. 
The IEC 61850 multicast application association defined the 
abstract model could easily be mapped to a moderated room, 
where the moderator is the publisher of the unidirectional 
information, and the subscribers are dynamically invited to 
join the room in which the information is being published.  
XEP-0030 specifies an XMPP protocol extension for a 
generic Service Discovery, with which XMPP clients can 
discover services associated to a domain (support of MUC, 
time synchronization scheme, security actors, …) or to a 
given XMPP Client (support of MUC, support of service 
discovery, support of additional XEPs). To fulfill the plug 
and play requirements of a secured Smart Grid environment, 
XMPP Service Discovery offers an alternative to DNS-SRV 
records within a domain, having trusted entities (XMPP 
Server of the domain, or XMPP Clients) responding to 
service discovery requests. XEP-0060 specifies an XMPP 
protocol 
extension 
for 
a 
generic 
Publish-Subscribe 
functionality: an XMPP client can be configured to create a 
node onto the XMPP server, in which it will publish 
information for subscribers. With means of the Service 
Discovery protocol extension, XMPP Clients can discover 
the publish nodes and can request a subscription to them. 
Publish-subscribe model can be useful for publishing tariff 
data.  
III. 
SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS 
This section describes IT security requirements that are 
connected with the reliable operation of a smart energy grid. 
The security requirements are mapped to standardized IT 
security measures. 
A. Security Requirements 
Security requirements targeting the integration of DER 
into power system architectures are typically derived from a 
given system architecture like the one shown in Figure 1, and 
from use cases describing the interactions of the components. 
Also, further security requirements may be posed through 
national regulations, depending on the country the DER 
integration is done. These regulations specifically target the 
privacy protection of end user related information.  
The main focus in the context of this document is placed 
on the investigation of the communication relations and data 
assets exchanged between the components. Table I below 
provides the most relevant data assets.  
TABLE I. DATA ASSETS 
Asset  
Description, example 
content  
Security 
relation  
Customer 
related 
information 
Name, identification number, 
location 
data, 
schedule 
information, 
electrical 
network topology data 
Effects 
on 
customer privacy  
Meter Data  
Meter readings that allow 
calculation of the quantity of 
electricity 
consumed 
or 
supplied over a time period.  
Effects 
on 
system 
control, 
billing, 
and 
customer privacy 
Control 
Commands  
Actions requested by one 
component. 
These 
may 
include Inquiries, Alarms, 
Events, and Notifications.  
Effects 
on 
system 
stability 
and 
reliability 
and also safety  
Tariff Data  
Utilities or other energy 
providers 
may 
inform 
consumers 
of 
new 
or 
temporary tariffs as a basis 
for purchase decisions.  
Effects 
on 
competition and 
customer privacy 
as tariff depends 
on consumption. 
Data exchange of this information typically depends on 
the underlying system architecture and may comprise hop-to-
hop, end-to-end, or multicast communication, depending on 
the context and the involved entities. To determine the 
connected security requirements, the trust relations between 
the different entities are essential. Based on Figure 1 the 
following trust relations are assumed: 
 DER resource (XMPP client on IEC 61850 server)  
belongs to DER owner 
 DER control (XMPP client on IEC 61850 client/server) 
belongs to DNO or 3rd party grid service  
 XMPP 
server 
may 
belong 
to 
DNO 
or 
3rd  
party grid service provider 
 Trust relation between DER resource owner and DNO 
(e.g., based on contract) 
 XMPP server operator trusted regarding resource 
discovery 
and 
message 
transfer 
service 
(not 
processing!)  
These trust assumptions for the data exchange lead to 
base security requirements enumerated in Table II below. 
68
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE II. SECURITY REQUIREMENTS 
 
Security requirements  
R1 
End-to-middle source authentication ensures peers are 
properly identified and authenticated. It is required between 
XMPP client and XMPP server or between XMPP servers. 
Note 
that 
here 
it 
may 
target mainly 
component 
authentication. 
R2 
End-to-end source authentication ensures peers are properly 
identified and authenticated. It is required between IEC 
61850 client and server instances. This authentication goes 
across the XMPP server (“application layer”) and may be 
bound to a dedicated instance running on the IEC 61850 
host.  
R3 
End-to-middle integrity protection to ensure that data in 
transit 
has 
not been 
tampered 
with 
(unauthorized 
modification) between the XMPP client and XMPP server.  
R4 
End-to-end integrity protection to ensure that data in transit 
has not been tampered with (unauthorized modification) 
between the IEC 61850 client and server instances. Based on 
the different communication relations, the protection needs 
to support  
a) unicast: peer-to-peer related communication 
b) multicast: group based communication (via the MUC) 
R5 
End-to-middle confidentiality protection to ensure that data 
in transit has not been accessed (read) in an unauthorized 
way between the XMPP client and XMPP server. 
 
Security requirements  
R6 
End-to-end confidentiality protection to ensure that data in 
transit has not been accessed (read) in an unauthorized way 
between the IEC 61850 client and server instances. Based on 
the different communication relations, the protection needs 
to support  
a) unicast: peer-to-peer related communication 
b) multicast: group based communication (via the MUC) 
 
Mapping the enumerated requirements to the base 
architecture shown in Figure 1 is depicted in Figure 2 below. 
Note that the figure shows the unicast communication as 
well as potential multicast communication relations.  
Based on the trust assumptions and the enumerated 
security requirements in Table II, the consequent next step is 
the investigation into existing security measures to evaluate 
their effectiveness to cope with the base requirements. These 
security measures are used to identify a first target system 
security architecture and also potential missing pieces. For 
the missing pieces, target architecture specific security 
measures have to be defined. The following subsections map 
the existing measures based on standardized solutions and 
also investigating into enhancements of the considered 
standards.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Security Relations for DER Integration
69
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

B. Mapping of exisiting Security Measures 
The following subsections map standardized security 
measures to the security requirements, to discuss their 
applicability. 
1) Security Options in XMPP 
XMPP as defined in RFC 6120 [6] and shown in Figure 3 
already considers the following integrated security measures:  
 Transport layer protection using the Transport Layer 
Security protocol (TLS, specified in RFC 5246 [10]), 
allows for  
 mutual authentication of involved peers, 
 integrity protection of data transfer, and  
 confidentiality protection of data transfer. 
Depending on the chosen cipher suite, the application 
of this security mean addresses the security 
requirements R1, R3, and R5. 
 XMPP peer authentication with two options 
 Rely on TLS authentication (addresses R1), or 
 Using the separate Simple Authentication and 
Security Layer (SASL) authentication (in XMPP 
[11], addresses R1) to authenticate users. 
Note that the XMPP security features target the 
communication between a XMPP client and XMPP server in 
the first place. Additional means to address end-to-end 
security support (between XMPP clients) on higher protocol 
layers are available or are currently discussed within 
standardization groups. Examples are: 
 IETF RFC 3923 [12] describes end-to-end signing and 
object encryption utilizing S/MIME, like a secure 
email. 
This 
approach 
addresses 
the 
security 
requirements 
R2, 
R4a, 
and 
R6a 
by 
applying 
asymmetric cryptography on a per-message base. Two 
important points to note here are the following ones: 
Asymmetric cryptography in this context relates to the 
application of X.509 certificates and corresponding 
private keys in a similar way as in email applications. 
Note that the asymmetric encryption is typically much 
more costly in terms of required computational power 
compared to symmetric encryption, in particular for 
frequently exchanged messages. Hence, applying this 
approach may influence the performance in a negative 
way. Secondly, RFC 3923 is restricted to the 
application of RSA (Rivest, Shamir, Adleman) as 
asymmetric 
cryptographic 
algorithm 
for 
digital 
signature and encryption. More recent standards also 
support elliptic curve cryptography, which provides an 
adequate security level utilizing a much shorter key. 
Moreover, the operation is much more performant.  
 The IETF draft draft-miller-xmpp-e2e [13] describes 
end-to-end object encryption and signatures between 
two entities with multiple devices. This addresses the 
situation, where some end points for a given recipient 
may share keys, some may use different keys, some 
may have no keys and some may not support 
encryption or signature verification at all. The draft 
defines a symmetric key table that is managed via three 
mechanisms that enable a key to be pushed to an end 
point, to be pulled from an originator or negotiated. If 
applicable it addresses R4a and R6a. Note that this draft 
Internet standard document has expired. It is mentioned 
here, as the general approach may provide a solution. 
 The IETF draft draft-meyer-xmpp-e2e-encryption [14] 
describes XTLS as end-to-end TLS (like) channel. It 
would have been applicable to address R 2, R 4a, and R 
6a, but the work has stopped and the draft has expired. 
The draft is stated here for completeness, as the 
mechanism intended to evolve the security provided in 
IEC 62351-4 uses a similar approach (see the next 
subsection). 
 
 
Figure 3. XMPP Security Options  
 
 
70
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

2) IEC 62351 – Security for IEC 61850 and beyond 
The working group IEC TC 57 WG15 is responsible for 
maintaining and evolving different security mechanisms 
applicable to the power systems domain. Here, IEC 62351 
[15] has been defined, which is meanwhile split into 14 
different parts with different level of completeness. Figure 5 
shows the existing parts and their relation to the target 
energy automation standards.  
Out of this set of specific security parts, mainly four parts 
are within the scope for the further discussion of security 
mechanisms that help to protect XMPP communication. 
Note that three parts are already available as technical 
standard (TS), but are currently being revised and updated, 
while the fourth one is defined in edition 1. The parts 
referred to are: 
 IEC/IS 62351-3: Profiles including TCP/IP: This part 
basically profiles the use of TLS and is referenced from 
part 4, 5, 6, and 9. Profiling here relates to narrowing 
available options in TLS like the requirement to utilize 
mutual authentication reducing the number of allowed 
algorithms or the disallowance of utilizing certain 
cipher suites, not providing sufficient protection. 
Moreover, this part also provides guidelines for 
utilizing options, which depend on the embedding 
environment. An example is the relation of using 
session renegotiation and session resumption in 
conjunction with the update interval of the certificate 
revocation information. 
 IEC/TS 62351-4: Profiles including MMS: This part is 
currently in revision. The current document defines 
protection of MMS messages on transport and 
application layer. The application layer provides only 
limited protection as it does only allow for an 
authentication 
during 
the 
initial 
MMS 
session 
handshake without a cryptographic binding to the 
remaining part of session. As new scenarios arise, 
involving intermediate devices, this protection is no 
longer sufficient. Hence, IEC/TS 62351-4 is being 
revised to enhance the protection of MMS traffic with 
additional application layer security profiles. Now, 
MMS session integrity and confidentiality protection is 
targeted as depicted in Figure 4 below. 
 
Figure 4. IEC 62351-4 A-Profile enhancements 
This approach can be leveraged for the transport over 
XMPP to address R2, R4a and R6a. 
 
 
Figure 5. IEC62351 addressing energy automation communication  
71
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 IEC/TS 62351-6: Security for IEC 61850: This part 
targets the integrity protection of Ethernet multicast 
communication exchanges in substations utilizing 
GOOSE (Generic Object Oriented Substation Event), 
but can also be applied to the exchange of 
synchrophaser 
communication 
over 
wide 
area 
networks, also utilizing the GOOSE protocol. The 
originally standardized security measure employs on 
digital signatures on a per message base is currently 
being reworked to address performance shortcomings. 
It will be enhanced to allow for a group security 
approach utilizing symmetric cryptography to better 
cope with the performance requirements of GOOSE 
communication. This approach can also be leveraged to 
support the secure integration of DER addressing R4b 
and R6b in multicast environments. 
 Draft 
IEC/TS 
62351-9: 
Cyber 
security 
key 
management for power system equipment: This part 
focuses on the base key management of asymmetric 
key material like X.509 certificates and corresponding 
private keys, including the enrollment and revocation of 
certificates, but also symmetric keys applicable for 
group communication. For the latter, the IETF defined 
Group Domain of Interpretation (GDOI), RFC 6407 
[16], is used to provide the key material for IEC/TS 
62351-6. To achieve the transport of the IEC 61850 
related key material and the connected security policy, 
GDOI had to be enhanced with the appropriate key data 
payloads. This enhancement is described in [18].  
As there are some fundamental differences between 
automated pairwise (unicast) and group based (multicast) 
key management and the application of the key, the 
following two subsections provide some background on both 
issues. 
a) Pairwise or unicast security  
A 
typical 
protocol 
example 
for 
pairwise 
key 
establishment and application is TLS, which is already used 
by IEC 62351 to secure TCP based traffic. Here, both peers 
possess a X.509 certificate and a corresponding private key 
that are used to authenticate and to protect the negotiation of 
a session secret and an associated security policy between 
these peers. As TLS is required to be used with mutual 
authentication, the session key negotiation is best done by 
applying the Diffie-Hellman key agreement scheme that is 
already part of several TLS cipher suites. As a result, both 
peers possess a pairwise shared secret as session key that is 
the base for the further symmetric protection of the message 
exchanges. The combination of the key with dedicated 
security services (integrity, encryption or both) is negotiated 
during the handshake based on proposed cipher suites. Just 
the same approach is being used to setup the session keys in 
the realization of the A-profiles shown in Figure 4. Here, 
there are much less security options provided compared to 
TLS. Figure 6 provides an overview on this handshake.  
The base for the session key establishment is the signed 
handshake in the initiation phase. This handshake carries the 
Diffie Hellman parameter of both peers in a signed message. 
After the exchange both sides can derive the Diffie Hellman 
secret and utilize it to secure the concurrent session. The 
cleartokens shown in Figure 6 carry the necessary 
information for the Diffie Hellman key agreement. 
 
Figure 6. IEC 62351-4 Session Key establishment for A-Profiles 
The trust in the certificates on both peers is provided 
through a trusted third party that has issued these certificates. 
This is a typical task of a certification authority (CA), which 
is part of a Public Key Infrastructure (PKI). It is assumed 
that both peers trust the same CA. This CA can issue the 
certificates offline. The certificates are verified during the 
TLS handshake that does not involve the trusted third party 
directly. Note that the revocation state may also be provided 
offline through the use of certificate revocation lists (CRLs), 
which are typically refreshed once a day.  
b) Group based or multicast security 
The general approach of group based security clearly 
differs from the more common unilateral security approach. 
As stated before, the chosen approach for IEC 62351 is 
GDOI [16]. An overview of multicast security options for 
power systems can be found in [17]. 
In case of GDOI a trusted third party, the key distribution 
center (KDC), needs to be online as part of the session key 
establishment. Here, the session key is a key shared between 
a group of participants.  
Figure 7 shows the setup of a group of three IEDs, which 
form a group. The authentication towards the KDC is 
performed based on X.509 certificates and corresponding 
private keys. According to the security policy, the KDC 
distributes the key information (Key-ID) for the associated 
message flow (Stream-ID) to the authenticated IEDs. Each 
IED can then apply the group key to secure the message 
exchange between the three IEDs.   
72
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 7. GDOI based Key Distribution  
IV. 
PROPOSED COMMUNICATION SECURITY APPROACH 
Based on the discussed trust assumptions, the security 
requirements and the security means in Section III, the 
following measures are proposed as base for a secure 
communication architecture to enable the secure integration 
of DER systems into the Smart Grid. The measures are 
distinguished into unicast and multicast communication. 
Also identified are open issues, which have to be addressed. 
A. Unicast security means 
For unicast communication, the security requirements 
can be fulfilled by the security means described in the 
sequel. Both hop-to-hop and end-to-end security are required 
to fulfill the security requirements. 
Mutual 
authentication, 
session 
integrity 
and 
confidentiality of an XMPP-based client, -server, or server-
server communication are protected (hop-to-hop security 
from IEC 61850 point of view). This fulfills the 
requirements R1, R3, and R5. The TLS security protocol as 
specified in RFC 6120 (XMPP Core) is applied, using the 
cipher suites and settings defined in IEC/IS 62351-3 defining 
a TLS profile for protecting TCP based IEC 61850 traffic. 
The credentials used for authentication are X.509 certificates 
and corresponding private keys of the involved peers. The 
verification of XMPP client or XMPP server certificates 
requires that the root certificate of the issuing certificate 
authority (CA) is available at the other peer. Most likely the 
CA has a relation to the DNO or another 3rd party grid 
service provider.  
End-to-end authentication, i.e., between two XMPP 
client instances, integrity, and confidentiality can be 
achieved by applying the draft IEC/IS 62351-4 MMS secure 
session concept as stated in section 2) utilizing the AE+ 
profile to address R2, R4a, and R6a. 
Open at this point in time is if there is a distinction 
between the transport layer authentication and the 
application layer authentication in terms of utilized 
credentials. Using the same credentials for both may require 
a provisioning of access lists of allowed XMPP clients (DER 
resources) for the XMPP server upfront provided by the 
DNO (as blacklist or white list) to the XMPP server operator. 
This is especially necessary, if the DNO uses an own PKI 
infrastructure. Also, it may be in the interest of the XMPP 
server operator to utilize an own PKI for issuing certificates 
used to access the provided service to better divide potential 
liability issues. This is especially interesting if the DNO and 
the XMPP service provider are two distinct legal entities. 
73
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

B. Multicast security means 
For multicast communication, the multicast distribution 
point is the MUC, residing at the XMPP server side. Using 
XMPP out of the box, the multicast communication is 
protected only hop-to-hop between MUC and XMPP clients. 
Access to the MUC is controlled by user authentication. 
Here two basic approaches are possible:  
 If TLS is used with mutual authentication, the client 
certificate needs to carry the JID to provide the 
information about the authorization to use a dedicated 
JID to the MUC and/or presence service.  
 Alternatively, if TLS is used with either unilateral 
authentication or in case of mutual authentication, with 
a certificate not carrying the JID and thus bound to the 
device and not the user, user authentication is 
performed using SASL to control access to the MUC 
and/or the presence service.  
To achieve cryptographic end-to-end integrity and 
confidentiality protection, additional means are necessary. 
As the aforementioned group based key management 
protocol GDOI is already considered in the overall security 
architecture, it is also recommended for utilization to reuse 
existing features and components as far as possible. This 
establishes a group key shared between the authenticated 
members of the group. The security solution defined in IEC 
61351-6, i.e., the application of a group key for multicast 
communication, in conjunction with IEC 62351-9 defining 
the group key distribution, can be re-used directly to address 
security requirements R2, R4b and R6b.  
The 
realization 
of 
the 
group 
key 
management 
functionality is open, i.e., which entity generates the group 
key, and distributes it to the clients. Based on the given 
requirements, and the trust assumptions, the group key 
generation would be performed at the DNO or VPP side, 
while the group key distribution would be performed using 
the MUC of the XMPP architecture. This distributed key 
management certainly requires a protected end-to-end 
transport of the group key to avoid that the XMPP server 
operator has access to this sensitive information. The final 
mapping of the group based security scheme heavily depends 
on the underlying trust model. This trust model and the 
connected scenarios are currently under discussion in the 
IEC working group. The proposed solution builds one option 
to realize the group based communication technically. Note 
that there is currently work ongoing to also invest on one 
hand into the feasibility of using other group based key 
management schemes and also regarding the placement of 
the KDC in the overall architecture.  
V. 
IDENTIFIED OPEN ISSUES  
As stated in the previous section, open issues have been 
identified regarding the credentials used for the peer 
authentication (hop-to-hop, and end-to-end) in unicast 
communication, and also regarding the mapping of certain 
multicast security related functions to the various involved 
entities. Another issue besides the selection of the 
authentication credential relates to the performance of peer 
authentication of XMPP clients towards the XMPP server. It 
has to be determined, which entity performs the 
authentication and access control. Different options have 
been identified: 
 Option 1: The XMPP server performs the client 
authentication locally, using a locally available access 
control list. The access control list can be provided by 
the DNO, or by another 3rd party grid service provider 
over a secure configuration protocol. 
 Option 2: The DNO, or another 3rd party grid service 
provider, performs the authentication, and access 
control check remotely, based on a redirection from the 
XMPP server. Frameworks like OAuth [19] could be 
involved here. This would allow also the utilization of 
already established solutions. 
 Option 3: While the user authentication is performed 
locally by the XMPP server, e.g., using SASL, or a user 
certificate with included JID, the access control check 
is performed remotely. This approach would lead to a 
token based approach, which may utilize functionalities 
like SAML (Security Assertion Markup Language) 
tokens [20] or JSON web tokens [21]. 
These topics require further research, and the results will 
have to be part of future standardization work to ensure 
interoperable solutions. 
Based on a threat and risk analysis, the options for using 
single credential or different credentials for hop-to-hop, and 
end-to-end security, have to be compared in the specific 
application context. This is the basis to make a well-founded 
design decision. It has to be defined whether the choice can 
be left to the energy operator to provide flexibility for both 
options. If all peers authenticate using X.509 certificates, and 
corresponding private keys, the creation, and distribution of 
these operational certificates needs to be defined from a 
process, and also a technical point of view. The standard IEC 
62351-9 (targeting key management) provides guidance 
here, but the involved peers need to be identified, and their 
responsibility needs to be described for all use cases at a fine 
granularity to assure interoperability.  
Further issues requiring research are the management of 
multicast membership: Which entity serves as the room 
creator that is aware of the group communication need for 
the current use case and determines, which XMPP client is 
allowed to participate in which MUC multicast room.  How 
is the multicast key distribution being performed? It could be 
performed independently from the MUC, or alternatively 
using the MUC for distribution of the (encrypted) multicast 
key. The final solution will heavily depend on the underlying 
trust model, especially, if the XMPP server, including the 
MUC is operated by the DNO itself or a third party. This 
underlying trust model also builds the main point designing a 
solution to protect the information collected on the XMPP 
server itself. The information of published resources 
collected (and provided) at the XMPP server can be 
considered as essential asset, as it allows the potential control 
and information exchange with the connected energy 
resources, and can therefore be used to influence the 
connected energy grid in a sensitive way.  
74
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK 
This paper proposes security measures for the integration 
of DER systems into Smart Energy Grid and Smart Market, 
utilizing and combining mostly existing, or security means 
currently defined by different standardization organizations. 
The focus in this paper was placed on securing the 
information exchange between a DER system and a DNO 
controlling the energy grid. This approach considered the 
utilization of a potentially untrusted or less trusted 
environment for the communication exchange. The process 
for the definition of a standardized security solution is 
currently ongoing within the IEC taking the proposed 
solution as base.  
Open issues relating to authentication options of peers to 
the different service points (DNO, XMPP server operator) 
and also for leveraging multicast communication requiring 
further research have been identified, and possible directions 
for defining a suitable solution have been outlined. While 
open issues lie in the technical domain, they have 
dependencies also in the operational domain as security 
management operations have to be aligned with general 
operational use cases. The means to address have not been 
decided yet and need further research. A proof of concept 
implementation of the proposed technical security approach 
to protect unicast communication is currently ongoing.  
As outlined, but not address in this paper, the protection 
of collected information at the XMPP server is a necessary 
prerequisite to ensure a reliable management of DER. This is 
especially important as the number of connected DER is 
increasing and thus, the amount of energy, which can be 
controlled over publish subscribe mechanisms will increase. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Fries, R. Falk, H. Dawidczak, and T. Dufaure, “Secure 
Integration of DER into Smart Energy Grid and Smart 
Market,” Proceedings IARIA SMART 2015, June 2015, 
ISBN: 
978-1-61208-414-5, 
page 
56-61, 
https://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=smart_20
15_4_20_40020, [retrieved: January 2016]  
[2] ISO 61850-x: Communication networks and systems for 
power 
utility 
automation, 
http://www.iec.ch/smartgrid/standards/ [retrieved: Jan. 2015] 
[3] “Efficient Energy Automation with the IEC 61850 Standard 
Application Examples,” Siemens AG, December 2010, 
http://www.energy.siemens.com/mx/pool/hq/energy-
topics/standards/iec-61850/Application_examples_en.pdf 
[retrieved: Dec. 2014]. 
[4] ISO 9506: Industrial Automation Systems – Manufacturing 
Message Specification. 
[5] IEC TR 61850-80-3: Mapping to Web Protocols – 
Requirement Analysis and Technology Assessment  
[6] P. Saint-Andre, ”Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol 
(XMPP): Core,” RFC 6120, https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6120 
[retrieved: Jan. 2014]. 
[7]  A. Gulbrandsen, P. Vixie, and L. Esibov, “A DNS RR for 
specifying the location of services (DNS SRV),” RFC 2782, 
http://tools.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2782.txt [retrieved: Jan. 2015]. 
[8] XMPP 
Protocol 
extensions: 
http://xmpp.org/xmpp-
protocols/xmpp-extensions/ [retrieved: Jan. 2015]. 
[9] XMPP foundation: http://www.xmpp.org [retrieved: April. 
2015] 
[10] T. Dierks and E. Rescorla, “The Transport Layer Security 
(TLS) Protocol Version 1.2,” RFC 5246, Aug. 2008, 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5246 [retrieved: Jan. 2015]. 
[11] A. Melenikov and K. Zeilenga, “Simple Authentication and 
Security 
Layer 
(SASL),” 
RFC 
4422, 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc4422 [retrieved: Jan. 2015]. 
[12] P. Saint-Andre, “End-to-End Signing and Object Encryption 
for the Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol 
(XMPP),” 
RFC 
3923, 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3923 
[retrieved: Jan. 2015]. 
[13] M. Miller and C. Wallace, “End-to-End Object Encryption 
and 
Signatures 
for 
XMPP,” 
expired 
IETF 
draft, 
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-miller-xmpp-e2e/ 
[retrieved: Jan. 2016]. 
[14] D. Meyer and P. Saint-Andre, “XTLS: End-to-End 
Encryption for the Extensible Messaging and Presence 
Protocol (XMPP) Using Transport Layer Security (TLS),” 
expired IETF draft, https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-
meyer-xmpp-e2e-encryption-02.txt, [retrieved: Jan. 2016] 
[15] IEC 62351-x Power systems management and associated 
information exchange – Data and communication security, 
http://www.iec.ch/smartgrid/standards/ [retrieved: Jan. 2015]. 
[16] B. Weiss, S. Rowles, and T. Hardjono, “The Group Domain 
of 
Interpretation,” 
RFC 
6407, 
Oct. 
2011, 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6407  [retrieved: Jan. 2015]. 
[17] R.Falk and S. Fries, “Security Considerations for Multicast 
Communication in Power Systems,” International Journal on 
advances in Security, 2013 vol 6 nr. 3&4, ISSN: 1942-2636, 
[retrieved: Jan. 2016] 
[18] B. Weiss, M. Seewald, and H. Falk, “GDOI Protocol Support 
for IEC 62351 Security Services,” IETF draft, June 2015, 
https://tools.ietf.org/id/draft-weis-gdoi-iec62351-9-06.txt, 
[retrieved Dec. 2015] 
[19] OAuth - OAuth 2.0 authorization framework, http://oauth.net/ 
[retrieved Jan. 2015]. 
[20] Web Services Security SAML Token Profile Version 1.1.1, 
OASIS Standard, March 2012, http://docs.oasis-open.org/wss-
m/wss/v1.1.1/os/wss-SAMLTokenProfile-v1.1.1-os.html, 
[retrieved Jan. 2016]. 
[21] M. Jones,  J. Bradley, and N. Sakimura, “ JSON Web Token 
(JWT).” 
IETF 
RFC 
7519, 
May 
2015, 
https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7519, [retrieved Jan. 2016]. 
75
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

