National Electronic Identity Management: The Challenge of a citizen-centric
Approach beyond Technical Design
Stefan Strauß
Institute of Technology Assessment (ITA)
Austrian Academy of Sciences
Vienna, Austria
sstrauss@oeaw.ac.at
Georg Aichholzer
Institute of Technology Assessment (ITA)
Austrian Academy of Sciences
Vienna, Austria
aich@oeaw.ac.at
Abstract— National governments across Europe are currently
introducing
electronic
identity
management
systems
for
enhancing security and gathering more unified forms of
authentication
for
online
public
services.
A
particular
challenge of security system design is to cope with the suspense
between security and usability. This is strongly reflecting in
identity
management
where
this
suspense
becomes
very
apparent. Thus, for the success of identity management
systems a certain focus on user centricity is demanded. This
paper analyzes the system in Austria with respect to important
determinants
of
a
citizen-centric
identity
management
approach, deduced from security usability issues, interrelated
with factors for user perception as provided by the Technology
Acceptance Model. The result reveals a biased picture of user
centricity with an essential need for a stronger consideration of
user perception and the provision of additional benefits
addressing a perceivable user value.
Keywords - electronic identity management; user centricity;
security usability; e-government; Austria; TAM
I.
INTRODUCTION
With the achievement of higher stages of interaction in
online services and the increasing number of electronic
transactions in different domains of everyday life, identity
management (IDM) more and more becomes a crucial
challenge in the information society as most transactions
require user authentication. This is especially the case in the
field of e-government, where IDM plays a particular role.
The maturity of online public services allows users not just
to obtain information but also to conduct transactions with
public administration completely online via single sign-on
(SSO). Currently, there is a rather broad scope of different
concepts and technologies for authentication procedures in
online services, which makes IDM a tricky task to cope with,
especially for end-users. Therefore a number of countries in
Europe are introducing systems for electronic identity
management (e-IDMS) in order to improve security in online
services
and
to
set-up
more
harmonized
forms
of
identification and the corresponding procedures. As these
approaches at least aim to unify national IDM for e-
government, they have a special focus on their citizens as the
primary user group. Hence, user centricity is an essential
factor and a certain challenge in this context.
A part of this work has been presented at the CENTRIC
2009 conference and this paper is an extended version of our
contribution
[1].
It
upgrades
the
findings
in
[1]
by
emphasizing on issues regarding security usability and ties
them in with user perception as a key determinant for user
centricity.
Higher
levels
of
security,
efficiency
and
cost-
effectiveness of electronic communication and transactions
are the major benefits that governments expect from a
national e-IDMS, for the public administration itself as well
as for citizens and businesses. Lips et al. postulate that e-
IDM
becomes
“the
sine
qua
non
of
successful
e-
government”, and highlight two perspectives that have been
dominating up to now: “technical design” and “privacy
advocacy”
[2].
They
argue
for
transcending
the
preoccupation with these essentially instrumental views
towards analyzing the wider societal implications of this
innovation and for paying greater attention to social design
issues [3]. McKenzie et al. refer to challenges, policy
dilemmas entailed by multiple goals and failures in past IDM
approaches, which have spurred the debate on appropriate
overall e-IDMS strategies [4]. A number of normative
frameworks for e-IDMS that deal with user-centric aspects
have been suggested such as the set of principles for security
usability developed by Jøsang et al. [5], the Seven Laws of
Identity from Cameron [6] or the findings of the PRIME
project [7].
These initiatives underline the paradigm shift that IDM
approaches are currently experiencing towards a stronger
focus on the user. User-centric IDM is expected to provide
an individual “full control of transactions involving her
identity data” [8]. In terms of security systems, security
usability evolved as a special research field and is an integral
part of user centricity though with a strong focus on technical
design issues. More recent approaches of user centricity go
beyond technical design and highlight the importance of a
stronger
integration
of
further
aspects:
e.g.,
applying
experiences and techniques of the field of human-computer
interaction (HCI) such as psychological and social aspects of
12
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

usability in order to encourage a design perspective that
comprehends the user as a part of the system [9]. However,
there are several different concepts and understandings of
user centricity (cf. [8] [10]) and research on national e-IDMS
in terms of this aspect has been neglected. IDM approaches
in e-government have some major differences compared to
private sector IDM, with other determining factors to
incorporate [4]; above all, governments have to care for
broader aims such as social inclusion and interoperability,
and at the same time governments have coercive power,
which may lower incentives to be responsive to citizen
concerns. As these and similar aspects have not yet received
adequate attention in research on user-centric design of a
national e-IDMS, this paper aims to contribute to closing this
gap. On the example of the Austrian system, the peculiarities
of an e-IDMS are explained with regard to security usability
in order to grasp challenging aspects of citizen centricity.
The paper is structured as follows: Section II depicts the
research design of the analysis. Section III elucidates general
aspects of user centricity and the relation between security
and usability. In Section IV, relevant determinants for user-
centric IDM approaches are suggested. This is followed by
an explanation of the Austrian e-IDMS and its specific
design in Section V. The pursuance of user centricity in the
Austrian system is analyzed in Section VI, followed by
explanations for the current situation and considerations
about approaches to cope with major challenges (Section
VII). Finally, in Section VIII, the results of this analysis are
summarized and concluded.
II.
RESEARCH DESIGN
This paper analyzes national identity management from a
user-centric point of view and makes a contribution to
develop suitable approaches for overcoming the challenges
in this domain. The analysis is based on a case-study of the
national e-IDMS in Austria as a top-ranking EU-country in
terms of e-government [11]. This study is part of a larger
comparative research project on the introduction of national
identity management systems in selected European countries.
The empirical investigation (conducted in 2008) was a
combination of several methods: A comprehensive literature
review, an analysis of research papers, official documents,
expert statements, technical reports and specifications, face-
to-face
interviews
with
key
decision-makers
and
stakeholders at different governmental levels that were
involved in the innovation process; and practical tests of the
e-IDMS. For the analysis of this paper, following research
questions were identified:

What are the significant aspects of user centricity for
security systems and which role do they play for
identity management particularly in the context of e-
government? Starting with a brief introduction of
user
centricity
in
general,
we
focus
on
key
parameters relevant for user-centric national IDM.

What are the major characteristics of the national e-
IDMS in Austria and how does it incorporate
user/citizen-centric
parameters
and
the
user's
perception of the system? After describing specific
features and peculiarities of the Austrian system we
analyze them with respect to parameters relevant for
user centricity.

How balanced is the interplay between the relevant
determinants for user centricity in the Austrian e-
IDMS and what are major challenges for avoiding a
trade-off between security and usability? Based on
findings
of
security
usability
combined
with
considerations about user perception shed light on
the current situation regarding user centricity.
Our methodological approach draws upon theoretical
conceptualizations of user centricity, security usability as
well
as
technical
concepts
in
the
field
of
identity
management. The four basic architectural models of e-IDMS
– siloed, centralized, federated and user-centric identity
systems (cf. [5] [8] [12]) – show how technical IDM
concepts evolved towards a user-centric architecture. Hence,
we include these models in our analysis.
As
there
are
a
lot
of
different
views
and
conceptualizations of user centricity that do not provide a
commonly accepted delineation of the concept or a universal
set of criteria, our approach is also informed by key
dimensions of user centricity identified as predominant in the
relevant literature. As the aim of our paper is to analyze user-
centric aspects exceeding technical design, the methodology
also orientates on Davis’ [13] already classical Technology
Acceptance Model (TAM), which provides a suitable
framework for better understanding of user perception as it
allows to grasp relevant determinants and explanations for
the users willingness to get involved with a new technology.
In terms of security systems and identity management, this is
of special interest as the ambivalent relationship between
usability and security demands for a stronger consideration
of user perception in this domain.
The TAM describes the interrelation between system
characteristics, perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use
(i.e., usability) and attitude for usage and actual usage
behavior, i.e., the intention to use. Davis defines perceived
usefulness as “the degree to which a person believes that
using a particular system would enhance his or her job
performance”. This addresses the users’ perceived level of
potential improvement of workflows through the usage of
ICT, i.e., which benefits users expect from system usage.
Perceived ease of use (usability) is defined as “the degree to
which a person believes that using a particular system would
be free of effort”. Thus it refers to the users’ expectations of
the systems usability and the efforts usage implies. These
two factors form the users’ intention to use a technology and
have impact on the individual attitude for usage of a system
and thus on the resulting usage and acceptance of the system
itself [14] [15].
III.
ASPECTS OF USER CENTRICITY
In general, user centricity can be described as the
manifestation of a certain demand for more user-orientation
in technology. Placing the user and his demands in the center
of technology design should provide him more control and
user value. The rapid technological progress and particularly
the emergence of internet services played a certain role for
13
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the
paradigm shift
towards a
user-centric
view.
The
decentralized
structure
of
the
internet,
distributed
architectures and the increase of online service created
further complexity and new user-requirements for the
implementation of usable technologies and services in this
context, with user centricity becoming an essential aspect.
This reflects in many different domains and in particular in
the field of e-government.
A.
The Suspense between Usability and Security
In terms of security, user centricity is a particular
challenge as it addresses the tense relation to usability. Zurko
defined
user-centered
security
as
“security
models,
mechanisms, systems and software that have usability as a
primary motivation or goal” [9]. The challenge is to give
"end-users security controls they can understand and privacy
they can control for the dynamic, pervasive computing
environments of the future" [9]. This strongly reflects in the
emerging field of identity management (IDM) as it is all
about processing the user's personal data for identification.
User-centric IDM has the central aim to give users control
over their personal data and allow them to understand and
manage how these data is being processed in different
contexts [16].
The importance of privacy issues and an adequate
consideration of principles for data protection and privacy
are obvious. But the technical realization of privacy and
security is a complex task and it is challenging to implement
a system that is both - secure and usable. Security systems
often suffer from an imbalance between usability and
security. As an understated security level undermines the
objectives of the system, this imbalance is in many cases at
the expense of usability.
Moreover, Jøsang et al. also postulate “a very real
difference” between the degree of security of a system in
theory and its actual security. This underlines the potential
trade-off between usability and theoretical security, as the
intended protection of security systems strongly depends on
the user’s understanding of the system [17]. The introduction
of new security technologies such as e-IDMS brings further
challenges to avoid this possible trade-off. Hence, usability
“becomes a strategic issue in the establishment of user
authentication methods” [18]. Generally speaking, a user-
centric e-IDMS should provide privacy protection and
security as well as usability. The incorporation of security
usability is essential for the success of secure technologies.
B.
Principles for Security Usability
The existence of principles for security usability indicates
the demand for suitable approaches to avoid this possible
trade-off. One ancient and important attempt that influenced
security design was provided by the Dutch cryptographer
Auguste Kerckhoff. Already in 1883, he described six
principles for security systems: 1. The system must be
substantially, if not mathematically, undecipherable; 2. The
system must not require secrecy and can be stolen by the
enemy without causing trouble; 3. It must be easy to
communicate and remember the keys without requiring
written notes, it must also be easy to change or modify the
keys with different participants; 4. The system ought to be
compatible with telegraph communication; 5. The system
must be portable, and its use must not require more than one
person; 6. Regarding the circumstances, in which such a
system is applied, it must be easy to use and must neither
require stress of mind nor the knowledge of a long series of
rules.
These principles had high impact on today’s security and
cryptography systems and despite of their age, some are still
relevant.
Jøsang
et
al.
[17]
underline
the
particular
importance of principles 3 and 6 for today’s system design.
They tied in with Kerckhoff's principles and developed
principles for security usability. They distinguish between
principles for security action and security conclusion. A
security action is triggered, when the system demands the
user
to
produce
some
information
or
set
a
security
mechanism, (e.g., entering a password is a typical security
action). Security conclusion means the users’ ability, to
recognize the security state of the system (e.g., knowing that
a connection via SSL uses encrypted data transmission). The
principles are based on the conclusion, that the intended
protection provided by a security system strongly depends on
the user’s capability to understand, which security actions
and
conclusions
the
system
requires
and
to
react
appropriately. “Security systems will only be able to provide
the indented protection when people actually understand and
are able to use them correctly” [17].
Another approach that deals with user-centric security is
provided by Cameron’s seven laws of identity [6], which
offers some important guidelines for user centricity in
identity management systems. Similar to the principles of
Jøsang et al., the rules for system design suggested by
Cameron also focus on user understanding as a crucial factor
for providing the intended level of security.
User understanding is definitely a crucial aspect for user
centricity that often suffers from exaggerated security claims.
Hence, some authors (cf. [19] [20] [21]) question the
effectiveness of common security advice and principles in
this
respect.
For
instance, minimum requirements
for
password security (e.g., length, combination of signs and
numbers, etc.) might be of vast importance in theory.
However, as they are often not practicable and security risks
are rather abstract to users, they are more of a burden for
them. Most security advice are simply too complex for being
useful to end-users and do not fit their demands on the
system. As a result, security mechanisms foil themselves and
systems are often insufficient regarding user experience.
IV.
DETERMINANTS FOR A CITIZEN-CENTRIC IDM
APPROACH IN E-GOVERNMENT
The previous remarks show a certain demand for a
consideration of further aspects that go beyond technical
design issues. As this paper deals with national IDM in the
field of e-government we emphasize on identifying crucial
factors for user centricity in this respect. In order to highlight
how user centricity concerns the technical design of an e-
IDMS, this Section starts with an overview of the basic
models for identity management.
14
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A.
Evolution of Technical ID Models
There are four main types of ID models that can be
distinguished: siloed, centralized, federated and user-centric
systems. A siloed system is completely uncoupled from other
systems with no formal connections with other IDMS.
Hence, data processed within the IDMS is separated from
other systems and cannot be easily linked across different
domains. With respect to data protection and privacy this is a
highly important aspect. However, due to this separation, a
siloed system does not facilitate data sharing. Therefore it
often does not fit the needs for an efficient data processing
and sharing across multiple domains. Thus it allows no SSO
either and users need multiple accounts when interacting
with more than one system.
The
centralized
approach
aims
to
ease
this
inconvenience. In centralized systems all of a person’s data
are stored in a repository managed by a central provider and
independent from the applications using the data. This
central repository is accessible to service providers, which
can
use
it
for
their applications. Users are
able
to
authenticate through one account. However, the potential
threats to security and privacy are high in centralized
systems as all personal data is being processed in one single
unit and users are completely reliant on the central provider.
The federated model represents a sort of mixture between
the siloed and the centralized approach. Here, a central
identity
provider
(IdP)
manages
data
relevant
for
identification of a person and providers of services and
claims (SP) can use these data. The federation allows linking
up previously unlinked identifiers and SPs base their
applications on one single authentication mostly without
creating or maintaining user accounts on their own. Users
only authenticate via one single account, which can be used
for multiple services. Hence, a federated system offers more
user
convenience
and
reduces
privacy threats of the
centralized model as the IdP normally does not hold all
personal data. However, as the IdP knows, which identifiers
belong to a specific person, he has the ability to abuse this
knowledge
and
breach
the
user’s
privacy.
Thus
the
functionality of a federated system strongly depends on the
reliability of the IdP and the creation of a trustworthy
infrastructure.
To diminish the users’ dependence of a central IdP in a
federated system, the user-centric model evolved. It has a
certain focus on the person interacting with the system and
offers her more control. There is no central IdP, users can
choose between different SPs as well as IdPs. As identity
providers dot not belong to a federation they are expected to
act in the users’ interest rather than in those of the SPs. Due
to this freedom of choice, which parties to trust and which
information to reveal in a particular transaction, a person is
more independent and can gain advanced reliability in a
user-centric system. However, this extent of control also
brings greater demands on the users’ skills to handle this [5]
[8] [12].
B.
(Preliminary) Parameters
The relevance of user centricity for the success of e-
government is evident. Already in 2004, the mid-term review
of the EU action plan eEurope 2005 attested a need for a
“move to a demand-driven approach that emphasizes service
delivery, end-user value for all and functionality” [22]. As
citizens build a major subset of users in e-government, this
paper focuses on citizen centricity in the context of
electronic IDM and the term “user” mainly refers to the
citizen. IDM in e-government is different from IDM in
private sector. This difference demands for the consideration
of other aspects. So as to realize a user/citizen-centric e-
government approach, Blakemore and Undheim appeal for
“a clearer focus on technologies that use citizen-relevant
channels to deliver citizen/public value, rather than just to
deliver efficiency gains and cost savings” [23]. Governments
have to ensure equal access to public services for all citizens.
This implies the multi-channel principle, i.e., to offer
alternative channels to government services (online as well
as offline). Online public services should be usable with
familiar technologies in order to “maximize inclusion and
utility, and to avoid unnecessary demands (skills, device
purchase etc.) on citizens” [23].
In [1] we identified three major factors for citizen
centricity in national IDM:
Equality of access: In e-government, IDM has to consider
issues
on
a broader
scope such
as
social
inclusion,
affordability,
consistency,
interoperability
and
the
availability of public services for the whole population.
Inclusiveness and providing non-exclusive access to public
services via traditional as well as online channels to all
citizens is a central requirement. Public services have to be
accessible
without
e-ID
as
well
and
without
any
disadvantages in order to avoid a digital divide. The e-ID
should reduce, not enlarge the distance between the citizens
and public administration.
Privacy protection: The consideration of data protection
and privacy aspects as a core issue is of vast importance for
IDM. Governments have the substantial duty to protect the
citizen’s privacy and support them in controlling their
personal data. Hence, a major requirement on a user-centric
e-IDMS is its contribution to empowering users in managing
their ID in a self-determined way. One crucial property “that
must be satisfied in order to ensure privacy protection” is the
unlinkability of personal data [24]. This means to avoid the
use of unique identifiers, which are a threat to privacy
because they can be used for „privacy-destroying linkage
and aggregation of identity information across data contexts”
[25]. Thus, different identifiers for every sector should be
used, e.g., in the form of local pseudonyms [25]. Data
processing in the e-IDMS has to be transparent to users so
that they are able to comprehend how their personal data is
being processed within the system.
Citizen convenience: Improving convenience for users is
a central issue for IDM, as it determines how the system
responds to the citizens’ demands. This affects e-government
in particular as public services should be usable for every
citizen. The e-ID should support SSO and ease the users’
need to handle multiple accounts and the corresponding
procedures. At the same time the e-ID should provide
citizens’ a suitable and convenient way to deploy their e-ID
15
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

in different contexts without the need for handling multiple
login data and procedures.
An additional factor in line with these parameters is trust.
It is strongly interrelated with the other factors and
particularly connected to the possible trade-off between
security and usability. One might say trust is in between the
poles of this possible trade-off: Security and trust are
interdependent and determine each other in some respects.
Lacking usability foils security and as a consequence also
lowers trust in the system. When security mechanisms empty
into high complexity, users are then not able to understand
and consider them appropriately. One important aim of
national IDM is to increase the amount of trust in e-
government. “Concepts of trust and identity have become
intimately bound, and go beyond a purely technical focus”
[26]. Government organizations require citizens to trust in
them “in order to be legitimate and efficient” [27]. Applying
a reliable environment for public service usage is an essential
precondition for citizens’ trust in e-government. The e-IDMS
should
establish
a
solid
fundament
for
trustworthy
interactions between citizens and government with the
assurance, that his personal data is treated correctly and not
against his privacy [27].
V.
DEVELOPMENT OF THE AUSTRIAN E-IDMS AND
SPECIFIC DESIGN CHARACTERISTICS
First initiatives for a national e-IDMS already began in
the early 90ies with plans to set up a smart card system in the
field of social and health insurance administration. The
European Directive (1999/93/EC of December 13 1999 on a
Community Framework) for electronic signatures triggered
further impulses at a European level. Austria was (among
other EU-member states) directly involved in designing the
signature and hence one of the first countries in Europe to
implement a national e-IDMS for e-government services. In
October 2000, the idea of a smart card for unique
identification of citizens in a certain role – the so-called
“Citizen Card” (in German called “Buergerkarte”) was born
and announced as an integral part of Austria’s national
conversion of the eEurope initiative “information society for
all”.
Shortly
afterwards
the
government
approved
a
resolution for the implementation of a smart card based
system
to
support
e-government
services
[28].
First
prototypes of Citizen Cards were released during a pilot
scheme and available from 2002 until 2005.
As the system architecture for the Citizen Card (CC)
follows a technology-neutral approach the concept is not
bound to one specific card. Although plans during the
development process aimed to use the electronic health
insurance card (today known as “e-Card”) as primary device
for the CC concept. Together with the ATM card, the e-Card
became one of the major carrier devices to carry the CC-
function.
A.
Major system characteristics
The Citizen Card as centerpiece of the Austrian e-IDMS
has some specific characteristics. First of all, it strives for
technology-neutrality and multiple tokens as it is not a
physical card but a virtual concept that can be implemented
on various different hardware components (e.g., smart cards,
cell phones, USB devices) [29] . Due to their broad range of
use, smart cards are currently the preferred carrier devices
with e-Cards and ATM cards as main tokens. These cards are
wide-spread among the Austrian population. Every citizen
(8.3 million) has an e-Card and about 80% of the Austrians
hold an ATM card. These cards have the “sleeping” CC-
function integrated, which means that they are prepared for
the e-ID but the function needs initial activation. Ministerial
IDs, staff IDs of the Chamber of Commerce and student IDs
are some of the further possible carrier devices. The Citizen
Card fulfills two basic functions in online transactions with
public administration: it allows to verify the card holder’s
identity and to authenticate his/her request by providing an
electronic signature, which is stored on the card. A
peculiarity of the e-IDMS is its ID model and the technical
privacy concept: the system is based on a complex techno-
organizational infrastructure with an ID model that is
grounded on unique identifiers in the Central Register of
Residents (CRR), whereas sector specific identifiers (ssPINs)
are derived from. The amount of data stored on the card
depends on the specific carrier device. But every Citizen
Card contains at least the card holder’s full name, date of
birth, the source-PIN as unique identifier (for details see next
Section) and the cryptographic public keys needed for the e-
signature and content-encryption. The private key is stored in
a separate hardware unite on the cards’ chip. For protection
of these data, up to three different PIN-codes that are only
known by the card holder are applied. The first one is for
general access protection of the device, the second one for
using the e-signature and the optional third for the additional
feature of an integrated data box for storing electronic
documents such as a birth certificate [29] [30].
B.
Techno-organizational infrastructure and ID model
The Austrian e-IDMS is based on a complex techno-
organizational infrastructure. This set-up can be explained
regarding the CC’s two main functions – identification and
e-signature. For the creation and provision of the e-signature,
a Public key infrastructure (PKI) was established. The PKI
consists of one or more Certificate Authorities (CAs) that
issues
all
services
relevant
for
the
e-signature
and
Registration Authorities (RAs), where card holders can apply
for an e-signature. (Currently, the institution a.trust is the
only CA in Austria that applies qualified certificates required
for the e-ID). This CA coordinates several RAs (i.e., banks,
post offices, etc.), which usually provide the full activation
of a Citizen Card including the integration of the ID model
[29] [30].
The core infrastructure component for the ID model is
the Central Register of Residents (CRR). This register is a
national database, which contains data of all Austrian
residents. The primary key for every data-record is the CRR-
number, a 12-digit number, which acts as unique identifier
for a specific person. The CC’s whole ID model is based
upon the CRR-No. but not directly used to respect privacy
protection. Hence only a strong encryption of the CRR-No. –
the so-called source-PIN – is stored in the card to identify the
card holder and the law prohibits storing it outside the card.
16
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The source-PIN is created during card activation and used
for generating sector-specific PINs (ssPIN). An ssPIN is
based on an irreversible cryptographic function, which
prevents to recreate its original elements (i.e., the source-
PIN). Currently, there exist ssPINs for 26 sectors (e.g., tax,
education, health, etc.). An ssPIN is used for unique
identification of a person within the specific belong sector.
Storage of an ssPIN is regulated by the law and only allowed
within the sector it belongs to or is allowed to use it [30].
The Figure below gives an overview of the interrelations
between the major infrastructure components.
C.
Requirements and user interaction with the e-IDMS
Using the CC in online services requires the initial
activation of the function. RAs carry out the corresponding
procedures for the card holder. Until recently, this was only
possible by visiting an office. Now the whole activation
process can be carried out online as well with the
precondition that the e-Card is the carrier device. For the
handling of the CC, a PC with internet connection, a card
reader and special software – the so-called Citizen Card
environment (CCE) – are required. The CCE is available in
different variants, including productions completely free of
charge. In 2009, an online-variant of the software has been
introduced. The activation for ATM cards costs 12 € once,
and the certificate for the e-signature is 15.60 € per year.
A typical user session with CC usually proceeds as
follows: most public online services are available via SSO on
the Austrian e-government portal help.gv.at. After choosing
a service, the user is prompted to authenticate by putting his
card into the card reader and entering a PIN-code. This
grants the service access to the user’s ID data on the card in
order to generate a confirmation for accessing the service
(typically, it looks like this: “I, John Doe, born on January
1st 1973, confirm that I am using this service. Date, time:
January 12, 2010, 9:32:12”). This confirmation has to be
signed by the user by entering his signature-PIN. Then,
depending on the current service, some forms have to be
filled out with personal data (e.g., income data for tax
declaration). When submitting, the user is prompted again to
sign another confirmation in order to affirm his service
request and the correctness of his data. During submission,
the service requests creation of the ssPIN in the back office,
by reading the source-PIN out of the card and combining it
with the unique number of the current sector the service
belongs to (e.g., tax). After service completion the data is
being further processed in the back office applications of the
appropriate authority. It depends on the administrative
procedure, whether data processing is completely automated
or includes further treatment by the administration office
[29] [30].
VI.
THE BIASED PICTURE OF A CITIZEN-CENTRIC VIEW ON
THE AUSTRIAN E-IDMS
This
Section
analyzes
the
realization
of
relevant
determinants for citizen centricity (as described in Section
IV) in the Austrian system and then strives for explanations
of the biased picture that the analysis and the following
delineations draw.
A.
Mapping of the e-IDMS against typical ID models
A tentative attribution of the Austrian system to the four
basic ID models as described in Section IV.A is revealed by
the Table below:
TABLE I. MAPPING OF THE E-IDMS
Siloed
Centra
-lized
Fede-
rated
User-
centric
Method of authentication
X
Location
of
Identity
Information
X
X
(X)
Method
of
linking
accounts/learning if they
belong to the same person
X
(X)
Trust
Characteristics
(who
is
dependent
on
whom, for what)
(X)
X
Convenience
X
(X)
Vulnerabilities
(X)
X
X
As the basic models represent rather simplified “ideal-
types”, this mapping cannot be stringent, but still it gives an
initial clue about the system with regard to citizen centricity.
The user authenticates with the Citizen Card to each
service via SSO, whereas the CRR is the central identity
provider and supplies the ID data to service providers.
Hence, the method of authentication correlates with the
federated model. Regarding location of identity information,
the e-IDMS is mainly a mixture of centralized, federated and
user-centric model: all relevant ID information is centrally
stored in the CRR that service providers can integrate in their
separate accounts but identity verification usually requires
the CC. Linking of data across different domains is
prevented by the ssPINs and the corresponding legal
regulations, i.e., it is only allowed to link data within the
same sector or by offices permitted to process the data. But
the identity provider knows in which services a user deploys
his e-ID and the CRR contains more personal data than
generally needed for every service. Thus, users have to trust
that the federal identity provider and the service providers
CA
RA
Activates card
for user
Central Register of
Residents – CRR
Creates
ID model
User
Creates e-signature
and certificate
Card reader
Citizen Card
Figure 1: Techno-organizational infrastructure
17
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

use their data properly and with respect to privacy. Due to its
powerful role, the user is somewhat constrained by the
federal identity provider. As service utilization with e-ID
requires the CC as a separate device and PIN-codes, users
gain more control. However at the same time they are also
confronted with increased requirements to handle the e-ID.
As SPs have to request the federal IdP for the creation of
ssPINs, they are not completely liberated from the burden of
credential management. Altogether, the Austrian e-IDMS
mainly follows a federated approach, whereas some of its
features strive for a user-centric system design.
B.
Provision for citizen centricity
The e-IDMS incorporates a citizen-centric approach and
the consideration of relevant aspects reflects in several ways.
Regarding equality of access, different approaches have been
employed to avoid social exclusion and exclusiveness of the
e-IDMS; some of them especially during the rollout phase
also in order to broaden penetration and stimulate usage of
the system: to reduce financial burden, online transactions
with the e-ID were free of charge until the end of 2006.
Since 2008, there are no costs when using the e-Card as CC.
The
technology-neutral
concept
allows
using
several
different devices as carrier for the e-ID. Due to the
possibility to integrate the e-ID into different systems, it
provides openness and interoperability at least to some
extent. The e-ID is not compulsory and citizens are free to
decide whether to use it or not. Austria provides a broad
scope of different e-government services and of course,
services are still available in traditional offline forms. Online
services do not per se require the e-ID and can be used with
common authentication methods (i.e., username/password)
as well. Just a few services require the e-ID and only in
cases, where the transaction should be processed completely
online without any media friction. In this respect, the e-ID
could also be noticed as enabler of an additional access-
channel. Due to the availability of multiple tokens, citizens
also have some choice, which carrier device to use as Citizen
Card. As there are no costs for using the e-Card, neither for
activation nor for usage, most people are expected to prefer
this device.
For the consideration of privacy, the e-IDMS is based on
a sophisticated ID model, which strives for a balance of
security and data protection. As persistent static identifiers
allow data linking across different domains, they enable
potential privacy threats, i.e., identity fraud or infringement
of personal information [4]. Hence, the Austrian e-IDMS is
based on a complex ID model, which avoids the direct
processing of a unique identifier (as described in Section V).
The use of the ssPINs aims to prevent illegal linkage of
personal data. These identifiers are different for a defined
number of domains (currently 26), and legal regulations limit
the use of an ssPIN to the domain it origins from or is
allowed to use it. Moreover, it is also prohibited to
persistently store the source-PIN (as basis-number for an
ssPIN) outside the Citizen Card. This technical sector
separation corresponds to the deployment of different
pseudonyms. As the e-IDMS applies an electronic token in
form of a hardware device, users receive at least some
control over their personal data. The combination of
knowledge
(the
PIN-code)
and
possession
(the
card)
improves security of the authentication procedure compared
to usual concepts, which are based on username/password.
The system contributes to enhance citizen convenience as
it
provides
a
comprehensive
approach
to
harmonize
authentication procedures. Most Austrian e-government
services are available at the e-government portal help.gv.at
and citizens can use their CC to authenticate at this single
entry-point via SSO. With the CC as one device to
authenticate in different services, identity management is
alleviated as citizens do not have to handle several user
accounts and credentials. The openness of the concept to
different carrier devices gives users the possibility to choose
their preferred token for the CC-function. The possibility of
activating the e-Card completely online offers a convenient
way to enable it as carrier medium. Beside the two main
carrier cards (e-Cards, ATM cards) there was also a CC
available on a cell phone without needing a smart card or
card reader. A legal provision allowed this so-called “Citizen
Card light”, which had less security requirements. As the
legal regulation was only temporarily, the “Citizen Card
light” was only available until the end of 2007. In November
2009, an improved version of the CC on a cell phone has
been announced and is available since 2010 [31]. An
additional online version of the CCE is available since 2009,
which is completely browser-based and thus reduces efforts
as
users
do
not
have
to
install
additional
software
components.
The techno-organizational infrastructure of the e-IDMS
contributes to create a circle of trust. The involved parties
(CA, RA, IdP, SPs) have to fulfill certain requirements,
which are legally defined (e.g., in legal regulations for e-
signature, privacy, administrative procedures, etc.). The Data
protection commission serves as a custodian over the lawful
appliance of the e-IDMS. The Ministry of the Interior
administrates the CRR and acts as central identity provider
on behalf of the DPC. Service providers have to register their
applications and to request for deploying their services with
the CC. Due to the privacy aware system implementation
and the increased amount of control, the e-IDMS seems to be
grounded on a reliable fundament that is capable of
enhancing citizens’ trust in e-government.
C.
Current usage and acceptance of the system
With the two main carrier devices – e-Card and ATM
cards – the penetration of potential CC is high as these cards
are wide-spread in Austria and already prepared for the CC-
function. There is also a number of services available that
can be used with the CC at all three administrative levels
(federal, provincial, municipal) at the Austrian e-government
portal. However, there is no significant increase in card
activation and usage although the Citizen Card is obtainable
for several years already. The optimistic goals for the
number of card activations had to be adjusted downwards
several times. E.g., the intended number of 200,000 active
CCs by the end of 2005 was not achieved. In 2006, only
about 60,000 activated cards were in use and a substantial
part of these are bulk activations by public organizations [1]
18
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[32].
According
to
recent
estimates
of
the
Federal
Chancellery, about 120,000 were circulating by May 2009
[33].
A look at the usage levels of three exemplarily online
services reveals some peculiarities [1]:
TABLE II.
USAGE OF SERVICES IN 2007
Transactions
Total
Total - online
Citizen Card
Tax declarations
Approx.
4,000.000
1,846.922
(46%)
12.801 (0.7%)
Student grants*)
66.933
53 (0.1%)
53 (0.1%)
Retirement
pay
account **)
35.974
10.485 (29.1%)
10.485 (29.1%)
*) Data refer to academic year 2007/08. **) Data refer to 2008.
There are some remarkable differences in usage of these
services. The number of transactions for tax declaration is of
particular interest as it is considerably higher compared to
the other services. It is the most successful e-government
application in Austria; the amount of citizens transmitting
their tax declaration online is close to 50%. However, the
vast majority prefers common authentication based on
username and password. Less than 1% uses the CC for this
service. As online processing of the two other services
requires authentication with CC, the number of online
transactions equals the number of transactions with Citizen
Card. The comparatively higher amount of citizens using the
online
service
for
retirement
pay
account
queries
is
explainable by the significantly higher number of potential
users
(students
only
represent
a
small
share
of
the
population) as well as strong advertising and PR actions
taken for e-health and social services during the roll out of
the e-Card, which received increased public attention.
D.
Explaining the current situation
The usage level is only progressing very slowly and a
remarkable increase as expected by the main stakeholders
has not occurred yet. Despite of the important considerations
of citizen centricity in the Austrian system, the overall
situation draws a rather biased picture.
In order to identify explanations for this situation it is
expedient to take up a more general view on the e-IDMS as a
security system, as this allows gaining a better understanding
of relevant determinants. From this point of view, the e-ID
represents a certain security mechanism for citizens when
interacting with public administration. Users are mostly
considered to be the soft spot of a security system that often
neglect the proper use of security mechanisms. This
negligence is often stated as irrational or ascribed to the
users’ lack of understanding the security mechanism.
However, a closer look shows that users act “entirely
rational” when rejecting security advice, as [21] argues: “A
main part of the problem with security advice is that we
hugely exaggerate benefits”. Additionally, the cost of user
effort is often ignored [21]. Security systems and the
corresponding requirements overwhelm users and offer them
“a
poor
cost-benefit
tradeoff”.
Therefore,
security
mechanisms are often rejected by users as the high
requirements made of users do not match the predicted
benefits. Users are confronted with a real effort to handle a
security system while at the same time this effort should
prevent from threats that are rather theoretical [20] [21].
Applications with an exclusive focus on security mostly
offer “a small perceived advantage in exchange for dealing
with an extraordinary complex interface” [19].
These remarks can also be transferred to the situation of
the Austrian system. The high complexity of the e-IDMS
plays a certain role for the user experience and thus is a
major vulnerability of the system, which has been a central
point of criticism and entails further controversial aspects.
Although the sophisticated ID model was designed to
prevent data linkage and protect the citizens’ privacy, the
effectiveness of this solution is questioned. As online service
process many personal data, illegal data linkage is still
feasible over these data, despite of the deployment of ssPINs.
The complex coherences of the system cause a lack of
transparency, which does not allow users to comprehend
how their e-ID and the related data are being processed
within the system. This also limits the users’ amount of
control over their personal data. Essential requirements for
preventing the e-ID to become an instrument of surveillance
are effective controls of the maintenance of fundamental
privacy
principles
(e.g.,
commensurability,
data
minimization, purpose limitation of data processing, etc.).
Due to the high overall complexity and opacity of the
system, this controllability of a proper data processing in
account with privacy is rather hard to ensure. Lacking
transparency and high complexity can also be expected to
lower the citizens’ level of trust in the e-IDMS. Overall, the
e-IDMS and especially the CC are perceived as too complex
with several flaws regarding citizen centricity. Benefits and
convenience
are
rather
low
compared
to
the
high
requirements made of users [32] [34].
These propositions address several serious aspects, which
indicate the suspense between usability and security in the
Austrian system in several contexts. There is some certain
evidence for this assessment. Two studies revealed some
interesting indications for the situation: In the “eUser” study
of 2005, 27% of the Austrian Internet users described the
need for a special end-user device for identification (i.e., the
CC) as a burden for using online public services. Costs were
estimated as too high compared to the expected benefits of
the CC [35]. According to another study from 2006, 33% of
the respondents mentioned to have no intention to obtain a
CC at all. The reasons stated for this correspond to the
propositions above: There is no or not enough need for the
CC (46%), lack of information about usage (37%), the CC is
not trustworthy enough (22%). Furthermore, 38% of the
respondents that stated to be card holders mentioned to never
have used their CC [36].
When considering the high requirements for usage (card
activation, card reader, installation of special software), it is
not very unlikely that handling of the e-ID is perceived as
burden. Several problems and obstacles in practical use also
appear from entries in the online support-forum for CC
19
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

users.1 Practical tests conducted for this research confirmed
the non-trivial and partly complicated handling of the e-ID.
Indeed, the number of security actions and conclusions (cf.
[16]) demanded from the user often seems to be over
exaggerated and beyond a standard users understanding of a
common system.
Beside the problem of high complexity, from a user’s
perspective, the system does not seem to offer enough
benefits and incentives. The marginal rate of contacts for a
citizen with public administration (only approx. 1.7 contacts
per year) and the existence of common and fairly effective
authentication methods are important aspects in this context
[1]. This, combined with the exaggerated efforts of using the
e-ID may considerably account for a weak benefit/cost ratio
(whereas costs do not primarily address financial expense,
but a disproportional effort). Thus, the e-IDMS provides
only a low user value.
It has to be noted that major stakeholders are aware of
this situation and since the mentioned studies have been
conducted, several measures were set to improve citizen
centricity and increase diffusion. The measures mainly
address the reduction of costs and usability problems: e.g.,
no charges for the e-Card, promotion of cost-reduced
notebooks with integrated card reader and pre-installed
software, an additional online version of the CCE and the re-
launched option of a cell phone based CC. To increase
penetration and usage, several promotion campaigns mainly
target teenagers and students. However, at present it is
uncertain whether these actions are adequate to cope with the
current situation and increase the level of usage.
VII.
IMPROVING USER CENTRICITY BY (RE-)FOCUSING ON
THE USER VALUE
The previous Section has shown that, although the
Austrian system seems to consider several citizen-centric
aspects the actual situation is not satisfying regarding usage
and acceptance. This leads to the TAM as its aim is to
identify relevant determinants for acceptance or rejection of
a technology. A classification of the current situation to the
two factors of the TAM, usefulness and ease of use, confirms
the biased picture depicted and offers further explanations.
The benefits a user expects from the system are addressed by
the factor perceived usefulness. The ease of use addresses the
costs and efforts that system usage entails. Now it has been
pointed out that these efforts are perceived as rather high
because citizens are confronted with additional requirements
(i.e., card activation, card reader, special software) and the
overall complexity of the system is perceived as too high.
At a first glance, the reduction of complexity might come
into mind as necessary approach for easing the situation and
improving citizen centricity. Reducing complexity certainly
is important to lower current burdens to usage. But does this
also stimulate usage? At least in the Austrian case this effect
did not occur: stakeholders took several measures in this
regard to alleviate handling of the e-ID. However, it is
currently not foreseeable whether these actions will be
1 http://tinyurl.com/c9kuvn
effective. Moreover, the scope of action for reducing
complexity might be limited with respect to the intended
security level. Plus, a deviation from the sophisticated ID
model of the Austrian e-IDMS cannot be expected to be
performed easily without enormous efforts and problems
regarding privacy protection.
In this regard, a rather interesting aspect is pointed out by
Gutmann and
Grigg: users do accept “a little more
complexity (…) for a fair offering in value” [18]. Davis [13]
argued similar, whereby “(…) users are often willing to cope
with some difficulty of use in a system that provides
critically needed functionality”. This implies a stronger focus
on finding a balance between acceptable complexity and user
value. It might seem obvious that system usage is strongly
interdependent with the benefits users can expect. But as
already underlined in the previous Section, this determining
issue seems to be neglected especially in terms of security
and identity management systems. Hence, “cost and benefits
have to be those the users care about, not those we think the
user ought to care about” [20]. Costs are not just meant in a
monetary sense here but subsume all the efforts that users are
confronted with. When the transaction costs incurred by
switching from familiar forms of identification to the e-ID
are high and the expected benefits due to this switching are
low then usage is expected to be low either.
In accord with the TAM it thus strongly depends on the
perceived usefulness of the e-IDMS, whether users are
willing to accept a certain degree of complexity. The
difficulty of usage can surely contribute a lot to “discourage
adoption of an otherwise useful system”, but “no amount of
ease of use can compensate for a system that does not
perform a useful function” [13].
The analysis has already shown that the system does not
seem to offer enough benefits and incentives. Whilst the
scope of available services is relatively broad, at the same
time, the average frequency of citizen contacts per year is
relatively low. Hence the incentives to access these services
via CC are marginal and the usefulness is perceived as too
low either.
When
considering
the
recent
measures
of
major
stakeholders, it is salient that the ease of use, respectively the
usability of the e-IDMS seems to receive more attention than
usefulness. Hence there is a certain demand for increasing
benefits and creating a “real” user value, which implies, that
service provision plays a crucial role for user centricity in the
e-IDMS. From a user’s point of view, current services with
e-ID do not considerably differ from common e-government
services except of the authentication method. An important
step forward might be finding out, which additional benefit
of the e-ID citizens would really appreciate. For instance
services, that offer new possibilities for interaction with
public administration and that legitimate the sophisticated
concept behind the system. At its current state, the e-IDMS
seems to be less suitable as an instrument for standard-users
than for users with special demands. For instance, the
number of citizens with a frequent use for the e-signature and
document encryption yet seems rather marginal. This might
be different in businesses with a certain demand for this
application and the security level provided by the e-ID.
20
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Major stakeholders also rated the business sector as crucial
for further diffusion.
A certain additional value for citizens could be to
enhance transparency of government actions: e.g., to grant
users access to administrative documents that pertain to
themselves
and
to
provide
information
about
current
administrative
proceedings
in
terms
of
freedom
of
information, of course with respect to privacy and data
protection issues. Here, trust as an important aspect comes in
again. Freedom of information laws appears “to have
contributed to citizens showing higher levels of comfort
about how their information will be handled" [4]. Or in other
words: when citizens are able to comprehend how their
personal data is being processed in public administration,
this contributes to increase trustworthiness in government,
which represents an important incentive. From a privacy
perspective, transparency is essential as surveillance can only
be effectively controlled and prevented when information
about purpose of e-ID usage and processing are definitely
regulated and accessible for citizens [34]. Applications for e-
ID in terms of freedom of information would also be
conducive
to
improve
effectiveness
of
privacy
as
it
contributes to improve an individuals’ control over his e-ID
respectively his personal data.
VIII.
CONCLUSION
The analysis of the Austrian e-IDMS regarding its
incorporation of citizen centricity reveals a biased picture:
although
the
system
includes
important
citizen-centric
factors and several measures were set to reduce complexity
and alleviate handling of the e-ID, the level of usage and
acceptance of the system does not meet the expectations of
major stakeholders. This ambivalent result highlights that the
intentions behind the e-IDMS regarding end-users do not
seem to match the users’ perceptions of the system. The
implementation of the Austrian system was dominated by
strong focus on security. This entailed a high overall
complexity, which is a particular burden for acceptance and
usage. However, measures to reduce this complexity have
not lead to the intended effects yet. In this respect, the e-
IDMS indeed reflects the depicted suspense between security
and usability. The crucial challenge for security systems in
general and e-IDMS in particular is to find suitable
approaches for avoiding this suspense. First and foremost
this implies a stronger focus on providing a “real” user value.
This
seemingly
rather
obvious
finding
addresses
the
necessity
for
a
paradigm
shift
in
system
design
to
compensate the mismatch between design philosophy behind
the system and the usability needs regarding security
usability from a user’s view.
An important step towards finding suitable approaches
for easing this situation is to emphasize on user perception as
determinant of vast importance for user centricity. The
deployment of the TAM allowed to conclude that this
necessary focus is currently rather neglected in the e-IDMS.
The measures taken mainly address the ease of usage (i.e.,
increase usability) whilst the usefulness of the system (i.e.,
the expected benefits) is left behind. Hence, there is a certain
demand for further efforts to improve usefulness, which
mainly concerns service provision and the creation of
additional user value. Whilst the e-ID in its current state inter
alia suffers from the end-users irregular demand, businesses
might have a more frequent need.
The Austrian case-study provided a useful example about
the importance of considering further aspects in system
design that go beyond technical issues in order to gain an
expedient level of user centricity. These aspects refer to
complex interrelations among multiple scopes especially in
terms of e-government. The major challenge in this regard is
to balance multiple goals, i.e., to provide a certain level of
security, protect the citizens’ privacy and offer both usable
and useful features from a citizen’s perspective. Necessary
adaptations do not just address the technical design of the
system but might also include further actions to take, i.e.,
reconfigurations of policy frameworks and legal regulations
for e-ID usage. Furthermore, governments neither are nor
should they be in a position to simply introduce additional
services as this is a matter of checks and balances. Hence, a
focus
on
improving
transparency
for
citizens
could
contribute to experience user value. An additional benefit
citizens could appreciate might be to facilitate access to
government information and administrative proceedings that
concern
them. This
institutionalization
of freedom of
information would also contribute to improve trust in (e-)
government. As the e-IDMS represents an innovation, a
rather tentative increase in acceptance and usage does not
seem surprising. However, when this technology should
establish itself in a mid-term perspective, this requires by all
means the composition of further measures in order to strive
for a more balanced provision of citizen centricity with
respect to its multiple determinants.
REFERENCES
[1]
G. Aichholzer and S. Strauß, "The Citizen’s Role in National
Electronic Identity Management. A Case-study on Austria",
Proc. of the Second International Conference on Advances in
Human-Oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies,
and Services (CENTRIC 09), IEEE Computer Society, 2009,
pp.
45-50,
doi:
doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/CENTRIC.2009.13
[2]
M. Lips, J. Taylor, and J. Organ, "Identity management as
public innovation. Looking beyond ID cards and authentication
systems",
in
ICT
and
public
innovation:
assessing
the
modernisation of public administration, V. Bekkers, H. van
Duivenboden, and M. Thaens, Eds., Amsterdam: IOS Press,
2006, pp. 204-216.
[3]
M. Lips, J. Taylor, and J. Organ, "Electronic government
towards
new
forms
of
authentication,
citizenship
and
governance", Paper to Oxford Internet Institute conference:
Safety and Security in a Networked World, October 8-10,
Oxford University, 2005.
[4]
R. McKenzie, M. Crompton, and C. Wallis, "Use Cases for
Identity Management in E-Government", in IEEE Security and
Privacy vol. 6 (2), March-April 2008, pp. 51-57.
21
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[5]
A. Josang, M. AlZomai, and S. Suriadi, "Usability and Privacy
in Identity Management Architectures", Proc. of the fifth
Australasian symposium on ACSW frontiers - Volume 68,
Australian Computer Society, 2007, pp. 143-152.
[6]
K.
Cameron,
"The
laws
of
identity",
2005,
http://tinyurl.com/2226ry.
[7]
J. S. Pettersson, S. Fischer-Hübner, N. Danielsson, J. Nilsson,
M. Bergmann, S. Clauss, T. Kriegelstein, and H. Krasemann,
"Making PRIME usable", Proc. of the 2005 Symposium on
Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS '05), vol. 93, New York:
ACM
Press,
2005,
pp.
53-64.
doi:
doi.acm.org/10.1145/1073001.1073007
[8]
A. Bhargav-Spantzel, J. Camenisch, T. Gross, and D. Sommer,
"User Centricity: A taxonomy and open issues", Journal of
Computer Security vol. 15 (5), October 2007, pp. 493-527.
[9]
M. E. Zurko, "User-Centered Security: Stepping Up to the
Grand Challenge", Proc. of the 1st Annual Computer Security
Applications
Conference
(ACSAC
05),
IEEE
Computer
Society,
2005,
pp.
187-202,
doi:doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/CSAC.2005.60
[10]
T. M. Eap, M. Hatala, and D. Gasevic, "Enabling User Control
with Personal Identity Management", Proc. of the IEEE
International Conference on Services Computing (SCC 07),
IEEE
Press,
2007,
pp.
60-67,
doi:
doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/SCC.2007.56
[11]
Cap Gemini Ernst and Young, "Online Availability of Public
Services: How is Europe Progressing? Web based Survey on
Electronic Public Services. Report of the Sixth Measurement",
2006,
http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/eeurope/i2010/docs/ben
chmarking/online_availability_2006.pdf
[12]
M. Donohue and A. Carblanc, "The role of digital identity
management
in
the
internet
economy:
a
primer
for
policymakers",
No.
DSTI/ICCP/REG(2008)10/REV1:
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD), 2009.
[13]
F. D. Davis, "Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and
user acceptance of information technology", MIS Quarterly, 13,
September 1989, pp. 319-339.
[14]
L. Leong, "Theoretical models in IS research and the technology
acceptance model (TAM)", in Technologies & Methodologies
For Evaluating information Technology in Business, C. K.
Davis, ed., Hershey, PA: IGI Publishing, 2003, pp. 1-31.
[15]
Y. Malhotra and D. F. Galletta, "Extending the Technology
Acceptance Model to Account for Social Influence: Theoretical
Bases and Empirical Validation", Proc. of the Thirty-Second
Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
(HICSS 99), Washington, DC: IEEE Computer Society, 1999,
pp. 6-14.
[16]
M. Hansen, H. Krasemann, M. Rost, and R. Genghini, 2003,
"Datenschutzaspekte von Identitätsmanagementsystemen. Recht
und Praxis in Europa", Datenschutz und Datensicherheit 27 (9),
2003,
pp.
551-555,
https://www.datenschutzzentrum.de/projekte/idmanage/DUD-
27-9.pdf
[17]
A. Jøsang, B. AlFayyadh, T. Grandison, M. AlZomai, and J.
McNamara, "Security Usability Principles for Vulnerability
Analysis and Risk Assessment", Proc. of the 23rd Annual
Computer Security Applications Conference, 2007, pp. 269-
278, doi: 10.1109/ACSAC.2007.14
[18]
C. Braz and J.-M. Robert, "Security and Usablity: The Case of
the
User
Authentication
Methods",
Proc.
of
the
18th
International
Conference
of
the
Association
Francophone
d'Interaction Homme-Machine (IHM 06); Vol. 133, 2006, pp.
199-203, http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1132736.1132768
[19]
P. Gutmann and I. Grigg, "Security Usability", IEEE Security
and
Privacy
3
(4),
2005,
pp.
56-58,
http://www2.computer.org/portal/web/csdl/abs/mags/sp/2005/04
/j4056abs.htm
[20]
B.
Schneier,
"Balancing
Security
and
Usability
in
Authentication",
February
2009,
http://www.schneier.com/blog/archives/2009/02/balancing_secu
r.html
[21]
C. Herley, "So Long And No Thanks for the Externalities: The
Rational Rejection of Security Advice by Users", Proc. of the
2009
New
Security
Paradigms
Workshop
(NSPW
09),
September 2009, pp. 133-144, http://research.microsoft.com/en-
us/um/people/cormac/papers/2009/solongandnothanks.pdf
[22]
EU-Commission,
"eEurope
2005
Mid-term
Review",
18.02.2004,
Bruessels:
Commission
of
the
European
Communities,
2004,
http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/eeurope/2005/doc/all_a
bout/acte_en_version_finale.pdf
[23]
M. Blakemore and A. T. Undheim, "A Handbook for Citizen-
centric
eGovernment",
2007,
http://www.ccegov.eu/downloads/Handbook_Final_031207.pdf
[24]
FIDIS, "D13.6: Privacy modelling and identity", Deliverable-
Report., Future of Identity in the Information Society, 2007,
http://www.fidis.net/fileadmin/fidis/deliverables/fidis-wp13-
del13.6_Privacy_modelling_and_identity.pdf
[25]
M. Rundle, B. Blakley, J. Broberg, A. Nadalin, D. Olds, M.
Ruddy, M. T. M. Guimarares, and P. Trevithick, At a
crossroads: "Personhood" and digital identity in the information
society,
No.
JT03241547,
29.02.2008:
Organisation
for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), 2008,
http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/31/6/40204773.doc.
[26]
F. Wilson, "Think Paper 11: Trust and Identity in Interactive
Services:
Technical
and
Societal
Challenges",
2007,
http://www.ccegov.eu/Downloads/Paper%2011%20-
%20Trust%20and%20identity%20in%20interactive.pdf
[27]
P. Chadwick, "Managing identity, privacy and the public trust,
Institute of Public Administration Austrialia series: The art of
the long view. The role of Government: Taking responsibility or
sharing
it?",
2006,
http://www.privacy.vic.gov.au/privacy/web.nsf/download/D901
0341D53F4684CA2571790011A65E/$FILE/Managing%20iden
22
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

tity,%20privacy%20and%20the%20public%20trust%20%28IP
AA%29%2016%20May%202006.pdf
[28]
A. Hollosi, H. Leitold, and R. Posch, "Die Bürgerkarte: Basis
und Infrastruktur für sicheres e-Government", in Tagungsband
der Arbeitskonferenz Enterprise Security - Unternehmensweite
IT-Sicherheit, P. Horster, ed., Paderborn, Germany: IT-Verlag,
March 2002, pp. 1-12.
[29]
G. Karlinger, D. Konrad and R. Posch, "Weissuch Bürgerkarte",
Version
May
2002,
http://www.buergerkarte.at/regain/file/D:/webs/at.buergerkarte.
downloads/WeissbuchBuergerkarte.20020515.pdf?index=main
[30]
Austrian Federal Chancellery,"Administration on the Net - The
ABC guide of eGovernment in Austria", No. New edition
7/2008, Vienna: Austrian Federal Chancellery, 2008,
http://www.digitales.oesterreich.gv.at/DocView.axd?CobId=193
94
[31]
Heise
Online,
"Österreich
führt
Handy-Signatur
im
E-
Government
ein",
press
release
of
June
07
2010,
http://www.heise.de/newsticker/meldung/Oesterreich-fuehrt-
Handy-Signatur-im-E-Government-ein-1016339.html
[32]
ARGE-Daten - Österreichische Gesellschaft für Datenschutz
(Austrian
Society
for
Pricacy),
"Was
wurde
aus
der
Bürgerkarte", press release of October 5 2006,
http://www2.argedaten.at/php/cms_monitor.php?q=PUB-
TEXT-ARGEDATEN&s=50759zjj
[33]
ORF Futurezone, "E-Voting: Blackbox statt Wahlkabine", press
release
of
May
17
2009,
http://futurezone.orf.at/stories/1603378/
[34]
S. Priglinger, "Auswirkungen der EU-DL Richtlinie auf die E-
Gov-Welt", in Datenschutzrecht und E-Government, D. Jahnel,
ed., Graz, 2008, pp. 267-283.
[35]
eUser study, "Public online services and user orientation -
country brief Austria", 2005, http://tinyurl.com/cj3hus
[36]
Fessel GfK - Institut für Marktforschung Ges.m.b.H. (Institute
for
market
research),"Online
Studie
6
Monitoring
E-
Government",
2006,
http://www.digitales.oesterreich.gv.at/DocView.axd?CobId=218
28
[37]
C. N. M. Pounder, "Nine principles for assessing whether
privacy is protected in a surveillance society", Identity in the
information society (IDIS) vol. 1 (1), 2008, pp. 1-22.
Al URLs last visited on 30.06.2010
23
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

