Exploring Blockchain, Semantics and Decision Support to Optimise Qualification 
Certification, Recruitment and Competency Management: an Assessment of 
Challenges, Current Practices and Opportunities  
Christos Kontzinos 
Decision Support Systems Lab 
National Technical University of Athens 
Athens, Greece 
ckon@epu.ntua.gr  
Panagiotis Kokkinakos 
Decision Support Systems Lab 
National Technical University of Athens 
Athens, Greece 
pkokkinakos@epu.ntua.gr  
Panagiotis Kapsalis 
Decision Support Systems Lab 
National Technical University of Athens 
Athens, Greece 
pkapsalis@epu.ntua.gr  
 
Ourania Markaki 
Decision Support Systems Lab 
National Technical University of Athens 
Athens, Greece 
omarkaki@epu.ntua.gr  
Vagelis Karakolis 
Decision Support Systems Lab 
National Technical University of Athens 
Athens, Greece 
vkarakolis@epu.ntua.gr  
John Psarras 
Decision Support Systems Lab 
National Technical University of Athens 
Athens, Greece 
john@epu.ntua.gr 
Abstract—In the era of digitisation, innovative information and 
communication technologies have transformed many areas and 
domains. The same cannot be said for Higher Education, 
especially as this concerns the certification of degrees, 
qualifications, and other accreditations of students and job 
seekers. Such certificates are still largely in paper form and 
require manual and time-consuming processes for their 
verification. The inability to effectively verify academic skills 
and qualifications also affects labour market processes, such as 
recruitment and competency management. In addition, current 
ICT solutions in the domain do not leverage emerging 
technologies that can offer solutions to existing challenges. 
Innovative technologies such as blockchain can offer an 
additional level of security and traceability of actions and data 
transactions, while semantics can provide the necessary data 
interoperability that is required for more effective analyses of 
data. The computational intelligence found in data analytics and 
decision support systems can facilitate the generation of useful 
knowledge and recommendations, while gamification can be 
used to transform processes, like recruitment, that are normally 
stressful and boring into something that can be intriguing, 
motivating, enjoyable and engaging. As such, this publication 
aims to assess blockchain, semantics, data analytics and 
gamification as four potential game changers that can be used 
to develop innovative solutions in the domain. Under that 
context, the potential of these four technologies will be evaluated 
as well as their current usage in existing solutions in the field. In 
addition, this publication is written under the context of the EU-
funded project QualiChain that aspires to investigate the impact 
of the aforementioned technologies, in the domain of public 
education, as well as the interfaces of the latter with the fields of 
private education, the labour market, and public sector 
administrative procedures. As such, the second part of this 
publication focuses on the prospective QualiChain solution and 
its potential advancements in the four technologies mentioned, 
taking into account the increasing need for digital solutions in 
the domain, as a result of the recent Covid-19 pandemic and the 
emergence of remote working and learning as the new 
paradigm.   
Keywords - higher education; recruitment; competency 
management;  blockchain; semantics; data analytics; decision 
support; gamification; Covid-19. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
When referring to a qualification certificate, the most 
common understanding is a higher education diploma, namely 
a piece of paper that proves the knowledge that has been 
acquired in a scientific field, or the skill to develop a certain 
task [1]. The certification body is the entity that provides a 
certificate for the acquired diploma and is the legal recogniser 
of the knowledge. In most cases, a paper-based education 
certificate denotes that a person has received a specific 
education and may even include information about the 
expected learning outcomes. Education certificates are used 
for various purposes, such as the recognition of the completion 
of a degree and the development of certain skills. 
Although education certificates are being utilised in 
various educational and work-related processes (e.g., 
individuals’ admission in other educational and training 
programmes, personnel recruitment), they are largely resisting 
the pull of technology. In particular, such certificates are still 
192
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

held in diverse formats in siloed databases and usually their 
verification requires paper documentation and extremely 
time-consuming manual processes [2]. Moreover, most HEIs 
(Higher 
Education 
Institutions) 
operate 
in 
isolated 
environments instead of collaborating with the respective 
industry that their graduates are projected to join. As such, in 
most cases there are no tools that can facilitate the transition 
of a person from being a student to a job seeker and the 
connection between academic institutions and the labour 
market is in most cases non-existent. Consequently, there is a 
clear lack of a trustworthy and automatic solution when it 
comes to archiving, managing and verifying educational 
qualifications that can operate in various settings and provide 
added value to users. 
The slow digitisation of the education sector [3] in 
conjunction with the lack of suitable ICT (Information and 
Communication Technologies) solutions for the verification 
of academic credentials, results in the holders of such titles 
being dependent from issuing/accrediting authorities every 
time they want to verify their degrees. This fact does not only 
affect academic institutions but also private and public 
organisations in their tasks that are related to HR (Human 
Resources). For instance, recruitment in an organisation 
requires from the recruiters to examine hundreds of 
candidates’ résumés, filter out the unqualified ones and 
identify the candidates whose qualifications and degrees 
should be validated. However, difficulties in the public and 
private sector also extend to a wider set of processes that 
follow contracting activities, indicatively encompassing 
personnel allocation and re-allocation, staff mobility, and 
skills’ development and evaluation. What the aforementioned 
challenges have in common is the general lack of digital 
equivalents for academic and other qualifications that can be 
validated by universities, recruiters, public and private 
organisations without the involvement of the issuing 
authority. In fact, the recent Covid-19 pandemic made such 
challenges even more apparent, since the general lockdown in 
most countries also affected the administrative bodies of 
universities that have the task of issuing a student’s academic 
qualifications 
in 
a 
verifiable 
form. 
Under 
normal 
circumstances paper-based qualifications are indeed an 
inconvenience. However, the lack of verifiable digital 
certificates during the pandemic affected many students, job 
seekers and employers who had no other way to receive or 
verify a university degree and other types of academic 
credentials, which had a negative impact in student mobility, 
recruitment and competency management. 
Solutions to the aforementioned difficulties require 
fundamental changes in work practices and processes that 
extend beyond the transformation of the recruitment 
procedure and trace back to not only the way education and 
employment credentials are archived, managed, and used, but 
also the way the educational and other accrediting 
organisations operate. Disruptive technologies, such as 
blockchain, algorithmic techniques, data analytics and 
semantics as well as concepts like gamification have the 
potential to provide solutions to these challenges. More 
specifically, blockchain, as a decentralised and unalterable 
store of information can help with the archiving and trust 
issues, as well as provide a frictionless method for transacting 
with others. At the same time computational intelligence has 
the potential to facilitate decision making and optimise work 
practices and procedures. 
In order to fully understand and assess the value that the 
combination of the abovementioned technologies could 
provide, it is essential to evaluate similar frameworks and 
tools that are being utilised by higher education and the labour 
market to provide solutions for the validation of certificates, 
the recruitment, and the competency management. This paper 
presents a state-of-play analysis of 19 tools and frameworks 
used in these domains. This analysis was performed under the 
context of the EU (European Union) funded project 
QualiChain, whose goal is to combine blockchain, semantics 
and other technologies to provide a holistic, trustworthy and 
automatic solution in the challenges presented above. 
Section I introduces the scope of this paper by presenting 
the current landscape and the challenges arising from the lack 
of technical solutions for qualification certification. Section II 
focuses on the potential of blockchain, semantics, data 
analytics and gamification to revolutionise Qualification 
Certification, Recruitment and Competency Management. 
Section III presents the QualiChain project and describes the 
platform’s functionalities. Section IV presents the criteria 
used for the analysis and provides a short description of each 
tool and framework that was analysed, while Section V 
presents the conclusions of the analysis. Section VI includes 
an assessment of how the Covid-19 pandemic affected higher 
education and the labour market. Section VII presents the 
advancements of QualiChain that can potentially disrupt and 
revolutionise the aforementioned domains. Finally, Section 
VIII concludes the document and provides ideas for future 
work. 
II. 
TECHNOLOGIES POTENTIAL FOR QUALIFICATION 
CERTIFICATION, RECRUITMENT AND COMPETENCY 
MANAGEMENT 
In this section, four core technologies, i.e., blockchain, 
semantics, data analytics and gamification are discussed, 
focusing on the potential they bring to Qualification 
Certification, Recruitment, and Competency Management. 
The purpose of this section in not to perform a State-of-the-
Art analysis but to discuss on the benefits and risks that these 
technologies bring with their application in the domains that 
are discussed. 
A. Blockchain 
Blockchain is a decentralised, permanent, and unalterable 
information storage technology that offers trusted archiving, 
and a frictionless method for information transactions and 
verification [4]. In blockchain, trust is ensured via 
cryptographic algorithms and mathematical methods based 
on achieving system consensus and not a centralised 
authority. A distributed approach can also greatly improve 
data safety as there is no single point of failure. As such, 
blockchain can improve the entire management of the 
certification lifecycle, including the archiving, management 
and verification processes [5]. Consequently, HEIs, 
193
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

recruiting companies, public and private organisations can 
take advantage of this technology to setup distributed 
platforms for storing, sharing and verifying academic and 
employment qualifications. Decentralisation also means that 
users (i.e., students, job seekers, employees) will have 
ownership of their data by keeping a decentralised copy that 
they can manage as they like. Moreover, through the use of 
blockchain, verification can become more secure, traceable 
and transparent for the benefit of all stakeholders involved 
(learners, education bodies, educators, and employers). In 
addition, via the use of automatic functions called smart 
contracts verification could be automated based on a set of 
parameters/attributes set by the issuer [6]. Secure and instant 
online 
certificate 
verification 
can 
enable 
the 
disintermediation of the process, bypassing third-party 
mediators and improving efficiency of dependent processes. 
Blockchain technology enables self-sovereignty and identity 
management as it introduces the ability to track transactions 
in a transparent and immutable manner, thus addressing the 
existing issues with trust and provenance management. 
Due to the availability of existing and demonstrated 
methods, the risks introduced by this technology are low and 
mostly limited to scalability issues, since none of the existing 
demonstrators have yet been tested to provide the desired 
functionality for more than a few thousand users. However, 
the recent Covid-19 pandemic and the increasing needs from 
education technical solutions make this limitation even more 
relevant. Also, especially, in the EU, the GDPR (General 
Data Protection Regulation) has introduced some limitations 
that mainly concern a user’s right to data deletion, or “the 
right to be forgotten” [7]. As blockchain is immutable 
(meaning that data cannot be deleted from the system) most 
approaches in the research bibliography bypass this challenge 
by keeping personal and transaction data off the ledger and 
using the blockchain to store the transaction hash [8][9][10]. 
As any other technology that is still in its infancy stage, other 
unknown risks that can expose blockchain to unexpected 
security issues might also emerge and therefore risk 
assessment is necessary for any technical solution based on 
blockchain.  
B. Semantics 
The Semantic Web is an idea proposed by World Wide 
Web inventor Tim Berners-Lee and is based on creating 
machine-readable relationships between data instead of only 
between the files, in which they are contained [11]. Semantics 
can be applied in various subject areas to model domain-
specific terms and organise data into information and 
knowledge. This can limit overall complexity of the data 
from a machine’s standpoint that can help overcome many 
challenges that stem from heterogeneous data sources, lack 
of data interoperability, and multilinguality. For example, in 
a higher education setting this means that degrees and other 
education certificates could be represented by knowledge on 
the learning outcomes and skills associated with said 
certificate. This could greatly improve student mobility and 
bypass procedures such as translation and verification. In 
addition, in recent years many initiatives have combined 
semantics with blockchain to overcome the issues of 
centralization and security that come with the semantic web. 
Verifiable semantic certificates (combining both blockchain 
and semantic technologies) could enable a learner-controlled 
and trustable educational ecosystem by promoting and 
enforcing semantic interoperability through domain-specific 
standards and ontologies (including a blockchain ontology). 
In fact, new approaches and applications can build on and 
extend existing ontologies such as the EthOn Ethereum 
Ontology for Blockchain [12] (which is still a valuable 
vocabulary independently of the Ethereum solution, thus is 
not limited to one platform), the JSON-LD-enabling Open 
Badges Vocabulary [13], and the SARO Skills and 
Recruitment Ontology [14] to model professional skills, 
skillsets, awarding bodies, certifiers and other relevant 
concepts.  
The integration of semantics in blockchain, especially in 
an education or professional setting can revolutionise and 
disrupt the domain. Educational or professional certificates 
stored in a blockchain can potentially include annotations 
linking them to specific skills in a remote repository. At the 
same time, the same skills vocabularies can be used to 
represent skillsets that are routinely observed, through NLP 
(Natural Language Processing) and IE (Information 
Extraction), in relation to open positions in the job market 
(identified in published online job profiles). The use of the 
same vocabularies to describe both certification and skillsets 
required by the job market will enable a number of innovative 
scenarios. Standards-compliant semantic representations of 
educational achievements will collectively be exploited to 
suggest to employers, the best matching employee for a new 
position, and also suggest career development path to 
employees (including suitable courses and training 
programs).  
On the other hand, the reliance on NLP, IE, and limited 
supervision may introduce a certain degree of automation 
errors that will to an extent or another impact the reliability 
of the most innovative applications, e.g., identification of 
ideal job candidates, suggestion of courses and career 
pathways. In addition, the need to securely access and obtain 
knowledge from various sources (including blockchain) 
iteratively to arrive at these smart suggestions can introduce 
scalability issues. Solving these solutions might require 
balancing a trade-off benefiting either time (quicker results) 
or broadness (more in-depth or precise results), thus also 
limiting the short-term innovation potential. However, the 
extra possibilities made available through those innovative 
technologies make them worthy of exploring.  
C. Data Analytics and Decision Support 
Data analytics allows applications to perform queries and 
data processing activities in a given set of data. The general 
goal is to build new knowledge out of data and thereby add 
value to it. New advancement in data science allow the 
194
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

development of tools that can perform freeform queries and 
data analytics on millions of rows of data thus expanding the 
potential use cases that can be derived from such technical 
solutions. 
In the context of an education or professional setting, 
these analyses have the potential to enlarge the scope of 
possibilities. For instance, the ability to analyse the status of 
an employee and personal progress trends could then be used 
to predict future possible positions. Alternatively, by 
applying MCDSS (Multi-Criteria Decision Support Systems) 
on the analysed data, employees could make more informed 
recruitment decisions based on a given set of parameters. In 
the case of a student, the current courses and skills in their 
educational profile can be used to make suggestions on 
additional courses and other learning activities based on a 
desired career path. In this case, data analytics could be 
combined with domain-specific semantic vocabularies to 
make more accurate and informed suggestions based on 
emerging skills and labour market trends and requirements as 
it will make dataset combinations easier. The same principles 
could be applied by a HEI to update an education curriculum 
based on emerging topics and technologies. Another example 
could be a match for the HR predictive analysis based on 
historical data of competencies and by following a prediction 
model. When analysing large amounts of historical data, 
technical solutions can also leverage advancements in ML 
(Machine Learning) that allows the creation of prediction 
models that are constantly trained and improved by the 
incoming streams of historical and open data. In general, data 
analytics can provide several value-added services such as 
intelligent 
profiling, 
career 
counselling, 
recruitment, 
competency evaluation or even consulting and decision 
support. Technically, a large range of ready-to-use methods 
and algorithms that are able to perform a wide panel of 
analytics are already available and free to use. For instance, 
one could have access to clustering libraries and methods [15] 
or open-source ML tools [16].  
On the other hand, when designing data analytics and 
DSS 
(Decision 
Support 
Systems) 
applications, 
the 
complexity of deploying the required solutions to perform the 
envisioned analyses has to be taken into account from the 
beginning, and more specifically at the time of the added-
value services definition and description. In other words, the 
decision support that an application will provide must be 
defined before setting out the analytics component and 
algorithms. This means that changes in a system’s added-
value services might cause delays in development. In 
addition, Machine Learning methods can be resource-
consuming and might lead to less accurate results when not 
run on large servers. Therefore, especially when dealing with 
historical data in order to provide prediction services, the 
resources needed can impact the quality of the output even 
when efficient and parsimonious methods are used. Finally, 
data analytics on the semantic layer rely on a sufficient 
amount of semantic or structured data. Therefore, it remains 
a risk that despite the analytics methods being robust and 
effective, they might not produce the desired result due to 
insufficient data (e.g., lack of training data in the right 
format).  
D. Gamification 
Gamification is an effective design strategy to insert game 
mechanics into existing contexts. Under the context of this 
publication, gamification can be applied in competency 
management to transform processes, like recruitment, that are 
normally stressful and boring into something that can be 
intriguing, motivating, enjoyable and engaging. Another 
benefit is the possibility to address the complex process of 
competency 
evaluation, 
which, 
by 
using 
different 
gamification techniques, can become simpler. Gamification is 
a great way for employees to receive constant, up to date, and 
automatic feedback that is useful to be applied in the 
competency retention process, where employees can see how 
they are doing compared to benchmarks they had set for 
themselves in the past, or compared to other individuals and 
teams in the organisation. In the learning process, increasing 
the levels of engagement will lead to an increase in recall and 
retention, so the learner is able to have a fun experience and 
still learn the subject in question. A gamification approach can 
be used as an effective and informal learning environment, to 
help learners practice real life situations and challenges in a 
safe environment. When gamification is executed correctly, it 
is a win-win situation for everyone involved. Working against 
personal benchmarks, being recognised for a job well-done, 
etc., gamification can be used to meet various needs within the 
organisation. Combined with the ability to view feedback at 
any given time, gamification allows everyone, and not only 
those at the top of the leaderboard, to enjoy the possibility of 
improving their performance. 
Although gamification is a powerful business strategy that 
can provide useful information and yield positive returns, it 
has some risks and potential negative consequences involved. 
Having a poor design is a major risk and can waste money and 
time. Consequently, it is essential to thoroughly understand 
who the users are and what motivates them. Through 
regarding mechanisms such as rewarding and leaderboards, 
sometimes companies risk rewarding ineffective collaborators 
while punishing valuable ones, or adding a leaderboard to a 
useless task, which will not enhance the quality of the task 
itself.  Additionally, competition between employees can be 
good for output but could lead to hostility or tension between 
individuals if it is not monitored correctly. Promising 
extraordinary rewards can set up unrealistic expectations. 
Although rewards can be used to strongly motivate an 
employee, it is important that the provided rewards are 
sustainable. Also, the demand for rewards can increase over 
time. If an employee becomes accustomed to a reward, they 
may lose motivation if new and better incentives are not 
added. There are several gamification frameworks that aid in 
this process to guarantee that the final solution is not only 
effective but also sustainable. 
III. 
THE QUALICHAIN CONCEPT 
QualiChain is a project that aspires to investigate the 
impact of disruptive technologies, i.e., blockchain, semantics, 
195
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

data analytics and gamification in the domain of public 
education, as well as the interfaces of the latter with the fields 
of private education, the labour market, and public sector 
administrative procedures. The concept of the project lies in 
applying the aforementioned technologies for the design, 
implementation, piloting, and thorough evaluation of the 
QualiChain technological solution, namely a distributed 
platform that targets the storage, service, and verification of 
academic and employment qualifications [17]. Besides the 
verification of educational and professional certificates, 
QualiChain aims to build manifold tools that could potentially 
provide solutions to the major challenged of the fields of 
education and labour market. Actually, its services are 
structured across the following to pillars, i.e., baseline and 
value adding services. Baseline services are grounded upon 
blockchain and semantics and enable the archiving, storage, 
and verification of educational awards and qualifications. In 
fact, they enable also the equivalence verification of 
certificates as well as qualifications’ portfolio management. 
Value adding services will build upon the baseline ones and 
will leverage the computational intelligence and gamification 
techniques to offer more advanced services, such career 
counselling, intelligent profiling, competency management, 
and recruitment and evaluation support. 
IV. 
RELATED TOOLS AND FRAMEWORKS 
This section pertains the comparative analysis of the 
current state of practices regarding tools, methods, and 
frameworks, similar to QualiChain that are used in education, 
public administration, and commercial applications. All the 
presented tools and frameworks have already been released 
for use. Furthermore, they are not expected to include every 
projected function of QualiChain due to the fact that their 
scope is much more specific. A comparison on the state-of-
play of the functionalities and technical capabilities included 
in such systems can facilitate the identification of innovative 
ideas or potential shortcoming of the existing solutions. 
A. Comparison Criteria 
 The criteria used for this comparative analysis represent 
the high-level technical capabilities of the various modules of 
the QualiChain platform and are the following: 
1. Target users: Τhis part of the analysis will help 
understand whether all the potential stakeholders have 
been identified. 
2. Blockchain usage/Data security: Identify the solutions 
that leverage blockchain or other data security methods. 
3. Personalisation approach: This criterion will facilitate the 
comparison of approaches that make the tools more user-
centric.  
4. Use of Semantics/Data interoperability: Distil the tools 
that provide the capability for data analytics and in less 
innovative solutions other searchable interfaces as well as 
the available pool of data. 
5. Gamification approach: Identify approaches that increase 
user engagement. 
6. Qualification certification and Multilinguality: Identify 
tools that certify qualifications. Two important sub-
criteria here further divide the tools into automatic and 
non-automatic and examine whether they are capable to 
translate degrees in multiple languages. 
7. Recruitment & Competency Management: This criterion 
pertains to the solutions that offer to organisations the 
ability to perform various HR related tasks. 
8. Open 
source/APIs 
(Application 
Programming 
Interfaces): Identify the openness of each tool and the 
potential to create synergies with QualiChain. 
B. Selected Tools & Indicative Analysis Tables 
The tools and frameworks analysed under the context of 
this publication were the following: 
1. Qualification Check [18] (tool): This tool offers a global 
solution for qualification verifications and is supported 
by a team of multilingual education experts. It provides 
qualification validation so that the organisations are 
protected from the damaging effects of credentials fraud. 
2. Recognition Finder [19] (tool and framework): This tool 
facilitates the recognition of foreign professional 
qualifications in Germany. It provides invaluable 
information about the legal foundations, the recognition 
procedures for individual occupations, and the available 
counselling services. The tool finds the competent 
authority that the user needs to contact for the respective 
occupation. 
3. ECTS (European Credit Transfer & Accumulation) 
System [20] (credit and grading system): ECTS is a 
credit system designed to help students move between 
organisations of different countries. Credits are based on 
the learning achievements and workload of a course, and 
hence a student can transfer their ECTS credits from one 
university to another, so that they add up to contribute to 
an individual's degree programme or training. 
4. UHR Recognition of foreign qualifications [21] (tool and 
framework): The Swedish Council for Higher Education 
evaluates foreign qualifications to support people that 
look for work in Sweden, wish to continue studying, or 
wish to employ someone with foreign qualifications. 
This tool includes an online application through which 
users can apply for an evaluation and recognition of 
qualifications; however, the validation is not performed 
automatically. 
5. ServiceNow [22] (tool): The ServiceNow module offers 
an expansive portfolio of training offerings across 
Information Technology (IT), HR, Customer Service, 
and other departments that cover the Now Platform (HR 
and workflow organisation platform for enterprises). It 
also provides certifications upon mastering new features 
offered in the latest release of the platform, micro-
certifications on a variety of subjects, and verification of 
certifications 
received 
through 
the 
ServiceNow 
platform.  
6. Teacher Certification [23] (framework): This framework 
of the British Columbia provides a number of services, 
such as certification services, criminal record checks, 
and fee information, to UK (United Kingdom) Ministry-
196
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

certified educators. It includes complete instructions 
regarding 
certification 
offices, 
pertinent 
e-mail 
addresses, and the methodological steps that a teacher 
should follow to complete a certain task.  
7. DegreeVerify [24] (tool): This tool provides immediate 
online verifications of college degrees and attendance. It 
provides prompt access to degree and attendance records 
and eliminates the complications and delays associated 
with manual processing by individual schools. It can also 
reduce the risk of making bad hiring decisions and 
ensure that only verified eligible student customers are 
eligible for receiving offers from prospective employers. 
8. WES (World Education Services) Degree Equivalency 
Tool [25] (tool): This tool compares a user’s education 
credentials to Canadian and US standards. It allows a 
user to select the country they have studied in and enter 
their credentials. Then the tool shows the degree 
equivalency. This tool estimates the degree equivalency 
instead of replacing an official evaluation. 
9. HEDD (Higher Education Degree Datacheck) [26] 
(tool): HEDD is UK’s official degree verification tool 
and is used by organisations, institutions, and 
universities to verify degrees. HEDD cannot be used by 
students or graduates to verify their own degrees, and 
hence the organisation using the tool’s services needs to 
request a proof of consent from the individual. 
10. NOKUT Recognition of foreign education in Norway 
[27] (framework): This framework helps institutions, 
organisations, and universities to validate foreign higher 
education degrees,  vocational education, and training 
certifications. It includes an exhaustive list of regulated 
professions and industries and a list of recognition 
authorities that users of the system need to contact to get 
recognised in Norway. 
11. Vitnemalsportalen Diploma registry [28] (tool): This 
registry is a Norwegian service that helps users to 
automatically collect results from higher education 
institutions in Norway and share them with potential 
employers, educational institutions, and other relevant 
recipients. All transmissions are encrypted and only the 
sender can decide who they want to share their data with. 
12. e-CF 2.0 Profiling tool [29] (tool): This tool aims to 
bring to life the content of e-CF version 3.0 and provide 
linkage to the EU ICT Professional profiles. It helps 
users build their own job and education profiles and 
provides comparisons between users’ created profiles 
and established ICT professional profiles to support skill 
gap identification. The tool also supports multiple 
languages. 
13. CEPIS e-Competence Benchmark [30] (tool): This tool 
facilitates the evaluation of ICT professionals’ skills, 
based on the e-CF. It compares ICT professionals’ 
competences with those required for a range of European 
ICT professional profiles. This helps individuals to plan 
their career development and make more informed 
decisions about further education. 
14. e-Competences assessment and certification assessment 
[31] (tool): This tool allows users to create their own 
professional profile, find the best matching ICT profiles, 
and choose the certificates that could help them achieve 
their goals. It also provides users with the following three 
functionalities; a self-assessment tool, a comparison of 
e-competence related certificates, and an e-competence 
demand and supply calculator. 
15. IT Staffing Nederland [32] (tool): This tool is embedding 
the European Competence Framework in their recruiting 
and matching systems in order to achieve better 
transparency and quality. This tool takes advantage of 
semantics for translation of ICT texts into digital e-
competences and provides transparency to better 
interpret job descriptions, vacancy texts, incoming CVs, 
and training materials. 
16. Blockcerts [33] (tool): Blockcerts is an open standard for 
creating, issuing, viewing, and verifying blockchain-
based certificates. These digital certificates are 
cryptographically signed, tamper-proof, shareable, and 
registered on a blockchain. The goal is to allow 
individuals to possess and share their own official 
records. 
17. Diplome [34] (tool): Diplome is a blockchain-based 
credential evaluation service that generates a “certificate 
wallet”, in which users can upload their qualifications. 
This tool facilitates the enrolment in foreign universities 
and helps individual enter the labour market in a foreign 
country. Diplome is a global ecosystem that can be used 
by authorities and institutions to securely and 
unchangeably register education/training documents, 
guaranteeing their transferability and authenticity. 
18. LinkChain [35] (tool): LinkChain is a Blockchain-
enabled Linked Data Platform that provides certificate 
equivalence verification, credential auditing and 
verification while supporting multi-lingual capabilities. 
19. Blockchain for Education [36] (tool): This tool, which is 
part of a platform that is in development, enables learners 
to present their digital certificates and supports 
certification authorities in the management and 
archiving of digital certificates. It relies on blockchain to 
enable tamper-proof archiving of certificates and their 
correct allocation to the learners. The existing in-use tool 
relies on Open Badges and uses JSON/JSON-LD for 
metadata and as a basis for querying (verification 
purposes). 
For the analysis of the tools and frameworks that are 
presented above, the following tables (Fig. 1) were used to 
describe the general functionality of each tool, the 
technologies implemented in it and the added value that they 
provide to users.  
197
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
Figure 1. Analysis table. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Comparison table. 
 
 
Following the previous analysis, a comparison table was 
created that analyses each tool according to the criteria 
described in Section IV.A. An indicative section of the 
comparison table is shown in Fig. 2. The full table is not 
presented in this body of work in its entirety, due to space 
limitations. The main objective of this table was to help draw 
the conclusions that will be presented in Section V. 
V. 
ANALYSIS OF RESULTS 
This section will conclude on the approaches that were 
analysed and the potential position of QualiChain in the 
domains of Qualification Certification and Human Resource 
Management. The conclusions will be based on the eight 
criteria that were defined for the comparative matrix as well 
as the overall added value of the presented tools. 
The target users are actually the only criterion where no 
significant differences among the various approaches can be 
noted. Since the tools presented are tailored for stakeholders 
of the domain of education, the domain the job market/HR 
management or a combination of both, there is no doubt that 
the target users are like those of QualiChain. Identified target 
users include students, job seekers, employers, private and 
public organisations, government agencies, education 
providers, regulators, HR teams and recruitment firms. This 
gives credence to QualiChain’s approach for stakeholder 
identification and proves that the list of QualiChain 
stakeholders is exhaustive and complete. 
Concerning other criteria, the analysis revealed that only 4 
out of the 19 tools (Blockcerts, Diplome, LinkChain, 
Blockchain for Education) leverage Blockchain ledgers and 
decentralised standards for the purposes of record keeping, 
issuing and verification of certifications. While blockchains 
are harder to implement than more traditional databases, their 
capabilities for secure distribution of certificates, security, 
data privacy, and immutability are considered to be of 
paramount importance for the minimisation of fraud around 
educational and other certificates. In addition, considering the 
approaches that did not use blockchain, only 2 (Qualification 
Check, DegreeVerify) keep records of transactions and 1 
(Vitnemalsportalen) provides any level of security by adding 
digital signatures on documents. 
Regarding semantics and data interoperability, of all the 
tools that were presented, only 4 took them into account. In 
particular, IT Staffing Nederland applies semantic software 
that translates ICT texts into digital e-competencies while 
Diplome applies other standards of interoperability on the 
data. On the other hand, Blockchain for Education, offers 
JSON-LD support, which can provide the required 
verification methodology. Furthermore, LinkChain is 
projected to be fully semantic and support public and private 
RDF. Moreover, 4 solutions had minor data analytics 
capabilities, mainly to match a student’s/job seeker’s profile 
with the skills required for a given position. Finally, 6 out of 
the 19 approaches provided some data structure coupled with 
searchable registries for the user’s convenience. However, 
except for LinkChain the rest of the approaches do not provide 
any automatic capabilities for analysis. 
The level of personalisation that each tool provides was 
also used as a criterion. The results here are quite positive 
given that 8 approaches provide some level of personalisation. 
For instance, ECTS makes learning more user-centred by 
using credits as currency. Additionally, WES offers digital 
badges used to display verified credentials on social media, 
such as LinkedIn. Moreover, tools powered by the European 
e-Competence Framework, enable users to develop their 
profiles based on preferred orientation and competence gap 
analyses. Finally, the approaches that leverage the blockchain 
technology, i.e., Blockcerts, Diplome, and LinkChain, provide 
users with a valid and verifiable certificate/qualifications 
wallet. 
Concerning gamification, there are no tools that can 
provide a clear solution. There are a few tools that provide 
some degree of informal gamification with credits and digital 
badges. However, the overall conclusion is that the 
community does not really consider it to be that important for 
the developed tools. Given that most of the tools are free of 
charge and offer solutions of low technical capabilities that are 
198
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

realistically applied in Niche markets, it makes sense that 
gamification is not a priority. 
The main criteria used for the analysis revolve around the 
two main high-level functionalities that QualiChain will aims 
to provide, i.e., Qualification Certification and Recruitment/ 
Competency Management. One clear division between the 
various tools concerns the level of automation that they 
provide. Only 4 out of the 19 solutions help users navigate 
through the various procedures that they will have to follow 
in order to get certified in a given country or domain, instead 
of automatically validating their qualifications. 
All the other solutions provide various levels of 
automation and will be assessed according to the actual added 
value that they offer to the entire end-to-end procedure of 
either 
Qualification 
Certification 
or 
Recruitment/ 
Competency Management. Starting from Recruitment/ 
Competency Management, no tools were found that offer 
holistic solutions in a pan-European level. In particular, while 
the majority of solutions offer solid functionalities that can 
help the HR teams of organisations make strategic decisions, 
tools like NOKUT (Norway) mainly apply to a specific 
country and other tools (i.e., e-CF 2.0 profiling tool, CEPIS e-
Competence benchmark, e-Competences assessment and 
certification assessment and IT staffing Nederland) can be 
applied only for ICT positions and organisations. On the other 
hand, platforms like LinkChain have the potential to support 
external analytics and serve as a data backend for qualification 
analysis, opportunity identification, competency development 
and evaluation, etc. 
On the contrary, regarding the domain of Qualification 
Certification, there are a number of solutions that provide 
added value in every step of the process. Tools such as 
Qualification Check, ECTS, Blockcerts, Diplome, LinkChain, 
and Blockchain for Education are considered to be holistic 
solutions that automatically handle every step of the process. 
In fact, some of these tools have already been adopted by 
multiple countries. However, there are still solutions that are 
country specific (i.e., Vitnemalsportalen, DegreeVerify), do 
not offer the full range of functionalities for every type of user 
(HEDD) or offer micro-accreditations for expertise in specific 
platforms and tools (ServiceNow). Moreover, only five of the 
presented approaches support Multilinguality and only three 
of them, namely NOKUT, Diplome, LinkChain, offer 
functionalities for both Qualification Certification and 
Recruitment/Competency 
Management. 
According 
to 
QualiChain, having both services seamlessly operate in a 
single platform has the potential to further connect high-level 
education with the job market. This will help each domain 
learn from the other and also help students, job seekers, but 
also organisation to make more informed decisions. Finally, 
the fact that 8 out of the 19 tools provide APIs that allow them 
to connect with other systems can potentially help QualiChain 
synergise with them. 
All in all, most of the tools that were analysed are either 
commercial applications or country/domain-specific and are 
usually focused on specific functionalities that are useful in 
some steps of the processes required by students, job seekers, 
educational institutions and organisations of all types. This 
gives credence to QualiChain’s holistic approach and proves 
that there is indeed a vacuum on the market of the domains 
tackled by the project. In fact, not only does QualiChain aim 
to fill a void in the market (that is made even more apparent 
from the Covid-19 pandemic) but also to advance the state-of-
the-art by developing a holistic platform that provides open 
semantic interoperability and data privacy building on and 
extending the research in blockchain, semantics, data 
analytics and gamification. 
VI. 
REFLECTIONS ON THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC 
The Covid-19 pandemic disrupted many facets of 
everyday life, especially those that require the physical 
presence of people for their completion. Higher Education 
institutions managed to adjust to the new conditions by taking 
advantage of online communication tools for teaching 
courses, organising exams, and communicating with students 
for various issues. Several members of the team had first-
hand experience on this change, as they are university 
professors. While such tools allowed universities to continue 
their academic activities, they also uncovered a number of 
challenges. For example, during exams, students were 
requested to identify themselves via webcam and by also 
providing a form of identification to the persons responsible 
for this process. Given that this had to be done for every 
student individually, it required from students to be present 
for a longer time during the exam, and a greater 
administrative effort from the school, leading to some general 
dissatisfaction. Furthermore, there were some data protection 
issues stemming from some of the online communication 
platforms that were brought forth. Moreover, universities had 
to face challenges regarding the issuance and verification of 
degrees and other forms of qualifications such as letters of 
recommendation. During the quarantine period of the 
pandemic, university administrative bodies operated in a very 
limited capacity. Despite this fact, students required their 
services for various reasons such as issuance of their degree 
or a letter of recommendation from professors so that they 
could keep pursuing professional opportunities. The lack of 
dedicated ICT infrastructures and the fact that degrees and 
other forms of qualification still require time consuming 
processes and are still largely produced/published in paper 
form delayed students a great deal. The same is true for 
employers and recruiters concerning the verification of 
educational credentials during recruitment processes.  
On another note, during the pandemic, students and 
lifelong learners started taking more online courses as an 
addition to the knowledge received from the school as well 
as due to the increased opportunities presented to them by 
various open universities that operate online. While such 
courses do provide official qualifications after completion of 
a course, students in this case end up possessing multiple 
heterogeneous qualifications in a fragmented form. What 
they are missing is the capacity to showcase such 
qualifications in a professional profile by also providing 
proof of their authenticity. 
199
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

It is obvious from the above that the Covid-19 pandemic 
made more apparent some of the issues and challenges 
mentioned in the previous sub-chapters. Given that we are 
now facing a new reality in everyday life and great 
uncertainty concerning the end of it, new innovative solutions 
must be generated to address the challenges that arise from 
this situation. Blockchain is a technology that is ideally 
situated right now as far as its level of maturity and the 
solutions that it can bring regarding the verification of 
identities, degrees, and other forms of qualifications. In fact, 
by also enhancing identity management systems with 
blockchain, people can have every form of identity gathered 
and validated in a single digital wallet that they can use to 
access online services taking advantage of the SSI (Self-
Sovereign Identity) paradigm. Under the same logic, 
verification of degrees can become a one-time process that 
generates a digital degree and proof of the verification 
process that students and graduates can then share with other 
universities, employers, etc. If a prospective employer wishes 
to review the authenticity of a degree, they will be able to do 
so via the hash of the respective block and blockchain’s 
algorithmic processes for validation of documents. The same 
is true for online and other forms of micro-accreditations that 
students receive from open universities and other online 
courses by implementing smart badge endorsement. In fact, 
by reengineering most forms of qualifications as smart 
badges, students and job seekers will possess a personal 
profile of verified credentials and qualifications making them 
easier to manage and share. Finally, it is hoped that digitising 
the aforementioned processes will make it easier to build 
added-value services on top of them bringing forth a new age 
in qualification validation. 
VII. POTENTIAL ADVANCEMENTS FOR QUALICHAIN 
A key insight, which informs multiple aspects of 
QualiChain, is that the value of innovation in the education 
and employment sphere resides in network effects. An 
innovation may be ground-breaking in its own right, but if it 
does not play well with everything else taking place in the 
same domain, it does not add any value. The stereotypical 
example is perhaps the invention of the telephone – until 
there were two telephones, working to a common standard, 
the invention was valueless. Education and employment 
involve a highly diverse range of stakeholders, with different 
(if often complementary) interests and desires, and with 
different information needs. To add value in this area, an 
innovation must fit into the network of stakeholders and their 
interactions and contribute across perspectives. Most of the 
solutions identified in this publication are commercial or 
country/domain-specific and focus on specific steps of the 
relevant processes. The vision of QualiChain spans across 
education and employment and aims explicitly to address 
issues from multiple stakeholder perspectives in order to 
maximise the value added across the domain. The technical 
philosophy is centred on standards and interoperability – 
working along with existing and emerging technologies and 
approaches, both to increase adoption and also to deliver the 
radical vision of the project in an effective and sustainable 
way.  
Blockchain, semantics, data analytics and DSS, and 
gamification are the four core technologies/concepts that 
have been identified as potentially ground-breaking in the 
education and employment sector. As such, the potential 
advancements of QualiChain for each of the aforementioned 
will be presented in the following sub-sections  
A. Blockchain 
Educational 
credentials 
and 
achievements, 
job 
applications, professional development records, and so on, 
can each contain various forms of personal information. 
While it is important to honestly share details that are 
relevant, e.g., in an application, it is also important that 
personal data is protected so that it is only used when 
necessary and by the smallest audience necessary. There are 
established practices for privacy and data protection in the 
non-blockchain case. When it comes to blockchain 
applications, the best practice is still emerging. QualiChain 
will go beyond the SotA (State of the Art) by making sure 
that users have control of their data directly in a personal data 
store, with self-sovereign distributed identifiers generated 
and used as needed. Blockchain records will ensure that user-
held data can be proven to be genuine and unmodified 
without any need for the user to relinquish control. Existing 
solutions do not provide this combination of security and 
control while maintaining verifiability. 
Furthermore, existing solutions using blockchains to 
guarantee immutability of data tend to be application-
specific. In order to implement the semantic approach to 
QualiChain, it will be more efficient to extend existing work 
among the consortium into a general-purpose platform for 
Linked Data and blockchains supporting the private or public 
storage and sharing of Linked Data with secure provenance 
and verifiability, coupled with self-sovereign identifiers. This 
represents a significant advance on the SotA, with 
applications beyond education and employment, contributing 
to the development of a decentralised trust layer for the Web 
in general. The increased possibilities this makes available 
have the potential, in the longer term, to feed back to 
education and employment in the form of a wider range of 
both verifiable and non-verifiable datasets across diverse 
domains, which can be integrated with, e.g., qualifications, to 
derive further network effects and new unforeseen services 
for learners, educators, employers and recruiters. 
Finally, regarding the legal and ethical compliance of the 
project with the GDPR, QualiChain has already performed a 
comprehensive analysis of the European legal and ethical 
landscape and has produced the necessary forms for informed 
consent/assent and risk assessment. In fact, QualiChain aims 
to generate a roadmap that can extend beyond the domain of 
education to help developers of blockchain solutions more 
easily navigate the legal landscape and achieve GDPR 
200
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

compliance. As such, QualiChain’s outputs advancing the 
SotA are the following: 
• 
Personal 
datastore-based 
blockchain 
system 
for 
credentials 
• 
Self-sovereign identities in qualifications and Human 
Resources 
• 
Recommendations for data protection best practice for 
blockchain applications 
B. Semantics 
The design of the Semantic Web and Linked Data is built 
around 
the 
assumption 
that 
data 
sources 
operate 
independently and organically, and that data integration and 
communication is best handled in a lightweight manner by 
encouraging the use of common vocabularies and providing 
the ability to relate post-hoc different vocabularies and 
schemas.  
QualiChain will make use of semantic technologies 
throughout, and will, wherever possible, make use of existing 
standard 
ontologies 
and 
vocabularies 
to 
maximise 
interoperability with existing systems. Ontologies developed 
for the project will be designed with reuse in mind and will 
be shared and promoted in order to encourage this. Where 
QualiChain needs to work with existing non-semantic 
systems, standard mechanisms for mapping to other data 
models will be used and will themselves be open for reuse 
outside of the project. The overall goal is to ensure that 
integrating QualiChain with other platforms is as 
straightforward as possible, and to encourage and support the 
adoption of semantic interoperability standards in general, in 
order to achieve significant network effects. As such, 
QualiChain’s outputs advancing the SotA are the following: 
• 
Ontologies for blockchain and verification 
• 
Ontologies for skills, competencies, and qualifications 
• 
Ontologies for recruitment and Human Resources 
• 
A general-purpose Semantic Blockchain platform 
C. Data Analytics and Decision Support 
Data analytics consist of the next abstraction level after 
the previously presented semantic layer. In the QualiChain 
solution, data crawling techniques will be employed to draw 
data from job posting websites so that they can be analysed 
in conjunction with the data already existing in QualiChain 
(user profiles, skill level of employees in a given domain 
etc.). The results of the analyses will then be used to feed the 
decision support systems assisting the project’s end-users 
with their use-cases. In fact, the Data Analytics and Decision 
Support value adding services of QualiChain have the main 
goal to provide sophisticated tools for data visualisation and 
analysis as well as evaluation and selection among 
alternatives. Although they constitute general purpose 
services, their emphasis is primarily in covering the needs of 
the QualiChain pilot applications.  
To provide decision support, QualiChain will make use of 
various MCDSS and algorithms to develop a general-purpose 
tool, utilised by several services that will help the decision 
maker choose among different options taking into account all 
the criteria that are meaningful for the final choice. This is 
feasible since multi-criteria decision-support methods 
quantify the benefit from every decision for every single 
criterion and combine them. Furthermore, the tool will 
provide the means to weight the criteria when there are many 
decision makers with different opinions about the importance 
of each criterion (e.g., different stakeholders have different 
goals, thus they have also different opinions about the 
importance of each criterion). As multi-criteria decision-
making is a broad scientific field, there are plenty of methods 
proposed. However, most of them stem from two ideas, the 
Multi Criteria Utility Theory and the Outranking Relations 
Theory.  
The Multi Criteria Utility Theory takes into account all 
the available criteria and calculates a total evaluation score 
for each alternative. The MAUT (Multi-Attribute Utility 
Theory) is one of the multiple methods classified as a multi-
criteria utility method [37]. On the other hand, Outranking 
methods build a preference relation, usually called an 
outranking relation, among alternatives evaluated on several 
attributes. In most outranking methods, such as Electre and 
Promethee, the outranking relation is built through the 
execution of a series of pairwise comparisons of the 
alternatives [38]. QualiChain’s DSS component will leverage 
algorithms from both theories and give users the ability to 
choose the ones that suit the purposes of their analyses. Based 
on the above, QualiChain’s outputs advancing the SotA in 
this field are the following: 
• 
Development of a multi-purpose DSS tool that can be 
extended and tailored to specific use cases 
• 
Combination of various algorithms (MAUT [39], Topsis 
[40], Electre I [41] and Promethee II [42]) to cater to 
every multi-criteria decision support problem 
• 
Add value to existing datasets by discovering new 
patterns 
• 
Provide decision support in multi-parameter problems 
with multiple decision makers. 
D. Gamification 
As noted in the analysis part of the publication, there is 
very little in the way of gamification in the domain targeted 
by QualiChain’s gamification plans. There is thus, significant 
potential for advancement by the project. In particular, 
approaches to gamification in professional development 
contexts require careful consideration and piloting, in order 
to ensure the goal of increasing motivation and engagement 
among target stakeholders, and to determine how best to 
employ gamification techniques in this area. To achieve this 
objective, QualiChain will build a gamification solution that 
can be used in each of the steps of a competency management 
system such as:  
• 
in competency acquisition through the development of 
engagement 
activities, 
quizzes 
around 
company 
challenges, related questions, and behavioural puzzles, 
201
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

gamification will personalise and add a fun element to 
the recruitment process  
• 
competency evaluation processes through the analysis of 
candidates’ actual behaviour and capabilities such as 
time management, creative and innovative thinking or 
problem-solving, skills will be assessed 
• 
in competency retention processes by creating 
mechanisms of collaboration and competition with a 
transparent 
point 
system 
within 
the 
company 
community, employees will continue to be motivated 
and focused 
• 
in competency development process through the 
measurement of the employee on-the-job performance, 
by providing simulated work environments as training.  
It is also intended to exploit the enhanced user 
engagement and motivation features of gamification 
techniques for bringing the QualiChain blockchain-based 
approach of storing education certificates into the 
mainstream and promoting the concept of lifelong learning.  
Gamification strategies will be used as a motivational tool to 
help employees reach tangible goals, by using game elements 
such as scores, competitions, badges, awards, and levels to 
motivate and maintain the employees in an encouraging and 
enjoyable system. The first steps to start developing the 
QualiChain gamification approach are underway via 
questionnaires, interviews, and focus groups with the 
respective pilot partners to distil business metrics that are 
intended to be fulfilled, each scenarios main actors (users, 
citizens, etc.), and the different existing mechanisms that 
appeal to the core drives of human behaviour. 
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This publication aimed to perform a comprehensive state-
of-play analysis on current approaches, technologies and 
applications that are employed in higher education and the 
labour market to facilitate qualifications’ certification and 
management as well as recruitment and competency 
management processes. In addition, four core technologies, 
namely blockchain, semantics, analytics and decision 
support, and gamification have been identified by the 
research bibliography as potential game changers in these 
domains. It can be surmised from the bibliographic research 
that most existing solutions heavily underutilise the 
aforementioned 
technologies, 
oftentimes 
lacking 
the 
technical expertise and the means to develop and implement 
innovative solutions that leverage emerging technologies in 
addition to traditional ICT techniques. Furthermore, it seems 
that there is a disconnect between higher education and the 
labour market in most solutions as they cater to only one of 
the two domains, and as a result, most applications address 
only a specific part of the overall process flow. On the other 
hand, QualiChain, the project that is the main focus of the 
publication, views higher education and labour market 
processes as interdependent and aims to develop a solution 
that addresses current challenges in a holistic way. For that 
reason, QualiChain will develop various value-adding 
solutions that cater to the needs of multiple stakeholders on 
top of a robust infrastructure that is based on blockchain and 
semantics. The projected platform will leverage the data 
security offered by blockchain and data interoperability 
offered by semantics with the computational intelligence 
found in analytics and decision support to offer an all-around 
solution that can cover every step of the process. At the same 
time, gamification mechanics will be employed to increase 
user engagement. QualiChain aims to advance the current 
state-of-the-art in the aforementioned technologies and 
become a central point in showcasing their usefulness to 
develop innovative solutions. All in all, it is considered that 
QualiChain’s technical solution will fill a large vacuum in the 
current market, also covering the increasing needs for remote 
verification, recruiting and competency management that are 
the result of the social distancing that was employed in a 
global level as a result of the recent Covid-19 pandemic. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been co-funded by the European Union’s 
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the 
QualiChain project, Grant Agreement No 822404. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
C. Kontzinos et al., “Using Blockchain, Semantics and 
Data Analytics to Οptimise Qualification Certification, 
Recruitment and Competency Management: a Landscape 
Review,” Mobile, Hybrid, On-line Learn. (eLmL 2020), 
2020. 
[2] 
M. Turkanović, M. Hölbl, K. Košič, M. Heričko, and A. 
Kamišalić, 
“EduCTX: 
A 
blockchain-based 
higher 
education credit platform,” IEEE Access, 2018, doi: 
10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2789929. 
[3] 
“Digitisation in Academic Education. Our agenda for a 
future-proof range of degree programmes,” 2017. 
[4] 
R. Zhang, R. Xue, and L. Liu, “Security and privacy on 
blockchain,” 
ACM 
Comput. 
Surv., 
2019, 
doi: 
10.1145/3316481. 
[5] 
A. Castor, “Cardano Blockchain’s First Use Case: Proof of 
University 
Diplomas 
in 
Greece.” 
https://bitcoinmagazine.com/articles/cardano-blockchains-
first-use-case-proof-university-diplomas-greece (accessed 
Dec. 01, 2020). 
[6] 
D. Serranito, A. Vasconcelos, S. Guerreiro, and M. Correia, 
“Blockchain Ecosystem for Verifiable Qualifications,” 
2020 2nd Conf. Blockchain Res. Appl. Innov. Networks 
Serv. 
BRAINS 
2020, 
pp. 
192–199, 
2020, 
doi: 
10.1109/BRAINS49436.2020.9223305. 
[7] 
“REGULATION (EU) 2016/679 OF THE EUROPEAN 
PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL of 27 April 
2016.” 
https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2016/679/oj 
(accessed Aug. 01, 2020). 
[8] 
N. B. Truong, K. Sun, G. M. Lee, and Y. Guo, “GDPR-
Compliant Personal Data Management: A Blockchain-
Based Solution,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Secur., 2020, 
doi: 10.1109/TIFS.2019.2948287. 
[9] 
A. Mahindrakar and K. P. Joshi, “Automating GDPR 
202
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Compliance using Policy Integrated Blockchain,” 2020, 
doi: 
10.1109/BigDataSecurity-HPSC-
IDS49724.2020.00026. 
[10] 
M. M. H. Onik, C. S. Kim, N. Y. Lee, and J. Yang, 
“Privacy-aware blockchain for personal data sharing and 
tracking,” Open Comput. Sci., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 80–91, 
2019, doi: 10.1515/comp-2019-0005. 
[11] 
T. Berners-Lee, J. Hendler, and O. Lassila, “The semantic 
web,” Sci. Am., vol. 284.5, pp. 34–43, 2001. 
[12] 
“GitHub - ConsenSys/EthOn: EthOn - The Ethereum 
Ontology.” 
https://github.com/ConsenSys/EthOn 
(accessed Dec. 01, 2020). 
[13] 
“Open 
Badges 
v2.0.” 
https://www.imsglobal.org/sites/default/files/Badges/OBv
2p0Final/index.html (accessed Dec. 01, 2020). 
[14] 
“Fraunhofer: 
SARO 
Ontology.” 
https://vocol.iais.fraunhofer.de/saro/visualization# 
(accessed Aug. 01, 2020). 
[15] 
T. W. Liao, “Clustering of time series data - A survey,” 
Pattern 
Recognit., 
2005, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.patcog.2005.01.025. 
[16] 
“MLlib | Apache Spark.” https://spark.apache.org/mllib/ 
(accessed Dec. 01, 2020). 
[17] 
C. Kontzinos et al., “University process optimisation 
through smart curriculum design and blockchain-based 
student 
accreditation,” 
2019, 
doi: 
10.33965/icwi2019_201913l012. 
[18] 
“Qualification Check - Certificate Global Verification.” 
https://www.qualificationcheck.com/ (accessed Dec. 01, 
2020). 
[19] 
“Federal Institute for Vocatiomal Education and Training: 
Recognition 
Finder.” 
https://www.anerkennung-in-
deutschland.de/en/interest/finder/profession 
(accessed 
Dec. 01, 2020). 
[20] 
“European Credit Transfer and Accumulation System 
(ECTS) 
| 
Education 
and 
Training.” 
https://ec.europa.eu/education/resources-and-
tools/european-credit-transfer-and-accumulation-system-
ects_en (accessed Dec. 01, 2020). 
[21] 
“Recognition of foreign qualifications - Swedish Council 
for 
Higher 
Education.” 
https://www.uhr.se/en/start/recognition-of-foreign-
qualifications/ (accessed Dec. 01, 2020). 
[22] 
“ServiceNow – Service Now Verification/Certification 
service.” https://www.servicenow.com/ (accessed Dec. 01, 
2020). 
[23] 
“British Columbia – Ministry of Education: Teacher 
Certification.” 
https://www.bcteacherregulation.ca/CertificateServices/C
ertificateServicesOverview.aspx (accessed Aug. 01, 2020). 
[24] 
“College Degree Verification Services | DegreeVerify.” 
https://nscverifications.org/degreeverify/ (accessed Dec. 
01, 2020). 
[25] 
“Degree 
Equivalency 
Tool 
- 
WES.org/ca.” 
https://applications.wes.org/ca/degree-equivalency-tool/ 
(accessed Dec. 01, 2020). 
[26] 
“Higher Education Funding COuncil for England 
(HEFCE): Higher Education Degree Datacheck (HEDD).” 
https://hedd.ac.uk/#section-what-we-offer (accessed Dec. 
01, 2020). 
[27] 
“Norwegian Agency for Quality Assurance in Education 
(NOKUT): Recognition of foreign higher education in 
Norway.” https://www.nokut.no/en/ (accessed Dec. 01, 
2020). 
[28] 
“The Norwegian Directorate for ICT and Joint Services in 
Higher Education and Research: Vitnemalsportalen 
Diploma 
registry.” 
https://www.vitnemalsportalen.no/english/ (accessed Dec. 
01, 2020). 
[29] 
“e-CF 3.0 Profiling tool on-line | European e-Competence 
Framework.” http://www.ecompetences.eu/e-cf-3-0-and-
ict-profiles-on-line-tool/ (accessed Dec. 01, 2020). 
[30] 
“Council of European Professional Informatics Societies 
(CEPIS): 
CEPIS 
e-Competence 
Benchmark.” 
https://www.cepisecompetencebenchmark.org/ (accessed 
Aug. 01, 2020). 
[31] 
“e-Competence Quality: e-Competences assessment and 
certification 
assessment.” 
http://www.e-competence-
quality.com/ (accessed Aug. 01, 2020). 
[32] 
“ICT-mastery: IT Staffing Nederland.” https://www.ict-
mastery.eu/index.php/en/#finding-the-best-ict-applicant 
(accessed Dec. 01, 2020). 
[33] 
“The Open Standard for Blockchain Credentials: 
Blockcerts.” https://www.blockcerts.org/ (accessed Aug. 
01, 2020). 
[34] 
“CIMEA: 
Diplome.” 
http://www.cimea.it/en/projects-
list/diplome-blockchain4people/home-page-blockchain-
2.aspx (accessed Dec. 01, 2020). 
[35] 
“LinkChain.” https://linkchain.supply/ (accessed Aug. 01, 
2020). 
[36] 
“Fraunhofer 
FIT: 
Blockchain 
for 
Education.” 
https://www.fit.fraunhofer.de/en/fb/cscw/projects/blockch
ain-for-education.html (accessed Aug. 01, 2020). 
[37] 
J. S. Dyer, P. C. Fishburn, R. E. Steuer, J. Wallenius, and 
S. 
Zionts, 
“Multiple 
Criteria 
Decision 
Making, 
Multiattribute Utility Theory: The Next Ten Years,” 
Manage. Sci., 1992, doi: 10.1287/mnsc.38.5.645. 
[38] 
D. BOUYSSOU and P. VINCKE, “Ranking Alternatives 
on the Basis of Preference Relations: A Progress Report 
with Special Emphasis on Outranking Relations,” J. Multi‐
Criteria Decis. Anal., 1997, doi: 10.1002/(sici)1099-
1360(199703)6:2<77::aid-mcda144>3.3.co;2-9. 
[39] 
J. S. Dyer, “MAUT-multiattribute utility theory,” in 
International Series in Operations Research and 
Management Science, 2005. 
[40] 
Y. Çelikbilek and F. Tüysüz, “An in-depth review of theory 
of the TOPSIS method: An experimental analysis,” J. 
Manag. 
Anal., 
pp. 
281–300, 
2020, 
doi: 
10.1080/23270012.2020.1748528. 
[41] 
J. Figueira, V. Mousseau, and B. Roy, “ELECTRE 
methods,” Mult. Criteria Decis. Anal. State Art Surv., pp. 
133–153, 2005, doi: 10.1007/0-387-23081-5_4. 
[42] 
B. Mareschal, “The Promethee Methods for MCDM,” 
Readings Mult. Criteria Decis. Aid, Springer, pp. 216–252, 
1990. 
 
 
 
203
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

