Estimating the Inspection Frequencies of Civil Infrastructures using Correlation 
Networks and Population Analysis
Prasad Chetti and Hesham H. Ali 
College of Information Science and Technology 
University of Nebraska at Omaha 
Omaha, NE 68182, USA 
pchetti@unomaha.edu and hali@unomaha.edu 
 
Abstract— Many recent studies have shown that a large 
percentage of bridges in many parts of the world have a low 
safety rating. The national bridge inventory database contains 
data on more than 600,000 bridges, where each bridge has 116 
parameters. Current safety inspections require bridge 
inspectors to manually inspect each bridge every few years. 
Manpower and budget constraints limit such inspections from 
being performed more frequently. More efficient approaches 
need to be developed to improve the process of bridge 
inspection and increase the overall safety of bridges and civil 
infrastructures.  In this study, we propose a correlation 
network model to analyze and visualize the big data associated 
with more than 600,000 bridges in the national bridge 
inventory database. We use correlation networks based on 
various safety parameters, then apply the Markov clustering 
algorithm to analyze a sub-set of 9,546 steel-stringer/multi-
beam or girder bridges. We use the produced clusters to 
propose a different maintenance schedule based on the bridges 
that show a higher chance of becoming deficient. Results show 
that of the top five clusters of bridges, three need to be serviced 
more frequently. We recommend that their inspection 
frequency be reduced to 12 months instead of 24 months. 
Keywords— Correlation Networks; Markov Clustering 
Algorithm; Structural Health Monitoring; National Bridge 
Inventory database; Inspection Frequency.  
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Every year, the U.S. Federal Highway Administration 
(FHWA) records the data of more than 600,000 bridges, 
with a total of up to 116 parameters in the National Bridge 
Inventory (NBI) database [1][2]. Detailed descriptions of 
these parameters can be found in the coding guide [3] 
developed by FHWA. This is a big data and the authors 
divided some of the parameters associated with these 
bridges as internal, external, and outcome parameters. For 
example, the overall fitness rating/safety rating is an 
outcome rating/parameter of a bridge and is well reflected 
by the sufficiency rating (SR). The SR ranges between 0 and 
1000. The higher the rating, the better the bridge condition 
is. The Deck Rating (DR), Structural Evaluation Rating (or 
Structural Condition Rating (SCR)), and Average Daily 
Traffic (ADT) are some of the internal parameters that 
affect the outcome rating, such as, the SR. The DR ranges 
from 0 to 9 and is used to rate the condition of the bridge. 
The higher the rating, the better the bridge condition is. SCR 
is calculated based on ADT and other condition ratings and 
represents the overall structural fitness of the bridge as 
given in the FHWA coding guide [3]. Ownership (OW) 
indicates the owner of the bridge responsible for its 
maintenance, and Inspection Frequency (IF) is an interval 
usually given in months to indicate how frequently the 
bridge gets inspected. The latter two are some of the 
external parameters. Structural Deficiency (SD) is a status 
assigned to each bridge to indicate whether the bridge is 
structurally sound or not.  
Structural 
Health 
Monitoring (SHM) 
involves 
implementing a damage detection and characterization 
strategy for engineering structures [4]. Current safety 
inspections using traditional SHM mechanisms require 
bridge inspectors to manually inspect each bridge every few 
years. Most of the bridges in the NBI database are assigned 
a safety inspection frequency of 24 months [27]. However, 
the 24 months’ inspection frequency may not be suitable for 
bridges that require immediate or more frequent attention 
due to their age or design standards. Manpower and budget 
constraints limit inspecting the bridges more frequently. 
Clearly, more efficient approaches need to be developed to 
improve the process of bridge inspection and increase the 
overall safety of bridges and civil infrastructures. As a 
result, we developed a correlation network model (CNM), 
based on SR rating values of the bridges for 25 years (i.e., 
from 1992 to 2016) in our earlier conference paper 
submitted [1]. The main idea behind this work is to use 
population analysis to assess the health level of each bridge 
and predict potential health hazards of bridges before they 
happen. Population analysis means that analyzing different 
things based on some particular context. Our main 
hypothesis is that bridges with similar health fitness ratings 
are included in a common group/cluster in the CNM and 
have similar behavioral patterns as discussed in our 
conference paper [1]. As an extension, we further analyzed 
these individual clusters and assigned updated inspection 
frequencies based on their structural health and verified 
what ratings are being affected by ADT.  
Our method takes a population of 9,546 steel-
stringer/multi-beam or girder design bridges across three 
states of the USA, such as, California, Iowa, and Nebraska, 
which come from three different climatic regions [9] of the 
country as shown in Figure 1. The reason for selecting 
bridges from different climatic regions is to study whether 
temperatures play any significant role on the bridges’ health 
in these states.  
151
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Initially, we created a correlation network of bridges 
based on their outcome rating, such as, SR, and then applied 
the Markov Clustering (MCL) algorithm [10] to produce 
clusters of bridges. The top 5 clusters were considered for 
further analysis to see what internal or external parameters 
enriched to each cluster. In addition, the last 25 years’ 
ADTs were considered to determine their effect on SR and 
other ratings. The correlations between ADT and other input 
parameters were also calculated to see what input 
parameters significantly impacted by ADT in a given 
cluster. Finally, we visualized the clusters of bridges with 
respect to their structural deficiency. 
As it was already mentioned above, this paper is an 
extension of our conference paper [1] and here we have 
conducted and added some other experimental results such 
as the effect of ADT on various ratings of the bridges, and 
assigning different inspection frequencies to the bridges in 
the top 5 clusters. The remainder of this paper is organized 
as follows. Section II gives the background of this research, 
where different studies on monitoring bridge health and 
inspection frequencies are introduced.  This section also 
describes the importance of correlation networks in this 
study and how correlation networks are used in other 
domains and ends with a brief introduction of how 
correlation networks are used in monitoring the structural 
health of civil infrastructures. Section II also presents some 
of the key concepts used for creating correlation networks 
and clusters. Section III describes the methodology used to 
develop correlation networks and clusters. Section IV 
presents the experimental results of this study. The final 
section 
presents 
the 
conclusions 
and 
future 
recommendations.  
 
II.  BACKGROUND 
Several recent research studies have attempted to 
estimate the inspection frequencies of highway bridges, and 
argued that there should be a rationale to set inspection 
frequencies for both aged bridges and new bridges. While 
newer bridges may only require inspection 24 months or 
more, older bridges may need to be inspected more often. 
Similarly, these studies also argued that inspection 
frequencies may be rationale when considering different 
structural condition ratings, design standards and risk 
factors and proposed an assessment procedure to create 
inspection intervals for steel bridges with fracture critical 
members [6]. Some authors have estimated inspection 
frequencies using life-cycle cost analysis for Stay-Cable 
replacement design [8]. The Bayesian network model used 
in [17] demonstrates the predictive and diagnostic 
capabilities of the model to estimate the load ratings of 
prestressed concrete bridges and is useful for bridge 
management. Deterioration models were also developed for 
Nebraska state bridges using input parameters of the bridges 
to estimate the deterioration of various condition ratings [5]. 
Similar studies were done in [24] for developing various 
deterioration curves using historical data of condition 
ratings of New York state bridges. A neural network with a 
novel data organization scheme and voting process used in 
[28] shows that it can identify damages in bridges with 86% 
accuracy. Studies also compared various distribution 
methods to estimating the inspection intervals of bridges 
using statistical analysis and showed that the Weibull 
distribution is likely the best fit for historical data of 
condition ratings [7]. 
 
 
Figure 1. Map of nine USA climate regions ( image courtesy : NOAA) [9]. 
 
However, all the studies done to date to estimate 
inspection intervals focused only on individual elements 
such as deck rating or superstructure rating. Hence, there is 
a need to estimate inspection intervals based on overall 
fitness ratings such as SR. If the given set of bridges are 
clustered based on correlations of historical or time-series 
data of SR, then individual clusters can be analyzed further 
to see what parameters are enriched for a cluster of bridges 
and accordingly the bridge owners may focus on those 
critical ratings/parameters, and update IF. For example, if a 
cluster is enriched mostly with structurally deficient bridges, 
then we can modify the IF of that cluster of bridges to a less 
than 24 months’ interval. Similarly, if a cluster of bridge is 
enriched with structurally good bridges, then we can update 
the IF to more than 24 months. 
 
A. Why to utilize a Correlation Network Model? 
As the NBI database has data on more than 600,000 
bridges, there is a need for powerful and efficient big data 
tools. CNM is such a powerful big data tool that can predict 
the structural health of civil infrastructures [1][19]. The key 
idea behind this work is to use population analysis to assess 
the health level of each bridge and predict potential health 
hazards of bridges before they happen. In the population 
analysis, we compare different clusters or groups of bridges 
with respect to a particular parameter, based on its 
enrichment. Our main hypothesis is that the bridges with 
similar health fitness ratings are included in a common 
cluster in the CNM and have similar behavioral pattern as 
shown in [1]. Analyzing these individual clusters will allow 
us to assign different inspection frequencies based on their 
deterioration patterns, and structural health.  
 
B. Correlation networks in other disciplines 
The ability to show generalization, visualization, and 
analysis capabilities made the correlation-based network 
152
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

analysis become a powerful analysis tool in biological 
studies and in various other disciplines [13]. Correlation 
network analysis was employed in studying biological 
systems to find the plant growth and biomass in Arabidopsis 
thaliana Recombinant Inbred Lines (RIL) and introgression 
lines (IL) [14][15]. 
 
Figure 2. Correlation network representation with bridges. 
 
Figure 3. Structural elements of a bridge [22]. 
 
It was also successfully applied to evaluate the effect of 
hypoxia on tumor cell biochemistry [16]. Correlation 
networks are useful to measure the changes in temporal 
datasets and study the cluster enrichment by a few Gene 
Ontology (GO) terms [18]. 
 
C. Correlation Networks for monitoring structural health  
Researchers in the recent past applied CNM to monitor 
the structural health of civil infrastructures, including 
analyzing safety issues of various bridges using inventory 
ratings and other parameters [19]. The basic advantage of 
using CNM is that the bridges can be clustered together 
based on some similarity and can be visualized as good and 
bad bridges [1][19]. As CNM is a new approach for 
monitoring various civil infrastructures, bridge owners may 
use CNM to display critical bridges and find an efficient 
way to improve the inspection schedules [19]. The 
advantage of this research over [19] is that it considers the 
temporal-data of SRs. Hence, it can accurately predict an 
overall fitness rating behavior of the bridges. So, creating a 
CNM that could deal with temporal-data is one of the 
objectives of this paper. The motivation of this paper is to 
process a CNM that could consider bridges’ overall 
behavior (i.e., SR) over a period of time and analyze highly 
correlated clusters of bridges to predict bridges’ behavior 
and alter the inspection frequencies accordingly. The 
research question of this paper is to determine what ratings 
are affected by ADT for each cluster of bridges in the 
population, if the bridges are clustered using the 
correlations of temporal data of SRs. The research objective 
of this paper is to provide a CNM-based decision support 
System for bridge owners to enable them to find out which 
bridges need to be serviced first and alter the inspection 
frequencies. As a result, we developed a novel CNM that 
considers the temporal data of SRs of the bridges for the last 
25 years (from 1992 to 2016), so as to exactly characterize 
the overall fitness behavior of the bridges over a period of 
time [1] and see what ratings are effected by ADT, and 
update the inspection frequencies. 
 
D. Key concepts used 
The key concepts for this paper are the graph model 
developing the correlation network, and the Markov 
clustering algorithm to obtain the group or clusters of 
bridges. 
 
a) Graph model 
The CNM is basically an undirected and unweighted 
graph-based model. The graph is defined as set of vertices 
and edges, G = (V, E), where V is a set of vertices and E is a 
set of edges. Each vertex (sometimes called nodes) 
represents a bridge/civil infrastructure. Two vertices are 
connected by an edge if and only if their Pearson’s 
correlation coefficient [11] ρ>= 0.90, where ρ is a real 
value, and p-value less than .05. A correlation between any 
two variables is a value between -1 and +1, which expresses 
the strength of linkage or co-occurrence. This strength is 
called Pearson's r or Pearson product-moment correlation 
coefficient if the correlation is between two continuous–
level variables [11][12]. We have used the Pearson’s 
correlation coefficient since the SR data follows normality. 
Figure 2 represents the undirected and unweighted graph 
model with 6 nodes and 6 edges. This paper uses bivariate 
(Pearson’s) correlation analysis to show the relationship 
between any two bridges.  
 
b) Markov Clustering (MCL) 
In any clustering mechanism, the objects are clustered 
together in such a way that the distances among clusters are 
maximized while the distances among the objects are 
minimized [30] as shown in Figure 4. The Markov 
Clustering (MCL) algorithm [10] used in this paper is based 
on the random walks property of the graphs. MCL is a fast 
and efficient algorithm and is designed for undirected and 
unweighted graphs. A random walk in a strongly connected 
cluster usually visits almost all the nodes in the cluster. MCL 
was already applied on various protein-protein interaction 
networks and proved to be extraordinarily robust to graph 
changes and superior in mining complexes from interaction 
networks [29]. The correlation network that we created for 
153
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

bridges or civil infrastructures is also similar to the protein-
protein interaction networks, we employed MCL to mine the 
groups or clusters of bridges that act similarly. 
 
 
Figure 4. Representation of clustering. 
 
 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
The following are the four phases of the CNM that we are 
proposing.  
i. 
Data acquisition and filtering 
ii. 
Creating a correlation network and applying 
MCL algorithm 
iii. 
Analyzing various clusters with respect to both 
input parameters, and output parameters, and 
comparing various clusters (population analysis) 
iv. 
Developing a decision support system 
 
A. Data Acquisition and Filtering 
The highway bridge data is obtained from the NBI 
database. A total of 25 years (1992-2016) of highway bridge 
data from three different states of the USA, i.e., California, 
Iowa, and Nebraska, are considered for this analysis. There 
are 9,546 highway bridges from these three states, and 
which are constructed with “Steel material and having 
Stringer/Multi-beam or Girder design”. These are recorded 
with the numeric 302 in the structure type as given in the 
FHWA coding guide [3].  The bridges are considered in 
such a way that their SR is available throughout these 25 
years. Hence, each bridge has a minimum age of 25 years. 
Inconsistent entries, such as the bridges that are recorded as 
culverts for some years and then non-culverts are removed 
from the consideration as explained in [1]. Our conference 
paper explains the data acquisition and filtering in detail [1].  
 
B. Creating a Correlation Network  
The SR data of the 9,546 bridges is collected as a 
matrix along with their 25 years SRs (i.e., from 1992 to 
2016). This is called an SR matrix, SR matrix, with each 
row (i.e., for each bridge) of the matrix having 25 years’ 
SRs in it as a vector. So, there are 9,546 rows in the matrix, 
A 
Pearson’s 
correlation 
coefficients 
matrix 
(say, 
Correlation-matrix) along with the p-values matrix are then 
obtained over the SR matrix. Each of these matrices are of 
size 9,546 by 9,546.  
Each bridge is then assumed as a node (vertex) in the 
graph model, and two nodes are connected by an undirected 
edge if and only if their correlation coefficient ρ >= 0.90 
and significance value p < .05. This creates a correlation 
network with bridges as nodes along with highly correlated 
nodes connected by edges as shown in Figure 5. MCL 
clustering algorithm is then applied in Cytoscape [19] on 
the previously obtained correlation network to produce 
clusters. The inflation parameter in MCL clustering can be 
modified in such a way that the higher inflation value 
produces clusters of small sizes in terms of nodes. However, 
we restricted our experiments to the best inflation 
parameter, such as 1.8, as given in [29]. The clusters 
produced by MCL algorithm are basically sub-networks of 
nodes and edges. MCL has produced 8610 nodes in various 
clusters and 3,865 nodes are present in the top 5 clusters 
and shown in Figure 6. These top 5 clusters are considered 
for further analysis. Various experiments are conducted on 
the top 5 clusters produced by the MCL algorithm, and the 
results are shown in Section IV below. 
 
C. The parameters considered for analysis 
The authors divided the NBI data parameters into three 
categories, such as, input parameters, output parameters and 
external parameters—based on their effect on SR as given in 
the FHWA coding guide [3] to calculate the SR value. SR is 
an output parameter. 
The following are the input and external parameters: 
a) Input parameters: Average Daily Traffic (ADT), Deck 
Rating 
(DR), 
Superstructure 
Rating 
(SpSR), 
Substructure Rating (SbSR), Structural Condition 
Rating (SCR), and Water Adequacy Rating (WAR). 
b) External parameters: State is mentioned as a Location 
(Loc) (to represent the climatic regions as shown in 
Figure 1), Owner (OW), Age Category (Age-Cat) 
derived from the Age (based on Year Built) of the 
bridge, Inspection Frequency (IF), Rebuilt (RB), and 
Structural Deficiency (SD) derived from the Status of 
the bridge. 
 
Some of the above parameters are described as below in 
the FHWA coding guide [3]. 
1. Item 1- State Code: considered as the Location 
(LOC) of the bridge, as the bridges for our analysis 
were scattered across three states, i.e., California 
(CA), Iowa (IA), and Nebraska (NE). These three 
states are from three different climatic regions [9]. 
California is from the West, Iowa is from the 
Upper Midwest (East North Central), and Nebraska 
is from the Northern Rockies and Plains (West 
North Central) as shown in Figure 1. 
2. Item 22- Owner (OW): Maintenance responsibility 
(Item 21) is used to represent the type of agency 
154
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

that is the primary owner of the bridge. For 
example, code ‘02’ in Item 21 is a county highway 
agency. 
3. Item 27- Year Built-  records the year that the 
structure was built. It is used to calculate the age of 
the bridge. In this study bridges are categorized 
into three categories based on their age. Ages 
ranging from 1 to 50 years are in Category A, 51 to 
100 years in Category B, and more than 100 years 
in Category C.  
4. Item 
29- 
Average 
Daily 
Traffic(ADT): 
It 
represents the most recent average daily traffic 
volume on the bridge. 
5. Item 91- Designated Inspection Frequency (IF): It 
represents the designated inspection frequency of 
the bridge in months. This interval could be varied 
from inspection to inspection based on the 
condition of the bridge. IF=24 indicates that the 
bridge inspection frequency is for every 24 months 
as shown in Figure 7.F. 
6. Item 106- Year Reconstructed/Rebuilt (RB): It 
represents the year of reconstruction to keep the 
bridge operational. RB=0 means that the bridge is 
not rebuilt. RB=1 indicates that the bridge is rebuilt 
as shown in Figure 7.E. 
7. Status of the bridge: There are four possibilities for 
the status of the bridges. Status ‘N’ indicates that it 
is “Not Applicable”. ‘0’ signifies that the bridge is 
“Not Deficient”. ‘1’indicates that the bridge is 
“Structurally Deficient (SD)”, and ‘2’ means that 
the bridge is “Functionally Obsolete.”  A condition 
rating of 4 or less for Item 58, or 59, or 60, or an 
appraisal rating of 2 or less for Item 67 or 71, make 
the bridge structurally deficient [23] as given in 
[3].  
8. Sufficiency rating (SR):  It is an outcome 
measure/rating that is calculated from four factors 
as given in [3]. It represents the overall fitness 
rating of the bridge and ranges between 0 and 
1000. The lower the rating, the lesser the overall 
fitness rating is. 
 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
 
This section demonstrates various experimental results 
with respect to different network properties, various input, 
output, and external parameters of the top 5 clusters.  
 
A. Network Properties of Top 5 Clusters 
The correlation network (correlation ρ>=0.90) is 
presented with 9546 nodes, 767542 edges, and 101 
connected components. This is basically a scale-free 
network. In a scale-free network the degree distribution of 
network follows a power-law. In a power-law node degree 
distribution, there are many nodes with fewer degrees and 
fewer number of nodes with more degrees. The nodes with 
higher degrees could be acting as hub nodes. The study of a 
hub node is very important with respect to network 
properties as this hub node is connected to many other 
similar nodes or bridges. However, studying those hub 
nodes is beyond the scope of this paper. Figure 6 shows the 
top 5 clusters (yellow colored clusters) produced by the 
MCL algorithm. These clusters’ statistics are shown in 
TABLE 1, with the topmost cluster having the highest 
number of nodes, which is 1,496 and 354,939 edges, and 
the smallest cluster having 255 nodes and 13,922 edges. 
The higher the clustering coefficient [23], the higher the 
degree to which nodes in a graph are inclined to cluster 
together. The higher values of the average clustering 
coefficient for each cluster / subnetwork indicate that the 
nodes inside each cluster tend to be part of that cluster only. 
Therefore, the top 5 clusters with higher clustering 
coefficients are considered for further analysis. TABLE 1 
shows that cluster 5 has the highest clustering coefficient, 
which is 0.838. The cluster density describes the potential 
number of edges present in the sub-network compared to 
the possible number of edges in the sub-network. From 
TABLE 1, we see that cluster 3 has the highest density 
(0.533) among all the top 5 clusters.  
 
B. Population analysis with respect to external parameters 
Figures 7.C through 7.F are a comparison of the top 5 
clusters with respect to some external parameters such as 
Age-Category (AGE-CAT), Owner of the bridge (OW), 
whether the bridge is Rebuilt (RB) or not, and Inspection 
Frequency (IF). Figure 7.C is a bar chart for comparing the 
age categories of various clusters. Category A is the set of 
bridges whose age is 1 to 50 years (labeled blue). B-
category bridges are from the age group 51 through 100 
(labeled green), and finally the last category, which is 
Category-C bridges (labeled yellow), with an age of more 
than 100 years. Cluster 2 is highly enriched with Category-
B bridges as shown in Figure 7.C, while the remaining 
clusters are mostly dominated by both Category-A, and 
Category B bridges. So, this could have affected the 
structural deficiency of the bridges as shown in Figure 7.B, 
where most of the cluster 2 bridges are structurally 
deficient.  
 
TABLE 1. NETWORK STATISTICS OF TOP 5 CLUSTERS 
PRODUCED BY THE MCL ALGORITHM. 
Cluster 
Number 
#Nodes 
#Edges 
Avg. 
Degree 
Density 
Avg. 
Clust. 
Coeff. 
SR 
Avg. 
Cluster1 
1496 
354939 
474.51 
0.317 
0.775 
623.7 
Cluster2 
1180 
99000 
167.79 
0.142 
0.674 
489.3 
Cluster3 
634 
106955 
337.39 
0.533 
0.823 
801.9 
Cluster4 
300 
13377 
89.18 
0.298 
0.812 
818.5 
Cluster5 
255 
13922 
109.19 
0.43 
0.838 
577.5 
155
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 7.D shows that there are six categories of 
owners of the bridges. However, all the clusters are highly 
dominated by Owner-2 (labeled green), which is a county 
highway agency [3]. So, we can infer that all the clusters are 
enriched and maintained by county highway agency. Figure 
7.E is a bar chart that shows whether the bridges were 
rebuilt (labeled green) or not (labeled blue). If we observe 
cluster 4, out of 300 bridges, 83 bridges were rebuilt, and 
most of them were rebuilt in the recent past. The average 
ratings given in Figures 8.B, and 8.C, show that cluster 4 is 
a special cluster having lower average ratings in the 
beginning year 1992 and subsequently increased to high 
average ratings (especially structural condition rating shown 
in Figure 8.B) as the number of rebuilt bridges increased in 
those subsequent years.  
 
 
 
Figure 5. Correlation network (correlation ρ>=.90) with 9,546 nodes, and 
767,542 edges (Average degree=89.14, and 101 connected components). 
 
Figure 6. Top 5 clusters (yellow colored clusters) produced by MCL 
algorithm. (Figure 5 and 6 were generated using Cytoscape [20]). 
 
We also observe from Figures 7.E that most of the 
cluster 2 bridges are rebuilt, but that have not increased any 
ratings in Figures 8.B and 8.C. From Figure 7.F, we see that 
cluster 2 is highly enriched with 24- month inspection 
frequency. So, we recommend that these bridges’ IF’s 
should be lowered, and maintenance must be done more 
frequently to increase the ratings. An inspection interval of 
12 months is more suitable for these bridges.  
 
C.  Population analysis of Top 5 clusters with respect 
to input rating parameters 
The input ratings that are considered for population 
analysis are, DR, SPSR, SBSR, WAR, and SCR of the NBI-
dataset-2016. These five different input ratings are 
compared with respect to their average values in the top 5 
clusters as shown in Figure 7. All the average ratings of 
clusters 3 and 4 are higher compared to all other clusters in 
top 5. This clearly indicates that these bridges do not have 
any maintenance issues in terms of any condition ratings in 
near future. This could be an indication that these bridges’ 
IF’s could be updated and increased to either 36 months or 
48 months instead of 24 months. Another interesting finding 
about this figure is that cluster 2 has lower average ratings 
in all the clusters. For example, cluster 2 has average SBSR 
value of 4.59. Which is less than 5. According to coding 
guide [3], these bridges will very soon become structurally 
deficient. But from Figure 7.F, we see that majority of these 
bridges’ inspection frequencies are 24 months. Hence, we 
recommend that this cluster’s IFs must be lowered to 12 
months. Similarly, from Figure 7, if we see the average SCR 
rating of cluster 2, it is 3.78. which is even below 4. Hence, 
most of these bridges fell in structurally deficient category. 
This can be seen from Figure 7.B, as this cluster is highly 
enriched with SD bridges.  
 
Figures 11 through 15 show the enrichment of 
individual average input rating values for different clusters. 
Figure 10 shows that both cluster 1 and 2 are highly 
enriched with DR = 5. As per the coding guide [3], these 
bridges are in “Fair Condition” as per the deck is concerned. 
They are just 1 rating above structural deficiency rating, 
such as rating 4. This calls the frequent maintenance, such 
as making IF=12 months for the decks of the bridges in 
these clusters.  
Figures 12 and 13 show the average condition ratings of 
superstructures and substructures, respectively. From Figure 
11, we see that cluster 2 is enriched with SpSR <= 5. Once 
these bridges’ SpSR’s drop from 5 to 4, then most the 
bridges will fall into the SD bridge category. Hence, the 
improvement in the SpSR rating in terms of dropping the 
live load is required. This can be done by reducing Average 
Daily Traffic and implementing required recovery services 
on these bridges. Cluster 2 from Figure 12 also shows that 
the substructure rating (SBSR) is critical, as most of the 
bridges’ enriched with SBSR ratings <= 5. Figure 13 shows 
that all the clusters are highly enriched with water adequacy 
rating (WAR) >=6. Hence, any improvement in terms of 
WAR rating is not required for the next couple of years. 
156
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

From Figure 14, we find that the bridges in clusters 1, 
2, and 5 are highly enriched with average structural 
condition rating (SCR) <=4, which shows that the maximum 
of the bridges in these clusters are either structurally 
deficient (SD) or very soon will they fall into this SD 
category. Hence, more frequent (such as, IF=12 months) 
maintenance is required for these clusters.  
 
Figure 7. Ratings comparison for top 5 clusters (year 2016). 
 
 
 
Figure 7.A. Location-Inspection Frequency (Loc-IF). 
 
 
Figure 7.B. Structural Deficiency (SD). 
 
Figure 7.C. Age-Category (AGE-CAT). 
 
Figure 7.D. Owner(OW). 
 
Figure 7.E. Rebuilt (RB). 
 
Figure 7.F. Top 5 clusters’ Inspection Frequencies (IF). (All these bar  
charts from Figures 7.A through 7.F were produced in SPSS [25]). 
 
 
157
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

D. Effect of the Average Daily Traffic(ADT) on various 
ratings 
 
Figures 8.A, through 8.C show the averages of 
Averages Daily Traffic (ADT), Structural Condition Rating 
(SCR), and Sufficiency rating (SR), respectively, for the 
years 1992, 1997, 2002, 2007, 2012, and 2016 (i.e., for 
every 5 years except for the year 2016, which has a gap of 
four years from 2012). The ADT graph shown in Figure 8.A 
indicates that the traffic rate is increasing year by year for 
any cluster of bridges except for the cluster 2 (between the 
years 1997 and 2002) and for the cluster 5 (between the 
years 2007 and 2012). Which clearly indicates that some 
measures regarding lowering the ADT must have been taken 
in those clusters in those years to increase the life of the 
bridges. However, that is not enough to increase the ratings 
of these bridges at the end year 2016. But at the same time, 
we see that the increase in ADT, decreases the ratings in 
case of remaining clusters as we compare Figures 8.A, with 
8.B, and 8.C. As these input ratings are reduced, it 
automatically affects the SR (the overall fitness) and hence, 
it gets reduced. For clusters 1, 2 and 5, the effect of ADT is 
huge on both input ratings (for example, SCR), and on 
output rating SR. As most of the bridges in these three 
clusters are already structurally deficient, the effect of ADT 
would be instant.  From Figure 8.D, we see that mean ADT 
volumes increased only due to category D (ADT>=5000) in 
cluster 1. This indicates that the very high traffic needs to be 
controlled for the bridges in cluster 1.  
 
E. Analysis with respect to Structural Deficiency 
 
The Structural Deficiency (SD) of the top 5 clusters is 
shown in Figure 7.B and their individual visualized 
comparison is shown in Figures 9.A through 9.E, with a 
total of 61.69% of cluster 2, 47.06% of cluster 5, and 
32.15% of cluster 1 bridges are structurally deficient. At the 
same time, further analysis on cluster 2, as shown in Figures 
9.B and 9.F, shows that this cluster is enriched with 62.63% 
Iowa and 17.29% Nebraska bridges, and both have 24-
month inspection frequencies and a mean sufficiency rating 
below 500. The same is the case for cluster 1. Here, more 
than 60% of the bridges are from Nebraska with 24-month 
inspection frequency and having a mean sufficiency rating 
of just above 600. Hence, we suggest that the 24-month 
inspection frequency for these structurally deficient bridges 
needs to be modified to a 12-month inspection frequency to 
provide rehabilitation services more frequently. Similarly, 
only 3.63% and 8.33% of cluster 3 and cluster 4 bridges are 
structurally deficient, as shown in Figures 9.C and 9.D. 
Cluster 3 and Cluster 4 are enriched with more than 94% 
and 63% of Nebraska bridges, respectively, with 24-month 
inspection frequency (as shown in Figure 7.A). Also, the 
average sufficiency rating of these two clusters is above 800 
as shown in Figure 15. Hence, these bridges’ 24-month IF 
can be increased to either 36 months or 48 months as these 
bridges need not be serviced more frequently. 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Comparison of top 5 clusters’ averages (dataset years 
1992,1997,2002,2007,2012 and 2016) with respect to various ratings and 
average daily traffic.  A: Average Daily Traffic (ADT). B: Structural 
Condition Rating (SCR). C: Sufficiency rating (SR). D: Cluster 1 means of 
ADT, category wise (four different colors indicating four different 
categories. 
Category-A: 
ADT<100, 
B: 
100<=ADT<1000, 
C: 
1000<=ADT<5000, and category D: ADT>=5000). 
158
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
A 
 
 
B 
 
 
C 
 
 
D 
 
 
E 
 
 
F 
 
 
Figure 9. Visualized comparison of Structural Deficiency(SD) of top 5 
clusters (Figures A through E respectively for cluster 1 through cluster 5) 
and Location-Inspection Frequency (Loc-IF, shown in Figure F). SD=0: 
Structurally Good, SD=1: Structurally Deficient, SD=2: Functionally 
Obsolete. (The above images were generated using Gephi [21]). 
159
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 10. Comparison of top 5 clusters with respect to Deck Rating (DR). 
 
 
Figure 11. Comparison of top 5 clusters with respect to Superstructure 
Rating (SpSR). 
 
Figure 12. Comparison of top 5 clusters with respect to Substructure Rating 
(SBSR). 
 
Figure 13. Comparison of top 5 clusters with respect to Water Adequacy 
Rating (WAR). 
 
Figure 14. Comparison of top 5 clusters with respect to Structural 
Condition Rating (SCR). 
 
 
Figure 15. Averages of SRs of top 5 clusters for the year 2016. 
 
160
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

V. CONCLUSION 
We have presented a model for identifying which 
bridges need to be serviced first and suggested intervals of 
inspection using correlation networks and population 
analysis along with cluster enrichment parameters. Different 
clusters are enriched with different parameters and/or 
ratings. Each cluster is analyzed and has given sufficient 
evidence for our original hypothesis that bridges with 
similar characteristics/parameters must be part of the same 
cluster. We found that there are three clusters of bridges 
(clusters 1,2 and 5), which have low values of sufficiency 
ratings as shown in Figure 15, and to which immediate 
rehabilitation services are required. Hence, they need to be 
serviced first. Therefore, their inspection frequency should 
be adjusted from 24 months to 12 months. Out of these three 
clusters, cluster 2 is eligible for federal funding as the 
average SR for this cluster is below 500 (SR value below 
500 makes a bridge eligible for federal funding as per 
FHWA guidelines [2]) as shown in Figure 15. From Figure 
15, we also found that the bridges in clusters 3 and 4 have 
high overall fitness ratings. Therefore, they do not require 
immediate attention and their inspection frequencies could 
be adjusted to 36 months or 48 months instead of 24 
months.  
We have further analyzed the clusters to see how 
increased ADT leads to decreased overall fitness (in terms 
of SR) of the bridges. We have also presented visualizations 
of all the top 5 clusters with respect to SD to allow different 
bridge owners to clearly distinguish what bridges are 
deficient, or functionally obsolete, or in good condition.  
From various visualizations and statistics with respect 
to different input ratings and external parameters, our 
decision support system could visualize that most of the 
bridges (built with steel material and having stringer/multi-
beam or girder design) from clusters 1, 2 and 5 are in both 
Iowa and Nebraska states, and with IF = 24 months, and 
aged above 50 years. These bridges need to be serviced first 
and their inspection frequencies need to be adjusted to 12 
months instead of 24 months.  
With all these results, our correlation network model 
enables various bridge authorities to clearly distinguish 
between the structurally good and deficient bridges. SHM 
inspectors can now estimate which bridges’ IFs need to be 
adjusted to 12 months instead of 24 months. Rehabilitation 
services should be provided accordingly, and authorities can 
distribute funds on priority basis which could result in 
saving money and many human lives.  
One shortfall of this method is that the big data 
associated with the information of thousands of bridges may 
consume more time to create the correlation matrix and 
correlation network, but with the power of existing 
supercomputers and their huge memories this couldn’t be a 
big problem. 
Presently we have considered only the bridges that are 
constructed with steel material and with stringer / multi-
beam or girder design. As a future work, we may study 
CNM to see the clustering of various bridges constructed 
with a different design and/or with different material, and 
for different states. We would also like to study these 
clusters further and assign risk rankings to these top 5 
clusters, to prioritize the clusters that need immediate 
rehabilitation services. Further studies may also focus on 
studying the remaining clusters instead of top 5 clusters. 
One can also use either DR or SbSR instead of SR, to create 
the correlation network and provide the inspection 
frequencies based on the temporal data of these ratings. We 
can also study the network properties of these clusters in 
detail to get more insights about these groups of bridges. 
This work may further be extended for verifying the 
temperatures role on the bridges as they come from different 
climatic regions.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors of this paper would like to thank the 
administration of the University of Nebraska at Omaha, 
USA as this research work is sponsored by the university 
under the GRACA research grant with the application 
number 16796.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1]  P. Chetti and H. H. Ali. “Analyzing the Structural Health of 
Civil   Infrastructures Using Correlation networks and 
Population Analysis”, Proceedings of the Eighth International 
Conference on Data Analytics, Porto, Portugal,  2019. 
[2]   Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), 
https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/bridge/nbi/ascii.cfm , 2018.08.15 
[3]   Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), 
https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/bridge/mtguide.pdf, 2018.08.15 
[4]  C. R. Farrar and K. Worden, "An introduction to structural 
health monitoring", Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society 
of 
London 
A: 
Mathematical, 
Physical 
and 
Engineering Sciences 365.1851, pp. 303-315, 2007. 
[5] A. Hatami and G. Morcous, “Developing deterioration models 
for Nebraska bridges”, No. M302, 2011. 
[6] J. Parr, Michael, J. Conner, Robert, and Mark Bowman. 
"Proposed method for determining the interval for hands-on 
inspection of steel bridges with fracture critical members", 
Journal of Bridge Engineering, 15.4 , 2009, pp. 352-363. 
[7] M. Nasrollahi and G. Washer, “Estimating inspection     
intervals for bridges based on statistical analysis of national 
bridge inventory data,” Journal of Bridge Engineering, Vol. 
20, No. 9, 04014104, 2014. 
[8] A. B. Mehrabi et al., "Evaluation, rehabilitation planning, and 
stay-cable replacement design for the hale boggs bridge in 
Luling, Louisiana", Journal of Bridge Engineering, 15.4, 
2010, pp. 364-372. 
[9] T. Karl and W.J. Koss, “Regional and national monthly, 
seasonal, and annual temperature weighted by area, 1895-
1983”, 1984. 
[10]  S. Dongen, “A cluster algorithm for graphs”, CWI (Centre for     
Mathematics and Computer Science), 2000. 
[11]  K. Pearson,  "On the coefficient of  racial likeness",  Biometrika pp. 
105-117, 1926. 
[12] J. Benesty et al., "Pearson correlation coefficient", Noise  
reduction in speech processing, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
pp. 1-4, 2009. 
161
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[13] A. Batushansky, D. Toubiana and A. Fait, “Correlation-based 
network generation, visualization, and analysis as a powerful 
tool in biological studies: a case study in cancer cell 
metabolism”, BioMed research international, 2016. 
[14] J. Lisec et al., “Identification of metabolic and biomass QTL 
in Arabidopsis thaliana in a parallel analysis of RIL and IL 
populations”, The Plant Journal, Vol. 53, No. 6, pp. 960-972, 
2008. 
[15] R.C. Meyer et al., “The metabolic signature related to high 
plant growth rate in Arabidopsis thaliana”, Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, Vol. 104, No. 11, pp. 4759-
4764, 2007. 
[16] H.L. Kotze, E.G. Armitage, K.J. Sharkey, J.W. Allwood, 
W.B. Dunn, K.J. Williams and R. Goodacre, “A novel 
untargeted metabolomics correlation-based network analysis 
incorporating 
human 
metabolic 
reconstructions”, BMC 
systems biology, Vol. 7, No. 1, pp. 107, 2013. 
[17] K. LeBeau and W.F. Sara, "Predictive and diagnostic load 
rating model of a prestressed concrete bridge", Journal of 
Bridge Engineering, 15.4, 2010, pp. 399-407. 
[18] K. Dempsey, I. Thapa, D. Bastola and H. Ali, “Identifying 
modular function via edge annotation in gene correlation 
networks using Gene Ontology search”, Bioinformatics and 
Biomedicine Workshops (BIBMW), IEEE International 
Conference, pp. 255-261, 2011. 
[19] A. Fuchsberger and H. Ali, "A Correlation Network Model for 
Structural Health Monitoring and Analyzing Safety Issues in 
Civil Infrastructures", Proceedings of the 50th Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, 2017. 
[20] P. Shannon et al., “Cytoscape: a software environment for 
integrated 
models 
of 
biomolecular 
interaction 
networks”, Genome research, Vol. 13, No. 11, pp. 2498-2504, 
2003. 
[21] M. Bastian, S. Heymann, and M. Jacomy, “Gephi: an open 
source 
software 
for 
exploring 
and 
manipulating 
networks”, ICWSM, Vol. 8, pp. 361-362, 2009 ( retrieved on  
August 15, 2017 from https://gephi.org/) 
[22] Daily Civil, http://www.dailycivil.com/structural-elements-
bridge/ 2018.08.15 
[23] Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), 
https://www.fhwa.dot.gov/bridge/britab.cfm 2018.08.15 
[24] A.K. Agrawal, K. Akira, C. Zheng. "Deterioration rates of 
typical bridge elements in New York." Journal of Bridge 
Engineering 15.4 (2010): 419-429. 
[25] A. Field, “Discovering statistics using IBM SPSS statistics”, 
Sage, 2013. 
[26] http://journal.r-project.org/archive/2013-1/kahle-wickham.pdf 
[27] C.F.R., National Bridge Inspection Standards, in 23 CFR part 
650. 2004: USA. p.7441974439. 
[28] Li Zhe and R. Burgueño, "Using soft computing to analyze 
inspection results for bridge evaluation and management", 
Journal of Bridge Engineering, 15.4, 2010, pp. 430-438. 
[29] S. Brohee and J. V. Helden. "Evaluation of clustering 
algorithms for protein-protein interaction networks." BMC 
bioinformatics, Vol. 7, No. 1, pp. 488, 2006. 
[30] A.K. 
Jain, 
“Data 
clustering: 
50 
years 
beyond 
K- 
means”, Pattern recognition letters, Vol. 31, No. 8, pp. 651-
666, 2010. 
 
 
 
 
 
162
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

