309
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Enhancing the Workforce Skills and Competences by Leveraging a Human-Centered
Knowledge-Based System in the Rise of Industry 4.0
Enrico G. Caldarola∗, Gianfranco E. Modoni∗ and Marco Sacco†
∗Institute of Industrial Technologies and Automation
National Research Council, Bari, Italy
Email: {enrico.caldarola, gianfranco.modoni}@itia.cnr.it
†Institute of Industrial Technologies and Automation
National Research Council, Milan, Italy
Email: marco.sacco@itia.cnr.it
Abstract—One of the signiﬁcant challenges of Industry 4.0 is
the realization of a more sustainable manufacturing along the
whole factory life-cycle, which has an impact on three different
dimensions: economical, environmental, and social. Whereas
the economic and environmental dimensions have been widely
discussed in many research works and progressively integrated
in production processes, there is still a shortage of studies aiming
at incorporating the social dimension. Consequently, economic
planning and policies lack the full acknowledgment of human
rights, education, health and gender diversity. With this study,
we aim at aligning the technological panorama of Industry 4.0
with the social dimension of sustainable manufacturing. This
alignment is realized through a knowledge-based system able to
represent, formally, both human factor and the principal aspects
of the value creation chain inside the factory, thus promoting
a human-centric workplace improving the social sustainability
in manufacturing by not penalizing productivity. This work is
an extended version of a previous work by authors, focusing on
the description of the design and implementation details of the
knowledge layer underpinning the whole system. Furthermore, a
case study is presented, in which factory environments try to meet
workers capabilities and desiderata, by augmenting the quality
of life and ensuring people health, while ensuring productivity.
Finally, since the research proposed in this article is a case study
research, a well known methodology and related guidelines are
exploited in order to study, analyze, evaluate and report the case.
Keywords–Social Sustainable Manufacturing; Industry 4.0;
Teaching Factory; Knowledge-Intensive Systems; Cyber-Physical
Systems; Semantic Web.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In recent years, new trends in manufacturing have em-
braced circular economy models, which emphasize the design
and implementation of a new sustainable industry changing at
different dimensions: economical, societal and environmental
[1]. The changes induced by the adoption of such regenerative
models can bring beneﬁts along all these three dimensions,
in different ways. From an economical point of view, circular
economy can generate sales and proﬁts, investing in infrastruc-
ture, paying tax responsibly, creating jobs, etc., while, from
an environmental level, sustainability signiﬁes minimizing
waste and emissions or hazardous substances, using energy
and resources efﬁciently, using environmental sound materials
and protecting biodiversity. Finally, from a social point of
view, circular economy can lead to good community relations,
respecting human rights, granting good working conditions and
ensuring the continuous learning of workers inside the factory.
Although there have been great progress in integrating the
economic and environmental spheres, difﬁculties still remain in
fully incorporating the social dimension. As a result, economic
planning and policies lack the fully acknowledgment of human
rights, education and health, and gender diversity [2]. A
concrete enhancement of the social sustainability can be made
possible by the adoption of new technological solutions and
paradigms coming from the fourth industrial revolution, also
known as Industry 4.0 [3][4]. Indeed, this latter promotes the
computerization of manufacturing grounding on some design
principles, such as interconnection, information transparency,
decentralized decisions and technical assistance. Two key
enabling technologies underpinning this evolution are Internet-
of-Things (IoT) and Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS), which in
turn are typically combined with other technologies [5] (e.g.
Digital Twin [6], Augmented and Virtual Reality [7], etc.). One
of the main strengths of Industry 4.0 is its capability to create
intelligent cross-linked modules, holding a great opportunity
for realizing sustainable industrial mechanisms on all three
dimensions mentioned above. In addition, it can contribute to
enhance the interoperability of all the productive hardware and
software resources covering the factory life-cycle.
According to [8], there are different opportunities of sus-
tainable manufacturing from Industry 4.0 based on macro and
micro perspectives. For example, from a macro perspective
view, new evolving business models are highly driven by
the use of smart data for offering new services, i.e., selling
the functionality and accessibility of products instead of only
selling the tangible products will be a leading concept (product
servitisation); cross-linking of value creation networks offers
new opportunities for realizing closed-loop product life cycles
and industrial symbiosis. Closed-loop product life-cycles help
in realizing de- and re-manufacturing systems enabling to
deliver high quality upgradable and re-usable future products
at affordable price to the global market. Industrial symbiosis
describes the (cross-company) cooperation of different facto-
ries in order to realize a competitive advantage by trading and
exchanging products, materials, energy, resources and infor-
mation [9]. From a micro prospective point of view, the major
opportunities for sustainability in Industry 4.0 come from the
adoption of new cutting edge technologies of computerized
manufacturing. For example, a simplistic scenario may consist
in turning the factory into a 4.0 one by retroﬁtting: machiner-
ies can be equipped with a distributed sensors network and
actuator systems as well as with related control logics in order

310
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
to realize a CPS with existing manufacturing equipment so
that the new capabilities can contribute to the economic and
environmental dimensions of sustainability.
The value creation in Industry 4.0 can be proﬁtably realized
through the adoption of human-centered technologies, which
put the human operator (or the knowledge worker) at the
center of the innovation process. Thus, the social challenges
of Industry 4.0 struggle for a wider involvement of human
factors in the product life-cycle and process simulation or
co-simulation. For example, the Human-in-the-loop (HITL)
allows the user to change the outcome of an event or process
and is extremely effective for the purposes of training because
it allows the trainee to immerse themselves in the event
or process. This human-centered vision is in line with the
European Commission strategy as reported in [10], where,
it is pointed out that, in order for European industry to be
competitive and ﬂourishing, it is needed to ensure workforce
with the right skills. Indeed, one of the key priorities for the
Factories of the Future (FoF) 18-19-20 Work Program [11]
is focused on the human factor, addressing in particular the
development of competences of the workers in synergy with
technological progress. Some of the technological enablers
addressing this objective, which have also acknowledged in
this work, are: (i) models for individual and collective sense-
making, learning and knowledge accumulation; (ii) workers
interconnection with machines and processes and developing
context-oriented services towards safety practices and decision
making. The human-centered approach has been fostered in
the context of Italian Industry 4.0 initiatives too, as their
inclusion in the scope of Call “Centri di competenza ad
alta specializzazione”1 (hereinafter mentioned as Competence
Centers) launched by the Italian Ministry of the Economic
Development can demonstrate. The initiative promotes the
establishment of highly specialized competence centers on
Industry 4.0 issues, in the form of public-private partnerships.
The competence centers will have to carry out guidance and
training activities for companies as well as support in the
implementation of innovation projects, industrial research and
experimental development aimed at the realization of new
products, processes or services (or their improvement) through
advanced technologies in the ﬁeld of Industry 4.0, particularly
for SMEs.
According to the Competence Centers Call, the overall
goal of this study is exploring the potential of the tech-
nologies related with Industry 4.0 (Hermann et al. (2016))
to enhance workforce skills and competences. In this paper
we extend a previous work where a knowledge-based system
for enhancing the workforce skills and competences in the
scenario of Industry 4.0 has been proposed [1]. Speciﬁcally,
this research work presents more improvements w.r.t. the
previous one as it adds more considerations in the introductory
section about sustainability and Industry 4.0. It widens the
related works section by adding new works about the principal
topics exploited in this work, i.e., the Teaching Factory, Visual
Approach in manufacturing training and Knowledge-based
Systems. In addition, this extended version adds details about
the knowledge models underpinning the proposed system. In
particular, the work introduced in this paper follows three
inspiring paradigms described as follows. Firstly, the Teaching
1http://www.sviluppoeconomico.gov.it/index.php/it/incentivi/impresa/centri-
di-competenza
Factory concept, which aims to align manufacturing teach-
ing and training to the needs of modern industrial practice.
Thanks to this new paradigm, future engineers and knowl-
edge workers (i.e., workers whose main capital is knowledge)
“need to be educated with new curricula in order to cope
with the increasing industrial requirements of the factories of
the future” [12]. Secondly, it exploits the Visual Approach
concept to manufacturing [13]. In this regard, the efﬁciency
of workers can be enhanced by Augmented Reality/Virtual
Reality (AR/VR) systems, such as headmounted displays to-
gether with Learnstruments [14] or by using new Information
and Communication Technologies (ICTs) for implementing
gamiﬁcation in order to support decentralized decision-making.
Finally, the adoption of Knowledge-based systems, which use
proper formalisms (semantic-based languages or ontologies)
[15] in order to represent the knowledge hidden in the product
or production process and facilitate the knowledge elicitation
promoting the sharing of knowledge and best practices, thus
contributing to create a continuous learning workplace and
support the human factor within the company [16], [17].
All the above paradigms contribute to realize the envisioned
concept of Smart Sustainable Factory as a thorough Cyber-
Physical System allowing safety, wellness and continuous
training inside the factory (Figure 1).
Acknowledging the great interest for the human factor in
modern factory, this article proposes a multi-layered frame-
work as a leading architecture satisfying the requirements
of social sustainability. The framework will be applied to a
concrete case study, which, eventually, demonstrates the use
of advanced technologies from the Industry 4.0 panorama
in order to create a user-centred factory environment. We
try to verge the layered framework previously introduced on
a real case study aligning the needs encountered with the
technological solutions belonging to each layer. The idea of
user-centred environment within the factory is conceived as a
smart workplace, which is attractive for workers, tailored to
their speciﬁc needs and able to ensure well-being, continuous
training and education, and sustainability without lessening
productivity.
Since this work represents a case study research and the
proposed case is a contemporary phenomena in its natural
context, the research methodology and guidelines followed
here are in line with those introduced in a well known work in
the literature [18]. As far as possible, we have borrowed some
of the key deﬁnitions, concepts and phases of such method-
ology from software engineering to Industry 4.0 theoretical
and operational context. Although this work is not conceived
as a case study research report, we have tried to formalize a
case study protocol and follow it when describing, analyzing,
evaluating and reporting the case under study.
The reminder of the paper is structured as follows: Section
2 collects some previous works in deﬁning a conceptual model
in Industry 4.0 both from academics and industrial research
groups. Section 3 describes the framework highlighting the
leading principle that have inspired it. Section 4 presents a case
study aiming at demonstrating the applicability of the concep-
tual framework introduced in this work. Section 5 introduces
the case study protocol, highlighting its phases. Finally, the last
section summarizes the main ﬁndings evaluating the case study
research. Later on future research investigations are outlined.

311
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 1. The Smart Sustainable Factory as a Cyber-Physical system
II.
RELATED WORKS
With the advent of Industry 4.0 and even before, new
spreading paradigms, such as lean manufacturing and ad-
vanced computer-based manufacturing, conceptual models or
frameworks have been thought in order to clearly highlight the
concepts and relationships resulting from the new perspective
proposed by the paradigm. In the following subsection, a
review of the major Industry 4.0 conceptual models will be
outlined, while in the subsequent subsections a brief review of
the three characterizing topics underpinning this work will be
proposed.
A. Industry 4.0 conceptual models
Lee et al. [3] propose a “5C architecture” for Cyber-
Physical Systems in Industry 4.0 manufacturing systems. It
is intended to provide a step-by-step guideline for developing
and deploying a CPS for manufacturing application. The
architecture is layers-based and includes the following levels:
•
Smart connection. It acquires accurate and reliable
data from machines and their components. Data might
be directly measured by sensors or obtained from
controller or enterprise manufacturing systems such as
Enterprise Resources Planning (ERP), Manufacturing
Execution Systems (MES), Software Conﬁguration
Management (SCM) and Coordinate Measuring Ma-
chine (CMM);
•
Data-to-information conversion. It performs some
computational task like multidimensional data correla-
tion, degradation and performance prediction in order
to infer information from the data;
•
Cyber. It acts as central information hub in this
architecture by collecting data from all the machines
and performing analytics tasks to extract additional
information that provide better insight also by taking
into consideration historical data coming from ma-
chines;
•
Cognition. It properly presents the acquired knowl-
edge to expert users supporting the correct decision to
be taken;
•
Conﬁguration. It represents the feedback from cyber
space to physical space and acts as supervisory control
to make machines self-conﬁgure and self-adaptive.
Another valuable architectural model is the “Reference
Architectural Model Industrie” (RAMI) 4.0 [19]. This model
combines the fundamental elements of Industry 4.0 in a three-
dimensional layer model including the “Hierarchy Levels”
axis, the “Life Cycle & Value Stream” axis and ﬁnally the
orthogonal vertical axis. The ﬁrst axis ranges over the different
functionalities within factories or facilities and retraces what
is provided by the International Electrotechnical Commission
(IEC) 62264 document [20]. Such functionalities intersect with
the second axis, which represents the life cycle of facilities and
products and is based on IEC 62890 [21]. Finally, the vertical
axis includes the decomposition of a machine into its properties
structured layer by layer: asset, integration, communication,
information, functional and business. Within these three axes,
all crucial aspects of Industry 4.0 can be mapped, allowing
objects such as machines to be classiﬁed according to the
model, thus providing a common understanding of Industry
4.0 technologies.
The Open Platform Communications Uniﬁed Architecture
(OPC UA) [22] is the new standard of the OPC Foundation
providing interoperability in process automation. It provides
a Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA) for industrial applica-
tions from factory ﬂoor devices to enterprise applications by
specifying an abstract set of services mapped to a concrete
technology. A communication stack is used on client- and
server-side to encode and decode message requests and re-
sponses. Also, this architectural model includes a bottom level
of data acquisition from heterogeneous data sources, which
provide the server implementation with data requested by the
client. OPC UA does not provide Application Program Inter-
faces (APIs) implementation for client-server communication
but a Web service-based implementation that allow heteroge-
neous clients to communicate with different implementations
of server (exploiting Microsoft, Java or C-based technologies).
Among the commercial solutions, which take advantage of
a semantic-based approach, it is worth mentioning the Global
Real Time Information Processing Solution (GRIPS) [23]
developed by Star Group, a software framework that enables
intelligent processing capabilities by linking information ob-
jects. Speciﬁcally, by allowing a geographically distributed and
multi-lingual authoring of structured and linked information
units, GRIPS supports the creation of product knowledge while
enabling semantically linked knowledge management on all
business-critical objects. The GRIPS authoring and informa-
tion processing model distinguishes three layers of information
processing: semantic content base layer, publication/document
types and structures layer, publishing channels layer. By ex-
ploiting the semantic-based enabling technologies, it beneﬁts
not only product communication, but also marketing, sales,
after sales and the end customer. Moreover, the framework
allows enhanced re-use of software components, standardiza-
tion, cost reduction, quality, sustainability and protection of
investments, seamless integration, and so forth.
In [24], the authors proposed a system approach to sup-
port sustainability of manufacturing from three perspectives:

312
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
energy, material, technology.
B. The Teaching Factory
From a theoretically point of view the Teaching Fac-
tory originates from previous instructional approaches such
as training-on-the-job and hands-on learning, which in turns
represent learning methodologies laying on a well-know and
principled model: the Bloom’s taxonomy [25][26]. This latter
is used to classify educational learning objectives into levels of
complexity and speciﬁcity [27], from knowledge to synthesis
through application and analysis, by emphasizing the ﬁnal
objective of the learning process, i.e., developing real compe-
tencies in learners rather than just knowledge transfer. Prior to
the use of the term Teaching was the expression Learning Fac-
tory. Although, they are now used interchangeably, the word
“learning” in the term, as opposed to teaching, emphasized
the importance of experiential learning, whose effectiveness in
retention and application possibilities w.r.t. traditional methods
such as lectures, has been broadly proven and discussed
in several works [28][29]. The ﬁrst Learning Factory was
developed in 1994 by the Penn State University and it was
conceived as an interdisciplinary hands-on senior engineering
design projects with strong links and interactions with industry
[30]. This early model of learning factories emphasizes the
hands-on experience gained by applying knowledge learned
at the culmination of engineering education to solve real
problems in industry and design/redesign products to satisfy
identiﬁed needs [31][32]. More recently the use of learning
factories has become multifaceted as various manifestations
of Learning Factory (at different sizes and involving different
scenarios) have appeared, and the term Teaching Factory has
taken hold in different application scenarios. As a general
rule, the great interest for such paradigm rises from the strong
feeling that promoting excellence in manufacturing represents
the major drive to generate wellness and wealth in any nation;
moreover, it is triggered by the customization-movement of
products [33]. These new forms of production control and
ﬂexible manufacturing increase the complexity of production
systems especially concerning information processing and
software engineering, thus requiring modern ways of training
to prepare aspiring engineers (or blue collars) for related
issues. For this reason, manufacturing education has received
great attention from researchers and scholars, so the interest
for Learning (or Teaching) Factory have moved from local
to European and worldwide organizations, while initiatives
and projects aiming at developing educational programs in
industry have been ﬁtting in the political agenda of many
national and international politicians. To cite few examples,
the European Commission with Manufuture and Factories of
the Future initiatives has promoted research programs oriented
in this way, the CIRP Research European Association has
developed a Collaborative Working Group (CWG) on Learning
Factories, the German Federal Ministry of Education and
Research through the German Academic Exchange Service
(DAAD) has founded the Network of Innovative Learning
Factories (NIL), and, ﬁnally, the Italian Government has come
out with the Competence Centers Call already mentioned in
the introductory section.
According to numerous works in the literature [34]
[28][35], the line of investigation related to the teaching factory
is twofold: from the one hand, it tries to ameliorate the
communication channel and the synergy between academia
and industry (Academia-to-Industry), by recognizing the needs
of modern industries in the increasing complexity of the market
and transferring the research achievements and technologies
advances from research groups and universities to industry;
from the other side, it strengthens the communication channel
between the industry and the education systems (Industry-
to-Classroom) by elevating the vocational learning to an
effective authentic learning instructional approach thanks to
real study cases brought into the classroom. From a learning
methodological point of view, almost all works existing in the
literature point out that, in order to make modern factories
and workers resilient to the changing market conditions and to
the complexity of new technologies involved in the production
process, it is necessary to “act self-organized in unknown
situation”. For this reason, traditional teaching methods are
no longer sufﬁcient to train competent employee, thus new
approaches are needed. Training in realistic manufacturing
environments, modernize learning process bringing it closer
to the industrial practice, leverage industrial practice through
the adoption of new manufacturing knowledge (fostering the
sharing and the elicitation of knowledge), improve young
(future) engineers competences [30]. The accent on realistic
manufacturing environments is also put by the CIRP Learning
Factory group (mentioned above), which has analyzed different
deﬁnition attached to the expressions above by collecting the
features characterizing each of them. This led the the working
group to individuate two sense of Learning (or Teaching)
Factory that it is worth to recognize here, depending on the
degree of contextualization: the narrow and the broad sense.
The learning factory in the narrow sense provides a real value
chain for a physical product in which participants can perform,
evaluate, and reﬂect their own actions in an on-site learning
approach. Whilst, the Teaching Factory in a broad sense
may emphasizes the use of Virtual Reality (or Mixed-Reality)
representations of factory facilities (value added chain) and
promote the learning process through e-enhanced learning
tools, which connect trainees remotely (through the network
communication infrastructure). The CIRP CWG has also pro-
posed a morphological (multidimensional) model serving as
an orientation in the design of a new learning factory as well
as a classiﬁcation tool for existing learning factories (50 single
features in seven dimensions were identiﬁed).
In industry, most notably large automotive companies have
recognized the enormous potential of learning factories.
From a technological perspective, the Teaching Factory
is supported by different e-enhanced learning tools, from the
traditional Learning Management System like Moodle [36] to
recent Virtual Classroom Environments [37], Mixed Reality
simulation and gamiﬁcation [7]. Furthermore, the realization
of a fully-synchronized Digital Twin supports the concrete
implementation of the Learning (or Teaching) Factory. In-
deed, due to the strict synchronization and the closed loop
between the real and the digital factory, the DT enhances
the collaboration between stakeholders, strongly supporting the
human knowledge toolkit, i.e., conceptualization, comparison
and collaboration [38], and thus contributing to the realization
of the teaching factory.

313
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
C. Visual Approach to Manufacturing
According to [39], mixed reality is the merging of real and
virtual worlds to produce new environments and visualizations
where physical and digital objects co-exist and interact in real
time. In recent years, the scope of its use has been increasingly
widening by embracing entertainment and interactive arts,
education as well as engineering and medical applications
[40]. In the ﬁeld of manufacturing engineering and production
process, mixed reality systems are widely used to implement
an efﬁcient and effective visual approach which try to transfer
the right information at the right person at the right time
[41]. In addition, in the context of instructional settings, MR
systems have been used for implementing Virtual Learning
Environment (VLE) concerned with issues of learning, training
and entertainment. In this regard, [42] analyzes the state-of-art
research of VLE based on virtual reality and augmented reality,
providing several examples for the purpose of education and
simulation. These applications show that VLE can be means of
enhancing, motivating and stimulating learners understanding
of certain events, especially those for which the traditional
notion of instructional learning have proven inappropriate or
difﬁcult. This advantages are valuable also in the context of
the Teaching Factory where learners are knowledge workers
or blue-collars called to continuously strive for excellence
and training within modern industrial scenario. Beyond the
Mixed Reality notion, the interaction between computers and
environments becomes actually environmental understanding
or perception. In this regard, the perception Windows API
developed by Microsoft2 reveal environmental information,
which are added to the Mixed Reality system. Environmental
input captures elements such as a person’s position in the world
(e.g., head tracking), surfaces and boundaries (e.g., spatial
mapping and spatial understanding), environmental lighting,
environmental sound, object recognition and location, thus
augmenting the user experience to a highest level of involve-
ment improving retention all acquired skills and knowledge.
In [43] is described the teaching factory solution called Agro,
providing expedient exercises by hands-on training as well
as in depth technology training. The central part of this
learning arrangement is the intelligent conveyor belt system
in combination with different stations arranged in so-called
factory zones. Each zone offers various education possibili-
ties (the possibility to improve competences in a particular
ﬁeld), e.g., Zone A (Process Automation) may contribute to
instruct trainee in controlling typical process variables such
as temperature, level, pressure, ﬂow rate, etc.; whilst, Zone C
(Production automation) offers the following possibilities (not
limited to): detection, differentiation, separation and mounting
of a product, or, programming controllers, adjusting sensors.
D. Knowledge-based system
Knowledge-based manufacturing (KBM) is the application
of knowledge-based systems technology to the domain of
manufacturing design and production. The design process is
inherently a knowledge-intensive activity, so a great deal of
the emphasis for KBE is on the use of knowledge-based
technology to support computer-aided design (CAD). How-
ever, knowledge-based techniques (e.g. knowledge manage-
ment) can be applied to the entire product lifecycle. KBM is
essentially engineering on the basis of knowledge models, i.e.,
2https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/uwp/api/windows.perception
a knowledge model uses knowledge representation to represent
the artifacts of the design process (as well as the process
itself) rather than or in addition to conventional programming
and database techniques. In this regard, one of the most
spread technology for knowledge representation, widely used
in different domain, no less in manufacturing engineering
is ontology. The latter ’is a formal, explicit speciﬁcation of
a shared conceptualization [44], where a conceptualization
represents a common view of how to represent a domain
of interest. Various research studies have exploited the great
expressivity of ontologies to integrate information related to
different abstraction levels within a manufacturing context.
For instance, [45] presented the Manufacturings Semantics
Ontology (MASON), an upper ontology developed upon the
three major concepts of entities, operations, and resources;
the authors also illustrated its two applications to implement
an automatic cost estimation and a multi-agent framework
for manufacturing simulation. Another example of general-
purpose ontology for the manufacturing domain is represented
by ADACOR (A Collaborative Production Automation and
Control Architecture) [46], which is focused on the shop ﬂoor
level and is based on the main pillars of decentralised systems,
supervisor entities and self-organisation. Moreover, [15] de-
signed the manufacturing system engineering (MSE) ontology,
which provides a common understanding of manufacturing
related terms to enhance the reuse of knowledge resources
within global extended manufacturing teams. More recently,
Terkaj, Pedrielli and Sacco [47] dealt with heterogeneity of the
digital tools supporting the factory life-cycle phases, by intro-
ducing the Virtual Factory Data Model (VFDM), which aims at
formalising and integrating the handled concepts of building,
product, process and production resource. The basic idea
behind VFDM is similar to the one behind the work by Panetto,
Dassisti and Tursi (2012) [48], where the product ontology
ONTO-PDM is proposed to provide a semantic layer to busi-
ness, design and manufacturing product-related information.
Chungoora et al. [49] proposed an approach based on ontology,
which is combined with the model-driven architecture (MDA)
in order to enhance interoperability between domain of design
and manufacturing. Negri et al. [50] presented an ontology
to model production systems and support interoperability in a
service-based control architecture. Bruno et al. [51] proposed a
semantic platform for managing product lifecycle information,
based on a modular ontology for PLM. Finally, the use of
knowledge-based models for enabling context-awareness in
the context of Smart Home, which can be borrowed in the
Smart Factory scenario too, has already been explored and
experimented by the authors in [52].
III.
THE CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK
Figure 2 depicts the layers-based conceptual framework
proposed in this work. The leading principles at the base of
the framework are: (i) highlight the cutting edge technologies
and paradigms belonging to Industry 4.0 in order to meet the
social sustainable manufacturing requirements involved in our
case study; (ii) categorize technologies and solutions according
to different layers having in mind the production processes,
from the design phase to its realization; (iii) emphasize the
digital synchronization between the real and digital factory
acknowledging the continuous exchange of data and feedback
between the factory and its mirror image in the cyberspace.

314
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 2. Conceptual framework for the Social User-centered Manufacturing in Industry 4.0
Starting from the bottom, the Real Factory layer represents
a unique level of acquisition for data coming from inside or
outside the factory. To this level belong data collected from the
shop-ﬂoor acquired for example through a distributed sensors
network (wireless sensors networks) such as in-line inspection
and monitoring data, wearable devices, proximity sensors like
eBeacon. This layer is also called to operate a preliminary
adaptation and integration of data acquired from heterogeneous
sources, also just at a syntactical level such as data cleansing
and syntactic alignment in order to let them be interoperable
and usable by the software tools at the upper levels of the
framework [7][53].
The IoT Hub is conceived as the layer in which the in-
depth knowledge of product-process and production systems
is elicited from raw data collected at the bottom level. Once
elicited, the product-process knowledge can be represented
through standard or de facto standard languages and tech-
nologies so that it can be shared and understood by human
and automated agents. The adoption of such formalisms in
modelling the information about products, processes and pro-
duction systems opens several perspectives in managing the
complexity of data models used in modern manufacturing
scenarios. Homogenizing the representation languages for data
models leads to several advantages: the reuse of already vali-
dated and standardized model, make it easy and fast the design
of new products based on available knowledge bases providing
the features and conﬁguration options of the product being
design, the possibility to pass such formal models as input of
reasoning tools, which apply ﬁrst-order logic based rules in
order to entail new knowledge from the asserted knowledge
base. IoT Hub follows the new manufacturing paradigm of
the Cloud Manufacturing, which is developed from existing
advanced manufacturing models and enterprise information
technologies under the support of cloud computing, Internet
of Things, virtualization and service-oriented technologies, and
advanced computing technologies [54]. Indeed, with the rise
of Big Data and Big Data Analytics technologies [55][56],
we are witnessing the trend of moving data, applications, or
other business components from an organization’s on-premises
infrastructure to the cloud, or moving them from one cloud
service to another.
The Semantic Middleware layer at the centre of the frame-
work represents a sort of gateway which plays the role of
systematic integrator of semantically annotated data [57][58],
coming from the enterprise data sources (local databases or
legacy database) and from outside (distributed storage or Web
of Data). This layer is responsible for: (i) implementing the
proper approach to transparently access data from multiple
clients, by taking into consideration security, reliability, re-
dundancy and trustability issues; (ii) providing reliable mech-
anisms to publish new data from the upper level applications
or by the bottom line and make them available to all interested
agents in a real-time or near real-time fashion with respect to
changes in critical data. A publisher-subscriber mechanism or
an Event Condition Action (ECA) architecture can be used in
order to implement such functionality [59]. To this level belong
one of the key component used in the scenario described in the
next section, i.e., the Digital Factory Model (DFM), which can
be conceived as an omniscient module able to understand the
representation models underlying the whole product life’ cycle,
the production process and system and the Virtual Individual
Model of workers engaged in the production process and their
skills.
The Application layer embraces different tools used in
computerized manufacturing. There exist many Digital Tools
that support engineers and designers in different phases of
product life-cycle. For example, Computer Aided Design
(CAD) software help users in creation, modiﬁcation, analysis
or optimization of a design and are used to increase the
productivity of the designer, improve the quality of design, and,
importantly, improve communications through documentation.
To this level also belong the Virtual Tools, i.e., Augmented Re-
ality Systems (like AR headset and visors), which implement
the Visual Approach to production process already described in
the introductory section and is one of the technological solution
adopted in the demonstration scenario. Finally, the Smart Tools
include all Business Intelligent tools and Analytics [56] used

315
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 3. The knowledge model importing schema
to analyze data and get insights from them to support expert
user in the decision making process (e.g., Opinion Mining
tools or Information Visualization tools). Proper info-graphics
or information visualization tools are necessary to completely
transfer acquired knowledge to the users [55] [60]. CAD is one
part of the whole Digital Product Development (DPD) activity
within the Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) processes,
and as such is used together with other tools, which are
either integrated modules or stand-alone products, such as:
Computer-aided engineering (CAE) and Finite element anal-
ysis (FEA), Computer-aided manufacturing (CAM) including
instructions to Computer Numerical Control (CNC) machines,
Document management and revision control using Product
Data Management (PDM).
The highest level of the framework is the Digital Twin level.
It resembles the Cognition level of the 5C architecture [3], i.e.,
at this stage proper presentation of the acquired knowledge
throughout the lower levels must be provided. Additionally,
there must be a constant synchronization between the real fac-
tory and its replica in the digital world. Such synchronization
requires that produced data or acquired by physical sensors
spread at the shoop-ﬂoor level must be passed to the digital
tools, which in turn elaborate them via sophisticate analytics
or simulations in order to provide feedback and reactions
that impact real-time over the real factory. The Digital Twin
is underpinned by representational models about the whole
factory. In particular, the demonstration scenario described in
the next section relies on three representational models, which
formally describe the meta-models of the digital replica of
the factory: the Digital Factory Model, the Virtual Individual
Model, and the Skills Virtual Model.
IV.
KNOWLEDGE MODELS
A detailed description of the knowledge models at the
basis of the system proposed in this work will be provided
in the current section as extension of the already mentioned
previous work by authors. In Figure 3 the importing schema of
the ontologies related to the three representational models is
depicted. All models have been written using OWL (Ontology
Web Language) and present a Description Logic (DL) expres-
sivity equal to AL (Attributive Language). This latter involves:
atomic negation (negation of concept that do not appear on the
left hand side of the axioms), concept intersections, universal
restrictions and limited existensial quantiﬁcation. For further
details about Description Logics and their expressivity a good
reference is [61], while for a formal deﬁnition of ontology and
all its speciﬁcations the work of Staab et al. is a comprehensive
one [62]. Ontologies in ﬁgure have been realized within
Prot´eg´e (v. 5.2.0) ontology editor [63], which allows, thanks
to numerous plugins, to represent even graphically all the
axiomatized classes and related properties, thus easing the
design and realization of ontologies. All images referenced
in this section have been realized using OntoGraf plugin 3,
which is able to represent, using the most spread graph layout,
a graph where nodes represent classes and edges represent
object properties linking classes with each other. The entire
ontology at the basis of the system has been conceived as a
modular one and implemented using the import clause in order
to link the core module to the side modules (Figure 3 depicts
this mechanism). Furthermore, by acknowledging a common
best practice in ontology design, each module has not been
conceived and designed from scratch but existing ontologies
with common overlaps with our application or knowledge
domain have been taken into account also for just inspiring
a direction to move in developing our ontology [64].
The three ontological models underpinning the knowledge
layer of the proposed system are: the Digital Factory Model,
the Virtual Individual Model and Skills Virtual Model. Each
of these models will be described in the following subsections.
A. The Digital Factory Model
This model is the core of the whole representational
model underpinning the proposed knowledge-based system. It
contains concepts and logical relations representing the entire
production system involved inside the company (from the shop
ﬂoor to the manager desk) including production process, ﬁnal
products (with all their speciﬁc parts), by-products (meant as
secondary product made in the manufacture or synthesis of
something else), services, components, raw materials, and so
forth. It borrows some concepts and idea from the Virtual
Factory Data Model introduced in [16]. The top level classes
contained in this module are:
•
Component, an high-level abstraction class used to
represent a part or element of a larger whole, espe-
cially a part of a machine or vehicle or a product;
•
Manufacturing Production, a class meaning a process
of converting raw material into ﬁnished products by
using various processes, machines and energy. Produc-
tion is a process of converting inputs into outputs;
•
Product, an high-level abstraction class representing
an article or substance that is manufactured or reﬁned
for sale. It is also conceived as a product anything
that can be offered to a market and that might satisfy
a want or need;
•
Production Process is a class representing a process
of combining various material inputs and immaterial
inputs (plans, know-how) in order to make something
for consumption (the output). It is the act of creating
output, a good or service which has value and con-
tributes to the utility of individuals;
•
Production stage, any phase of a production process
meant as a step to be accomplished in order to obtain
a ﬁnal product;
3https://protegewiki.stanford.edu/wiki/OntoGraf

316
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 4. Digital Factory Model classes hierarchy OntoGraph export
•
Raw Material, a class representing a basic material
that is used to produce goods, ﬁnished products,
energy, or intermediate materials which are feedstock
for future ﬁnished products.
Figure 4 depicts the classes hierarchy of the Digital Factory
Model using Prot´eg´e ontology editor, while the box in Figure
5 shows some axioms generating the classes hierarchy in
Description Logics.
Arm ⊑ Component
ArmLop ⊑ Arm
ArmPost ⊑ Arm
AssemblingProcess ⊑ WoodenFurnitureStage
BackRail ⊑ Rail
BackUprightSlat ⊑ Component
BatchProduction ⊑ ProductionProcess
Chair ⊑ WoodenProduct
Component:
Courses: CraftProduction ⊑ ProductionProcess
CrestRail ⊑ Rail
Finishing ⊑ ProductionStage
FrontRail ⊑ Rail
JobProduction ⊑ ProductionProcess
KilnDryProcess ⊑ WoodenFurnitureStage
Leg ⊑ Component
Log ⊑ WoodenFurnitureStage
MassCustomization ⊑ ProductionProcess
MassProduction ⊑ ProductionProcess
Packing ⊑ ProductionStage
Padding ⊑ WoodenFurnitureStage
PlaningAndDrillingProcess ⊑ WoodenFurnitureStage
Rail ⊑ Component
SandingProcess ⊑ WoodenFurnitureStage
ServiceProduction ⊑ ProductionProcess
Sofa ⊑ WoodenProduct
SwamillingProcess
SwamillingProcess ⊑ WoodenFurnitureStage
Table ⊑ WoodenProduct
WebbingBridge ⊑ Component
WoodenFurnitureProduction ⊑ ManufacturingProduction
WoodenFurnitureStage ⊑ ProductionStage
WoodenProduct ⊑ Product
WoodenProduction ⊑ ManufacturingProduction
Figure 5. Digital Factory Model classes hierarchy excerpt
B. Virtual Individual Model
The Virtual Individual Model is a formal conceptualization
of the operator proﬁle. It includes biographic info (gender, age,
language and so on), capabilities and eventually disabilities or
impairments, work aspirations and attitudes, training activities
and courses the worker has already taken part. This module
imports the Skills Virtual Model described later on in this
section. The Virtual Individual Model is based on the Virtual
Individual Model provided within the Pegaso project [65] and
provides a formally multi-faceted description of the operator
within the factory. The top level classes of this ontology are:
•
User, which subsumes its direct subclass Worker.
This one is used to proﬁle a worker inside the com-
pany with all biographic info belonging to him/her
(gender, age, language and so on). This class has
object relation with ﬁllers in classes belonging to
the Skills Virtual Model, such has: attendedCourse,
attendedTrainingActivity and requiresSkill;
•
Training Activity, any formative activity a worker
accomplishes in order to get trained for carrying out
a speciﬁc production process phase (or step).
•
Courses, a wider formative activity designed for work-
ers making them able to use a particular technol-
ogy. With respect to Training Activity a course in-
cludes many formative units and present interdisci-
plinary links to similar courses or related technologies
courses.
In the box in Figure 6 some axioms generating the classes

317
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
BenchCarpenter ⊑ Woodworker
CNCMachinesOperator ⊑ Operator
CabinetMaker ⊑ Woodworker
ComputerControlledMachinery ⊑ Courses
Engineer ⊑ Worker
FurnitureFinisher ⊑ Woodworker
OfﬁceWorker ⊑ Worker
Operator ⊑ Worker
Technician ⊑ Worker
WoodSawingMachineSetter ⊑ Woodworker
Woodworker ⊑ Operator
Worker ⊑ User
Figure 6. Virtual Individual Model classes hierarchy excerpt
Figure 7. Virtual Individual Model classes OntoGraph export
hierarchy of the Virtual Individual Model are shown using the
operators of Description Logics, while Figure 7 depicts the
same classes hierarchy using the Prot´eg´e ontology editor.
C. Skills Virtual Model
The Skill Virtual Model provides a formal representation
of the skills the operator need in order to perform each single
phase of the production proces. It includes the knowledge of
product and its parts, processes, competencies and operator
capabilities. This model is imported from the previous one
that in turn is imported from the ﬁrst one. One of the existing
model that have inspired this ontological model is the technical
report entitled: Skills for Key Enabling Technologies in Europe
by the European Commission [10]. The top level classes of this
ontology are:
•
Competence, a class embodying the concept of ability
to do something successfully or efﬁciently within the
workplace, speciﬁcally concerning a profession, e.g.,
programmer, manager, seller, etc.;
•
Skill a class embodying the concept of ability to
do something successfully or efﬁciently speciﬁcally
concerning a practice in a production processing.
In the box in Figure 8 some axioms generating the classes
hierarchy of the Skills Virtual Model are shown using the
operators of Description Logics, while Figure 9 depicts the
same classes hierarchy using the Prot´eg´e ontology editor.
Assembling ⊑ WoodworkingSkill
CutAndShape ⊑ WoodworkingSkill
DrillPresses ⊑ WoodwoorkingMachineSkill
EquipmentSetting ⊑ WoodworkingSkill
MillingMachines ⊑ WoodwoorkingMachineSkill
PickingUsingAREquipment ⊑ SelectivePicking
ProjectSpeciﬁcationVeriﬁcation ⊑ WoodworkingSkill
SelectivePicking ⊑ WoodworkingSkill
UsageOfLathes ⊑ WoodwoorkingMachineSkill
UsageOfRouters ⊑ WoodwoorkingMachineSkill
UsageOfSaws ⊑ WoodwoorkingMachineSkill
UsageOfShapers ⊑ WoodwoorkingMachineSkill
WoodFasteningMachines ⊑ WoodwoorkingMachineSkill
WoodwoorkingMachineSkill ⊑ WoodworkingSkill
WoodworkingSkill ⊑ Skill
Figure 8. Skills Virtual Model classes hierarchy excerpt
Figure 9. Skills Virtual Model classes OntoGraph export
D. The merged model
By merging the three models described above, the whole
modularized knowledge layer for the proposed system is ob-
tained. From such integration some interesting logical links be-
tween classes coming from the module parts derive, as shown
in Figure 10 reporting the main object relations characterizing
the whole ontology and described in DL language in the box
in Figure 11.
The main Object Relations are the following ones:
•
attendedCourse, which has User as broader domain
class and Course as ﬁller class. It establishing a logical
link between the worker ontological individuals (with
all its features) and the course individuals with all
information strictly related to courses;
•
attendedTrainingActivity, which has User as broader
domain class and TrainingActivity as ﬁller class. It
establishing a logical link between the worker ontolog-
ical individuals (with all its features) and the training
activity speciﬁc to a particular production process step;
•
hasSkill, which has User as broader domain class
and Skill as ﬁller class. It establishing a logical link

318
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 10. The main object relations characterizing the whole ontology
between the worker ontological individuals (with all
its features) and the skills collected in the knowledge
base, which assume relevance within the company due
to its core business;
•
requireSkill, which has ProductionStage as domain
class and Skill as ﬁller class. It establishing a logical
link between the speciﬁc work step needed to carry out
a processing and the skills collected in the knowledge
base, which assume relevance in doing such speciﬁ
work activity.
∃ attendedCourse Thing ⊑ User
⊤ ⊑ ∀ attendedCourse Courses
attendedTrainingActivity
∃ attendedTrainingActivity Thing ⊑ User
⊤ ⊑ ∀ attendedTrainingActivity TrainingActivity
hasSkill
∃ hasSkill Thing ⊑ Worker
⊤ ⊑ ∀ hasSkill Skill
requiresSkill
∃ requiresSkill Thing ⊑ WoodenFurnitureStage
⊤ ⊑ ∀ requiresSkill WoodworkingSkill
Figure 11. Major object relations DL excerpt
V.
CASE STUDY RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
In this section the process steps for conducting the pro-
posed case study will be described, according to the guidelines
suggested in [18]. Also in this work, we put the proposed
case study in the context of other research methodologies and
refer to general deﬁnitions of the term case study according to
established works in the literature [66][67][68]. All dimensions
resulting from the cited works emerge in this one, being this
(1) an empirical method aimed at investigating contemporary
phenomena in their context, (2) a research strategy that uses
multiple sources of evidences, (3) a case where the boundary
between the phenomenon and its context may be unclear, ﬁ-
nally, (4) it is characterized by information gathering from few
entities (people, groups, organizations) and lack of experiment
control. This research is also in line with the “observational
methods” proposed by [69]. Our case study is used for explana-
tory purposes, according the Robson classiﬁcation [66], as it
involves testing existing theories in conﬁrmatory studies. It can
be considered an interpretive case study, according to [70], as
it attempts to understand phenomena through the participants’
interpretation of the case study context. In ﬁgure 12, the
study case research methodology followed here is summarized
according to the steps mentioned in [18]. The main steps of the
procedure are depicted in the green arrows and are as follows:
1)
Case study design and planning;
2)
Data collection and preparation;
3)
Analysis of Data;
4)
Reporting;
5)
Reviewing.
Each phase will be detailed in the subsequent subsections
and it is worth to mention here that the whole procedure is
subject to continuous review by other researcher or stakehold-
ers and the evaluation of each phase, also in this work, has
been carried out through speciﬁc checklists at the end of each
phase.
A. Case study design and planning
Acknowledging the general mantra that planning is crucial
for every project (also in case study research like this), we
have applied the minimal set of elements that a plan for case
study should contain according to [66]: (1) Deﬁne what to
achieve, the Objective; (2) characterize what is studied (Case);
(3) review the frame of references about the objective, i.e.,
the Theory; (4) what to know about the case under study
(Research questions); (5) the strategy for collecting data or
evidence about the case and, ﬁnally, individuate a strategy for
analyzing data (where to seek data).
Being this a case study exploratory and descriptive in
nature, the Objective of the case study is more generally
formulated and less precise than in ﬁxed research design.
According to the description of the case study described in
section VI and what stated in the introduction, the case aims
at demonstrates the use of advanced technologies from the

319
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 12. Case study methodology overview
Industry 4.0 panorama in order to create a user-centred factory
environment, thus, we formulate the objective (Obj) as the
question in the box below:
Obj: Are the advanced technologies from Industry 4.0 able
to promote a user-centred factory environment in modern
factories?
The case study is described in section VI too and is
conceived as an holistic study according to [67], where two
different scopes are addressed: (1) the ability of the system to
support the worker in each phase of the production process,
(2) the ability of the system to improve the level of comfort
and wellness of the workers at a shop ﬂoor. The frame of
reference, i.e. the theory, followed in this case study research
has been deﬁned in the direction of making the context of
the case study research clear and is focused on Industry 4.0
literature In particular the conceptual models existing in the
literature and advanced technologies have been reviewed and
collected in order to fulﬁll the frame of reference for this case
study research. The frame of references is described in Section
2, where a review of the main conceptual models for Industry
4.0 is shown, for example, the ”5C architecture for Cyber-
Physical Systems, the Reference Architectural Model Industrie
(RAMI) 4.0, and ”The Open Platform Communications Uni-
ﬁed Architecture (OPC UA)” to cite a few. Furthermore, the
references section shows the three inspiring paradigms from
Industry 4.0, with a review of the enabling technologies for
each of them: the Teaching Factory, the Visual Approach to
Manufacturing (with AR/VR technologies) and the knowledge-
based manufacturing systems.
The research Questions (RQs) for this case study research
have been individuated in order to state what is needed to
know in order to fulﬁll the objective of the study. The research
questions specialize the objective breaking it into more detailed
questions. Here three question have been reported:
RQ1: Does the proposed system enhance workforce skills
and competences by promoting a continuous learning
environment within the company?
RQ2: Does the proposed system augment the social
sustainability within the company by promoting good
community relations, respecting human rights and granting
good working conditions?
RQ3: Does the productivity increase thanks to the good
workers’ condition the system is able to guarantee within
the company?
In order to answer to the research questions, it is needed
to collect evidences and data from the shop ﬂoor whose level
of formalism and nature will be detailed in the subsequent
sections.
B. Data collection and preparation
There are several different sources of information that can
be used in a case study. In this one, we have used different
degree of data collection techniques, according to [71]. Also,
we have taken into account viewpoint of different roles inside
the company, e.g., workers, managers and engineers, this way
making the conclusion stronger than a conclusion based on
a single source. Speciﬁcally, ﬁrst degree data collection used
involve real time data or information acquisition through for

320
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
example interviews and observations at a shop ﬂoor, while,
second degree collection data consists in the usage of software
tools made available for the workers within the proposed
system and automatically monitored. Finally, a third degree
of collection techniques is used for example when historical
data from previous production processes have been analyzed
in order to compare the data of the new results with standard
production methodologies outcomes (in terms of failure, pro-
duction pieces for time units, and so forth). The ﬁrst degree
data collection is based on Interviews. In this work different
types of interviews have been used according to the recipient
of the interview itself. A fully-structured interviews, similar to
a questionnaire-based survey, is used for workers engaged in
the shop ﬂoor in production processes supported by the new
system under study, while open questions have been addressed
to managers and engineers. In the ﬁrst case, the aim of the
interviews was to seek to ﬁnd relations between constructs
and describe or explicate the case, while in the second case,
the aim is to know how individuals (managers and engineers)
qualitative experience the phenomenon. An interview session
is divided into a number of phases. First the researcher presents
the objectives of the interview and the case study, and explains
how the data from the interview will be used. Then a set of
introductory questions are asked about the background etc. of
the subject. After the introduction comes the main interview
questions, which take up the largest part of the interview. In
order to get feedback and avoid misunderstandings, the major
ﬁndings are summarized by the researcher towards the end of
the interview. In general, in this case study interview sessions
are structured according to the funnel model that begins with
open questions and moves towards more speciﬁc ones.
C. Analysis of data
Since this case study research is a ﬂexible research method,
qualitative data analysis methods are used. According to [18],
the basic objective of the analysis is to derive conclusions
from the data, keeping a clear chain of evidence. This means
that a reader should be able to follow the derivation of results
and conclusions from the collected data. In order to achieve
this, we have implemented a systematic analysis techniques
where analysis has been carried out in parallel with the data
collection. As soon as new insights come out during the
analysis of collected data, new data must often be collected and
instrumentation such as interview questionnaires are updated.
In fact, according to Figure 12, each phase is subject to a con-
tinuous process of reviewing according to feedback received
from readers and other researchers. The need for multiple
researchers point of view comes form the attempt to reduce as
much as possible any bias by individual researcher. This case
study uses the Hypothesis conﬁrmation techniques rather than
the Hypothesis generation [72], as the study is explanatory and
aims to conﬁrm that a hypothesis is really true. The hypothesis
are in line with the research questions previously stated. Firstly,
hypotheses are generated and then they are conﬁrmed in a
procedures based on a series of steps. For instance, transcribed
interviews from managers are initially analyzed by one of
the researchers and properly codiﬁed in order to assign to
each interviewee’s point of view, a point in favor or not
to the corresponding hypothesis being conﬁrmed, then, the
results from multiple interviewees are collected in order to
summarize ﬁndings. Structured interview are less complicate
in analysis due their structured nature. Here positive answers
to a questionnaire coded for speciﬁc hypothesis to conﬁrm are
collected in order to obtain a conﬁrmation or not based on the
majority of collected answers.
D. Reporting
The report communicates the ﬁndings of the study, but is
also the main source of information for judging the quality of
the study. This article in not conceived as a fully reporting of
the case study research upon which is based. For such scope,
future activities have been planned in order to fully accomplish
this task. This section just describes broadly the research
methodology used in order to present our case study. This
study may have different audiences, such as peer researchers,
policy makers, research sponsors, and industry practitioners
and is preliminary to further detailed reports.
E. Reviweing and validation
A set of checklists (Chk) for each phase have been listed in
order to help reviewer and other stakeholder in order to validate
the methodology and the correctness of the case study. A short
list of some of them are shown as follows:
Chk1: What is the case and its units of analysis?
Chk2: Are clear objectives, preliminary research ques-
tions, hypotheses (if any) deﬁned in advance?
Chk3:Is the theoretical basisrelation to existing literature
or other casesdeﬁned?
Chk4: Are the planned methods and measurements sufﬁ-
cient to fulﬁll the objective of the study?
Chk5:Is data collected according to the case study proto-
col?
Chk6: Is the analysis methodology deﬁned, including roles
and review procedures?
Chk7: Are there clear conclusions from the analysis,
including recommendations for practice/further research?
Chk8: Are the case and its units of analysis adequately
presented?
Chk9: Are the objective, the research questions and cor-
responding answers reported?
Chk10: Does the report contain conclusions, implications
for practice and future research?
VI.
USER-CENTRED WORKPLACES: A CASE
STUDY
The case study presented here is focused on the production
process of wooden furniture, such as sofas, dispensers, chairs
and so on. This case study is signiﬁcant because, on the one
hand, the adoption of innovative technologies can improve the
whole production process making it more competitive and lean,
while, on the other hand, the need for a hand-made production
as the most important added value for customers, signiﬁcantly
reduces the freedom of action in terms of processes automation
and innovation deployment. Thus, most of the process innova-
tion is user-centred, i.e., it needs to be addressed towards the
direct support of human operators activities rather than towards
sophisticated machinery.
Typically, human operators involved in this scenario have
to deal with two different kinds of issues, which will be
further discussed as follows. At ﬁrst, the operators are not
interchangeable in the assembly line, since she/he is formed
for (and is in charge of) accomplishing a speciﬁc task (e.g.,
drilling, assembly of parts, cutting, etc.); therefore, job rotation

321
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 13. Case study conceptual overview
is not applicable, and thus, the company has great difﬁculty in
distributing the workload, for example, when it must deal with
peaks of requests for a certain product (requiring speciﬁc work-
ings) or in the case of unavailability of some resources. More-
over, the lack of a proper job rotation may result frustrating for
worker who is forced to perform the same operations all the
time. Secondly, the high variety of wooden products along with
the mass customization may require an extra effort for workers
in order to deal with the rapidly change of work instructions,
without the help of technologies. For example, the use of
traditional hard copy manuals, instead of technologies based
on a Visual Approach, will force the operator to continuously
check out the instruction sheets (due to the strong difference
among assembling sequences of different products models),
and this can lead to a waste of time, which can signiﬁcantly
grow depending on worker experience and on the frequency
of production of different models. Conversely, the proper
adoption of a Visual Approach supported by technologies,
will provide just-in-time information delivering, following the
principle of transferring the right information at the right
person at the right time.
What we expect from the implementation of user-centred
workplaces is: reducing non-value adding activities; reducing
mistakes from employees and suppliers; reducing time for
employee orientation and training; reducing search time in
navigating the facility and locating tools, parts and supplies; re-
ducing unnecessary human motion and transportation of goods;
increasing productivity supporting sustainability, mainly from
a social perspective. Workers will no longer perform their
tasks routinely; instead, they will have to undertake varied
and mostly unstructured tasks, depending on the needs of the
dynamically changing production process. Teams should/will
include ﬂexible and remote ways of working and interacting
with the systems as well as with other workers.
As shown in Figure 13, the case study involves different
actors and components: the operators, an AR equipment, the
Digital Factory Manager (DFM) and the virtual models. It
also involves different technological solutions which support
such components: an Augmented Reality System, with annex
headset or visors like the Oculus Rift, a distributed sensor
network, which is spread throughout all machinery and oper-
ators, intelligent software robots like chatbot able to assist the
human operators in accomplishing their tasks, in a high level
of abstraction, and ﬁnally, representational languages such as
ontologies [73], belonging to the Semantic Web technologies
panorama [74]. The latter are used for formally representing
the knowledge about the whole factory and the involved actors
through the semantic model presented in the previous section.
These formal models need to be properly integrated in
order to be used by the DFM, exploiting well-known tech-
niques for ontology integration existing in the literature [57].
Furthermore, related to each model there is an extensional
part (the model instance) that need to be persisted through
storage technologies such as RDF Stores or TripleStore [59];
One of the key components of the entire case study is the
DFM, which can be conceived as an omniscient module able
to understand the representation models underlying the whole
product life’ cycle, the production process and system and the
Virtual Individual Model of workers engaged in the production
process and their skills. With all these information at hand,
the DFM is able to infer the right allocation of people to
production process phases by ensuring that individuals with
proper skills and capabilities (or maybe attitude or desiderata)
are engaged in activities that best ﬁt the worker characteristics,
this way, realizing the transfer of the right information at
the right person at the right time. The synergistic use of
these technologies allows the implementation of a closed-loop
between the real factory and the its digital replica.

322
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
With the support of the technologies mentioned above,
framed in each layer depicted in Figure 2, it is possible
to imagine a demonstration scenario as follows. Once the
operator is ready to start her/his work, she/he approaches the
workstation and is immediately recognized through proximity
sensors like eBeacon. By accessing her/his proﬁle, represented
in the VIM (Virtual Individual Model), the system is able to
verify if the operator properly ﬁts to do a certain job over
a certain machine. Both the Digital Factory Model and the
Skill Virtual Model allow the system to know which skills
are needed to use a particular machine, and which machine
has to be used in carrying out a speciﬁc task for producing a
particular item or component of a ﬁnal product. The operator
proﬁle also contains a report of operator performances in
accomplishing speciﬁc tasks and her/his preferred tasks. The
personal record also contains info like impairments, such as,
for example, visual or audio deﬁcit, which can be used by
the system in order to adjust, for example, the work surface
lighting. The operator faces a work plan with all the parts
of which the piece is made, but does not know how the
different parts should be mounted (or because the operator
is not trained or because the piece is new). The operator is
guided step-by-step to accomplishing the work by the use of
AR equipment, which are constantly connected to a DFM, via
wireless networks. The latter constantly informs the operator
about the procedures to be followed when accomplishing a
certain task. A distributed network of sensor is pervasively
used in order to monitor the worker positions with respect to
machines and the advancement of her/his work.
In this study, we modeled the skills of the various operators
and mapped with the operations to be performed. This way,
the AR system is able to display the full piece of work,
superimposed on what has so far built by the operator, to
provide a clear idea of how to continue the work that is
being done. The AR system also displays a preview of the
ﬁnished piece on the basis of the piece produced so far
and on the basis of the drawings in 3D as designed by
the CAD. 3D drawings are displayed as a virtual silhouette
of the part still to be worked on. The AR display is also
provided with a chatbot interface, which allows the user, via
a speech recognition system or via a wireless keyboard, to
interact with intelligent software robots able to answer the
operator questions in a high level of abstraction. The chatbot
also acts as an info request router being capable to forward
a request to a human operator recognized able to respond
according to her/his proﬁle and experiences, as modeled in
the Virtual Individual Model. Any updates in the production
process or in hardware and software components of machinery
can arise the need for a professional upgrade of the operator
that is promptly reported by the system, this way ensuring a
continuous learning within the factory. The synergistic use of
different technological solutions makes the workplace smart,
i.e., a sustainable work environment which is attractive for
workers, tailored to their speciﬁc needs and able to ensure well-
being, continuous training and education, by also augmenting
overall productivity.
VII.
CONCLUSIONS
In this work, a conceptual framework for social manu-
facturing sustainability in the rise of Industry 4.0 has been
proposed. The idea of the framework is to put in evidence how
the cutting edge technologies under the Industry 4.0 umbrella
can support the fundamental principles of social sustainability.
In order to demonstrate this, intelligent cross-linked value
creation networks have been realized by turning the traditional
factory in a Cyber-Physical System, which implements the
concept of Teaching Factory and uses knowledge-based sys-
tems and a Visual approach to production process. A case study
has been presented in order to verge the layered framework
introduced on a real case study aligning the needs encountered
with the technological solutions belonging to each layer. The
paper demonstrates how the framed technologies can help in
implementing the user-centred environment within the factory.
This is conceived as a smart workplace, which is attractive for
workers, tailored to their speciﬁc needs and able to ensure well-
being, continuous training and education, and sustainability
without lessening productivity. Future lines of researches will
investigate the adoption of more sophisticated and complete
knowledge models of the production process also by applying
the proposed framework to other industrial scenario.
REFERENCES
[1]
E. G. Caldarola, G. E. Modoni, and M. Sacco, “A knowledge-based
approach to enhance the workforce skills and competences within
the industry 4.0,” IARIA, eKNOW 2018, The Tenth International
Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge Management.
ThinkMind, 2018, pp. 56–61.
[2]
R. Schneider, “Measuring social dimensions of sustainable production,”
OECD Sustainable Development Studies, 2008, pp. 39–47.
[3]
J. Lee, B. Bagheri, and H.-A. Kao, “A cyber-physical systems archi-
tecture for industry 4.0-based manufacturing systems,” Manufacturing
Letters, vol. 3, 2015, pp. 18–23.
[4]
H. Lasi, P. Fettke, H.-G. Kemper, T. Feld, and M. Hoffmann, “Industry
4.0,” Business & Information Systems Engineering, vol. 6, no. 4, 2014,
pp. 239–242.
[5]
M. Hermann, T. Pentek, and B. Otto, “Design principles for industrie 4.0
scenarios,” in System Sciences (HICSS), 2016 49th Hawaii International
Conference on.
IEEE, 2016, pp. 3928–3937.
[6]
G. E. Modoni, E. G. Caldarola, W. Terkaj, and M. Sacco, “Synchro-
nizing physical and digital factory: Beneﬁts and technical challenges,”
12th CIRP Conference on Intelligent Computation in Manufacturing
Engineering.
CIRP Procedia, 2018.
[7]
V. Kuts, G. E. Modoni, W. Terkaj, T. T¨ahemaa, M. Sacco, and T. Otto,
“Exploiting factory telemetry to support virtual reality simulation in
robotics cell,” in International Conference on Augmented Reality,
Virtual Reality and Computer Graphics.
Springer, 2017, pp. 212–221.
[8]
T. Stock and G. Seliger, “Opportunities of sustainable manufacturing in
industry 4.0,” Procedia Cirp, vol. 40, 2016, pp. 536–541.
[9]
M. R. Chertow, ““uncovering” industrial symbiosis,” Journal of Indus-
trial Ecology, vol. 11, no. 1, 2007, pp. 11–30.
[10]
EC, “Skills for Key Enabling Technologies in Europe,” European
Commission, Tech. Rep., 0 2016.
[11]
EFFRA, “Factories 4.0 and Beyond - Recommendations for the work
programme 18-19-20 of the FoF PPP under Horizon 2020,” EFFRA.
European Factories of the Future Research Association, Tech. Rep., 09
2016.
[12]
G. Chryssolouris, D. Mavrikios, and L. Rentzos, “The teaching factory:
A manufacturing education paradigm,” Procedia CIRP, vol. 57, 2016,
pp. 44–48.
[13]
H. Hirano, 5 pillars of the visual workplace.
CRC Press, 1995.
[14]
R. McFarland, C. Reise, A. Postawa, and G. Seliger, “18.9 learnstru-
ments in value creation and learning centered work place design,” in
Proceedings of the 11th Global Conference on Sustainable Manufactur-
ing - Innovative Solutions, 2013, pp. 624–629.
[15]
H. Lin and J. A. Harding, “A manufacturing system engineering
ontology model on the semantic web for inter-enterprise collaboration,”
Computers in Industry, vol. 58, no. 5, 2007, pp. 428–437.

323
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[16]
B. K´ad´ar, W. Terkaj, and M. Sacco, “Semantic virtual factory supporting
interoperable modelling and evaluation of production systems,” CIRP
Annals-Manufacturing Technology, vol. 62, no. 1, 2013, pp. 443–446.
[17]
L. Daniele, F. den Hartog, and J. Roes, “Created in close interaction
with the industry: the smart appliances reference (saref) ontology,” in
International Workshop Formal Ontologies Meet Industries.
Springer,
2015, pp. 100–112.
[18]
P. Runeson and M. H¨ost, “Guidelines for conducting and reporting case
study research in software engineering,” Empirical software engineer-
ing, vol. 14, no. 2, 2009, p. 131.
[19]
M. Hankel and B. Rexroth, “The reference architectural model industrie
4.0 (rami 4.0),” ZVEI, 2015.
[20]
IEC, “Iec 62264-1 enterprise-control system integration–part 1: Models
and terminology,” Tech. Rep., 2003.
[21]
IEC, “Iec 62890 life-cycle management for systems and products used
in industrial-process measurement, control and automation,” Tech. Rep.,
2006.
[22]
S.-H. Leitner and W. Mahnke, “Opc ua–service-oriented architecture
for industrial applications,” ABB Corporate Research Center, 2006.
[23]
M. Gutknecht, “Introduction to GRIPS,” STAR AG, Tech. Rep., 07
2014.
[24]
C. Yuan, Q. Zhai, and D. Dornfeld, “A three dimensional system ap-
proach for environmentally sustainable manufacturing,” CIRP Annals-
Manufacturing Technology, vol. 61, no. 1, 2012, pp. 39–42.
[25]
E. G. Caldarola, G. E. Modoni, and M. Sacco, “Manulearning: A
knowledge-based system to enable the continuous training of workers in
the manufacturing ﬁeld.” 12th International Conference on e-Learning,
2018.
[26]
V. Kuts, T. Otto, E. G. Caldarola, G. E. Modoni, and M. Sacco,
“Enabling the teaching factory leveraging a virtual reality system
based on the digital twin,” Proceedings of the 15th Annual EuroVR
Conference.
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, Ltd, Finland,
2018.
[27]
L. W. Anderson, D. R. Krathwohl, P. Airasian, K. Cruikshank, R. Mayer,
P. Pintrich, J. Raths, and M. Wittrock, “A taxonomy for learning,
teaching and assessing: A revision of blooms taxonomy,” New York.
Longman Publishing. Artz, AF, & Armour-Thomas, E.(1992). Devel-
opment of a cognitive-metacognitive framework for protocol analysis
of mathematical problem solving in small groups. Cognition and
Instruction, vol. 9, no. 2, 2001, pp. 137–175.
[28]
S. E. Alptekin, R. Pouraghabagher, P. McQuaid, and D. Waldorf,
“Teaching factory,” Industrial and Manufacturing Engineering, 2001,
p. 17.
[29]
J. Cachay, J. Wennemer, E. Abele, and R. Tenberg, “Study on action-
oriented learning with a learning factory approach,” Procedia-Social and
Behavioral Sciences, vol. 55, 2012, pp. 1144–1153.
[30]
E. Abele, J. Metternich, M. Tisch, G. Chryssolouris, W. Sihn, H. El-
Maraghy, V. Hummel, and F. Ranz, “Learning factories for research,
education, and training,” Procedia CiRp, vol. 32, 2015, pp. 1–6.
[31]
J. E. Jorgensen, J. S. Lamancusa, J. L. Zayas-Castro, and J. Ratner,
“The learning factory,” in Proceedings of the Fourth World Conference
on Engineering Education, St. Paul, Minneapolis, USA. Citeseer, 1995.
[32]
J. S. Lamancusa, J. L. Zayas, A. L. Soyster, L. Morell, and J. Jorgensen,
“2006 bernard m. gordon prize lecture*: The learning factory: Industry-
partnered active learning,” Journal of engineering education, vol. 97,
no. 1, 2008, pp. 5–11.
[33]
I. Gr¨aßler, A. P¨ohler, and J. Pottebaum, “Creation of a learning factory
for cyber physical production systems,” Procedia CIRP, vol. 54, 2016,
pp. 107–112.
[34]
D. Mavrikios, N. Papakostas, D. Mourtzis, and G. Chryssolouris,
“On industrial learning and training for the factories of the future: a
conceptual, cognitive and technology framework,” Journal of Intelligent
Manufacturing, vol. 24, no. 3, 2013, pp. 473–485.
[35]
L. Rentzos, M. Doukas, D. Mavrikios, D. Mourtzis, and G. Chrys-
solouris, “Integrating manufacturing education with industrial practice
using teaching factory paradigm: A construction equipment applica-
tion,” Procedia CiRP, vol. 17, 2014, pp. 189–194.
[36]
M. Dougiamas and P. Taylor, “Moodle: Using learning communities to
create an open source course management system,” 2003.
[37]
M. J. Kruger-Ross and R. D. Waters, “Predicting online learning
success: Applying the situational theory of publics to the virtual
classroom,” Computers & Education, vol. 61, 2013, pp. 176–184.
[38]
M. Grieves, “Digital twin: manufacturing excellence through virtual
factory replication,” White paper, 2014.
[39]
A. d. S. e Silva and D. M. Sutko, Digital cityscapes: Merging digital
and urban playspaces.
Peter Lang, 2009.
[40]
Y. Ohta and H. Tamura, Mixed reality: merging real and virtual worlds.
Springer Publishing Company, Incorporated, 2014.
[41]
F. Capozzi, V. Lorizzo, G. Modoni, and M. Sacco, “Lightweight
augmented reality tools for lean procedures in future factories,” in
International Conference on Augmented and Virtual Reality.
Springer,
2014, pp. 232–246.
[42]
Z. Pan, A. D. Cheok, H. Yang, J. Zhu, and J. Shi, “Virtual reality and
mixed reality for virtual learning environments,” Computers & graphics,
vol. 30, no. 1, 2006, pp. 20–28.
[43]
J. Martin and J. Bohuslava, “Augmented reality as an instrument for
teaching industrial automation,” in Cybernetics & Informatics (K&I),
2018.
IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–5.
[44]
N. Guarino, D. Oberle, and S. Staab, “What is an ontology?” in
Handbook on ontologies.
Springer, 2009, pp. 1–17.
[45]
S. Lemaignan, A. Siadat, J.-Y. Dantan, and A. Semenenko, “Mason:
A proposal for an ontology of manufacturing domain,” in Distributed
Intelligent Systems: Collective Intelligence and Its Applications, 2006.
DIS 2006. IEEE Workshop on.
IEEE, 2006, pp. 195–200.
[46]
P. Leit˜ao and F. Restivo, “Adacor: A holonic architecture for agile and
adaptive manufacturing control,” Computers in industry, vol. 57, no. 2,
2006, pp. 121–130.
[47]
W. Terkaj, G. Pedrielli, and M. Sacco, “Virtual factory data model,”
in Proceedings of the workshop on ontology and semantic web for
manufacturing, Graz, Austria, 2012, pp. 29–43.
[48]
H. Panetto, M. Dassisti, and A. Tursi, “Onto-pdm: Product-driven
ontology for product data management interoperability within man-
ufacturing process environment,” Advanced Engineering Informatics,
vol. 26, no. 2, 2012, pp. 334–348.
[49]
N. Chungoora, R. I. Young, G. Gunendran, C. Palmer, Z. Usman, N. A.
Anjum, A.-F. Cutting-Decelle, J. A. Harding, and K. Case, “A model-
driven ontology approach for manufacturing system interoperability and
knowledge sharing,” Computers in Industry, vol. 64, no. 4, 2013, pp.
392–401.
[50]
E. Negri, L. Fumagalli, M. Macchi, and M. Garetti, “Ontology for
service-based control of production systems,” in IFIP International Con-
ference on Advances in Production Management Systems.
Springer,
2015, pp. 484–492.
[51]
G. Bruno, R. Korf, J. Lentes, and N. Zimmermann, “Efﬁcient man-
agement of product lifecycle information through a semantic platform,”
International Journal of Product Lifecycle Management, vol. 9, no. 1,
2016, pp. 45–64.
[52]
M. Sacco, E. G. Caldarola, G. Modoni, and W. Terkaj, “Supporting the
design of aal through a sw integration framework: the d4all project,”
in International Conference on Universal Access in Human-Computer
Interaction.
Springer, 2014, pp. 75–84.
[53]
G. E. Modoni, M. Sacco, and W. Terkaj, “A telemetry-driven approach
to simulate data-intensive manufacturing processes,” Procedia CIRP,
vol. 57, 2016, pp. 281–285.
[54]
G. E. Modoni, M. Sacco, and W. Terkaj, “A semantic framework for
graph-based enterprise search,” Applied Computer Science, vol. 10,
2014.
[55]
E. G. Caldarola and A. M. Rinaldi, “Big data visualization tools: A
survey - the new paradigms, methodologies and tools for large data
sets visualization,” in - KomIS, INSTICC.
SciTePress, 2017.
[56]
E. G. Caldarola and A. M. Rinaldi, “Big data: A survey - the new
paradigms, methodologies and tools,” in Proceedings of 4th Interna-
tional Conference on Data Management Technologies and Applications
- Volume 1: KomIS, (DATA 2015), INSTICC.
SciTePress, 2015, pp.
362–370.
[57]
E. G. Caldarola and A. M. Rinaldi, “A multi-strategy approach for
ontology reuse through matching and integration techniques,” in Quality
Software Through Reuse and Integration.
Springer, 2016, pp. 63–90.

324
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[58]
G. Modoni, E. G. Caldarola, W. Terkaj, and M. Sacco, “The knowledge
reuse in an industrial scenario: A case study,” in eKNOW 2015,
The Seventh International Conference on Information, Process, and
Knowledge Management, 2015, pp. 66–71.
[59]
G. E. Modoni, M. Veniero, A. Trombetta, M. Sacco, and S. Clemente,
“Semantic based events signaling for aal systems,” Journal of Ambient
Intelligence and Humanized Computing, 2017, pp. 1–15.
[60]
E. G. Caldarola and A. M. Rinaldi, “Improving the visualization of
wordnet large lexical database through semantic tag clouds,” in Big
Data (BigData Congress), 2016 IEEE International Congress on. IEEE,
2016, pp. 34–41.
[61]
F. Baader, D. Calvanese, D. McGuinness, P. Patel-Schneider, and
D. Nardi, The description logic handbook: Theory, implementation and
applications.
Cambridge university press, 2003.
[62]
S. Staab and R. Studer, Handbook on ontologies.
Springer Science &
Business Media, 2010.
[63]
N. F. Noy, M. Sintek, S. Decker, M. Crub´ezy, R. W. Fergerson, and
M. A. Musen, “Creating semantic web contents with protege-2000,”
IEEE intelligent systems, vol. 16, no. 2, 2001, pp. 60–71.
[64]
G. Modoni, M. Doukas, W. Terkaj, M. Sacco, and D. Mourtzis,
“Enhancing factory data integration through the development of an
ontology: from the reference models reuse to the semantic conversion
of the legacy models,” International Journal of Computer Integrated
Manufacturing, vol. 30, no. 10, 2017, pp. 1043–1059.
[65]
G. Modoni, M. Sacco, G. Candea, S. Orte, and F. Velickovski, “A se-
mantic approach to recognize behaviours in teenagers.” in SEMANTICS
Posters&Demos, 2017.
[66]
C. Robson and K. McCartan, Real world research. John Wiley & Sons,
2016.
[67]
R. K. Yin, “Case study research: Design and methods (applied social
research methods),” London and Singapore: Sage, 2009.
[68]
I. Benbasat, D. K. Goldstein, and M. Mead, “The case research strategy
in studies of information systems,” MIS quarterly, 1987, pp. 369–386.
[69]
M. V. Zelkowitz and D. R. Wallace, “Experimental models for validating
technology,” Computer, vol. 31, no. 5, 1998, pp. 23–31.
[70]
H. K. Klein and M. D. Myers, “A set of principles for conducting
and evaluating interpretive ﬁeld studies in information systems,” MIS
quarterly, 1999, pp. 67–93.
[71]
T. C. Lethbridge, S. E. Sim, and J. Singer, “Studying software engi-
neers: Data collection techniques for software ﬁeld studies,” Empirical
software engineering, vol. 10, no. 3, 2005, pp. 311–341.
[72]
C. B. Seaman, “Qualitative methods in empirical studies of software
engineering,” IEEE Transactions on software engineering, no. 4, 1999,
pp. 557–572.
[73]
T. R. Gruber, “A translation approach to portable ontology speciﬁca-
tions,” Knowledge acquisition, vol. 5, no. 2, 1993, pp. 199–220.
[74]
T. Berners-Lee, J. Hendler, O. Lassila et al., “The semantic web,”
Scientiﬁc american, vol. 284, no. 5, 2001, pp. 28–37.

