398
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Unmanned Aerial Systems as Tools to Assist in Digitalized Decision Making 
 
Major, Title of Docent, PhD Tapio Saarelainen 
Army Academy 
Army Research and Development Division, 
Lappeenranta University of Technology 
Lappeenranta, Finland 
tapio.saarelainen@mil.fi 
tapio.saarelainen@lut.fi 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents an idea-phase introduction of 
how to utilize swarms of Unmanned Aerial Systems (UASs) to 
assist the overall capability in digitalized decision making at 
company level and below. In military operations, access to 
analyzed data is crucial in optimizing the performance of the 
troops. This need for data access applies also in civilian 
settings, and therefore, this paper briefly discusses some use 
cases of UASs in civilian environments. UASs are used as hub-
stations and tools to gather data from the areas of interest and 
to increase Situational Awareness (SA). Autonomous or guided 
platforms built with commercially off the shelf (COTS) 
material, UASs remain inexpensive data collecting tools. As the 
tempo of operations increases, a sustained capability for 
accruing timely and accurate data from a designated area is 
necessary for improved digitalized decision making. The aim in 
examining technologies and principles applicable both in 
military and civilian data gathering is to illustrate their 
applicability in both of these environments.  
Keywords-Unmanned Aerial Systems (UASs); dismounted 
company attack; real-time data; digitalized decision making. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper is an extended version of [1] and examines at 
an idea-stage the utilization of Unmanned Aerial Systems 
(UASs) in decision making, reconnaissance and monitoring 
by means of implemented sensors on UASs. This discussion 
comprises use cases drawn from both military and civilian 
contexts. The difference between Unmanned Aerial Vehicle 
(UAV) and Unmanned Aerial System (UAS) is slight but 
this slight difference is important in that UAS also refers to 
the ground systems and not just the flying component. The 
fast and reliable method of collecting data requires that the 
collected data are transmitted to the base-station as timely as 
possible. This ensures that the data are available for decision 
making purposes within a minimal delay. Moreover, industry 
and regulators have opted for UAS rather than UAV as the 
preferred term to detone Unmanned Aircraft or Aerial 
Systems as UAS encompasses all the aspects of deploying 
these aircraft rather than the mere platform. 
Militaries all over the world continue developing 
methods for saving the lives of own troops. The reason for 
this is the downsizing process of armies in western countries. 
In the environment where military operations are executed, a 
battlespace, the number of soldiers in combat units 
decreases, and simultaneously the number of personnel to 
take care of the logistics and maintenance issues increases as 
the maintenance of machinery utilized in the battlespace asks 
for ever increasing resources. The overall aim of militaries 
continues to be the sustained capability to improve 
operational performance despite the downsizing and 
minimized number of soldiers in combat. The remedy for 
this is an attempt to increase SA, which asks for the use of 
UASs to produce the required data for analyzing purposes. 
In what follows, the preferred term is Unmanned Aerial 
Systems (UASs), including drones, unmanned aerial vehicles 
(UAVs), and remotely piloted aircraft (RPA), demonstrating 
the military use history that reflects this equipment’s long-
recognized potential in supporting warfighting efforts [2]. 
UASs represent systems that function as swarms and thereby 
enable effective collecting and transmitting of data. 
UASs continue to be increasingly introduced in military 
operations. For instance, UASs exceed human-capability is 
that in Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (ISR) 
[3], which involve dangers and unaffordable casualties. 
Without accrued knowledge from the Area of Interest (AOI), 
any army becomes incapacitated. Typically, UAS are utilized 
in operations that are characterized as being dull, dirty or 
dangerous (DDD). Also, UAS can be exploited in covert 
operations, and in research and environmentally critical 
roles. In addition, the economics of operation speak for the 
advantage of the UAS. Resorting to the performance of UAS 
can assist in minimizing human labour.  
A company attack, typically a dismounted company 
attack, is a demanding military operation, which requires 
constant real-time data to allow executing all the phases of 
an operation to achieve the set goal. It comprises several 
phases of action, the first of which involves reconnaissance. 
An attacking unit must find out the composition and location 
of the opposite entity before a successful attack can be 
executed. Once the reconnaissance data have been gathered, 
the planning sequence of the operation begins by 
implementing the process of Military Decision Making 

399
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Process (MDMP). In this process, it is possible to benefit 
from automated assisting tools. When the MDMP has been 
carried out, it results in different types of Courses of Action 
(COAs). These COAs represent different alternatives to 
military commanders on how to organize the attack. Once 
the optimal COA has been chosen, the maneuver, 
dismounted company, attack can be ignited. A dismounted 
company attack is composed of the phases outlined in the 
following Figure 1: Assembly area, dismount line, line of 
departure, engagement, combat and the objective. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Dismounted company attack as a process [1]. 
To illustrate examining COAs, Figure 2 depicts two 
different types of COAs in a battlespace. The number of 
different COAs in real combat situation varies in that the 
number of COAs typically equals more than two, but to 
simplify things, in this case, there are only two COAs 
involved in the example depicted. In the first COA, the 
objective is to stop an armored enemy by deploying a 
flanking movement, whereas in the second COA, the 
objective is to destroy an enemy command post by direct 
engagement. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Different types of Courses of Action [1]. 
The utilization of UASs can be seen as having a central 
role when real-time data are required for rapid decision 
making. UASs can be viewed as a resource for military 
commanders in that UASs offer the advantage of surprise in 
an attack by producing the real-time data needed for decision 
making. If a commander fails in surprising the enemy, he or 
she loses the possibility to take the initiative in the operation. 
The ability to take and maintain the initiative is usually a 
prerequisite for a successful military operation, especially in 
a dismounted company attack. In order to facilitate an 
improved decision making process it is necessary to have 
access to the type of data that are necessary and most 
updated. 
The utilization of UASs is necessary to get the correct 
information from enemy space as rapidly as possible in the 
hectic tempo of operations, save soldiers’ lives and support 
the morale of troops performing the maneuvres in an 
operational area. Furthermore, the use of unmanned 
equipment can be seen as part of optimizing the existing 
resources of military units as machines ceaselessly continue 
fearless fighting. 
When militarily utilized, UASs can be used for varying 
tasks: performing terrain reconnaissance in the area of 
objective, performing reconnaissance of the use of Nuclear, 
Biological 
and 
Chemical 
substances, 
maintaining 
reconnaissance engagement by providing data on enemy 
movements, and monitoring the actions of enemy troops 
(direction and speed of movement, location, size, formation, 
action). UASs can also be utilized in the targeting process in 
that UASs can be sent airborne to the designated areas for 
the reconnaissance and targeting of the potential enemy 
targets. UAVs can act as relay stations for sustaining the 
constant capability to communicate and control the troops 
and machines in the hostile area.  
Collected data from the designated areas are utilizable in 
the MDMP that is linked to gaining SA and choosing 
between different COAs. These data can be collected more 
safely, if an appropriate number of UASs of the necessary 
type are available for these operations. Using UASs 
alongside with dismounted close combat soldiers to 
complement data gathering makes it possible to combine 
optimally the capabilities of soldiers and equipment. The 
latter can be sent out to the most dangerous locations while 
dismounted close combat soldiers remain in charge of the 
less lethal task, if ever possible in a battlespace. 
The use of UASs gives an advantage for commanders. 
First, UASs can be sent to the areas of interest, days ahead, if 
required. UASs can be shut down or reactivated via electrical 
signals when necessary. This gives commanders the 
advantage to transport the UASs as reconnaissance resources 
to the designated areas timely at the chosen moment. When 
UASs have been flown to the area and shut down, they will 
not consume any energy, and the saved energy can be used at 
a chosen moment and in the wanted operation, which 
supports the own battle plan and own objectives. 
Commanders are able to plan these actions prior to execution 
and have UASs transported to the areas when deemed 
appropriate and safe. UASs can be ready and standing by in 
a chosen area, with the chosen sensors embedded in the UAS 
platform.  
To summarize: commanders can benefit from the use of 
push and pull factors. Commanders can push the UASs to the 
optimal area of battlespace at a chosen moment. The 
optimized location of UASs may then guarantee the 
improved 
performance 
in 
own 
oncoming 
military 
maneuvers. The pull factor means pulling the data from the 
designated areas at a chosen moment. These data are pulled 
to increase the performance of own operations in analyzing 
the collected data. The collected data serve as raw material 
for defining SA and COP. The accrued data are utilized in 
the MDMP and in the process of choosing between different 
COAs. 
A network structure offers a new and ubiquitous way to 
share and forward all kinds of data, including data collected 

400
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
by various sensors, the Wireless Polling Sensor Network 
(WPSN) was introduced in [4]. Since nodes do not form a 
network per se but rather are polled by a selected node of the 
mobile network, they remain undetected due to their passive 
nature. Communication is critical in the execution process of 
command and control. When the possibilities offered by the 
Wireless Polling Sensor Network are taken into active use 
together with using One Time Pads (OTPs), two 
communication goals become achievable: the covert network 
and security in messaging. This is discussed more in Section 
VI.  
When machines, such as UASs, are utilized, Service 
Oriented Architecture (SOA) becomes applicable. In 
digitized battlespace and in digitized operational planning, 
SOA is utilizable in allocating processes of own existing 
resources and optimizing the use of troops timely and in the 
correct operational area. SOA is also useful in offering 
assistance in the overall planning process. SOA can be used 
in optimizing the timing of the different actions, also while 
the dismounted company attack is in progress, and in 
automating the MDMP. By automating the MDMP and 
using UASs, commanders can save time, resources and lives 
as well as achieve the set objective. 
In both military and civilian operations the need for 
updated analyzed data is equally important. The means 
utilized for collecting data on areas and targets of interest are 
identical as well.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
concentrates on the related work, Section III discusses the 
characteristics of Unmanned Aerial Systems, and Section IV 
targets the essence of practical communication. Section V 
deals with Wireless Polling Sensor Networks and the use of 
One Time Pads, Section VI deals with Military Decision 
Making Process, and Section VII tackles Situational 
Awareness and Common Operational Picture. Section VIII 
discusses the significance of sensors, and Section IX looks at 
SOA in relation to MDMP and reorganizing the chain of 
command in troops. Section X concentrates on possibilities 
offered by new technologies, Section XI comprises 
discussion, Section XII concludes with the results, and 
Section XIII addresses requirements for further studies.  
The main contribution of this paper is the idea phase and 
conceptual level description of how the data accrued with the 
assistance of UASs can be implemented into a decision 
making process and how these collectd and analyzed data in 
turn may enhance the results gained by means of a military 
decision making process. Also, improved situational 
awareness and common operational picture contribute in 
facilitating collective performance that can be identified as 
the overall performance capability in the execution of 
processes. Finally, this paper introduces idea phase methods 
on how to improve the process of automatic data gathering 
with the assistance of UAS and how to increase inputs 
towards automated decision making processes and towards 
automized military operations. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The importance of UASs both in military and civilian 
environments has been recognized and several studies have 
examined the overall performance of UASs in civilian 
settings. For instance, data acquisition for post-disaster 
assessment has been studied in [5]. Furthermore, [6] studied 
using UASs for inspecting structural damage caused by 
hurricane and concluded that UAVs have great potential for 
post-disaster data collection and assessment. The identified 
challenges included obstacle avoidance, site access, sensor 
coverage and weather conditions. 
Moreover, civilian use cases of using UAVs include 
obtaining data on traffic trends and monitoring and 
controlling traffic in real-time to ease the traffic flows in 
risky areas, as indicated in [7]. In case of an emergency the 
pinpointed crash-site can be fast recovered and the injured 
evacuated.  
UAVs have also been used for data acquisition for 
management and monitoring purposes in gas-pipeline 
inspection [8] with sustained UAV flying capacity for 
several hours. 
Preparations for potential disaster-related usage of vision-
based UAV navigation have been identified as an important 
factor in UAV navigation, see [9].  In this study, an 
algorithm was developed to identify structures within the 
UAV-collected imagery and navigation directives based on 
these structures were relayed back to the UAV. 
The main challenges with UASs are linked with the 
limited communication ranges. This issue has been identified 
also in [1]. UASs have successfully been used in detecting 
different types of Points of Interests (POIs). The use of 
UASs in search and destroy missions has been challenging, 
as pointed out in [10]. The main challenges involve the 
communication process between the UASs [10]. The 
problem was solved by creating a new coalition formation 
algorithm to enhance the communication among the UASs.  
In addition, UASs offer a more inexpensive solution than 
human-operated helicopters for monitoring high-voltage 
transmission lines [11].  
As for the military use cases, several researchers have 
been studying the use of UASs in accruing data to support 
SA, COP and MDMP by increasing the performance of 
different types of networks. Moreover, the studies listed here 
have concentrated on increasing the speed, safety and 
capability to communicate in an improved manner.  
As demonstrated in [12], ad-hoc networks can create a 
UAS access net ensuring communication among mobile or 
stationary users. These ad-hoc networks support Blue Force 
Tracking, as indicated in [13]. When UASs are equipped 
with Free Space Optics (FSO) communication links, 
operations can be executed by avoiding to become sensed by 
means of electrical reconnaissance detection, as concluded in 
[14]. FSO represents an optical communication technology 
that uses light propagating in free space to transmit data from 
point-to-point (and multipoint) by using low-powered 
infrared lasers, which can also be used for localization 
purposes, if range and orientation information is available 
FSO-technology offers high-speed, up to 10 Gb, reliable and 
cost-effective connectivity for heterogeneous wireless 
services provision in both urban and rural deployments when 
Dense Wavelength Division Multiplexing (DWMD) is 
utilized in Radio-on-FSO (RoFSO) system.  

401
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
In vision-based tracking, pan-tilt gimbaled cameras using 
Commercial off-the shelf (COTS) components can be used 
together 
with 
calculation 
algorithms 
and 
advanced 
controlling systems for integrated control of a UAS and an 
onboard gimbaled camera, see [15]. Along with the 
availability of both low-cost and highly capable COTS-based 
UASs and Unmanned Ground Vehicles (UGVs) and 
communications equipment, it is reasonable to apply quick 
and inexpensive means for surveillance, tracking and 
location purposes, as discussed in [16]. UASs of varying 
types and sizes can be used in aerial surveillance and ground 
target tracking, see [17]. To boost the performance of a 
single UAS, swarms of small UASs can rely on airborne 
MANETs, as indicated in [2]. Transmission antennas are 
significant in the process of operating UASs, as indicated in 
[18]. When swarms of UASs are utilized for navigation, 
localization and target tracking, information synchronization 
is important, as discussed in [19]. In present battlespace 
miniature UASs are becoming increasingly significant 
among surveillance applications, as shown in [20]. Remotely 
controlled UASs can act as an assisting tool in tracking and 
monitoring, as discussed in [15]. Remotely controlled UASs 
can enhance SA, Blue Force Tracking (BFT), thereby 
enforcing the probability of success in missions, even when 
operating beyond line-of-sight, see [21]. The means for 
exploiting UASs and UGVs in the processes of data 
collection and the distribution of an updated COP to be 
implemented in Shared SA are discussed in [22]. Battle 
Management Language (BML) can be seen as a common 
language enabler between machines and interfaces along 
with almost ubiquitous swarms of UASs [19]. For example, 
networks utilizing COTS components mounted on of UASs 
add survivability and remove the need for a line-of-sight 
connection, as described in [16]. 
This present paper examines how to facilitate a 
dismounted company attack with the use of UASs. This 
means aiming at optimizing the use of existing resources and 
automating an attack to the extent feasible. The objective is 
to contribute to the overall goal of increasing safety in 
military operations by means of improved use of resources 
resulting in decreasing numbers of casualties as well as 
increasing the tempo of own military operations. 
The same calculation parameters and algorithms are 
utilizable both in military and civilian data collecting 
systems. This same applies to data transmitting systems. 
III. 
CHARACTERISTICS OF UNMANNED AERIAL SYSTEMS 
Unmanned Aerial Systems utilized in a dismounted 
company attack can be autonomous or guided platforms built 
with COTS material ensuring the relatively low price tags on 
the UASs. The main function of UASs is to produce real-
time data for commanders for decision making purposes. The 
use of swarms of UASs ensures the gathering of data behind 
the visual horizon. The distances between command link and 
the swarms of UASs are typically few kilometers. Once 
identified by the actions of an adversary, a UAS ends up 
becoming annihilated. Therefore, UASs have to be built to 
be disposable elements. When the UASs are used as swarms, 
the combat survivability of the system can be increased. 
Some of the promising characteristics of the UASs 
involve long flight duration, improved mission safety, flight 
repeatability due to improving autopilots and reduced 
operational costs, especially in military environments, 
compared to manned aircraft. The potential advantages of an 
unmanned platform, however, depend on factors, such as 
aircraft and sensor types, mission objectives, and the UAS 
regulatory requirements for operations of a particular 
platform [2]. 
For the purposes of this paper, measuring the utilization 
of UASs in a dismounted company attack would require real 
functioning swarms of UASs. Creating a simulation to model 
a UAS assisted operation is at present, unfortunately, non- 
feasible on the grounds that neither funding nor facilities are 
available.  
In Network Centric Operations (NCO) it is seminal to 
ensure identifying and defining relevant information to 
enable its distribution in the battlespace. This presupposes 
timely and secure information flow between own warriors 
and sensors [23]. UASs have to be used for collecting all the 
data available in the battlespace. Contemporary weapon 
systems require greater amounts of intelligence data at a 
higher accuracy level than ever before [13]. Since operations 
tend to be multi-national, different sensors and systems are 
required to communicate understandably between each 
entity. This means that all the participants representing 
different nations must agree on the wavelengths, frequencies, 
and waveforms to be utilized in the transmission processes 
between the sensors and base-stations. Various entities and 
nations typically utilize different types of signals and 
waveforms for varying reasons, and the utilization of the 
radio magnetic spectrum must be settled before a multi-
national operation can be successfully executed. This is 
necessary to minimize instances of fratricide and collateral 
damage, which requires the maximized distribution of the 
updated COP. One solution for this involves utilizing 
Business Management Language (BML) [23]. 
As for the classification of UASs, the types of 
classifications vary depending on the source, as in [24]. A 
classification based on size includes the sub-classes of Small, 
Medium and Large UASs. The class of Small UASs can 
include Very Small UASs, which in turn can include Micro 
or Nano UASs and Mini UASs, whereas the categorization 
of UASs according to their travel ranges and endurance in 
the air include the following sub-classes developed by the 
US military: Very low cost close- range UASs, Close-range 
UASs, Short-range UASs, Mid-range UASs, and Endurance 
UASs. Table I below lists varying types of UASs. 
Especially in civilian applications, UASs can be 
identified as collectors of data in ecological, meteorological, 
geological and human-induced disasters. UASs can be seen 
as versatile tools in data gathering for their flexibility, safety, 
ease of operation and relatively low-cost of ownership and 
operation. This facilitates UAS implementation in disaster 
situations, as described in [5].  
This paper discusses only UASs because of their 
versatility compared to other Unmanned Vehicles (UVs), 
such as Unmanned Ground Vehicles (UGVs). When a small 
tactical level military unit, such as a company, is performing 

402
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
a complicated maneuver, a dismounted company attack, the 
UASs represent the only reasonable type of UVs to be 
utilized. 
The following Table I lists a classification of types of 
UASs built for varying purposes.  
 
TABLE I.  
TYPES OF UASS 
 
 
UASs are capable of monitoring the designated target 
areas and transmitting real-time data to the base-station 
simultaneously when monitoring the area (see Figure 3). 
 
 
Figure 3.  UASs and the data transmission [1]. 
When flight times are short, less than an hour, engines 
and sensors embedded into UASs can be powered by liquid 
fuel batteries to ensure adequate level of energy. Liquid 
Polymer (LiPo) batteries are utilizable for their capacity. 
Electrical surveillance components, guidance systems, and 
command systems depend on adequate electricity level.  
Typically, the distance between a communication link 
and a swarm of UASs is few kilometers, and therefore 2.4 
GHz 
Ultra-Wideband 
Network 
system 
between 
the 
communication link and the base station is applicable for 
these distances. The usual speed of swarms of UASs is tens 
of kilometers per hour. This is a chosen speed to balance the 
energy consumption and the range of transmission power 
and movement. 
UASs are most versatile with their capability for quick 
deployment. UASs tend to be miniature-sized airplanes, 
drones and helicopters, weighing few kilograms. The range 
of these vehicles can vary from few hundred meters to few 
kilometers as can their mass and size. The same applies to 
the payload. The payload can be measured from tens of 
grams to few hundred grams depending on the use and 
measurements of UASs.  
The typical payload of UASs can comprise varying 
sensors, such as: acoustic-, seismic-, magnetic-, visible 
image-, shortwave infrared (SWIR)-, thermal-, infrared-, 
low-light television (LLTV)-, and sensors for laser tracking 
and spotting, and for facial recognition. These sensor 
packages can be also deployed into the area of interest at a 
desired moment. If the area of interest is known well in 
advance, a UAS and the sensor package can be flown into 
the perimeter in advance and been dropped in the chosen 
area. In addition, a UAS can be guided close to the area of 
interest. The UAS can then be parked, for example, on 
rooftops and cliffs to wait for the command to start the 
reconnoitering mission. This saves time and positions the 
UAS in nearby perimeters of the desired area. The UASs 
remain hidden and hard to detect, and when detected, it is too 
late anyway. 
In versatile combat situations, different types of Combat 
Information Systems (CISs) implemented by sensors are 
important 
parts 
of 
military 
command 
and 
control 
environment systems [25]. Raw reconnaissance data remain 
critical for creating a comprehensive Situational Awareness 
and Common Operational Picture. Without constant flow of 
intelligence and surveillance data, successful military 
operations cease from existing. 
The significance and potential of miniature UASs has 
been discussed since the beginning of the past decade. 
Today, miniature fixed-wing UASs are mainly used to target 
drones, for surveillance, and as decoys [26.].  
Examples of target drones do not belong to the category 
of miniature fixed-wing aircrafts, but they are full-scale 
target drone types, such as FQM-117. Target UAV series 
include three members: MQM-117A, MQM-117B and 
MQM-117C. 
In terms of reconnaissance drones, a famous example is 
RQ-11 Raven UAV. As for decoy drones, identifiable are 
Israeli manufactured Firebee 1241 and Scout. 
For civilian purposes, the main uses of UASs include 
internal security, for instance border patrol, victim search 
and rescue, research, wildlife and land management, and 
agricultural maintenance processes. 
IV. 
COMMUNICATION BETWEEEN ENTITIES 
The amount of data accrued via versatile sensors and 
tracking systems is vast. As a result, to distribute the location 
information filtered and fused through various systems 
remains a challenge. As said, warriors’ main function 
remains to fight instead of double-checking the monitor of 
their palm-top or equivalent. Besides, there will always be 
disturbances in the electromagnetic spectrum, quality of 
service (QoS) and transmitting power along with the limited 
bandwidth set limitations to the ubiquitous communication 

403
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
systems. 
However, 
the 
possibilities 
of 
battlespace 
communication are versatile, since almost all the sensors 
utilized are somehow linked together to facilitate BFT and 
Combat Identification (CID) and to improve COP and SA. 
UAS can be seen as a functional tool in the process of 
accruing data, see Figure 4. 
 
Figure 4.  Data accruing process in brief. 
When UASs are utilized in operations, the significance of 
communication links cannot be overemphasized. UAS are 
extensively used in exploration missions. They are used 
routinely to collect and send collected data back to ground 
station that provides real-time information on the covered 
area. Printed antennas can be seen as a solution in UASs. As 
described in [27], the significance of a functional printed 
antenna has been successfully tested and reported concerning 
a study in which printed antennas were used in computers for 
wireless local area network (WLAN) connectivity in the 
frequency of 2.4. GHz ISM (802.11b.g) and the 5 GHz 
(802.11a) bands. Printed patch antennas are widely utilized 
in automobiles as antennas for receiving signals of the global 
positioning system (GPS) and also in satellite digital audio 
radio systems (SDARS). These systems pose acceptable gain 
and radiation efficiency, as described in [28]. 
The capability to communicate between troops (soldiers) 
and machines (UASs) must be sustained throughout an 
operation. Without communication there is neither command 
nor control between the entities. Communication can be 
described as comprising three layers. These layers are 
sensor-layer, C4I2SR –layer and shooters –layer. The layers 
are connected with the existing communication networks. 
Different layers are depicted in Figure 5. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Communication network from sensor to shooter [1]. 
The depicted layers communicate and forward data via 
UAS–radios, 
which 
can 
utilize 
the 
output 
of 
GPS/GLONASS receivers for automatic position reporting. 
When Software Defined Radios (SDRs) are embedded 
onboard UASs, typical SDRs’ features can be included into 
transmission protocols. These include: Multiband 30 – 512 
MHz, multimode, multi-mission, software programmable 
architecture, Low Probability of Detection (LPD) and Low 
Probability of Identification (LPI), simultaneous voice and 
data, updated and analyzed data transfer from sensor to 
decision maker and onwards to the shooter applications. 
Lightweight 
UAS–implemented 
radios 
offer 
low 
consumption transceivers operating in the frequency of 2.4 
GHz Industrial, Scientific and Medical (ISM) band. The use 
of this frequency offers very low Radio Frequency (RF) 
signature modulation scheme based on spread spectrum 
technology (DSSS) and provides a robust, reliable and low 
probability of detection time division multiple access 
(TDMA) waveform. Radios typically feature advanced 
encryption standard (AES) encryption providing a very high 
security level on the transferred audio and data systems, 
while security keys can be downloadable. UAS -radios can 
provide several tactical communication services: full-duplex 
voice conferencing, GPS reporting, e-mail, chat, file transfer, 
and real-time video streaming. 
When properly adopted into active use, UASs can be 
seen as flying hubs or flying relay-stations, tools of 
communication. 
When 
UASs 
are 
used 
to 
secure 
communication, as depicted in Figure 5, the throughput of 
communication can be maximized. Furthermore, the swarms 
of UASs end up creating an own data communication 
system, as depicted in Figure 6. This ensures that the data 
transmission distances between UASs remain short and 
become operationally secure. This aids in meeting the 
requirements of Low-Probability of Detection (LPD) and 
Low-Probability of Identification (LPI). The described 
delicate system introduced is a new one and based on ideas 
that can be executed by utilizing existing COTS- technology 
[29]. 
 
 
Figure 6.  A data exchange process inside the swarm of UASs [1]. 
Figure 5 describes the idea of using UASs as swarms. 
The number of UASs used in each scenario varies depending 
on the commanded mission and its speed and other set 
requirements. 

404
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
V. 
WIRELESS POLLING SENSOR NETWORKS 
A battlespace tends to be embedded with different types 
of sensors found from the soil, airborne or attached into 
various types of manned and unmanned vehicles. The 
utilization of Wireless Polling Sensor Network (WPSN) 
together with One-Time Pads (OTP)s can be viewed as one 
possible solution for the improvement of a communication 
system between sensors and UASs. In the case of UAVs and 
other easily captured nodes there is a special disadvantage in 
using ordinary crypto algorithms requiring a stored key. 
Furthermore, neither the time nor the computing power is 
available for asymmetric algorithms. A solution to this 
problem is presented by a novel idea of exchanging One-
Time Pads and encrypting data with one of the OTPs. One-
time pad (OTP), or Vernam’s cipher, is a crypto algorithm 
where the key is as long as the plain text. The modern 
version of the algorithm simply takes a bitwise exclusive or 
of the key and the plain text. The idea is explained in [30]. 
The other OTP must be discarded for security reasons 
WPSN can be viewed as one possible solution when 
gathering data from different sensors and sensor networks. 
When a swarm of UASs is utilized in forming an ad-hoc 
network and polling a large number of fixed sensor nodes, a 
secure network system can be created. The WPSN system is 
more robust in the military environment than traditional 
Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs). Although WSNs have 
been used for a long time, they demonstrate particular 
disadvantages. These include the fact that multi-hop 
transmission fails when nodes are destroyed in military 
environments, battery lifetime creates limitations, and 
security challenges remain unsolved. A WPSN has 
advantages in all of these areas compared to other proposed 
solutions. WPSN comprises a small mobile ad-hoc network 
of UASs and a high number of fixed ground-based sensors, 
which are periodically polled by the UASs. 
The advantages concerning WPSN and OTP include that 
in the WPSN solution the fixed sensor nodes remain 
concealed, yet active, because the sensor nodes of WPSN do 
not communicate with each other but only respond to polling 
by the mobile nodes. The WPSN node communicates with a 
UAS through encrypted messages. Thereby, WPSN responds 
only after a UAS has submitted a polling request with a 
specific code. The routes of UVs can be fed into the systems 
early enough to gain the needed information from the 
designated areas [30]. 
When speaking about a battlespace and actions taking 
place in this hostile environment, it is mandatory that some 
of the UASs be shot down or destroyed by other means of 
contemporary warfare. This possibility must be recognized 
prior to engagement. UASs must be designed so that once 
malfunctioning, they will get automatically destroyed 
(software and hardware) to become instantly useless for the 
adversary. Yet, this destruction of one UAS does not 
jeopardize the concept of sustained secure communication, 
for the network composed by remaining UASs will reroute 
itself automatically. 
By exploiting WPSN and OTP it is possible to utilize 
UASs as described above when gathering data both in 
military and civilian environments. Especially the using of 
OTP increases operational security in both of these 
digitalized environments. 
VI. 
MILITARY DECISION MAKING PROCESS 
In military operations performed at tactical level, i.e., 
battalion and below, the significance of tempo and timing 
becomes critical. In the MDMP all the raw data collected by 
UASs have to be analyzed and taken into account as they are 
directly connected with targeting systems, weapon selection 
processes, COP, SA and Control, Command, Computers, 
Communication, Information, Intelligence, Surveillance and 
Reconnaissance (C4I2SR ). 
Here, automation and mathematics can be seen as 
assisting tools in the process of making rapid and reliable 
decisions. When mathematical methodology is implemented, 
measuring the additive value model is the simplest and most 
commonly used mathematical model in multiple objective 
decision analysis. As described in [31], the additive value 
model is given by the equation: 
 
( )
( )
∑
=
=
n
i
ij
i i
j
wv x
x
v
1
 
(1) 
where 
( )
jx
v
  is the total value of alternative j,  
i =1
 to n are the value measures specified in the 
qualitative value model, 
ij
x  is alternative j’s score (raw data) on value measure i, 
( )
vi xij
 is the single-dimensional value of alternative j on 
value measure i, 
and 
i
w  is the swing weight of value measure i. 
 
Equation (1) is the simplest and most commonly used 
mathematical model in multiple objective decision analysis. 
Obviously, mathematics alone cannot solve the dilemma 
of making the correct operational decision quickly in a 
chaotic combat setting. When a decision is made between 
different COAs, mathematics and probability prognosis can 
only be seen as assisting tools. The human commander 
remains the only one who is responsible for sensible and 
applicable decision, which can be converted into commands 
to be issued and executed in an operation.  
VII. SITUATIONAL AWARENESS AND COMMON 
OPERATIONAL PICTURE 
The term Situational Awareness has been given an apt 
definition in the Army Field Manual 1-02. SA can be 
understood as knowledge and understanding of the current 
situation, which promotes timely, relevant and accurate 
assessment of friendly, competitive and other operations 
within the battlespace in order to facilitate decision making. 
SA, furthermore, equals an informational perspective and 
skill that fosters an ability to determine quickly the context 
and relevance of events that is unfolding. The term SA 

405
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
comprises three levels: 1) perception, 2) comprehension and 
3) projection [32]. SA, or, the lack of it, remains critical in 
performing military operations successfully. The means to 
increase SA can and must be fostered and developed, since 
the loss or deterioration of SA results in inaccuracies, human 
errors, and eventual casualties and fratricide. The military 
operation in progress usually fails because of poor level of 
SA. 
Situational Awareness has a strong relation to COP. COP 
represents an overall understanding of the prevailing 
situation in the battlespace. COP can be displayed on the 
screen of a computer or a digital device, and by using 
markers and traditional maps. COP features elements, such 
as individuals of friendly forces, neutral entities and the 
adversary, presented by symbols of various types. 
To complete the list of phenomena affecting the MDMP, 
C4I2SR needs to be taken into account. UASs are utilized to 
assists the MDMP performed in C4I2SR environment. When 
combined together as swarms, UASs form tools for accruing 
data, forwarding and analyzing these data into the form of 
information to create COP and increase SA. 
To sum up, all these listed elements are linked to the 
MDMP. The decisions made as part of the MDMP can also 
be seen as tools in targeting and weapon selection processes. 
Figure 7 explains the relations and functions inside MDMP 
when the use case is related to targeting and weapon 
selection systems. In the MDMP, the end-come is the 
optimal use of weapon systems to avoid collateral damage 
and fratricide. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Decision making system in targeting and weapon systems [33]. 
VIII. SENSORS 
In order to achieve the set objective in a given military 
setting, it makes sense to utilize maximally the data produced 
by various types of sensors when accruing data from hostile 
environments. In some cases, especially when the weather 
conditions are challenging, for example, the wind speed 
exceeds 10 metres per second, the UASs cannot be used or 
they are too slow and there has to be an alternative 
possibility to deploy sensors for accruing real-time data. 
Some of these sensors can be deployed to the area of interest 
with the assistance of artillery fire produced by mortars or 
cannons. Rapidly deployable airborne sensors represent 
relatively inexpensive and versatile tools for low-level 
battalion and company operations. As indicated in [33], light 
sensor munition can be deployed behind enemy lines, and an 
example of sensors’ deployment, when UASs are not 
applicable, is Sensor Element Munitions (SEMs). SEMs can 
be manufactured of composites surfaced with materials 
capable of absorbing radar beams, making the SEM less 
visible in enemy counter-artillery radars. In any military 
operation, airborne sensors are important for missions, such 
as force protection, perimeter control and intelligence 
utilization, as discussed in [34]. Transmitting the accrued 
data to prevent cases of fratricide and to ensure success in 
operations presupposes optimal communications. WiMAX 
transmission offers applicable possibilities in forwarding 
collected data. The distances in the transmission process are 
relatively short, ranging from 1 kilometre to few kilometres 
in conditions of clear Line-Of-Sight.  
The sensor package inside sensor element munitions is 
named Sensor Element (SE), which is made of COTS-
products comprising sensors capable of sensing most of the 
phenomena occurring in the electromagnetic spectrum. 
Overall, COTS-products are relatively inexpensive and 
reliable in terms of function, as explained in [35]. Sensor 
Elements can contain the same sensors as UASs. The 
command post has the capability for the data fusion of all the 
accrued sensor information.  
Once an SE is airborne, it immediately starts to transmit 
the gathered data to friendly troops either directly or, if the 
transmission distance exceeds the capability of the 
transmission unit, the SE transmits the data to another 
airborne device, which acts as a relay station in relation to 
own troops. The SE communicates with the receiver station 
and other sensor element packages over a 2.4 GHz Ultra-
Wideband Network system. The accrued data are encrypted 
for security reasons. The composition of SEMs is depicted in 
Figure 8.  
 
 
Figure 8.  Structures of Sensor Element Munitions (SEMs): An artillery 
SEM (left), a mortar SEM (right) [33]. 
SEMs can be deployed to the target area with manned 
artillery weapons or unmanned remotely controlled pieces of 
artillery or by using mortars, as mentioned earlier. The 
process of deploying SEM to the area of interest is depicted 
in Figure 9. SEM ejects the Sensor Element, which in turn 
reports the gathered data to the base station [33].  

406
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 9.  Process on how to deploy an SE to an enemy territory [33]. 
In Signature Prediction Process (SPP), described in [33], 
sensors accrue data and transmit these data for analysing 
centres. These data collected with SEMs are then verified 
with the data collected with other sensors in order to predict 
and anticipate the target and its actions. These data can be 
also utilized in analysing different possible courses of action 
and in the weapon selection process. 
When we implement a weapon of any kind as part of the 
unmanned aerial system, we are dealing with an Unmanned 
Combat Aerial System (UCAS). The route planning of a 
UAS or Unmanned Combat Aerial System (UCAS) is in a 
significant role when an operation is in its planning stage. 
The same applies to the significance of algorithms in time 
limited operations, as indicated in [36]. The reconnoitering 
range tends to vary from one to few kilometers. When a 
dismounted company attack is supported with units of UASs 
tailored for Close-Air Support (CAS), the data exchange 
transmission process for the target data is depicted in Figure 
10. 
 
 
Figure 10.  The process of detecting target to the shooter [33]. 
The UASs of CAS units optimize the speed and 
destruction power used in proximity to destroy the 
designated targets. When a small unit operates, it needs to 
achieve results in short time in order to maintain the 
initiative and reach the set objective. A company is a small 
military unit, which has to maximize the momentum offered 
by the performance produced by CAS units. UASs must be 
utilized as tools to evaluate the outcome of the executed CAS 
fire-mission. If the result of CAS fire-mission is reported not 
to fulfil the requirements set, the new round of CAS fire-
mission must be performed to destroy the chosen target. 
IX. 
SERVICE ORIENTED ARCHITECTURE 
SOA offers a variety of possibilities to improve the 
performance in military operations. When UASs become 
more increasingly identified as an exploitable resource in the 
military data producing environment and as the inputs of the 
UASs become fully utilized operationally, SOA is going to 
render itself useful for military commanders in executing 
military operations. SOA can be exploited when needing to 
reorganize the military organization after casualties affect the 
chain of command in a dismounted company. This process is 
described in [37]. Military operations nowadays usually 
demonstrate features of Network Centric Warfare (NCW) in 
which one key aspect is to be able to offer a valid and 
accurate COP for the operating troops in the battlespace. A 
basic requirement for a military commander is the ability to 
command the troops and sustain optimal SA and COP. An 
important aspect in distributing information in the 
battlespace is the amount and quality of information shared 
at different levels. SOA can be seen as a useful tool in 
distributing data in a preprogrammed manner. The amount of 
information allocated must be set to a level where the 
decision maker can perform timely and draw accurate 
conclusions. In the battlespace, the units suffer from 
casualties and the chain of command never remains intact.  
A constructive idea in SOA is in its process ideology. In 
a dismounted company, the composition of the unit and its 
performance are critical in executing the operations. Military 
units suffer from casualties and their mathematical 
performance value tends to change in an unpredictable 
manner. The performance of a military organization, such as 
a dismounted infantry company, can be mathematically 
calculated as explained in [37]. Behind these mathematical 
values is a Psycho Physical Factor, described in [37]. The 
process of creating this factor is described in [38] and the 
formula may be useful in calculating the performance of a 
military unit. 
The implementation of SOA is described in [37]. A key 
aspect in the presented architecture [37] is the dynamically 
changing architecture. Benefitting from the possibilities 
offered to orchestrate data and services with the assistance of 
SOA allows for improved performance in the execution of 
operations. SOA can be utilized in the process of choosing 
between different COAs. Eventually, the chosen COA will 
be fine-tuned into commands and maneuvres of a 
dismounted company attack. 
In applying SOA paradigms, loose coupling, dynamic 
binding and independency of development technologies, 
platforms and organizations, as well as locations, all these 
become advantages in that the use of SOA typically 
encourages reusing services. The identified assets belong to 
military units, but military units offer their responsibilities 
through services, and capability deployment requires 
invoking and integrating a number of services. Figure 11 
depicts the relations of services, assets and capabilities of a 
military unit. 
 
Figure 11.  Conceptual model of C4I2SR capabilities based on SOA [39]. 

407
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
In a dismounted company attack, all operating military 
platoons use the same services and assets of a dismounted 
company. In this case, SOA itself offers a flexible approach 
to identify C4I2SR capabilities when several platoons benefit 
from the services and assets of a dismounted company. SOA 
enables a company to respond more quickly to the changing 
battlespace situations and requirements to execute the given 
missions in the given time and with the allocated resources. 
X. 
POSSIBILITIES OF NEW TECHNOLOGIES 
In order to be able to obtain depth of information, 
detailed digital data on the desired target, new technologies 
that render increasingly detailed information on the given 
targets become indispensable. These technologies include 
hyperspectral and multispectral imaging.  
The classification of hyperspectral data by using 
statistical pattern recognition methods requires a lot of 
processing time. Image channels of the data are strongly 
correlated with each other. The classification and recognition 
of images requires algorithms of correct type. Hyperspectral 
images are produced by imaging spectrometers. Remote 
imaging has been utilized for scanning Earth and planetary 
surfaces. Typically, spectrometers are able to perform 
spectral measurements of bands, typically at least from 0.4 to 
2.4 micrometers. The range represents visible through 
middle infrared wavelength ranges. Remote imagers in turn 
are designed to focus and measure the light reflects from 
many adjacent areas on the Earth’s surface. The principle of 
spectrometer is presented in Figure 12. 
 
 
Figure 12.  Functionality of an imaging spectrometer [40]. 
To interpret the scanned images, it is vital to understand 
spectral reflectance. As indicated in Figure 13, vegetation 
has higher reflectance in the near infrared range and lower 
reflectance of red light than soil [40]. 
 
 
Figure 13.  Representative spectral reflectance curves for several surface 
materials over the determined spectral range of visible light to reflected 
infrared [40]. 
Spectral libraries are important for they provide a source 
of reference spectra that can assist in the process of 
interpreting hyperspectral images. Imaging sensor converts 
detected radiance in each wavelength channel to an electric 
signal, which is then scaled and quantized into discrete 
integer values that represent encoded radiance values [40]. 
There are different strategies for image analysis. To 
interpret the collected data remains a challenge. Finding 
appropriate tools and approaches for visualizing and 
analyzing the essential information in a hyperspectral scene 
remains an area of active and constant research. Various 
countries 
and 
organizations 
have 
studied 
different 
approaches to solve the appropriate number of bands and 
wavelength ranges in order to improve the performance of 
spectrometers. The following Table II features the names of 
different types of sensors, organizations, number of bands 
used and wavelength ranges that have been identified.  
TABLE II.  
A SAMPLE OF RESEARCH AND COMMERCIAL IMAGING 
SPECTROMETERS 
 
 
 
Hyperspectral image is comprised of several layers. Each 
layer contains data in certain wavelength. This is depicted in 
Figure 14. 
 

408
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 14.  Hyperspectral image comprises several gray scale images that 
depict the same are in different wavelengths. [41]. 
Figure 15 features an image, in which steel rooftops are 
visible in white. The white color is visible in the process of 
interpreting the visual images provided by the sensors.  
 
 
 
Figure 15.  Steel roofs of buildings seen in white color [41]. 
One of the techniques used in UASs, laser scanning 
involves a scanning sensor transmitting thousands of pulses 
towards the target area (for example, terrain). The reflected 
echoes of pulses are then measured. Interpreting the 
collected images requires automatic classifiers. They search 
for artificial objects from the gathered data. In the future full 
waveform scanners are expected to produce more precise 
images from the scanned areas. 
In thermal imaging sensor packages now weigh only 120 
grams. The size and energy consumption of commercially 
produced sensors have decreased. 
As indicated in [42], miniature size UASs, weighing few 
kilograms, equipped with payloads of hundreds of grams, are 
capable of performing reconnaissance operations performed 
during a short period of time. The typical Spatial Resolution 
(MS) is from one to twenty centimeters, when the fight-
altitude remains below 500 meters as described in [42]. 
In practice, when two images, which have been taken 
from an identical area in a different time slot, are closely 
compared, it becomes possible to identify the changes. In 
doing so, changes surface concerning vehicles, pieces of 
artillery units, troops, and man-made bridges in the area of 
interest. 
XI. 
DISCUSSION 
Although there are similarities between the military’s 
operational requirements and those of the civilian UAS 
industry, standardization is still very much lacking. Yet, it is 
standardization that is required between the military settings 
and civilian UAS markets. This is because the equipment 
needs to be compatible and interoperable and used for data 
collecting jointly if necessary. Unless there are set standards, 
end-users 
of 
technology 
cannot 
benefit 
from 
the 
development of synthetic vision systems, sensors, flight 
hardware, advanced materials and robotic systems as none of 
these would be affordable.  
As for the seminal terminology, definitions of UAS and 
UAV can be found in [43] and [44]. Obviously, academia 
and industry continue to affect the evolution of the 
terminology used. Also, when dealing with organizing 
services 
among 
different 
entities, 
Service 
Oriented 
Architecture is an important issue. As indicated in [45], SOA 
fosters loose coupling of software assets, reuse of software 
components, acceleration of time to market, and reduction of 
organizational spending. The object is to benefit from the 
data collected with the best solutions available to increase 
the operational performance in accessing services, and lastly, 
to increase the speed and safety of operations executed. .  
The data produced by various multi-sensors can be 
utilized in the data refinery process to ease the recognition 
and identification process. This can be done with the 
assistance of data fusion processes by resorting to computer-
programs designed for these data fusion processes [33]. In 
fact, when using the KNearest-Neighbour (KNN) algorithm, 
approximately 80 % of unknown target samples can be 
recognized correctly, when the known target classification 
accuracy remains above 95 %. This enables the use of the 
ATR and the Automatic Target Cuer (ATC) [33]. 
As presented in publications [1], [33], the size and type 
of sensors have dramatically improved during past years. 
Sensors can be embedded inside artillery munitions or 
dispersed from aircraft. In some cases, helicopters can act as 
mother ships containing from tens to hundreds of small 
UASs and transport and drop them in designated areas for 
data accruing purposes.  
When the UASs are successfully utilized in the different 
phases in a dismounted combat attack, the results can be 
optimally utilized. These gained results can be identified and 
evaluated in relation to the different stages of the process of 
a dismounted company attack. When the need of a requested 
service is identified, automated systems assist to fulfil the 
need of any type (need of data, resupply, firepower, 
evacuation). 
UASs can be used for collecting updated and existing 
data and serving in the role of a radio transmission relay-
link, as a flying hub-station and in assessing the impact of 
artillery fire. Using swarms of UASs enables quick, reliable 
and effective data collecting from a specified area. 
Furthermore, when UASs function as the communication 
link, the chain of command and control remains secure as 
regards communication. 

409
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
By exploiting the data accessed by means of using UASs 
it is possible to enhance a dismounted military operation: 
readjusting the direction and action of combat units and 
increasing their speed. The communication between UASs 
and ground base-stations is encrypted. This ensures that the 
data collected and communication transmitted remain intact 
and coherent. UASs may fly via automated waypoints or 
serve as fighter-operated systems. UASs can be designed to 
be disposable, self-destroyable, once their task has been 
completed, or in case of malfunction, or if encountered by 
enemy. The use of SEMs becomes applicable in cases when 
the weather conditions are challenging, for example, the 
wind speed exceeds ten meters per second, or if data 
concerning a target must be rapidly accessed.  
Compared to traditional WSN-systems, WPSN allows for 
improved security protocol in the communication between 
UASs and sensors. Data collecting systems gather raw data 
on battle space phenomena, for example, troop movements 
and action. These raw data feed the MDMP and facilitate 
speeding up the decision making. Using mathematical 
models and –programs produces improved SA and COP, 
compared to non-automatized human decision making 
performance. The improved SA and COP allow for 
significant increase in efficiency as regards planning and 
implementing the tactical use of destructive fire power.  
As the raw data collected by UASs are already in 
electronic form, SOA can be utilized in planning, distributing 
and optimizing resources: evacuation, supplies, use of 
artillery fire. When the described systems for data collecting, 
analyzing, and communicating function as planned, it 
becomes possible to carry out an automated, computer-
assisted attack as described in Figure 16. Utilizing FSO 
communication links fosters reliable, secure and coherent 
communication in command and control processes. 
If and when all the accrued data can be properly 
processed and analyzed in MDMP with the assistance of 
SOA, the performance of troops can result in an automated 
dismounted company attack as depicted in Figure 16. 
 
 
Figure 16.  An automated attack operation. [1] 
Figure 16 aims to visualize the goal of commanding 
military troops with the assistance of a computerized 
Artificial Intelligence (AI). The final commands for the 
military units to move and execute are given by a human 
commander, not by a machine. UASs can be seen as tools in 
monitoring and assisting in an operation when re-adjusting 
its pace: If the pace of the units or an individual soldier is too 
slow, the data transmitted by UASs is utilized to fine-tune 
the speed and direction of the operating troops. The SA data 
acquired by means of UASs must be used in taking the 
initiative and translating it into success in battle and 
eventually meeting the set objectives of the given military 
operation.  
As indicated in Figure 16 that features an automated 
military attack, similarly it is possible to control and 
command a search and rescue operation in a civilian setting, 
for example in a traffic crash. In other words, the executed 
operation is automated and sequenced. The use of 
mathematical classifiers is based on computational power 
and effective algorithms. The effective algorithms are 
utilizable both in military and civilian environments in that 
they do not separate environment-specific factors per se but 
rather merely calculate the values inserted in the algorithms 
regardless of the environment in question. 
XII. CONCLUSIONS 
This paper examined how to utilize the real-time data 
collecting ability provided by UASs in order to improve the 
performance of a military performer and a civilian entity. 
This would require also standardizing the UASs to benefit 
both entities. The approach adopted is an idea-stage 
examination and as such aims to provide grounds for further 
discussion.  
From a civilian perspective, the use of UAVs offers more 
cost-effective operational monitoring and management of 
natural resources. In flying low and slow and being 
comparatively affordable, UASs provide scientists with new 
opportunities for large scale appropriate measurement of 
ecological phenomena. This speeds up data gathering and 
saves natural resources in terms of energy consumption 
(aviation petroleum). The use of UASs does not disturb the 
balance of nature (animals, vegetation, birds migrating) more 
than using human-labor intense data gathering methods. 
From a military viewpoint, this paper relies on benefitting 
from the use of UASs as part of a dismounted company 
attack [1]. When doing so, it also points out the necessity of 
rapid data collection to support the fast MDMP.  
According to the studies covered, it is important to 
continue doing research to improve the capabilities of data 
accruing with the assistance of UASs of various types. The 
variety and versatility of UASs continue to increase with 
UASs 
equipped 
with 
octo-rotors 
for 
superior 
maneuverability and stability as well as vertical take-off and 
landing. UASs are equipped with several types of sensor-
packages depending on the data to be accrued. Also, the 
prevailing circumstances, such as mission duration and 
weather conditions, affect the equipping of UASs with 
bespoke sensor packages.  
UASs are capable of producing high quality of data 
especially when platforms operate with low speed and in low 
altitude. Especially search and rescue missions benefit from 
mission effectiveness of the sensor and scanning systems, 
when sensors have enough time to monitor the areas beneath. 

410
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The UASs have to be able to communicate constantly with 
the base-station, and network reliability has to be ensured. 
The significance of connectivity presupposes that UASs 
must utilize suitable and reliable communication means and 
frequencies. Printed antennas have proved their efficiency in 
the frequency of 2.4 GHz ISM band. Embedded antennas 
provide several advantages for UASs, including reduced 
weight, lower manufacturing costs and lower drag. 
The utilization and performance of UASs can be seen as 
data collectors in the battlespace. Sensors embedded into the 
UASs used can produce different types of data from the 
designated area. UASs can be deployed in most weather 
conditions and immediately when required, as there are no 
latency times. The data collected by UASs are then 
transmitted to the command posts. The collected real-time 
data remain critical for the MDMP. The data accrued must 
be in a pre-defined digitized form, which is applicable in 
digitized decision making systems exploited in the 
battlespace. The level and quality of SA continues to be 
critical at the dismounted close combat soldier level, whilst 
the level of COP plays an important role in command posts, 
where operations are planned, commanded and controlled. 
Laser scanning and hyperspectral imaging offer new 
plausible means to accrue data from the battlespace. 
However, as these are technologies in-progress, uncertainty 
must be accepted.  
The data for the MDMP are collected by using various 
types of sensors embedded into UASs and SEMs. The key 
issue is the speed of deploying the sensor package to the 
area. The prevailing combat situation in the battlespace 
determines the selecting of the type of UAS and sensor 
package embedded. The data accrued must be in a digitized 
form applicable in the software environment used. SOA can 
be used in re-organizing troops and allocating resources.  
The ultimate goal of a dismounted company attack is to 
execute the mission with the resources allocated and to 
obtain the set objective. This asks for sustaining timely 
performance with a minimal number of casualties, decreased 
instances of fratricide and with the least possible amount of 
collateral damage. The objective is difficult to obtain, when 
relying on soldiers prone to erring. However, operational 
performance can be improved if the data collected by means 
of UASs are reliable and timely and can be adopted in active 
use to facilitate decision making. The possibility to use 
updated and analyzed data is vital for operations’ success, 
especially in operations executed at a low operational level, 
such as a dismounted company attack. The utilization of 
these said data for decision making purposes may result in 
increased individual and collective performance capability in 
the executing of operations. With improved levels of SA and 
COP, operational security may be sustained. 
When computers act as assisting tools both in the MDMP 
and its civilian equivalent offering suggestions as commands 
to the commander of attacking troops or, say, the staff in a 
search and rescue mission, the commander either approves or 
rejects the suggested commands. Thus, the role of a human 
decision maker remains critical in the chain of command. 
XIII. FUTURE WORK 
Because Situational Awareness data remain vital in 
successful military and civilian operations, the reliable data 
must be gathered with all the possible means available. This 
applies to civilian cases of success as well. Attention must be 
paid to planning the utilization of UASs together with 
accounting for the operational security issues concerning 
using software and hardware in the battlespace and in, for 
example, civilian rescue operations.  
Future work must be focused on system reliability and 
ease of use of selected tools to improve COP and SA in both 
civilian and military environments. 
The usability of UASs to create a functional 
communication network requires field testing in combat 
exercise settings prior to any operational use. UASs have to 
be remotely destroyable both physically and digitally. The 
capability of UASs to self-destroy when malfunctioning or 
having been shot down must be tested. Other identified 
challenges are related to maintaining an adequate level of 
constant energy flow and protecting against violations 
caused by electronic warfare.  
The use of SOA in assisting the MDMP has to be studied 
in combat exercise settings as well in order to gain realistic 
and relevant data on human commanders evaluating COAs 
when planning a dismounted company attack.  
It is impossible to interpret digitized data without 
appropriate and suitable algorithms. Therefore, calculation 
power is needed to improve the performance of MDMP and 
the utilization of SOA. When appropriate solutions are 
designed to meet these challenges, the planning and 
execution capability of both military and civilian operations 
may significantly increase.  
Obviously, this involves implementing technologies so 
that they conform to the requirements set by the given usage 
environment. Data gathering tools and mathematical 
algorithms operate on the same principles whether the 
operational environment is a military or civilian one. The key 
is to allow for reliable data gathering in all circumstances 
complemented by reliable data analyzing and utilizing as part 
of digitalized decision making. Prior to making decisions the 
decision maker needs to have timely and secure access to the 
most recent Situational Awareness concerning the Area of 
Interest. This may then optimize operational success and 
eventually bring about the desired end outcome. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] T. Saarelainen, “Unmanned Aerial Vehicles as Assisting 
Tools in Dismounted Company Attack,” in Proc. of 
NexComm, April 19 – 24, 2015, Barcelona, Spain, ISBN: 
978-1-61208-396-4,  pp. 19 – 27. 
[2] A. C. Watts, V. G. Ambrosia, and E. A. Hinkley, “Unmanned 
Aercraft Systems in Remote Sensing and Scientific Research: 
Classification and Considerations of Use,” Remote Sens. 
2012, vol 4, 1671-1692; doi:10.3390/rs4061671. 
[3] A. Kim, M. Kim, E. Puchaty, M. Sevcovic, and D. Delarentis, 
“A System-of-systems framework for the improved capability 
of insurgent tracking mission involving unmanned aerial 
vehicles,” in Proc. of 5th International Conference in System 

411
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
of 
Systems 
Engineering, 
Loughborough, 
2010, 
doi:10.1109/SYSOSE/2010.5544076, pp. 1 – 6. 
[4] T. Saarelainen and J. Jormakka, “C4I2SR Tools for the Future 
Battlefield Warriors,” in Proc. of IEEE International 
Conference on Digital Communications (ICDT) 13-19 June, 
2009, 
Athens, 
Greece, 
pp. 
38 
– 
43, 
doi:10.1109/ICDT.2010.15. 
[5] S. Adams, C. Friedland, and M. Levitan, “Unmanned Aerial 
Vehicle Data Acquisition for Damage assessment in hurricane 
events,” in Proc. of 8th International Workshop on Remote 
Sensing 
for 
Disaster 
Management, 
Tokyo, 
Japan, 
https://blume.stanford.edu/sites/default/files/RS_Adams_Surv
ey_paper_0.pdf, accessed on Aug 30, 2015. 
[6] K. Pratt, R. Murphy, et al., “Requirements for semi-
autonomous flight in miniature UAV for structural 
inspection,” Proc. in Association for Unmanned Vehicle 
Systems International, Orlando, Florida. 
[7] A. Puri, “A survey of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) for 
traffic 
surveillance,” 
www.citeseerx.ist.edu/ 
viewdoc/ 
summary?doi=10.1.1.108.8384, accessed on Aug 30, 2015.  
[8] D. Hausamann, W. Zirnig, et al., “Monitoring of gas 
transmission pipelines –A cutomer driven civil UAV 
application,” 
Proc. 
in 
5th 
ONERA-DLR 
Aerospace 
Symposium, Toulouse, France, 2003. 
[9] S. Rathinam, Z. Kim, et al., “Vision based following of 
locally linear structures of using an unmanned aerial vehicle,” 
in Journal of Structure Systems, vol. 14, no.1, pp. 52 – 63, 
2008. 
[10] J.M George, P.B. Suit, J.B. Sousa, and F.L. Pereira, 
“Coalition formation with communication ranges and moving 
targets,” in Proc. of American Control Conference, June 30 – 
July 2, 2010, Baltimore, U.S.A., pp. 1605 – 1619, 
doi:10.1109/ACC2010.5531604. 
[11] J. Toth and A. Gilpin-Jackson, “Smart wiev for a smart grid – 
unmanned aerial vehicles for transmission lines,” in Proc. of 
the 1st Interntional Conference on Applied Robotics for the 
Power Industry, 5 – 7 Oct. 2010, Montreal, QC, Canada, pp. 1 
– 6, doi:11.1109.CARPI.20105624465. 
[12] S. Chaumette, R. Laplace, C. Mazel, and A. Godin, “Secure 
cooperative ad hoc applications within UAV fleets,” IEEE 
Conference 
on 
Military 
Communications 
Conference 
(MILCOM 2009), 18-21 Oct. 2009, Boston, MA, pp. 1 – 7, 
doi 10.1109/MILCOM.2009.5379819. 
[13] E. Loren, L. Riblett, and J. Wiseman, “TACKNET: Mobile ad 
hoc secure communications network,” in Proceedings of 41st 
Annual IEEE International Carnahal Conference on Security 
Technology, 8-11 October 2007, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, 
pp. 156 – 162. 
[14] C. Chlestil et al., “Reliable optical wireless links within UAV 
swarms,” in Proceedings of Transparent Optical Networks, 18 
– 22 June, 2006, Nottingham, Great-Britain, pp. 39 – 42, doi 
10.1109/ICTON.2006.248491. 
[15] V.N. Dobrokhodov, I.I. Kaminer, K.D. Jones, and R. 
Ghabcheloo, “Vision-based tracking and motion estimation 
for moving targets using small UAVs,” in Proceedings of the 
2006 American Control Conference Minneapolis, June 14 - 
16, 
Minnesota, 
USA, 
pp. 
1428 
– 
1433, 
doi 
10.1109/ACC.2006.16564418. 
[16] D. Hague, H.T. Kung, and B. Suter, “Field experimentation of 
cots-based UAV networking,” in Proceedings of IEEE 
Conference on Military Communications (MILCOM2006), 
23-25 
Oct. 
2006, 
pp. 
1 
– 
7, 
doi 
10.1109/MILCOM.2006.302070. 
[17] A. Ruangwiset, “Path generation for ground target tracking of 
airplane-typed UAV,” in Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE 
International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics 
(ROBIO), Bangkok, Thailand, February 21 – 26, 2009, pp. 
1354 – 1358, doi 10.1109/robio.2009.4913197. 
[18] C-M. Cheng, P-H. Hsiao, H.T. Kung, and D. Vlah, “Transmit 
antenna selection based on link-layer channel probing,” in 
Proceedings of IEEE Conference on World of Wireless, 
Mobile and Multimedia Networks, 18-21 June 2007, 
Cambridge, 
MA, 
U.S.A. 
pp. 
1 
– 
6, 
doi 
10.1109/WOWMOM.2007.4351703. 
[19] Y. Qu, Y. Zhang, and Q. Zhou, “Cooperative localization of 
UAV based on information synchronization,” in Proceedings 
of the 2010 IEEE International Conference on Mechatronics 
and Automation, August 4 – 7, 2010, Xi’an, China, pp. 225 – 
230, doi 10.1109/ICMA.2010.5589081. 
[20] M. Pachter, N. Ceccarelli, and P.R. Chandler, “Vision-based 
target geo-location using camera equipped MAVs,” in 
Proceedings of 46th Conference on Decision and Control 
(CDC2007), 
2007, 
pp. 
2333 
– 
2338, 
doi 
10.1109/CDC.2007.4434038. 
[21] B. Cummings, T. Zimmerman, B. Robinson, and M. Snyder, 
“Voice over blue force tracking,” in Proceedings of IEEE 
Conference 
on 
Military 
Communications 
Conference 
(MILCOM 2006), 23-25 Oct. 2006, Washington, DC, pp. 1 – 
5, doi 10.1109/MILCOM.2006.302173. 
[22] J. Harrald and T. Jefferson, “Shared situational awareness in 
emergency management mitigation and response,” in 
Proceedings of 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference 
on System Sciences (HICSS 2007), Jan. 2007, Waikoloa, HI, 
pp. 23 – 23, doi 10.1109/HICSS.2007.481. 
[23] K. Rein, U. Schade, and M. Hieb, “Battle Management 
language (BML) as an enabler,” IEEE Conference on 
Communications, ICC’09, 14 – 18 June, Wachtberg, 
Germany, 2009, pp. 1 – 5. 
[24] Geospatial Applications of Unmanned Aeial Systems (UAS), 
“1.4 Classification of the Unmanned Aerial Systems,” 
https://www.e-education.psu.edu.geog597g/node/5, accessed 
on July 30, 2015. 
[25] S. Green and R. Watkin, ”Information provision for the 
dismounted close combat soldier,” in Proc. of the 13th 
Conference on Information Fusion, 26 – 29 July 2010, 
Edinburgh, pp. 1 – 8, doi:10.1109/ICIF.2010.5712066. 
[26] G. Cai, K-Y. Lum, B. M. Chen, and T.H. Lee, “A brief 
overview on miniature fixed-wing unmanned aerial vehicles,” 
in Proc. of th 8th International Conference of Control and 
Automation, 9 – 11 June, 2010, Xiamen, pp. 285 – 290, 
doi:10.1109/ICCA2010.5524453. 
[27] M. S. Sharawi, O. A. Rawashdeh, and D. N. Anoi, 
“Evaluation and field testing of an embedded antenna in a 
small UAV wing structure,” in Proc. of Radio and Wireless 
Symposium, 10 – 14, Jan, 2010, New Orleans, LA, pp. 589 – 
592, doi:10.1109/RWS.2010.5434138. 
[28] G. Austin et al., “Compact dual-band antenna for wireless 
access point,” Electronics Letters, vol 42, no. 9, April, 2006. 
[29] M. C. Zari et al., “Personnel identification system utilizing 
low 
probability-of-intercept 
techniques: 
prototype 
development and testing,” in Proceedings on The Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers 31st Annual 1997 
International Carnahan Conference on Security Technology, 
15-17 Oct 1997, Canberra, ACT, pp. 224 – 230, doi 
10.1109/CCST.1997.626274. 
[30] J. Jormakka and T. Saarelainen, “UAV-based sensor networks 
for future force warriors,” International Journal On Advances 
in Telecommunications, vol 4, numbers 1 and 2, 2011, 
ISSN:1942-2601, pp. 58 – 71. 
[31] R. Dees, S. Nestler, R.Kewley, and K. Ward, “WholeSoldier 
performance: A value-focused model of soldier quality,” 77th 
MORS Symposium, WG20- Manpower and Personnell, 35 
pages, 7 Dec 07, 21.6.2010, accessed on 5.2.2015. 
[32] Field 
Manual 
FM 
1-02, 
www.armypubs.army.mil/doctrine/Active_FM.html FM 1-02, 
accessed on 8.12.2012. 

412
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[33] T. Saarelainen, “Targeting situational awareness beyond the 
event horizon by means of sensor element munition,” ICDT 
2012, The Seventh International Conference on Digital 
Telecommunications, pp. 8 – 14. 
[34] P. 
Buxbaum, 
“Denying 
access,” 
Special 
Operations 
Technology, July 2010, Vol 8, Issue 5, pp. 26 – 27. 
[35] R. Kozma et al., “Multi-modal sensor system integrating 
COTS technology for surveillance and tracking,” Radar 
Conference, 10-14 May 2010, pp. 1030 – 1035, doi 
10.1109/RADAR.2010.5494467. 
[36] W. Xinzeng, C. Linlin, L. Junshan, and Y. Ning, “Route 
planning for unmanned aerial vehicle based on threat 
probability and mission time restriction,” in Proc. of the 
Second International Geoscience and Remote Sensing 
Conference, 28 – 31 Aug. 2010, Qingdao, pp. 27 – 30, doi: 
11.1109.IITA-GRS.2010.5603127. 
[37] T. Saarelainen and J. Timonen, “Tactical management in near 
real-time systems,” IEEE International Multi-Disciplinary 
Conference on Cognitive Methods in Situation Awareness 
and Decision Support, (CogSIMA2011), Miami Beach, 
Florida, 22.–24 Feb 2011, U.S.A., pp. 240 – 247, 
10.1109/COGSIMA.2011.5753452. 
[38] M. 
Phillips, 
“Air-to-Ground 
and 
ground-to-air 
communications,” Military Technology, Vol XXXVII, Issue 
6/2013, pp. 66 – 67. 
[39] Z. Ying, W. Zhixue, L. Xiaoming, and C. Li, “C4ISR 
capability analysis based on service-oriented architecture,” 
The Fifhth IEEE International Symposium on Service 
Oriented System Engineering, 2010, pp. 179 – 180, DOI 
10.1109/SOSE.2010.41. 
[40] R.B. Smith, “Introduction to Hyperspectral Imaging,” 5 
January, 2012 http://www.microimages.com, accessed on 
June 30, 2015. 
[41] J. Lumme, “Vegetation and soil classification and analysis 
from imaging spectrometer data,” Master’s thesis, Helsinki 
University of Technology, 28 May 2004. 
[42] S. Nebiker, A. Annen, M. Scherrer, and D. Oesch, “A light-
weight multispectral sensor for micro UAV – opportunities 
for 
very 
high 
resolution 
airborne 
remote 
sensing,” 
www.isprs.org/proceedings/XXXVII/congress/1_pdf/204.pdf, 
accessed on Aug 30, 2015. 
[43] http://uavdesignguide.com/tag/what-is-the-difference-
between-uav-and-uas/, accessed on October 11, 2015. 
[44] https://www.uavs.org/index.php?page=what_is, accessed on 
October 1, 2015 
[45] http://www.sparxsystems.com/downloads/whitepapers/SOMF
-2.1-Conceptualization-Model-Language-Specifications.pdf, 
accessed on October 12, 2015. 
 

