209
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Centricity in Project Risk Management: New Dimensions for Improved Practice 
Jose Irizar 
School of Business and Management 
University of Gloucestershire 
Cheltenham, UK 
Jose.Irizar@googlemail.com 
Martin Wynn 
School of Computing and Technology 
University of Gloucestershire 
Cheltenham, UK 
MWynn@glos.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract – Most organisations engage in major projects during 
their life cycle, and effective project management is 
increasingly accepted as a necessary competence in larger 
companies. Nevertheless, a considerable proportion of projects 
continue to fail to meet their due dates, exceed budget, do not 
deliver to specification, miss quality standards, or fall short on 
customer expectations. The effective management of project 
risk is a major component of this problem, and central to its 
resolution; and yet the theory of risk management remains 
relatively undeveloped and its practice is often poorly 
executed. This paper examines how the concept of centricity 
can be applied to some key elements of risk management to 
develop a conceptual framework that highlights some of the 
shortcomings of current practice and suggests alternative ways 
forward. The initial results of applying the model in three 
major projects in the automotive industry are discussed. 
Keywords - project management; centricity; risk; risk 
management; 
risk 
identification; 
risk 
assessment; 
risk 
ownership; risk treatment; subjective construct; conceptual 
model.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The quest to improve the management of risk in project 
implementation has led researchers and practitioners to 
explore new ways of conceptualizing and classifying risk 
within project management [1]. Project management is 
regarded as being of strategic significance in a wide range of 
industries, and the management of risk is an integral part of 
the project management process. Despite the recognized 
criticality of project success for organizations, a considerable 
proportion of projects continue to either not meet their due 
dates, exceed budget, do not deliver to specification, fail 
quality standards, or do not meet customer requirements.  
Project failure remains an area of considerable interest in 
contemporary project management literature, and effective 
risk management has been identified as one of the major 
criteria for project success [2]. Yet it remains an area where 
there is neither a clearly defined theoretical underpinning nor 
an agreed approach to support the development of a 
universally agreed method for managing risk. Nevertheless, 
risk management has become a central component of some 
of 
the 
most 
widely 
deployed 
industry 
standard 
methodologies, such as Project Management Body of 
Knowledge, PRINCE2®, Systems Development Life Cycle, 
Integrated Capability Maturity Model, and Information 
Technology Infrastructure Library. Comprehensive risk 
management is considered as the means by which the effects 
of unexpected events can be limited, or even how such 
events can be prevented from happening [3]. Risk 
management, 
as an 
integral component of project 
management, can thus make a significant contribution to 
overall project success [4]. This article attempts to develop 
some new directions in this debate through applying the 
concept of centricity to a number of themes that run through 
existing risk management literature – risk identification, risk 
assessment, risk ownership, and risk treatment. The overall 
aim of the research is to assess the validity of centricity as a 
key concept in the development of project management 
practice. This will also inform policies aimed at enhancing 
current project risk management, particularly in the 
automotive industry. 
This introductory section is followed by a discussion of 
the theoretical framework for this paper. The application of 
the centricity concept to different aspects of risk 
management is presented in section three, and the base 
models are further elaborated in section four. Section five 
then analyses the risk registers of three major projects 
against these models. Finally, the concluding section 
summarises results to date and looks at how this research can 
be further progressed. 
II. 
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK AND RESEARCH METHOD 
The risk management process is often viewed as 
comprising five main activities [5], and this provides a useful 
initial frame of reference for this study (Figure 1). Our focus 
is in the area encompassed by risk identification, risk 
assessment, risk allocation, and risk control, although our 
chosen terminology is a little different from that used in this 
model. 
 
Figure 1.  Project Risk Management Process based on PMBoK guide [5]  

210
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
Risk identification is the starting point for risk 
management in projects. It is considered to be the most 
influential risk management activity for project outcomes 
[6], it was found to be one of the most used risk related 
concepts by organizations [7], and it is recognized by project 
managers as one of the key areas in need of improvement in 
complex projects [8]. There are two main schools of thought 
regarding risk identification – “risk as an objective fact” and 
“risk as a subjective construct”. The former considers risk as 
epistemologically probabilistic, whilst risk in the subjective 
construct perspective allows multiple epistemological 
dimensions of risk [9]. “Risk as an objective fact” considers 
risks to objectively exist. In the case of “risk as a subjective 
construct”, risk phenomena are subjectively constructed by 
observers themselves. This subjective-objective construct 
dichotomy is particularly relevant to the identification of 
risk, which can also be associated with the concept of 
“centricity” [1]. Risk as a subjective construct may thus be 
considered as “person-centric”, originating from a subjective 
perception of risk, rather than from an objective assessment 
of whether the risk exists and the significance of it. 
As regards risk assessment, the choice of a particular 
industry prescribed project management methodology can 
have a major impact on how risks are assessed, and on 
overall project outcomes. Project management methodology 
can be defined as the application of knowledge, skills, tools, 
and techniques to project activities to meet the project 
requirements [10] or, using the widest definition given by 
Cockburn [11], anything that the project management team 
relies on in order to successfully deliver project results. All 
of the mainstream methodologies have their own techniques 
and tools for assessing risks. These methodologies include 
the Project Management Body of Knowledge (PMBoK), 
Project Risk Analysis and Management (PRAM), PRINCE2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
and the Scrum Agile Standard.  The first three of these are 
generally considered to belong to the so called traditional 
project management approach, whilst Scrum is the most 
prominent of the new project management approaches [11].  
PMBoK, published by the Project Management Institute 
(PMI) is the project management guide most widely 
followed by international organizations. PMI’s outreach, its 
proximity to project management core theories, and its 
formalization of processes compared to the other standards, 
make it the optimum standard guide for many authors [12]. 
One major criticism of PMBoK is its mechanistic approach, 
making it suitable for routine or technical situations [13], but 
not so appropriate for unusual or one-off situations. The 
methodology entails the use of its Probability and Impact 
Matrix for qualitative risk assessment. Some authors, such as 
Chapman and Ward [14], challenge the value of this tool for 
risk assessment. The experience of the risk assessor can 
determine the so-called probability estimate starting values, 
and thus estimates become biased. This effect is known as 
“anchoring” [15].    
The development of risk matrices for assessment has 
taken place isolated from academic research in decision 
making – risk matrices can produce arbitrary decisions and 
risk-management actions. These problems are difficult to 
overcome because they are inherent in the structure of the 
matrices [16]. Their theoretical basis is superficial and the 
validity of the qualitative information they employ is highly 
suspect [17]. The use of risk matrices for assessment 
illustrates the potential impact of project management 
methodologies on risk management and project outcomes. 
The allocation of ownership for identified risks is an 
essential element of the risk response plan. Ownership is 
concerned with allocating responsibility for managing 
project uncertainty to appropriate project parties. Risk 
 
Figure 2. The main dimensions of risk studied using the centricity concept 
 

211
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
responsibility assignment is considered one of the most 
influential factors in project risk management success. Risk 
allocations are fundamental because allocations can strongly 
influence the motivation of parties and the extent to which 
project uncertainty is assessed and managed by each party 
[14]. Recognising that different parties have different 
objectives, varying perceptions of project risk, and uneven 
capability for managing associated sources of uncertainty, 
highlights the significance of risk ownership allocation in the 
overall risk management process [18]. 
Looking at the risk ownership allocation process, many 
risk management professionals see its control as being 
dependent on the project manager. This leads to the 
conclusion that the effectiveness of the risk allocation 
process depends on the project manager’s skills, experience 
and management style. This can be viewed as project-centric 
risk ownership allocation, with the project manager seen as 
the key individual in operational delivery of project 
outcomes. An alternative perspective highlights the possible 
benefit of assigning risk ownership allocation control, and 
risk allocation itself, to a range of individuals, who may not 
be in regular contact with the project manager [14]. 
Practitioners’ responses suggest that an alternative system 
that encourages all project members to participate in the risk 
management process is normally missing. A consequence 
may be the failure to create a collective responsibility to 
manage risk [18]. 
A further risk dimension discussed here is risk treatment. 
Project risk treatment is the stage at which the risk strategy is 
defined. The strategy defines how to manage risk. This can 
be anywhere in a spectrum from reduce exposure or mitigate 
impact to transfer/externalize risk or accept risk. The 
decision to choose any of these responses can be supported 
by tools that provide risk factor dependencies and priorities 
[19]. Risk treatment thus depends on the risk propensity or 
attitude to taking risks. Behaviour towards taking risks may 
change over time through education, training and experience. 
A balanced risk treatment will probably increase the 
threshold at which point the organization is willing to take 
risks. As a result, an organization may enhance its 
competitive edge. If it is averse centric in its treatment of 
risk, it will be less likely to take risks, having a lower 
propensity for risk taking. 
A balanced approach to risk treatment would be one 
focusing both on risk and reward. An overemphasized focus 
on risk versus reward may have considerable influence on 
strategic decisions such as entering new markets, developing 
new products or targeting new mergers and acquisitions [20]. 
Executive inaction may result in loss of potential revenue 
growth. Education and training in project risk management, 
with subsequent additional experience in the organization, 
may lead to a better understanding of risk and reward. People 
themselves are a major source of risk, and education, training 
and experience can make them part of the solution. Proper 
risk management can be seen as a protective shield for the 
organisation, rather than an action stopper. Management and 
employees together learn through education and training to 
take and manage risks, not to avoid them. The organization 
can thereby treat risk appropriately and not circumvent it. 
The aim of this research is to explore how the concept of 
centricity can be applied to the four dimensions of risk 
management discussed above (see Figure 2). Centricity in a 
managerial context can be defined as the mind set or attitude 
that characterises the managers’ or organisation’s outlook 
and motivation in the relationship to others [21] [22]. In 
recent years, qualitative research has found increasing 
recognition in many areas of project management practice. A 
large number of empirical studies using qualitative data are 
available in academic literature and specialized journals [2] 
[4] [9]. At the same time, management researchers and 
practitioners in particular rely on evidence-based policy. In 
fact, most of the existing generally accepted standards in the 
project management field as a whole are built around 
evidence-based policy and best practice. 
Through an analysis of existing literature, allied to 
empirical 
data 
and 
observations 
in 
large 
project 
environments, this paper looks to develop a conceptual 
framework for research in the following areas: 
• 
Person-centric risk identification vs. objective risk 
identification 
• 
Methodology-centric risk assessment vs. multi-
disciplinary/eclectic risk assessment 
• 
Project-centric 
risk 
ownership 
allocation 
vs. 
devolved ownership allocation 
• 
Averse-centric risk treatment vs. balanced risk 
treatment 
This approach assumes that it is feasible and sensible to 
cumulate findings and generalize results to create new 
knowledge. The application of the centricity concept to the 
aspects of risk management discussed in this paper will be 
tested and developed further through primary research case 
studies as part of an on-going research project. 
III. 
CONCEPT DEVELOPMENT 
The identification of risk as a subjective phenomenon 
coincides with its creation – the risk exists only once the 
stakeholder has identified it. This is particularly noticeable 
for risks linked to an organization’s own qualities and 
deficiencies [23]. This subjective or person-centric risk 
identification can often produce inefficiencies in the 
management of risk that may impact detrimentally on project 
cost and overall project success (see Figure 3). 
The analysis of risks associated with different 
information systems (IS) by Ward and Griffiths [24] uses a 
strategic grid depiction of risk categories (Figure 4) that can 
be used in the application of the centricity concept for project 
risk management. If we view risk identification against risk 
assessment in grid format, many projects - arguably the 
majority - adopt a person-centric approach to risk 
identification and a methodology centric approach to risk 
assessment. Yet we suggest, as an initial standpoint, that a 
combination of objective risk identification and eclectic risk 
assessment is likely to produce the most successful project 
outcomes (see Figure 5). 
The use of risk matrices for risk assessment illustrates 
this well. Their apparent simplicity and transparency are 
reasons for their popularity; however, they potentially entail 

212
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
serious mathematical defects and inconsistencies. Different 
risk assessors may assign greatly different ratings to the 
same risk exposure [25]. Such different ratings are due to 
fundamentally different worldviews, beliefs, and other 
psychosocial factors, the consequences of which are not 
significantly changed through reflection and learning. 
 
       
 
There are a number of evident shortcomings in the use 
of these matrices. These include instability resulting from 
categorization differences, and the lie factor, which suggest 
that they can obscure rather than enlighten communication. 
The rankings produced have been shown to be unduly 
influenced by the matrix design, which is ultimately 
arbitrary. It is suggested that other means of assessing risk 
based on decision-analytical methods could produce 
improved outcomes [17]. An example of a decision-making 
 
 
 
 
 
tool applicable to new product development (NPD), designed 
to help the project manager choose the best way to improve 
project success rates while controlling the level of risks, is 
presented by Marmier, Gourc and Laarz [26]. Other authors 
combine content analysis with cluster analysis of existing 
historical data, to develop the Risk Breakdown Structure 
which can be used to build risk management guidelines [27]. 
These scientific decision analysis tools could be an 
alternative to the popular but inefficient use of risk matrices 
for risk prioritization. The establishment of systematically 
maintained lessons learned datasets could also provide 
quantitative reliable data to estimate the likelihood of 
potential events. 
There are some similarities in an initial assessment of 
risk identification and risk ownership using the centricity 
concept (see Figure 6). Risk ownership centricity is viewed 
as an overdependence on centralised control and allocation 
of risks, and their subsequent management and resolution.  
The different approaches to the ownership of risk 
management often appear as a conflict between centralized 
project risk management and the empowerment of sub-
project teams [28]. The complexity of certain projects makes 
it difficult to understand the consequences of central 
decisions for the team members. The project manager alone 
will struggle to comprehend the details of all potential risks, 
oversee these and control their management. Yet many 
projects are project centric in terms of risk management 
process and person-centric as regards risk identification. The 
on-going monitoring and maintenance of the risk register in 
which project risks are listed is often controlled by the 
central project manager [29]. It is suggested that overall 
project outcomes would be improved by appropriately 
combining centralized and decentralized ownership of risk 
management, 
especially 
in 
complex 
projects. 
More 
particularly, project management practitioners in industries 
which 
require 
intense 
collaboration 
- 
such 
as                       
automotive product development - complain about the 
insufficient development of risk management methods and 
processes not being integrated and synchronized. Lack of
 
Figure 3. The two means of risk identification [9]. 
 
Figure 4. Quadrant grid depiction of IS risk categories [24] 
 
Figure 5. Risk identification and risk assessment: basic model 
 

213
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
collaborative 
risk 
management, 
together 
with 
poor 
communication, is the main reason for project failure in the 
automotive industry [30]. 
Similarly, in major IS projects, the IT function has 
traditionally owned and led information risk management 
and security operations. However, the move to user 
ownership of systems requirements, process improvement 
issues and data access and maintenance, have changed the 
risk and security paradigm. Business managers, systems 
users and the IT function are now required to understand and 
learn others risk-reward trade-offs. The IT function must 
now share ownership of the risk management process and 
transfer accountability for some key areas of risk to business 
partners [31].  
The final dimension considered here is risk treatment, 
again juxta positioned against the central theme of risk 
identification (Figure 7). As noted above, centricity in a 
managerial context can be viewed as a mind-set or attitude 
that characterises the managers’ or organisation’s outlook 
and motivation in their relationship with others. Averse 
centric organizations will be less likely to take risks in their 
treatment of risk as they show a lower propensity for risk 
taking. Risk averse organisations may even avoid managing 
risks or limit resources available for risk management 
activities, which will work against effective risk management 
making these organisations, paradoxically, more vulnerable 
to risk [32].  
IV. 
MODEL PROGRESSION AND IMPLICATIONS 
The basic conceptual model can be developed further in 
the light of literature analysis and project experience, 
indicating the downsides and upsides of operating in each 
quadrant of the model (see Figures 8, 9 and 10). This may 
also have implications for the use of some of the mainstream 
project management methodologies in their treatment of risk 
issues.  
For example, PMI’s project management guide, although 
considered as the best in class among all available 
methodologies and guides, could be enhanced with some 
early risk identification tools and techniques from more 
minor project management methodologies such as Scrum.  
 
 
                                                     
 
                                
 
 
                    
 
 
Such enhancements would help reduce project uncertainty. 
In addition, experience gained by specific industries’ 
customized methodologies can increase risk management 
effectiveness. These could provide quantitative data to 
support estimations of the probabilities of risks occurring. 
Equally, decision analysis tools are an alternative or 
complement to the inconsistent but widely used risk 
matrices. Decision analysis tools may be initially difficult to 
adopt; however, they can provide objective data to support 
risk assessment as an alternative to the use of risk matrices 
with all their inherent deficiencies. 
The popularity of new project management approaches, 
such as that embodied in Scrum, resides in their adaptability 
to accommodate change and the unexpected, as opposed to 
the quest for risk predictability, which is the basis of the 
traditional approaches [12]. These new approaches also 
highlight the importance of both formal and informal 
communication, 
collaboration 
between 
project 
team 
members, and their involvement in decision making, 
suggesting that a more devolved and collective risk 
management process is generally beneficial. 
Figure 7. Risk identification and risk treatment: basic model 
 
Figure 6. Risk identification and ownership: basic model 
 
Figure 8. Risk identification and risk assessment: model development 

214
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
Context, such as the project organization’s size and 
complexity, may play a significant role in tailoring and 
adapting any project risk management methodology when 
applying the different standards. Generally speaking, the 
traditional approach is more appropriate for projects with a 
very low level of uncertainty in which emphasis will be on 
planning. Conversely, agile project management, with a 
more flexible approach to a collective risk management 
process, fits best in environments characterized by a high 
level of uncertainty [12]. 
The two standards with a greater emphasis upon early 
risk identification are PRINCE2 and Scrum. Traditional 
project management practices struggle to deal effectively 
with uncertainty. In highly uncertain environments, 
approaches such as Scrum and lean methods can help 
manage residual uncertainty about risk not addressed by 
traditional project management practices [33]. 
 The model developed using centricity concepts suggests 
that a combination of risk management based on traditional 
standards and more flexible approaches typified by Scrum 
would be beneficial for most projects. However, this would 
imply significant mindset changes in the organisation [34].   
Project teams need to be empowered to effectively use a 
range of different methodologies and techniques, which may 
involve team members adopting new roles. This may result 
in teams creating their own, tailored, risk management 
process and activities [35]. 
V. 
PRELIMINARY RESEARCH RESULTS 
 The provisional conceptual framework has been used in 
assessing risk in three major projects in the automobile 
sector. Two of these projects relate to the implementation of 
a mainstream ERP packaged software product (projects 1 
and 2); and the third (project 3) concerns the development of 
a mechanical steering gear product for an international 
automotive Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM). The 
main source of data has been the risk registers in these three 
projects, which detail 15, 20, and 48 risks respectively. 
These risks were first classified against risk identification 
  
 
 
and risk assessment criteria (Table I and Figure 11). The 
majority of risks fall into the top left quadrant (Quadrant 1), 
signifying objective identification of risk, and methodology 
centric in terms of assessment. Most risks can be considered 
to have been objectively identified - after discussion and 
agreement with the project manager and other colleagues. 
Yet there remains a degree of subjectivity in most risk 
identification, particularly in the first ERP project, where 
many risks were registered individually by the team member 
or group. Although these were validated or completed by the 
project manager, there was still a certain degree of 
subjectivity in the item description, its cause, assumptions, 
probability estimation or estimated impact on objectives.  
This can be better understood by looking at the five risks 
from Project 3 that fall in Quadrant 4 in Figure 11 - where 
risk identification is adjudged person centric and risk 
assessment remains methodology centric. Four out of these 
five risks can be classified as “project schedule risks” (where 
timescale is a major uncertainty), and the fifth one can be 
classified as a “specification risk”, (where completeness of 
specification is at risk). A lack of collective, objective 
assessment is indicated by the fact that, in the risk register, 
the risk type or risk category was not adequately maintained 
or updated by the project manager or any other team member 
during the project life cycle; and once the countermeasures 
agreed to mitigate the risk items were completed, these risks 
were then eliminated from the register without adequate 
consideration. From the risk register, examples of “project 
schedule risks” include “risk of delay in design verification 
due to component prototype timing” and “potential 
misalignment between supplier key product characteristics 
matrices”. In the first example, once the manufacturing team 
had confirmed the prototype timing was not an issue for 
design verification, the risk item was closed. In a similar 
manner, for the second item, after the engineering 
representatives confirmed that there was no misalignment 
between the two lists with the responsible suppliers, the risk 
item was closed, the result of this confirmation being risk 
“elimination”. These are examples of how person centric risk 
identification and methodologically centric risk assessment 
Figure 9. Risk identification and risk ownership: model development 
Figure 10. Risk identification and risk treatment: model development 

215
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
can combine to produce decisions that may be neither 
properly objective nor likely to engender sound project 
management outcomes.  
Risks were then mapped against risk identification and 
risk ownership. More mature organizations may deal with 
risk in a more devolved manner – sub-project teams may be 
accustomed to having exposure to risks and have the 
knowledge and experience to manage them effectively. 
There was some evidence of this in the project to develop the 
mechanical steering gear product (project 3 – see Table II). 
The project team members and the project stream leads or 
sub-project leads were experienced enough to identify, 
record and suggest counter measures to a small number of 
risks, which were managed in this way (the 2% in Quadrant 
2 in Figures 12 and 13). 
These two risk items were managed by the engineering 
sub-group with no or minor involvement from the project 
manager. They represent two objectively identified risks that 
were owned and managed in a devolved/local manner. The 
risks were associated with two new components which failed 
two critical quality criteria - process validation and design 
verification. Both risk items reflected a lack of experience in 
the organization in general regarding the design and 
conception of the mentioned components. The engineering 
sub-group arguably had most experience in managing 
projects and dealing with risks. Counter measures suggested 
and pursued for the management of these risks were early 
sourcing, early involvement of suppliers in the design 
process, and adequate testing using an accepted standard – 
the Failure Mode and Effect Analysis (FMEA) process. The 
majority of risks across all three projects were, however, 
largely owned by the central project team. Organizations 
with less of a project management culture are more 
dependent on the project manager skills when dealing with 
risks.  
A classification of risks on the risk identification-risk 
treatment axes indicates that a balanced attitude to risk 
taking was prevalent across all three projects. This reflects 
the relatively mature nature of these organisations, where 
calculated risk-taking is recognized as an element of overall 
management. The fact that the vast majority of the risks were 
identified after project approval in itself indicates a 
confidence in these organisations that all groups involved are 
able to work together to develop a response plan to deal with 
identified risks. This is reflected in Figure 14, indicating that 
all risks, however identified, were dealt with in a “balanced” 
or “risk seeking” manner, as opposed to risk averse centric.  
VI. 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
This article has explored how the concept of centricity 
can be applied to some key aspects of project risk 
management to aid understanding and develop alternative 
perspectives. The concept of centricity has been used as a 
key component in the development of a conceptual model 
that is now being tested and refined through primary case 
study research of risk management processes in IS and new 
product development projects in the automotive industry. 
This entails action research, through which the conceptual   
framework  is  being  applied and  developed in major  pan- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European projects. 
Our initial assumptions were that in most projects, risk 
identification 
is 
person-centric, 
risk 
assessment 
is 
methodology-centric, and the overall risk management 
process is project-centric. Yet current literature, recent trends 
and personal observation suggest that a move away from 
centricity in these components of risk management would 
benefit project outcomes. The integration of traditional and 
agile project management methodologies and their tailoring 
to the specific needs of the organization is gaining wide 
practitioner and academic attention. The initial results from 
primary research case studies in organisations with a strong 
management culture and significant project experience 
generally support the initial assumptions. However, they also 
raise a number of issues that are now being pursued through 
more detailed analysis of each of the three cases. The various 
dimensions of risk management will be matched against 
different aspects of each project – project focus, duration, 
budget, resourcing, ownership, expectation, and tolerances 
for example – as well as with project outcomes; and a wider 
range  of  more  in-depth  interviews  is  being  conducted  to  
Figure 11. Risk identification and risk assessment: preliminary mapping of 
first research results 
(Quadrant 1 – top left; Quadrant 2 – top right; Quadrant 3 – bottom right; 
Quadrant 4 – bottom left)  
Figure 12. Risk identification and risk ownership: preliminary mapping of 
first research results 

216
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
 
Risk identification and assessment 
Project 
1 
Quadrant1 
Quadrant 2 
Quadrant 3 
Quadrant 4 
Total  
13 
 
 
7 
Total % 
65% 
 
 
35% 
Project 
2 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Total 
13 
 
 
2 
Total % 
87% 
 
 
13% 
Project 
3 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Total 
43 
 
 
5 
Total % 
90% 
 
 
10% 
TOTAL 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Total 
69 
 
 
14 
Total % 
83% 
 
 
17% 
 
 
widen perspectives and more firmly ground assessments in 
first hand interview material. Once this further research stage 
is completed, the contribution of the centricity concept to 
improved risk management practice will be clearer, but 
initial research results suggest that this is a new way of 
looking at risk management that can add value to the overall 
process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Risk identification and ownership 
Project 
1 
Quadrant1 
Quadrant 2 
Quadrant 3 
Quadrant 4 
Total  
13 
 
 
7 
Total % 
65% 
 
 
35% 
Project 
2 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Total 
13 
 
 
2 
Total % 
87% 
 
 
13% 
Project 
3 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Total 
41 
2 
 
5 
Total % 
85% 
4% 
 
10% 
TOTAL 
1 
2 
3 
4 
Total 
67 
2 
 
14 
Total % 
81% 
2% 
 
17% 
 
      This is illustrated by the challenge facing the project 
manager considering how to manage overall risk. The 
question is not just which project management risk approach 
should be adopted, but more how to select a “best of breed 
approach”, choosing the most suitable techniques, templates, 
Figure 14. Risk identification and risk treatment: preliminary mapping of 
first research results 
TABLE I. RISK IDENTIFICATION AND ASSESSMENT IN THE THREE 
PROJECTS: QUADRANT ALLOCATION 
 
TABLE II. RISK IDENTIFICATION AND OWNERSHIP IN THE THREE 
PROJECTS: QUADRANT ALLOCATION 
Figure 13 . Risk identification and risk ownership: quadrant allocation 

217
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
tools and artifacts out of the different standards and 
methodologies that are available. It is hoped that this 
research, by introducing the concept of centricity to analyse 
current practice, will engender this process and lead to better 
overall project outcomes. As Peter Drucker has put it, “when 
intelligent, moral, and rational people make decisions that 
appear inexplicable, it’s because they see a reality different 
to the one seen by others” [36]. This phenomenon, in the 
case of risk management, requires further research into the 
interaction and communication between individuals, project 
teams and their contexts. If the centricity concept can be 
successfully harnessed to underpin this research, it has the 
potential to significantly enhance eventual project outcomes. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Irizar and M. Wynn, “Centricity in Project Risk 
Management: 
Towards 
a 
Conceptual 
Framework 
for 
Improved 
Practice,” 
CENTRIC 
2014: 
The 
Seventh 
International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented and 
Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services, Nice, 
France, October 12-16, 2014, pp. 83-88, ISBN: 978-1-61208-
369-8. 
[2] D. McClure, From the CIO trenches: Why some projects fail 
and others succeed, Gartner Industry Research, 2007. 
[3] R. Jen, Visual Ishikawa Risk Techique (VIRT) - An approach 
to risk management, PMI Virtual Library, 2009, URL: 
http://www.pmi.org/en/Knowledge-Center/Knowledge-
Shelf/~/media/Members/Knowledge%20Shelf/Jen_2009.ashx 
[accessed: 2015-05-20]. 
[4] K. de Bakker, “Risk management affecting IS/IT project 
success through communicative action,” Project Management 
Journal, 42(3), 2011, pp. 75-90. 
[5] V. Holzmann, Analyzing Lessons Learned to Identify 
Potential Risks in new Product Development Projects, Paper 
presented at the 6th European Conference on Information 
Management and Evaluation, 2012, pp. 127-134. 
[6] K. de Bakker, A. Boonstra, and H. Wortmann, “Risk 
managements' communicative effects influencing IT project 
success,” International Journal of Project Management, 30(4), 
2012, pp. 444-457. 
[7] P. L. Bannerman, “A Reassessment of Risk Management in 
Software Projects” in Handbook on Project Management and 
Scheduling, Vol. 2, C. Schwindt & J. Zimmermann, Eds., 
Switzerland, Springer International Publishing, 2015, pp. 
1119-1134. 
[8] C. M. Harvett, “A Study of Uncertainty and Risk 
Management 
Practice 
Related 
to 
Perceived 
Project 
Complexity,” 
(PhD), 
2013, 
URL: 
http://epublications.bond.edu.au/theses/73/ [accessed: 2015-
05-20]. 
[9] H. Zhang, “Two schools of risk analysis: A review of past 
research on project risk,” Project Management Journal, 42(4), 
2011, pp. 5-18. 
[10] PMI, A guide to the project management body of knowledge 
(PMBOK®) (Fifth ed.) Project management institute, Inc., 
2013. 
[11] M. Špundak, “Mixed Agile/Traditional Project Management 
Methodology – Reality or Illusion?” Procedia - Social and 
Behavioral Sciences, 119, 2014, pp. 939-948. 
[12] M. J. Thaheem, “Project Risk Management for Sustainable 
Restoration of Immovable Cultural Heritage: Lessons from 
Construction Industry and Formulation of a Customized PRM 
Model,” 
(Doctorate 
of 
Philosophy), 
2014, 
URL: 
http://porto.polito.it/2531894/1/THAHEEM_Tesi.pdf  
[accessed: 2015-05-20]. 
[13] P. W. G. Morris, L. Crawford, D. Hodgson, M. M. Shepherd, 
and J. Thomas, “Exploring the role of formal bodies of 
knowledge in defining a profession – The case of project 
management,” International Journal of Project Management, 
24(8), 2006, pp. 710-721. 
[14] C. Chapman and S. Ward, Project risk management: 
processes, techniques and insights, John Wiley & Sons, 2003. 
[15] A. Tversky and D. Kahneman, “Judgment under uncertainty: 
Heuristics and biases,” Science, 185(4157), 1974, pp. 1124-
1131.  
[16] P. Thomas, “The Risk of Using Risk Matrices,” Masters  
thesis, 
University 
of 
Stavanger, 
2013, 
URL: 
http://brage.bibsys.no/uis/bitstream/URN:NBN:no-
bibsys_brage_45899/1/Thomas_Philip.pdf [accessed: 2015-
05-20]. 
[17] K. D. Wall, “The Trouble With Risk Matrices,” DRMI 
Working Papers Ongoing Research, 2011, pp. 11-23. 
[18] C. M. Harvett, “A Study of Uncertainty and Risk 
Management 
Practice 
Related 
to 
Perceived 
Project 
Complexity,” 
PhD 
thesis, 
2013, 
Bond 
University, 
ePublications@bond.  
[19] D. Aloini, R. Dulmin, and V. Mininno. “Risk assessment in 
ERP projects,” Information Systems, 37(3), 2012,  pp. 183-
199, doi: 10.1016/j.is.2011.10.001. 
[20] TowerGroup, “Reducing Risk Management’s Organizational 
Drag Executive Guidance,” Vol. Executive Guidance Q3 
2014, Arlington VA,  CIO Executive Board, 2014. 
[21] H. V. Perlmutter, “The Tortuous Evolution of the 
Multinational Corporation,” Columbia Journal of World 
Business, 4 (1), 1969, pp. 9-18. 
[22] M. Olsen and A. Roper, “Towards an Understanding of 
Centricity: 
Profiling 
International 
Hotel 
Groups,” 
International Journal of Hospitality Management, 17(2), 1998, 
pp. 111-124. 
[23] J. Irizar and M. Wynn, “Risk as a Subjective Construct: 
Implications for Project Management Practice,” The Fifth 
International Conference on Information, Process, and 
Knowledge Management (eKNOW 2013) IARIA, Feb. 2013, 
pp. 135-141, ISBN: 978-1-61208-254-7. 
[24] J. Ward and P. Griffiths, Strategic planning for information 
systems, 2nd ed., Chichester, John Wiley& Sons, 1996. 
[25] D. J. Ball and J. Watt, “Further Thoughts on the Utility of 
Risk Matrices,” Risk Analysis, 33 (11), 2013, pp. 2068-2078. 
doi: 10.1111/risa.12057. 
[26] F. Marmier, D. Gourc, and F. Laarz, “A risk oriented model 
to assess strategic decisions in new product development 
projects,” Decision Support Systems, 56, 2013, pp. 74-82. 
[27] V. Holzmann, Analyzing Lessons Learned to Identify 
Potential Risks in new Product Development Projects, Paper 
presented at the 6th European Conference on Information 
Management and Evaluation, 2012, pp. 127-134. 
[28] T. M. Williams, “Empowerment vs risk management?” 
International Journal of Project Management, 15, 1997, pp. 
219-222. 
[29] P. L. Bannerman, “Risk and risk management in software 
projects: A reassessment,” The journal of systems and 
software, 81(12), 2008, pp. 2118-2133. 
[30] K. Niebecker, “Collaborative and cross-company project 
management within the automotive industry using the 
Balanced 
Scorecard,” 
Ph.D. 
dissertation, 
Faculty 
of 
Engineering and IT, University of Technology, Sydney, 2009. 
[31] E. Chobanova, “Why You Should Share Your Risk With 
Business 
Partners,” 
[Online], 
 
URL: 
http://www.executiveboard.com/it-blog/why-you-should-
share-your-risk-with-business-partners, 
2014, 
[accessed: 
2015-05-20]. 

218
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[32] P. L. Bannerman, “A Reassessment of Risk Management in 
Software Projects,” Handbook on Project Management and 
Scheduling Vol. 2, C. Schwindt & J. Zimmermann, Eds. 
Springer International Publishing, 2015, pp. 1119-1134. 
[33] C. Besner and B. Hobbs, “The paradox of risk management; a 
project management practice perspective,” International 
journal of managing projects in business, 5 (2), 2012, pp. 230-
247. 
[34] M. McWha, 2014, “Agile is a Mindset, not a Methodology,” 
URL: 
http://www.executiveboard.com/it-blog/agile-is-a-
mindset-not-a-methodology  [accessed: 2015-05-20]. 
[35] R. Rodríguez Gutiérrez, J. Minguella Canela, F. Fenollosa i 
Artés, B. Ventayol Femenias, and M. A. d. l. Santos López,   
“Experiences in Agile R&D Project Management for New 
Product Design and Development in the Automotive 
Industry,” The 16th International Research/Expert Conference 
on Trends in the Development of Machinery and Associated 
Technology, TMT 2012, pp. 223-226.  
[36] Bud Baker, “The fall of the firefly: An assessment of a failed 
project strategy,” Project Management Journal, 33 (3), 2002, 
pp. 53-57. 
 
PRINCE2® is a Trade Mark of The Office of Government 
Commerce.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

