Affordable Sensors for Agricultural Applications  
 
  
Paulo Sergio de Paula Herrmann Junior 
Embrapa Instrumentation (CNPDIA) 
São Carlos – SP, Brazil 
paulo.herrmann@embrapa.br 
 
Victor Bertucci Neto 
Embrapa Instrumentation (CNPDIA) 
São Carlos – SP, Brazil 
victor.bertucci@embrapa.br 
 
Abstract— Agricultural sensors are crucial in improving 
crop yields and reducing resource waste. It has led researchers 
to develop affordable sensors that can be easily integrated into 
existing farming systems. The developing of low-cost sensors 
involves adequate materials and simple manufacturing 
methods, ensuring reliable and accurate measurements. 
Embrapa Instrumentation's has been putting efforts for the 
low-cost agricultural sensor’s development. This article 
discusses a sensor for soil moisture measurement using the 
microwave technique; a sensor for measuring the apparent 
electrical conductivity of soils; a sensor for measuring water 
and plant relationships; and a sensor for evaluating spray 
solution concentration to weeds control to improve crop yield 
and reduce the use of water. Such affordable sensors in 
agriculture can provide an effective and sustainable solution to 
enhance productivity into small and medium farms, as well as 
increasing in food security and supporting sustainable 
agriculture. 
Keywords - affordable sensors; soil moisture; soil electrical 
conductivity; water-plant measuring; spray quality; pest control. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
This paper presents an extended version of a previous 
study presented at the Eighth International Conference on 
Advances in Sensors, Actuators, Metering and Sensing 
(ALLSENSORS 2023), organized by the International 
Academy, Research and Industry Association (IARIA), and 
held in Venice in April 2023 [1]. 
The applications of sensors in general, and more 
specifically, affordable sensors, are the basis for developing 
devices 
for 
instrumentation, 
automation, 
precision 
agriculture, and digital agriculture. 
The global agricultural sensors market size was valued 
at USD 4.74 billion in 2021. It is expected to reach USD 
16.83 billion by 2030, growing at a Compound Annual 
Growth Tate (CAGR) of 15.12% during the forecast period 
(2022–2030) [2].  
The low-cost sensor is a technology initially 
developed for consumer and research applications. 
Competitive and low-cost due to economies of scale, these  
 
Ladislau Marcelino Rabello 
Embrapa Instrumentation (CNPDIA) 
São Carlos – SP, Brazil 
ladislau.rabello@embrapa.br 
 
Paulo Estevão Cruvinel 
Embrapa Instrumentation (CNPDIA) 
São Carlos – SP, Brazil 
paulo.cruvinel@embrapa.br 
 
sensor technologies allow new applications or more 
economical use of sensors in production and environments 
[3][4]. 
Despite being used in research, most field sensors are 
still in their infancy in their commercial relationship. Soil 
moisture sensors can be mentioned, sensors that can 
correlate fertility, scales that could indicate performance, 
sensors, and indicators of pests and diseases, among others, 
and if they were present in the field, they could be 
connected to IoT (Internet of things) [5]. 
The review by Kayad and their colleagues highlights the 
numerous advantages of using sensor applications to 
enhance the quality of life for humans. The comprehensive 
paper covers various topics, such as soil and plant sensing, 
farm management, and post-harvest applications. The 
examples illustrate how sensors can measure soil moisture 
content, keep tabs on drain pipes, monitor topsoil 
displacement during harrowing, prevent spray drift in 
vineyards, evaluate winter wheat and tree health with 
thermography, 
and 
remotely 
oversee 
the 
various 
agricultural processes. Furthermore, the review delves into 
the digitalization of food systems and the utilization of 
archived data from plowing operations. Lastly, the paper 
explores the potential of post-harvest sensor applications for 
sunflower seeds [6]. 
Below, one may find a brief discussion of affordable 
sensors for agriculture that were developed at Embrapa 
Instrumentation. In the next sections there are the 
descriptions of the recent development of affordable 
sensors, which are: a sensor for measuring soil moisture 
using microwaves with two techniques (waveguide and free 
space); a system for measuring the apparent electrical 
conductivity of ECa soils; a sensor for measuring the water 
and plant relationship; and a sensor to evaluate spray 
solution concentration to control weeds to improve crop 
yield and reduce water.  
The sensors listed have something in common: they are 
affordable and designed to be used in agricultural 
environments. They are capable of measuring different 
aspects of the environment, such as soil, water, plants, and 
to provide support for weed control. Additionally, they can 
also be integrated into IoT technologies. 
102
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

II. 
SENSOR FOR SOIL MOISTURE 
MEASUREMENT, USING MICROWAVE 
TECHNIQUES 
The content and availability of water in the soil are 
parameters of fundamental importance in the various fields 
of basic and applied science, as well as in technologies for 
agriculture, geology, meteorology, hydrology, and various 
areas of engineering.  
The most used techniques for measuring soil water are 
gravimetric, 
neutron 
moderation 
and 
gamma-ray 
attenuation, Time Domain Reflectometry (TDR), and 
remote sensing. 
The choice of microwave frequency, 10 GHz, was based 
on two main reasons: first, because this is an intermediate 
frequency, between maximum absorption by water and 
maximum penetration of the electromagnetic wave in the 
water-soil 
system; 
second, 
because 
oscillators 
are 
commercially found. tuned to that frequency. Under normal 
temperature conditions, in the frequency range of 1.0 GHz 
to 30 GHz, the water power constant is in the range of 40 to 
80 and the loss tangent varies from 0.15 to 1.20. Most dry 
matter, in particular dry soil, has a dielectric constant of the 
order of 1 to 5 and losses. Between 0.001 and 0.050, i.e., 
differences in this order of magnitude. 
Through the interaction of electromagnetic waves, at 
microwave frequency, with the water-soil system, greater or 
lesser attenuation of the signal is obtained depending on the 
volumetric moisture content present.  
Figure 1 presents a system for measuring soil moisture 
content that uses microwave signal transmission and 
reception through the waveguide technique, in the X band, 
with an operating frequency of 10 GHz and a power of 25 
mW. In tests carried out at the laboratory level, we proved 
the correlation of the attenuation in dB with the volumetric 
humidity in clayey, sandy, and glass microsphere soils [7]. 
 
Figure 1. A system for measuring soil moisture content that uses 
microwave signal transmission and reception through the waveguide 
technique. 
The 
electrical 
specifications, 
provided 
by 
the 
manufacturer, of the gunn system used are listed in Table I.  
Figure 2 presents the results that show the influence of 
water in the water-soil system, in the attenuation of 
microwaves, through the relation of the attenuation of the 
signal in dB by the volumetric soil moisture in sandy soil 
(1.20 < soil density (g/cm3) < 1.26), clayey (0.83 < soil 
density (g/cm3) < 0.92)) and glass microsphere (1.13 < soil 
density (g/cm3) < 1.19)). The error in sample preparation 
was 4.7%. All measurements were conducted under 
laboratory conditions (room temperature ~23.0 ± 0.5 C and 
Relative Humidity (RH%) equal to 36%).  
The combination of sand, lime, and clay mixed with 
water can affect the microwave signal and the detection of 
soil through microwaves. A study conducted by Schmugge 
[8] delved into the influence of soil texture on soil detection 
through microwaves. By analyzing the behavior of water 
molecules when introduced to soil, researchers could 
understand the effect of soil removal better. 
When water molecules align with an applied field, they 
exhibit a high dielectric constant. However, factors such as 
freezing, high frequencies, or a solid connection to soil 
particles can restrict water's free molecular rotation, 
decreasing its dielectric constant. When first added to dry 
soil, the initial water molecules attach to the particle surface 
due to physical-chemical interactions, leading to a slight 
increase in the dielectric constant. As more water is added 
and surpasses a transitional level, these molecules move 
away from the particle surface and contribute to a more 
significant increase in the power constant. The water 
retention of soil depends on particle size or texture 
distribution, with clay soils possessing a larger water 
surface and retaining more water. Consequently, they bind 
more firmly to water compared to sandy soil. The transition 
point occurs in clay soil at higher moisture levels than in 
sandy soil. 
TABLE I.  OPERATING CHARACTERISTICS OF THE GUNN 
SYSTEM 
RF central frequency 
10,250MHz-4V varactor 
bias 
RF output power 
25 mW 
Tuning: mechanical 
Electronics 
±100MHz 
60 MHz Minimum 
Stability in frequency 
350 kHz/°C 
RF power vs temperature 
and tuning voltage 
6 dB max 
Noise figure 
12 dB max 
Entry requirements:  
Gunn Voltage 
Gunn Current 
Tuning Voltage 
 
+ 10 Vdc 
500 mA maximum 
+1 a+20 volts 
Temperature of operation 
30 °C to +70 °C 
 
Figure 2. The attenuation calibration curve in dB, as a function of the 
volumetric soil moisture of the samples. 
103
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A network analyzer, model 8510 from Hewlett-Packard, 
was used, evaluating the parameter insertion loss S21 (dB) to 
compare with the results obtained in the attenuation system 
in dB. Figure 3 presents the results for all samples with a 
linear regression where their r2 was 0.976. 
 
 
Figure 3. Comparison between the results obtained with the proposed 
system and those obtained the insertion loss S21 (dB), using the 8510 HP 
network analyzer. 
Investigating the behavior of plant root system growth 
as a function of soil water is essential for studying root 
physiology. Figure 4 shows a non-invasive tool based on 
the transmittance of electromagnetic waves in the 
microwave frequency range, operating close to 4.8 GHz, 
which was developed using microstrip patch antennas to 
determine volumetric soil moisture in rhizoboxes. Antennas 
were placed on both sides of the rhizobox, and the S 
parameters were measured using a vector network analyzer.  
 
 
 
Figure 4. Block diagram of the system developed to measure S21 (dB) of 
soil moisture in the rhizobox, using the Vector Network Analyzer, in the 
microwave frequency range (4.6–5.0 GHz). 
 
The dispersion parameter S21 (dB) was also used to 
show the effect of different soil types and temperatures on 
the 
measurement. 
In 
addition, 
the 
sensitivity, 
reproducibility, and repeatability of the system were 
evaluated (Fig. 5). The measurement was carried out three 
times to each dot (n = 3). The red dots represent the 
reproducibility (98.9%) averages, and the black dots 
represent 
the 
repeatability 
(93.0%) 
averages. 
The 
quantitative results of soil moisture, measured in 
rhizoboxes, presented in this work, demonstrate that the 
microwave technique using microstrip patch antennas is a 
reliable non-invasive and accurate system, and has shown 
potentially promising applications for measurement of roots 
based on rhizobox phenotyping [9]. 
 
 
Figure 5. Relation between |𝜀∗| versus the average of S21 (dB) shows the 
repeatability and reproducibility of the system developed were calculated. 
Figure 6 shows the relationship between the S21 
measured with the developed system and the volumetric soil 
moisture θV (%) determined and calculated by the second 
and third-order polynomial equation. The calibration was 
obtained using four (04) samples, which are: Cerrado Soil 
(squares), Kaktus Soil (open circles), and Glass Beads 
(triangles). The experiment was carried out at the standard 
laboratory ambient conditions (Temperature (T(◦C)) = 25.0 
± 0.5 ◦C, and RH (%) equal to 30%. 
 
 
Figure 6. Relationship between the S21 measured with the developed 
system and the volumetric soil moisture θV (%). The four (04) samples 
used are Cerrado Soil (squares), Kaktus Soil (open circles) and Glass 
Beads (triangles). 
Besides, by using the microwave techniques, since the 
temperature affects the error of volumetric soil moisture 
measurements, a calibration curve requires information on 
soil temperature and soil water content. The distinct effect 
of porous media on the calibration curve (S21 (dB) vs θV 
(%)) has also been observed, giving the opportunity to use 
104
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

such an approach to investigate plant root growth in 
different soil types and moisture. 
Techniques that allow deepening the study of water 
relations in plants are impacting areas of Agronomic 
Engineering in addition to cutting-edge areas such as Plant 
Phenotyping. 
III. SYSTEM FOR MEASURING THE APPARENT 
ELECTRICAL CONDUCTIVITY OF SOILS 
Soil apparent electrical conductivity (ECa) originated 
from measuring soil salinity, a pertinent problem in arid 
zones associated with irrigated crops and areas with shallow 
water tables. Soil ECa is greatly influenced by a vast 
combination of physical and chemical properties of the soil, 
such as soluble salts; mineralogy and clay content; the 
amount of water present in the soil; volumetric density; 
organic matter, and soil temperature. 
The most effective application of apparent soil electrical 
conductivity is at field scale in mapping the spatial 
variability of many edaphic properties, e.g., organic matter, 
moisture, and in the determination of a wide variety of 
anthropogenic properties, such as leaching fraction; 
irrigation and drainage patterns; compaction patterns due to 
machinery [10]. 
Soil ECa is a quick, more reliable, and easy tool than 
other techniques, but it only sometimes correlates with crop 
yield. Therefore, the ECa measurement is among the most 
frequently used tools in precision agriculture research for 
the 
space-time 
characterization 
of 
edaphic 
and 
anthropogenic properties that influence crop productivity. 
The measurement of electrical conductivity (σ) 
originates from the measurement of electrical resistivity (ρ), 
which consists of using a sample of known shapes and 
dimensions (square, cylindrical, and others). 
The following equation then calculates the electrical 
resistance: 
𝑅 =  𝜌 (𝐿
𝐴) 
(1) 
 
where R is the electrical resistance [Ohms, Ω], ρ is the 
electrical resistivity [Ohms x centimeters, Ω.cm], and L is 
the sample length [centimeters, cm]. 
For samples of undefined shapes and dimensions, the 
method known as the four-point system [11] is used 
(Figure7), which consists of using four metal electrodes 
sequentially, aligned, i.e., taking into account the predefined 
distances S1, S2, and S3. 
 
 
Figure 7. Four-point system. 
Applying electrical current, I (Ampere) to the outer 
electrodes and with a voltage V (Volts) reading from the 
two center electrodes. The resistivity is then calculated with 
the following equation: 
𝜌 = 
2. 𝜋 (𝑉
𝐼 )
1
𝑆1 + 1
𝑆2 − 
1
𝑆1 + 𝑆2 − 
1
𝑆2 + 𝑆3
 
(2) 
 
      Electrical conductivity, σ, is defined as the inverse of 
electrical resistivity, so we have: 
 
𝜎 = 1
𝜌 
(3) 
 
Figure 8 illustrates the block diagram of the developed 
system, which uses the PIC18F258 manufactured by 
Microchip Technology [12] as its central processor. The 
system 
was 
designed 
for 
reading 
two 
four-point 
measurement systems, consisting of two voltmeters, one of 
unitary gain and the other of gain three for deeper 
measurements, an alternating voltage source of 159 Hz for 
measuring electric current, three signal filters for reading 
channels, three alternating to continuous signal converters, 
1024 bits; 1 bit resolution; 4.88x10-3 Volts dc; 32-character 
Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) for viewing electrical 
conductivity measurements and control information, four-
function keyboard for user-machine communication; 
standard RS232 serial port for communication and transfer 
of stored data and the National Marine Electronics 
Association (NMEA) sentences for Global Navigation 
Satellite System (GNSS) system and flash memory for 
storage of collected data, as well as memory capacity equal 
to 64 Kbytes (Figure 9). 
 
 
Figure 8. Apparent electrical conductivity system block diagram. 
 
Figure 9. Electrical soil conductivity measurements system. 
105
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A. Applications of soil apparent electrical conductivity.  
Scudiero et al. [13] developed a mobile platform and 
data post-processing algorithm to facilitate geospatial 
measurements of CEa along or near driplines. Gamma-ray 
(γ-ray) spectrometry is commonly used for clay content and 
type mapping. The development of this platform allows for 
better characterization of soil properties in micro-irrigated 
orchard systems using motion detection technology. 
Luchiari Junior et al. worked to define management 
zones using electrical conductivity through electromagnetic 
induction to define management zones according to other 
parameters used in the work [14] where it specifies that the 
electrical conductivity map revealed similar patterns to the 
reflectance and management zone maps (Figure 10). 
 
 
Figure 10. a) Map of apparent electrical conductivity of the soil; and b) 
Map of homogeneous management zones. 
Vilela et al. [15] and Resende and Vilela [16] 
conducted a thorough assessment of the application of 
precision agriculture in annual crops. They particularly 
focused on the tools utilized to characterize the variability 
of the areas under study, such as soil electrical conductivity 
sensors, digital terrain elevation models, and aerial images. 
These tools facilitated the identification of factors that 
affect productivity variations in the study plots. 
Moreover, Oliveira, Franchini, and Debiasi [17] 
conducted a study on the spatial variability of soybean, 
corn-soybean productivity, and soil electrical conductivity 
in a specific type of soil, namely, a Latossolo Bruno. 
According to the authors, ECa and soybean productivity are 
determined by the space where they were mapped. Soybean 
productivity was significantly and inversely correlated with 
ECa, which makes ECa a valuable parameter in defining 
different management zones within a crop. (For more 
information, please refer to Figure 11). 
 
Figure 11. Apparent electrical conductivity and soybean productivity 
maps. 
Brandão et al. [18] conducted a study in the Cerrado 
region of Goiás, Brazil, to investigate the correlation 
between soil electrical conductivity (ECa) and pH. The 
study generated ECa maps to evaluate spatial variability and 
found a substantial similarity between ECa and pH values. 
The authors concluded that ECa can be used to characterize 
variability and estimate soil acidity in the Cerrado Biome. 
Oliveira and Benites [19] conducted a study on soil 
variability to indicate the opportunity for precision 
agriculture in a direct planting system. The study used 
quantitative techniques to evaluate the potential of 
information in supporting a decision-making process for the 
production system. The authors emphasized soil electrical 
conductivity's importance in interpreting spatial variation 
and supporting optimized soil sampling schemes. 
Greco et al. [20] conducted a geostatistical study of 
the electrical conductivity and altitude of soil cultivated 
with sugar cane. The study aimed to verify the spatial 
variability of the soil's electrical conductivity and the soil's 
slope under a direct planting system. The authors concluded 
that the spatial variability in the electrical conductivity 
results correspond to differences in altitude, which can help 
diagnose soil and plant characteristics that vary according to 
the terrain's topography (Figure 12). 
 
 
Figure 12. Isoline maps a) apparent electrical conductivity 0-30 cm; b) 
conductivity 0-90 cm and c) altitude elevation. 
Perez et al. carried out a study on spatial variability in 
crop-livestock integration systems [21], where it has been 
correlating a given pest with electrical conductivity. Such 
authors concluded that a pattern of reinfestation is 
associated with areas of greater electrical conductivity. 
Salton et al. studied electrical conductivity to correlate 
with some physical and chemical attributes of an oxisol 
with a 15-year management history [22], where they found 
that electrical conductivity can help delimit management 
zones and homogeneous areas when subjected to the same 
management system. 
Tutmez [23], in this study were used advanced 
regression algorithms for the interpretation capacity of 
functional precision models against the lower-level 
mechanistic models. To explore the relationships between 
electrical conductivity (EC), which is the most critical 
indicator for salinity and irrigation, and soil parameters 
(texture, 
chemical 
concentrations), 
a 
comparative 
assessment based on supervised learning algorithms was 
106
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

conducted and the results were interpreted. by statistical 
learning. A comparative evaluation of the results revealed 
that unlike conventional mechanistic models, machine 
learning interpretation provides additional interpretations, 
meta-data and transparency for sustainable soil and 
environmental management. 
To 
improve 
management 
techniques 
in 
grape 
cultivation, Miele, Flores, and Filippini Alba study the use 
of various precision agriculture techniques [24], including 
soil electrical conductivity, to assist in making the best 
decisions ways of management. Also, Nascimento et al. 
conducted a study in the grapevine to determine 
homogeneous areas with electrical soil conductivity in 
semi-arid soil [25]. Figure 13 illustrates measurements 
taken using the system in the study's area where vines are 
planted and the definition of homogeneous areas for this 
crop. 
 
Figure 13. Maps of homogeneous zones of apparent electrical conductivity 
of the soil, grapevine culture, semiarid region, in Brazil. 
Rabello and their team have comprehensively 
explained their research on electrical conductivity methods, 
equipment development, and adaptations of imported 
systems for use in agricultural implements such as 
subsoilers and seeders [26]. Furthermore, they have detailed 
the creation of a tropical system suitable for general 
electrical conductivity measurements [27] [28]. 
The developed system, as described above, is based on 
the 
4-point 
electrical 
conductivity 
measurement 
methodology that consists of 4 metallic rods, where 2 rods 
are injected with a known electric current and two are used 
to measure the potential difference. Similar equipment uses 
the same methodology, but with rods with already defined 
distances between them. Unlike the equipment developed, 
the rod distances are adjustable (within their limitations), 
thus enabling the measurement of electrical conductivity at 
different depths and measurements at different agricultural 
crops 
The authors are currently continuing their research on 
conductivity measurement systems. They have produced 
reports assessing the feasibility of directly reading soil 
electrical conductivity data and making it available on the 
cloud for analysis using artificial intelligence. This will 
enable interested parties to access the data, integrate it with 
productivity maps, soil attributes, and soil fertility, and 
make real-time decisions regarding crop management. The 
system can also be configured for variable rate application 
systems, updated with modern technologies, expanded for 
use with the IoT, and programmed for use on cell phones. 
IV. 
SENSOR FOR MEASURING WATER AND 
PLANT RELATIONSHIPS 
Studies in water relations of higher plants often present 
many ongoing debates about the mechanisms responsible 
for the ascent of water in plants. In the 70’s, one of the most 
useful techniques to aid in direct measurements of plant 
cells, called the pressure probe [29], was developed. It 
consisted of a glass capillary connected to a chamber filled 
with oil that punctured the cell wall, thus establishing a 
hydraulic connection between the cell sap and oil content.  
Using an optical microscope, it was possible to measure 
the movement of the oil/cell sap boundary, the meniscus, 
and then by raising or lowering the oil pressure inside the 
chamber mechanically until the meniscus returned to its 
original position, one could measure the pressure with a 
sensor in the oil chamber. Through this technique, as well 
as a series of improvements (such as system automation), it 
was possible to more accurately determine how plant cell 
pressure varies under different physical conditions, thus 
enabling an understanding of the hydraulic conductivity of 
cell membranes and the volumetric modulus of the cell’s 
elasticity [30]. 
So far, in that time, there had not been a detailed 
physical model describing how to calculate measurement 
errors, time constants, dynamical behavior, and temperature 
correlation. Bertucci Neto developed a physical model of 
the pressure probe and proposed an automated pressure 
probe 
based 
on 
thermal, 
instead 
of 
mechanical, 
compensation [31].  
 
 
Figure 14.  Video image of the meniscus in the capillary. 
The meniscus movement could be parameterized and 
correlated with the pressure applied to the capillary tip. One 
of the detection techniques developed was based on video 
image digitization. A single video line related to the 
meniscus position was striped and digitized. In this manner, 
the meniscus position is correlated to the time base. In 
107
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 14 the whole video image is shown, while Figure 15 
shows the information of a video frame and a striped video 
line related to the meniscus position. 
The information obtained on the single video line is 
shown in Figure 16 as well as the digitized signal. The other 
technique was based on image treatment (through 
LabView). The meniscus positional datum was used to 
control the system and return the meniscus to its original 
position through a feedback loop. Through the camera 
signal, it was, therefore, possible to select a region in the 
image in which a single video line carried the entirety of the 
data on the meniscus’ position. 
 
 
Figure 15.  Oscilloscope signal. Above: Video signal of 262.5 lines of a 
frame. Below:  Single video line stripped from the frame in the region of 
the meniscus image. 
As predicted in the modeling study, the relationship 
between electric heating voltage and the meniscus position 
in pixels is quadratic. The quadratic approximation presents 
a standard deviation of less than 10 pixels. After applying 
an external pressure, the meniscus' position returns to its 
origin with the help of a Proportional -Integral – Derivative 
(PID) controller action. The Control System Principle 
(CSP) was based on a regulation method in which the 
electrical power signal, generated as a counterbalance, is 
correlated with the measure, in order to maintain the output 
signal (in this case the meniscus' position) constant despite 
pressure variations applied on the capillary's tip'. Figure 17 
shows the quadratic behavior between the voltage signal 
applied to the heater versus the meniscus displacement in 
pixel. Using this data, a linear expression relating electric 
power supply in watt and displacement in pixel can be 
obtained. This calculation is useful to the linearization of 
the mathematical model set up. Based on experimental data, 
it is possible to calculate the dynamical response of the 
power generated by the heater to keep the meniscus on its 
original position. This is shown in Figure 18 where the 
experimental signal in watt (in black) represents the effort 
made by the electric heater to keep the meniscus on its 
original position. In the same figure, for comparison 
purposes, a theoretical simulated outcome based on actual 
parameters is shown in red. 
  
 
Figure 16.  Oscilloscope signal. Above: digitized signal after the voltage 
comparator. Down: voltage information of the single video line. 
 
Figure 17.  Quadratic behavior between electric power in volt and 
meniscus’ displacement. 
 
Figure 18.  Power supply effort in watts to counterbalance the pressure step 
on the tip of the capillary: experimental response (black), and theoretical 
response (red). 
108
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

V. 
SENSOR FOR THE PH REAL TIME 
MEASUREMENTS IN AGRICULTURAL SPRAY 
SOLUTION 
The pH is a scale from 0 to 14 used to determine the 
degree of acidity of a solution, being possible to classify it 
as acidic (pH < 7), basic (pH > 7), or neutral (pH = 7). It is 
based on the degree of acidity of an aqueous solution based 
on the concentration of hydronium ions (H3O+).  
Acidic solutions have excess hydronium ions and a pH 
lower than 7. On the other hand, basic solutions have an 
excess of hydroxyl ions (OH-) and pH values greater than 7. 
In addition, solutions considered neutral have the same 
concentration of H3O+ ions and OH- ions, and their pH 
measurement is 7. 
The negative logarithm of the molar concentration of 
H3O+ ions in the form can obtain the pH measurement: 
pH= −log[H3O+] 
(4) 
      Naturally when one is considering water the process of 
auto-ionization has the same amount of H3O+ and OH- 
ions. Therefore, aqueous solutions of any substance have 
these two types of ions, and the condition of acidity or 
basicity of the medium is defined by the ratio between the 
amounts of H3O+ and OH-, so as follows (Table II). 
TABLE II.  
MEDIUM AND STATUS FOR THE PH   OCCURRENCE. 
  
Status 
Acid 
excess H3O+ ions 
Basic 
excess OH- ions 
Neutral 
equal amounts of   H3O+ 
and OH- ions 
 
Hydronium ions are formally represented as H3O+. 
However, it is common to find the notation H+ for 
hydronium ions or to refer to the acidity of a medium. 
Pesticides, insecticides, and herbicides have their 
effectiveness modified by the pH of the solution resulting 
from the preparation of syrup that involves the active agent 
of these products and water. 
Generally, for weed control, herbicides are used, which 
work better in slightly acidic pH, around pH 4 to 6, and in 
some exceptions may act better in slightly alkaline. 
Glyphosate, for example, acts preferentially between pH 3.5 
to 5.0, being a weak acid [32][33]. 
At this pH of the spray solution, the ions are dissociated, 
favoring the foliar absorption of glyphosate due to the 
greater ease of crossing cell membranes, increasing the 
effectiveness of the product [34]. Besides, the effectiveness 
of glyphosate is affected both by the pH of the medium and 
by the presence of cations in the spray water [35]. 
The above or below ideal range can initiate degradation 
of the molecule, or hydrolysis. For example, when a weak 
acidic herbicide is mixed in a solution with an acidic pH, it 
tends to remain intact, however if it is mixed in a solution 
with an alkaline pH, it can result in the breakdown of 
molecules. In fact, despite many pesticides having a 
buffering effect in their formulations, special attention 
should be considered in pH value monitoring. Therefore, 
regardless of the pH of the pre-existing spray solution, one 
may adjust to the pH close to the ideal of each formulation. 
This is a fact that the producer must be aware of, 
especially in mixtures with fungicides and insecticides, 
which may have negative effects on the effectiveness of 
other pesticides. 
A portable optical instrument for pH measurements was 
presented in 2011, and it makes it possible to determine pH 
with a colorimetric sensor array [36]. In fact, the use of four 
membranes containing acid-base indicators makes it 
possible to cover the full range of pH using the hue (H) 
coordinate measurements of the HSV color space. The 
resulting microcontroller-based system has shown to be 
immune to optical and electrical interferences. Besides, the 
authors showed that the pH response of the selected four 
sensing elements was modeled, and calibration curves were 
applied to a validation set and real samples obtaining 
positive correlations between the real and predicted data. 
In 2013, a seawater pH data with good spatial and 
temporal coverage to apprehend ocean acidification 
phenomena studies was presented [37]. In such a way, it 
performed an accurate and precise autonomous in situ pH 
sensor for long term deployment on remote platforms. The 
widely used spectrophotometric pH technique was capable 
of the required high-quality measurements. In fact, it has 
been reported a key step towards the miniaturization of a 
colorimetric pH sensor with the successful implementation 
of a simple microfluidic design with low reagent 
consumption. The system featured a short-term precision of 
0.001 pH and accuracy within the range of certified values. 
Likewise, the optical set up was robust and relatively small 
due to the use of an USB mini-spectrometer, a custom-made 
polymeric flow cell and an LED light source. 
In addition, a portable electronic instrumentation for pH 
in-situ reading based on the use of a conductive polymer 
was also presented in literature [38]. Authors have used 
polyaniline, which proved to be useful to be used as a 
sensor for pH measurements. In such instrumentation the 
spectroscopy in the UV - Vis was successfully used. 
Furthermore, for education purposes, in 2018 it has been 
presented as an open-source potentiometric instrument for 
pH determination experiments with Bluetooth wireless 
connectivity [39]. The hardware was built on a solderless 
breadboard and mainly composed of an Arduino Nano 
microcontroller, a 16-bit analog-to-digital converter, two 
electronic buffer amplifiers, a temperature sensor, and a 
Bluetooth module, i.e., a low-cost instrument. Also, the 
software was written in Arduino Sketch and the cross-
platform Python language, both of which the students were 
allowed to access and modify freely. The instrument was 
demonstrated with a traditional glass electrode and a custom 
palladium/palladium oxide pH sensing electrode, and 
compared with a commercial pH meter. Results showed that 
109
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

both the accuracy and precision of the developed instrument 
were adequate for teaching purposes.  
Recently, at Embrapa Instrumentation, a pH sensor has 
been developed to operate in real time directly embedded 
into a spray nozzle, which is located on the spray boom 
(Figure 19). 
 
 
Figure 19.  Technical draw of the intelligent pH sensor assembled on the 
nozzle for direct injection sprayer. 
It has been used as a Raspberry Pi (RPi) due to its 
powerful processor, rich I/O interface, and Internet of 
Things (IoT) capability, which allowed the remote control 
across existing spray boom infrastructure and reduced 
human intervention [40]. Besides, the developed IoT pH 
system can gather measurements data for intelligent 
evaluation by resident software. 
The RPi is a mini-embedded computer developed in the 
United Kingdom by the Raspberry Pi Foundation in 
association with Broadcom. The model used was the RPi 3 
B+, where its specifications can be seen in Table III. 
TABLE III.  
RASPBERRY PI 3 MODEL B+ CHARACTERISTICS 
 
 
The internal memory is defined using a micro SD card, 
where the kernel of the operating system is also present, 
being recommended the use of at least 8 Gbytes of memory. 
In addition, the RPi 3 B+, unlike previous family models, 
enables BCM43438 wireless LAN and Bluetooth Low 
Energy (BLE) communication, allowing wireless data 
exchange.  
When it is being applied to a direct injection sprayer it 
has a typical control loop as shown in Figure 20. In this 
figure, the upper blocks indicate the direct injection 
components and corresponding variables qhref, Vh, and qh, 
which represent the set point for the chemical flow, 
controlled, and measured variables, respectively. In the 
lower blocks, at the same figure, is possible to observe the 
sprayer components, which are described as qfref, Vf, and 
qm, which represent the set point for the mixture flow, 
controlled, and measured variables respectively. 
 
 
Figure 20.  Block diagram for the fungicides, herbicides or insecticides, 
mixture control, and the intelligent pH sensor. 
In this type of direct injection sprayer, the injection 
point is located upstream from the sprayer pump as 
presented in [41][42]. The water flow qw is dependent on 
both the flow mixture qm and the injection flow qh. The 
intelligent sensor is assembled to measure the pH of the 
spray solution, which is proportional to its output denoted 
VpH. 
Figure 21 shows the flow-diagram of the algorithm for 
real time self-diagnostics. 
 
 
 
Figure 21.  Computational Flow diagram for the real time measurements 
and flag related to the spray solution pH evaluation. 
The calibration curve for the intelligent sensor for pH 
measurements is presented in Figure 22. 
 
 
Figure 22.  Calibration Curve and comparison with values obtained with 
prepared solutions with well-known pH values. 
The information provided by the intelligent pH sensor 
could be in the form of a flag, which shows a confidence 
level of the spray solution quality during its applications. 
Furthermore, the results show additional information than 
traditional sensors and meet prospects in practical 
110
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

applications, bringing potential benefits for sustainability, 
precision agriculture processes, and the potential to be used 
in IoT systems. Its configurations will depend on demand 
and large-scale applications. 
VI. CONCLUSIONS 
By using the sensor developed with microwave 
technique in the GHz frequency, it was possible to see that 
the main benefits with the instrument proposed here were 
not only the use of a non-destructive methodology, but also 
easy measurement of soil water, portability, use of non-
ionizing radiation, speed in the measurement, and low cost. 
Besides, the use of the apparent electrical conductivity of 
the soil has demonstrated usefulness as an important tool 
for precision agricultural work, since one may find its 
simplicity, as well as time and cost savings in carrying out 
decision-making in the areas of agricultural management 
having spatial variability. However, it is important to 
observe that ECa alone does not allow to answer all 
questions needed after the data mosaic be provided. 
Likewise, by supplying the physical model for the pressure 
probe and its improvement it has become possible an 
automated pressure gauge. Such a gauge is quite useful to 
investigate the displacement of a meniscus in the 
observation of the water-plant ratio, i.e., the water potential 
direct in agricultural crops. Furthermore, the possibility to 
have an intelligent sensor to measure the pH of a mixture 
(pesticide plus water) in spray systems contributes to 
decrease environmental impacts as well as in cost-reduction 
associated with the pest control efficiency. Finally, such 
affordable sensors proved to be innovative to improve 
production and resilience in agriculture. Future works will 
be focused on improvements in interoperability and real 
time operations to support agricultural databases and 
decision making based on the use of artificial intelligence.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been supported by the following 
Brazilian research agencies: Embrapa Instrumentation and 
Embrapa Labex – Europe. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. S. P. Herrmann Junior, L. M. Rabello, V. Bertucci Neto, P. 
E. Cruvinel, “Developing Affordable Sensors in Agriculture 
Based on Results Obtained at Embrapa Instrumentation”, The 
Eighth International Conference on Advances in Sensors, 
Actuators, Metering and Sensing (ALLSENSORS 2023), 
IARIA, Apr. 2023, pp. 8-15, ISSN: 2519-836X, ISBN: 978-
1-68558-083-4.  
[2] Agricultural Sensors Market Growth, Share, Forecast to 
2030. [Online]. Availablefrom: https://straitsresearch.com/re 
ports#:~:text=Market%20Snapshot&text=The%20global%20
agricultural%20sensors%20market,period%20(2022%E2%80
%932030).%202021%2015/02/ 2023.02.15.  
[3] T. M. Banhazi, et al., “Precision livestock farming: An 
international review of scientific and commercial aspects”, 
International 
Journal 
of 
Agricultural 
and 
Biological 
Engineering, vol. 5, Iss. 3, pp. 1-9, 2012.  
[4] P. E. Cruvinel and L. Martin Neto, "Subsidies for the 
development of Brazilian agribusiness: the agricultural 
automation program, vision and strategies”. (Original in 
Portuguese Language: Subsídios para o desenvolvimento do 
agronegócio brasileiro: o programa automação agropecuária, 
visão 
e 
estratégias), 
Technical 
Document, 
Embrapa 
Instrumentation, no. 32, pp. 1-4, Sep. 1999. 
[5] G. S. Hundal et al, “Exploring Barriers to the Adoption of 
Internet of Things-Based Precision Agriculture Practices” 
Agriculture 2023, vol. 
13, 
163: 
htps://doi.org/10.3390/agriculture13010163  
[6] A. Kayad, D.S. Paraforos, F. Marinello, S. Fountas, “Latest 
Advances in Sensor Applications in Agriculture”, Agriculture 
2020, vol. 10, pp. 362, https://doi.org/10.3390/agricul 
ture10080362. 
[7] P. S. P. Herrmann, "Characterization of an equipment for 
measuring soil moisture using the microwave technique” 
(Original inn Portuguese Language: Caracterização de um 
equipamento para medida de umidade do solo através de 
técnica de micro-ondas), M.Sc Dissertation, São Carlos 
School of Engineering, Department of Electrical Engineering, 
University of São Paulo (USP), pp. 1-124, 1993.  
[8] T. J. Schmugge, “Remote sensing of soil moisture: recent 
advances”, IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote 
Sensing, vol. 21, pp. 336-344, 1983.  
[9] P. S. P. Herrmann, V. Sydoruk, and F. N. Marques Porto, 
“Microwave Transmittance Technique Using Microstrip 
Patch Antennas, as a Non-Invasive Tool to Determine Soil 
Moisture in Rhizoboxes”, Sensors, vol. 20, pp. 1166, 2020, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/s20041166.  
[10] D. R. Nielsen, J. W. Biggar, and K. T. Erh, “Spatial 
variability of field-measurement soil-water properties”, 
Hilgardia, Berkeley, vol. 42, no. 7, pp. 215-259, 1973.  
[11] F. M. Smits, “Measurement of sheet resistivities with the 
four-point probe”, Bell System Technical Journal, New York, 
pp. 711-718, 1958.  
[12] Microchip 
Technology. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
htttp://www.microchip.com/ 2023.03.15.  
[13] E. Scudiero, D.L. Corwin, P.T. Markley, T.  Rounsaville, T. 
Bughici, T.H. Skages, “A system for concurrent on-the-go 
soil apparent electrical conductivity and gamma-ray sensing 
in micro-irrigated orchards”, Soil and Tillage Research, vol. 
235, 105899, Jan. 2024.  
[14] A. Luchiari Junior et al, “Management Zones: Theory and 
Pratice”, (Original in Portuguese Language: Zonas de 
manejo: teoria e pratica, In: Precision agriculture: a new look. 
(R. Y. Inamassu et al, (Ed.)), São Carlos: Embrapa 
Instrumentation, Brazil, pp. 60-64, 2011.  
[15] M. F. Vilela et al, “Preliminary Mapping of Management 
Zones in a Corn-soybean Production System in the Cerrado”, 
(Original in Portuguese Language: Mapeamento preliminar 
de zonas de manejo em sistema de produção de milho-soja no 
Cerrado) In: Precision agriculture: a new look. (R. Y. 
Inamassu et al, (Ed.)), São Carlos: Embrapa Instrumentation, 
Brazil, pp. 189-193, 2011.   
[16] A. V. Resende and M. F. Vilela, “General Evaluation, Results 
and Perspectives of the Use of Precision Agriculture in anual 
crops”, (Original in Portuguese Language: Avaliação geral, 
resultados e perspectivas do uso de agricultura de precisão em 
culturas anuais), In: Precision agriculture: a new look. (R. Y. 
Inamassu et al, (Ed.)), São Carlos: Embrapa Instrumentation, 
Brazil, pp. 135-137, 2011.  
[17] F. A. Oliveira, J. C. Franchini, H. Debiasi, “Spatial variability 
of soybean productivity and electrical conductivity of a 
Bruno 
Oxisol”, 
(Original 
in 
Portuguese 
Language: 
Variabilidade espacial da produtividade da soja e da 
condutividade elétrica de um Latossolo Bruno). In: Precision 
agriculture: a new look. (R. Y. Inamassu et al, (Ed.)), São 
Carlos: Embrapa Instrumentation, Brazil, pp. 153-156, 2011. 
[18]  Z. N. Brandão et al, “Apparent electrical conductivity and its 
correlation with pH in soils in the cerrado of Goiás” (Original 
in Portuguese Language: Condutividade elétrica aparente e 
sua correlação com o pH em solos no cerrado de Goiás), In: 
Precision agriculture: a new look. (R. Y. Inamassu et al, 
(Ed.)), São Carlos: Embrapa Instrumentation, Brazil, pp. 162-
167, 2011.  
[19] R. P. Oliveira, V. M. Benites, “Soil variability as an indicator 
of the opportunity for precision agriculture in a direct 
planting system”, (Original in Portuguese Language: 
Variabilidade do solo como indicador da oportunidade da 
agricultura de precisão em sistema de plantio direto). In: 
Precision agriculture: a new look. (R. Y. Inamassu et al, 
111
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(Ed.)), São Carlos: Embrapa Instrumentation, Brazil, pp. 194-
200, 2011. 
[20] C. R. Greco et al, “Geostatistics applied to soil electrical 
conductivity and altitude of soil cultivated with sugar cane”, 
(Original 
in 
Portuguese: 
Geoestatística 
aplicada 
à 
condutividade elétrica do solo e altitude do solo cultivado 
com cana-de-açúcar. In: Precision agriculture: a new look. 
(R. Y. Inamassu et al, (Ed.)), São Carlos: Embrapa 
Instrumentation, Brazil, pp. 245-248, 2011.  
[21] N. B. Perez et al, “Spatio-temporal Variability in Crop-
livestock Integration in the Sothern Region of Brazil: 
Perspectives for Intervention with Precision Agriculture”, 
(Original in Portuguese Language: Variabilidade espaço-
temporal em sistemas de integração lavoura-pecuária na 
Região Sul do Brasil: perspectivas de intervenção com 
agricultura de precisão). In: Precision agriculture: a new look. 
(R. Y. Inamassu et al, (Ed.)), São Carlos: Embrapa 
Instrumentation, Brazil, pp. 249-253, 2011.  
[22] J. C. Salton et al, “Electrical conductivity and physical and 
chemical attributes of an Oxisol after 15 years under 
management systems in Mato Grosso do Sul” (Original in 
Portuguese Language: Condutividade elétrica e atributos 
físicos e químicos de um Latossolo apos 15 anos sob sistemas 
de manejo em Mato Grosso do Sul), In: Precision agriculture: 
a new look. (R. Y. Inamassu et al, (Ed.)), São Carlos: 
Embrapa Instrumentation, Brazil, pp. 254-260, 2011.  
[23] Tutmez, B. Identifying electrical conductivity in topsoil by 
interpertable machine learning, Model Earth Syst. Environ, 
2023, https://doi.org/10.1007/s440  
[24] A. Miele, C. A. Flores, and J. M. Filippini Alba, “Current 
Status of Precision Viticulture Research in Rio Grande do 
Sul: First Results from Production Unit (PU) Grape for 
Wine” (Original in Portuguese Language: Status atual da 
pesquisa de viticultura de precisao no Rio Grande do Sul: 
primeiros resultados da UP Uva para Vinho), In: Precision 
agriculture: a new look. (R. Y. Inamassu et al, (Ed.)), São 
Carlos: Embrapa Instrumentation, Brazil, pp. 267-272, 2011.  
[25] P. S. Nascimento et al, “Homogeneous zones of apparent 
electrical conductivity in Quartzanic Neossolo in the 
Semiarid”, (Original in Portuguese Language: Zonas 
homogêneas de condutividade elétrica aparente em Neossolo 
Quartzarenico no Semiárido), In: Precision agriculture: a new 
look. (R. Y. Inamassu et al, (Ed.)), São Carlos: Embrapa 
Instrumentation, Brazil, pp. 290-293, 2011.  
[26] L. M. Rabello, “Soil electrical conductivity, topics and 
equipaments” 
(Original 
in 
Portuguese 
Language: 
Condutividade elétrica do solo, tópicos e equipamentos). 
Technical Document, São Carlos: Embrapa Instrumentation, 
pp. 1-19, 2009.     
[27] L. M. Rabello, R.Y. Inamassu, and A. C. C. Bernardi, “Soil 
eletrical conductivity measurement system”, (Original in 
Portuguese Language: Sistema de medida de condutividade 
elétrica do solo), Sao Carlos: Embrapa Instrumentation, 
Technical Document, no. 54, pp. 1-8, 2010. 
[28] L. 
M. 
Rabello 
et 
al, 
“Soil 
electrical 
conductivity 
measurement adapted to a planter” (Original in Portuguese 
Language: Medida de condutividade elétrica do solo adaptada 
a uma plantadeira), Sao Carlos: Embrapa Instrumentation, 
Technical Document, no. 46, pp. 1-4, 2008.  
[29] D. Hüsken, E. Steudle, and U. Zimmermann, “Pressure probe 
technique for measuring water relations of cells in higher 
plants.” Plant Physiology. vol. 61, pp. 158-163, 1978.  
[30] D. J. Cosgrove and D. M. Durachko, “Automated pressure 
probe for measurement of water transport properties of higher 
plant cells”, Review of Scientific Instrument, vol. 57. no. 10, 
pp. 2614-2619, 1986.  
[31] V. Bertucci Neto, "Modeling and automation in a new 
measurement technique for water and plant relationships”, 
(Original in Portuguese Language: Modelagem e automação 
em nova técnica de medida para relações de água e planta), 
Ph.D Thesis. São Carlos School of Engineering, Department 
of Electrical Engineering, University of São Paulo (USP), pp. 
1-181, 2005.  
[32] P. Christofolleti, “Classroom material”, AgroAdvance, pp. 1-
35, 2021.  
[33] T. L. C. Andrade, "Acaricidal action of hexythiazox, dicofol 
and fenbutatin oxide, at three pH levels of the syrup, in the 
control of the mite Brevipalpus phoenicis Geijskes, under 
laboratory conditions” (Original in Portuguese Language: 
Ação acaricida do hexythiazox, dicofol e óxido de fenbutatin, 
em três níveis de pH da calda, no controle do ácaro 
Brevipalpus 
phoenicis 
Geijskes, 
em 
condições 
de 
laboratório), MSc. Dissertation in Agronomy, Area of 
Concentration in Agricultural Entomology, Faculty of 
Agricultural and Veterinary Sciences, State University of São 
Paulo (UNESP), pp. 1-70, 1997.  
[34] D. M. Sanchotene et al, (“Influence of salts and water pH on 
the efficiency of imazethapyr + imazapic in controlling red 
rice”, Planta Daninha, vol. 25, pp. 415-419, 2007.  
[35] S. J. P. Carvalho et al, “Efficacy and pH of glyphosate 
mixtures after the addition of nitrogen fertilizers and the use 
of a sprayer pressurized by CO2”, Brazilian Journal of 
Agricultural Research, vol. 44, no. 6, pp.  569-575, 2009.  
[36] A. Martinez-Olmos et al, “Sensor Array-Based Optical 
Portable ´ Instrument for Determination of pH”, Sensors and 
Actuators 
B: 
Chemical, 
pp. 
840-848, 
2011. 
DOI:10.1016/j.snb.2011.02.052.  
[37] V. M. C. Rérolle et al, “Development of a colorimetric 
microfluidic 
pH 
sensor 
for 
autonomous 
seawater 
measurements”, Analytica Chimica Acta, vol. 786, pp. 124-
131, 2013.  
[38] G. 
Vendramini, 
Development 
of 
portable 
electronic 
instrumentation for pH measuring in the field using an optical 
sensor based on polyaniline film base, MSc Dissertation, 
Federal University of São Carlos (UFSCar), SãoCarlos, pp. 1-
81, 2015. 
[39] H. Jin et al, Open-source low-cost wireless potentiometric 
instrument for pH determination experiments, Journal of 
Chemical Education, vol. 95, pp. 326−330, 2018. DOI: 
10.1021/acs.jchemed.7b00479.  
[40] Raspberry Pi 3, Model B+. [Online]. Available from: 
https://datasheets.raspberrypi.com/rpi3/raspberry-pi-3-b-plus-
product-brief.pdf. 2023.08.15. 
.  
[41] U. R. Antuniassi, P. Miller, and M. Paice, Performance 
evaluation of injection metering systems, Brazilian Journal of 
Agricultural and Environmental Engineering, vol. 6, Issue 1, 
pp. 159-165, 2002.  
[42] K. P. Gillis et al, Injection mixing system for boomles, target-
activated herbicide spraying, Transaction of the ASAE, vol. 
46, Issue 4, pp. 997-1008, 2003.  
 
 
112
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

