337
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Index Keys Method for Analyses of Urban Spaces 
Methodological assumptions 
Małgorzata Hanzl 
Institute of Architecture and Town Planning 
Lodz University of Technology 
Lodz, Poland 
e-mail: mhanzl@p.lodz.pl 
 
Abstract— The paper proposes the index keys methodology of 
analysis of urban structures. The research stems from the 
descriptions of urban settings with regard to culture related 
issues. The geometrical analyses of public spaces, including the 
examination of streets and squares profiles and urban 
silhouettes, draw upon the writings of Kazimierz Wejchert, 
widely recognised for his contribution to the theory of 
urbanism in Poland. Cultural aspects of given settings require 
developing methods of description of public spaces. A few 
hypotheses are formulated concerning the relation between the 
crowd of people representing a given culture and the urban 
settings 
which 
constitute 
their 
habitus. 
Quantitative 
parameters describing the form of space are introduced, 
including: central angle, corrugation and regularity. The 
algorithmic method has been applied for the automatisation of 
the process. The preliminary results of analyses are presented 
as well as further research pathways. 
Keywords-urban design; public spaces; urban morphology. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The requirement to establish the methodology of 
examination of physical urban settings has been recognised 
[1]. As it has been stated cities arise out of man's social 
needs, they are described as an embodiment of collective art 
and techniques [2]. Culture related aspects of everyday space 
usage are reflected first of all by internal organisation and 
arrangement of urban settings, their character and the 
meaning, which they convey. The issue of a theoretical 
exploration of the analysis of urban outdoor space should be 
addressed from a dual perspective: morphological and 
anthropological. The requirement to include culture related 
aspects of urban structures into the normative theory of 
urban design should be recognised and the epistemological 
apparatus included in the clearly defined ontology. The 
current paper attempts at the geometrical analyses of public 
spaces, including the examination of street and square 
profiles and urban silhouettes drawing upon the writings of 
Kazimierz Wejchert [3], a Polish post-war researcher and 
urban designer, widely recognised for his contribution to the 
theory of urbanism in Poland.  
The paper is organised as follows: after this introduction, 
the anthropological perspective is briefly presented, which 
points out the understanding of situation and the definition of 
habitus, the main methodological assumptions are discussed, 
with an emphasis on the explanation of index keys concept. 
Section IV explores analytical methodology, introducing 
several parameters intended for the description of urban 
enclosures. Further on, the case study is introduced, which 
contains an explanation of the development of the 
methodology for detailed description of outdoor spaces and 
discusses the preliminary results of the research including the 
semi-automated analyses of selected parameters with 
Grasshopper. Section VI provides conclusions from the 
paper and presents further steps, which are to be taken in 
order to verify the presented methodology of analyses. 
II. 
ANTHROPOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE 
When looking for the relation between urban structures 
and the culture of space usage there are three main issues 
that should be considered: (1) physical features, including 
distribution, shape and size of forms defining the space, (2) 
the distribution and behaviour of space users, which reflect 
their social order and (3) the flow of human movement, 
which finds its reflection in the sociometric layout of a given 
place. Flows are connected with movement/traffic and are 
related to space, following the definition by Yi Fu Tuan [4]. 
Concentrations enable contact and communication processes. 
They are static rather than dynamic, thus place related. Both 
types are closely interrelated, they inseparably interpenetrate 
each other. Whenever the human flow stops for a moment 
concentration occurs, though interrelations require more 
comfortable conditions to take place, among others: time and 
spatial arrangement. According to the theory formulated by 
Lynch [5], flows may be approached as paths and 
concentrations as nodes. Concentrations tend to a static form, 
while flows serve mainly as a means of getting to some 
destination. Taking into consideration mostly their static 
behaviour, the distribution of people in public spaces reflects 
social order. Contemporary research in anthropology clearly 
proves that lack of street or square boundary in modernists 
cities and districts is one of reasons for the absence of the 
traditional urban life. The form of physical enclosure should 
be subject of research to enable it to convey emotions and 
culture related meaning in a more conscious sense. The 
current paper is an extension of the former one [1], which 
elaborates 
more 
on 
the 
proposed 
methodology 
of 
examination of physical urban enclosures with the use of 
Grasshopper scripting for semi-automatised  analyses. 
 

338
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A. The concept of situation 
In anthropology, situation is defined as a theatre of 
human activities [6]. Goffman [7, p.18] refers to a situation 
as to “the full spatial environment anywhere within which an 
entering person becomes a member of the gathering that is 
(or does then become) present”. Anthropologists developed 
elaborated theories on ways in which a site is converted into 
a meaningful ‘place’, by inscribing human activities into the 
surroundings. The relationship between people and sites 
encompasses both: attaching meaning to space and 
“recognition 
and 
cultural 
elaboration 
of 
perceived 
properties of environments in mutually constituting ways 
through narrative and praxis” [8, p.14]. Schumacher [9] 
states that the role of architecture is to frame social 
communication [9, p.414]. Thomas, who introduced the 
concept of situation in the 1920s, defined it as a 
“constellation of the factors determining the behaviour” [10, 
p.8] after [9, p.420]. 
B. The definition of habitus 
The morphological approach [11] refers the above 
concept to the urban structure introducing the notion of 
habitus. The set of identifiable cues, which may be qualified 
as culture-specific [12, pp.106-107], and referring to spaces, 
includes features like: “quality, size, shape, enclosing 
elements, paving, barriers, and links, etc.”, requires 
examination with regard to the distribution of human flows 
and concentrations and their intensities, and consequently 
occasions for contacts. Both Gehl [13] and Whyte [14] point 
at similar rules of use of outside spaces. The territorial 
distribution and exchange of nonverbal cues serves the 
communication purpose and usually certain semantics may 
be attributed to it [7]. The behaviour of a given human group 
in concentrations reflects its culture. The movement 
component tends to be more universal and less culture 
dependent, as Hillier and Hanson [15] claim. The thesis is 
made that the rules, which govern the non-verbal 
communication component of the human group behaviour 
are the same ones that govern the distribution of buildings. 
They represent the same culture of space usage. 
C. Issues related to proxemics 
The proxemics approach, presented by Hall [16] and his 
successors, examines the relation between spatial patterns of 
space usage in different cultures and the material 
environment. The differences between morphological 
structures representing various cultures are particularly 
apparent in cities that, like Lodz, had become a melting pot 
of many cultures. Hall [17] identifies direct relationships 
between interpersonal distances and other characteristics of 
individuals and communities and the way they shape their 
own physical environment. Hillier and Hanson [15, p.27] 
refer to the usage of space and the patterns of behaviour 
appropriate for different communities and ethnic groups as 
the determinants of the final shape of urban structures. 
According to Hillier [18] a city is seen as a system of visual 
distances, strongly influenced by both perception and 
personal distances. 
 
III. 
METHODOLOGICAL ASSUMPTIONS 
A proposal of the method for the analysis of public 
spaces is presented, based on the writings of Wejchert [3]. K. 
Wejchert's theory of urban composition is widely recognised 
for its contribution to the theory of urbanism in Poland. 
Similarly to methods developed by Collins and his followers, 
it allows discussion of the atmosphere of urban spaces.  
Forgoing morphological descriptions of urban structures 
were based on the analyses of plans, i.e., Conzenian school 
of urban morphology [19]. The other group refers to the 
diachronic characteristics of constructions, i.e., Muratori’s 
tradition [20]. They do not allow for considerations referring 
to the ambiance of the settings discussed as a whole. The 
actual, practice-based approach engages the definition of 
genius loci, notably in rehabilitation projects. 
The research applies the anthropological approach to the 
description of cities and urban structures. It follows and 
develops the so far available, descriptive methods. E.g., 
Rapoport listed a comprehensive set of culture related 
characteristics of physical structures [12, pp.106]. Hillier and 
Hanson [15, p.224] ponder on the method of investigating 
encounters as morphic languages. They conclude that the 
aim is to establish how encounter systems get differential 
properties. The resulting peculiarities would have different 
manifestations in space. 
A. Perception as a factor influencing the creation of space 
Strzemiński [21] pointed at the evolution of visual 
awareness along with the development of civilisation. Visual 
awareness was transformed together with the changes of 
socio-cultural settings. He examined it as a consequence of 
economic and technical development. Both above factors as 
well as the social structure of a community in the defined 
historical context influenced the way people perceive spatial 
settings. The notion of visual awareness is understood as the 
“cooperation of seeing and thinking”. It emphasises the role 
of cognitive absorption of perceived visual stimuli. 
Strzemiński [21] identifies two ways of the development of 
visual awareness. In rural cultures, it is the observation of the 
interior of an object, which finds its expression in the studies 
of nature. The second form was a silhouette vision. It is said 
to develop from the primitive contour observation in 
economies based on hunting and breeding animals. This 
form is typical of tribes accustomed to vast open spaces. 
The derivative of the silhouette vision was the 
perspective of simple parallel projection. In the further stage 
it was followed by the development of rhythm, including 
architectural rhythmisation. The last phenomena was a 
consequence of the inclusion of the afterimage effect, natural 
for the perception of vast open spaces. Another form of 
seeing was the one concentrated on ware attributes, with 
emphasis on the texture and weight of objects. Usually this 
form was devoid of larger perspectives. It was particularly 
apparent in communities, whose main occupation was 
commerce. Adorno [22, p.5] points at the role of artworks as 
a medium reflecting the unconscious aspects of culture. He 
states that “artworks are afterimages of empirical life insofar 
as they help the latter to what is denied them outside their 
own sphere and thereby free it from that to which they are 

339
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
condemned by reified external experience.” The same refers 
to the urban settings, which, perceived by a group of users, 
answer their needs, including the aesthetic criteria. 
B. Rhythm - a component of unconscious contexting 
Components containing the meaning of public spaces 
may 'speak' in different way. Some features are obvious and 
result from the functional conditions of a given development. 
They may be classified as direct communication. This group 
may include the elements of streets furniture such as: traffic 
lanes of various widths and surfaces, cycling paths, 
pavements, greenery, bollards, etc. It is a platitude to say that 
there are streets that are designed for driving fast and others 
inviting for a walk in the shade of trees. An elementary 
analysis of street profile allows one to distinguish a 
commercial street from a residential one. The general 
character of public spaces and their development through the 
ages is addressed in manuals of the history of urbanism. 
Another part of communication may be classified as 
indirect, in analogy to non-verbal cues. According to Hall 
[23]: "Nonverbal systems are closely tied to ethnicity (...) 
they are of the essence of ethnicity." The consistency of 
urban pattern, as experienced in public spaces, is a 
consequence of the rules of crowd behaviour constituting 
part of a given culture. Kinesics is a way a person moves and 
handles their body. People specialised the language of the 
body making it integrated and congruent with everything 
they do, it is culturally determined and should be read 
against the given cultural background. Also, the presence of 
a synchronisation with settings is claimed, which takes place 
when the urbanscape belongs to the same culture as the 
visitor. Then a sense of belonging may be present and a place 
is perceived as more attractive than when the synchronisation 
is lacking. Settings which are out of phase are more likely to 
seem alien, unordered. As a consequence, the notion of 
rhythms may serve as an element connecting indirect 
communication with physical settings. 
C. Theory of seeing – index keys concept 
Like in the paintings of Van Gogh, seeing is concentrated 
around a few key points, which define how a scene is 
perceived [21]. The analyses should provide observation of 
processes: flows and forces, and concentrate on their key 
points. Situations that are the most important for the 
definition of cultural character, i.e., the moments of human 
interactions, particularly attract researchers’ attention [17, 
p.56] – they are static rather than dynamic. The methodology 
of key points analogues to the anthropological method of 
taking photographs by members of the group that is 
observed, who are able to notice the clue activities important 
for their cultures and often unnoticeable for foreigners, 
allowing for observation of socially meaningful activities 
responsible for the formation of a cultural specific 
environment. 
The application of the ‘key points’ methodology to the 
physical urban settings allows for the mathematical analyses 
of traditionally defined geometrical features of urban 
landscapes. It assumes the choice of the most obvious 
perspectives when observing the environment. In the case of 
urban spaces, it means choosing these view axes, which 
provide profiles and silhouettes respectively perpendicular or 
parallel to the main axe of a given path.  
 
Figure 1.  Index points and cross-sections definition. I – geometrical 
central point, II – index key points, αn – central angles for each cross-
sections, wn – widths of each unique part of wall 
In the proposed methodology the simplest way to extract 
cross-sections and silhouettes is used, based on orthogonal 
projection. The methods to acquire and analyse more 
realistic geometrical features including the perspective 
projection require further elaborations. The analyses of the 
profiles and of the silhouettes may use, among others, the 
highly efficient methodology proposed by Gal & Doytsher 
[24], which allows the replacement of the Line of Sight 
(LOS) methodology of extracting silhouettes of groups of 
buildings. The automatisation of profiles or silhouettes 
acquisition is also available using the Light of Sight (LOS) 
module of ArcScene by ESRI. There are also some 
preliminary attempts to model 3D isovist environment, in 
analogy to the method by Benedict [25] referring to the 2D 
plan drawing. These trials, some of them sophisticated, e.g., 
[26], equally require development of an analytical 
background. 
Further methodology development should also take into 
consideration the processes described by the Gestalt 
psychology, e.g., the shortening of distances in the 
perception of distant buildings. Other field of studies are the 
ways in which humans perceive the environment, e.g., 
perception of meaningful entities [27]. 
IV. 
THE ANALYTICAL METHODOLOGY 
A. Convex - definition 
Hillier and Hanson [15] defined a series of rules 
governing the spatial order of analysed settlements. They 
noticed that the definition of the basic spatial unit for 
analyses, which would be distinguishable in the geometrical 
way, is essential for further considerations. Referring to their 

340
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
theoretical apparatus, a basic spatial unit that may serve for 
the description of public spaces is a convex. A “fully convex 
fat space” is defined as “a part of a space, which represents 
the maximum extension of the point in the second dimension 
given the first dimension” [15, p.91]. In Hillier logic of 
space, the implicit assumption is made that all the cells, 
representing spaces, are similar units, both in size and in 
shape. It does not describe the actual form of urban closures 
and the spatial edges are lacking. The critique concerns a 
lack of geometrical description of buildings, which form 
urban settings, including their size, shape and distribution 
(e.g., [28]).  
Spaces, which are not defined spatially but by the 
presence of some other edges – like property borders, remain 
problematic. A more complete picture, which may serve to 
describe reality in a reliable way, requires the introduction of 
the shape and size parameter(s) and multiplying them by 
three dimensions. Studies in human perception show a trend 
to generalise objects to wholes, when the compounds are 
located close to each other, have similar attributes, may be 
described with the same contour line and their meaning, 
recognised from former experience, remains similar.  
B. Description of the form of space 
The way in which an observer perceives space in the 
urban interior depends on the parameters of cross-section. 
Wejchert [3]. The basic features important for describing 
convex spaces are profiles and wall silhouettes. The analysis 
of a wall's silhouette allows for identification of required 
index points, which may further on serve for the creation of 
profiles. Cross-sections may be created for any cue point of 
any unique physical form of objects surrounding the space 
change, i.e., the height and the shape of buildings.  
Each index point is referred by one profile, various 
profiles require association with distinguished index points. 
The starting point for each profile is located on the line, 
which is parallel to the wall and goes through the 
geometrical centre of the given convex; see Fig. 1. Cross-
sections are by definition perpendicular to the convex wall. 
In the case of buildings or other constructions that are set 
back from the convex edge and not perpendicular to it, the 
middle point of a building/construction is the location of an 
index point. Similar situation occurs in the case of buildings 
that are located behind other buildings but whose height 
exceeds the height of the front building. 
The method may also serve for the description of some 
concavity closures. Yet, as their perception as one spatial 
unit is more the result of tradition than of their geometrical 
attributes, these shapes should be defined manually, i.e., 
divided into two or more basic convexes and then 
reconsidered as one whole. An example of a concavity space 
widely recognised as single urban interior is the L-shaped 
Piazza della Signoria in Florence. 
C. Central angle 
One of the most important parameters describing cross-
sections is the central angle. The central angle is an angle 
between a horizontal plane parallel to the floor at the height 
of 1.5m (the medium level of sight for humans) and a line 
going through the highest point of the building defining the 
closure in a given index point. The point belongs both to the 
silhouette line and to the cross-section, see Fig. 2. 
Wejchert [3] provides general rules for classification of 
closures based on the description of heritage sites, which are 
widely recognised as beautiful for their great proportions. 
The central angle values in most of the discussed squares 
range from 25° to 30°, e.g., Piazza Saint Marco in Venice - 
28° to 30°, Old Market in Warsaw - 30°. The angle smaller 
than 10° refers to closures, which are feebly read in space. 
Either the plan dimensions are too vast or the vertical 
dimension is not adequate to provide the proper definition of 
space.  
The closures of a central angle parameter higher than 60° 
rarely serve as public piazzas. An important feature for their 
evaluation are lighting conditions appropriate for a given 
climate. The general attitude towards more densely built 
spaces has changed recently, their values being widely 
recognised after the end of Modernism. The former 
pejorative connotation of terms such as “canyon” or “well” 
[3] lost their previous importance along with the common 
scarcity of defined spaces and dispersion of development. 
The central angle analysis is made for each of the cross-
sections created at each of the index-points of the 
distinguished walls, and then combined for the walls forming 
the convexes, using the following formula (1), where α1, α2, 
α3, αn are values of central angles of each of the defined 
cross-sections, n is the number of index points for each wall, 
wn is the width of a piece of a wall represented by a given 
index point and w is the length of the whole wall. 
 
∑




×
=
×
+
×
+
×
=
w
w
w
w
w
w
w
w
n
n
n
n
α
α
α
α
α
2
2
1
1
 (1) 
D. Corrugation and size 
The urban spaces must be also measured using metric 
values. Humans, as Gehl asserts in the interview in a 
documentary film ‘Urbanized’ by Gary Hustwit, “remain a 
small walking animal” and require spaces of human scale. 
The spaces that are too large seem undefined. Gehl 
recognises a distance of 100m as a maximum that allows for 
proper reception by the observer of the environment. The 
assumed research methodology refers to the width of half of 
the closure, thus the distance should not exceed 50m. The 
actual dimensions of physical spaces reflect also the 
requirements defined by proxemics. The differences in 
personal distances influence both the perception of space and 
its production [16], [23], which means that we may assume 
that the size of space is perceived and designed differently by 
people of various cultural background. Continuing this 
thread, the analysis of the dimensions of public spaces 
proves that they remain culture specific.  
The definition of space may be either precise or hazy. In 
the first case walls form clearly cut edges, in the second one 
buildings and other objects are scattered, forming a kind of 
fuzzy boundary. As Wejchert [3] argues, sight tends towards 
forms that are ‘strong’, which means: clearly defined, and 

341
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
towards layouts that are concise. Parts or the whole of the 
observed constructions may be hidden behind other objects, 
which occurs both in the vertical as in the horizontal plane. 
In the case of breaks in the structure - i.e., openings in the 
walls, the closest object closing the perspective visible in the 
silhouette view is taken into consideration. Similarly, a 
higher building located in the background should be taken 
into account as, constituting a part of a silhouette, it 
influences the actual central angle parameter. The index 
points, where there are no visible constructions, are 
described with central angle value 0.  
 
Figure 2.  Corrugation of the wall, an- set back or behind of a part of a 
wall, d – a distance of the wall from the central point of the cross-section. 
 
In a situation where buildings are set back from the line 
of frontages, the method allows for the description of an 
angle in a way similar to other cases. Variations of a 
buildings’ offset are another parameter important for the 
definition of the space's character. The line of frontages may 
be located in the edge of a given convex or set back, the 
offset may be regular or irregular, any of these attributes 
influence the perception of the space (Fig. 2). 
Corrugation may be defined using the formula (2), where 
ϕ  symbolises corrugation value of the wall and γ - the offset 
of a single part of the wall. The possibilities of comparison 
of different situations are enabled thanks to the normalisation 
of offset values as in formula (3), where a represents the 
offset in metric units and d – the distance of the wall from 
the central point of the cross-section. In the case of some 
elements, offset of the lines of frontage shift should be given 
as positive numbers. 
 
 
n
= ∑ n
γ
ϕ
 
(2) 
 
d
γn = an
 
(3) 
E. Distribution of index points 
Further analyses include the distribution of index points, 
which reflects the distribution of buildings – each point 
belongs to a single building and the points are located in the 
middle of the facade. Such an analysis allows for easy 
detection of rhythms, repetitions, symmetries, axial layouts, 
etc. Distribution of index points may be described as 
clustered, spaced or scattered. It should be noticed that 
similar words are applied to the characteristics of the groups 
of people forming a crowd [29]. 
When analysing index point distribution the parameter of 
regularity may be defined referring to an ideal pattern, which 
for each case would mean equal distribution of the number 
of points defined for a given wall (Fig. 3). Any shift from the 
point resulting from an equal division should be measured 
and normalised by the width of the wall represented by each 
index point. The sum of all shifts divided by the number of 
index points describes the value of regularity for each wall. 
The regularity of the whole closure is described by the 
average value. The regularity may be described with the use 
of the formula (4), where τ is the regularity parameter, r 
represents a single shift, ϖ - width of an average part of a 
wall, w – width of a piece of a wall represented by a given 
index point and n is the number of index points for a given 
wall (5). 
 
 
Figure 3.  Regularity of the wall – method of description. 
 
n
r
n
n
τ ϖ *
= ∑
 
(4) 
 
n
wn
n
= ∑
ϖ
 
(5) 
V. 
THE CASE STUDY 
The case study pertains to two areas located in Lodz, 
Poland. One of them is Zgierska Street, located in the Old 
Town, in the former 'Jewish district'. In the 19th century, the 
district served as a habitat of the multiethnic society, in 

342
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
which orthodox Jews constituted a majority. These settings 
were commonly described as possessing a special ‘Jewish’ 
character. This notion is evoked by the form of public 
spaces, different than in other parts of the city. The other 
place is the Old Market in Lodz, located in the same 
neighbourhood. The subject of analysis is its former 
appearance, before the demolition during World War II and 
later. The other settings, used for reference, are an example 
of workers houses built for employees of the textile factory 
by Karol Scheibler in Plac Zwycięstwa as well as the first 
villa of this entrepreneur located on the other side of the 
same square. The square was later cut through by an 
important traffic route, Aleja Piłsudskiego. The remnants of 
the cultural heritage are however preserved even in the 
changed settings. Photographic analyses use the results of an 
inventory by students of the Institute of Architecture and 
Town Planning of Lodz University of Technology, 4th sem., 
tutor M. Hanzl. 
The examples of the regularity analyses are presented in 
Fig. 4, results are included in Table I. The rhythm is 
described by the regularity parameter, which in case of 
Zgierska Street is lower than half and in the case of Plac 
Zwycięstwa is close to 0. This confirms the observation that 
the second case is a regular one in opposition to the first. The 
square was conceived as a single design, assuming repetition 
of identical workers buildings. The other site also remains 
regular although here it was not a requirement. We may 
assume that in this case a designer made a decision choosing 
this kind of solution appropriate in these settings. 
 
 
Figure 4.  The analysis of regularity: current buildings (1) and parcels (2), historical buildings (3) and parcels (4). Values of shifts (r) for each key point 
shown in grey. Zgierska Street, Lodz, drawing uses results of inventory by students of the Institute of Architecture and Town Planning of Lodz University of 
Technology, 4th sem., tutor M. Hanzl 
 
A. Parametric approach 
In order to automatise the process of analysis, the 
Grasshopper for Rhinoceros 3D, a well known and widely 
recognised parametric modelling system, has been used. The 
analysis was performed on the sketchy reconstruction of the 
former appearance of the Old Town in Lodz, located in the 
very heart of the former so called Jewish quarter, not far 
from the first location analysed. The geometrical data has 
been acquired directly from the Sketchup model based on the 
archive photographs of the settings. The analyses of 
regularity and of central angle were performed. The value of 
corrugation has been counted as well. The details of the 
process of parametric modelling are presented in the 
illustrations (Fig. 5, Fig. 6, Fig. 7, Fig. 8, Fig. 9, Fig. 10). 
The numerical values are collected and ordered in the Table 
II and in  the Table III. The summary values of  central 
angle, corrugation and regularity are enbolden. 

343
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE I.  
THE ANALYSIS OF REGULARITY: Τ - THE REGULARITY PARAMETER, R - A SINGLE SHIFT, W – WIDTH OF A SINGLE WALL, N - THE NUMBER OF 
INDEX POINTS FOR A GIVEN WALL 
West side of Zgierska Street 
East side of Zgierska Street 
n 
r [m] 
w [m] 
τ 
N 
r [m] 
w [m] 
τ 
1 
1.59 
16.37 
 
1' 
5.81 
35.71 
 
2 
9.80 
6.73 
 
2' 
17.15 
34.49 
 
3 
14.72 
22.03 
 
3' 
16.15 
11.26 
 
4 
13.55 
19.48 
 
4' 
9.41 
23.04 
 
5 
10.77 
20.47 
 
5' 
9.10 
23.74 
 
6 
10.93 
19.31 
 
6' 
8.92 
24.43 
 
7 
11.48 
19.71 
 
7' 
7.78 
19.88 
 
8 
11.05 
20.26 
 
8' 
2.96 
18.24 
 
9 
9.68 
21.59 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
9.30 
18.72 
 
 
 
 
 
11 
5.56 
26.64 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
0.05 
21.97 
 
 
 
 
 
rn 
9.04 
19.44 
0.46 
 
9.66 
23.85 
0.41 
σ 
4.46 
4.70 
 
 
4.82 
8.11 
 
 
 
TABLE II.  
THE ANALYSES' VALUES FOR THE RECONSTRUCTION OF THE OLD MARKET IN LODZ: CORRUGATION AND CNETRAL ANGLE 
 
North facade 
West facade 
East facade 
South facade 
 
Corrugation (φ) 
0.003623 
0.101632 
0.014923 
0.163982 
  
0.009263 
0.22144 
0.264982 
0.289413 
0.013601 
0.13674 
0.558645 
0.380535 
0.00796 
 
0.830679 
0.437859 
 
 
0.841983 
0.452478 
 
 
0.506262 
0.47934 
 
 
1.078754 
0.341997 
Average corrugation 
0.0086118 
0.153271 
0.585175 
0.363658 
0.27767889 
Central angle (α) 
0.217827 
0.134396 
0.233878 
0.236677 
  
0.192346 
0.083026 
0.17665 
0.197135 
0.259558 
0.143964 
0.153952 
0.157785 
0.185947 
 
0.258512 
0.173245 
 
 
0.163747 
0.189091 
 
 
0.143275 
0.191368 
 
 
0.141501 
0.146875 
 
21.391969 
12.0462 
18.16452 
18.45967 
17.5155888 
 
 
 

344
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE III.  
THE ANALYSES' VALUES FOR THE RECONSTRUCTION OF THE OLD MARKET IN LODZ: REGULARITY 
Regularity (τ) 
1.274003 
0.237062 
0.028775 
1.652843 
  
0.891403 
0.098132 
0.893457 
1.497418 
3.035771 
0.335194 
2.577649 
1.420905 
2.653172 
 
3.06436 
4.331363 
 
 
2.686072 
8.04802 
 
 
7.255301 
6.223592 
 
 
5.978173 
1.241455 
 
0.103669 
0.007883 
0.22197 
0.339451 
0.16824325 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  The analysis of regularity τ for the East facade of the Old Market in Lodz, reconstruction of the state before the World War II. 
 

345
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 6.  The analysis of regularity τ for the South facade of the Old Market in Lodz, reconstruction of the state before the World War II. 
 
Figure 7.  The analysis of the central angle α and corrugation φ values for the North facade of the Old Market in Lodz, reconstruction of the state before the 
World War II. 
 
 
Figure 8.  The analysis of the central angle α and corrugation φ values for the West facade of the Old Market in Lodz, reconstruction of the state before the 
World War II. 

346
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 9.  The analysis of the central angle and corrugation values for the East facade of the Old Market in Lodz, reconstruction of the state before the 
World War II.
The semi-automatic analyses presented in figures and 
tabular data collected as a result enabled work with large set 
of data and thus improvements of the method developed 
formerly and presented in [1]. Some small lapses were 
eliminated. Application of the semi-automatic method 
allowed significant acceleration of analyses. At this stage it 
is possible to switch between subsequent facades and 
analyses are performed automatically. The results will be 
further presented in the form of charts, showing rhythms of 
facades as waves, separate for each wall. Their overlap is 
going to be subject of the further analyses. There is also the 
possibility to write results of analyses to the separate Excel 
file for further research. For now this process is not fully 
automatic. 
The analyses performed allow one to state that the 
corrugation of walls of the old market was significant, 
which, in comparison with the current settings, is an 
important difference. Similarly, the rhythms of current 
facades, constructed after World War II in socio-realism 
style, are very regular - the overall value is close to 0. 
The application of an algorithmic method of analysis 
enables easy comparison of parameters for various settings. 
It has allowed verification of assumed mathematical 
apparatus and its validation. Use of Grasshopper, which is a 
the Rhino3D extension very popular among architects, may 
in future allow implementation of these types of analyses in 
the design process, similarly to other extensions of this type. 
The further work assumes creation of an extension for 
Grasshopper 
allowing 
the 
above 
analyses.

347
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 10.  The analysis of the central angle α and corrugation values φ for the South facade of the Old Market in Lodz, reconstruction of the state before the 
World War II. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
The challenge defined by Hall [23, p.55] that in a 
globalising world man must find out how “basic cultural 
systems such as time and space are used to organise 
behaviour” starts to influence contemporary urban design 
thought, as numerous studies show [9]. The thread of cultural 
studies imports viable content to the proposal of ontology for 
urban design, which is being developed, e.g., by Duarte et al. 
[30], Beirão et al. [31] or Beirão [32]. The requirement to 
define the methodology of description of public space 
character has been recognised. The studies of urban 
morphology are going through a period of intensive revival 
after a break associated with the activities of modernists [33] 
and attract the attention of numerous researchers all over the 
world, as Gauthier and Gilliland [9] describe in their 
comprehensive résumé.  
An extensive set of culture dependent features was 
defined by Rapoport [12]. The current study provides 
assumptions to the quantitative description of public spaces 
based on the theory by Wejchert [3]. The concept of index 
points is introduced, which enables examination of the 
physical form of urban settings with the use of geometrical 
description. Basic values are defined, including the 
parameters of central angle, regularity and corrugation of an 
enclosure. Further development of the current theory is 
envisaged, including different approaches to the analyses of 
urban silhouettes and cross-sections, as well as its 
verification for the description of the assumed case study. 
The current research is an ongoing one. Further steps 
include validation of the proposed methodology in an 
experimental way and comparison of various urban 
environments. This may help to understand the diachronic 
aspects of urban development. The first step covered 
exploratory modeling of various urban environments with 
the use of available software, including: (1) Google 
SketchUp; (2) CityEngine; (3) Rhino and comparison of 
results with the two-dimensional analysis explained hitherto 
[19]. The further steps assume comparison of resulting 
values with the extended analyses of kinetics patterns. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The current study is a part of the research project 
financed by National Science Centre of Poland UMO-
2011/03/D/HS3/01630, entitled: "Morphological analysis of 
urban structures – the cultural approach. Case studies of 
Jewish communities in the chosen settlements of Lodz and 
Masovian voivodeships". 

348
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Hanzl, "Index keys method for analyses of urban public 
spaces," The Fifth International Conference on Advanced 
Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services 
(GEOProcessing 2013) IARIA, Feb.  2013, pp. 108-113, 
ISSN: 2308-393X, ISBN: 978-1-61208-251-6. 
[2] L. Mumford, The Culture of Cities. New York: Harcourt 
Brace, Jovanovich, Inc., 1970. 
[3] K. 
Wejchert, 
Elementy 
kompozycji 
urbanistycznej. 
Warszawa: Wydawnictwo Arkady, 1984. 
[4] Y.-F. Tuan, Space and Place, The Perspective of Experience. 
Minneapolis, London: University of Minnesota Press, 1977. 
[5] K. Lynch, The Image of the City. Cambridge: The MIT Press, 
1960. 
[6] R. S. Perinbanayagam, “The definition of the situation: an 
analysis of the ethnomethodological and dramaturgical view,” 
The Sociological Quarterly, vol. 15, pp. 521–541, 1974. 
[7] E. Goffman, The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life, 
Monograph. Edinburgh: University of Edinburgh, Social 
Science Research Centre, 1959. 
[8] D. L. Lawrence and S. M. Low, “Locating Culture,” The 
antropology of Space and Place, Locating Culture, S. M. Low 
and D. L. Lawrence-Zuniga, Eds. Oxford: Blackwell 
Publishing, 2009, pp. 1–47. 
[9] P. Schumacher, The Autopoiesis of Architecture A New 
Framework for Architecture, vol. 1. Great Britain: A John 
Wiley and Sons, Ltd, Publication, 2011. 
[10] W. I. Thomas, Primitive Behavior: An Introducton to the 
Social Sciences. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1937. 
[11] P. Panerai, J. Ch. Depaule, and M. Demorgon, Analyse 
urbaine, Marseille: Édition Parenthèses, 2009. 
[12] A. Rapoport, The Meaning of the Built Environment. A 
Nonverbal 
Communication 
Approach. 
Tuscon: 
The 
University of Arizona Press, 1990. 
[13] J. Gehl, Life Between Buildings, Using Public Space. 
Kopenhagen: The Danish Architectural Press, 2001. 
[14] W. Whyte, The Social Life of Small Urban Places. New 
York: Project for Public Spaces, 2009. 
[15] B. Hillier and J. Hanson, The Social Logic of Space, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984 
[16] E. T. Hall, Hidden Dimension. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 
1966. 
[17] E. T. Hall, “Proxemics,” The Anthropology of Space and 
Place, Locating Culture, S. M. Low and D. L. Lawrence-
Zuniga, Eds. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, pp. 51–73, 2009. 
[18] B. Hillier, “The genetic code for cities – is it simpler than we 
thought?,” Complexity Theories of Cities have come of Age, 
Delft: TU Delft, Sep. 2009. 
[19] J. W. R. Whitehead and P. J. Larkham, Eds., Urban 
Landscapes, International Perspectives. London: Routledge, 
2000. 
[20] G. Cataldi, G. L. Maffei, and P. Vaccaro, “Saverio Muratori 
and the Italian school of planning typology,” Urban 
Morphology, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 3–12, 2002. 
[21] W. Strzemiński, Teoria Widzenia. Kraków: Wydawnictwo 
Literackie, 1974. 
[22] T. W. Adorno, Aesthetic Theory. London, New York: 
Continuum International Publishing Group, 2011. 
[23] E. T. Hall, Beyond Culture. New York: Anchor Books, 1989. 
[24] O. Gal and Y. Doytsher, “Fast and accurate visibility 
computation in a 3D urban environment,” in The Fourth 
International 
Conference 
on 
Advanced 
Geographic 
Information 
Systems, 
Applications, 
and 
Services 
(GEOProcessing 2012), IARIA, Jan. 2012, pp. 105–110, 
ISSN: 2308-393X, ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6. 
[25] M. Benedikt, "To take hold of space: isovists and isovists 
fields," Environment and Planning B: Planning and Design, 
vol. 6, pp. 647–65, 1979. 
[26] E. Morello and C. Ratti, "A digital image of the city: 3D 
isovists in Lynch’s urban analysis." Environment and 
Planning B: Planning and Design 36:5, pp.837-853, 2009.  
[27] S. Guberman, V. V. Maximov, and A. Pashintsev, “Gestalt 
and image understanding,” Gestalt Theory, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 
143–166, 2012. 
[28] C. Ratti, “Space syntax: some inconsistencies,” Environment 
and Planning B: Planning and Design, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 487–
499, 2004. 
[29] N. Fridman and G. A. Kaminka, “Towards a cognitive model 
of crowd behavior based on social comparison theory,” 
Proceedings of the national conference on artificial 
intelligence, Vol. 22. No. 1. Menlo Park, CA; Cambridge, 
MA; London: AAAI Press, MIT Press, p.731, 2007. 
[30] J. P. Duarte, N. Montenegro, and J. N. Beirão, “Public space 
patterns Towards a CIM standard for urban public space,”  
Respecting Fragile Places, Proceedings of the 29th 
Conference on Education in Computer Aided Architectural 
Design in Europe, T. Zupancic, M. Juvancic, S. Verovsek, & 
A. Jutraz, Eds. Ljubljana, Slovenia: eCAADe, pp. 79–85, 
2011. 
[31] J.N. Beirão, J.P. Duarte, N. Montenegro, "Public space 
patterns towards a CIM standard for urban public space," 
Respecting Fragile Places, Proceedings of the 29th 
Conference on Education in Computer Aided Architectural 
Design in Europe, T. Zupancic, M. Juvancic, S. Verovsek, & 
A. Jutraz, Eds. Ljubljana, Slovenia: eCAADe, pp. 79–85, 
2011. 
[32] J.N. Beirão, CItyMaker Designing Grammars for Urban 
Design, Architecture and the Built Environment, Vol.5, Delft 
University of Technology, 2012. 
[33] J. Rykwert, The Idea of a Town, The Anthropology of Urban 
Form in Rome, Italy and the Ancient World. Cambridge, 
London: The MIT Press, 1989. 
[34] P. Gauthier and J. Gilliland, “Mapping urban morphology : a 
classification scheme for interpreting contributions to the 
study of urban form,” Urban Morphology, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 
41–50, 2006. 
 

