Implications of COVID-19 Across eGovernment Services: An Australian Taxation 
and Social Services Comparative  Case to the Health Environment 
 
Samantha Papavasiliou and Carmen Reaiche 
Adelaide Business School 
University of Adelaide,  
Adelaide, Australia 
e-mail: samantha.papavasiliou@adelaide.edu.au, 
carmen.reaiche@adelaide.edu.au 
Shirley Papavasiliou 
Palliative Care 
Barossa Hills Fleurieu Local Health Network 
SA Health  
South Australia, Australia 
e-mail: shirley.papavasiliou@sa.gov.au
 
 
Abstract— COVID-19 has had a profound impact on people 
across the world and on the provision of government services. 
This has impacted how governments provide services to their 
citizens, in addition to the implications of digital first service 
provision which initially impacted how individuals interact 
with public sector entities.  This research highlights the similar 
assistance requirements and concerns with different public 
sector digital services, while highlighting the differences across 
digital health and taxation and social services. Evidence for 
this research is presented through a case study on the 
Australian Taxation Office, data collection from the Services 
Australia and two digital health platforms, MyAgedCare and 
My Health Record. By understanding the different issues and 
assistance seeking requirements across the public sector digital 
services, particularly while responding to unpredictive and 
disruptive environments such as the ones triggered by COVID-
19, digital service designers and policy makers can shape  
better services that meet the needs and expectations of users. A 
primary finding of this research highlights the need to 
maintain human interfaces for assistance-seeking,  in order to 
maximise an individual’s capacity to interact with the system 
successfully. General expectations and key concerns of users , 
particularly focusing on the current disruptions triggered by 
COVID-19 Pandemic are also discussed in light to advice 
policy-makers within the public sector digital environment. 
Keywords- Digital Health; Assistance Seeking; Digital 
Inclusiveness; Digital Ecosystem; Public Sector.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The implications of the COVID-19 global pandemic 
have impacted the methods used by  government 
organisations and public sector entities in provision of 
services. To reduce the risk of infection to both patients and 
staff, services have had to swiftly shift from predominantly 
face-to-face to digital formats. These services encompass 
the scope  services and include healthcare, social services, 
taxation, and private sector services. COVID-19 combined 
with the shift of public sector services to digital first 
technologies 
have 
created 
additional 
barriers 
and 
complexities to the adoption of services in the mandatory 
and voluntary services space.  
As public sector services adopt new technologies and 
start to identify the considerable benefits associated with 
utilising digital services, the availability and use of legacy 
systems will decrease [1] [2]. Public sector services are 
fundamental in a modern society and service availability is 
crucial. However, with the use of digital services in lieu of 
legacy systems, especially in the mandatory service space, 
users are becoming more and more limited in their choices 
[2]. Therefore, this paper argues that for governments to be 
truly inclusive, legacy systems must remain in place, to 
enable and provide access to all who require them.  
The ongoing coronavirus (COVID-19) situation has led 
to a global health emergency and declared by the World 
Health Organisation as a pandemic on March 11th 2020 [3]. 
This situation has put previously unseen stress and 
unexpected impacts on the healthcare system across the 
world [4]. The current COVID-19 pandemic has created an 
opportunity for the extended use of digital technologies in 
the health sector. Digital health technologies and tools 
include telemedicine/telehealth, digital health records and 
mobile health technologies [5]. Although obvious benefits 
exist in the ability to provide services online, this 
opportunity does not come without complexities and 
difficulties for accessing and developing services (for both 
service users and developers). Especially as a result of the 
speed in which the transition to digital for many services 
from legacy was conducted.  
This paper explores the responses across government 
organisations and public services to the global pandemic, 
through the application of findings from an Australian 
Taxation Office (ATO) case study, used to understand the 
barriers and opportunities affecting digital service provision 
in the public sector. Additional data was collected to 
develop a case study on social services in Australia, through 
exploration of the Australian service provider Services 
Australia. The findings from these two case studies have 
been used to start the discussion on the digital health 
environment, including the most common Australian digital 
health platforms known as My Health Record and 
MyAgedCare [6], both services which are displayed with 
similar digital formats. This paper does not argue against the 
248
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

use of digital approaches for service provision, however it 
questions the inclusiveness and equity of access of 
providing digital first services in mandatory service space 
(e.g., tax lodgement or aged care referrals). In addition this 
paper explores the responses to COVID-19 from the 
aforementioned government service providers in Australia, 
outlining how through a crisis government organisations 
responded quickly to an escalating situation.  
The purpose of transitioning public sector services to 
digital platforms is clear, to provide easy access to 
government services, and to promote the transformation and 
delivery of modern and future proof digital services to those 
who need them [2] [7]. There are millions of Australians 
who utilise online government services through the central 
platform “myGov”, as well as numerous state government 
online services [2]. The large numbers utilising the services 
demonstrate how Australian public sector digital services 
are well adopted within the community. However, there are 
still pockets of the community who are struggling to access 
necessary services [2].  
In addition to the global pandemic, government 
organisations and their associated public services have been 
progressively 
responding to other changes 
in 
the 
environment. All Australian Public Sector Organisations 
were impacted by the introduction of the Australian Digital 
Continuity Policy 2020, mandating the use of digital first 
channels for every public sector service provided [8]. This 
policy put considerable pressure on both public sector 
organisations and service users. Through exploration of 
previous literature, a considerable gap was identified 
between what is known about digital service users and non-
users, and those individuals who are required to use them. 
Therefore, the impact of shifting mandatory public sector 
services to a digital first platform is still largely unknown. 
As digital first service provision is the way forward for all 
public sector organisations (especially in Australia), a 
holistic view of users is needed. Research needs to support 
and assist users, improve services and inform policy to 
increase long-term voluntary compliance obligations in a 
mandatory service space. To support this view, this research 
is exploring the relevance of previous research based on a 
case study on the ATO, and comparing them to different 
services provided by the Australian Department of Health.   
This paper will explore the barriers to digital adoption in 
the public sector space, specifically comparing mandatory 
and voluntary spaces. These comparisons will be based on 
understanding 
that 
ATO, 
Services 
Australia 
and 
MyAgedCare services are mandatory and My Health Record 
being voluntary. This research explores the common 
reported themes among digital barriers and proposes 
additional research to be undertaken to address the gaps. 
The themes will be derived from an ATO case study 
(conducted previously) and comparing to a pilot study 
undertaken on MyAgedCare. Additional research has 
explored the identified barriers to the use of My Health 
Record (a voluntary service), to understand the similarities 
across digital health and digital taxation, as well as 
mandatory and voluntary. Through the use of thematic 
analysis outlining the barriers to digital adoption, links 
between the ATO and Services Australia case study and the 
digital health platforms are introduced to demonstrate the 
similar issues across the different eGovernment services. 
Further analysis was conducted to understand the 
implications of shifting traditionally in-person services 
(including doctors consultations) to digital platforms or 
telephone, during COVID-19 have been used to further 
understand the implications of digital services in healthcare. 
This is not to imply that the use of digital technologies in 
healthcare are not valuable, cost effective or is capable of 
providing high quality services to meet the needs of users, 
however this research indicates that the complexities of 
patients and their healthcare requirements can be missed 
without 
face-to-face 
consultations. 
In 
face-to-face 
communication, all participants can not only hear, but see 
body language and facial expressions, which can aid 
understanding of meaning behind the spoken words. Digital 
technology which uses video as a form of face-to-face has 
positive aspects but can impact eye gaze with participants 
concentrating on the screen. Any barrier which impedes 
medical staff ability to understand non-verbal cues, has the 
potential to detrimentally impact provision of patient 
centred care. 
By exploring the various barriers and their links to the 
User Centred Model (Figure 1) the analysis provides lessons 
learned applicable to both policy makers and digital services 
designers.  
The structure of this paper is divided into six sections. 
Section one contains the introduction, section two outlines 
the literature reviewed, section three discusses the ATO, 
social services, My Health Record, Telehealth and 
MyAgedCare, the fourth section outlines the methods, the 
fifth section highlights the results of the study and the final 
section is the conclusion.  
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
All government organisations and public sector services 
across the globe have been impacted by COVID-19, with 
varying responses. The most significant affect has been felt 
in healthcare sector [9], where demand for services remain 
high and additional services are required to deal with 
COVID-19. Within the public sector space, there have been 
significant impacts for financial support sectors (including 
taxation and social services) [10]. With a critical demand for 
financial support as a result of increased rates of 
unemployment, lockdowns temporary closing businesses 
and restrictions impacting the number of patrons and 
employees allowed on site [11].  
A. Digital Inclusion  
Inclusion is complex as it incorporates numerous 
concepts including; awareness, acceptance, respect and 
understanding, to provide equal participation opportunities 
[12][13]. An inclusive environment encourages people with 
different characteristics, backgrounds and ways of thinking, 
249
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

to work together to fulfil their potentials [12][13]. These 
environments require considering both internal and external 
stakeholder perspectives, and placing equal value on all 
perspectives regardless of where they originated [14]. 
Digital inclusiveness is also increasingly complex, as it 
involves multiple components within the specific digital 
ecosystem of an individual. Therefore, digital inclusion 
identifies the importance of access to information and 
communications technology and the resulting social and 
economic benefits for users [15]. An individual’s level of 
digital inclusion is impacted by digital skills, connectivity 
and accessibility. Digital skills include the capacity to use 
technology to connect with the services (internet and 
computer), connectivity involves having internet access (the 
infrastructure) and accessibility is the user friendly digital 
services that assist in accessing the service [16]. Thus 
raising the question, does digital health have potential 
negative implications on levels of digital inclusiveness?  
B. Digital Divide 
One of the most significant issues towards the use of 
digital public sector services is the digital divide, whereby 
in Australia more than 2.5 million individuals are still not 
online [16] and the digital divide is largest in those older 
than 65 [16]. The digital divide is defined as the gap 
between individuals or groups with limited access to digital 
information and services, compared to those who have 
effective access [16]. With the shift of government services 
to online delivery methods, there is considerable potential 
for older Australian’s to be disadvantaged from the greater 
use of emergent and dominant communication technologies 
[16], as digital services tend to leave older Australian’s out 
[17]. An aging population is vulnerable and in some cases 
reluctant to use digital technology, raising concerns about 
ability to use technology, scams, privacy, self-diagnosis 
resulting from misunderstanding of information and the 
desire for face-to-face explanations [18]. Thus raising the 
question, how do digital health platforms affect service use?  
The digital divide is an issue that effects lower income 
earners, individuals with poor access to the internet and/or 
those individuals who lack the skills to use technology, 
making it harder to access. Furthermore, lower levels of 
digital inclusion are associated with individuals who only 
access internet through mobile devices. Digital exclusion 
often exacerbates other forms of social exclusion; this 
includes unemployment, low education and poverty [19]. 
Therefore, the importance of digital inclusion is undeniable; 
all Australians require access to both technology and skills 
to ensure they can take part in every aspect of social and 
economic life. There are practical concerns for achieving 
equitable levels of access between different social groups 
and public services, as society is not homogenous, providing 
basic accesses to the community is not sufficient. Services 
provided to citizens by government need to align their 
design and application to the needs of the community, to 
encourage digital inclusiveness and begin to breakdown the 
digital divide.  
C. Barriers to eGovernment 
Previous research has explored the specific barriers to 
digital adoption within the eGovernment space. The 
European Commission, defines a barrier to eGovernment as 
the, characteristics within the contexts of legal, social, 
technological, or institutional which negatively impact the 
development of eGovernment [18, P.3]. This can be caused 
by users’ lack of demand and the obstacles preventing 
engagement with services, or disincentives for the 
government to supply the eGovernment services or 
prevalence of obstacles preventing its supply [19].  This 
research identified barriers and compiled them into seven 
key categories; leadership failures, financial inhibitors, 
digital divide and choice, poor coordination, workplace and 
organisational inflexibility, lack of trust and poor technical 
design [19]. However, research suggests that regardless of 
the platform, the impact of stakeholders (internal and 
external) can negatively influence its use [20]. Therefore, 
successful eGovernment platforms depend on understanding 
the environments in which they operate [21]. These 
elements including stakeholder inclusiveness should be 
considered more in-depth, with their relationship to the 
multiple barriers preventing eGovernment/digital service 
adoption and their applicability across disciplines.  
III. 
EGOVERNMENT SERVICES: ATO AND HEALTH 
For this research, mandatory environments are classified 
as “Public Sector Organisations who must by legislation 
provide Digital Platforms for their services” [22][23]. 
Whereas mandatory interactions are defined as “Users who 
meet certain characteristics and must by legislation interact 
with the public sector service provider to meet these 
obligations” [22][23]. Therefore, users must engage with 
providers, but under the digital first mandate expectations 
around how they do so has changed. In contrast voluntary 
public sector services are similar to those provided by the 
private sector, in that an individual can decide whether they 
want to utilise the service or not.  
A. ATO 
The ATO was the first service provider to adopt digital 
first service provision, with the introduction of myTax for 
individuals, business portals, and tax agent portals. The 
ATO requires all individuals to interact annually with them 
to submit their tax return, all individuals who derive income 
within Australia. Since the digital first transition, the 
majority of services are digital and require an understanding 
of both taxation and computer systems. Taxpaying 
population is in Australia is over 16 million; of these 84% 
are individuals [23]. The ATO has high digital adoption 
rates of the MyTax platform, with 95% of individuals 
eligible to utilise the service [23], however there are still 
gaps within the population that need to be explored and 
understood.  
In addition to the ATO’s digital transformation and 
taxation responsibilities, they have been made responsible 
250
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

for the implementation of various COVID-19 financial 
responses [24]. Firstly, the Jobkeeper Payment, which was 
available to businesses who were also employers (or sole 
traders) in order to continue to pay their employees during 
financial hardship (including lockdowns, restrictions and 
decreased financial turnover) [24]. Second, the Cash Flow 
Boost payment, which was made to businesses who met 
certain characteristics to maintain cashflow during financial 
difficulties [24]. Thirdly, remissions of general interest 
charges for taxation debts incurred post January 23rd 2020 
[23]. Finally, the deferral of business reporting requirements 
and payments as a result of COVID-19 [24]. The ATO was 
also responsible for additional financial support measures 
for individuals including early release superannuation 
($10,000 payment from their retirement funds) [24]. The 
implementation and roll out of these measures required a 
rapid response, in many cases occurring over days or weeks. 
There is no doubt that the pandemic has driven innovative 
responses and overnight changes in how the ATO and day 
to day operations responded to disruption– leveraging on the 
capabilities of digital technologies.  
Progressively the myTax platform became more 
inclusive, through annual and ongoing adaptions, and the 
progressive changes in the manner in which digital adoption 
and service provision has occurred [25] [26]. Each iteration 
incorporates the feedback from users to ensure ongoing 
viability of the platform, while also ensuring ongoing 
success 
[26]. 
The 
iterative 
approach 
of 
ongoing 
improvements has been a key component outlining the 
success of the myTax platform, which makes the platform a 
good case study on the creation of inclusive government 
services. This is not to say that the platform is 100% 
inclusive, 
there 
are 
still 
issues 
with accessibility, 
understanding and willingness to change that impact its use 
[27].  
B. Social Services 
Services Australia underwent digital transformation in 
2016, shifting the majority of their services progressively to 
digital first platforms [28]. This was largely in response to 
the Digital Continuity Policy 2020. Services Australia is the 
overarching body of Centrelink, who is responsible for the 
provision of a number of social services including financial 
payments for multiple pensions (e.g., retirement, disability, 
carer and student) [29]. Therefore, they are responsible for 
the provision of financial support for some of the most 
vulnerable individuals in the community.   
Social services in Australia were considerably impacted 
by the COVID-19 pandemic, specifically due to the 
increased need to access financial support, causing 
unprecedented site traffic [30]. This is largely the result of 
the increased unemployment rate in Australia, as a result of 
COVID-19 [31]. Similarly to the ATO, updates to the site 
and phone services were made in a matter of days. The 
impact of these recent events clearly  highlights the need to 
evaluate and complement the existing digital ecosystem, 
setting out the plans (and supporting legislation) to address 
high volume systems’ demand. There is an opportunity to 
further expand the scope to support a unified platform for 
the social service sector to speed data access and ensure 
privacy for users, during this accelerated process to digital  
transformation. 
The responses to the digital transformation of social 
services has been mixed in Australia. With inconsistent 
levels of demand, access to the site can be limited and 
difficult at times [32]. The provided services can also be 
complex and difficult to understand, namely the wording, 
the documentation required and the process to obtain 
financial support [32]. As a result, there have been multiple 
iterations to the creation and development of the digital 
services, however there remains a high demand for legacy 
services and options moving forward [32]. 
C. Digital Health  
Healthcare systems are becoming significantly more 
complex, with more professionals becoming involved in 
each individual patients care, and ever-changing healthcare 
needs of the population [33]. Healthcare is the product of a 
complex adaptive system, comprised of people, equipment, 
processes and institutions which all work together [34]. 
Healthcare systems operate at their best, by undertaking 
ongoing improvements. However, when the system fails to 
improve it negatively impacts the system [35]. Therefore, 
the research argues that through the application of a systems 
thinking lens, the complexity of the different interacting 
internal and external environments within organisations, 
health systems and society for example, can be better 
identified and understood. The systems complexity 
highlights both problems and opportunities and requires 
responsive organisations and systems capable of adjusting 
to changes. The ability of the system or components of the 
system to respond to changes, all depends on one’s ability to 
understand influences [36]. Systems thinking can provide a 
holistic view and assist in identifying areas requiring 
revisiting [37]. 
D. Telehealth 
Telehealth or telemedicine has had a transformative 
effect on healthcare delivery worldwide, especially as a 
result of the rapid shift in telemedicine adoption from both 
patients and providers during COVID-19 [38].  Research 
demonstrates that telemedicine is an important tool used by 
medical practitioners and their timely delivery of healthcare 
and support to patients during the COVID-19 pandemic 
[39]. Telemedicine (also referred to as telehealth) includes 
real-time audiovisual interactions between a patient and a 
healthcare provider [39]. Telemedicine allows providers and 
patients the opportunity to obtain healthcare regardless of 
geographic location and increases the number of interactions 
a health provider can have during the day [39]. 
Interestingly, research demonstrates how telemedicine 
visits typically include less information than video or in-
person visits [39]. Furthermore, there are key barriers 
associated with the wider adoption including limited 
251
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

financial reimbursement for appointments, reduced comfort 
levels with telemedicine technologies for both patients and 
providers and geographic limitations to the use [38]. Digital 
and telehealth is dependent on available technology, reliable 
data and phone/mobile connections [39]. Comfort levels 
with using technology, levels of digital and health literacy 
are important factors impacting adoption and use [39]. An 
argument for maintaining in-person-care or face to face 
consultations.  
Further research demonstrates that the rapid development 
and application of telemedicine have required doctors and 
healthcare providers to quickly learn how to facilitate 
appointments 
online, 
which 
include 
empathy 
and 
appropriate diagnosis techniques [38]. Research into the 
satisfaction of users and providers of telehealth has provided 
unclear results, especially when it comes to perceived 
quality of care [40]. Effective communication skills are vital 
for health care workers, particularly when access to non-
verbal cues is either diminished or absent in the case of 
telephone calls. There are also times when specialist 
medical staff are reliant on the physical assessment skills of 
a health care worker available with the patient. 
E. My Health Record 
 
Figure 1. My Health Record System Model: Australian 
Government, Department of Health 
 
My Health Record is an online platform containing a 
summary of an individual key medical and health 
information (including histories). The site provides 
information for individuals and health practitioners who 
opted into the service to view medical histories, previous 
tests, medication (history and current) and diagnosis. The 
My Health Record platform was piloted in 2016 [41]. The 
aim of the platform was to provide a single location for all 
medical details of a patient that is readily available for 
health practitioners and users. The service is voluntary, 
there was an opt-out process between 2018 and 2019, where 
eligible Australians indicated whether or not they wanted 
the service [41]. To be eligible an individual must be 
registered with Medicare. Although there are a number of 
benefits from the provision of the online health record, more 
than 2.5 million Australians opted out of the platform [42]. 
The primary reason was privacy concerns, specifically 
because not only doctors can view the records (any 
registered health provider can); data can be used for 
research; once created the record cannot be deleted and 
there is fear of hacking data [43]. Figure 1 provides a visual 
representation of how the health record digital platform 
interacts with the rest of the Australian health system.  
F. MyAgedCare 
MyAgedCare is an online platform for individuals aged 
65 or older which is the starting point on an individual’s 
aged care journey [44]. The site provides information for 
government-funded services available at home to enable 
individuals 
to 
continue 
living 
independently. 
The 
MyAgedCare platform has undergone numerous changes 
since its launch in 2013, aiming to provide a consistent, 
streamlined and holistic assessment of clients. However a 
study published in 2018 demonstrates service demand 
significantly outweighs supply. With 127,748 on waitlists or 
not receiving adequate levels of assistance based on their 
needs [45], and the waitlist growing by 20,000 every six 
months [46]. Furthermore, 96,000 people waiting since 
2013 have found nursing home placements faster than their 
preferred option of home care, and more than 16,000 people 
died waiting for services [46]. Numbers are impacted by 
geographical location, types of services, financial outlay and 
availability of qualified staff. Although this backlog in 
services is important to note, it is not the key issue raised in 
this paper, this study focuses on the implications of 
MyAgedCare as a digital platform and how this, in turn, 
affects patient centred care and equitable access to identified 
care needs. 
 
Both digital health eGovernment platforms under 
analysis are relatively new, having not undergone as many 
iterations as the ATO myTax platform. However, these 
platforms have a considerable impact on end users and the 
Australian population, as they are both critical for providing 
information and links to information that outline individuals 
health profiles, where and how to access services and has 
the capacity to act as a facilitator of medical services in 
Australia. This research intends to highlight the key lessons 
learned from the ATO digital experience, to help inform 
digital health service designers, to provide avenues for 
designers and policy makers to obtain guidance on how to 
develop more inclusive digital services in this space. 
Simultaneously, other eGovernment platforms can take 
advantage of the key learnings from the ATO digital 
experience, as this is transferable to eGovernment. 
IV. 
METHODS 
A qualitative approach was applied to this research. An 
integration of both interpretative and exploratory approach 
to obtain an in-depth understanding of the key barriers to 
digital adoption and how they were overcome was 
considered appropriate to the ATO, Services Australia, 
MyAgedCare and My Health Record cases. This approach 
provides 
evidence 
to 
describe 
the 
eGovernment 
252
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

environment and provide insights to promote ongoing 
service adoption.  
This research has three components, the first component 
was the analysis of the ATO digital experience. The ATO 
study component for this research used primary data 
collected during a 4-week period over July 2018. A survey 
form was provided to 11 call centre operatives who 
populated numerous fields outlining reasons for call and 
demographics of callers; to understand why people were 
seeking assistance. Once collected the data (N = 3,990) was 
anonymised through aggregation techniques to group like 
individuals into similar groups to understand the population. 
As this research was designed to be exploratory in nature, 
the focus was to understand the different issues facing users, 
a thematic analysis was completed on the qualitative data 
obtained. Additional data was collected in June 2020 from 
users, seeking an understanding of the ATO’s response to 
COVID-19. Users were asked what they perceived the 
ATO’s response was to COVID-19, this provided insights 
into how they felt the response impacted their situation.   
The second component discusses the Services Australia 
platform. This data was collected from individuals who 
sought social service payments after being financially 
impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic. In June 2020, users 
were asked what were the barriers to digital adoption while 
using the Services Australia services. Furthermore, the users 
were asked what they perceived Services Australia’s 
response to COVID-19 to be, and how it affected them. 
The third component incorporates the Digital Health 
sector platforms, My Health Record and MyAgedCare. For 
the MyAgedCare component of this research, data has been 
collected from concerns, interpretations and perceptions of 
various stakeholders engaged with the MyAgedCare 
platform (N = 543). Data analysed underpinned the actor’s 
perception on “What do they think of the MyAgedCare 
platform?”. The same method was utilised to explore the 
My Health Record platform which works on similar digital 
integration system approach (N = 350). The main focus of 
the discussions was to understand what different actor’s 
perceptions are on “What do they think of the My Health 
Record Platform?”. The data was consolidated and 
anonymised when analysed to identify common themes and 
trends within the responses. The data collected for this 
component has been treated as a pilot and comparative form 
to the ATO digital environment and therefore was only 
based on answering a singular question. The additional 
analysis conducted was on existing data provided outlining 
environmental components.  
Additional data collection was undertaken to determine 
how users of health services perceived health response to 
COVID-19. Table I summarises key demographics of the 
Health data and Table II summarises Social Services and 
ATO data.  
 
 
 
TABLE I.  
HEALTH DATA DEMOGRAPHICS 
 
MyAgedCare 
Health Record 
N = 543 
N = 350 
Age Groups 
18-29 
10 (1.9%) 
40 (11.4%) 
30-39 
40 (7.4%) 
66 (18.9%) 
40-49 
42 (7.7%) 
71 (20.3%) 
50-64 
223 (41%) 
85 (24.3%) 
65+ 
228 (42%) 
88 (25.1%) 
Gender 
Male 
190 (35%) 
130 (37.1%) 
Female 
353 (60%) 
220 (62.9%) 
Occupation 
Client 
391(72%) 
252 (72.1%) 
Carer 
60 (11%) 
40 (11.4%) 
Doctor 
5 (1%) 
5 (1.4%) 
Allied Health 
37 (6.8%) 
20 (5.4%) 
Nurses  
50 (9.2%) 
33 (9.4%) 
TABLE II.  
ATO AND SOCIAL SERVICES DATA DEMOGRAPHICS 
 
ATO 
Social Services  
N= 3990 
N = 170 
Age Groups 
<18 
1 (.1%) 
0 
18-29 
1,955 (48.9%) 
20 (11.8%) 
30-39 
758 (19%) 
15 (8.8%) 
40-49 
479 (12%) 
50 (29.4%) 
50-64 
519 (13%) 
55 (32.5%) 
65+ 
278 (7%) 
30 (17.5%) 
Gender 
Female 
1,799 (45%) 
90 (47%) 
Male 
1,947 (48.9%) 
80 (53%) 
Undisclosed 
244 (6.1%) 
0 
 
Table III outlines the breakdown of how the data was 
used to inform this research, outlining the key findings and 
themes as per the findings of the Gioia Method.  
TABLE III.  
HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICES FOCUS GROUP 
DEMOGRAPHIC 
ATO (N = 3,990) 
My Health Record (N = 
350) 
MyAgedCare (N = 543) 
Randomised N= 160 
Randomised N= 160 
Randomised N= 160 
Multiple questions – 
Digital Adoption / 
eGovernment digital 
Interface 
Pilot: One key question 
– Digital Adoption / 
eGovernment digital 
Interface 
Pilot: One key question 
– Digital Adoption / 
eGovernment digital 
Interface 
COVID-19 Implications 
around 3 key areas: 
Information Provision, 
services and the core 
business: Financial 
COVID-19 Implications 
around 3 key areas: 
Information Provision, 
services and the core 
business: Medical 
COVID-19 Implications 
around 3 key areas: 
Information Provision, 
services and the core 
business: Medical 
 
V. 
UNDERPINNING FINDINGS: USER CENTRED MODEL 
The research adopted an interpretive lens to guide 
analysis with a systems view. Through the analysis of the 11 
call centre operatives’ surveys, a conceptual model is 
proposed for the complete integration of key stakeholders 
influencing end user digital adoption: User Centred Model 
253
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(see Figure 2). The key factors and element of this model 
emerged by observation and interpretation of all the 
stakeholders and interactive elements within the system and 
all the parts of the broader environment.  The purpose of 
adopting a systems lens to build this model was to provide a 
user-centred research approach which can guide policy 
making as well as provide better support and understanding 
of the various needs of the different users. This conceptual 
model contributes to knowledge by initially identifying a 
number of factors within a user’s environment and their 
degree of impact on willingness or capacity to adopt 
mandatory digital services. The model also provides the 
benchmarking factors to explore and categorized the 
emergent barriers of the above mentioned call centre 
operative’s surveys. 
 
Figure 2. User Centred Model 
 
Table IV outlines the thematic analysis conducted 
within the ATO, this table demonstrates the different 
barriers, listed by ascending order, individuals face when 
interacting with the myTax platform and creates a basis for 
the analysis of the digital health platforms. The thematic 
analysis demonstrates that individuals seek assistance and 
advice on both tax technical components and general 
platform and technical support. Both of these scenarios are 
relevant for the digital health space, as language used in 
services and information provided can have a considerable 
impact on end users.  
When comparing the themes outlined within Table IV, 
all themes influence an individual capability and willingness 
to utilise digital services. There are links within each section 
to legislation, mandatory services and the environmental 
impacts. From this, the research can infer that there is a lack 
of understanding of mandatory services, specifically what 
the legislation is requiring the shift to digital. Therefore, to 
address this, users need to be informed of the changes and 
the provision of transparent policies are required, these 
policies need to be easily interpreted by all users. 
Furthermore, by understanding how different policies 
interact with the mandatory services users can be more 
informed as to the security and safety of their data, without 
this understanding it is unclear how end users will feel 
confident and comfortable using the services.  
 
TABLE IV. ATO BARRIERS TO DIGITAL ADOPTION 
Themes 
(listed by 
priority order) 
Users comments 
Platform 
support and 
technical 
support 
- Do not know how to access the page 
- What are the security measures in place? 
- How do I link between the MyGov and MyTax 
platforms?  
- I have not used this before 
- where is my prefilled data ? 
- How do I change my details/or name?  
- The identification questions were incorrect  
- I am having technical difficulties  
Lacks computer 
skills, and/or 
has preference 
to use non 
digital 
- I want to use myTax by I don’t know how to use a 
computer  
- I have no email address or digital presence  
- Do not nor wish to, own a computer   
- How do I do this digitally?  
- I always do my taxes this way 
- Language barriers prevents the use of digital  
- Only completes old non digitalised forms 
Requires 
education in the 
system, 
platform 
awareness 
- How do I lodge?  
- Why do I need to?  
- How does tax work?  
- Why do I have to pay money?  
- How does income work?  
- Where do I put information on the form?  
- What are tax offsets? 
- How long does this take?  
- What is a deduction? 
 
When comparing the findings within Table IV to the 
preliminary findings within Tables V-VI, lessons can be 
learned in relation to the potential inclusiveness of digital 
services, especially when looking beyond mandatory 
systems and simply exploring the various policies and 
involvement of stakeholders. For example, in both 
mandatory and voluntary systems, an important issue for 
end users is the security concerns related to their private 
data, how they access the digital services and their level of 
digital literacy. The users for these services also differ 
considerably, which demonstrates interesting findings when 
it comes to across the board generalisability of barriers to 
digital inclusiveness.   
 
 
TABLE V. ATO’S RESPONSE TO COVID-19 
Theme 
(listed by 
priority) 
Users comments 
Financial 
- I was able to obtain financial business support to keep 
my employees quickly (job keeper allowances) 
- Accessed my superannuation  
- I was able to financial cash flow boosts because my 
business was struggling financially 
- Ability to defer debt payments and interest charges 
Informatio
n provision 
- Online information was easy to access  
- Information was in plain language  
- Everything was available in one place  
Services 
- Online support (via email)  
- Phone support (contacted call centre) even on weekends  
- Business Portal.  
- Through my tax agent I was able to get help  
 
 
254
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
TABLE VI. SERVICES AUSTRALIA BARRIERS TO DIGITAL ADOPTION 
Theme 
(listed by 
priority) 
Users comments 
Platform 
support 
and 
technical 
support 
- Do not know how to access the page 
- The page keeps dropping out 
- What are the security measures in place? 
- How do I link between the MyGov and Services 
Australia platforms?  
- I have not used this before 
- How do I change my details/or name?  
- The identification questions were incorrect  
- I am having technical difficulties  
Lacks 
computer 
skills, 
and/or has 
preference 
to use non 
digital 
- I have no email address or digital presence  
- Do not nor wish to own a computer  
- How do I do this digitally?  
- Language barriers prevents the use of digital  
- Only completes old non digitalised forms 
Requires 
education 
in the 
system 
- How do I obtain support payments online? 
- Why do I need to online?  
- Where do I put information on the form?  
- How long does this take?  
 
TABLE VII. SERVICES AUSTRALIA’S  RESPONSE TO COVID-19 
Theme 
Users comments 
Financial 
- I was able to obtain financial support after losing my job 
- Health care card was given to me so that I could afford 
medical treatments even without a job 
Informati
on 
provision 
- I found information online about how to get support  
- I was able to find the information through social media 
platforms 
Services 
- Online application process   
- Phone support (contacted call centre) even on weekends   
 
The results within Tables VIII-XI, highlight how 
regardless of platform, the assistance required relates to end-
user concerns about terminology, accuracy of information 
and representation. Furthermore, there is a clear and direct 
relationship between digital awareness of the operations of 
online platforms (eGovernment) and the types of questions 
asked within the digital space (e.g., digital literacy 
questions, obtaining the correct information).  
TABLE VIII. RESPONSES TO "WHY ARE YOU NOT USING DIGITAL 
SERVICES?" 
Theme 
(listed by 
priority) 
Users comments 
Scams/Fraud 
/Security  
- Fear of scams  
- Not sure which is the real website and which is 
fraudulent  
- Computer/cyber security concerns 
No 
computer/ 
Internet 
access   
 
- Have no experience utilising a computer or accessing the 
internet  
- Unclear on what a digital health service is  
- Have no access to the internet of computer 
Skills 
- Lack of skills 
- Not sure how to use it  
- COVID impacted access to in person services 
Attitude 
- Do not want to use it?  
- Why should I? 
- I am too old to learn 
Other 
- How is my data being used?  
- Inconsistent information  
- Processes are complicated  
TABLE IX. RESPONSES TO “WHAT DO YOU THINK OF MYAGEDCARE?” 
Theme 
(listed by 
priority 
order) 
Users comments 
Phoneline 
- Rude staff 
- Staff demanding to speak to client directly despite 
acknowledgement of advocate availability 
- Hearing impairment impacting communication 
- Language barriers  
Confusing 
- Terminology used by staff 
- Questions deemed by clients as intrusive and unnecessary 
- Inaccurate information provided on website 
- Clients unable to understand the different services and costs 
involved – written information only with a lack of visual 
representation 
- Sometimes inaccurate representation of available services 
- Availability of services for under 65 years 
Difficultly 
accessing 
- Vision impairment 
- A lack of comprehension 
- Unreliable or no internet in the home (particularly rural and 
remote) 
- Mobility impairment - unable to leave home to use public 
access computer  
- Inability to express urgency 
Attitudes  
- What is the point?  
- Do not see value 
- Poor design  
- Not compatible with my lifestyle  
TABLE X. RESPONSES TO "WHAT DO YOU THINK OF MY HEALTH 
RECORD?" 
Theme 
(listed by 
priority 
order) 
Users comments 
Privacy  
- Confidentially and privacy concerns   
- Concerns for the ongoing privacy for their data stored 
online  
- Unhappy that it cannot be deleted once created  
- Unclear who can access my records and why?  
- Allied health services can access my records  
- What if my medical history is shared an 
Confusing 
- Terminology used online 
- Accuracy of information provided on online 
- Not every doctors client and hospital is represented  
Difficultly 
accessing 
- Vision impairment 
- Do not understand how to use the portal 
- Low levels of digital literacy 
- Unreliable or no internet in the home  
- Mobility impairment - unable to leave home to use public 
access computer  
 
TABLE XI. HEALTH’S RESPONSE TO COVID-19 
Theme 
(listed by 
priority 
order) 
Users comments 
Medical 
- My doctors appointments are now online or over the phone  
- I had my scripts faxed to the chemist, who delivered them 
to my house  
- I am scared about contracting COVID by seeing the doctor 
and sitting in the waiting room 
Informati
on 
provision 
- Information about the outbreak is online  
- There is conflicting information about the spread of 
COVID 
- Information not online was hard to find 
Services 
- I was able to see my doctor even on weekends   
255
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

VI. 
DISCUSSION 
More than ever, inclusive digital services are critical to 
keeping Australians connected during this pandemic. The 
extent to which the delivery of the Australian health care 
system is exposed to disruptions including those imposed by 
COVID-19, has been two fold. Firstly, some of the changes 
have left health providers more able to provide timely, 
efficient, and appropriate care for a given individual. 
However in contrast, the effectiveness of health care is often 
determined by the characteristics of the delivery system, in 
this case ‘telehealth’. Moving to a learning healthcare 
system delivered solely online will require the identification 
of specific areas where system complexities slow or inhibit 
progress. Findings indicate that an online only approach 
slows the development of solutions due to the diversity of 
technological capabilities of the end user (i.e., patients).  
Overcoming impediments such as lack of  computer literacy 
and absence of  technology savvy skills amongst the end 
users is a priority for e-government platforms aiming digital 
inclusion between the general population.   
At this point of time, it is almost impossible to foresee the 
horizon past the peak of the COVID-19 disruptions. 
However, it appears that once we move to the Post 
Pandemic phase, there will be a chance to reform Australian 
social service e-systems. The ATO case  set the example by 
being a “fast mover” adjusting their e-services, embracing 
technology and the new ways of working. In doing so, it 
appeared that they touch on some of the themes influencing 
end user digital adoption: User Centred Model (as shown in 
Figure 2) and maintained a face to face contact when needed 
(i.e., human phone support access).  
Disruptions such as the COVID-19 Pandemic demands a 
new value network that reinforces all stakeholder 
participation in the digital ecosystem. Findings show that 
this has not been the case in the health arena when 
participants were asked what they thoughts were in relation 
to My Health Records and the overall response to COVID-
19.  Information as well as clear accessibility to data were 
some of the barriers identified. This is of great concern 
when already analysts are seeing a significant increase in the 
uptake of telehealth since the outbreak of COVID-19. We 
must take into account that patients already have an 
expectation of how care should be delivered when liaising 
on a face to face health appointment, and these expectations 
are increased by the virtual care options in which they see 
themselves having a more personal medical consultation. 
Table XI shows how participants adopted this system to 
supplement in-person attendances. Overall, the participant 
perceptions were positive in terms of having access to an 
online care system and yet struggled with finding 
information and allocating the right process to follow.  
 These 
care 
models, 
which 
under 
the 
current 
environment, may become mandatory systems, demand 
health systems that are digital inclusive and user friendly. It 
is at this point that we argue that a better understanding of 
the stakeholders’ interaction and behaviours is needed to 
facilitate a rapid and effective integration.  The patient’s  
(i.e., end users) perception, is that technology is poised to 
flip healthcare from scarcity to abundance. Therefore it is 
highly likely that the type of healthcare online services 
expected is one that provides them with ongoing / unlimited 
access. These new models of care provide another layer of 
complexity to the already complex system in place. 
However, we argue that in these disruptive complex times, 
there is a great opportunity to improve healthcare policy and 
the many aspects of the digital healthcare functions keeping 
in mind the adoption of a User Centred Model. A User 
Centred Model, in particular, can focus on the digitalisation 
of systems that enables ongoing access to patient care; 
patient and provider experiences; as well as the productivity 
and efficiency of the health system in allowing full-
engagement and understanding of all involved.  
There is no doubt that Australia will need to have a 
structured approach to continue the virtual care motion from 
the COVID-19 pandemic. This approach can potentially be 
initiated by a complete understanding of all the stakeholders 
already involved in the current digital health eGovernment 
platforms (i.e., MyAgedCare and My Health Records) in 
order to guarantee a truly inclusive digital healthcare system 
and an effective telehealth tool. In addition, as the ATO case 
showed, the stakeholders within the health sector should 
aim to strengthen partnerships between Australia’s 
technology sector and providers to drive virtual care 
inclusive systems. Australia is at a critical point in which 
the assurance of the development of policies balancing 
robustness with ease to support the adoption of new virtual 
care technologies is detrimental. As mentioned earlier, a 
good starting point is to encourage telehealth and other 
digital systems to connect to the My Health Record and 
other existing technologies that health professionals use 
today. However, of great importance is to enable trust levels  
prior engaging with technology, levels that are often 
triggered by first hand face to face consultations. Perhaps, 
this calls for an initial hybrid approach. An approach that 
can be considered a transitional and user training approach. 
Particularly in cases where digital health services were told 
to be unreliable or participants did not have strong internet 
connections. Therefore attention to the right infrastructure 
that enable data and information to freely and securely flow 
must not be left outside the health agenda. 
Little was known prior to the experiences of 2020, that 
the digital divide was to become more complex and generate 
disruptions to the already challenging environment of 
mandatory digital systems. The COVID-19 pandemic is a 
unique disruptive element that will challenge our digital 
culture in many ways, not least in our expectations of how 
we receive healthcare and access all government social 
services. This research highlights that virtual healthcare and 
the lessons learnt from ATO have had an important role to 
play in the future of eGovernment digital platforms design 
and its expected that all the digital transformation in the 
eGovernment sector that will continue to occur will be as 
digital inclusive as that seen already in other industries. 
256
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Therefore, a systems’ worldview, a systems thinking lens 
can provide the avenues for a comprehensive analysis of the 
transformational forces within the Australian digital 
platforms by looking at different stakeholders and their 
ability to respond to change.  
VII. CONCLUSION 
The preliminary findings from the digital health space in 
comparison to the ATO case study demonstrates significant 
similarities between the digital/online platforms and the 
issues associated with digital awareness, acceptance, 
assistance 
seeking, 
accessibility 
and 
support. 
As 
demonstrated within the results of the ATO case study and 
Services Australia examples, the value of face-to-face or 
human interaction based assistance is still a necessary 
component of the success of eGovernment service 
inclusiveness. Digital health too quickly removed the face-
to-face component of assistance in regard to both My Health 
Record and My Aged care, decreasing the inclusiveness and 
making it difficult for individuals who preferred face-to-face 
support. Human interaction support is available in this 
space, however does not provide the same emotional 
support often expected within the delicate situations evident 
in healthcare. However, acknowledging the disruptions 
caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, we are not critiquing 
the quick digital response provided by telehealth systems. 
But we are highlighting the fact that the digital platform of 
the Australian health care system faces major challenges in 
aiming for ‘a digital inclusive’ user interface. Challenges 
additional to digitalisation are to be consider while 
transitioning to different ways of working by citizens, these 
include: the increase of demand for provision of care in 
aging groups, and the rising costs due to COVID-19. 
The responses on perceptions on what participants think 
about My Health records platform (see Table VIII) indicates 
that users will expect services to be tailored to their specific 
needs, to guarantee privacy of personal data and 
information, and to address their  personal preferences in the 
way they will access the interface. For policy-makers in the 
design arena, the challenges and  implications are around 
the identification and  inclusion of knowing who these users 
are, responding to their specific demands, and developing 
platforms that personalizes the experience to what is 
relevant to them, especially for our more vulnerable users: 
the disable and  aging population. Technology and data are 
only as effective and efficient as the insights they gain in 
order to better respond to all stakeholders’ needs. 
My 
Health 
Record 
and 
MyAgedCare 
have 
a 
considerable amount to learn from the ATO and Services 
Australia, who have maintained high adoption and 
satisfaction ratings within their digital service. Furthermore, 
through multiple iterations, ongoing improvements were 
made possible, while ensuring that different avenues for 
obtaining support and assistance were available to suit the 
user’s needs (e.g., in person, over the phone and through 
intermediaries). What this research has indicated is that the 
digital health services have moved too quickly in their 
transition from legacy to digital services. The ATO learned 
within their transition to digital first services, specifically 
what legacy systems they could do without and which ones 
they need to maintain and improve.  
eGovernment  services across the various sectors in 
which they operate must seek to further understand their 
stakeholders and overcome the barriers experienced  in the 
full digital integration of its users in order to provide a truly 
optimised experience and maintain ongoing engagement. 
There are key elements that need to be addressed to be 
successful, and ones needing further research: such as the 
concept of “digital inclusion in disruptive times” and the 
concept of  “value exchange” between the user and the 
service, whereby there must be a benefit for the user to 
allow access to their data without their ongoing concern of 
privacy laws and access inequality. 
Future research is set to explore the role of digital 
health and telehealth in greater detail within the palliative 
care space. In order to assess the challenges and experiences 
across the different areas of health care.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 The results and views presented in this paper do not 
represent the view of the Australian Taxation Office, 
Department of Health, Department of Social Services or the 
Australian Government. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. Papavasiliou and C. Reaiche. “A Digital Systems Approach Across 
eGovernment Services: The Australian Taxation Office and The 
Health Environment”, Proceeding of the Fourteenth International 
Conference on Digital Society. pp. 34-39. 2020. Valencia Spain. 
ISBN: 978-1-61208-760-3. 
[2] 
Digital Transformation Agency, Digital Delivery of Government 
Services: Digital Transformation Agency Submission to the Finance 
and Public Administration Committee. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.aph.gov.au/DocumentStore.ashx?id=9d695f6a-2354-
4cc5-be0d-913de41b25de&subId=516630.  
[3] 
World Health Organisation. WHO Director-General’s Opening 
Remarks at the Media Briefing on COVID-19 – 11 Match 2020. 
[Online]. 
Available 
From: 
https://www.who.int/dg/speeches/detail/who-director-general-s-
opening-remarks-at-the-media-briefing-on-covid-19---11-march-
2020.  
[4] 
McKinsey. Covid-19: Implications for Business. [Online]. Available 
From: 
https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/risk/our-
insights/covid-19-implications-for-business#.  
[5] 
B.K. Scott, G.T. Miller, S.J, Fonda, R.E. Yeaw, J.C. Gaudaen, H.H. 
Pavliscsak, M.T. Quinn and J.C. Pamplin. “Advanced Digital Health 
Technologies for COVID-19 and Future Emergencies,” Telemedicine 
and e-Health. 2020.  
[6] 
Department of Health. Evaluation of my Health Record Participation 
Trial 
Report. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.health.gov.au/internet/main/publishing.nsf/Content/publi
cations-Evaluation-of-the-my-health-record-participation-trials/.  
[7] 
C. Dilmegani, B. Korkmaz and M. Lundqvist. “Public Sector 
Digitalisation – The Trillion Dollar Challenge,” McKinsey Business 
Transition Office. 2014. 
[8] 
National Archives of Australia. Digital Continuity 2020. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
www.naa.gov.au/Information.management 
/Digital.Continuity. 
257
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[9] 
H. Burns, B. Hamer and A Bissell. Covid-19: Implications for the 
Australian Healthcare Workforce. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.pwc.com.au/important-problems/business-economic-
recovery-coronavirus-covid-19/australian-healthcare-workforce.html/.   
[10] Australian Department of Treasury. Economic Response to the 
Coronavirus. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://treasury.gov.au/sites/default/files/2020-03/Overview-
Economic_Response_to_the_Coronavirus_2.pdf/.  
[11] Business News Australia. COVID-19 News Updates. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.businessnewsaus.com.au/covid-19-
news-updates.html/.  
[12] S. Thompson. Defining and Measuring ‘Inclusion’ Within an 
Organisation K4D; Helpdesk Report. Brighton, UK: Institute of 
Development Studies, 2017. 
[13] W. Wallace and G, Pillans. Creating an Inclusive Culture: UK 
Corporate 
Research 
Forum. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.crforum.co.uk/wpcontent/uploads/2016/11/11-Creating-
an-Inclusive-Culture-1.pdf.  
[14] OECD. Inclusive Government for a More Inclusive Society. In 
Government at a Glance 2015. Paris, France: OECD Publishing, 
2015. 
[15] J. Thomas, J. Barraket, C.K. Wilson, E. Rennie, K. Cook, Y.M. Louie 
and I. Holcombe-James. Measuring Australia’s Digital Divide: The 
Australian Digital Inclusion Index 2018, Melbourne, Victoria: RMIT 
University. 2018. 
[16] UK Government. Policy Paper: Government Digital Inclusion 
Strategy. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/government-digital-
inclusion-strategy/governmentdigital-inclusion-strategy.  
[17] Aged Care  Guide. Digital Inclusion Leaves Older Australian’s Out. 
[Online]. Available from:  http://www.adedcareguide.com.au/talking-
aged-care/digital=inclusion-leaves-older-Australias-out/.  
[18] European 
Commission. 
Breaking 
Barriers 
to 
eGovernment; 
Overcoming Obstacles to Improving European Public Services. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https:/www.oii.ox.ac.uk/archive/downloads/research/egovbarriers/deli
verables/solutions_report/Solutions_for_eGovernment.pdf.  
[19] S. Angelopoulos, F. Kitsios, P. Kofakis and T. Papadopoulos. 
“Emerging Barriers in eGovernment Implementation,” Proceedings of 
International Conference on Electronic Government (EGOV 2010), 
2010, pp. 216-225, Lausanne Switzerland (29 August – 2 September). 
ISSN: 978-3-642-14798-2. 
[20] M. Yildiz. 2007. “eGovernment Research: Reviewing the Literature, 
Limitations, and Ways Forward,” Government Information Quarterly, 
Vol. 24.   
[21] S. Papavasiliou, C. Reaiche and P. Ricci. “Digital Adoption: The 
Need for Truly Inclusive eGovernment Services”, Proceeding of the 
2019 International Conference on E-Learning, E-Business, Enterprise 
Information Systems & eGovernment. pp. 43-49. 2019. Las Vegas 
USA. ISBN: 1-60132-495-2 
[22] S. Papavasiliou, C. Reaiche and P. Ricci. “Digital Interactions 
Strategy: A Public Sector Case”, The Thirteenth International 
Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments. pp. 19-23. 2019. 
ISBN: 978-1-61208-685-9. 
[23] Australian Taxation Office. Individuals. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.ato.gov.au/About-ATO/Research-and-statistics/In-
detail/Taxation-statistics/Taxation-statistics-2016-17/?page=7.  
[24] Australian Taxation Office. Covid-19. [Online].  Available from: 
https://www.ato.gov.au/general/covid-19/.  
[25] B. Carmody. ATO Rolls Out myTax to Sole Traders and Contractors 
for 
the 
First 
Time. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
https://www.smartcompany.com.au/finance/ato-rolls-out-mytax-to-
sole-traders-and-contractors-for-the-first-time/.  
[26] A. Coyne. ATO to Kill Off e-Tax. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.itnews.com.au/news/ato-to-kill-off-e-tax-401902.   
[27] N. Olsen. Tax Administration in a Digital Age: The Australian 
Experience. [Online]. Available from: https://www.ato.gov.au/Media-
centre/Speeches/Other/Tax-Administration-in-a-Digital-Age-The-
Australian-experience/.  
[28] S, Easton. The Big Reveal: Services Australia Reforms Linked to Data 
Sharing and Digital Transformation. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.themandarin.com.au/121752-the-big-reveal-services-
australia-reforms-linked-to-data-sharing-and-digital-transformation/.  
[29] Centrelink. 
Centrelink. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.servicesaustralia.gov.au/individuals/centrelink.  
[30] T, Stayner. Australia’s Unemployment Rate is Expected to Peak at 
9.25 Per Cent. That’s Another 240,000 People Out of Work. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.sbs.com.au/news/australia-s-
unemployment-rate-is-expected-to-peak-at-9-25-per-cent-that-s-
another-240-000-people-out-of-work.  
[31] C.M. Richards. Disabled, Elderly and Carers: A History of 
Centrelink Coronavirus Supports. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://independentaustralia.net/politics/politics-display/disabled-
elderly-and-carers--a-history-of-centrelink-coronavirus-
supports,14153/.  
[32] KPMG. How Human Services Providers are Achieving Digital 
Transformation. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://home.kpmg/au/en/home/insights/2017/01/future-of-human-
services-delivery.html.  
[33] S. Leyshon and S. McAdam. 2015. “Scene Setter: The Importance of 
Taking A Systems Approach to Persons Centred Care”, BMJ. vol. 
350.  
[34] J. Clarkson, J. Dean, J. Ward, A. Komashie and T. Bashford. 2018. 
“A Systems Approach to Healthcare: From Thinking to Practice”, 
Future Healthcare Journal. Vol. 5, pp. 151-155.  
[35] J. Braithwaite. 2018. “Changing How We Think About Healthcare 
Improvement”, BMJ. vol. 361.  
[36] R.M. Lebeir. Health Care Management: The Contribution of Systems 
Thinking, UK: University of Hertfordshire, 2006. 
[37] A. Gorod, L. Hallo and T. Nguyen. 2019. “A Systematic Approach to 
Complex Project Management: Integration of Command-and-Control 
and Network Governance”, Systems Research and Behavioural 
Science. Vol. 35, pp. 811-837.  
[38] D.M. Mann, J. Chen, R. Chunara, P.A. Testa and O. Nov. 2020. 
“COVID-19 Transforms Health Care Through Telemedicine: 
Evidence from the Field”, Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association, vol. 27, pp. 1132-1135.  
[39] C. M. Contreras, G.A. Metzger, J.D. Beane, P.H. Dedhia, A. Ejaz and 
T.M. Pawlik. 2020. “Telemedicine: Patient-Provider Clinical 
Engagement During the COVID-19 Pandemic and Beyond”, Journal 
of GastroIntestinal Surgery.  
[40] J.M. Polinski, T. Barker, N. Gagliano, A. Sussman, T.A. Brennan and 
W.H. Shrank. 2015. “Patients’ Satisfaction with Preference for 
Telehealth Visits”, Journal of General Internal Medicine, vol. 31, pp. 
269-275.  
[41] Department of Health. What is My Health Record?, [Online]. 
Available from: https://www.myhealthrecord.gov.au/for-you-your-
family/what-is-my-health-record. 
[42] C. Knaus. More than 2.5 million people have opted out of My Health 
Record. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2019/feb/20/more-than-
25-million-people-have-opted-out-of-my-health-record.  
[43] A. Bogle. My Health Record: Your Questions Answered on 
Cybersecurity, Police and Privacy, [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.abc.net.au/news/science/2018-07-15/my-health-record-
questions-answers-security-privacy-police/9959622/.  
[44] MyAgedCare. 
About 
Us, 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
https://www.myagedcare.gov.au/about-us.   
[45] National Aged Care Alliance. 2019 Federal Election Position 
Statement - Getting Aged Care Right for Everyone. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://agewellcampaign.com.au/wpcontent/uploads/2019/05/2019-
Federal-Election-Position-Statement.pdf.  
258
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[46] S. Lauder and V. Milton. My Aged Care Home Care Wait of Only 12  
Months has the Allens Considering Themselves Lucky, [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2019-05-10/eunice-
and-john-allen-wait-for-home-care-package/11098848. 
 
259
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

