Compassionate Game Design: A Holistic Perspective for a Player-centric Game 
Design Paradigm for Games4health 
Aslihan Tece Bayrak 
Dept. of Game Development 
Media Design School, MDS 
Auckland, New Zealand 
tece.bayrak@mediadesignschool.com 
 
Abstract—Despite the growing interest in using games for 
positive health outcomes such as alleviating disease symptoms, 
mental or physical therapies, or rehabilitation, finding suitable 
games or developing custom games fit for purpose is challenging 
for the researchers. Using commercial games for these purposes 
pose various usability challenges and health and safety pitfalls. 
When it comes to designing one, creating a compelling game is 
already challenging. This article presents a novel theory called 
compassionate game design that aims to encourage development 
of compassionate games with the help of a player-centric game 
design paradigm. The paradigm facilitates a closer exploration 
for affordances and limitations of games for players with 
(mental or physical) health conditions or with diverse physical 
and cognitive abilities. The main contribution of the paradigm 
is its ability to promote a closer focus on player resources and 
encourage a diverse inquiry towards creating games that are 
more compassionate. 
Keywords - game design; player-centric design; user-centered 
design; accessibility; games for health; compassionate design. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The interest in game based interventions or game assisted 
treatments for greater health benefits has increased 
significantly over the last decade with a visible change 
towards a more positive perception of games. Games for 
health research hopes to leverage the compelling nature of 
games for positive health outcomes. For the games aiming to 
assist medical treatments or provide therapy or rehabilitation, 
the target player group is special as they are very different than 
a healthy player demographic. Despite the increase in the 
variation of player demographic playing all kinds of 
commercial games [63], the symptoms or the impacts of a 
disease such as (motor or non-motor symptoms) in Parkinson 
Disease (PD), or the effects of the conditions (such as mood 
or attention span in autism) are what makes a player 
demographic special. This means depending on the 
complexity of conditions, the ability to perform in a 
commercial game is limited, and the chance of frustration due 
to failures during the performance is high [4]. When the main 
purpose for using a game is increasing adherence to the 
therapy or treatment, the game needs to be engaging while 
also fulfilling its core purpose, i.e., therapy, rehabilitation, 
treatment, etc. [28]. Therefore, games that are designed for 
this purpose need to be favoring player’s conditions while also 
establishing motivation and engagement. This means, a clear 
approach towards understanding the needs of the player and 
usability scope of the game is essential. Usability scope of the 
game is defined and shaped by its system-like properties that 
are curated through game design. Therefore, guidance to unite 
this understanding with game design would be beneficial for 
successful solutions.  
Even though industry practice advices and attempts for 
early involvement of players by methods such as playtesting, 
focus group activities, interviews, questionnaires and usability 
analysis, participative practices in game development are not 
in the same form or shape as such in product design and 
development mainly due to the creative nature of intellectual 
property. Lack of player-centered approaches to game design 
in commercial contexts was also discussed by other 
researchers [30][35][54]. In the hindsight, common industry 
practices and priorities for commercial game development 
may not be relevant or efficient for developing games for 
special purposes such as learning or health and rehabilitation. 
Lack of a suitable game design methodology that explores 
designing for these demographics seems to be a result of lack 
of engagement with design research within games studies 
[21]. Therefore, creating player experiences for special 
purposes that are embedded in entertainment can seem 
overwhelmingly complex for a researcher who is not 
identifying as a game designer. Both for the use of commercial 
games and in order to develop new games, there is a need for 
further design research to inform suitability and purpose of the 
games for health outcomes [4][5][28]. A player-centered 
model that unfolds the layers of a game experience with 
respect to the player’s perspective can help a designer (or a 
researcher-designer) cut through this complexity.  
This work presents a player centric design paradigm for 
designing games for health and rehabilitation purposes.  The 
paradigm is player-centric by prompting the designer to 
contemplate on player perceptions and player capacity. It 
encourages the designers to reinforce a closer relation across 
the layers of the game experience while promoting a 
discussion to understand the relation between players’ 
conditions and the layers of the game. Therefore, it 
emphasizes compassion for the current state of the player in 
terms of their disease (especially if they have a chronic 
disease), mental and physical stamina, or their abilities in 
order to foster development of suitable game elements for 
positive health benefits. This means game design is influenced 
by a player model. In Merriam-Webster, compassion is 
defined as [a] “sympathetic consciousness of others' distress 
together with a desire to alleviate it”. Thus, the model aims to 
support creation of a compassionate game. 
1
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

To present the paradigm, its development and application, 
the paper is composed of the following sections. Section II 
presents the motivation and background work to explain why 
this paradigm is necessary and the plateau of literature to 
ground the work. Section III discusses the methodology. 
Section IV explains what compassionate design is and its 
challenges. Section V presents the player-centric design 
model with its layers and main elements while Section VI 
presents a discussion and conclusion. 
II. 
MOTIVATION AND BACKGROUND 
This design paradigm emerged during a research through 
design activity, and further developed into its current form 
with a synthesis of existing game design approaches and user 
experience research. A scoping review for player-centric (or 
player-centered) methods for game design revealed little in 
terms of an established methodology, techniques or model 
while the notion of player-centered design is commonly 
mentioned to be favored as user-centered equivalent of user 
experience design. Current game design methodologies are 
unhelpful to contemplate how to facilitate usability at the 
game level, how each design decision impacts the player’s 
ability to play, and what to focus on during a design activity 
involving players with health issues [35]. Treadaway et al. 
[57] initiated a discussion on compassionate design for 
dementia care and developed guidelines on the use of 
compassion in activities of design for wellbeing. As much as 
these guidelines bring important concepts to the spotlight, i.e., 
dignity and personhood, application of these in game design 
can be more effective if adopted by a player-centric thinking. 
Towards synthesizing a player-centric design model for health 
purposes, this section presents the state of the art on game 
design, player-centric design, players, player experience, and 
games for health. The last subsection presents a case analysis 
to unite the background work towards strengthening the 
motivation. 
A. On game design 
Literature has a few well recognized, sometimes loosely 
defined, frameworks for game design and analysis. These are 
Schell’s elemental tetrad [20], Fullerton’s Formal-Dramatic-
Dynamic (FDD) elements [19], Adams’ interaction model [9] 
and mechanics-dynamics-aesthetics (MDA) [48]. All of these 
agree to see games as systems that resemble the characteristics 
of a closed system with the elements enclosed, their 
properties, and relations between those elements [13][66]. 
Among these, Fullerton’s formal elements are a core set of 
elements granular enough to allow a micro-level thinking for 
the design or analysis of a game [19]. Formal elements allow 
studying the game grammar by dissecting a game into its 
smallest building blocks.  These are listed in Table 1. with a 
brief explanation on how they relate to game grammar. Notice 
that all formal elements are somewhat interrelated in their 
definition, role and use in game design. 
In Fullerton’s FDD model [19], dramatic elements bring 
meaning to the formal elements and establish context while 
dynamic elements emerge when formal elements are put into 
motion. 
TABLE 1. FORMAL ELEMENTS OF GAMES AND THEIR DESCRIPTION; 
REPHRASED FROM GAME DESIGN WORKSHOP BY FULLERTON [19]. 
Formal 
elements of 
games 
Description 
Supporting questions 
players  
The main agents of the 
game; define interrelations 
among players, the effects 
of rules on players, etc. 
How many players, what 
are their roles, and how do 
they interact with one 
another? 
procedures  
Methods 
of 
play 
and 
actions towards achieving 
the game objectives 
What exactly the players 
do, how do they do that? 
resources  
In-game assets that can be 
used to accomplish goals; 
they are a part of in-game 
economy; they must have 
utility and scarcity. 
What can I afford? How is 
a resource useful to the 
player? When and how 
the player can access/lose 
resources? 
objectives 
Represent the purpose of 
the player within the rules 
of the game. 
What are the players 
trying to achieve? What 
kind of impact do the 
objectives have on the 
game? 
rules 
Define 
game 
objects, 
actions that are allowed and 
restricted; rules govern the 
system. 
What 
is 
the 
player 
allowed to do? How are 
the rules presented and 
enforced? 
conflict 
Emerges 
from 
the 
oscillation between goals 
and rules (accomplishing 
the goals within the given 
rules is a challenge). 
What is the challenge? 
What 
makes 
it 
hard/challenging 
to 
accomplish the goals? 
boundaries 
Define the physical and 
virtual 
play-space 
by 
separating game elements 
from anything that does not 
belong to the game. 
What are some physical 
limitations that define the 
play space? What are 
some 
conceptual 
limitations? 
outcome 
The 
result 
of 
the 
activity/session/game; this 
must 
be 
visible 
and 
measurable. 
How does the game end? 
How does the player 
progress/advance?  
Is the objective reached? 
  
However, the relation between those are rather loosely defined 
or are not presented in a form that would easily allow their use 
by un-trained game designers. Refraining from a detailed 
discussion on the set of formal elements, both the elemental 
tetrad and the MDA framework present a high-level model 
based on visibility of the layers or different perspective 
holders. Elemental tetrad and derivatives of this model [36] 
show a four-way relationship between mechanics, aesthetics, 
story and technology drawing attention to how visible these 
are from outside the system. Even though this four-way 
relationship is helpful for game analysis, it is too loosely 
defined to be helpful as a game design approach. On the other 
hand, MDA presents two separate viewpoints; one from 
designers’ perspective, the other from players’. This makes 
MDA a useful model to discuss different perspectives even 
though it is not helpful for the design process. For a game 
designer, mechanics are designed to give rise to dynamics, and 
hence aesthetics are conveyed as a result of these dynamics. 
Therefore, they see mechanics, dynamic and aesthetics in this 
given order. Here, aesthetics represents all emotional aspects 
that stem from the game. Conversely, player’s perception 
follows an inverse order: aesthetics-dynamics-mechanics. It is 
framed with their perception of the aesthetics; therefore, their 
2
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

viewpoint is always under the influence of their perception of 
the aesthetics. As much as elemental tetrad and MDA are 
helpful for contemplation on perspectives, they do not 
facilitate a closer investigation towards dismantling a 
complete game experience into its thinner slices, explaining 
influences for experience design or designing a game for 
special purposes and/or special demographics such as people 
with chronic health issues. Such granularity is missing and 
would be very helpful for designing compassionate games that 
would keep emphasis on the capabilities of the player.  
Almeida and Silva [41] reviewed a collection of game 
design methods and tools (as per 2013) drawing attention to 
the use of visual languages and design modelling despite 
favored varyingly across industry and academic fields. They 
argue that the immaturity of design research in game design 
field prevents the adoption of these by researchers or industry. 
Moreover, they note that the game design methods and tools 
under review lack representation of the player perspective, 
especially for aesthetic components. Indeed, these approaches 
seem to mostly favor the game over the player, therefore 
lacking methods to draw attention to the player and facilitate 
compassionate design. For this, a visual game design model 
can be helpful for communication across researchers, 
designers and other members of the development team while 
developing compassionate games.  
B. Player-centric Design  
It is commonly thought that the player-centric design is an 
extension of the user-centered design. On one hand, one can 
argue that game design is inherently player-centric since it 
always questions what the player is doing, what they are 
allowed to do, their objectives, rewards, the consequences for 
the player, and how the player is supposed to feel during the 
gameplay experience. Therefore, it would be unfair to suggest 
that game design is not player-centric. On the other hand, 
game design practice is a creative endeavor, meaning that it 
may carry a separate authorial intent due to its creative nature. 
In the virtual boundary of play-space, the game world is 
governed by the rules and dressed in the metaphors of the 
game. Besides, game design practice could also be perceived 
as play-centric, putting emphasis on gameplay over other 
elements of the game. Therefore, rather than the habits, 
requests or expectations of the player, the nature of play and 
how it manifests itself may take precedence. In response to all 
these arguments, player-centric design is centered with 
empathy to the player and aims to provide a positive 
experience to the player despite contradictions with creative 
pursuit [9]. Therefore, player-centric design puts the player 
before the creator. 
Charles et al. also [27] acknowledge that most of the 
player-centered approaches to game design rely on the 
research on human factors and are adopted from user-centered 
approaches. Although these are useful for addressing usability 
issues at an application level, the additional qualities of games 
as a media (such as the level of challenge, player skills and 
gameplay, etc.) are not addressed. Adams presented another 
model that is based on the interaction between the player and 
the game, yet does not encourage explorations on sensory 
complexity of games more than perceiving them as user 
interfaces [9]. Although this could be seen as a much clearer 
approach that allows the use of existing HCI research for 
games, it creates further ambiguity on the potential needs of 
games on a visual and contextual level. 
When game design literature is scanned for the role of 
player in game design, it becomes apparent that player-centric 
game design is not as common, but involvement of players in 
design process such as in participatory design is even less 
considered or troublesome [30][54]. A more often seen 
application of player-centric design is with early playtests and 
the use of player personas rather than participatory design 
sessions as seen in product design or service design. As much 
as iterative design practice is praised, most of the time studios 
prefer to involve as few people as possible and as late as 
possible due to secretive nature of creative production. 
Sometimes an audience model is created to enable intellectual 
assumptions for players’ needs assuming that designers have 
a decent understanding of what players wants and needs. This 
notion has been strongly criticized for neglecting the real 
persona of the player and reducing them to simple 
unimportant actors disconnected from a larger socio-cultural 
context. Sotamaa suggests designers to focus on what they are 
good at while acknowledging the players as the specialists of 
their own “everyday gaming” [35]. 
On the other hand, player involvement in context of 
player-centeredness can also be considered continuous rather 
than finalized by the end of production period of a game. 
Player modelling [27] and automatic/dynamic difficulty 
adjustment based on biosensors [53] are some methods to 
create more player focus during gameplay. Industry practice 
ackowledges the use of personas rather than focus groups [66] 
since the involvement of individual tastes of potential players 
may be noisy rather than useful for the designer even though 
persona development or the personas themselves are rarely 
shared by the game designers within the industry [44].  
Inspired from Norman’s emotional design [12], Baharom 
et al. [33] suggest a conceptual framework that offers a 
valuable discussion about the relation between emotion, 
perception, reason and structural elements of games. The 
framework is encouraging for discussions on the cognitive, 
psychomotor and affective dimensions of games by placing 
player-centric design in the center although interrelations 
between these dimensions remain unclear. Hodent also argues 
that user experience (UX) should not be separated from the 
design cycle as it is the glue that ensures intended experience 
and players’ perceptions work together to create an enjoyable 
gameplay experience [56].  
C. Unpacking Play and Players 
The concept of play and why people play have been a hot 
topic for decades in social and cultural studies, psychology, 
and philosophy. Sutton-Smith argued for the cultural 
significance of play stating that it takes many forms 
throughout the life of each individual [65], and Suits argued 
that games are central to human existence and that “everyone 
alive was really a grasshopper in disguise” [64]. Game studies 
as a relatively young research field also inherits this question, 
and further asks why people enjoy playing a game more than 
another, what it is that people find in the activity of gameplay, 
3
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

what motivates them for this activity, how this enjoyment is 
governed, how it can be shaped, etc.  
1) Aesthetics of play: Aesthetics, as adopted from MDA 
framework 
by 
[48], 
represents 
emotional 
aspects 
communicated by the game. Previous section on game design 
already mentioned that emotions emerge via the dynamics of 
the game experience, and mechanics of a game serve for the 
aesthetic goals. The aesthetics mentioned by [48] are 
(broadly) sensation, fantasy, challenge, narrative, fellowship, 
discovery, expression, and submission. On the other hand, 
Lazzaro argues that we play because it is fun despite the 
ambiguity in the definition of “fun”. She suggested the Four 
Keys to Fun method to explain the phenomena of “fun” [49]. 
In 4Keys2Fun, fiero (hard fun), curiosity (easy fun), 
excitement (serious fun), and amusement (people fun) are 
chosen as four core emotions. Lazzaro presents groups of 
emotions as subset of these four and discusses how some 
actions (towards creating the game features) can resolve into 
these emotions. For example, actions of collection, rhythm 
and repetition create emotions of excitement, focus and 
relaxation. Therefore, they create “serious fun”. The 
suggestion is building a play experience to evoke more than 
one emotion to prevent stagnation.  
2) Meaningful play: Salen and Zimmerman [13] state that 
“the goal of successful game design is the creation of 
meaningful play.” Meaningful play emerges from the relation 
between a player’s action and the system outcome that is 
visible as immediate and long-term effect. If this relation is 
not clearly visible to the player, players lose interest in the 
gameplay. If the relation is discernable immediately and the 
result is integrated into the larger context of the game, the 
actions in the game become meaningful. With immediate 
feedback, the player receives a confirmation about their 
action; with long term effect, player sees that their choices 
matter and their actions carry meaning towards reaching their 
in-game goals. Hence, meaningful play motivates the player 
experience.  
3) Motivation: Psychology studies on human behavior 
consider that factors that activate and sustain behavior 
towards a goal or that create propensity to learn and act are 
motivational factors, and are either intrinsic or extrinsic in 
nature. Intrinsic motivation comes from within such as 
enjoyment in the activity itself rather than for an external 
reason whereas extrinsic motivation originates from an 
external reward [45]. If extrinsic motivation is considered as 
controlled motivation, through practice this can be 
transformed into self-determined autonomous motivation 
(hence intrinsic). Self Determination Theory (SDT) suggests 
that human motivation is based on three basic psychological 
needs: competence, autonomy, and relatedness [37]. 
Competence refers to the universal will to perform better at 
something; autonomy refers to the desire to be in control of 
one’s own path; relatedness refers to the desire to connect 
with other beings. Although SDT originates from the 
psychology field, Player Experience Needs Satisfaction 
(PENS) model [38] translates the dimensions of SDT into 
measurable domains for game development and analysis. 
According to PENS, when these three needs are fulfilled for 
a player within the context of the game world, players 
experience higher levels of satisfaction, and potentially 
continue playing the game.  
4) Player personalities and preferences: The idea of 
player types and that some features are favoured by some 
types of players were first mentioned with the first Multi User 
Dungeon (MUD) [47]. Player types (sometimes referred as 
Bartle’s player types)—killers, achievers, socializers, and 
explorers were representing players’ interest in MUDs. 
Killers are interested in features that allow them to act on 
other players such as combat and direct interaction; achievers 
are interested in features that resolve with tangible 
acknowledgement of success such as badges, unique items, 
etc.; socializers are interested in features that encourage 
playing with other players, collaboration and social 
interaction; explorers are interested in adventure, discovering 
and mostly acting on the world. This is later adopted by other 
designers and researchers and expanded upon [51][52], still 
somewhat staying true to the first four types but developing 
interim types to suit the variety of game experiences present 
today. 
As much as continuation of play is of interest, it is argued 
that there is a taste factor involved in a player’s initial choice 
to start playing [39]. Correlations between motivation and 
taste may be possible although not supported by any research. 
Regardless, VandenBerghe argues that taste factor can be 
obtained by taste maps as presented in Engines of Play method 
[39].  
Engines of Play is a method suggested by VandenBerghe 
[40], initially at a game developers conference. It relies on the 
Big Five psychological model (also known as Five Factor 
Model or OCEAN) and is suggested as a way to find out a 
correlation between game features and personality of players 
to enable a “more accurate empathy” towards different kinds 
of players. There is no empirical validation reported by the 
date of this writing; nonetheless, the idea is that people seek 
out experiences that align with their personality traits. Five 
personality traits are mapped to five discrete domains 
(OCEAN): 
openness, 
conscientiousness, 
extraversion, 
agreeableness, and neuroticism. This approach was further 
developed into taste maps to understand player motivations 
(domains of play) in relation to personality traits and game 
features by VandenBerghe [40]. Later, in his blog he noted 
that the Engines of Play method was employed by another 
game studio to analyze their existing franchise as an early 
exercise prior to adopting it in the future, and that the method 
was successful in terms of clarifying the reasons behind the 
success of the franchise and allowing all team members to 
effectively communicate intent and result at various stages of 
development by using the stereotypes created with the taste 
maps [55]. 
Stereotypes mostly take the form of personas and inform 
the design process while creating contextual layer and 
aesthetics. In a post about player profiles for Magic: The 
Gathering (Wizard of the Coast, 1993), Mark Rosewaters 
(head designer of Magic: The Gathering) explains that 
personas (he refers to them as psychographic profiles [44]) 
allow him to isolate different personality traits and behaviors 
so that what motivates a particular type of person to act in a 
certain way could become clear. He continues “[to] create an 
4
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

emotional response, I had to understand what emotions I was 
trying to evoke”. Therefore, personas can be used to guide the 
design strategy with empathy so that suitable gameplay 
features can be developed. 
D. Unpacking Game Experience 
Game experience research shows interest in understanding 
the emotional experience of a player so that a better and more 
purposeful player experience can be created [62]. Towards 
this goal, user-centered design encourages the use of focus 
groups, participatory design, usability testing, and usability 
heuristics; however, the reception of these methods in games 
industry is mixed [59]. From a commercial angle, many 
studios seem to consider some of these methods less effective 
or time/resource consuming. It is hard to argue against 
business oriented decisions; however, this notion seems to be 
less effective when developing games for health and learning. 
Commercially, a common thought in game development is 
accepting that the product will not be appealing to all users 
within the target demographic, therefore should be selectively 
designed for the most profitable subset demographic. 
Nonetheless, in the context of games for health and learning, 
this notion can be challenged for the purpose of maximizing 
the reach of the product. Therefore, a closer look at the 
concepts of game experience is necessary. These are optimal 
experience, usability, playability, accessibility, and game feel. 
1) Optimal experience: A balance between skill and 
challenge is often argued to create an optimal experience for 
a person in any kind of performance; flow [50]. Challenge 
depends on the fine balance between an individual’s ability 
to perform up to the standard of a given objective. When they 
do not have the competence to fulfil the demands of the 
activity, they feel anxiety. Flow theory explains that there are 
seven core components to flow. They are categorized under 
conditions and characteristics. Conditions (clear tasks, 
feedback, concentration, attainable goal) are the prerequisites 
of flow while characteristics refer to the experience of the 
individual in the state of flow. They are control, diminished 
awareness of self, altered sense of time. According to 
Csikszentmihalyi, maintaining this balance is one of the most 
critical prerequisites for flow, and it is important for both 
motivation and learning [50]. In order to maintain 
engagement and promote flow, challenge should be matching 
player growth in skill, tasks and goals should be made clear, 
feedback should be timely and readable, and distractions 
should be minimized.  
2) Usability: Usability in game development aligns with 
common usability guidelines developed for human computer 
interaction even though usability for games and game-like 
experiences encompass more than just the interface or the 
interaction modalities. Nielsen and Norman group defines 
usability as ”a quality attribute that assesses how easy user 
interfaces are to use” [6]. A usable interface should be easy 
for a user to become familiar with and competent in; to 
achieve their objective; to discover previously less known 
attributes when need arises; to recover from an error; and to 
recall how to use the interface on subsequent visits. As much 
as these can be valid for a game interface, it is necessary to 
note here that player experience (game experience) is larger 
than the interface itself; therefore, an isolated perspective that 
only focuses on the experience based on interaction modality 
and the attributes of user interface would highly likely miss 
the bigger picture for evaluating the experience of a game. 
The bigger picture includes all facets of player experience 
including but not limited to interaction modalities, user 
interface, audio-visual design, in-game challenges and 
objectives, player attention, engagement, immersion, etc. As 
Juul and Norton [46] point out, distinguishing the difficulty 
in interaction/interface and the difficulty of gameplay as a 
challenge of the game is necessary to separate game usability 
from that of production software. Since games are by nature 
inefficient and lusory, the line between difficulty in interface 
versus the challenge of a game could be rather blurry while a 
gameplay challenge can also be located at the interface. 
3) Playability: Extending from usability research, 
playability and player-game interaction has been gaining 
some speed to explore practical applications for game 
usability challenges [16][26][34][62], and there is further 
work on playability and the complexity of player 
involvement in player experience evaluation [25]. Sanchez et 
al. [25] define playability as “a set of properties that describe 
PX [Player eXperience]”, and add that playability measures 
the effectiveness, efficiency, satisfaction and fun of 
performing to a specified performance as per the specific 
goals of the entertainment experience. Even though the same 
attributes of usability are applicable to playability, their 
meaning are different. Since the main goal of PX is 
entertainment, Sanchez et al. collated seven attributes to 
characterize 
playability: 
satisfaction, 
learnability, 
effectiveness, 
immersion, 
motivation, 
emotion, 
and 
socialisation. Among these, motivation and emotion are 
directly about the user and shaped by player preference. In 
addition, motivation is also said to be “a key factor in 
generating a positive experience for the player. 
4) Accessibility: Despite the well-defined nature of 
accessibility within user experience domain, accessibility 
may differ for special demographics [33]. Accessibility of a 
game refers to the ability to enable the participation of people 
with disabilities to interact with the game and play without 
feeling any barriers during their interaction with the game or 
during overcoming the challenges presented by the game. 
Isbister states that “video games should be considered above 
all as complex IT systems, with which individuals wish to 
interact within the framework of a goal-directed activity” 
[34]. In fact, the complexity of each differs depending on pre-
designed layers of gameplay experience, which may be open 
to emergence of more complex behaviours in some cases. On 
the other hand, accessibility seems to be simplified to 
interaction modalities without much consideration on 
cognitive load, emotional demand or context related issues. 
There is no disagreement on the importance of a suitable 
interaction modality and a satisfying user experience, and that 
they are integral to the creation of engaging and enjoyable 
game experiences. Furthermore, it is essential for a player to 
be able to see past the interaction modalities while playing a 
game so that they could fully engage with the activities and 
events in the game, hence be in the flow of the game. Juul 
5
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

emphasizes that challenge of the gameplay should never be 
mixed with interface difficulty [46].  
5) Game feel: Game feel, in Swink’s definition, is “the 
tactile, kinesthetic sense of manipulating a virtual object” 
[10, pg.xiii], and it is essential to the game experience. Three 
building block of game feel—real-time control, simulated 
space, and polish, shapes the game feel towards resolving into 
five common experiences. They are (as taken from [10, 
pg.10]):  
• 
The aesthetic sensation of control; 
• 
The pleasure of learning; 
• 
Practicing and mastering a skill;  
• 
Extension of the senses; 
• 
Extension of identity;  
• 
Interaction with a unique physical reality within the 
game.  
The pleasure of the game experience mostly maps to a 
combination of those. For example, with driving games, it is 
more about the aesthetic sensation of control; yet, while 
driving in an obstacle course, it is more about practicing and 
mastering a skill. When the car is damaged, and the player 
screams at that moment, it is about extension of the senses and 
identity. This is also how game feel connects to SDT. As a 
player gets better at performing in the game, their competence 
increases. As their competence increases, they will feel and 
demand more autonomy for their actions. The combination of 
balanced competence and autonomy (resembling optimal 
experience) makes them motivated. As they feel motivated 
and focused on the experience, they will feel connected to 
their avatar or their car that they are driving; hence, their 
avatar becomes a part of their identity. 
E. Games for Health and Rehabilitation 
Over the years, literature on games for health has grown 
with both the use of commercial games and the development 
of custom made games for health benefits including but not 
limited to improved balance and gait, muscle strength, reach, 
etc. [2]-[5]. Games are considered as a solution to non-
adherence to therapy, the lack of motivation for therapy and/or 
rehabilitation, the service and delivery costs of therapy such 
as unbalanced patient-therapist ratio, reach to and distribution 
of services, lack of accuracy in tracking progress, etc. There 
are convincing arguments [28] about using commercial games 
for physical therapy since they are already products that are 
commercially developed to create and maintain engagement; 
however, clear contributions on re-appropriation of existing 
games for specific purposes and maturity of guidelines to 
adapt those for people with chronic diseases are limited. 
Similarly, researchers have mostly adopted or applied existing 
game design models [9][19], some extended from existing 
models [18][31], or developed on an ad-hoc basis in order to 
create a suitable product without much exploration on the 
design practice [4][5][14][15]. Lack of a design methodology 
to facilitate design exploration for a selected demographic 
with unusual limitations, such as motor, cognitive or mental 
difficulties that may be developed due to a chronic disease, 
seems to be a result of limited design research within games 
research [21]. This means, learnings and observations from 
these studies are fragmented and hard to reconcile for further 
studies. Both for the use of existing commercial games and 
with the purpose of developing custom games, there is a need 
for further design research to ensure suitability and 
accessibility of games for special demographics [4][5]. 
Potential recipients of game-based rehabilitation include a 
variety of age groups across a variety of diseases such as 
cerebral palsy, ADHD, autism, post-stroke, Parkinson’s and 
parkinsonism, age-related deterioration, etc. Development 
initiatives for games for health in each of these seem to be 
discrete and isolated. Even though the requirements of each 
and every rehabilitation and limitations of each and every 
target user group are different, it is not unrealistic to expect a 
common design strategy or a framework that can 
accommodate common methods to develop games that 
augment rehabilitation during the treatment of these diseases. 
Within games for health context, a set of guidelines was 
collated to inform developers on the special constraints for 
their design [11][14][17][18] while also pointing out the lack 
of further development in the game design discipline. Game 
design in its practice is agile and opportunistic, yet the design 
practice itself is under-researched. A study by Isbister and 
Mueller on variety of interaction modalities especially in the 
field of movement based games is one of the few that 
evaluates conditions of interaction and suggests strategies for 
a more successful design of movement-based systems, mainly 
games [17]. The guidelines provide insights for the design of 
interaction modalities, necessary feedback compatible with 
the interaction device and activity, extends from self-
expression, challenge and fun. Among the few studies that 
attempt to develop games for PD patients, Assad et al. 
previously suggested design principles for designing games 
for PD, particularly for motion based games for rehabilitation 
purposes [11]. Although informative, the principles are 
prescriptive for a specific type of game (such as arm extension 
based exercise features or balance features) rather than 
allowing a wider applicability supported with a clear 
methodology for game design. Moreover, while each item in 
the guideline can be affecting various areas in the game, the 
interconnected nature of the game experience as per these 
affects is hard to perceive. Therefore, a model such as the one 
presented in this paper could have been useful to guide the 
designer towards realising these relations. For example, 
fostering wider and fluent movement is advised, but input 
modality is not discussed probably because the guidelines are 
aimed for movement based games. Gerling et al.’s “extended 
model” (seem to be extended from Fullerton’s formal 
elements [19]) presents a useful basis for designing for older 
adults [18]; however, the analysis lacks a wider perspective on 
the interplay between the elements of the model in relation to 
a player-centric focus. As a game design paradigm, such 
perspective would encourage an exploration of player’s 
perspective in this context especially for the needs/issues of 
special demographics with health issues. Nevertheless, the 
notes on the player’s abilities (both cognitive and motor 
abilities, such as attention span, short-term memory, repetitive 
input, etc.) to be considered as resources resonates with the 
perspective of compassionate game design concept presented 
here. In line with the previous discussion here, Burke et al. 
[29] suggested three principles to game design for health and 
6
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

rehabilitation: meaningful play, handling failure and setting a 
suitable level of challenge, and applied these to the 
development of games for the rehabilitation of stroke patients. 
Despite limited reflection on the development process or the 
design iterations, the note on adaptive aspects of the games 
and that they were well-received by the players is valuable. 
F. Case analysis: On Design Challenges for Players with 
Impairments due to Parkinson Disease 
In light of state of the art presented above, this subsection 
presents a case analysis to unite the background work towards 
strengthening the motivation. In this example, the case 
analysis looks into the difficulties that people with PD may be 
facing in their daily life. In the context of compassionate 
design, these difficulties help addressing the design 
challenges. A similar analysis would be useful, in fact 
necessary, while attempting to design for a special 
demographic. Later, in the presentation of the paradigm, the 
notes from this analysis is used to show how challenges are 
addressed within the holistic nature of the paradigm.  
Research shows that quality of life for PD patients drops 
over time meaning that activities of daily living, such as 
dressing, grooming, bathing, self-feeding and functional 
mobility are jeopardized as disease develops [23]. Even at 
earlier stages various disturbances and impairments limit the 
ability of the users while performing tasks that are considered 
simple; rendering many games inaccessible for this player 
base. The disturbances and impairments that are commonly 
observed across PD patients are sensory sensitivities, motor 
impairments, 
cognitive 
impairments 
and 
emotional 
sensitivities. Many of these impairments, especially in early 
stages of PD, show close similarities to age related changes 
that are commonly observed among older adults or other 
health related situations, such as stroke patients [14]. 
1) Sensory sensitivities: Sensory difficulties include not 
only hearing or vision problems as mostly seen with elders 
[18], but also sensitivities for sensory overload due to visual 
and sound stimuli. Occupational therapy for PD advise 
reducing visual stimuli by reducing confusing patterns 
(striped-checker), strong colours and hues, and simplifying 
the load by preventing contrasting visuals and clutter [22]. 
Visio-spatial disturbances and strong contrasts cause freezing 
while clutter overloads cognitive processes with a need of 
strategising and replanning. There are no specific sensitivities 
reported about audio; however, the use of metronome and 
inducing percievable rhythm into daily life are presented to 
be useful to enhance motor abilities [22]. 
2) Motor 
impairments: 
Main 
motor 
impairments 
observed in PD are trembling fingers and hands (tremor), 
rigidity, slowness in movement (bradykinesia), and gait 
problems [22]. Subtle slowness in movement, postural 
change and gait problems are also seen in elders even though 
the scale of these differ from PD. Trembling fingers and 
hands, especially depending on the scale of movement can 
make it very hard to use an input device or perform button 
presses while the slowness in movement can increase the 
response time.  
3) Cognitive impairments: Cognitive impairments that 
are commonly seen with PD are learning and retaining 
information (working memory), concentration and attention, 
and executive functions. Executive functions are a set of 
inter-related cognitive processes that are essential for goal-
directed behaviours [24]. Even though they are heavily 
related to cognitive domains, motor skills and connection 
between cognitive and motor skills are the main reason why 
they are absolutely necessary for activities of daily living 
[24][23]. In order to preserve gait, a person needs to evaluate 
their surroundings, strategically decide a path of movement, 
shift their weight and meanwhile check their balance. If they 
come across an obstacle, they should be able to stop 
executing their plan and rework a new plan similar to the 
correction cycle mentioned before. This means all six 
executive functions are actively used during a simple walking 
task: attention, inhibition, planning, reasoning, shifting 
(flexibility), and working memory. Gait disorders share 
similar issues originating from deficiencies in executive 
functions and also observed among older adults. This means 
impairments in executive functions also develop among older 
adults, perhaps milder than PD. In addition to a previously 
identified need for task creation frameworks to facilitate 
purposeful use of games for special demographics [4], it has 
become appearant that there is a need for a design paradigm 
that draws attention to the abilities and limitations of the 
players, thereby clearly mapping the position of the player in 
relation to the game experience. Therefore, the player-centric 
design model is developed to support and inform designing 
games for rehabilitative and preventative therapies for PD.  
III. 
METHOD  
The method of this study is design science research (DSR) 
while the presented work aligns closer with the idea of 
developing a nascent theory through the means of DSR [42]. 
Despite the emergence of new frameworks or design 
principles towards facilitating purposeful use of games for 
serious means such as creating positive change, alleviating 
disease symptoms, chronic disease rehabilitation, etc. [28], 
there is a clear fragmentation in the design field, separating 
other more flourished design fields and game design. The 
compassionate design philosophy and the player-centric game 
design paradigm are developed through grounding strategies 
[42], and the synthesis draws from human computer 
interaction, user-centered design practices, and game design. 
As per the activities of DSR compiled by [43], the activities 
of this research are below. 
• 
Activity 1: Problem identification and motivation is 
discussed in Motivation and Background section 
(Section II) while conceptual grounding is also 
presented. Existing approaches for the intersection of 
game development, user-centered design and the state 
of the art for design approaches for games for health 
are presented. Core issues of research projects 
utilizing games for therapy/rehabilitation of special 
demographics including chronic diseases and elders 
7
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

are (1) researchers’ potential lack of knowledge and 
understanding for game design and development 
towards creating a compelling game experience or 
selecting a suitable game, (2) the complexity of a 
game experience that would fulfill the requirements 
of a therapy (or rehabilitation), and (3) the ability to 
identify the necessities and expectations of the chosen 
demographic within the context of game design. 
Hence, the conceptual grounding not only provides a 
motivation for the problem but also synthesizes 
theory from the material sources in order to build 
grounding material for the suggested paradigm. 
• 
Activity 2: In relation to the problems identified in the 
previous section, objectives for a solution are 
discussed in the Compassionate Game Design section 
(Section IV). The core objective is drawing attention 
to three areas about the player: (1) player-game 
relation, (2) player resources, (3) player perception 
and 
game 
content. 
The 
objectives 
of 
the 
compassionate design are explained starting from 
these three areas while value grounding for these are 
also enclosed. Following from the core problems 
identified with the activity 1, the activity 2 reinforces 
the development of the compassionate game design 
concept. Hence, a leading philosophy for the design 
paradigm is developed via an inquiry on purpose and 
action. 
• 
Activity 3: In response to the objectives identified 
during activity 2, the player-centric design paradigm 
is developed to present an easy to apply model for 
development and selection of games for a special 
purpose. The paradigm presents a clear account for 
the layers of a game experience, how these layers are 
interconnected, and the role of the player in relation 
to these. The details of the concepts across the model, 
their nature and their relations are explained in the 
Section V. 
• 
Activity 4: The purpose of the paradigm is enabling 
the development or selection of a game fit for 
purpose. This activity is dispersed across the 
explanation of the model in Section V. A detailed 
discussion for the application of the model as per the 
holistic capacity of the paradigm is presented. The 
application of the model, design examples and 
validation fall out of the scope of this paper and are 
planned for future work.  
 
 The work stands as a theory building DRS activity to 
create synthesis across diverse fields while providing an easy 
to follow perspective for researchers, who may be new to 
games for health or who may have limited knowledge about 
game design. The artefacts of the activities are the 
compassionate game design concept (presented in Section IV) 
and the player-centric game design paradigm (presented in 
Section V). Strengths, limitations and future steps are 
discussed in the last section. 
IV. 
COMPASSIONATE GAME DESIGN  
What is meant with compassionate game may seem fluffy 
and idealistic. However, the idea of a compassionate game 
originates from the comfortable and embracing feeling of 
compassion. Compassion has been actively practiced within 
the context of healthcare and made its way into public 
healthcare policies despite the ambiguity of its application as 
compassionate care [61]. In healthcare context, the meaning 
of compassion sometimes gets mixed with dignity, identity, 
and self-worth. Regardless, it is suggested that caring 
conversations and building relationships with the patients can 
help to effectively practice compassionate care [61]. If we are 
considering games as platforms to deliver or support 
healthcare, we need to start practicing ways of integrating 
compassion into game design. 
A compassionate game would tolerate the failures of a 
player with kindness rather than confrontation so that the 
failures are perceived as opportunities of development rather 
than unsuccessful attempts; therefore, the remaining feeling is 
not frustration. A compassionate game would allow for a 
grace time that suits a player’s capabilities rather than 
confronting the player with a challenge that they cannot 
improve upon; therefore, the remaining feeling is not a decline 
in self-esteem. Compassionate games would not compete with 
the player on a layer that the players cannot improve; they 
rather encourage the player for participation by providing a 
harmonious and suggestive environment of support and care. 
Therefore, they strive for accessibility, inclusivity, care, 
tolerance and adaptation. Compassion in this sense may seem 
to conflict with the notion of challenge and conflict in game 
design. On the contrary, it is about finding the right area in the 
game design where challenge should be planted so that it is 
possible for the players to fairly overcome the challenge rather 
than facing an unsolvable/impassable problem due to their 
limitations; thus, feel incompetent. Therefore, compassion 
does not suggest removing the challenge but planting it in an 
area where player progression is not limited by the disease. 
Hence, it is about care and tolerance with an understanding of 
what a player is going through so that their competence 
develops.  
Applying compassionate game design means seeking 
further inquiry in the design process in relation to three areas 
about the player: (1) player-game relation (at a one-to-one 
level), (2) player resources (skills and abilities), (3) player 
perception and game content (what is going on in player’s 
mind versus what the game is offering). By doing so, the 
player model, as the central element of compassionate game 
design will be integrated into the process of developing a 
game that is compassionate towards its players. The following 
subsections present the compassionate design concept as per 
these three areas while the last subsection discusses the 
challenges of compassionate design. 
A. Player-game Relation: Interactivity 
Crawford [66] defines interactivity as “a cyclical process 
in which two actors alternately listen, think, and speak. The 
quality of interaction depends on the quality of each of the 
subtasks (listening, thinking, and speaking).” This points to 
the relational prospect of interactivity and its iterative nature. 
8
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The micro level (the smallest interactive cycle, i.e., moment-
to-moment) and the macro level interactions (a larger 
trajectory of interactions) are intertwined to create a 
meaningful player experience [13]. Within compassionate 
design context, a compassionate game would show 
competence in listening more attentively, finesse in speaking 
with care, and less complexity in the combination of 
interactions and interaction modalities. Therefore, the design 
paradigm needs to draw attention to the flow of interaction. 
Citing from Sutton-Smith, Salen and Zimmermann [13] 
refer to game experience as a combination of five dimensions: 
visual scanning, auditory discriminations, motor responses, 
concentration and perceptual patterns of learning. Players 
scan the entire scene based on the visual and auditory signs 
while concentrating on events and signals provided by the 
game. They perform actions based on the demands of the 
game and proceed whilst scanning for visual and auditory 
cues. This cycle continues as the player carries on playing the 
game. As they do so, players learn more about the patterns of 
play and improve their understanding of the game from 
familiarity to higher expertise. At its core, the cycle of play is 
an implicit micro game loop that stands on the perceptual 
understanding of the game world, the processing time of the 
perceptions, and the response from the player. Norman 
suggests that the ideal interaction cycle is present when no 
psychological effort is necessary to use a system (bridge the 
gulf of execution) [58]. This resembles the correct game feel 
notion in which the performance of interaction with the 
system becomes a compelling spatial presence [10].  
Swink explains the interaction cycle as an action-
correction cycle where player perceives an interim goal 
towards completing an action and slowly reaches their target, 
except this happens so fast that we do not necessarily notice 
the process [10]. The trouble arises for people with 
neurodegenerative diseases. Due to motor or/and cognitive 
impairments, a part or some parts of the action-correction 
cycle show delays; therefore, the action becomes harder to 
perform. When there is delay at system’s end, we see that as a 
usability problem due to the lack of timely feedback. When 
delay happens at player’s end (Fig. 1), system needs to be 
gracefully waiting and in fact supporting at times by 
additional supportive feedback. Since our main concern is 
reducing frustration and increasing compassion in our design, 
we need to consider this cycle both for the player and the 
game. 
 
Figure 1. Interaction between player and the game when an action is 
initiated by a player or a game 
The figure above (Fig. 1) presents the stages of the 
interaction between player and the game (action correction 
cycles from top to bottom):  
• 
(1) When it is player’s turn, what happens at player’s 
end: Player perceives the situation, it goes through 
their cognitive process, then player creates a motor 
response; meanwhile, the game waits.  
• 
(2) When it is game’s turn after player initiates an 
action, what happens at game’s end: Game receives 
input, processes the information in its structural core 
(games 
as 
a 
closed 
formal 
system), 
then 
contextualizes the outcome with information layer, 
then feeds the information to the presentation layer 
via relevant metaphors. 
• 
(3) When game responds for player’s turn while 
waiting for a reaction from the player, what happens 
at game’s end while waiting for player’s reaction: 
Game presents the current state of the game and waits 
for an input (response of the player); then receives the 
input and passes it to its core to process as response 
again. From the moment an input is received, the rest 
of the cycle is the same as the second cycle. When the 
game reaches to the second step here—waiting for 
response, this step is where the first action cycle takes 
place. 
Each of these interaction cycles requires well-tuned 
graceful delay for player action (the moments that the game 
receives input), and player perception (the moments that the 
game presents output). Intended player actions or player 
reflexes should be considered to be potentially affected by 
their condition, so should player perception—as it includes 
vision, hearing, and cognitive processing that may also be 
affected by their condition. This means response from the 
game should be perceivable by the player with longer and 
lingering feedback to support the moment-to-moment 
gameplay within an action-correction cycle and ensure a 
continuity of perception. More about the response of the game 
and forms of the response are discussed as the paradigm 
explained in Section V (Subsection D). 
B. Player Resources (Skills and Abilities): Game Difficulty, 
Challenge and Accomplishment 
Starting questions for identifying the right challenge for a 
compassionate game experience goes through identifying the 
areas impacted by a disease or condition. A thorough analysis 
for the underpinnings of impairments, disease symptoms, 
physical or emotional difficulties enhances the start of a 
better-informed game design process. This is exemplified in 
the case analysis presented before. Previous discussion on 
formal elements (Section II.A) already mentioned the holistic 
nature of these elements. While the conflict between the in-
game game objectives and the rules form the challenges in the 
game, difficulty sits in a sliding scale based on what kind of 
skills are necessary and the complexity of the procedure to 
perform in-game actions. Player skills, abilities, and capacity 
shape the player performance, therefore player experience. 
This means the paradigm needs to draw attention to these for 
a true player-centered approach. 
9
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Skill, as per the definition we use from the dictionary1, is 
“dexterity or coordination especially in the execution of 
learned physical tasks”; ability 2 is “the quality or state of 
being able”; and a resource loosely refers to the capacity. In 
this context, the players suffering from a condition such as 
motor impairments may have the skill (originally) to perform 
fine motor tasks such as buttoning a shirt; however, their 
ability may not be allowing to do so any more. This is most of 
the time true for all patients as they go through different stages 
of a chronic disease [60]. For diseases such as PD, 
Alzheimer’s, Dementia, etc., cognitive skills, motor skills, 
emotional and physical stamina deplete over time as they 
progress. 
Player resources pose a larger problem depending on 
patient demographics. For example, Parkinson’s patients 
develop cognitive impairments such as working-memory 
issues, or reduced flexibility and inhibition, which may hinder 
their strategic planning ability. Even when they are able to 
perform a level of strategic planning, how fast they get tired 
in the process of re-strategizing restricts their capacity in this 
task, therefore their resource for strategic planning. They also 
develop motor-skill impairments such as precision control, 
bradykinesia, freezing, etc. As disease develops, the scale of 
these hindrances grows demanding more support and 
compassion from the system. Since these impairments limit 
their cognitive and motor ability to perform precise, repetitive 
or complex tasks, this means their cognitive and motor 
resources to perform in this system is limited. In addition, their 
physical resources such as endurance, agility and stamina are 
limited along with their emotional resources such as 
resilience, self-efficacy, and self-esteem. Hence, it is 
important to identify the resource intensity of the skills (type 
and scale of resources—motor, cognitive, emotional, 
physical) necessary to perform to a level of completion.  
1) Motor resources: These refer to the capacity in 
performing activities with fine and/or motor skills such as 
quick-response, timed-response, precision, repetition, reach, 
etc. If the ability of a player is already restricted in any of 
these domains, interaction modality needs to accommodate 
the restriction. For example, people with tremor may not be 
able to use a control scheme that requires timed-response and 
precision simultaneously. What is and is not achievable by 
the player needs to be identified in the process. 
2) Cognitive resources: These refer to the capacity in 
performing activities that demand cognitive abilities such as 
remembering a number of items for a certain amount of time 
(working memory, short-term and long-term memory), 
attention (selective attention, sustaining and retargetting 
attention), anticipation (pattern recognition and prediction), 
decision making, problem solving, planning (sequencing, 
prioritization, reordering), etc. People with conditions that 
affect cognitive resources, executive functions are also 
affected [24]; hence, quality of life is under threat. For 
example, people with attention deficit hyperactivivity 
disorder (ADHD) will find it hard to sustain their attention; 
therefore, a game designed for this target demographic needs 
to reclaim their attention repetitively and be ready to gently 
                                                
1 https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/skill 
remind without drawing attention to the reality that they did 
not pay attention in the frst place.   
3) Emotional resources: In playability context, Sanchez 
et al. [25] refer to the emotion as players’ involuntary 
response. In the context of compassionate game design, 
emotional resources refer to the capacity in perseverance 
while feeling those emotions evoked by the game. It is less 
likely that a player would find it hard to deal with too much 
fun; however, it is more likely that they will have a limit for 
frustration before they give up playing the game. Thus, the 
emotional resources are resilience, self-esteem, self-efficacy, 
trust, etc. The capacity of the emotional resources can be 
influenced if not directly affected by a disease or a condition. 
The response of a game at moments of success and failure 
may drain or refill this resource.  
4) Physical resources: These refer to the capacity in 
physical performance including the ability to perform 
throughout the gameplay session (endurance), ability in 
combined tasks such as movement and button press 
(dexterity), speed, muscular strength, power, etc. This may 
sometimes overlap with motor resources especially when 
precision and reach are required as in interactive dexterity by 
Sanchez et al. [25]. 
Overall, failing forward and a positive reinforcement 
throughout the challenge as per the previous discussions on 
motivation and optimal experience, should be the driving 
force of a compassionate game. According to dopaminergic 
studies [28], it is noted that uncertainty of result (win or lose) 
and almost succeeding or narrowly avoiding failure increase 
not only motivation but also dopamine release. 
C. Player Perception and Game Content: Motivations and 
Reservations 
Playing a game is rewarding; it rewards the player with an 
experience of “fun” as long as they wanted to play it. Swink 
suggests a challenge for a game designer is to create a game 
mechanic that is worth learning for players [10]. In fact, the 
difficulty of learning a procedure for gameplay only becomes 
worthwhile by the return of that action and how integral that 
action for the continuum of gameplay. Therefore, rewards of 
mastery, how difficulty of a procedure scales for the variety 
of individuals with diverse skills and abilities, and the relation 
of the mechanic to the contextual layer of the game (its art, 
theme and story) shapes the motivation. Meanwhile, pre-
judgement, previous experience or fear shapes reservations. If 
the reservation grows larger than what motivations has to 
offer, it causes non-adherence. For a compassionate game, the 
challenge is creating pathways to overcome the reservations. 
This goes through positively changing the player perceptions. 
Games have the unique ability to invite people in and persuade 
them for participation. Their ability to shape perception and 
fight reservations of the participants should be explored 
further towards creating compassionate games. 
D. On Challenges of Compasionate Game Design 
Within the context of compassionate game design, a game 
that is not able to accommodate a player’s health or learning 
2 https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/ability 
10
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

related difficulties is considered to be impaired. Therefore, the 
main challenge of compassionate game design is removing the 
impairment of the game so that it is playable by special 
demographics. This starts with identifying areas that players 
are struggling due to their conditions. As a starting point, these 
areas can be categorized in three domains: sensory challenges, 
physical challenges and cognitive challenges. For example, a 
core challenge of game design for special demographics with 
health issues is the restrictions on the physical and cognitive 
abilities of the player group. When this merges with the 
perceptions of the players about the nature of the activities, it 
becomes hard to create motivation to play the game. 
Therefore, it is important to notice that when players are not 
able to fulfil the expectations of the moment-to-moment 
gameplay simply because it is not possible due to their current 
condition, they will lose interest in the game as the game is 
only another reminder of their inability; hence, the experience 
is not enjoyable. Then, the challenge is introducing tolerance 
and support for these moments of need. 
According to Swink [10], any delay that breaks the 
continuity of an experience creates poor game feel. Therefore, 
a game needs to be responsive for the player inputs. Similarly, 
any player action in response to the events presented by the 
game needs to be timely; otherwise, deemed unsuccessful by 
the game. Hence, the game acknowledges successful behavior 
and rewards it while also clearly communicating the 
consequences upon failure. From a purely game design point 
of view, facing consequences helps to reinforce meaning in 
choices. However, from a player-centric design point of view, 
especially for players with motor and/or cognitive 
impairments as in Parkinson’s or stroke patients, how much 
time should be evaluated as the time-frame for “timely 
response” is unclear. The procedures of the game should be 
forgiving with a suitable error margin and compensating for 
delays as motor-cognitive processes in player’s mind may 
take longer than an ordinary player. This may mean shifting 
the challenge to another aspect of game rather than using 
input-timeliness, 
input-combinations, 
or 
input-related 
challenges as a central element of core gameplay. Especially 
for anxiety prone demographics, removing time-constraint 
related design elements such as time-trials (obvious time 
constraint), falling platforms (hidden time constraint), 
traversal challenges (time constraint imposed by combination 
of other elements such as enemies, moving platforms, etc.) all 
together could even be a more suitable approach. In 
consideration of mental barriers, such compassion would 
reduce anxiety and stress, while replacing those with 
confidence, self-assurance and trust. 
Game accessibility requests compassion from the system 
to bridge the gap between the player and the game in order to 
reduce the impact of impairment. For example, similar to how 
a poor visual design of an interface would reduce the usability 
significantly, a poorly developed game world with low quality 
art assets and poor choice of color palette would also reduce 
the quality of game experience. For a user interface (UI), 
chosen color palette, negative space, density/scarcity of visual 
elements, placement and alignment of UI elements such as 
button, text boxes etc., consistency of all UI elements in and 
across the pages including font, size and color, and the feeling 
and readability of transitions are extremely important. All 
these elements come together to create the right feeling for the 
interface with its content and suitability to the context. Similar 
but more intense, contextual content of games requires far 
more depth compared to a user interface. The player 
perceptions of the game world not only stem from the 
narrative elements that are telling a story of the game world 
but also the familiarity of the player with the game and game 
world. Therefore, the player needs a high processing power in 
order to evaluate all the information they could gather from 
the game in real time while playing the game. Thus, complex 
visual stimuli may become paralyzing if the system does not 
show enough compassion when a player’s impairment is 
getting in the way of their play activity. Without a model that 
helps breaking down areas that demand processing power and 
areas to hide delay, it is uneasy to contemplate on how this 
need could be resolved without frustration. 
V. 
A HOLISTIC MODEL FOR PLAYER-CENTRIC GAME 
DESIGN 
The model seen in Fig. 2 attempts to draw attention to the 
identified core areas of compassionate design as per the 
discussion in Section IV. It aims to encourage a designer to 
take a player’s perspective in relation to the formal structure 
of games and aims to enable a deeper discussion on game 
design challenges for special demographics. In doing so, the 
purpose is presenting a holistic map laying down the building 
blocks of the compassionate game design concept. This 
concept becomes readable with a game model and a player 
model that interacts with one another. With a player-centric 
focus, the model (Fig. 2) is extended from [1], and combines 
layers of player experience—as inspired from Garret on the 
planes of user experience [7][8]—with Adam’s game design 
model [9] and Fullerton’s formal elements [19]. In addition, 
Mayra’s [67] core and shell dialectic informed the work for 
explaining the relation between formal elements of a game 
and a game’s context. In a simplistic fashion, the dialectic 
captures the actors of player experience to start a conversation 
about their relation even though it lacks details to explain the 
potential elements of player experience or player’s role in this 
dialectic.     
The rationale for compassionate design is discussed in the 
previous section including a perspective for potential 
challenges it may entail. Here, player-centric game design 
model is explained with its layers. 
 
11
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 2. The player-centric game design model aims to encourage the development of compassionate games (extended from [1]). Therefore, it favours a 
player model by bringing transparency to the capabilities of the player and helps a designer to perceive the system from players’ point of view.
With this model, a designer (i.e., researcher as a designer) 
can map the systematic flow of player experience and the 
mechanisms carried out in the game without losing focus on 
the player end of the game world. When the interaction cycle 
starts with a presentation of a game scene to the player, player 
observes it through their perception. As they act via pressing 
the buttons on the controller, moving the joystick or somewhat 
invoking the input layer as per the interaction modality 
available to them, the game receives this input and carries it 
to the structural core of the game to be resolved as per the 
predefined rules (as per the formal elements of the game). 
When this is resolved, the response will be dressed up by the 
contextual layer (in order to fit with the theme and style of the 
game) and shaped into the form of necessary information as 
per the game, its genre and style; hence, a responsive feedback 
will be passed to the presentation layer for the player to 
observe and start the interaction cycle again. Compassion is a 
necessity to be practiced at all stages of this cycle in order for 
a game to become compassionate. 
A. Frame of the Game World  
Frame of the game world acknowledges that the player 
model overlaps with the game model in creation of the 
gameplay experience similar to the discussions on experience 
of play in Salen and Zimmermann’s schemas [13]. Schemas 
explain how the experiential layer of a game emerges when 
players play it. The game is governed by the rules that are 
formal elements of the game grammar and stays same for each 
player, yet the experience of each player is unique as per their 
session filtered by their perception. Each player engages with 
the game world through their perceptions that are mainly 
based on their mental model [12]. In this context, the relation 
between the game and the player is initiated and maintained 
by the player. Therefore, the frame of the game world encloses 
the player as it is activated with the presence and interaction 
of the player.  
B. Player Model 
Player model is composed of player perception and player 
resources. It considers the player perception as a combination 
of motivations, reservations and a mental model through 
which players engage with the game world. Swink refers the 
player perception as “perceptual field” [10] that is a 
combination of all previous experience including ideas, 
thoughts, memories, etc. From a player’s point of view, game 
is only the interface since they do not need to know about (or 
perhaps are not interested in) any inner workings of the system 
(Fig. 3).  
 
Figure 3. When we truly think in a player-centered fashion, it becomes 
apparent that players are very likely not aware of the interconnected system 
that makes the game function. 
Game presents the current state of the system to the player, 
this is observed and filtered through the mental model to be 
judged against motivations and reservations by player’s 
perception. Once there is a decision or a resolution at player’s 
end, an action is performed by the player via the input scheme 
of the game. The game receives this input and magically 
12
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

processes it. Both decision making process and performing the 
action are taxing on player’s resources. 
1) Mental model: Mental models refer to thought 
processes about how something works in the real world. They 
are formed via observations, or assumptions based on prior 
knowledge. Each person’s mental model is clouded with their 
pre-judgements and their interpretation of the system [58]. 
There are three models of the system (as adopted from 
[58]): (1) how the player thinks the game works; (2) how the 
game is presented to the player as; (3) what the game really is. 
Mental model maps to the first model, even before player 
starts any interaction with the system. This resembles the user 
image and the system image concepts of Norman [58]. After 
the first interaction, mental model is reinforced with their 
continuous interaction. The further the gap between the first 
model and the last—what player thinks for how the game 
works versus what it really is and how it works—, the lower 
is playability—hence the higher is frustration.  
A well developed game interface either resembles an 
already known system to leverage familarity or helps the 
players to develop a clear mental model of what they can do 
in this game. Tutorials are generally used as a bandate when 
game is not able to intuitively help players to build a good 
mental model of the system. The ability of the game to suggest 
a clear mental model reduces the complexity of interaction 
during stages of the action cycle [12]. Unlike HCI’s common 
approach of mainly relying on user interface for evaluation of 
usability, for games human action cycle is dispersed over 
gameplay. Therefore, mental model is influenced by three 
contextual 
elements 
at 
perception 
level: 
(1) 
the 
contextualisation of actions at goal formation stage of the 
human action cycle, (2) the procedures and their contextual 
presentation at execution stage of the human action cycle, and 
(2) audio-visual feedback and game state presentation within 
user interface (or heads-up display—HUD) at evaluation stage 
of human action cycle. These are directly related to the 
presentation aspect of the interaction layer and indirectly 
related to the information layer as the contextual metaphor is 
fed from the core of the game. 
2) Motivations: Elaborating on the aforementioned 
research on player motivation, the purpose of this in the 
framework is to draw designer’s (researacher’s) attention to 
the motivations of the player and how they influence their 
participation. This should align with not only the purpose of 
the game but also the intentions of the player to motivate 
participation. With meaning and purpose built in the game, 
the idea is leveraging the players’ motivation for working 
towards their in-game goals to fulfill the health and 
rehabilitation goals. This is why PokemonGo (Niantic, 2016) 
has been praised by health practicioners. For a patient who 
needs to do a descent amount of walking every day, the in-
game goal of hunting pokemons serves the purpose of the 
therapy by motivating the patient to walk since hunting 
requires finding the pokemons in the first place. In order to 
find them, a player needs to physically walk around until 
pokemons appaear in the location based augmented world. 
Hence, daily walking activity is fulfilled with the help of the 
mobile game.  
3) Reservations: Any reason that prevents a player from 
participation is referred within reservations.  It may be based 
on previous experience or can be formed at the first instance 
of interaction. Barriers to physical activity such as fear of 
injury, poor self-image, low self-esteem or lack of confidence 
to join group exercise activities are commonly reported 
among reasons for lack of motivation for therapies or 
rehabilitation [28][60][63]. Another set of barriers may also 
originate from unfamiliarity with technology, lack of clarity 
and ease of use (accessibility) of a system, perceptions on the 
usefulness of technology, self-image, and fear of failure. 
Therefore, the player model draws attention to the relation 
between reservations and motivations, and how they may 
influence the mental model of a target user group. As much 
as motivations act as a driving force, reservations act as the 
hand brake. Nevertheless, the game experience needs to be 
fluid and effortless.   
C. Player Resources 
In this context, player resources are considered as the 
currency that a player spends during the play session. Each 
individual has finite physical, emotional and cognitive 
capacity. Player resources represent this capacity and its 
availability during gameplay. Rather than the resources 
commonly discussed as a formal element of a game, the 
resources referred in this model are intrinsic to a player. 
Intrinsic player resources are cognitive skills, motor skills, 
physical abilities and emotional abilities (physical and 
emotional stamina). These are within the power of the player 
and do not belong to the in-game economy. They are not 
generated by the game or in the game; however, they are 
brought in and used by the player, yet consumed by the game. 
They are limited, and refresh time for these vary from person 
to person. For a suitable design targeting players with physical 
or mental health related difficulties, designers need to study 
how these resources are effected by the disease and how they 
will be used in the game in order to prevent frustration during 
the game. 
For example, after long hours of play, the physical stamina 
of a player may drop, and they may not be able to function as 
prompt as they were at the beginning of the play session. This 
is an example of a player spending their physical stamina 
(their physical ability resource); hence, getting tired after a 
long period of playing. If the player is suffering from anxiety 
and the game is designed to alleviate this, the decision-making 
process in the game needs to accommodate that and should 
not rely on dilemmas as a challenge, dynamics such as time 
trials or quick-time events should be avoided, and visual 
stimuli should be organised to prevent clutter and overloading. 
D. Interaction Layer  
Interaction layer represents the overlapping space of game 
world and player’s world. Via this layer, player sends input to 
the game world, observes the results of their input and 
receives a response from the game world. Interaction takes 
place between the player and the game world. It is either 
started by the player via an input, or by the game world via an 
event presented with the presentation layer. When it is 
initiated by the player, the game responds; when it is initiated 
13
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

by the game via presentation layer, the player responds via 
input layer. In both cases, information layer feeds the 
presentation layer with necessary data. Interaction layer is 
composed of presentation layer and input layer. 
1) Presentation Layer: Presentation layer can also be 
thought as sensory layer encompassing audio, visual and 
haptic presentation of the current status of the game. This 
includes continuous presentation of the game world and the 
game’s response to the player inputs. Any feedback generated 
in response to the player inputs is presented by the 
presentation layer. Clarity of presentation and a suitable 
composition of audio-visual elements are essential for 
readability. The presentation of this layer is either (1) active 
or (2) reactive:  
a) Active presentation (1) is initiated and conciously 
generated by the game with respect to or regardless of player 
positions or existance. It is important to notice that in any 
moment that the player is not interacting with the game, this 
presentation would still be actively present; hence, active 
presentation. It is an audio-visual presentation for the theme 
and of the game world, and would include any audio-visual 
element to inform the player about the current active or 
passive status of the game including but not limited to 
telegraphing for potential actions/events or signalling for 
awareness of moment-to-moment development of events in 
the game, score, etc.  
b) Reactive presentation (2) is developed in response to 
or because of an action initiated by a player, therefore can be 
considered as system’s (game’s) response to the player; 
commonly referred as feedback. Necessary to note that this 
presentation would only be executed if an action that would 
trigger a reaction was performed by the player. Reactive 
presentation can take forms of audio-visual and/or haptic 
feedback directly in response to a player input or to draw 
attention to a change that was a result of the player 
action/input. Audio-visual effects in user interface that 
inform the player for the moment of change are also examples 
of this category. For example, a falling platform would only 
fall (or destructed into pieces with an appealing vfx and sfx) 
if the player character walks/jumps onto it. Therefore, audio-
visual presentation (vfx and sfx for distruction) is a reaction 
to player’s interaction with a game element (falling platform 
in this case). If player health changes during this action, an 
audio-visual effect on user interface (one of the hearts 
blinking prior to disappearing) would also be used to draw 
attention to this change in addition to the update of player 
health on screen. Any of the reactionary feedback is time 
sensitive and loses its value at the end of the perceivable 
window (i.e., 240ms for a full correction cycle). Swink [10]  
suggests, if a computer’s response takes equal or longer than 
half of the correction cycle (i.e., 120ms), the systems feels 
laggy.  
The response of the game world could be: 
• 
in the form of visual effects that shows the moment 
and result of interaction (mostly referred as visual 
feedback); 
• 
in the form of sound that acknowledges the moment 
and result of interaction (mostly referred as audio 
feedback); 
• 
haptic such as vibration of the controller; 
• 
in UI including sound and visual effects. 
The response fulfills the expectations of gulf of evaluation. 
The longer it takes the game to respond or the more 
disconnected the response is to the current perceivable context 
of the game, the larger is the gulf of evaluation. Hence, the 
game usability is lower.  
2) Input Layer: Input layer is responsible for the 
interaction device, input techniques, clarity of input mapping, 
directness, sensitivity and consistency of input. A common 
goal for a game controller is effortless use with which the 
input device feels like the extension of the body [10]. This 
motto becomes challenging for special demographics with 
impariments or difficulties related to motor skills. For 
example, PD has some symptoms, such as tremor, 
bradykinesia or hypokinesia that may cause difficulty in 
using an input device or perform an input action within a 
required time-frame or precision. Therefore, additional 
research into input devices and interaction modalities would 
be useful. Moreover, further research on familiarity of the 
player group, mental model, and restrictions of disease stages 
for input modality is expected to improve the design. 
In addition to the input device or interaction paradigm, the 
complexity of input is also important. The complexity of input 
refers to the combination of buttons for an input and the 
characteristics of the combination such as time-specific input, 
simultaneous or ordered button presses, etc. 
To reconcile, an effective interaction layer for a 
compassionate game needs to be: 1) immediate; therefore, 
presentation layer needs to present the feedback immediately, 
and show the change in game-state if there is; 2) responsive; 
therefore, the presentation layer always presents a response to 
any input and the player is never left in dark in terms of what 
is happening with the system; 3) informative; the presentation 
is readable and clearly presenting all necessary information 
such as game-state or contextual clues, feedback is clear and 
adequate; 4) forgiving; the input scheme allows for a feasible 
input window, error recovery has necessary feedback and is 
motivational.  
E. Information Layer  
Information layer sits in the middle of presentation layer 
and structural core of the game, and interprets outputs of the 
core system in a readable format for the player. Cues for 
meaning making (semantics), affordances and limitations for 
the player [12], contextual visual material, data organization, 
response of the game (feedback for the player), and any 
information, such as score, status, outcomes, etc., belongs to 
this layer. Even though the information is generated by the 
structural core of the game, its interpretation is handled in 
information layer and passed to the presentation layer for the 
player to see. Therefore, the collaboration between 
information layer and presentation layer carries high 
importance. 
1) Contextual Layer: Contextual content works with the 
formal elements and supports meaning making. Objectives, 
14
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

rules, procedures, affordances and limitations become 
meaningful with the help of contextual content. While being 
important for engaging the audience, contextual content is 
also important for maintaining attention and motivation. In 
order to develop content based on the interests of the target 
audience (elders, kids, young adults, etc.), a participatory 
approach or persona studies would be preferable. Salen and 
Zimmermann [13] emphasize that without context, there is no 
meaning; hence, contextual meaning helps to develop 
meaningful play. For example, Pokemon Go creates a context 
around training a special creature called pokemons and 
battling to defend your dojo; therefore, one needs to capture 
the pokemons prior to training them. This means the activities 
of walking around to find the pokemons, performing the 
moves, and using the means to capture them serve within this 
context. The rarity of the creatures, what kind of environment 
they prefer, and how they respond the moves of the player 
feed into the lore of the game. Swink suggests that the visual 
content and the context need to work together with the help 
of the right metaphor for a fuilfilling experience [10]. The 
metaphor represents the connection between context and 
mental model.  
2) Game State: Game state presents any necessary 
trackable data that influences players’ decision making while 
they are playing. Game state includes but not limited to score, 
item count, health, current or remaining time, active or 
planned tasks/quests, current progress, success/failure, 
win/lose, etc. Transparency of game state is necessary to 
ensure competence and autonomy in gameplay.  
3) Feedback: Feedback refers to a compassionate 
reaction that is both contextually suitable and positively 
perceivable by the player. The positive nature of feedback is 
emphasized in games for health circles [28][11]. Feedback 
needs to be focusing on the successes rather than failures. 
Encouraging continuation of participation and reinforcing 
flow are within the role of feedback. Necessary to note that 
feedback can take many forms within a game including but 
not limited to audio effects, audio-visual changes to the 
entities in the game (sound, color changes, color flashes, 
outlining, scaling, etc.), animation of entities in the game or 
animation at user interface level, visual effects, narration, or 
any change in the game world, etc. Some important things to 
consider for the attributes of feedback are; how often to show, 
how amplified it needs to be, how long it should be shown, 
and in which form (audio and visual) it needs to be. These 
attributes should also take into account the capability of the 
player (as per the player resources dsicussed before) for a 
compassionate feedback. For example, for a player who can 
be disturbed by the nature of visual stimuli (i.e., colour, 
shape, light or change in those), visual feeback should be 
carefully catered not to breach the acceptable visual qualities. 
F. Structural Core  
Structural core of a game comprises formal elements [19]. 
Both the information layer and the presentation layer are 
dependent on the core structure of the game while also 
creating meaning for it. From player’s point of view, the core 
of the game may be completely invisible (Fig. 3) as their 
perception is shaped by the presented information (based on 
how it is interpreted by the information layer). Therefore, 
discoverability, learnability and consistency of the system 
need to be resolved at this layer so that relevant data could be 
fed to the information layer.  
1) Procedures: Procedures are the first point of 
interaction with the input from the player. They are integral 
to moment-to-moment gameplay, and they define the chain 
of moves necessary for performance in the game. Reiterating 
the previous discussion on correction cycle, a delay in any 
stage of player performance will make the time-frame of user 
input longer. For example, double jump could require hitting 
the jump button twice within a second in order to perform 
double jump. This seemingly simple action could be 
unexpectedly challenging for a person with rigidity or 
sloweness of movement, who might find hitting the same 
button twice hard to repeat within a second’s window. 
Another example is the number of steps necessary to do 
something, such as the steps to be performed to bake a cake. 
For a person with memory issues such as in Alzheimers, 
remembering those would be really hard, therefore frustrating 
to perform. Thus, procedures should be catered for a suitable 
grace time, simple recovery (this does not mean game needs 
to be easy), shorter and less complex chain of actions for 
ability to learn and retain information. On top of these, 
additional consideration for  impairments would make a big 
difference. When done right, the core game demands less 
player resources and/or compensates for lack of those when 
necessary.  
2) Resources: Management of in-game resources may 
prove challenging if learning, managing and controlling the 
resource features of the game are challenging for the players’ 
resources as per discussion in Section IV.B. Additionally, 
depending on the way in-game resources are used in the 
game, an interface complexity may also occur creating 
additional sensory and cognitive challenges at a level of 
presentation layer. For example, games of real-time strategy 
genre are more resource heavy than single screen puzzle 
games even though their cognitive complexity may resemble 
one another. 
3) Objectives: The role of objectives in game design has 
already been discussed throughout the article. An additional 
note here is on how in-game objectives of the game need to 
somewhat serve the targeted health and rehabilitation 
benefits of the overall experience. Previously discussed 
motivation example on Pokemon Go shows how in-game 
objectives motivate gameplay, and partially serve for the 
therapy objectives (walking daily). If the therapy objective 
was doing some moves in addition to walking, the game 
would have needed these moves performed towards catching 
a pokemon. Besides, objectives should be discernable and 
achievable by the player considering limited cognitive and 
emotional resources may make an objective unreachable. 
4) Rules: Since the system is governed by the rules, 
transparency and consistency of these were already 
mentioned as necessity. It is important to note that if the 
complexity of the rules prevent the players from 
understanding the moment-to-moment gameplay, game fails 
to be compassionate. The limitations emposed by the 
15
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

cognitive and emotional resources also shape the player’s 
ability to understand the rules. 
5) Conflict: Conflict in context of compassionate design 
requires additional care. By definition, conflict represents the 
challenge that attempts to prevent a player from reaching 
their in-game goals and objectives. This is also what 
separates digital games and game usability from other 
interactive digital experiences. While challenging a player, a 
game presents the player with a problem to be solved and to 
be overcome. Referring back to motivation and the 
experience of flow, the design of the challenge directly 
affects the playability of the game. Therefore, developing a 
suitable challenge and scaling the difficulty for sensitive 
demographics is absolutely necessary to motivate play and 
induce flow. Designing the challenge is essentially designing 
the game.  
VI. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
This section shares a discussion and a closing note on the 
theory and application of the model presented in the paper. 
A. On Compassionate Game Design 
The idea of compassionate game design emerged during 
the analysis of potentially suitable commercial games for 
rehabilitation of PD, followed with an attempt to identify the 
sources of the issues found with them [4]. During the 
prototyping stage of an exercise game for PD, the building 
blocks of the player-centric design paradigm surfaced as a 
nascent theory. Compassionate game design concept is novel 
and brave although naïve. The concept has a novel perspective 
to carry the idea of empathy towards a more applicable format 
that is much clear for inquiry and contemplation for game 
design process. It draws attention to the player’s position in 
the game experience, and encourages the researcher/designer 
to examine the design in relation to three areas about the 
player. These are player perception, player resources, and 
player-game relation (discussed in Section IV in detail). 
Player-centric game design paradigm is the artefact of the 
design research activity that is grounded with the 
compassionate game design concept. The model aims to be 
easy to read and apply by anyone without prior game design 
knowledge. As any novel idea, the way to see whether it is 
useful for the larger community is by putting it into use and 
letting it evolve with the findings.  
B. Strengths, Limitations, and Future Work 
The purpose of the model is to promote further discussion 
on the elements of game design with a player-centric focus; 
therefore, the main strength of the work originates from the 
incorporation of the user experience model and “game feel” to 
ensure this. The paradigm welcomes exploration in those 
layers, and encourages analytical thinking towards a player-
centric design. Currently, there is no other work that brings a 
player model and a game perspective together as a game 
design model. The details of the player model with the never-
ending dance between motivations, reservations, and mental 
model contributes to the understanding of what players think 
when they start playing a game. Furthermore, the resources in 
the player model allows the researcher/designer to keep an eye 
on the internal challenges only apparent to the player that are 
of a sensitive nature affected by a condition or a disease.  
As much as the compassionate game design concept and 
the paradigm were developed with a synthesis of current 
work, the player-centric design model should not be 
considered to carry any predictive abilities for a best possible 
system of game based rehabilitation. The development of a 
compassionate game with the help of the model do not ensure 
an effective rehabilitation, nor a single design that is useful for 
all kinds of rehabilitation. A planned improvement is 
expanding the model with the addition of a set of questions on 
what to do for each layer, and exemplar design snippets to 
further help the researchers. Since the bulk of the theory is 
presented through synthesis now, there is room to develop a 
user map or a guide for holistic thinking in future work. In 
addition, a report for the application of the paradigm with a 
development journal, the resulting product and a postmortem 
is planned for the future. Finally, despite some mentions of 
playability, an additional angle with a more detailed 
playability concept following from existing playability 
literature, and a discussion on how playability relates to this 
model are in the pipeline of future work. 
C. Conclusion 
In this paper, a player-centric design paradigm is presented 
to improve game design practice for health-related purposes. 
The paradigm is holistic as it draws attention to the 
interconnected nature of a game experience, the layers of the 
game experience to allow a closer understanding of players’ 
perception of these layers, and some approaches to enhance 
empathy for player resources. The paper encloses an analysis 
of the current literature for similar game design pursuits, 
presents a discourse for compassionate game design, and 
explains the player-centric design paradigm in detail with 
grounding strategies. The main contributions of the work are 
the compassionate game design concept and the player-centric 
design model. They are developed to provide an easy to follow 
perspective for researchers, who may be new to games for 
health or who may have limited knowledge about game design 
despite a vision on using games for health and rehabilitation 
purposes. The hope is more effectively leveraging the 
potential of games for this vision with the creation of more 
compassionate games. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. T. Bayrak, “A Player-Centric Game Design Paradigm with 
Compassion,” CENTRIC 2018, The Eleventh International Conference 
on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, 
Technologies, and Services, pp. 58-63, 2018. 
[2] 
D. Levac, S. Glegg, H. Colquhoun, P. Miller, and F. Noubary, "Virtual 
reality and active videogame-based practice, learning needs, and 
preferences: A cross-Canada survey of physical therapists and 
occupational therapists," Games for health journal 6, no. 4, pp. 217-
228, 2017. 
[3] 
A. E. Staiano and R. Flynn, "Therapeutic uses of active videogames: a 
systematic review," Games for health journal, vol. 3.6, pp. 351-365, 
2014. 
[4] 
A. T. Bayrak, B. Wünsche, and C. Lutteroth, "Reviewing the Evidence: 
In Pursuit of a Framework for Parkinson Disease Rehabilitation with 
Games," The Promise of New Technologies in an Age of New Health 
Challenges, p. 9, 2016. 
16
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[5] 
B. Bonnechère, Serious Games in Physical Rehabilitation, Springer, 
2018. 
[6] 
J. Nielsen, "Nielsen norman group," [Online]. Available from 
https://www. nngroup.com,  last accessed May 2020. 
[7] 
C. Macklin and J. Sharp, Games, Design and Play: A detailed 
approach to iterative game design, Addison-Wesley Professional, 
2016. 
[8] 
J.J. Garrett, Elements of user experience, the user-centered design for 
the web and beyond, Pearson Education, 2010. 
[9] 
E. Adams, Fundamentals of game design. Pearson Education, 2014. 
[10] S. Swink, Game feel: a game designer's guide to virtual sensation. 
CRC Press, 2008. 
[11] A. Oliver, R. Hermann, D. Lilla, B. Mellies, R. Meyer, L. Shevach, S. 
Siegel et al. "Motion-based games for Parkinson’s disease patients." In 
International Conference on Entertainment Computing, pp. 47-58. 
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2011. 
[12] D. A. Norman, Emotional design: Why we love (or hate) everyday 
things, Basic Civitas Books, 2004. 
[13] K. Salen Tekinbaş and Eric Zimmerman, Rules of play: Game design 
fundamentals, MIT press, 2004. 
[14] M. Balaam, S. R. Egglestone, G. Fitzpatrick, T. Rodden, A. Hughes, 
A. Wilkinson, T. Nind et al. "Motivating mobility: designing for lived 
motivation in stroke rehabilitation." In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 3073-3082. 
2011. 
[15] A. C. de Barros, J. Cevada, À. Bayés, S. Alcaine, and B. Mestre, "User-
centred design of a mobile self-management solution for Parkinson's 
disease," In Proceedings of the 12th international conference on 
mobile and ubiquitous multimedia, ACM, p. 23, 2013. 
[16] L. Caroux, K. Isbister, L. Le Bigot, and N. Vibert, "Player–video game 
interaction: A systematic review of current concepts," Computers in 
Human Behavior 48, pp. 366-381, 2015. 
[17] K. Isbister and F. “Floyd” Mueller. "Guidelines for the design of 
movement-based games and their relevance to HCI," Human–
Computer Interaction 30.3-4, pp. 366-399, 2015. 
[18] K. M. Gerling, F. P. Schulte, J. Smeddinck, and M. Masuch, "Game 
design for older adults: effects of age-related changes on structural 
elements of digital games," In International Conference on 
Entertainment Computing, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 235-242, 
2012. 
[19] T. Fullerton, Game design workshop: a playcentric approach to 
creating innovative games, CRC press, 2008. 
[20] J. Schell, The Art of Game Design: A book of lenses. AK Peters/CRC 
Press, 2014. 
[21] A. Kultima, "Game design research," Proceedings of the 19th 
International Academic Mindtrek Conference, ACM, 2015. 
[22] A. Aragon, B. Ramaswamy, and J. C. Ferguson, The professional's 
guide to Parkinson's disease, Parkinson's Disease Society, 2007. 
[23] G-M. Hariz and L. Forsgren, "Activities of daily living and quality of 
life in persons with newly diagnosed Parkinson’s disease according to 
subtype of disease, and in comparison to healthy controls," Acta 
Neurologica Scandinavica 123.1, pp. 20-27, 2011. 
[24] A. Diamond, Executive functions, Annual review of psychology, vol. 
64, pp. 135-168, 2013. 
[25] J. L. G. Sánchez, F. L. G. Vela, F. M. Simarro, and N. P. Zea, 
"Playability: analysing user experience in video games." Behaviour & 
Information Technology 31, no. 10: 1033-1054, 2012. 
[26] J. L. Sánchez, N.O. Zea, and F.L. Gutiérrez, “From usability to 
playability: Introduction to player-centred video game development 
process,” In International Conference on Human Centered Design (pp. 
65-74). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2009. 
[27] D. Charles, A. Kerr, M. McNeill, M. McAlister, M. Black, J. Kcklich, 
A. Moore, and K. Stringer, “Player-centred game design: Player 
modelling and adaptive digital games,” In Proceedings of the digital 
games research conference, vol. 285, p. 00100. 2005. 
[28] K. Lohse, N. Shirzad, A. Verster, N. Hodges, and H. M. Van der Loos, 
“Video games and rehabilitation: using design principles to enhance 
engagement in physical therapy,” Journal of Neurologic Physical 
Therapy, 37(4), 166-175, 2013. 
[29] J. W. Burke, M. D. J. McNeill, D. K. Charles, P. J. Morrow, J. H. 
Crosbie, and S. M. McDonough, "Designing engaging, playable games 
for rehabilitation." In Proceedings of the 8th International Conference 
on Disability, Virtual Reality & Associated Technologies, pp. 195-201. 
2010. 
[30] O. Sotamaa, L. Ermi, A. Jäppinen, L. Laukkanen, F. Mäyrä, and J. 
Nummela, “The role of players in game design: a methodological 
perspective,” In Proceedings of the 6th DAC Conference, pp. 34-42. 
Copenhagen: IT University of Copenhagen, 2005. 
[31] B. De Schutter, “Gerontoludic design: extending the mda framework 
to facilitate meaningful play for older adults,” International Journal of 
Gaming and Computer-Mediated Simulations (IJGCMS) 9, no. 1, 45-
60, 2017. 
[32] K. Miesenberger, R. Ossmann, D. Archambault, G. Searle, and A. 
Holzinger, “More than just a game: accessibility in computer games,” 
In Symposium of the Austrian HCI and Usability Engineering Group, 
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 247-260, 2008. 
[33] S. N. Baharom, W. H. Tan, and M. Z. Idris, “Emotional design for 
games: A framework for player-centric approach in the game design 
process,” International Journal of Multimedia and Ubiquitous 
Engineering, 9(10), 387-398, 2014. 
[34] K. Isbister and N. Schaffer, Game usability: Advancing the player 
experience. CRC press, 2008. 
[35] O. Sotamaa, “Perceptions of Player in Game Design Literature,” 
In DiGRA Conference, 2007. 
[36] J. G. Bond, “Introduction to Game Design, Prototyping, and 
Development: From Concept to Playable Game with Unity and C,” 
Addison-Wesley Professional, 2014. 
[37] R. M. Ryan, C. S. Rigby, and A. Przybylski, “The motivational pull of 
video games: A self-determination theory approach, “ Motivation and 
emotion, 30(4), 344-360, 2006. 
[38] S. Rigby and R. Ryan, “The player experience of need satisfaction 
(PENS) model,” Immersyve Inc, 1-22, 2007. 
[39] J. VandenBerghe, “Engines of play,” In Proceedings of the first ACM 
SIGCHI annual symposium on Computer-human interaction in play-
CHI PLAY, Vol. 14, pp. 476-476, 2014. 
[40] J. VandenBerghe, “Engines of Play: How Player Motivation Changes 
Over 
Time,” 
In 
GDC 
Vault. 
[VIDEO]. 
Available 
from:  
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Lg2GndSat1E&feature=youtu.be, 
2016, accessed May 2020. 
[41] M. S. O. Almeida and F.  S. C. da Silva, “A systematic review of game 
design methods and tools,” In International Conference on 
Entertainment Computing, pp. 17-29, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 
2013. 
[42] P. Heinrich and G. Schwabe, “ Communicating nascent design theories 
on innovative information systems through multi-grounded design 
principles,” In International Conference on Design Science Research 
in Information Systems, pp. 148-163, Springer, Cham, 2014. 
[43] K. Peffers, T. Tuunanen, M. A. Rothenberger, and S. Chatterjee, "A 
design science research methodology for information systems 
research,” Journal of management information systems, 24(3), 45-77, 
2007. 
[44] M. Rosewater, ”Timmy, Johnny, and Spike Revisited. Making 
Magic, 18,” 
[ONLINE] 
Available 
from: 
https://magic.wizards.com/en/articles/archive/making-magic/timmy-
johnny-and-spike-revisited-2006-03-20, 2006, accessed May 2020. 
[45] R. M. Ryan and E.L. Deci, “Intrinsic and extrinsic motivations: Classic 
definitions 
and 
new 
directions,” 
Contemporary 
educational 
psychology, 25(1), 54-67, 2000. 
[46] J. Juul and M. Norton, “Easy to use and incredibly difficult: on the 
mythical border between interface and gameplay,” In Proceedings of 
the 4th international conference on foundations of digital Games, pp. 
107-112, 2009. 
17
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[47] R. Bartle, “Hearts, clubs, diamonds, spades: Players who suit 
MUDs,” Journal of MUD research, 1(1), 19, 1996. 
[48] R. Hunicke, M. LeBlanc, and R. Zubek, “MDA: A formal approach to 
game design and game research,” In Proceedings of the AAAI 
Workshop on Challenges in Game AI, Vol. 4, No. 1, p. 1722, 2004. 
[49] N. Lazzaro, “Why we play games: Four keys to more emotion in player 
experiences,” In Proceedings of GDC, 2004. 
[50] M. Csikszentmihalyi, Flow: The psychology of happiness. Random 
House, 2013. 
[51] J. Hamari and J. Tuunanen, “Player types: A meta-synthesis”, 2014. 
[52] B. Stewart, "Personality and play styles: A unified model,” Gamasutra, 
September, 1, 
2011, 
[ONLINE] 
Available 
from: 
http://www. 
gamasutra. com/view/feature/6474. php., accessed May 2020. 
[53] C. Liu, P. Agrawal, N. Sarkar, and S. Chen, “Dynamic difficulty 
adjustment in computer games through real-time anxiety-based 
affective feedback,” International Journal of Human-Computer 
Interaction, 25(6), 506-529, 2009. 
[54] R. Khaled, “Muse-based game design,” In Proceedings of the 
Designing Interactive Systems Conference, pp. 721-730, 2012. 
[55] J. VandenBerghe, “Engines Of Play Case Study: Relic Entertainment,” 
2017, 
[ONLINE]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.darklorde.com/engines-play-case-study-relic-
entertainment/, accessed May 2020. 
[56] C. Hodent, The gamer's brain: How neuroscience and UX can impact 
video game design, CRC Press, 2017. 
[57] C. Treadaway, A. Taylor, and J. Fennell, “Compassionate design for 
dementia care. International Journal of Design Creativity and 
Innovation, 7(3), 144-157, 2019. 
[58] D. A. Norman, “Cognitive engineering. User centered system design, 
31, 61, 1986. 
[59] M. Rajanen and J. Nissinen, “A Survey of Game Usability Practices in 
Northern European Game Companies,” IRIS: Selected Papers of the 
Information Systems Research Seminar in Scandinavia. Issue Nr 6, 
2015, Paper 8. http://aisel.aisnet.org/iris2015/8  
[60] C. H. Vuong, T. Ingalls, and J. J. Abbas, “Transforming clinical 
rehabilitation into interactive multimedia,” In Proceedings of the 19th 
ACM international conference on Multimedia, pp. 937-940, 2011. 
[61] B. Dewar, E. Adamson, S. Smith, J. Surfleet, and L. King, “Clarifying 
misconceptions about compassionate care,” Journal of Advanced 
Nursing, 70(8), 1738-1747, 2014. 
[62] R. Bernhaupt, User Experience Evaluation Methods in the Games 
Development Life Cycle. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 1–
8, 2015.  
[63] T. De la Hera, E. Loos, M. Simons, and J. Blom, “Benefits and factors 
influencing the design of intergenerational digital games: a systematic 
literature review,” Societies, 7(3), 18, 2017. 
[64] B. Suits, The Grasshopper-: Games, Life and Utopia. Broadview Press, 
2014. 
[65] B. Sutton-Smith, The ambiguity of play. Harvard University Press, 
2009. 
[66] C. Crawford, Chris Crawford on game design, New Riders, 2003. 
[67] F. Mäyrä, An introduction to game studies, Sage, 2008.  
[68] Wizard of the Coast, Magic: The Gathering, [Card Game] US.Wizard 
of The Coast, 1993. 
[69] Niantic, Pokemon Go, [Mobile Game], Ninantic, 2016. 
 
18
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

