Qualitative and Quantitative Risk Analysis of Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Flights on 
Construction Job Sites: A Case Study  
 
Hashem Izadi Moud  
Assistant Professor 
Construction Management Department 
Florida Gulf Coast University 
Fort Myers, FL, USA  
email: hizadimoud@fgcu.edu 
Xun Zhang 
Post-Doctoral Scholar 
M. E. Rinker, Sr. School of 
Construction Management 
University of Florida  
Gainesville, FL, USA  
email: xzz0032@ufl.edu 
 
Ian Flood 
Professor & Director of Research & 
Graduate Education 
M. E. Rinker, Sr. School of Construction 
Management  
University of Florida  
Gainesville, FL, USA  
email: flood@ufl.edu 
 
Alireza Shojaei  
Assistant Professor 
Building Construction Science 
Department 
Mississippi State University 
Mississippi State, MS, USA 
e-mail: Shojaei@caad.msstate.edu 
 
 
Yuanxin Zhang 
Associate Professor 
Department of Construction 
Management 
Guangzhou University 
Guangzhou, China 
email: yuanxin@gzhu.edu.cn   
 
Craig Capano 
Chair and Professor 
Construction Management Department 
Florida Gulf Coast University 
Fort Myers, FL, USA 
email: ccapano@fgcu.edu 
 
 
Abstract - Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) have been 
extensively used on construction job sites in the last ten years. 
UAVs applications span from progress monitoring and site 
monitoring to structural health inspection and construction 
safety. While different applications of UAVs on job sites have 
been extensively researched, the risks and hazards of flying 
UAVs on construction job sites have never been quantitatively 
or qualitatively measured. Around the world, the general 
aviation industry developed sophisticated methods to evaluate 
risks of UAV flights over general population. However, in 
construction domain, discussions over risks of UAV flights is 
nonexistent. This is particularly interesting as the construction 
industry constantly maintains one of the highest rates of 
fatalities and injuries, among all other industries, in the world. 
Currently, UAVs are used in various construction activities 
regularly without proper risk assessment schemes or safety 
plans. Neither construction project managers nor construction 
safety officers have action plans in place for UAV safe use. This 
paper presents the first known quantitative and qualitative 
analyses of UAV flight risks in construction job sites. A 
quantitative model is presented and tested for UAV flight risk 
assessment, using the Monte Carlo Simulation technique. A 
case study tested the proposed model on an actual construction 
job site. The model proposed in this paper can be used by 
construction safety officers and construction project managers 
to take safety into account when planning UAV flights over job 
sites. This paper further argues that using models and methods 
introduced in this paper can make UAV flights in any 
environment safer and more reliable.  
Keywords- Risk Assessment; Unmanned Aerial Vehicle; 
UAV; Monte Carlo Simulation; UAV flight risk 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), commonly referred 
to as drones, have been used in the construction industry for 
over ten years [1]–[4]. The versatility that UAVs provide 
enables construction managers, project managers, safety 
professionals, superintendents and other project team 
members to capture different types of data, mainly visual 
data, from locations that might not easily be accessible due 
to variety of reasons including, but not limited to, high 
hazards or elevations. UAVs are commercially available, 
which makes them favorable tools that can be used in even 
small size construction projects. Relatively low-cost of 
purchase and operation of new generation UAVs along with 
the various capabilities that UAVs offer, including high 
resolution 
visual 
imaging, 
thermal 
imaging, 
Radio 
Frequency IDentification (RFID), laser scanning and other 
sensing technologies, have played a crucial role in UAVs 
proliferation in construction research and practice. UAVs are 
being used on most construction job sites in the United States 
(U.S.) on daily basis. UAVs have been used for variety of 
purposes including construction progress monitoring [5], [6], 
overall site monitoring [6], structural health inspection [8]–
[12], surveying job sites and building 3 Dimensional (3D) 
models [13], infrastructure asset management [14]–[17], 
urban monitoring [18], material tracking [19], sustainable 
energy production management [20], and construction safety 
[21]. In the last ten years, UAV uses and applications in 
construction have grown exponentially but the risks arise 
from integrating UAVs into construction job sites, as a new 
construction equipment, are hardly explored.  
In overall, risks associated with UAV flights over general 
population can be divided into the following two categories:  
135
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

1- Direct Hazards: Hazards and risks associated with 
direct impact of UAV-involved accidents; such as 
falling of a UAV, falling of debris from a collision 
accident involving a UAV and other elevated 
objects, other UAVs or other flying objects [22], 
[23]; and  
2- Indirect Hazards: Secondary hazards and risks 
associated with UAV-involved incidents including 
hazards associated with the invasion of personal 
space [24], [24], diverting the attention of workers 
due to the UAVs’ sound and motion (thereby 
increasing their cognitive load while performing 
their tasks [26]–[28], and invasion of a workers’ 
personal space [29]. 
 
Construction is one of the deadliest industries in the U.S. 
Unfortunately, the highest rates of fatalities and injuries 
usually belong to the construction industry. This asks for 
immediate action from the construction industry to prevent 
fatality and/or injury on job sites as soon as possible. In the 
U.S. alone in 2015 and 2016, more than 900 cases of 
fatalities are reported in the construction domain. In 2015 
around 4,836 job related fatalities occurred in the U.S.; out 
of these 4,836, almost 20% occurred in construction. In 
construction, falls, slips and trips are the most common cause 
of fatal incidents, with 364 cases. Transportation incidents 
were the second highest cause (with 226 cases) and contact 
with objects came third (with 159 cases) [30]. Many of these 
incidents are equipment-involved. These statistics show the 
crucial role that construction equipment plays in safety 
incidents that happen on construction job sites. It also 
reminds construction professionals that there is an immediate 
need for better monitoring job site safety conditions and the 
extent that safety rules, regulations and procedures on job 
sites are being followed. It is fatefully important to have the 
safety of construction equipment in check at all time in order 
to avoid any accident. It is not difficult to provide a safe 
environment of use for traditional construction equipment 
such as excavators, loaders, and cranes as they are 
thoroughly regulated due to prolong use on construction job 
sites. However, regulating safe use of more innovative types 
of construction, equipment such as UAVs, is a critical job; as 
there are not many, if any, rules and regulation concerning 
the safe use of newly introduced equipment to construction 
job sites. In case of UAVs, there is no specific rule regarding 
safe use in construction environments. Only rules and 
regulations that are concerned with safe use of UAVs are the 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) general rules that 
govern the safe UAV flights in public, and over general 
population. The lack of a comprehensive qualitative and 
quantitative methodology for risk assessment of UAVs 
operations on construction sites coupled with a rapid increase 
in their use pose a new safety threat that requires attention. 
This paper investigates the risks associated with UAV flights 
on construction job sites. It further aims at evaluating 
quantitative 
and 
qualitative 
UAV 
flights 
risks 
on 
construction job sites by proposing quantitative and 
qualitative approaches that can measure risks associated with 
UAV flights over construction job sites under certain 
circumstances. This paper proposes the first ever known 
model to quantify UAV flight risks on construction job sites. 
A case study is presented in later sections, which shows the 
applicability of the proposed risk model. In this case study, 
risks of UAV flights over construction job site of an under-
construction building at the University of Florida is 
quantitatively and qualitatively measured to demonstrate the 
proposed model applicability and significance. An earlier 
version of this paper [1] presented in Eighth International 
Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation 
(INFOCOMP 2018) in Barcelona. This paper presents a 
more in depth discussion on the topic and is an extended 
version of the conference papers. 
II. 
RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING UAV FLIGHTS 
IN THE UNITED STATES 
The FAA oversees the U.S. civil aviation for the 
Department of Transportation. Small Unmanned Aerial 
Systems (UAS) (a broader category for UAVs) definition 
concerns UAS weight. The small UAS means an unmanned 
aircraft with a take-off weight of less than 55 lbs., including 
everything that is on board or otherwise attached to the 
aircraft. The FAA published the regulations Part 107 for 
small UAS operation as the following [31][32]:  
(1) Limitations for Flight speed, altitude, and space of 
small UAS. The ground speed of small UAS may not exceed 
100 miles per hour. The flying height of small UAS cannot 
exceed 400 feet above the ground unless the UAS is flown 
within a 400-foot radius of a structure and does not exceed 
400 feet above the structure's immediate uppermost limit. In 
addition, the minimum flight visibility of small UAS must be 
no less than 3 miles from the control station. The minimum 
vertical distance of the UAS from clouds must be no less 
than 500 feet below the clouds and the minimum horizontal 
distance from the clouds must be no less than 2,000 feet 
(Section 107.51);  
(2) Operation of a small UAS is prohibited during the 
night. In addition, the small UAS cannot be used during 
periods of civil twilight unless the small unmanned aircraft 
has lighted anti-collision lighting visible for at least 3 statute 
miles (Section 107.29);  
(3) With a vision that is unaided by any device other than 
corrective lenses (including contact lenses), the remote pilot 
in command, the visual observer, and flight control operators 
must be able to see all flight operations of the small UAS 
(Section 107.31);  
(4) A small UAS cannot be flown above a person unless 
the person: (a) is directly involved in the operation of the 
small UAS; or (b) is inside a covered structure or a stationary 
vehicle which can provide reasonable protection against a 
falling of the small UAS. (Section 107.39)  
(5) A person cannot operate or act as a remote pilot in 
command or visual observer in the operation of multi-UAS 
at the same time. (Section 107.35)  
(6) No person is allowed to operate a small UAS on a 
moving aircraft, on a moving land or water-borne vehicle 
unless the operation requires the small UAS to fly over a 
sparsely populated area and is not transporting another 
person's property for compensation or hire. (Section 107.25)  
136
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(7) Operation near aircraft and right-of-way rules: Each 
small UAS must yield the right of way to all aircraft, 
airborne vehicles, and launch and reentry vehicles. Yielding 
the right of way means that the small UAS must give way to 
the aircraft or vehicle and may not pass over, under, or ahead 
of it unless well clear. [Section 107.37 (a)] In addition, no 
one may operate a small UAS approaching another aircraft to 
avoid the risk of collision. [Section 107.37 (b)]  
(8) Prohibition of Dangerous Work. No person may (a) 
operate a small UAS with carelessness or recklessness to 
endanger the life or property of another; or (b) allow to drop 
objects from small UASs in a manner that may cause undue 
harm to persons or property on the ground. Small UASs 
cannot carry dangerous substances. (Section 107.25)  
(9) Operation near airports: Small UASs must not 
interfere with the normal operation (take-off and landing) of 
any airport, helicopter airport, or seaplane base. (Section 
107.25)  
(10) Small UASs may not be flown in prohibited or 
restricted zones unless the person manipulating the UAS has 
the permission issued by the controlling agency. (Section 
107.45)  
This research made the following assumptions based on 
the most critical aspects of the FAA regulations for small 
UAS: (1) the construction site mentioned in the case study is 
not located within a five mile radius of any airport; (2) the 
operations of the UAV used in the research are following all 
FAA regulation; (3) the UAV is flown within the vision line-
of-sight of the remote pilot in command, the operator, and 
the visual observer; (4) the specifications of UAV in this 
research comply with FAA regulation, and more importantly 
(5) UAV were not flown over any person for safety 
consideration. These assumptions are specifically highlighted 
in the qualitative risk analysis that is provided in the 
discussion and conclusion sections. 
III. 
RISKS OF UAV FLIGHTS 
A. Quantitative Risks of UAV Flights  
Quantifying risks of UAV flights over construction job 
sites is the main step in decision making process of UAV 
safety on job sites. By quantifying the risks of UAVs, 
superintendents, construction project manager, construction 
safety managers, insurance companies and other decision 
makers can have a clear view of the risks associated with 
UAV flights under certain circumstances. A quantifiable 
risks analysis of UAV flights will give insurance companies 
a better insight into the value, extent and severity of risks 
associated with UAV flights on construction job sites. It also 
helps the decision makers to make rational, informed and 
scientific decisions on the issue of UAV safety on job sites. 
In risk management, risk is assumed to be the product of 
probability of occurrence and impact (Eq. (1)).  
                                            
       Risk = Probability of occurrence * Impact             (1)                                 
 
In order to develop a model for UAV flight risks on job 
sites, first step is to define Probability of occurrence and 
Impact. This paper uses some of the risk models that have 
been extensively used in the general aviation industry (1) as 
the bases for developing a risk model that fits UAV flight 
risks on construction job sites, and (2) to quantify the 
probability of occurrence and impact. In general aviation 
industry Clothier and Walker [23], proposed a model that 
defines and measures the ground fatality expectations of 
flights. The model measures and enumerates the risk of 
expected ground fatalities based on the chances that a UAV 
flight might fail and/or due to falling debris of a UAV 
involved incident. It is worth noting that this model only 
quantifies the direct risks of falling UAVs, and/or debris. 
This model does not consider the indirect risks associated 
with UAV flights.  
Some of the indirect risks that are not considered in this 
model but could have a crucial impact on safety are: (1) 
threatening workers’ personal space, (2) threatening privacy 
of workers, (3) potential distraction of workers due to UAV 
on-board lights and (4) potential distraction of workers due 
to UAVs noise and motion.  
Clothier and Walker [23] proposed the ground fatality 
expectation model of UAV flights as below: 
 
                             SO = MR * φ * AL                           (2) 
                                
In this model SO is the Safety Objective in terms of the 
number of fatalities per flight hours. The φ refers to the 
population density of the area under flight path of the UAV. 
This area is the exact area under UAV flight path in which 
UAV can maneuver. The AL (sometimes shown as AL) is 
called the lethal area. The lethal area refers to the circular 
area around the UAV which is measured by using a diameter 
of maximum length of UAV diameter plus a (safety) buffer. 
Lethal area is believed to be the area of direct impact in case 
of a falling UAV. As demonstrated in Eq. (2), the bigger this 
lethal area, the larger would be the ground fatality impacts 
due to a flight failure or accidents. MR is referred to the 
mishap rate. Mishap rate is calculated using the formula in 
Eq. (3). 
 
               MR = SFR + MCDebris + Other                    (3)                       
 
In this formula, SFR is referred to System Failure Rate, 
which is measured per (million) flight hour(s). The 
MCDebris refers to the quantity of debris from a possible 
midair collision per flight hour. While MCDebris is a factor 
that is hard to measure, it is possible to assume a probability 
or an estimate this factor. It is also possible to assume that 
there will be no injuries and/or fatalities due to debris. In this 
paper MCDebris is assumed to be zero as estimating 
MCdebris in construction context is not possible due to lack 
of data. The last factor is Other. This factor refers to the 
other types of hazards that might result in fatality risks. Like 
MCDebris, for this factor, it is possible to assume a 
probability, an estimate or no value at all. Sometimes lack of 
data could result in avoiding the use of MCDebris and 
Others. 
137
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

B. Qualitative Risks of UAV Flights  
As discussed in Section II, FAA established a series of 
general rules and regulations for UAV flights in the national 
air space. Out of all FAA rules, two rules and regulations are 
specifically very significant for the construction industry. 
These two are as follow: (1) never fly a UAV out of the 
pilot’s line of sight and (2) never fly a UAV over a populated 
area. The implementation of these two would mean that it is 
not legal for construction managers to (1) allow a UAV flight 
over general population close to the construction job sites, 
(2) allow a UAV flight over construction personnel working 
on job sites and (3) allow a UAV flight over and close to 
construction machinery and equipment on job sites. It is vital 
for construction project managers, superintendents and 
construction safety managers to guarantee the safety of 
construction personnel working on site. When it comes to 
UAV flights, the three qualitative measures outlined above 
have to be strictly enforced in order to avoid any violation of 
FAA rules and regulations and make job sites safer. As it is 
outlined in Section II, the rest of the rules outlined by FAA 
are assumed to be enforced by the project team. Some of 
them such as distance from airports are to be checked on a 
case by case basis by the project team in order to assure the 
safety of UAV flights on job sites. 
Based on these specific regulations, authors developed a 
qualitative safety map for UAV flights over the job site that 
has been used as a case study in this research and is 
presented in the analysis and discussion sections.  
IV. 
MONTE CARLO SIMULATION AS A RISK ASSESSMENT 
METHOD  
Monte Carlo simulation (MCS) is named for the well-
known gambling capital of Monaco and is essentially a 
random number generator technique [33]. As MCS generates 
a large quantity of sample paths of outcomes for prevalent 
features analysis, it is widely used for risk analysis, risk 
quantification, sensitivity analysis, and prediction [34]. With 
the rapid advancement of computing technology, computers 
become competent of modeling reality and assisting in 
decision making by taking account of randomness and 
uncertainties via exploring various scenarios. Through 
calculating the values of the modeled scenarios, a more 
reliable decision can be made through use of MCS [33].  
With great ease, MCS has been widely adopted by 
scholars and practitioners in a broad spectrum of disciplines 
to solve thorny and sophisticated problems [33]. The most 
famous application was probably by Enrico Fermi, a Nobel 
Laurent in physics in 1930, to study the properties of the 
newly discovered neuron. MCS was also a core technique for 
the Manhattan Project in 1950s [33][34]. Its application was 
then expended to engineering, research and development, 
business, and finance [33]. Thompson et al. [35] employed 
MCS in a public health risk assessment research to account 
for uncertainties. Burmaster and Anderson [36] proposed 14 
principles of good practice in conducting and evaluating 
MCS-based risk assessments for hazardous waste sites. 
Stroeve et al. [37] substantiated the feasibility of using MCS 
for air traffic safety assessment. Au et al. [38] proposed an 
upgraded MCS with an ability to accommodate rare failure 
events commonly seen in engineering for compartment fire 
safety. To copy with the high transaction costs and financial 
risks for renewable energy technologies, Arnold and Yildiz 
[39] introduced MCS for risk analysis through representing 
the lifecycle of a renewable energy technology investment 
project. Their research uncovered tremendous advantages 
concerning content and methodology over the traditional 
NPV estimation or sensitivity analysis. Arunraj et al. [40] 
combined fuzzy set theory with MCS for industrial safety 
risk assessment, which was used to a benzene extraction unit 
(BEU) of a chemical plant.  
MCS also comes into the radar of scholars in the 
construction community and has gained great popularity. 
MCS has typically been used in conjunction with other 
techniques in construction management related research. 
Rausch et al. [41] applied MCS in off-site construction to 
mitigate rework risks through tolerance analysis. To deal 
with data scarcity and uncertainty, Kwon et al. [42] 
incorporated MCS into Case-based reasoning to estimate 
cost compensation in construction noise disputes. Kim and 
Lee [43] employed MCS with a genetic algorithm in the last 
step of their prediction model development for the 
engineering maturity effect on oversea megaprojects.  
MCS is a favorable tool for UAV related studies. To 
ensure low altitude safety, Chen et al. [44] used MCS to 
evaluated the effectiveness and robustness of a proposed 
UVA and bird targets tracking and recognition model using 
surveillance radar data. Similarly Lu et al. [45] utilized MCS 
to validate an approach proposed to improve the 
performance of direction arrival estimation of UVAs for low 
signal-to-noise ratios. Dabiri et al. [46] verified the reliability 
of a channel modeling and parameter optimization system 
for UAV-based free space communication using multi-rotor 
UAVs.  
As UAVs are increasingly prevalent on construction 
projects, this phenomenon poses a series of safety related 
risks to the construction workers and properties on job sites 
due to obstacles, operational mistakes, and inclement 
weather. Plioutsias et al. [47] discovered that small UAVs 
were typically neglected for hazard analysis among 
researchers and practitioners and identified 20 hazardous 
types. Izadi Moud et al. [48] presented a quantitative tool for 
UAV flying risk assessment on construction jobsites in 
combination with qualitative analysis by considering FAA 
rules and regulations on safety specifications of UAVs. Izadi 
Moud et al. [48] applied the previously developed risk 
quantification model to a real-world case based on 
malfunction rate of UAVs, population density of the area 
covered by UAVs flight routes. Izadi Moud et al. [49] further 
studied the indirect risks of UAVs operations on construction 
sites, in which MCS was employed in measuring the 
proximity between UAVs and construction workers.  
    On construction job sites, small UAVs require safety 
consideration due to uncertain operational conditions, such 
as their weak structural shape that may cause instability and 
failure in windy weather, their potential for operational 
errors, as well as their high maneuverability and potential for 
mechanical failures. Plioutsias et al. [47] published a 
138
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

research paper that concludes current commercial UAVs are 
very far from being able to meet safety requirements. To 
simulate collision and other hazards between one or multiple 
UAVs operating on construction sites and their bordering 
area, use of MCS method offers flexibility and accuracy in 
simulation. This method is playing an important role in 
modeling uncertainties, such as the movement of different 
kinds of object on a construction site and environmental 
factors, such as wind [50]-[53]. 
V. 
ANALYSIS OF THE CASE STUDY 
This section presents Analysis of Quantifying Risks of 
UAV Flights and Analysis of Quantifying Risks of UAV 
Flights. 
A. Analysis of Quantifying Risks of UAV Flights 
In this section, MCS is used to assess the risk of flying 
UAVs over construction job sites, which is referred to as the 
Safety Objective (SO) as described by Eq. (2). Mishap Rate 
(MR), the Lethal Area (AL) and the density of population (φ) 
are needed to find the SO in each area. MR is the variable 
with the least empirical data as there is not much information 
recorded on the MR of UAVs. In this analysis, it is assumed 
that the UAV lifetime, or the duration over which 
possibilities of crash exist, is normally distributed, with a 
range between 100 hours and 10,000 hours, a mean of 5,050 
hours, and standard deviation of 1,650 hours. MR is referred 
to as the rate of failed UAV flights in a given lifetime for a 
UAV. In this case, the normal productive life of a UAV is 
estimated to be in this range. As a result, MR is calculated as 
one crash in a UAV’s lifetime: 1 / (lifetime of UAV in flight 
hours). 
AL is the area that has the potential for lethal impact from 
the UAV or debris if a UAV crashes. Typically, it is 
calculated by using the longest dimension of a UAV. In this 
case, considering the fact that most of the UAVs flying over 
construction job sites are commercially available, it is 
presumed that AL can assume a value between 0.3 m and 1.8 
m. Thus, an even distribution across a diameter with a 
minimum of 0.3 m and maximum of 1.8 m is used in the 
simulation. The density (φ) represents the number of 
personnel on the site divided by the area of the location that a 
UAV flies over. In this study, it is assumed that only 
construction workers are present at the job site. Due to a lack 
of empirical data, it is estimated that the number of 
construction personnel on the job site varies between 2 and 
14 with a normal distribution (a mean of 8, a standard 
deviation of 2). The density is calculated for Area 1 to Area 
4 by dividing the sampled number of construction workers 
for each zone by its area. The area of each location that a 
UAV can fly over is calculated and shown in Figures 1 and 
2. The area surrounding the job site is divided into Area 1 
through Area 4 using the logic of FAA regulations regarding 
safe UAV flights, which prohibits UAV flights over head of 
people, in this case construction personnel sidewalks and 
pathways. Thus, considering the pathways that construction 
personnel routinely commute between workstations and the 
job site, four separate areas are drawn as separate areas that 
UAVs can fly over. Due to these regulations, UAVs cannot 
fly from one of these areas to another because they need to 
fly over a construction personnel pathway, which is 
prohibited by FAA regulations. 
Figure 3 depicts the resulting distribution for density (φ) 
for area 1. The representative population density distribution 
for area one is a normal distribution with mean of 
0.001061765 and standard deviation of 0.000262214. 
 
 
Figure 1. General layout of the construction site. 
 
Figure 2. simplified layout for analysis. 
139
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 3. Resulting φ distribution for area 1. 
Figure 4 depicts the resulting distribution for density (φ) for 
area 2. The representative population density distribution for 
area two is a normal distribution with mean of 0.000402085 
and standard deviation of 0.000102536. Figure 5 depicts the 
resulting distribution for density (φ) of area 3. The 
representative population density distribution for area three 
is a normal distribution with mean of 0.000124368 and 
standard deviation of 3.07317E-05. Figure 6 shows the 
resulting distribution for density (φ) of area 4. The 
representative population density distribution for area four is 
a normal distribution with mean of 0.002208846 and 
standard deviation of 0.000551396. It can be seen that the 
density distribution for the area 4 has a denser distribution 
representative. 
 
 
Figure 4. Resulting φ distribution for area 2. 
 
Figure 5. Resulting φ distribution for area 2. 
 
Figure 6. Resulting φ distribution for area 2. 
A MCS of Eq. (2), using the aforementioned factors, was run 
using the Palisade @Risk 7.5. The number of simulation 
iterations was controlled for convergence of the mean, 
standard deviation, and 90% percentile simulated values of 
the SO results of each area. The simulation was run until it 
reached convergence with 95% confidence and 5% 
tolerance. The convergence was checked every 600 
iterations. The simulation reached convergence at 102,000 
iterations. The results of the Monte Carlo simulation are 
summarized as follows: 
 
Area 1 (Figures 7 and 8):  
o 
Mean: 2.53521E-07 
o 
Mode: 2.64621E-08 
o 
Median: 1.7822E-07 
o 
Standard deviation: 6.22557E-07 
 
Area 2 (Figures 9 and 10): 
o 
Mean: 9.57806E-08 
o 
Mode: 9.05201E-09 
o 
Median: 6.7361E-08 
140
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

o 
Standard deviation: 1.968E-07 
 
Area 3 (Figures 11 and 12): 
o 
Mean: 2.94819E-08 
o 
Mode: 2.86018E-09 
o 
Median: 2.07374E-08 
o 
Standard deviation: 6.47009E-08 
 
Area 4 (Figures 13 and 14): 
o 
Mean: 5.21982E-07 
o 
Mode: 4.10386E-08 
o 
Median: 3.73742E-07 
o 
Standard deviation: 9.33199E-07 
 
 
Figure 7. SO result of area 1 from simulation. 
 
 
Figure 8. Zoomed in SO result of area 1 from simulation. 
 
Figure 9. SO result of area 2 from simulation. 
 
 
Figure 10. Zoomed in SO result of area 2 from simulation. 
 
 
Figure 11. SO result of area 3 from simulation. 
141
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 12. Zoomed in SO result of area 3 from simulation. 
 
Figure 13. SO result of area 4 from simulation. 
 
Figure 14. Zoomed in SO result of area 4 from simulation. 
Figures 15-18 depict the inputs’ impacts on the 
corrosponding SO output means. It is evident that AL had 
the most significant impact, followed by the MR and the 
least impactfull variable is the number of workers in the 
area. However, it should be noted that this conculusion is 
based on the assumptions of this study and it should 
evaluated on a case by case basis.  
 
Figure 15. Inputs effect on SO area 1 mean. 
 
Figure 16. Inputs effect on SO area 2 mean. 
 
Figure 17. Inputs effect on SO area 3 mean. 
142
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 18. Inputs effect on SO area 4 mean. 
Figure 19 shows the changes in the output mean of the SO 
area based on the variation on of the inputs. It can be seen 
that the AL and MR have the same imapct on the SO while 
the number of workers in the area has the opposite effect.  
 
Figure 19. Change in output mean of SO in area 2 depending on variations 
in the inputs. 
B. Analysis of Qualitative Risks of UAV Flights 
As extensively discussed in Section II, the FAA governs 
UAVs flights in U.S. National Air Space. Some of the rules 
and regulations that FAA posed on UAVs flights prohibit 
UAV flights over general population or simply over people’s 
heads. Using this logic, in Figure 1, there is a need to restrict 
UAV flights to only areas that are considered safe based on 
FAA rules and regulations. Consequently, in Figures 2 and 
20, the job site is divided into four standalone areas; each 
safe for UAV flights considering these areas do not contain 
workers’ pathways. These areas are contained between 
shared workers’ pathways or walkways. In order to 
qualitatively measure the safety of UAV flights in this case 
study, a qualitative assessment of UAV flights risks, using 
FAA rules and regulations, is developed. Some of the 
principles that are used are as follow:  
 
UAV no-fly zone areas are shown in red. These 
are the areas that are absolutely forbidden for 
UAVs to fly over/on due to federal rules. The 
no-fly zones are considered to be airspace above 
people’s heads. 
 
The area immediately adjacent to the red areas 
are shown in orange as it is risky to fly close to 
a no-fly zone. 
 
Any existing construction equipment is shown 
in orange. It is risky to fly over, on or adjacent 
to this moving construction equipment. 
 
In this example, there are two tower cranes 
which, by nature, are constantly moving in three 
dimensions. It is risky to fly on or close to these 
tower cranes. 
By taking into account of all the above-mentioned facts, 
a color-coded safety map in Figure 20 illustrates the safety 
risks of UAV flights based on the qualitative facts. In this 
figure, green indicates safe flight zones. Red indicates no-fly 
zones and orange indicates risky flight zones. As shown in 
Figure 20, all areas of this job sites are considered safe, 
shows in green, except the areas that are on the direct 
workers’ pathways, which are shown in red as an indicator of 
absolute no-fly zones, and areas close to red zones or close to 
construction equipment including two giant tower cranes 
shown in east and south sides of the under-construction 
building in Figure 20. It is recommended that UAV flights in 
orange areas be in discretions of the construction project 
teams. Construction project teams are advised to make 
decisions on the safety of UAV flights over orange areas by 
considering all facts and on a case by case basis.  
VI. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
This paper presents qualitative and quantitative risk 
analyses of UAVs flights over construction job site 
environments. It is the first known study discussing risks of 
UAVs flights over construction job sites using a Monte Carlo 
Simulation as a well-known quantitative analysis and also a 
qualitative analysis based on FAA rules and regulations. The 
qualitative method proposed in this research uses UAV lethal 
area, failure rate, also referred to as Mishap Rate, and 
population density as the main factors to quantify the direct 
risks associated with UAV flights. The model is tested in a 
case study; an under-construction building at the University 
of Florida’s campus. Monte Carlo Simulation is used as the 
computation technique to run the simulation of the proposed 
model using the case study characteristics as inputs. 
Different probabilities are given for personnel on job site, 
UAV size, which is used for finding the lethal area, and 
mishap rates. The results show that the safety objectives, 
expressed in terms of fatalities per million flight hours, vary 
in Areas 1 through 4. Areas 1 and 4 have the highest median 
of safety objectives by 1.7822E-07 and 3.73742E-07, 
respectively. These numbers mean the expected fatalities for 
a UAV flight over these areas are 1.78 per ten million flight 
hours for Area 1 and 3.73 per ten million flight hours for 
Area 4. Based on Clothier and Walker [23], the general 
aviation industry fatality rate is restricted to one fatal 
incident in one million flight hours. While it is not truly 
143
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 20. A color-coded map showing the qualitative risks of flying UAVs in a construction job site, where green represents the minimum risk, orange 
represents the medium risk and red represents high risk or no-fly zones. 
 
accurate to propagate the fatality rate of the general aviation 
industry to the UAV industry, authors use the general 
aviation industry as a reference to compare the risks due to 
the lack of data on qualitative risks of UAV flights. 
By comparing the simulation results to the general 
aviation industry fatality restriction rate, which is one fatality 
in a million flight hours, it appears that in the case study 
analyzed in this paper, most areas have lower than normal 
fatality risks of flights. It is worth noting that ultimately is up 
to construction managers or safety officer to utilize these 
findings and decide on the appropriateness of UAV flights 
on this construction site. 
The FAA rules and regulations prohibit UAVs to fly over 
peoples’ heads, over or close to airports and set specific 
guidelines regarding UAVs operations. By combining FAA 
rules and guidelines and safety needs of UAV flights in 
construction environments, such as higher risk of UAV 
collision in proximity of tower cranes, a qualitative color-
coded safety map is generated that shows the relatively safer 
areas for UAV flights, using green, compare to medium 
UAV flight risks areas, with orange color, and no-fly zones, 
or the highest risks of UAV flights zones with red.  
The presented qualitative and quantitative analyses help 
construction project managers, construction safety managers, 
site superintendents and insurance companies to make 
informed decisions, based on actual data, regarding the 
safety of UAV flights using specific temporal and spatial 
data. These models will also enable different stakeholders to 
detect, explore and address the risks of UAV flights in 
construction job site environments, which will help the 
construction industry to better manage the safety of UAV 
flights. 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Izadi Moud, A. Shojaei, I. Flood, X. Zhang & M. Hatami. 
“Qualitative and quantitative risk analysis of Unmanned 
Aerial Vehicle Flights over construction job sites”. 
Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on 
Advanced Communications and Computation (INFOCOMP 
2018), Barcelona, Spain, 2018.  
[2] Y. Ham, K. K. Han, J. J. Lin, and M. Golparvar-Fard, “Visual 
monitoring of civil infrastructure systems via camera-
equipped Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs): a review of 
related works,” Vis. Eng., vol. 4, no. 1, p. 1, 2016. 
[3] P. Liu, Y. Chen, N. Huang, Y.  Han, S. Lai, C. Kang, & H. 
Tsai, M. "A review of rotorcraft unmanned aerial vehicle 
144
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(UAV) 
developments 
and 
applications 
in 
civil 
engineering". Smart Struct. Syst, 2014, 13(6), pp. 1065-1094. 
[4] M. Zucchi, “Drones: a gateway technology to full site 
automation.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.enr.com/articles/9040-drones-a-gateway-
technology-to-full-site-automation?v=preview. 
[Accessed: 
30-Mar-2018]. 2015. 
[5] K. Han, J. Lin, and M. Golparvar-Fard, “A formalism for 
utilization of autonomous vision-based systems and integrated 
project models for construction progress monitoring,” in 
Proceedings of Conference on autonomous and robotic 
construction of infrastructure, 2015, pp. 118–131. 
[6] J. J. Lin, K. K. Han, and M. Golparvar-Fard, “A framework 
for model-driven acquisition and analytics of visual data using 
UAVs for automated construction progress monitoring,” in 
Computing in Civil Engineering, 2015, pp. 156–164. 
[7] M. Wen and S. Kang, “Augmented reality and unmanned 
aerial vehicle assist in construction management,” in 
Computing in Civil and Building Engineering, 2014, pp. 
1570–1577. 
[8] C. Eschmann, C. Kuo, and C. Boller, “Unmanned Aircraft 
Systems for remote building inspection and monitoring,” 
Proc. 6th Eur. Work. Struct. Heal. Monit., Dresden, Germany, 
vol. 2, pp. 1–8, 2012. 
[9] N. Kerle, J. Fernandez Galarreta, and M. Gerke, “Urban 
structural damage assessment with oblique UAV imagery, 
object-based image analysis and semantic reasoning,” in 
Proc., 35th Asian conference on remote sensing, 2014. 
[10] M. N. Shen, M. K. Mulgaonkar, Y. Kumar, V. Nagatani, & K. 
Ohno. "Collaborative mapping of an earthquake‐damaged 
building via ground and aerial robots". Journal of Field 
Robotics, 29(5), pp. 832-841, 2012. 
[11] G. Morgenthal and N. Hallermann, “Quality assessment of 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) based visual inspection of 
structures,” Adv. Struct. Eng., vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 289–302, 
2014. 
[12] K. S. Pratt, R. R. Murphy, J. L. Burke, J. Craighead, C. 
Griffin, and S. Stover, “Use of tethered small unmanned aerial 
system at Berkman Plaza II collapse,” in Safety, Security and 
Rescue Robotics. IEEE International Workshop on, pp. 134–
139, 2008. 
[13] S. Siebert and J. Teizer, “Mobile 3D mapping for surveying 
earthwork projects using an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) 
system,” Autom. Constr., vol. 41, pp. 1–14, 2014. 
[14] A. Ellenberg, A. Kontsos, F. Moon, and I. Bartoli, “Bridge 
related damage quantification using unmanned aerial vehicle 
imagery,” Struct. Control Heal. Monit., vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 
1168–1179, 2016. 
[15] C. Eschmann, C. Kuo, C. Kuo, and C. Boller, “High-
resolution 
multisensor 
infrastructure 
inspection 
with 
unmanned aircraft systems”. ISPRS-International Arch. 
Photogramm. Remote Sens. Spat. Inf. Sci., no. 2, pp. 125–
129, 2013. 
[16] N. Metni and T. Hamel, “A UAV for bridge inspection: 
Visual servoing control law with orientation limits,” Autom. 
Constr., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 3–10, 2007. 
[17] S. Rathinam, Z. W. Kim, and R. Sengupta, “Vision-based 
monitoring of locally linear structures using an unmanned 
aerial vehicle,” J. Infrastruct. Syst., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 52–63, 
2008. 
[18] R. Qin, “An object-based hierarchical method for change 
detection using unmanned aerial vehicle images”. Remote 
Sens., vol. 6, no. 9, pp. 7911–7932, 2014. 
[19] B. Hubbard, H. Wang, M. Leasure, T. Ropp, T. Lofton, S. 
Hubbard, and S. Lin, “Feasibility study of UAV use for RFID 
material tracking on construction sites,” in Proc. 51st ASC 
Annu. Int. Conf, 2015. 
[20] R. R. Murphy, K.L. Dreger, S. Newsome, J. Rodocker, E. 
Steimle, T. Kimura, K. Makabe, F. Matsuno, S. Tadokoro, 
and K. Kon, “Use of remotely operated marine vehicles at 
Minamisanriku 
and 
Rikuzentakata 
Japan 
for 
disaster 
recovery,” 9th IEEE Int. Symp. Safety, Secur. Rescue Robot. 
SSRR, pp. 19–25, 2011. 
[21] J. Irizarry, M. Gheisari, and B. N. Walker, “Usability 
assessment of drone technology as safety inspection tools,” J. 
Inf. Technol. Constr., vol. 17, no. 12, pp. 194–212, 2012. 
[22] N. D. Opfer and D. R. S. PE, “Unmanned aerial vehicle 
applications and issues for construction,” in 121st ASEE 
Annual Conference and Exposition, 2014. 
[23] R. A. Clothier and R. A. Walker, “Determination and 
evaluation of UAV safety objectives,”. Bristol, United 
Kingdom: 21st International Unmanned Air Vehicle Systems 
Conference, 2006. 
[24] R. Clarke, “Understanding the drone epidemic,” Comput. 
Law Secur. Rev., vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 230–246, 2014. 
[25] R. L. Finn and D. Wright, “Unmanned aircraft systems: 
Surveillance, ethics and privacy in civil applications,” 
Comput. Law Secur. Rev., vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 184–194, 2012. 
[26] F. Christiansen, L. Rojano-Doñate, P. T. Madsen, and L. 
Bejder, “Noise levels of multi-rotor unmanned aerial vehicles 
with implications for potential underwater impacts on marine 
mammals,” Front. Mar. Sci., vol. 3, pp. 277, 2016. 
[27] C. F. Liew and T. Yairi, “Quadrotor or blimp? Noise and 
appearance considerations in designing social aerial robot,” in 
Human-Robot 
Interaction 
(HRI), 
8th 
ACM/IEEE 
International Conference on, pp. 183–184, 2013. 
[28] G. Sinibaldi and L. Marino, “Experimental analysis on the 
noise of propellers for small UAV,” Appl. Acoust., vol. 74, 
no. 1, pp. 79–88, 2013. 
[29] B. A. Duncan and R. R. Murphy, “Comfortable approach 
distance with small unmanned aerial vehicles,” in RO-MAN, 
IEEE, pp. 786–792, 2013. 
[30] Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Census of fatal occupational 
injuries (CFOI) - current and revised data.” [Online]. 
Available: https://www.bls.gov/iif/oshcfoi1.htm. [Accessed: 
20-Apr-2018], 2018.   
[31] Federal Aviation Administration. "Certificated remote pilots 
including commercial operators". [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.faa.gov/uas/commercial_operators/ 2019.08.19, 
[Accessed: 30-Mar-2018]. 2018. 
[32] Federal Aviation Administration. "Electronic code of federal 
regulations. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-
idx?SID=dc908fb739912b0e6dcb7d7d88cfe6a7&mc=true&n
ode=pt14.2.107&rgn=div5#se14.2.107_135 
 
2019.08.19, 
[Accessed: 30-Mar-2018]. 2015 
[33] J. Mun, "Modeling risk: applying Monte Carlo simulation, 
real 
options 
analysis", 
forecasting, 
and 
optimization 
techniques, John Wiley & Sons, 2006. 
[34] E. Zio, "System reliability and risk analysis,  The Monte 
Carlo simulation method for system reliability and risk 
analysis", Springer, pp. 7-17, 2013. 
[35] K.M. Thompson, D.E. Burmaster and E.A.C. Crouch, "Monte 
Carlo techniques for quantitative uncertainty analysis in 
public health risk assessments", Risk Analysis vol. 12, no. 1, 
pp. 53-63, 1992. 
[36] D.E. Burmaster and P.D. Anderson, "Principles of good 
practice for the use of Monte Carlo techniques in human 
health and ecological risk assessments", Risk Analysis vol. 14 
no. 4, pp. 477-481, 1994. 
[37] S.H. Stroeve, H.A.P. Blom, and G.J. Bakker, "Systemic 
accident risk assessment in air traffic by Monte Carlo 
simulation", Safety Science vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 238-249, 2009. 
145
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[38] S.K. Au, Z.-H. Wang, and S.-M. Lo, "Compartment fire risk 
analysis by advanced Monte Carlo simulation", Engineering 
Structures vol. 29, no. 9, pp. 2381-2390, 2007. 
[39] U. Arnold, and Ö. Yildiz, "Economic risk analysis of 
decentralized renewable energy infrastructures – A Monte 
Carlo Simulation approach", Renewable Energy vol. 77, pp. 
227-239, 2015. 
[40] N.S. Arunraj, S. Mandal, and J. Maiti, "Modeling uncertainty 
in risk assessment: An integrated approach with fuzzy set 
theory and Monte Carlo simulation", Accident Analysis & 
Prevention vol. 55, pp. 242-255, 2013. 
[41] C. Rausch, M. Nahangi, C. Haas, and W. Liang, "Monte 
Carlo simulation for tolerance analysis in prefabrication and 
offsite construction", Automation in Construction vol. 103, 
pp. 300-314, 2019. 
[42] N. Kwon, J. Cho, H.S. Lee, I. Yoon, and M. Park, 
"Compensation cost estimation model for construction noise 
claims using case-based reasoning", Journal of Construction 
Engineering and Management vol. 145, no. 8, pp. 15, 2019. 
[43] M.H. Kim and E.B. Lee, "A forecast model for the level of 
engineering maturity impact on contractor's procurement and 
construction costs for offshore EPC megaprojects", Energies 
vol. 12, no. 12, 2019. 
[44] W.S. Chen, J. Liu and J. Li, "Classification of UAV and bird 
target in low-altitude airspace with surveillance radar data", 
Aeronautical Journal vol. 123, no. 1260, pp. 191-211, 2019. 
[45] J. Lu, J. Yang, X.H. Liu, G.B. Liu, and Y. Zhang, "Robust 
direction of arrival estimation approach for unmanned aerial 
vehicles at low signal-to-noise ratios", Iet Signal Processing 
vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 456-463, 2019. 
[46] M.T. Dabiri, M.S. Sadough, and M.A. Khalighi, "Channel 
modeling and parameter optimization for hovering UAV-
based free-space optical links, IEEE Journal on Selected 
Areas in Communications vol. 36, no. 9, pp. 2104-2113, 
2018. 
[47] A. Plioutsias, N. Karanikas, and M.M. Chatzimihailidou, 
"Hazard analysis and safety requirements for small drone 
operations: to what extent do popular drones embed safety?", 
Risk Analysis vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 562-584, 2018. 
[48] H. Izadi Moud, A. Shojaei, I. Flood, and X. Zhang, "Monte 
Carlo based risk analysis of Unmanned Aerial Vehicle flights 
over construction job sites",  SIMULTECH, 2018, pp. 451-
458. 
[49] H. Izadi Moud, I. Flood, A. Shojaei, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, M. 
Tadayon, and M. Hatami, "Qualitative assessment of indirect 
risks associated with Unmanned Aerial Vehicle flights over 
construction job sites",  ASCE International Conference on 
Computing in Civil Engineering Atlanta, Georgia, 2019. 
[50] D. Alejo, J. A. Cobano, G. Heredia, and A. Ollero, “An 
efficient method for multi-UAV conflict detection and 
resolution under uncertainties,” in Advances in Intelligent 
Systems and Computing, vol. 417, 2016. 
[51] S. P. Cook and D. Brooks, “A Quantitative metric to enable 
Unmanned Aircraft Systems to remain well clear,” Air Traffic 
Control Quarterly, vol. 23, no. 2–3, pp. 137–156, 2015. 
[52] J. A. Douthwaite, A. De Freitas, and L. S. Mihaylova, “An 
interval approach to multiple unmanned aerial vehicle 
collision avoidance,” in Sensor Data Fusion: Trends, 
Solutions, Applications (SDF), no. April, pp. 1–8, 2017. 
[53] A. Mcfadyen, T. Martin, and L. Mejias, “Simulation and 
modelling tools for quantitative safety assessments of 
unmanned aircraft systems and operations,” in IEEE 
Aerospace Conference, vol. June, pp. 1–12, 2016. 
 
 
 
  
 
146
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

