352
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Metacognitive Support of Mathematical Abstraction Processes:
Why and How - A Basic Reasoning
Hans M. Dietz
Institute of Mathematics
University of Paderborn
D 33098 Paderborn, Germany
Email: dietz@upb.de
Abstract—A signiﬁcant and distinctive feature of human be-
ings is the ability of performing abstraction operations, e.g.,
when forming categories of objects or even conscioulsy creat-
ing abstract objects as it is typical in mathematics. Although
the possible range of corresponding abilities is certainly pre-
determined by individual genetic factors, a high-level abstraction
performance will typically be achieved gradually by an intensive
long-run practice in solving abstraction prone problems. On the
other hand, mathematical abstraction is often considered to be
a serious obstacle in mathematics education. As metacognition
has turned out to be helpful in overcoming some other obstacles
in the students’ process of knowledge acquisition, one may ask
whether metacognition may also serve as a remedy against the
abstraction obstacle and, in particular, whether it may help
to accelerate the acquisition of abstraction abilities. The paper
provides some inital reasoning w.r.t. this possibility, proposes
some basic principles of abstraction that could be taught on
a metacognitive level, and presents a concept of a corresponding
teaching experiment. Hopefully, it will provide more effective
teaching as well as a better understanding of cognitive processes
underlying mathematical abstraction.
Index Terms—Abstraction; Mathematical Abstraction; Math-
ematics Education; Mathematical Reading; Metacognition.
I. INTRODUCTION
The present article is a substantially enlarged and extended
version of the authors recent paper “Metacognitive Support
of Mathematical Abstraction Processes” [1] presented at the
2016 IARIA Cognitive conference in Rome.
Basic mathematics courses belong to the greatest challenges
for ﬁrst year university students from many disciplines. The
author’s long run experience in conducting such courses at
the University of Paderborn indicates that one main reason
for that is the lack of appropriate study and working tech-
niques. For many students, the major obstacle in understanding
mathematics is the lacking aptitude to understand its language.
As a remedy, a system of in-teaching metacognitive support
instruments named ”CAT” was introduced [2]. CAT provides
instructions that help to improve the studying and working
routines. But more than that, its core focus is on enhancing
the ability to read and understand mathematical texts properly
[3][4]. Accompanying empirical studies [5][6] showed that im-
provements could be achieved by using CAT’s metacognitive
instruction tools.
Even with this, one often sees refusal or even fear of the
perceived abstractness of mathematics. Moreover, many of
the beginning students are quite unfamiliar with any kind
of abstractness. Hence, coping with mathematics becomes
particularly hard for them. This raises the question how to
facilitate the “access to abstraction” for them.
It is impossible to rise this question without referring to the
aspect of time, because good abstraction abilities are typically
achieved “by doing”, i.e., by solving problems that require – or
at least promote – a certain level of abstraction. Even math-
ematicians develop their abstraction skills within a lengthy
process of education and mathematical work. However, in
basic courses for non-mathematicians, there is not enough
time to re-run along this path. As an alternative, the present
paper proposes to support some basic aspects of abstraction
on a metacognitive level, by explicitly “teaching abstraction
principles”, with the objective to accelerate the process of
acquiring abstraction skills.
In order to derive such rules, several aspects of abstrac-
tion are discussed. A generally adopted hypothesis is that
abstraction operations are organized hierarchically. Piaget [7]
has described that, and how, this hierarchy is run through in
children’s development of mathematical thinking. The hierar-
chical nature of abstraction was also emphasized by Dubinsky
[8] [9] and Arnon et al. [10]. In contrast to the forementioned
ones, the approach pursued here aims to additionally support
the construction of several layers of abstraction by explicit
metacognitive instruction. Although this work is still in an
early stage it can be hoped that it shall yield not only
better teaching instruments but a better understanding of the
underlying cognitive processes as well. In particular, the hope
for better teaching instruments is supported by the empirical
ﬁndings from [5] [6] regarding CAT’s instructions, which are
essentially metacognitive. -
As compared to [1], the novel contribution of the present pa-
per covers both a broader and deeper embedding of the paper’s
subject in the corresponding research history – including new
insights from quite recent work –, and a more thorough and
lucid exposition of relevant concepts, including new examples
for metacognitive support.

353
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The paper is organized as follows: In Section II, the need of
abstraction in economics education is highlighted. The nature
of abstraction and its “economics” is discussed in Sections III,
and IV. Section V deals with perceived abstraction aversity.
The role of metacognition is discussed in Section VI. The
following section deals with operational aspects of abstraction.
Section VIII gives an outlook of a forthcoming teaching
project and possible applications of the results.
II. IS ABSTRACTION EDUCATIONALLY NEEDED?
It is often believed that abstraction is a matter of “pure
mathematics” rather than of its applications. However, prac-
tically this is not true. Here are some fundamental reasons
for that: In many applications, at least a basic understanding
of the (abstract) language of mathematics is required. Further,
abstraction is a core feature of building mathematical models
for more or less “real” problems. Modeling requires a “trans-
lation” of representations of “real” objects, their attributes,
and relations into the language of mathematics. And last
but not least, precise reasoning often relies on the abstract
logical structure rather than on the domain speciﬁc content
of arguments. By these and other reasons, the ability to
cope with abstraction is closely related to a high professional
performance in several domains, as can be seen, e.g., from
Greuel et al. [11].
Moreover, in economics, there is a particular demand of “ab-
straction” at least along four different lines. First, fundamental
economic phenomena are explained with the help of abstract
mathematical concepts. Look, e.g., at a preference relation as
described here:
x ⪯ y
:()
2x1 + 3x2  2y1 + 3y2.
(1)
The students must be able to read, understand, and handle
symbolic expressions like this. Note that the context of consid-
ering such relations typically involves some set theory. From
the economic point of view, set theory provides the appropriate
language to describe, e.g., sets of possible economic decisions.
Thus, the students should master this language to a certain
minimal extent. However, the author’s teaching experience
says that even quite basic concepts of set theory are perceived
as being rather abstract by many students.
Second, modern economics is interested in qualitative re-
sults that are valid under quite general assumptions. Accord-
ingly, these results rely on abstract qualitative properties of
the underlying models. For example, one can say a lot about
the behavior of an enterprise that produces one good for a
polypolistic market, given only that its internal cost function
is neoclassic, regardless of its concrete form [3]. Hence the
qualitative nature of the problems is in the foreground, while
purely numerical calculations are of less signiﬁcance.
Third, economics is concerned with complex systems and
their equilibria. The study of such systems is often decom-
posed into studies of subsystems, the internal parameters of
which are determined via optimization, given some exogenous
parameters. But it has to be understood that these exogeneous
parameters become endogenous when entering a higher level
of consideration. That is, frequently there is no point in ﬁxing
numerical values, rather one has to develop kind of functional
thinking.
And fourth, by employing modern and sophisticated results
of mathematics, economics adopt the abstraction level of
mathematics itself. This conﬁrms that Devlin’s [12] statement
“The main beneﬁt of learning and doing mathematics is not the
speciﬁc content; rather it’s the fact that it develops the ability
to reason precisely and analytically about formally deﬁned
abstract structures” holds true for modern economics, as well
as for other sciences.
III. WHAT IS ABSTRACTION?
So far, ”abstraction” was used in quite general way. For the
purposes of this paper, some speciﬁc aspects of interest shall
be described and put in the general context.
A. General Aspects
Everybody knows somehow and from somewhere “what is
abstraction”, as this word became present in a lot of domains.
A common feature of many conceptions of “abstraction” refers
to the latin word abstrahere in the philosophical sense of
omitting unessential details of an object in the process of
inductive thinking, resulting in a new – or simpler – entity,
as it was described ﬁrst by Aristotle. Until today, the term
“abstraction” has conquered its place in various scientiﬁc dis-
ciplines: philosophy, psychology, linguistics, cognitive science,
mathematics, computer science, education, and others – and
beyond that as well in common understanding. Accordingly,
the amount of varying interpretations as well as the number
of publications on this subject is extremely large and indicates
that “abstraction” is a rather rich and complex notion. It is
neither possible nor the purpose of this paper to give a full
account to all essential aspects of this notion. Rather it shall
concentrate on some aspects that may be essential both from
the cognitive point of view and for teaching mathematics.
B. Abstraction as Mental Processes
Henceforth,
the
term
“abstraction”
shall
be
used
in
the narrower sense to denote individual mental processes.
Typically, these processes result in abstract objects or, more
precisely, in new – and simpler – mental representations
of previously present mental objects or their relations,
respectively, or even in the creation of new mental objects.
Clearly, there is a duality of abstraction processes and
their results. Viewing abstraction as a process has a long
history, as “... there is evidence in Aristotle’s psychological
and biological writings which suggests that abstraction is
a component of the inductive process by which we reach
universal concepts” (Smith [13]). An intrinsic feature of
abstraction is that it can lead to a re-structured organization
of mental knowledge structures (Hershkowitz et al. [14]).
In a wider sense, “abstraction” will also be understood as
individual mental processes of understanding and exploiting

354
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
already existing abstract objects and concepts. It is obvious
that these processes are of particular signiﬁcance for learning
mathematics and, thus, should be promoted.
Some Comments
The author is aware of the deﬁciencies of these explanations
– after all, the given notion of abstraction refers to “mental
processes” and “mental representations”, or more speciﬁcally,
to the change of the latter by means of the ﬁrst. That is,
these terms might need an explanation, too. Again, they
are used frequently with varying senses. Given that both –
processes, and representations – are present within our living
organism, in the end they must be accomplished on a neuro-
bio-physiological level, exist in distributed electric potentials,
speciﬁc chemical substances or particular molecular structures
and their changes. That is, the possibly most subtle explanation
of cognitive functions may start from neuro-bio-physiological
details.
However, the possibility to investigate these details with
sufﬁciently high resolution has but developed within the last
few years; knowledge about these basic mechanisms keeps on
growing rapidly. On the other hand, reasoning about cognitive
activities has a very long tradition, without having hands on
that level. The key to this seeming puzzle is that research
and reasoning on the subject “human thinking” used more or
less abstract models of this subject, and more or less speciﬁc
languages to describe these models as well.
With respect to research on cognitive systems these models
can be understood, as C. Eliasmith [15] poses it, by dif-
ferent kinds of metaphors. He systematizes four mainstream
metaphoric approaches known as symbolicism, connectionism,
dynamicism, and the Bayesian approach. While symbolicism,
roughly spoken, supposes that cognitive systems work similar
like computers and process something like symbolic rules, as
prominently stated by Fodor [16], connectionism sees brain
functions better represented by abstract “neural” networks
(Rumelhart and McClelland [17]). The dynamicism approach
tries to tie brain functions closer to the continous ﬂow of
different input signals that have to be responded to within
very short periods of time; it is related to systems and control
theory. The Bayesian approach is prominently represented by
Anderson [18] and the recent work of Tenenbaum, Grifﬁths,
and others [19][20]. Eliasmith [15] points out that all of
these metaphors are appropriate to explain some aspects of
cognition, but perhaps neither of them is apt to explain all.
To sum up: Dependent on the respective purpose, it can
sufﬁce to use a metaphoric level of description. Abstraction
(as performed by the mind) can perhaps be understood by
abstract models of the mind’s operation. For the purposes
aimed at here, this exposition shall rely on verbal terms as
used in mathematics education, education sciences, and in
part in cognitive psychology. The view towards abstraction
as a process of changing or creating mental representations
in a particular manner seems to be widely accepted, even if
not always a deﬁnition of abstraction is provided (see, e.g.,
Gentner [21]).
The role of abstraction in cognition
Although “... human cognition is certainly embodied, its
embodiment is not what gives human cognition its advantage
over that of other species. Its advantage depends on its ability
to achieve abstraction in content and control” (Anderson et
al. [22]). Indeed, much speaks for the view that abstraction
is a fundamental working principle of the brain, that drives
already early stages of mental development. Schulz et al.
[23] come to the suggestion “... that children’s ability to
learn robust, abstract principles does not depend on extensive
prior experience but can occur rapidly, on-line, and in tandem
with inferences about speciﬁc relations. ... Researchers have
proposed that such rapid learning is possible because chil-
dren’s inferences are constrained by more abstract theories ...”.
Skorstad et al. [24] stressed that “Current work in concept-
formation suggests that abstraction does indeed take place
during concept learning...” H. Ballard pointedly summarizes
“brain computation as hierarchical abstraction” [25]. Shepard
[26] argues “Possibly, behind the diverse behaviors of humans
and animals, as behind the various motions of planets and
stars, we may discern the operation of universal laws. ”
In this line, the author conjectures that it is universal
laws, too, that allow for abstraction and even drive it.
Abstraction makes many cognitive operations feasible – by
reducing the demand of ressources, energy consumption,
and operational complexity. Hence the hypothesis that any
particular abstractions occur as the result of optimization
processes driven by universal laws.
Localization
It seems obvious that abstraction plays a prominent role in
those brain domains that are responsible for conscious thinking
and human language processing, but it is also quite reasonable
to assume that abstraction mechanisms already work in more
basic layers of the brain’s functional architecture, in particular,
when processing sensomotoric informations. Here, one of the
most basic operations is visual pattern recognition, possibly
followed by identifying simultaneously occuring similar pat-
terns. The occurence of patterns – or patterns of patterns –
is processed further by higher cognitive layers, associating
these patterns with objects or events. The same can be said
with respect to the parallel processing of other kinds of
sensomotoric input. A particular task of even higher layers is
to deﬁne or understand, respectively, categories of perceived
objects, like “animal”, “cat” vs. “dog”, etc. This task is highly
abstractive as it requires to detect essential common features
and to neglect non-essential features of the objects; note that
whether some features are “essential” or not depends on the
underlying cognitive goal.
A further abstraction step is performed by creating category
labels, and yet another by handling category labels instead of

355
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
a variety of objects itself. From there, a much higher level
of abstraction is achieved by including structural relations
between categories or labels, respectively.
Some more words about the connection between abstraction
and understanding, creating, or handling categories, as this
connection is particularly strong: “The earliest theories of
category representation (e.g., rule based and prototype) tended
to view category knowledge as consisting of abstract informa-
tion that summarizes the central tendency across examples.
Rule-based theories and models hypothesize that category
representations consist of one or more rules or deﬁnitions that
can be be learned from experience ...” (Levering & Kurtz [27]).
It appears to be obvious that rules themselves are abstract in
its nature, even if they are physically represented. Gentner has
pointed out that the human smartness is connected with the
ability to create relational categories [21]. Relational properties
have to be extracted from structured representations of objects,
their attributes, and relations. The way this goes in comparison
and analogy is described in terms of structure-mapping by
Gentner et al. [28][29]. It seems to be natural that a similar
description might be given w.r.t. abstraction as a particular
form of structure-mapping.
Summarizing, it appears that abstraction processes are orga-
nized within a complex architecture that mirrors the functional
brain architecture itself.
C. Mathematical Abstraction
Thinking about mathematical abstraction, too, goes back to
Aristotle who, in “... the context of mathematics, ... uses the
term ‘abstraction’ (aphairesis) to refer to the act of ignoring
or disregarding matter and change from perceptible objects in
order to isolate their speciﬁcally mathematical characteristics
as distinct objects of thought” (Smith [13]). When talking
about mathematical abstraction a slightly broader view shall
be used; “mathematical abstraction” will refer to abstraction
processes connected with “understanding mathematics” or
“doing mathematics”, respectively. This means that the objects
of cognition themselves are representations of mathematical
objects or relations.
Formally, mathematical abstraction is often understood as a
(non-injective) mapping a, say, with a(x) beeing an abstraction
of x and, vice versa, each x with f(x) = y being an
instantiation of y. An early source of viewing it that way is
Rinkens [30]; more recently, this view is taken up in abstract
diagrammatic reasoning (Stapleton [31]).
Here, we have to be more speciﬁc w.r.t. the teaching
objectives. It will be distinguished between receptive, applica-
tive and creative abstraction.
Receptive abstraction refers
to individual brain activities that provide “understanding” of
abstract concepts that have been deﬁned beforehand by other
individuals. To the opposite, creative abstraction is concerned
with the construction of new mental representations without
external inspiration. Applied abstraction means to employ
abstract objects and relations, regardless whether these have
been created by other individuals or not. Accordingly, enhanc-
ing receptive abstraction is the primary concern of teaching,
where active and creative abstraction play an important role in
problem solving, which comes into the focus in the advanced
stages of teaching.
Although being complex, there are some particular aspects
of abstraction that can be isolated. The following activities
will be considered as basic aspects of abstraction:
• encapsulation:
i.e., to see a number of objects as a whole entitiy, e.g.,
to see
e
4x2
23x+17
as e
something
(2)
• symbolization:
i.e., introducing abstract referents (indices) for patterns
like expressions, relations, statements etc.; e.g.,
e
4x2
23x+17 = e a ,
(3)
• analogization:
i.e., identifying common features in different objects or
domains and creating a new object out of them, e.g.,
identifying the common property of squares, rectangles,
rhombus, etc., as being a quadrangle:
COMMON(square, rectangle, rhombus, ...) = quadrangle
• class formation:
i.e., encapsulation of a number of analogized objects, e.g.,
forming the class (or set) of quadrangles.
The following activities work upon a certain stock of pre-
established abstract objects:
• structural synthesis:
e.g., grouping separate objects x and y to a pair (x, y)
being considered as a new object
• object embedding:
i.e., seeing a particular object as an element of an appro-
priate category (set) in order to use category properties
rather than individual properties, e.g., as here:
e
4x2
23x+17 = e'(x)
(4)
In the example, the left hand superscript expression is
interpreted as evaluation of some differentiable function
'; hence, results for the whole class can be applied (e.g.,
the chain rule of differentiation).
• switching embedding levels:
i.e., embedding/outbedding in nested structures; e.g., the
changes of focus between a set and its elements.
Further abstraction operations work on structures on collec-
tions of objects rather than on objects itself:
• structural alignment
in the sense of a simultaneous encapsulation of objects

356
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
and their connecting structures, typically followed by a
symbolization.
Example: The expression
✓
1
7
3
5
◆
·
✓
2
8
9
4
◆
(5)
(with the dot denoting usual matrix multiplication) could
be seen as
something ◦ something’
or even more brieﬂy as
a ◦ b,
say, with a, b denoting some objects of some category
and ◦ denoting some operation, all of them still to be
speciﬁed;
• structure-object interchange:
that is, rendering structures, i.e., relations between differ-
ent objects, to encapsulated objects of consideration
• recursion:
i.e., establishing recursive structures within problems or
within problem solving strategies; e.g., when trying to
simplify the expression
A \ (B [ (A \ (B [ (A \ (B [ (A \ B)))))).
(6)
This enumeration is by no means complete, but may sufﬁce
for the purpose of this paper.
IV. THE ECONOMICS OF ABSTRACTION
As already mentioned, a signiﬁcant feature of creative
abstraction is to omit “unessential” details of the object under
consideration. However, what is “unessential” can vary heavily
with the underlying cognitive task. This can be observed in a
variety of domains and is particularly true in mathematics.
For example, the set of the real numbers, equipped with the
usual addition and multiplication, represents different abstract
objects at the same time, e.g., a vector space, a ring, a ﬁeld, etc.
Which property is “essential” clearly depends on the problem
under consideration. Typically, the choice of the appropriate
abstraction will ease the solution of a problem – the problem
can be solved with less mental effort, within less time, with
deeper insight in its nature, etc. Sometimes, it is even impos-
sible to solve a given problem without appropriate abstraction.
So far, this phenomenon is clearly a social experience of the
mathematical community, but on the other hand, it can be re-
experienced by each individual that deals with mathematical
problems.
Hence the author’s hypothesis: A latent aversion against
abstraction can be reduced by the individual experience of
“economic beneﬁts” when using abstraction.
V. ABSTRACTION AVERSITY
As mentioned, mathematics education is perceived as being
difﬁcult by many students. Often it is claimed that this is due to
the abstractness of mathematics. This does reﬂect an attitude of
restraint up to rejection towards abstractness. This may seem
a little bit puzzling as without the hierarchically abstractive
organization of brain functions there would be no human life.
However, many of the brain abstractions remain unconscious
or, at least, are not subject to conscious attention. That is,
the conscious mind seems to reject activities that are quite
basic for its very existence. However, there is evidence of such
phenomena. E.g., Medin and Ross write “We have repeatedly
demonstrated the limitations of people as abstract, deductive
reasoners and noted with chagrin the difﬁculty of producing
transfer of training or generalized problem-solving skills” [32].
While this statement refers to abstraction-related actions,
there is also rejection of abstraction before any action takes
place. Here is an example from the author’s teaching practice.
From time to time, the author uses to check whether the
students captured a given matter – by directly asking them
in the lecture. Often, the students have questions. In many
cases, the author can answer explaining the subject
• either by a concrete numerical example
• or by using symbolic notation (variables).
The students can choose between these possibilities by a
“ballot”, i.e., by by raising their hands in favor of one of these
two possibilities. In an auditory of about 500-600 people, the
number of hands cannot be counted exactly; however, it is
possible to obtain reasonably good estimates. In almost all
cases
• about 80% of the votes prefer the numerical example
• only 20% prefer a more abstract explanation.
This observation matches a statement of ¨Osterholm, saying
that the presence of symbols renders mathematical texts more
difﬁcult [33].
VI. WHAT CAN METACOGNITION DO?
When arguing that metacognition might help to accelerate
the acquisition of abstraction abilities, there should be some
justiﬁcation. After all, the possible use of metacognition in
education is not undisputed. Also, the relation of metacogni-
tion to abstraction should be considered. A pessimistic view
is offered by Hajek: “... the formation of a new abstraction
seems never to be the outcome of a conscious process, nor
something at which the mind can deliberately aim, but always
a discovery of something which already guides its operation”
[34]. However, the author’s experience with the metacognitive
support system CAT allows for some optimism, as shall be
seen below.

357
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A. Some educational experience
As alredy mentioned, coping with mathematics belongs
undoubtedly to the major challenges for many ﬁrst-year uni-
versity students. The author’s long run experience in teach-
ing basic mathematics courses for large numbers of future
economists at the University of Paderborn indicated that one
severe reason for the difﬁculties with mathematics is the lack
of adequate techniques – for studying in general, and for
coping with mathematics in particular.
As a remedy, the author started in 2010 to teach not
only mathematical subjects itself, but as well appropriate
strategies that allow to succcessfully deal with these subjects.
These strategies, summarized by the logo “CAT”, are rule
based and of metacognitive type. The rules, referred to as
Checklists, Ampel (german for trafﬁc lights) and Toolbox, do
not only address issues of a proper organization of the study
process, but rather the organization of concept understanding,
self assessment, and problem solving. As it is impossible to
account to all details here, the reader is referred to [2][3][4]
for a detailed description.
A distinctive feature of CAT is that teaching and exercising
working methods became integrated part of the regular
mathematics course. Already long before 2010, there had
been several attempts to support the students – e.g., by
offering them optional tutorials dealing with such methods.
But these offers failed to be effective as most of the students
did not take advantage of them. By introducing CAT in the
regular course, all students can optionally beneﬁt from this
offer; they can learn what these methods aim at, how they
work, judge them, and decide whether to employ them in
their own work.
“Reading Mathematics”
CAT’s major concern is to enable the students to read and
understand mathematical texts and expressions properly – from
the level of single signs, symbols, or words up to the level of
valid mathematical concepts. The way to go is described by
the Checklist “Reading” along ﬁve steps. This checklist is to
be used together with the student’s vocabulary – a written (and,
hopefully, mental) list that keeps track of all new deﬁnitions
and symbols. The ﬁve steps of the checklist are described in
Table I.
Basically, the ﬁrst two steps of the Checklist “Reading”
provide nothing but the lexical fundamentals of a concept.
Consider, e.g., the phrase
M := { n 2 N | 9m 2 N : n = 2m }.
(7)
In reasonably good course notes, all necessary ingredients are
provided before this phrase occurs; here, we assume that the
symbols “ := ”, “{...|...}”, “2”, “N”, “9”, and “:” have been
introduced beforehand. Clearly, the concept of sets has to be
understood before, too. Note that a student who arrives at
the above phrase when reading the course notes can easily
TABLE I. The Checklist ‘Reading’
S1: Spell
(Make sure to know the precise meaning/role
of each single symbol, sign, or word.)
S2: Read out
(Try to read out the full phrase as a spoken sentence.)
S3: Animate
(Provide examples, and non-examples, respectively.)
S4: Visualize
(Provide a graphical visualization, if appropriate.)
S5: Talk
(Give an explaining talk to others, including
questions and discussion.)
perform the steps S1 and S2 of the Checklist “Reading”, as
all mentioned pre-deﬁned ingredients can be imported from
the vocabulary. After doing so, the student might arrive at a
sentence like this:
(V1) M is deﬁned as the set of all natural numbers n
with the property that there exists a natural number m
such that n equals 2m.
One might think that such a – reasonably ﬂuent – verbalization
should reveal its meaning easily, hence the student should
generate at a brief description like
(V2) M is deﬁned as the set of all even natural numbers.
However, this is by far not true, as became evident from
written exams, see, e.g., Dietz & Rohde [35]. In an appropriate
task, about 50% of the students were able to provide a
reasonable “read out” analogous to (V1), but only 10% could
give a meaningful explanation like (V2) using their own words.
That is, a ﬂuent statement like (V1) does by far not guarantee
a deeper concept understanding. Hence, (V1) has still to be
followed by the steps S3, S4 and S5 of the Checklist “Reading”
in order to arrive at a valid mental concept. Note that the
mentioned results of the 2012 exams clearly indicate that many
students, although they had been taught these steps, did not
yet perform them in a satisfactory manner.
To henceforth support the students better in going through
these steps, the instrument of a Concept Base was introduced
– a kind of form sheet that augments the vocabulary entries
of a concept – key word, deﬁnition, denomination, “read
out”, syntax – by compliant extensions like examples,
non-examples (from S3), visualizations (from S4), useful
statements, and applications (from the ongoing progress in the
course). [4] gives an detailed account on how to perform these
steps, in particular, how to obtain examples and visualizations.
Empirical ﬁndings
It should be stressed again that the mentioned rules are
metacognitive in nature. Initially, these rules had been ex-
plained and exempliﬁed within the lectures solely, based on the
author’s belief in their immediate persuasiveness. However, it

358
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
turned out that this was not enough in order to change long-
term working habits. Therefore, after 2010 the implementation
and improvement of CAT was accompanied by several empir-
ical studies.
An initial qualitative study [5] gave rise to the persuasion
that metacognitive support, particularly for “reading mathe-
matics”, can be effective. From 2012 on, a quantitative pre-
study and a three-stage main study were conducted. Several
results are reported in [36] and [6]. The pre-study from 2012
showed clearly that, at that time, many students did not apply
the CAT methods. Several reasons for that could be found:
• Essentially, the students missed support by the tutors.
• They did often not understand how the methods apply.
• Many students widely underestimated their own need and
possible beneﬁt of these methods.
As a consequence, all components of the teaching process
– including tutorials, homework exercises, mentoring – have
successively been aligned in order to “live” CAT. The investi-
gations of the subsequent stages of the main study show that
these measures led to a considerable increase in the acceptance
of CAT. From [6] and from some yet unpublished data of the
main study one can see the following: Recently, the Checklist
Reading, Vocabulary, Toolbox, and Concept Base are ranked
to be helpful by large majorities of the students (between
63% and 84%) and – except for the Concept Base – these
tools are regularly used by the majority of students. Moreover,
most of the students do use concept bases at least sometimes.
Interestingly, many students esteem the helpfulness of these
instruments even higher (Table II).
TABLE II. Rating of the helpfulness of CAT’s instruments
Instrument
Percentage of students
of CAT
rating it “very helpful”
Checklist Reading
19.9
Vocabulary
38.5
Concept Base
16.4
Toolbox
32.2
As to the effects of CAT on the study success: At the
described level of exploitation, CAT turns out to be deﬁnitively
helpful for students with medium academic performance. In
this group of students, the use frequency of CAT is pos-
itively correlated with the success rate of the ﬁnal exam
and negatively correlated with the grades (1=‘very good’, 5
= ‘insufﬁcient’). Besides that, there are verbal comments of
students like “... put more effort on rendering concept bases,
as these are really important for own learning” (authors trans-
lation from german “mehr Aufwand auf die Erstellung von
Konzeptbasen legen, da diese wirklich wichtig zum eigenen
Lernen sind”).
Admittedly, the utilization of CAT by the students did
not yet reach the desired degree; in particular, the author
believes that a more intense use of concept bases could
promote deeper understanding a lot. The data from [6]
suggest that many students do overestimate the time effort
needed for utilizing concept bases. This problem might be
overcome in the future by providing better information for
the students. Further, both utilization and efﬁcacy of the
Ampel need to be substantially improved. But summarizing
the results obtained so far, the metacognitive support has
shown its potential to provide effective help for many students.
As to abstraction
In the same spirit, it appears that at least some aspects of
conscious abstraction are amenable to meta-instructions. Gold-
stone & Sakamoto state that “If abstracting deep principles
that cut across different domains is frequently valuable (see
Anderson, Reder, & Simon, 1996 and Barnett & Ceci, 2002
for defenses of this assumption), then it is likewise valuable
to ﬁnd ways to promote this abstraction” [37].
B. “Value added” by metacognition
The metacognitive rules provided by CAT, although exem-
pliﬁed in the context of a mathematics course, are by far not
bound to mathematics. Rather it appears that the provided
working techniques could easily apply in other domains as
well, with minor and obvious modiﬁcations. (This was at least
one of the basic intentions when initiating CAT.) There is
episodic evidence that some students applied Concept Bases
in other courses, too. However, so far the long run effects of
introducing CAT have not yet been investigated.
C. Metacognition as abstraction
It should be noted that metacognition itself is highly abstrac-
tive in its nature, because the rules of working and thinking
become objects of interest rather than the proper subjects
of the work and thinking. Of course, one may argue that
metacognition is part of the brain’s task management, which
seems to be undeniable. However, in the author’s opinion it
seems to be more natural to consider task priorization, task
ressource allocation, and time management as belonging to
task management, whereas rules are abstract in nature.
VII. OPERATIONAL ASPECTS OF ABSTRACTION
For the purposes of the project, we have to conﬁne ourselves
to selected aspects of abstraction. The selection takes into
account:
• the needs of abstraction within the course
• the degree of operationability
• the degree of observability.
Recall that we want to support problem understanding and
solving processes with the help of metacognitive abstraction
rules. These can be understood as rules that guide and structure
the working process rather than providing particular abstrac-
tion results. From this point of view, the focus will be on
such aspects of abstraction that appear to be in reach of such
metacognitive rules. Examples of such aspects are

359
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
• encapsulation/analogization/symbolization
• structuring
• recursion techniques and
• qualitative reasoning.
To illustrate the idea of abstraction meta-rules suppose that
the student’s problem under consideration is given by some
text, formula or so, henceforth called the document. The ﬁrst of
the forementioned abstraction aspects is closely related to the
visual input. Hence, the following meta-rules are suggested:
(R1) Provide a clear visual organization of the document.
(R2) Identify large substructures.
(If appropriate, put them into containers or symbolize
them, respectively.)
(R3) Identify similar patterns.
(If appropriate, symbolize them.)
(R4) Identify repetition indicators w.r.t. tasks or structures, re-
spectively.
(Try to use one solution for all repeated tasks and one
principle to work with repeated structures.)
For example, consider this task for students:
Task 1: Determine the operating minimum, given the fol-
lowing cost functions: 1) K1(x) := 4x2+15 x+42, x ≥ 0,
2) K2(x) := 242x2 + 72x + 117, x ≥ 0, ... 5) K5(x) :=
25x2 + 5x + 242, x ≥ 0.
Obviously, there are at least three different levels of abstraction
on which this task could be fulﬁlled. We call the least one level
(A0) Without any experience in abstraction-aided working, the
students would tend to solve each of the problems 1 to
5 individually, using only numerical computations. This
would imply to perform the corresponding ansatzes and
solving techniques altogether ﬁve times, and probably
some of the students would try to facilitate the computa-
tion somehow “on the way”.
We claim that by respecting the above rules progress to a
higher abstraction level could be promoted. Indeed, a better
visual organization of the task according to rule (R1) might
already change the document as follows:
Task 1: Determine the operating minimum, given the fol-
lowing cost functions:
1. K1(x) := 244 x2 + 15 x + 142, x ≥ 0
2. K2(x) := 242 x2 + 72 x + 117, x ≥ 0
...
...
5. K5(x) := 125 x2 + 15 x + 242, x ≥ 0.
From here, looking both at the ﬁve repetitions as proposed by
rule (R4) and at similar patterns as proposed by rule (R3), the
students might more easily see the uniform structure
K (x) :=
x2 +
x +
, x ≥ 0,
(8)
where the gray boxes symbolize containers with different
contents. According to (R4), we recommend to ﬁnd a uniﬁed
solution from here. Thus, it is appropriate to follow (R3) and
to symbolize the contents of the boxes as
K (x) := a x2 + b x + c x ≥ 0.
(9)
Thus, the next abstraction level is attained:
(A1) The problem is solved in a symbolic rather than numeric
way.
Using the symbolic approach, Task 1 can be solved at once,
yielding a result in terms of the parameters a, b and c. Then,
the desired ﬁve numerical results can easily be obtained by
just plugging in the appropriate numbers.
Note that working on level (A1) rather than on level (A0)
is quite obviously advantageous; it pays in time savings,
less error sensitivity, qualitative insights, and also aesthetics.
All these advantages can be experienced by the students
themselves and they might also stimulate them to try such
an approach again, when solving other problems. Analogous
meta-rules can be formulated for structuring and recursion
techniques, although there we shall need and exploit additional
syntactical guidelines.
Let us look at another example. Suppose we are in a context
where matrix multiplication was just introduced, deﬁned in
terms of abstract formulae and illustrated by numerical exam-
ples. No further rules of matrix multiplication have been given
yet. Now the students are given the following task:
Task 2: Decide whether these two terms describe one and
the same matrix:
✓ ⇣ 1
7
3
5
⌘
·
⇣ 2
8
9
4
⌘◆
·
⇣ 6
−1
0
11
⌘
and
⇣ 1
7
3
5
⌘
·
✓ ⇣ 2
8
9
4
⌘
·
⇣ 6
−1
0
11
⌘◆
.
It seems to be quite natural to answer this question directly by
simply calculating both double matrix products and obtaining
two equal results, namely
✓
390
331
306
433
◆
.
The situation changes if the same task is to be performed
again – either several times with different numbers or just
once, but with “uneasy” numbers – like in this (artiﬁcial)
example:
Task 2’: Decide whether these two terms describe one and
the same matrix:
✓ ⇣ 4263
7377
3521
5769
⌘
·
⇣ 74650
70294
19032
54280
⌘◆
·
⇣ 6279
5017
3592
2156
⌘
and
...

360
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Probably, some students might try again to apply numerical
calculations, using some calculators. Nevertheless, it becomes
plausible that the more effort an immediate calculation
requires, the bigger the incentive to look for a simpler, more
elegant, and typically more abstract solution. Some students
might see, along the lines described before, as structure like
that:
Task 2’: Decide whether these two terms describe one
and the same matrix:
(A ◦ B) ◦ C
and
A ◦ (B ◦ C).
So, the idea that associativity does also hold in matrix
multiplication, which was just introduced, might occur – at
least more easily than before.
At this point it should be stressed again that the initial
progress in dealing with both forementioned tasks is heavily
supported by our brain’s ability to identify structural properties
of the sensomotoric input, here more speciﬁcally: of the visual
input. Processing any text-based mathematical task starts with
processing its text. At a very raw level, even before reading
the symbols and making sense of them, one can view such a
text just like a picture. By doing so, one can detect structures
like clusters, straight lines or axes, or even nesting of patterns.
In our examples, the ideas governing abstraction are closely
connected with such properties.
Turning back to Task 2’, it remains to prove that this idea is
really true – with A, B, C being matrices and ”◦” representing
matrix multiplication ” · ”. It turns out that the attempt to do
so reveals the possibility to obtain further neat abstractions on
different levels.
To begin with, one has to understand that the following
identity has to be proved:
(A · B) · C = A · (B · C)
(10)
or brieﬂy
DL = DR
(11)
with DL := (A · B) · C and DR := A · (B · C). Note that
this idea involves a – more or less conscious – combined
encapsulation/symbolization operation.
The superﬁcially “easiest” version to prove (10) is bound
to matrix dimension (2,2) by writing
A =
⇣ a
b
c
d
⌘
, B =
⇣ f
g
h
j
⌘
, C =
⇣
k
l
m
n
⌘
,
say, and performing the necessary calculations symbolically.
So one ﬁnds that
DL
11 = (af + bh)k + (ag + bj)m = DR
11;
analogously one shows that it holds
DL
ij = DR
ij
for all relevant pairs (i, j) of indices. Thus (11) is established.
Again the solution is found by passing to abstraction level
(A1). Its advantage is being valid for all (2,2) - matrices,
irrespective of concrete numeric values.
Nevertheless, one may argue that this solution is still too
laborious. Suppose one agrees upon this point of view. Then,
it is time to look for another approach that might be more
effective – i.e., more economic. Again, it turns out that this
objective is attained via abstraction: The solution is promoted
by CAT’s Toolbox concept mentioned above. The ﬁrst tools to
be placed in the Toolbox when trying to prove anything are the
necessary deﬁnitions. As assumed, the product of two matrices
A and B of dimensions (L, M) and (M, N), respectively, was
deﬁned symbolically, namely to be the (L, N) matrix H with
entries
Hij =
M
X
m=1
aimbmj
(12)
(i = 1, ..., L; j = 1, ..., N); one uses the notation H =: A · B.
Now, in order to prove (10) by referring to this deﬁnition,
one has to show that
N
X
n=1
M
X
m=1
almbmncnp =
M
X
m=1
N
X
n=1
almbmncnp
(13)
holds for any matrices A, B and C of dimensions (L, M),
(M, N) and (N, P), with L, M, N, P 2 N, respectively, and
for all l 2 {1, ..., L}, P 2 {1, ..., P}, respectively. Note that it
is quite straightforward to prove (13) by just exploiting the
rules for addition and multiplication of real numbers. But,
according to the author’s experience, many students don’t
understand that (13) proves (10) right away. The reason for
that lies in the fact that connecting (10), (13), and (12) involves
a nested structural embedding; in particular, one and the same
symbol – H – has to be identiﬁed subsequently with A · B,
(AB) · C, B · C, and A(B · C). That is, a targeted training of
such operations might be quite desirable.
To summarize: Starting from abstraction level (A1) in
connection with the desire for a higher working economy
and guided by metacognitive instructions like Toolbox and
abstraction rules, a higher degree of sophistication is attained.
This higher degree of sophistication can be understood as a
price that has to be paid in order to answer an initially simple
question – but this price pays multiply, not only as proving
(13) is that straightforward, but even more as, in the end, this
solution of the initial task becomes quite easy and, moreover,
provides a deeper conceptual insight into the matrix calculus.
Qualitative reasoning
Now what about qualitative reasoning? This refers to ab-
straction level
(A2) This level of abstraction is achieved when referring to
more general – and thus more abstract – classes of objects
when solving a given problem.

361
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Here, there are two main directions of interest: First, the
mathematical generalization; the second direction might be
called “economic generalization”.
Mathematical generalization: Here, the more general classes
of objects are deﬁned within mathematics.
Consider, e.g., the following task:
Task 3: Determine
min
D f
✓
= min
x2D f(x)
◆
(14)
for a given differentiable function f on some interval D. As
long as f is described by a computable expression as, e.g., in
Task 1 or in (9), it can be assumed that most of the students
would try to run a standard approach by solving f 0(x) = 0 for
x and reasoning about the solution(s) that have been found (if
so), possibly by additionally inspecting the boundary points
of D.
However, a more abstract point of view is taken if they try to
ﬁgure out whether f obeys some useful qualitative properties.
E.g., if it can easily be seen that f is increasing, there is no
point in trying to solve f 0(x) = 0; instead it is known in
advance that if min f exists it is attained in the left boundary
of D. Similarly, if one knows that f is convex than one also
knows that each local minimum of f is automatically global
– saving energy, e.g., when reasoning about the number and
types of solutions of f 0(x) = 0.
Note that this kind of viewing the problem requires the
readiness to invest some more abstract thoughts before
starting to really tackle the problem; however, in many cases
this investment will pay. In addition, the initial investment
will not be that expensive, because the students do have some
quite easy tests for mononocity and convexity at hand.
Economic generalization:
In modern economics one considers classes of functions
named “cost functions”, “production functions”, “utility func-
tions”, etc., often in combination with qualitative attributes
like being “neoclassic”. Intrinsically, these classes and at-
tributes, respectively, can be deﬁned in terms of mathematical
properties. At the same time, they obey a strong economic
signiﬁcance. To be able to reason in terms of these notions –
and thus on the second abstraction level – is quite valuable
for ongoing economists.
Returning to Task 1, the students might enter level (A2) by
observing that each K is a neoclassic cost function. Thus, the
operating minimum – as the minimum average variable costs -
is nothing but the limit of the average variable costs as x # 0.
Now it is quite easy to obtain the same results as above.
Clearly, to step here from level (A1) is quite complex and
requires a solid theoretical background. It is clear that to work
on this level cannot – and shall not – be trained before this
solid theoretical background was laid out. But provided this
was done, a corresponding meta-rule could be
(R5) Try to work in economic categories rather than with nu-
meric examples.
To follow this rule, the students need a very clear overview
over the mathematical tools at their disposal. This overview is
supported by the toolbox concept as described in [3].
VIII. THE PROJECT
The forementioned meta-rules can only brought to life by
an intense training that shows how to use them and how
they can help to re-structure ones own work in order to gain
more progress within the same time. We intend to test and to
improve corresponding training measures within a voluntary
project group. These measures should
• positively change the students’ attitude towards abstrac-
tion
• increase the aceptance of (at least passive) abstraction
• enhance the ability of active abstraction
• enrich the regular teaching process.
The project group shall be constituted by random choice
from a set of voluntary applicants, hence there shall be an
untreated control group as well. The only incentive for par-
ticipating shall be the perspective of being able to cope better
with mathematics, but no examen credits shall be promised.
As to the program: Before and after the series of proper
training units we shall perform guideline based interviews as
well as observed and videotaped working sessions. Through
appropriately designed tasks, it shall be observed whether
the students become more apt to understand and use abstract
approaches than before. The training sessions shall focus on
the different aspects of abstraction, as mentioned above. Tasks
1 – 3 might serve as a possible examples: First, before the
training starts, the students are asked to solve a task of this
kind by their own. Their approaches and solutions are observed
and video documented. After that, we introduce the meta-rules
and explain how they work in these and other examples. It
will be important to address the beneﬁts of using abstract
approaches as well. The students will be given a series of
example tasks, with the help of which they can exercise their
ability in pracising the meta-rules. At the end of the training
sessions, the students shall be given another set of tasks,
and again their approaches and solutions are documented.
Ideally, there shall be a tendency to work on a (slightly) higher
abstraction level as at the beginning of the training. It can be
expected that this effect will be the more signiﬁcant the more
the students can gain positive own experience.
IX. CONCLUSION
In large and heterogeneous basic mathematics courses
students need support to manage mathematical abstraction.
The paper described some particular aspects of mathematical
abstraction that, so the author’s hypothesis, can be trained

362
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
with the help of metacognitive rules. As a justiﬁcation of this
hypothesis it is shown that metacognitive rules already have
proved to be helpful in another context, i.e., in supporting
“reading mathematics” and problem solving. In addition, some
examples of metacognitive rules that address abstraction are
provided. Further a framework for an appropriate ﬁeld study in
order to investigate the possible effects of a metacognitive-rule
based training of mathematical abstraction was presented.
Although performing such a ﬁeld study as well as adjusting
the training instruments is subject to future work, the present
discussion might be inspiring for those that intend to deal
with mathematical abstraction as a human cognitive ability, in
particular by supporting abstraction in mathematics education.
REFERENCES
[1] H. M. Dietz, “Metacognitive support of mathematical abstraction pro-
cesses.” COGNITIVE 2016: The Eighth International Conference on
Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications, pp. 62–65, 2016,
ISBN: 978-1-61208-462-6.
[2] ——, “CAT – a Model for In-teaching Methodical Support for Novices.
(in german; original title: CAT – Ein Modell f¨ur lehrintegrierte studi-
enmethodische Unterst¨utzung von Studienanf¨angern,” in Biehler, R. et
al. (Eds.), Teaching and Learning Mathematics in the Transition Phase
(in german; original title: Lehren und Lernen von Mathematik in der
Studieneingangsphase).
Springer, 2015, pp. 131–147.
[3] ——, Mathematics for Economists · The ECOMath Handbook. (in
german, original title: Mathematik fuer Wirtschaftswissenschaftler · Das
ECOMath Handbuch).
Springer Gabler, Heidelberg et. al., 2012.
[4] ——, Semiotics in Reading Maths, in Kadunz, G. (ed.), Semiotic Per-
spectives of Learning Mathematics (in german, original title: Semiotis-
che Perspektiven auf das Lernen von Mathematik), Springer, Heidelberg,
2015, part IV, chapter 1, pp. 185–203.
[5] H. M. Dietz and J. Rohde, “Methodological study support for ﬁrst
semester students in service mathematics.” Beitr¨age zum Mathematikun-
terricht, 2012, (In german; german title: Studienmethodische Un-
terst¨utzung f¨ur Erstsemester im Mathematikservice.).
[6] F. Feudel and H. M. Dietz, “Teaching study skills in mathematics service
courses - how to cope with students’ refusal?” Teaching Mathematics
and its Applications, 2016, (submitted).
[7] J. Piaget, El nacimiento de la inteligencia en el nino. Critica, Barcelona,
1975 (1985).
[8] E. Dubinsky, Reﬂective Abstraction in Advanced Mathematical Thinking,
chapter 7 in: Tall, D. (Ed.), Advanced Mathematical Thinking, Kluwer,
Dordrecht, 1991, pp. 195-126.
[9] D. Tall, Ed., Advanced Mathematical Thinking.
Kluwer, Dordrecht et
al., 1991.
[10] I. Arnon, et al. APOS Theory. A Framework for Research and Curricu-
lum Development in Mathematics Education.
Springer, New York et
al., 2014.
[11] G.-M. Greuel, R. Remmert, and G. Rupprecht, Eds., Mathematics -
Driving Force of Business (in german, original title: Mathematik - Motor
der Wirtschaft).
Springer, Jan. 2008.
[12] K. Devlin, Introduction to Mathematical Thinking.
Devlin, Petaluma,
2012.
[13] A. J. Smith, Aristotle on Abstraction. Ph.D. Thesis. The Johns Hopkins
University, Baltimore, 2010.
[14] B. Hershkowitz, B. Schwarz, and T. Dreyfus, Abstraction in context:
Epistemic actions, in: N. Seel (Ed.), Encyclopedia of the Sciences of
Learning Vol. 32, No.2, New York: Springer, 2012, pp. 195-222.
[15] C. Eliasmith, How to build a brain: a neural architecture for biological
cognition.
Oxford Univ. Press, 2013.
[16] J. Fodor, Ed., The Language of Thought.
Crowell, New York, 1975.
[17] D. Rumelhart and J. McClelland, Parallel distributed processing: Explo-
rations in the microstructure of cognition.
MIT Press/Bradford Books,
Cambridge M.A., 1986, vol. Number 1.
[18] J. Anderson, The adaptive character of thought.
Routledge, New York,
1990.
[19] J. Tenenbaum and T. Grifﬁths, “Generalization, similarity, and Bayesian
inference,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences, vol. 24, pp. 629–641, 2001.
[20] T. Grifﬁths and J. Tenenbaum, “Optimal predictions in everyday cogni-
tion,” Psychological Science, vol. 17, pp. 767–773, 2006.
[21] D. Gentner, “Why we are so smart,” Rumelhart Prize Talk, 2016 Annual
Meeting of the Cognitive Science, Philadelphia, August 12, 2016.
[22] J. Anderson, D. Bothell, M. Byrne, S. Douglass, C. Lebiere, and Y. Qin,
“An integrated theory of the mind,” Psychological Review, vol. 111, No.
4, 2004.
[23] L. Schulz, N. Goodman, J. Tenenbaum, and A. Jenkins, “Going beyond
the evidence: Abstract laws and preschoolers? Responses to anomalous
data.” Cognition, vol. 109 (2), pp. 211–223, 2008.
[24] J. Skorstad, D. Gentner, and D. Medin, “Abstraction processes during
concept learning: A structural view.” in Proceedings of the Tenth Annual
Conference of the Cognitive Science Society. Cognitive Science Society,
1988, pp. 419–425.
[25] D. H. Ballard, Brain Computation as Hierarchical Abstraction.
MIT
Press, Cambridge, Jan. 2015.
[26] R. N. Shepard, “Toward a universal law of generalization for psycho-
logical science,” Science, New Series, vol. 237, No. 4820, pp. 1317 –
1323, 1987.
[27] K. Levering and K. Kurtz, Generalization in Higher Order Cognition.
Taylor & Francis Group, New York and Hove, 2010, pp. 175 – 197.
[28] A. D. Markman and D. Gentner, “Structure mapping in the comparison
process,” American Journal of Psychology, vol. 113 (4), pp. 501– 538,
2000.
[29] D. Gentner, “Structure-mapping: A theoretical framework for analogy,”
Cognitive Science, vol. 7, pp. 155 – 170, 1983.
[30] H. D. Rinkens, Abstraktion und Struktur. Grundbegriffe der Mathematik-
didaktik (in German).
Henn Verlag, Ratingen, 1973.
[31] G. Stapleton, “Reaoning with constraint diagrams,” 2004, Ph.D. thesis,
University of Brighton.
[32] D. L. Medin and B. H. Ross, The Speciﬁc Character of Abstract
Thought: Categorization, Problem Solving, and Induction, in Sternberg
R.J. (Ed.), Advances in the Psychology of Human Intelligence Vol. 5,
Lawrence Erlbaum, Hillsdale, 1989, pp. 189-223.
[33] M. ¨Osterholm, “Characterizing reading comprehension of mathematical
texts.” Educational Studies in Mathematics, vol. 63, pp. 325–346, 2006.
[34] F. Hajek, New Studies in Philosophy, Politics, Economics, and the
History of Ideas.
Routledge & Kegan Paul, London, 1978.
[35] H. M. Dietz and J. Rohde, “Adventures in Reading Maths,” in Petersburg
Department of V.A. Steklov Institute of Mathematics of the Russian
Academy of Science (Ed.): Philosophy, Mathematics, Linguistics: As-
pects of Interaction (PhML 2012). Proceedings of the International
Scientiﬁc Conference St. Petersburg, May 22-25, 2012, pp. 61–68.
[36] F. Feudel, “Studienmethodische F¨orderung in der Mathematik f¨ur
Wirtschaftswissenschaftler - Chancen und Schwierigkeiten.” Beitr¨age
zum Mathematikunterricht, 2015.
[37] R. L. Goldstone and Y. Sakamoto, “The transfer of abstract principles
governing complex adaptive systems,” Cognitive Psychology, vol. 46,
pp. 414 – 466, 2003.

