300
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Innovation and Creativity in HCI Education 
 
Alma L. Culén  
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
E-mail: almira@ifi.uio.no 
 
 
Abstract—The present paper explores what creative thinking 
and design thinking could contribute to Human-Computer 
Interaction (HCI) education if included as a part of the 
curriculum. The investigations were carried out in the context 
of a mixed undergraduate and graduate course in HCI. The 
findings indicate that design thinking contributed to increased 
focus on innovation and creativity, as well as prevented too 
early fixation on a single solution in the initial phases of HCI 
design processes. More openness in design processes and 
changes in ways of learning required stepping out of the 
comfort zone for some students. However, increased creativity 
and adaptability may still be the best long-term benefits that 
HCI education can offer to students when preparing them for 
future work practices. The paper also addresses the 
organization of the course that, based on the empirical 
evidence from the past two years, fosters such processes in HCI 
education. 
Keywords-innovation; creativity; design thinking; HCI 
education. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
This paper is an extended version of the paper [1], 
presented at the Advancements in Human-Computer 
Interaction (ACHI 2015) conference. It, like its conference 
version, discusses the role of innovation, design thinking, 
and creativity in Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) 
education.  
HCI is an interdisciplinary field drawing from diverse 
disciplines, including computer science, psychology, media 
studies, and design. Historically, the field developed in the 
early 80s as a specialty area in computer science, embracing 
cognitive science and human factors engineering. Although 
it has undergone strong development over the past three 
decades, it is still taught at computer science departments 
worldwide, usually as part of the core computer science 
curriculum. After graduation, the students who chose HCI 
focus during their studies tend to pursue many different 
paths, ranging from seeking further education and aiming 
for research careers to practicing interaction design, often 
also in design consultancies, or working as information 
system developers. Preparing such students for their future 
work is challenging. In addition to the diversity of career 
paths that they can choose, they always need to relate to 
changing technologies, interaction modes, and interfaces. 
These, in turn, affect people’s work and leisure practices 
that HCI professionals design for. So, how and what to 
teach HCI students that will help them to have successful 
carriers? 
HCI students, on the one hand, need to learn appropriate 
theories and research methods, as well as understand state-
of-the-art research and the importance of scientific rigor and 
relevance. However, being a profoundly interdisciplinary 
field, HCI does not offer any unifying core theories, so this 
goal is hard to achieve once and for all. For example, 
entering a new application domain often requires the 
acquisition of new knowledge, understanding of the state-
of-the-art research, as well as the ability to develop domain 
and context specific tools, techniques, and methods. Thus, 
constant learning is likely to be a part of the career path. 
On the other hand, students need to be able to design 
new technologies and interfaces, using diverse design 
approaches, and usually, without any formal training in 
design. This is, in part, why design processes in HCI often 
depend heavily on engaging users and other stakeholders in 
participatory and co-design processes, described by Muller 
as the third space of HCI, see [2]. Participatory approaches 
that involve users and stakeholders in design processes are 
undoubtedly valuable, but they also carry with them certain 
limitations. For example, HCI design practitioners, in a co-
design situation, share the design responsibility with 
participants, whom they often rely on as domain experts. 
Thus, the choice of participants may influence the quality of 
the results. As these results (prototypes), are frequently not 
intended to become use artifacts, but are tied to some 
research objectives, this is often not seen as problematic. 
This focus on research objective, in contrast to making a 
new artifact for use, reflects the major difference in 
approach to design between HCI and interaction design as 
taught in design educations. The latter, while utilizing 
human-centered approach, also relies on design practices 
that imply more open and creative approaches to design 
situations, with intent to make a novel product for use. The 
question we started investigation for this paper was: could 
HCI students benefit from the inclusion of design thinking 
and designerly practices as part of their HCI curriculum? If 
so, what kind of benefits/challenges would this yield? 
Drawing on insights from the work presented here and 
our previous work [3]–[6], this paper argues that teaching 
about innovation, and engaging students in creative 
innovation processes such as design thinking, offers one 
possible answer to what kind of knowledge and skills the 
students could be taught in HCI. Adopting this approach 
may be successful in a long run because, while on the road 
to becoming an innovator within a design team, one usually 
experiences creativity (one’s own or that of others) and need 
to adapt to new situations. Creativity and adaptability may 

301
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
offer 
greater 
permanent 
value 
to 
human-computer 
interaction education than many other kinds of knowledge 
and skills commonly considered to be part of HCI 
education. As reported in [5], all ten students in a graduate 
HCI course that made use of design thinking processes 
perceived themselves to be non-creative individuals at the 
beginning of the course. At the end of the course, all 
(excepting one student who felt neutral) stated that the 
design thinking affected them and that they now see 
themselves as more creative and confident in their skills. 
Thus, on a basic issue of whether the creativity can be 
taught, we can say that with proper tools and support, 
creativity can, at least, be nurtured [5]. We also observed an 
increased interest in invention among HCI students who 
participated in the course. 
An additional indication that cultivating creativity could 
be a valuable asset was provided through a survey 
conducted at the end of a combined bachelor-master course 
in the fall of 2014. All design teams (18 teams in total, 3-4 
students on each team) who participated in the class 
completed the survey. All teams reported that they now see 
HCI design as a creative process, and provided qualitative 
statements related to their experience of individual and 
group creativity. Some of these are presented later, in the 
discussion section of this paper. 
In summary, the question this paper tries to answer is: 
what kind of knowledge and skills should be passed onto 
new generations of HCI students? While the complete 
answer remains elusive (many discussions around the HCI 
curriculum are already going on [7], [8]), our experience 
from the past two years of including design thinking and 
innovation (or, more precisely, increased focus on 
invention) in the curriculum shows that these benefit HCI 
students significantly. More open and creative processes 
seem to change how students that take part in such 
processes perceive themselves as HCI practitioners, and 
secondly, how they understand design processes, practices, 
and approaches to innovation.   
The paper is structured as follows: the next section offers 
some arguments as to why HCI education should include 
innovation and creative thinking. In Section III, we show 
how these elements were introduced in a mixed bachelor-
master HCI course. Discussion of the case is presented in 
Section IV, followed by the conclusion in Section V. 
II. 
FOCUSING ON INNOVATION 
The ACM SIGCHI Curricula for Human-Computer 
Interaction defines Human-computer interaction as "a 
discipline concerned with the design, evaluation, and 
implementation of interactive computing systems for human 
use and with the study of major phenomena surrounding 
them", see Hewett et al. [9]. Teaching HCI typically 
includes the teaching of user-centered requirements 
analysis, design and prototyping, implementation, a design 
of experiments and evaluation. HCI's interdisciplinarity 
brings with it tensions between the breadth and the depth of 
teaching, diverse theories and practices, including the choice 
between contributing to science or to design (of new 
interfaces, products, services or interaction modes). Despite 
these tensions, HCI education is very much alive and doing 
well in practice, although still without generally agreed 
upon curricula. 
Innovation, on the other hand, is known to be hard to 
achieve in practice, while it is very easy to understand the 
need for it, and the benefits it brings, see [10]. There are 
various ways to define innovation. The Oslo Manual [11] 
defines it as: “the implementation of a new or significantly 
improved product (good, or service) or process, a new 
marketing method, or a new organizational method in 
business practices, workplace organization, or external 
relations.” 
It is difficult to teach students to be innovative, creative 
and inventive. In particular, it is not easy to make good 
instructional frameworks for doing so. The processes related 
to innovation rely heavily on creativity, but also on both 
existing knowledge and on technical skills that are already 
present among the members of the design team and those 
whom they choose to include in the design processes. In 
particular, it is hard to define learning outcomes for such 
processes. 
Within HCI, the creativity component is usually, at least 
partially, bypassed by two things: the framing of the process 
as a procedure that everyone can follow on the one hand, 
and relying on users and their participation in different 
stages of design processes on the other hand. The ‘typical’ 
design process consists of developing an understanding of 
the contextual domain first, and second, concretizing this 
understanding through practical work that involves iterative 
prototype design and evaluation, often in co-creation with 
users and other stakeholders. However, designerly and 
creative practices, a core activity of innovative design [12], 
[13] are, as already mentioned, harder to frame. 
Purposefully managed innovation through design and 
creativity has been advocated in many different ways [14]. 
Design thinking is one of those options. Understanding 
design thinking is not straightforward. In [15, p. 13], 
Kimbell offers three different ways of understanding design 
thinking: as a cognitive style, as a general theory of design, 
or as an organizational resource. The last understanding 
lends itself well as an approach to innovation and real-life 
problem solving through human-centered design, employing 
empathy with users, rapid prototyping and abductive 
thinking as its main components. This understanding of 
design thinking has strongly impacted innovation in 
business, education, health and other crucial domains, see 
[12], [13], [16]–[18]. Many examples of how businesses and 
organizations could benefit from incorporating design 
thinking into their work and organizational processes were 
given in Brown’s book [19], making design thinking into an 
efficient innovation engine emphasizing observation, 
collaboration, fast learning, visualization of ideas, rapid 
concept prototyping, synthesis and concurrent business 
analysis. 
However, no approach solves all problems. Thus, only a 
few years after design thinking made a breakthrough in the 
world of business strategy and management, its limitations 
were brought forth in works such as Collins and 
McCullagh’s works [20], [21]. The point made by 

302
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Nussbaum in [22], though, hits home best: “From the 
beginning, the process of design thinking was a means to 
deliver creativity. But in order to appeal to the business 
culture of process, it has on occasion been reduced to a 
more linear process—presumably to eliminate the mess, 
conflict, failure, emotions, and iteration that are part and 
parcel of the creative process. In a few companies, CEOs 
and managers accepted that mess along with the process, 
and real innovation took place.” In short, the core of 
innovation is creativity, a messy and unstructured process. 
By framing design thinking in a particular, linear way, the 
creativity becomes limited, leading, in turn, towards failure 
to innovate. 
Simultaneously, concerns are being raised around the 
failure of design processes currently applied within the field 
of HCI to support more radical innovation [3]. In particular, 
HCI design processes are held to lead mainly to incremental 
innovation and small changes. Innovation, radical or 
incremental, is a much more complex process than the 
design and invention of new products, systems, or 
interaction modes. It implies also their acceptance and use 
by people [11]. Upon careful consideration of design 
practices within HCI, one could argue that invention is 
common. However, a very small percentage of those 
inventions (prototypes) ever become finished products, and 
an even smaller percentage is adopted and used, see [4], 
[23]. 
Design thinking is only one approach to design, but it 
may be the one that is particularly suitable for non-designers 
and for multi-disciplinary collaboration. It employs, in part, 
steps similar to those often proposed in HCI: it frames its 
process in ways that have familiar overtones to those used in 
HCI, see Fig. 1. 
 
Figure 1.  A process that may seem familiar to HCI students, as well as to 
those using design thinking. The image is adapted from [24]. 
Arguably, differences between design thinking and HCI 
should be sought by other means than comparing high-level 
design processes. One needs to consider differences in the 
assumptions, scope and aim of the design process – 
concerning, for instance, the role of research, the 
requirements specification, the questioning of assumptions, 
the consideration of organizational issues and the systematic 
exploration of design alternatives.  
Design thinking stands on three main pillars: empathy 
with users and human-centeredness, rapid prototyping to 
generate a large number of alternatives in order to solve the 
correct problem rather than any given problem correctly (the 
creative part), and last, but not least, their synthesis leading 
to the best viable and feasible solutions that incorporate 
desired values, see Fig. 2 and [17].  
IDEO [25], a design and innovation consultancy, has 
streamlined the process shown in Fig. 1 and made a 60 
minutes version of it available to all, also non-designers. 
Although their process appears to be simple and short, its 
power rests on its capacity to initiate deeper engagement 
with the problem space and allow for organizational 
changes that support the engagement and creativity initiated 
by those short processes.  
 
 
Figure 2.    The solutions emerging from design thinking should be 
desirable, feasible and viable, i.e., belong to the intersection of the three. 
 
As mentioned in the Introduction, HCI students need to 
master diverse types of knowledge and gain practical design 
experience. They are also expected to produce or develop 
new knowledge. In [26], Owen proposes a model for dual 
nature of knowledge production as depicted in Fig. 3.  
 
 
Figure 3.  The dual nature of knowledge building, from Owen, [26].   
Within interaction design, as practiced by HCI 
professionals, the research (finding, discovery) and design 
(prototyping, making) are often intertwined, involving 
knowledge of techne (programing, digital crafting), 
episteme (theoretical grounding) and phronesis (practical 
design knowledge). Production of new knowledge within 
these three (or any similar distinctions between knowledge 
forms) is also expected from students, especially those who 
are more advanced in their studies. Multiple roles that an 
interaction design student often assumes in any given 

303
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
project (that of a researcher, a designer, a programmer, or a 
crafter) further obscure the clarity of what this new 
knowledge is. In addition, he/she may have personal biases 
towards, or different levels of expertise in, either research, 
programming or design [27].  
Fig. 3 makes another important point: realms of theory 
and practice are seldom balanced in a field. Papadimitriou’s 
paper [28] discusses this topic in relation to the field of 
databasis; it considers the relation between theory and 
practice in the databases, summarizing what a good theory 
is and how applied science looks like during the ‘normal’ 
phase (referring to Khun’s view on the structure of scientific 
revolution [29]). Papadimitriou searches for the equivalent 
of the concept of ‘crises’ in a non-natural, applied science 
field. As a possible contender, he proposes the lack of 
connectedness between theory and practice in the field of 
data basis. This is visually represented by a directed graph 
with very few paths connecting communities focusing on 
theoretical knowledge and those focusing on practical 
knowledge. At the same time, the theoretical community, as 
well as the practice-based community, had strong internal 
connections.  
Similar arguments are true for HCI and its education. If 
the knowledge circle in Fig. 3 was further divided into 
diverse knowledge forms it would become even more 
transparent that there are too few connections between 
discovery and invention. A demand that the knowledge is 
relevant and rigorous exists within both discovery and 
invention. However, different criteria of relevance and rigor 
apply to different knowledge forms whose purposes, 
processes and contexts are also different [30], [31].  
Navigating this landscape is particularly challenging for a 
novice HCI practitioners and interaction designers, HCI 
students among them, who wish to use HCI design and 
research through design approach, see [32] and [33], and 
who need to address knowledge production related to all 
these diverse knowledge forms and establish both relevance 
and rigor in their work. 
So, why make the teaching of HCI, even more, 
complicated by explicitly introducing creative thinking, 
using design thinking and innovation? 
III. 
THE CASE: TEACHING HCI WITH A CREATIVE WREE 
A. Previous Classroom Experiences with Design Thinking  
During the fall semester of 2013 two student project 
teams, from a combined bachelor-master course in 
interaction design, were introduced to design thinking. 
These teams worked with the design of new services for the 
University Library. They were introduced to design thinking 
and participated in workshops using service design methods 
and tools, such as service design cards, touch points and 
customer journeys, see [34].  
Besides, during the same semester, a small graduate 
course of ten students, mentioned in the introduction, 
adopted the design thinking approach and studio-based 
teaching. There, three student groups were taught about 
design thinking and focused explicitly on nourishing 
creativity [5], [6]. They were also required to read articles 
like [33], [35]–[39], to gain a deeper understanding of 
research through design and designerly practices. In 
addition, successful examples of applications of design 
thinking were discussed [17], as was the work reflecting on 
the design practice and possibilities for understanding daily 
practices as a design material, see [30], [40].  
Experiences from both classes strongly indicated that 
cultivation of creative thinking and making have a potential 
to contribute positively to the teaching of HCI.  
B. The Course Setup 
The teaching approach that we argue for in this paper 
was applied in the context of a combined bachelor-master 
course in interaction design. The course in question teaches 
traditional HCI research methods, using the textbook [41], 
and has two prior HCI courses as prerequisites. In addition 
to teaching research methods through lectures and small 
group learning sessions, the course aims to address real-
world problems by offering a semester-long project in 
cooperation with external, local organizations. Usually, ten 
or more organizations (or large, funded research projects) 
are involved, offering two distinct project proposals each. 
Students, in small design teams of 3-4, select one of the 
proposals, based on a first-come-first-serve basis. The 
project work is, thus, anchored in the real needs of local 
companies and organizations. Sometimes, these needs are 
not clearly formulated. Rather, a company wishes to renew 
its offerings and engages student teams in looking for new, 
open and creative solutions. Some student teams have 
experienced such open requests as challenging. The insight 
that demand for novel and creative solutions could be 
challenging was gained through observation that proposals 
with a narrow scope and clear goals were almost always 
selected first while explorative problems were chosen last.  
The students in the course were further supported (or 
challenged) in their learning efforts as follows: they were 
free to make mixed master-bachelor student groups, but 
master students needed to have a deeper focus on 
knowledge and knowledge production. Thus, they were 
required to read, understand, and actively apply previous 
research related to their projects. This implied finding 
published research of high quality and discerning its 
relevance to their projects. Both master and bachelor 
students needed to find examples of relevant previous 
design work. Furthermore, all teams had regular, hour-long 
design feedback sessions during the conceptual design and 
prototyping phases of the project (usually during the first 4-
5 weeks). One senior researcher and a representative of a 
company, for which the students were designing, were 
required to participate in these sessions. Also, all groups 
made in-class, midterm presentations of their design efforts. 
The presentations were open to anyone, from interested 
organizations to other faculty members, professional 
designers, and junior students. They were also available 
online, see [42].  
The course ended with a juried competition for the best 
student project, again with open access to the event. An 
independent jury consisting of three judges, recruited among 
HCI, design, and pedagogy professionals, judged the 

304
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
contest. Criteria for the jury were: novelty, clarity of 
presentation, the potential impact of the designed prototype 
(its relevance), validation of the prototype with users and 
the overall impression of the project work. This exact setup 
has been run for three consecutive years and has included a 
survey at the end of each semester. The surveys were 
individual and optional previously, focusing on cooperation 
with industry and research partners. Last year’s survey was 
filled by all design teams and included questions about 
creativity, group or individual, and how design processes 
were affected by the introduction of creative and design 
thinking.  
Although the course addresses real-life problems, which 
in non-academic settings would likely be solved by 
multidisciplinary teams, multidisciplinarity was not always 
possible to achieve in the context of this university course. 
In other words, teams could not invite others whose 
expertise could contribute significantly to the quality of 
designs and prototypes (for example, a highly skilled 
programmer, designer or engineer). Multidisciplinarity was 
anchored in the skills and knowledge that students had in 
addition to HCI, such as psychology, graphic design, or arts 
and in skills and knowledge of those that they collaborated 
with, such as librarians, museum professionals, software 
developers and others from participating organizations. 
Students were encouraged to understand the assemblages of 
skills and knowledge that they had within the team, and 
consequently organize work so that their skills could be 
used well, but also so that they could learn the most, from 
each other, organizations they worked with, and senior 
researchers.  
C. The Use of Creative Thinking and Innovation 
The teams were free to choose and follow an approach 
of their choice, as long as they complied with general course 
requirements described above. The challenge was how to 
best support the creativity within each team. A lecture on 
creative thinking and design thinking was given at the start 
of the course, introducing concepts of assemblages of skills 
and practices. The idea that one can design and adopt a set 
of practices that support creativity was also introduced in 
[5]. This was further practically demonstrated and re-
enforced during design sessions.  
In addition, all available external opportunities were 
sought out and used to motivate students. For example, last 
year, during the fall semester, the dean of the University 
extended an innovation challenge to all students at the 
University of Oslo, whether they study science, politics, 
social sciences or entrepreneurship. The most innovative 
idea was rewarded both financially and through support for 
its further development. The students participating in the 
innovation challenge had to go through several selection 
rounds, until the winner was chosen. All student teams in 
the course were encouraged to participate. Two teams took 
up the challenge. This has, in addition to the usual 
interaction-design course work, involved making a financial 
proposal and a business plan for implementation of the 
innovative idea/proposal, and a proof of the feasibility, 
essentially following the idea behind Fig. 2. Students did 
not have any prior experience with such processes yet 
managed to make a financial and business model for their 
ideas. Both teams were selected among the top four projects 
(although neither ultimately won the first place).  
However, when judged independently in the context of 
the course and during the final competition, they won the 
first and the third place (from the total of 18 teams), 
indicating that they were highly motivated by the innovation 
challenge. 
Each of the two teams in question consisted of four 
second year undergraduate students, and was supervised by 
a PhD student whose research focused on elderly living in a 
smart house. Thus, both projects addressed design for and 
with elderly users in that context, see [43] and [44] (projects 
were delivered in Norwegian, but one group also wrote a 
paper based on their project in English, and presented it at 
the HCII 2015 conference, see  [45]). The latter project, see 
Fig. 4, developed a high fidelity interactive prototype 
utilizing low frequency-based technology (iBeacons) that 
helps elderly people with cognitive difficulties to navigate 
complex buildings indoors. Their system aimed to improve 
the well- being of elderly people and help them become 
more independent by introducing a familiar design on the 
tablet that was already in use as part of the smart house 
solution, and integrating it with a pre-existing aid, a walker.  
The use of the smart-walker with the tablet that 
presented data from iBeacons, required mastery of the 
technology every time it was used. However, this task was 
made to be as simple as possible. SmartWalker enabled 
users with cognitive difficulties to move easier around on 
their own, giving them an increased degree of freedom of 
movement inside the complex building where they live. 
 
Figure 4.  SmartWalker: a system co-designed with elderly and based on a 
low frequency technology and a simple visualization of the current position 
in the building on a familiar tablet interface. Photos from [44].  
The second project [43], see Fig. 5, focused on self-
management and bodily mastery through movement, see 
also [46]. It involved design of an exercise system for 
elderly users. The system was based on a motion sensor 
(Kinect), and wearable technology (a glove, powered by 
Arduino, that enabled more precise tracking of movements). 
The system provided feedback on whether exercise was 
performed correctly, and was designed to support bodily 
mastery and well-being in general, and in particular for 
those who needed rehabilitation and training after, for 
example, a fall.  
This project involved 26 persons, 17 elderly, 3 
physiotherapists and 6 employees in diverse homes for 
elderly.  

305
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 5.   An exercise system that enables correction of movements during 
the exercise session. Photo from [43]. 
Even though these two groups have achieved very good 
results, they were not the only ones that pursued the goal of 
being innovative and creative. Some other ways in which 
this focus on creative thinking and innovation affected the 
work of the project teams, with examples, is discussed in the 
next section. 
IV. 
DISCUSION 
The contextual differences among briefs presented to 
students by organizations that participated in this 
educational endeavor were substantial. Some teams were 
required to find new application domains for existing 
technologies, others to design new applications involving 
new technologies and yet others had to use old applications 
and old technologies, but find new ways of working with 
them. For example, a team had to work with the latest 
technology such as Google glasses and their potential use in 
crises situations by crisis management state bodies, such as 
the police, or paramedics. Another team had to work with 
complex web-based software used in the oil industry that 
required creative thinking around how to help users to 
customize it. What, then, about knowledge building and the 
best approach to it, for individuals, teams, and the class as a 
whole?  
A. Arbitrage, Bricolage and Assemblages 
Reflecting on alternatives and knowing why design 
processes involved certain tools, techniques and methods 
was a course requirement. This was seen as part of the 
knowledge production process, either in support of the 
scientific methods or in support of establishing reflective 
designerly practices, see [30]. Arbitrage was used to discuss 
what the ‘new knowledge’ is in each case, and how to 
communicate it.  
Arbitrage is a concept used in economics and has to do 
with price negotiations where one capitalizes on striking 
deals that profit the most from imbalances between prices 
on similar items at different markets. Translated to 
interaction design, one might want to strike the optimal 
balance for similar work in terms of regarding differences in 
knowledge among practitioners and researchers working 
closely together. Over time, this strategy could increase 
links between research and practice in interaction design.  
The issue of knowledge production has been a recent 
topic of discussion in interaction design and HCI 
communities. The discussion was concerned with how 
research through design in interaction design and HCI 
design, produces new knowledge. What forms this 
knowledge takes and how to frame questions around it has 
been a topic of a recent CHI workshop [47].  
If students worked alone, arbitrage perhaps would not 
have been as effective, since they all have similar 
knowledge bases. However, the involvement of senior 
researchers and industry partners (most of whom are 
practitioners) was required, in part, to provide fertile ground 
for negotiations around knowledge production and design 
artifact created.  
Bricolage and assemblages are terms used by Levi-
Strauss [48], as well as by many others. We have 
experimented with implementing the practice of bricolage, 
both in the sense of using multiperspective research 
methods and seeing what ‘fits’ best in relation to the 
problem at hand, and as the practice of design and making 
that constrains design space in some way (in our case, 
material expenses needed to be minimal, and students were 
encouraged to use in-house resources). Assemblages of 
skills and practices were used as described earlier in the 
paper. With bricolage, also assemblages of materials were 
relevant. These concepts appeared to be useful in supporting 
creativity and a better understanding of a design practice in 
HCI education, see [5] and [49], while also improving 
students’ analytic skills.  
The practical application of these concepts in design 
processes was not yet carried out systematically. Both the 
assemblages of skills and practices, as well as arbitrage, 
were processes that could be applied where there was true 
multidisciplinary within the team. Then the participants 
were asked to explain their approaches or demonstrate their 
skills so that others could gain an understanding of what 
those are and include them actively in the decision-making 
process. This process was also beneficial in terms of 
preventing too early fixation on any given solution, having 
first to get acquainted with people’s skills and practices, 
postponing the need to fixate on a solution fast, and instead, 
give time to consider the resources within the team and how 
these fit together. The bricolage was most relevant for 
projects where students were building or constructing an 
artifact using materials at hand and trying various 
techniques and methods in their work.  
B. Design Thinking and Combining Approaches 
The vast majority of teams benefited from being inspired 
by at least one of the three main components of design 
thinking: empathy with users, rapid prototyping, or 
abductive thinking. The use of any specific method, 
including design thinking, was never enforced, so teams 
could choose to use any component of design thinking, none 
or a combination of design thinking with other practices 
used in industry, and more traditional HCI approaches. Yet, 
as mentioned above, the negotiations needed to be done 
(arbitrage) as to which approaches fit best relative to the 
problem at hand. 

306
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Empathy is a multifaceted construct that includes 
emotional recognition, vicarious feeling, and perspective 
taking [50]. Empathy was ‘new’ for many HCI students. 
While students were used to conducting user studies, they 
seldom tried to take the place of a user themselves and 
develop empathy with users in that way (e.g. through role-
playing). In part, this might be due to the perception that 
basing the design decisions on empathy, the ‘scientific’, 
objective component of the research is lost in favor of the 
subjective (emphatic feelings of the HCI designer). Another 
reason might be that the phenomenological perspective that 
is characteristic of the latest wave of HCI, is still lagging 
behind in HCI education. Regardless of the reason for 
empathy’s ‘newness’, once it was tried, the students 
understood its benefits and could apply it creatively when 
working with conceptual development of their solutions.  
As an example, two teams were engaged in designing 
for better waiting room experiences in children’s wing of 
the hospital. Being empathetic observers in the hospital’s 
waiting room brought insights that whatever it was that they 
would end up making, it had to respect young patients’ right 
to have a quiet and safe (e.g., germ free) waiting room. They 
could engage young patients, alone or with others if desired, 
in technology-mediated interaction, but it had to be easy to 
choose a non-engagement as well. What students learned 
from empathic observations eliminated many of the initial 
ideas they had. They worked extra hard in order to find 
novel and engaging solutions that also meet all the above-
mentioned conditions. The end results of design and 
research efforts were the following: the first team developed 
a water fountain, Fig. 6, and the second team a dress-up 
game. The LED lit fountain was controlled by in-air hand 
gestures, enabled by the Leap Motion sensor, not requiring 
any physical contact. It was fun to play with, nice to look at, 
and it had a pleasing and very soft sound, see Fig. 6 and 
[51]. The breakthrough for this group was achieved after 
they experienced empathy with young patients and 
understood how to translate this empathy, together with 
other findings, into a design opportunity. 
 
 
Figure 6. The water fountain project. Photos from [51]. 
The second team utilized the Kinect motion senor to 
support their dress-up game, again requiring no physican 
contact with any objects in the room. The game, see Fig. 7, 
could be played by a single child, or by multiple 
participants. In the stand by mode, it was non-intrusive and 
easy to ignore. Attention was paid to special situations, such 
as players in a wheel chair, and players with otherwise 
different movements  (for example, slower than usual, as a 
result of fatigue). 
  
 
Figure 7. A dress-up game for young patients waiting for an appointment, 
see [52]. 
 
Rapid prototyping, the second pillar of design thinking, 
was also frequently used. Once students understood that 
they were to generate many simple prototypes, not just one 
or two, they found that communication of ideas became 
easier and clearer, in particular when group members had 
different backgrounds and levels of knowledge. 
 The following case demonstrates how the two teams 
working with service design for the University Library went 
about rapid prototyping. A workshop was organized by one 
master degree student, and apart from the two teams, two 
researchers, one designer and eight librarians attended the 
workshop. The participants were divided into two groups 
and engaged in bricolage and rapid prototyping, see Fig. 8. 
 
 
Figure 8. Making rapid prototypes of an intermediary surface in order 
to enable better precision when using LEAP motion for selection of books, 
see [53]. 
 
Everyone was to make as many prototypes as possible in 
the given timeframe. The problem they worked with had to 
do with reducing precision problems arising from the 
gesture-based selection when using the LEAP motion, in a 
multi-user situation. The second and longer part of the 
workshop was dedicated to discussion related to the 
prototypes made. The library experts could at once provide 
information on existing services, and how each of 

307
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
prototypes could fit with the existing services (or not), 
discussing the viability of proposals.  
The last pillar of design thinking, abductive reasoning, 
was used to discuss how good parts of some of the 
prototypes could be combined to make a better prototype. 
The feasibility of diverse prototypes was a prominent part of 
this discussion. Abductive thinking and the ability to ‘see’ 
design opportunities by combining aspects of diverse 
proposals may be something that comes easier to people 
within design disciplines, rather than those using analytic 
way of thinking. The participating student teams clearly 
benefitted from being a part of this process, at least by 
gaining an understanding of what rapid prototyping and 
abductive thinking involve, as well as the relevance of 
concepts presented in Fig. 2.  
C. Survey results 
A short questionnaire, consisting of three questions only, 
was conducted after the initial 4 weeks of instruction, during 
which time the students were encouraged to remain open, 
not to “jump” to a particular solution, but instead, to take 
the time to feel the discomfort of not having a solution yet, 
and actually exploring the options. 30 students answered the 
questionnaire.  
The first question was phrased as follows: “In the design 
process you now have started, how did you feel about the 
request to keep the process open and resist the desire to use 
the first opportunity to define your solution and work 
towards accomplishing it”. These are some answers to the 
question: “I believe that this is more enjoyable and 
challenging. However, it can be tempting to jump right into 
solving a problem, and it is important to try to avoid this”. 
“It is difficult to keep yourself from starting to implement 
the first idea that one comes upon. One also thinks that if 
the solution is good enough, then one saves time and money 
by jumping over, maybe, an unnecessary process”. 
“Curious, hesitant at first”. “I actually think it is exciting. 
You know – the part of the process when everything can 
happen. I love being creative and I love creating ideas. For 
our group’s work, my strategy was to make use of the small 
sketchbook our supervisor gave us. I used it to sketch ideas 
even if it was very early in the process”. These answers 
reflect a willingness to engage in open processes. They 
sometimes expressed the discomfort and sometimes the joy 
of having an opportunity to do so.  
The second question was phrased as follows: “Can you 
think of anything that instructors could do to help you with 
keeping the process open and creative?” Some of the 
answers here indicate a worry that they will somehow not 
have enough time to do the “real work”, or lack of 
understanding of how they can accomplish all the goals laid 
out for the course: “Even more real-life examples”, or  
“being clear about how much/what is expected of us”, 
“creative tools”.  
The last question was open, requesting “Any comments 
on creativity in design processes?”  Most people did not 
answer this one, or answered it with a simple “I like it”. 
Some other comments included: “It is hard, without 
knowing the defined possibilities”, “Tips about places one 
can find inspiration”, “Background differences are good” 
and “look to choreographers – they have an idea they want 
to explore – each dancer contributes with their movement 
material”. This last remark expresses the same idea behind 
discussing the assemblages of skills, practices and materials.  
At the end of the last semester, all teams filled a 
questionnaire, providing 18 sets of answers. Two questions 
were related to creativity: 
1) Do you think that the kind of work you did in this 
course is also creative? 
2) What do you think about group creativity? 
All teams answered the first one in affirmative. As for the 
second question, here are some of the answers (the answers 
were given in English, as presented, only the very last 
statement was translated from Norwegian): “It really helps. 
Quite often you have some ideas, but you need help to be 
able to explain them. So in our group we really understood 
how each other was thinking, and we could really help each 
other describe and realize our ideas and creativity.” Another 
team expresses it as follows: “We have a group of different 
people with different ways of thinking, stirred together in a 
creative pot, it's awesome”! The third considers that the 
“group work increases creativity”. The two most cautious 
expressions were the following two: “We feel that the group 
works very well together, although this experience may 
vary”, and “Very good! Perhaps a bit too creative and 
ambitious”. 
D. Analysis 
During the past three years, much experience was 
accumulated with project-based courses such as the one 
described in this paper. Lots of anecdotal evidence as to 
what works and what does not has been gathered and best 
efforts made to design a course that teaches HCI with a 
focus on creativity and innovation. Clearly, both theory and 
practice needed to be well represented in such a course. 
Things are not made easier by the lack of theory as to how 
interaction design produces new knowledge [47], what 
makes a prototype novel [54] or how to bridge (connect) 
diverse theoretical concepts and theoretical concepts and 
practice (see Fig. 3). Arbitrage (facilitated by a senior 
researcher or designer) helps discuss, understand and choose 
tools and methods that fit the context and design space. It is 
difficult to build directly on design and creativity in HCI 
due to the lack of design knowledge and frequently 
experienced insecurity among students in their capacity to 
be creative. Creativity is often confused with being artistic. 
However, through the work with the course, we see 
evidence that designerly practices, including bricolage and 
design thinking, are highly relevant tools for supporting 
creativity among students, conducting projects in the 
described 
setting. 
Multidisciplinarity 
is 
important, 
considerations of different practices often open up for new 
ways to be creative and learn in the process. The 
multidisciplinary exchange is facilitated well by looking at 
group composition and assembling all skills and practices in 
a short session at the start of the work on a project, which 
also facilitates getting to know other members of the project 

308
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
team.  Students’ answers to questionnaires confirm these 
findings. 
The class as a whole learns to trust the process by having 
common presentations and demonstrations during the 
semester. Hearing and learning about different approaches, 
but also experiencing the results they produce, is very 
important. The close contact with the outside institutions, 
and a senior researcher or designer (often a PhD student), 
helps keep the processes within the framework of the 
course, as well as it utilizes their tacit or scientific 
knowledge for moving forward their work and learning 
through both classes and designerly practices. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The aim of this paper has been to inquire into the 
interplay between innovation, design thinking and creativity 
as educational channels that stand out as alternative or 
complementary to the ones traditionally used by HCI 
educators.  The framework for learning about innovation, 
design thinking and creativity was introduced and explained. 
This setup has been repeated for the past two years and may 
be repeated by others. The concepts that have been helpful in 
the cultivation of creativity were assemblages of skills and 
practices within multidisciplinary settings, empathy, rapid 
prototyping and abductive thinking. At the same time, care 
was taken not to reduce working with them as a specific 
procedure. Rather, tools, methods and techniques needed to 
be reflected over and chosen in accordance with the problem 
at hand. Experimenting with, or, at least, negotiating choices 
of research methods and techniques was encouraged.  
Further research is required regarding other frameworks 
and practices for supporting creativity and innovation in 
HCI curriculums, including a comparative analysis of 
outcomes.  
The achievements and learning outcomes in the course 
described here has kept improving over the last three years, 
as frameworks for supporting innovation and creativity got 
better and clearer described. The students’ understanding of 
processes has also increased over time.  These findings 
indicate that design thinking contributed to increased focus 
on innovation and creativity, as well as helping to keep 
design processes wider and more open for a longer period, 
fostering increased flexibility and adaptability in learning 
processes.  Added creativity and adaptability may be the 
best long-term goals that HCI education can add to its 
curriculums when preparing students for future work 
practices.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Many people deserve profound gratitude for helping with 
this work. All representatives from different participating 
organizations, designers and other professionals, as well as 
Ph.D. students, who helped with supervising student teams, 
have my deep gratitude. Finally, gratitude goes to all the 
students in the course for their work and for their efforts to 
try new ways of doing things that they were familiar with. In 
particular, gratitude is due for taking time to participate in 
surveys and interviews. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. L. Culén, “HCI Education: Innovation, Creativity and 
Design Thinking,” in Proceedings of ACHI 2015, The Eighth 
International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human 
Interactions, 2015, pp. 125–130. 
[2] M. J. Muller, “Participatory design: the third space in HCI,” 
in The Human-computer Interaction Handbook, Hillsdale, NJ, 
USA: L. Erlbaum Associates Inc., 2003, pp. 1051–1068. 
[3] A. L. Culén and A. Følstad, “Innovation in HCI: What Can 
We Learn from Design Thinking?,” in Proceedings of the 8th 
Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: Fun, 
Fast, Foundational, New York, NY, USA, 2014, pp. 849–852. 
[4] A. L. Culén, “Scaffolding Sustainability in the Academic 
HCID Practice,” in Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Interfaces and Human Computer Interaction, 
2014, pp. 45–54. 
[5] S. Finken, A. L. Culén, and A. A. Gasparini, “Nurturing 
Creativity: Assemblages in HCI Design Practices,” in 
Proceedings of DRS 2014, Umeå, 2014, pp. 1204–1217. 
[6] A. L. Culén, H. N. Mainsah, and S. Finken, “Design Practice 
in Human Computer Interaction Design Education,” in 
Proceedings of ACHI 2014, The Seventh International 
Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions, 
2014, pp. 300–306. 
[7] E. F. Churchill, A. Bowser, and J. Preece, “Teaching and 
Learning Human-computer Interaction: Past, Present, and 
Future,” Interactions, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 44–53. 
[8] L. Bannon, “Reimagining HCI: Toward a More Human-
centered Perspective,” Interactions, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 50–57, 
Jul. 2011. 
[9] T. T. Hewett, R. Baecker, S. Card, T. Carey, J. Gasen, M. 
Mantei, G. Perlman, G. Strong, and W. Verplank, “ACM 
SIGCHI Curricula for Human-Computer Interaction,” ACM, 
New York, NY, USA, 1992. 
[10] G. C. O’Connor, “Major Innovation as a Dynamic Capability: 
A Systems Approach,” J. Prod. Innov. Manag., vol. 25, no. 4, 
pp. 313–330, 2008. 
[11] Luxembourg, 
The 
Measurement 
of 
Scientific 
and 
Technological Activities Oslo Manual: Guidelines for 
Collecting 
and 
Interpreting 
Innovation 
Data. 
OECD 
publishing, 2005. 
[12] T. Brown and J. Wyatt, “Design Thinking for Social 
Innovation (SSIR),” Stanford Social Innovation Review, 
2010. 
[13] T. Brown, “Design Thinking,” Harv. Bus. Rev., vol. 86, no. 6, 
p. 84, 2008. 
[14] B. von Stamm, Managing Innovation, Design and Creativity, 
2 edition. Chichester, UK  ; Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2008. 
[15] L. Kimbell, “Rethinking design thinking: Part I,” Des. Cult., 
vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 285–306, 2011. 
[16] N. Cross, “Designerly ways of knowing,” Des. Stud., vol. 3, 
no. 4, pp. 221–227, 1982. 
[17] R. L. Martin, The Design of Business: Why Design Thinking 
is the Next Competitive Advantage. Harvard Business Press, 
2009. 
[18] A. L. Culén and M. Kriger, “Creating Competitive Advantage 
in 
IT-Intensive 
Organizations: 
A 
Design 
Thinking 
Perspective,” in HCI in Business, F. F.-H. Nah, Ed. Springer 
International Publishing, 2014, pp. 492–503. 
[19] T. Brown, Change by design: how design thinking can 
transform organizations and inspire innovation. New York, 
NY: HarperCollins Publishers, 2009. 
[20] H. Collins, “Can Design Thinking Still Add Value?,” Des. 
Manag. Rev., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 35–39, Jun. 2013. 

309
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[21] K. McCullagh, “Stepping Up: Beyond Design Thinking,” 
Des. Manag. Rev., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 32–34, Jun. 2013. 
[22] B. Nussbaum, “Design Thinking Is A Failed Experiment. So 
What’s Next?,” Co.Design, 2012. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.fastcodesign.com/1663558/design-thinking-is-a-
failed-experiment-so-whats-next. [Accessed: 01-Dec-2015] 
[23] P. K. Chilana, A. J. Ko, and J. Wobbrock, “From User-
Centered to Adoption-Centered Design: A Case Study of an 
HCI Research Innovation Becoming a Product,” in 
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2015, 
pp. 1749–1758. 
[24] M. K. Collias, “Unpacking Design Thinking: Define,” 
Knowledge 
Without 
Borders. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://knowwithoutborders.org/unpacking-design-thinking-
define/. [Accessed: 01-Dec-2015]. 
[25] “IDEO | A Design and Innovation Consulting Firm.” 
[Online]. Available: http://www.ideo.com/. [Accessed: 24-
Oct-2014]. 
[26] C. Owen, “Design thinking: Notes on its nature and use,” Des. 
Res. Q., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 16–27, 2007. 
[27] A. L. Culén, S. Joshi, and A. Atif, “HCID: Who is an 
interaction designer?,” in Proceedings of the 2nd International 
Conference for Design Education Researchers, Oslo, Norway, 
2013, vol. 4, pp. 1924–1937. 
[28] C. H. Papadimitriou, “Database Metatheory: Asking the Big 
Queries,” SIGACT News, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 13–30, Sep. 
1995. 
[29] T. S. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 3rd 
Edition, 3rd edition. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago 
Press, 1996. 
[30] D. A. Schön, The reflective practitioner: How professionals 
think in action, vol. 5126. Basic books, 1983. 
[31] J. Dewey, Logic - The Theory of Inquiry. S.l.: Saerchinger 
Press, 2007. 
[32] D. Fallman, “Why research-oriented design isn’t design-
oriented research: On the tensions between design and 
research in an implicit design discipline,” Knowl. Technol. 
Policy, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 193–200, 2007. 
[33] J. Zimmerman and J. Forlizzi, “Research Through Design in 
HCI,” in Ways of Knowing in HCI, J. S. Olson and W. A. 
Kellogg, Eds. Springer New York, 2014, pp. 167–189. 
[34] A. L. Culén and A. Gasparini, “Find a Book! Unpacking 
Customer Journeys at Academic Library,” in The Seventh 
International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human 
Interactions, 2014, pp. 89–95. 
[35] J. Zimmerman, E. Stolterman, and J. Forlizzi, “An analysis 
and critique of Research through Design: towards a 
formalization of a research approach,” in Proceedings of the 
8th ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems, 
2010, pp. 310–319. 
[36] D. Fallman, “Design-oriented Human-computer Interaction,” 
in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2003, pp. 225–
232. 
[37] E. Goodman, E. Stolterman, and R. Wakkary, “Understanding 
interaction design practices,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, New 
York, NY, USA, 2011, pp. 1061–1070. 
[38] J. Löwgren and J. L. E. Stolterman, Thoughtful Interaction 
Design: A Design Perspective On Information Technology. 
MIT Press, 2004. 
[39] B. K. Chakravarthy and J. Krishnamoorthi, “Innovation By 
Design.” 
[40] L. Kuijer, A. de Jong, and D. van Eijk, “Practices As a Unit of 
Design: An Exploration of Theoretical Guidelines in a Study 
on Bathing,” ACM Trans Comput-Hum Interact, vol. 20, no. 
4, pp. 21:1–21:22, Sep. 2008. 
[41] D. J. Lazar, D. J. H. Feng, and D. H. Hochheiser, Research 
Methods in Human-Computer Interaction. John Wiley & 
Sons, 2010. 
[42] “Project presentations - INF2260 - Fall 2014,” 2014. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.uio.no/studier/emner/matnat/ifi/INF2260/h14/pres
entations/. [Accessed: 01-Sep-2015]. 
[43] “Motus - Kampen Omsorg+ - INF2260 - Høst 2014 - 
Universitetet 
i 
Oslo.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.uio.no/studier/emner/matnat/ifi/INF2260/h14/pres
entations/kampen2/index.html. [Accessed: 01-Dec-2015]. 
[44] “SmartWalker - Indoor Navigation for Eldery - INF2260 - 
Høst 2014 - Universitetet i Oslo.” [Online]. Available: 
http://www.uio.no/studier/emner/matnat/ifi/INF2260/h14/pres
entations/kampen1/smartwalker---indoor-navigation-for-
eldery.html. [Accessed: 19-Jan-2015]. 
[45] M. Källström, S. Berdal, and S. Joshi, “Designing an Indoor 
Navigation System for Elderly People’s Capabilities,” in 
Human Aspects of IT for the Aged Population. Design for 
Everyday Life, vol. 9194, 2015, pp. 435–445. 
[46] A. L. Culén, S. Finken, and T. Bratteteig, “Design and 
Interaction in a Smart Gym: Cognitive and Bodily 
Mastering,” in Human Factors in Computing and Informatics, 
A. Holzinger, M. Ziefle, M. Hitz, and M. Debevc, Eds. 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 609–616. 
[47] K. Höök, P. Dalsgaard, S. Reeves, J. Bardzell, J. Löwgren, E. 
Stolterman, and Y. Rogers, “Knowledge Production in 
Interaction Design,” in Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM 
Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2015, pp. 2429–
2432. 
[48] C. Lévi-Strauss, The Savage Mind. University of Chicago 
Press, 1966. 
[49] A. L. Culén, H. N. Mainsah, and S. Finken, “Design, 
Creativity 
and 
Human 
Computer 
Interaction 
Design 
Education,” J. Adv. Life Sci. V 6 N 34 2014, vol. 6, no. 3&4, 
2014. 
[50] A. A. Gasparini, “Perspective and Use of Empathy in Design 
Thinking,” in ACHI 2015, 2015. 
[51] J. Berggren, G. Schistad, and T. Borge, “UTAIN - Interactive 
fountain.” 2014. 
[52] “KlePå - INF2260 - Høst 2014 - Universitetet i Oslo.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.uio.no/studier/emner/matnat/ifi/INF2260/h14/pres
entations/KleP%C3%A5/. [Accessed: 01-Dec-2015]. 
[53] A. L. Culén and A. A. Gasparini, “HCI and Design Thinking: 
Effects on Innovation in the Academic Library,” in 
Proceedings of the International Conferences on Interfaces 
and Human Computer Interaction 2015, 2015, pp. 3–10. 
[54] M. Wiberg and E. Stolterman, “What Makes a Prototype 
Novel?: A Knowledge Contribution Concern for Interaction 
Design Research,” in Proceedings of the 8th Nordic 
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: Fun, Fast, 
Foundational, New York, NY, USA, 2014, pp. 531–540. 
 

