Reflexivity, Language Games, and Computer-Supported Cooperative Work 
Being an Insider in Engineering Projects: The Case of Designing Maritime Technology 
Yushan Pan 
Department of Ocean Operations 
Norwegian University of Science and Technology 
Ålesund, Norway 
yushan.pan@ntnu.no 
 
 
Abstract—Computer-supported cooperative work (CSCW) 
researchers have plenty to say about designing through texts; 
however, implementation and the gap between the design 
material and texts are misunderstood by systems developers in 
engineering projects in the process of designing collaborating 
systems. This problem is not new but an ongoing issue of 
utilizing 
CSCW 
insights 
effectively 
and 
correctly 
in 
engineering projects. By reviewing a five-year, multiple-site 
ethnographic study in the maritime domain, this paper reflects 
on reflexivity and language games. These can be used by 
CSCW researchers as theoretical concepts to study their own 
contributions and better position themselves in engineering 
projects, thus producing the same images and languages 
between themselves and others. By examining their own 
contributions, CSCW researchers could reduce the gap 
between CSCW research and engineering practices.  
Keywords- engineering design; language games; CSCW; 
reflexivity; practice–research gap. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
For decades, researchers in the field of computer-
supported cooperative work (CSCW) have assumed that they 
are able to inform the design of computer systems. However, 
this assumption has created gaps between CSCW research 
and engineering practices [1][2]. Systems developers in 
industries are considered outsiders by the computer science 
community and are mostly engineers within the fields of 
automation, machinery, electrical, and manufacturing and 
processing. 
Although 
information 
technology 
has 
successfully found its own role in the fields above, a 
common understanding of designing collaborative computer 
systems has yet to be achieved [3][4]. For example, the 
collaboration between systems automation and machinery 
engineering is about integrating machines with different 
functions. Designing such systems requires systems 
developers to reflect on the collaboration of machines and 
the machines’ view of the end-user’s work procedures.  
Although CSCW researchers have plenty to say about 
designing cooperative systems to support end-users, the 
researchers have not done enough to translate the theoretical 
knowledge of CSCW into forms and instruments that can be 
used by the wider communities who might act on the 
researchers’ findings [5]. Rather than consulting CSCW 
insights [6], systems developers primarily rely on their own 
professional 
knowledge 
and 
skills 
during 
systems 
development. This phenomenon causes a problem in which 
the final design does not involve end-users sufficiently.  
The core problem is that CSCW researchers might 
assume that they are systems developers. To some degree, 
these researchers overlook systems developers as end-users 
of CSCW research [7]. Grønbæk et al. argued that the main 
CSCW challenges in large-scale technical projects are that 
“[u]sers do not make explicit distinctions between working 
in cooperative or individual ‘modes’, they just want to carry 
out their work” [6, p. 76]. The same could apply to systems 
developers, who do not always follow their work routine 
(analyzing, designing, implementing, testing, and iterating 
the process). Instead, the golden rule is to use and reuse any 
developed systems models in a new project and then update 
the development log to show the requirements were fulfilled 
[8]. This is an ongoing debate in the field of engineering. 
However, the present paper has no intention to reopen this 
debate, as this topic has been discussed repeatedly. Instead, 
this paper considers this phenomenon in seeking an approach 
that could support systems developers with fruitful and 
practical CSCW insights for designing maritime technology. 
The current CSCW literature does not always involve the 
insights of the systems developers or uncover many 
important aspects of general interest for work in the 
engineering setting, because many may not have been 
uncovered by engineering work routines.     
In line with many other struggles in the CSCW 
community, such as the issues of implementing CSCW 
systems from scratch [2][7][8], the unsurprising failure to 
260
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

use CSCW insights in engineering projects can also be found 
in maritime technology. The application of current maritime 
technologies does not support cooperative work among 
operators on board [7][9]. The current design of operator–
vessel interaction follows the principles of engineering 
design, including cognitive ergonomics and human factors 
[10][11]. The fundamental principle is to focus on the design 
applicability, the scope of the technical process, and the 
system structures to support the efficacy of machine use [12]. 
Operators are subjects in the experimental work conducted to 
verify whether a design is successful. However, the social 
aspects of human–vessel interaction have been largely 
dismissed. Moreover, operators are not encouraged to 
articulate their requirements, and the system design team is 
composed of various specialists serving as consultants to the 
project.  
If the above are the facts, then how could CSCW 
researchers contribute to the design of maritime technology 
as a completely foreign group sharing few common interests 
with systems developers? In shifting the focus from 
machines to human challenges, the design of cooperative 
systems to support maritime operations entails positioning a 
CSCW researcher in the maritime field. However, very few 
studies have addressed how researchers can successfully 
conduct CSCW research outside this scientific community. 
For example, scholars have tried to extend collaborative 
computing in a design approach to shape the design 
processes, to help users articulate their requirements with 
other specialists in systems design in the aviation and 
maritime domains [13]–[15]. Thus, it would be worthwhile 
to discuss how CSCW can be extended beyond the classic 
discussion about the relationship between ethnography and 
design [16] to the collaborative effort of computer scientists 
and sociologists [17].  
The remainder of the article is structured as follows. 
Section II presents the movement in CSCW research and the 
research question of the present paper. Section III outlines 
the main case (i.e., designing remote control systems as the 
fundamental background of the article). Section IV presents 
reflexivity and language games as the theoretical concepts 
and methods used in the paper. Section V describes how 
participants are recruited in designing remote-control 
systems with respect to CSCW insights. Section VI presents 
the reflection of using theoretical concepts to guide the work 
in engineering projects. In doing so, the paper discusses its 
contribution to CSCW research in Section VII, which moves 
the historical debate on the relationship between ethnography 
and design to a new focus on the role of CSCW researchers 
in engineering projects to support CSCW research. The 
paper is concluded in Section VIII.  
II. 
THE MOVEMENT IN CSCW RESEARCH 
The movement in CSCW research has been the subject of 
debates for several years [18]. Current CSCW research has 
moved beyond single disciplines, such as sociology and 
computer science, to establish itself well in a new field. 
However, in the key literature on the intervention of design 
in CSCW [18], little attention has been paid to intervention 
in CSCW research [18]. Even when intervention is 
addressed, it is not clear how, when, and what could be 
intervened. Although a few studies addressed how CSCW 
research can help in design technologies, mainly in the 
healthcare field, the difference is that the work practices of 
health workers require CSCW researchers to communicate 
with developers who, in most cases, share a similar 
background, such as computer science, software engineering, 
and the like.  
However, it is quite a different story when CSCW 
researchers 
work 
with 
people 
who 
have 
different 
backgrounds while focused on control engineering and 
automation. In such contexts, priority is given to expertise 
outside CSCW, and interactive experiences of computation 
and cooperative work become less vital. Operators are 
affected by usefulness and usability issues in the given 
technology. Moreover, different priorities in the design 
process challenge CSCW researchers, who must design 
systems in cooperation with “outsiders.” In protecting their 
own academic interests, CSCW researchers have to find 
ways to make sense of CSCW insights beyond their own 
discipline [7].  
As a member of the new generation of CSCW 
researchers, the CSCW researcher (“the researcher”) in the 
present work has multidisciplinary education ranging from 
software engineering to social computing. The researcher not 
only can understand the design site and the object of study 
but also has hands-on “practice.” As Ehn [19] points out, this 
generation of CSCW researchers understands the language 
games (referring to a philosophical concept developed by 
Ludwig Wittgenstein where language use and actions into 
which the language is woven) [20] of use activities and can 
transform the bottleneck of computer-supported activities of 
users in real life into the rule explanations of systems 
development as procedural and reproducible practices for the 
design process. This is not a new and one-way approach to 
understanding practice, but a method addressing Ackerman’s 
definition of “the divide between what we know we must 
support socially and what we can support technically” [21].   
261
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Thus, the research question for this article is formulated 
as follows: “How do we shorten the distance between CSCW 
research and its practice in engineering projects?” Unlike 
studies [1][15] that focused on organization (working 
division of labor) and CSCW, this paper adds new evidence 
and insights regarding the use of the concepts of reflexivity 
and the Wittgensteinian concept of “language games” to 
probe the practical implications of CSCW design as an 
evaluating the quality of CSCW research in engineering 
projects [14]. In the following sections, the design of remote-
control systems for autonomous vessels is used as a case. 
The bottleneck of CSCW research in an engineering project 
is transformed into a contribution of procedural and 
reproducible practices in implementing the design process.  
III. 
THE CASE: DESIGNING REMOTE-CONTROL SYSTEMS 
Traditionally, maritime technology focuses on control 
systems, machinery, and the automation of maritime vehicles 
of any kind. The design process is purposeful, systemic, and 
iterative. Systems developers conduct their work in various 
constraint conditions to find possible solutions for problems, 
which are usually limited to the given scenarios. Systems 
developers communicate with a small group of users, for 
whom the design follows a positivist paradigm with the 
intention to ultimately test a system. Design requirements are 
usually based on three principles: corporate, technology, and 
social [3]. The primary principle is that the corporation must 
be able to generate design requirements in line with the 
company’s organizational structures, strategic vision, and 
available resources, based mainly on the knowledge and 
expertise of the systems developers. This principle does not 
change until social aspects challenge the company’s 
framework through markets. The second principle, which 
Gershenson and Stauffer [24] termed “technology,” is the 
knowledge of engineering principles, material properties, and 
physical laws [12]. User requirements are considered last. 
The requirements of the third principle are weighed to 
optimize the trade-off with the requirements of the first two 
principles and to align them with the needs of the users, 
including the “must-have need” and the “attractive need.”  
Thus, in line with the principles, systems developers 
consider artefacts important for remote-control systems. In 
addition, 
systems 
developers 
narrow 
the 
design 
specifications to comply with reliability, ergonomics (i.e., 
human factors), manufacturability, and control ability similar 
to software engineers, who use models to automatically 
synthesize an executable code [25]. The philosophy 
underlying all the solutions is technology-centered design. In 
other words, by using a certain algorithm to represent 
situational awareness [26][29], systems are expected to 
represent information as accurately as possible in human 
decision making [25][27][28]. The common principle that 
underpins these previous studies is the assumption that the 
systems will be well-designed to support human tasks, such 
as drawing patterns, creating models, and making sense of a 
machine’s actions. Through well-structured technology-
centered experiments, as in most engineering projects, 
systems developers expect that human factor specialists 
[21][22] can investigate whether interfaces could be built to 
satisfy the operators. If so, what kinds of “human error” 
could be investigated? Hopefully, the results can be utilized 
to reform the systems according to a better vision. As a 
consequence of this approach, operators are expected, oddly 
enough, to be re-trained in the skills needed in the 
autonomous future [30][31]. The others, without protection 
against the failures, errors, and faults caused by technology, 
which cannot be called human errors, are treated as 
regulatory and policy issues [24][25][32]. Politicians, 
societies, and shipowners require clarification of the 
potential 
liabilities 
(e.g., 
collisions) 
introduced 
by 
autonomous technologies [33][34].  
However, the cost of the running ships may not be 
decreased 
as 
expected. 
Instead, 
it 
might 
increase 
significantly due to infinite maintenance and changes in 
remote-control systems, which will certainly displease 
operators and shipowners. When changes are introduced, 
people quickly learn the changes’ characteristics and 
discover how to maximize them. When autonomous 
technology and remote control are introduced, people react 
in the same manner.  
IV. 
THEORETICAL CONCEPTS AND METHODS 
To better understand the role of CSCW researchers in 
engineering projects, two concepts are of interest, namely, 
reflexivity and language games. Reflexivity is a method for 
sharing 
sense-making 
between 
practitioners 
and 
an 
ethnographer in terms of gaining performative knowledge of 
professional expertise. Language games are a method for 
guiding CSCW researchers to practice their interpretation of 
findings in various ways that fit engineering projects for 
systems developers and the sponsors of the projects (i.e., the 
shipowners).  
A. Reflexivity 
Calas and Smircich [35, p. 240] define reflexivity as the 
“constant 
assessment 
of 
the 
relationship 
between 
knowledge” and “the ways of doing knowledge.” Through 
“reflexivity,” researchers can pay attention to “the way 
262
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

different kinds of linguistic, social, political, and theoretical 
elements are woven together in the process of knowledge 
development 
during 
which 
empirical 
materials 
is 
constructed, interpreted and written” (p. 9). In conducting a 
reflexivity study, interpretation is used as a tool for 
producing 
scientific 
knowledge 
[36]. 
In 
doing 
an 
interpretation, we reflect on how “we become observers of 
our 
own 
practice” 
[37]. 
Reflexivity 
suggests 
the 
complexification of thinking and experience or thinking 
about experience [37]. It is a process of exposing or 
questioning our ways of doing. In a discussion of the third 
wave of human–computer interaction (HCI), Bødker [38] 
calls for a crucial and conventional understanding of 
reflexivity. Reflexivity, according to her, is different from 
positivism: Reflexivity is an intervention for data gathering. 
Bødker does explain how this process impacts the quality of 
the data itself. In the end, reflexive practices can find 
structural patterns in what they have observed, thus 
extending the theory the practices used. However, reflexivity 
has had difficulty finding a place in HCI and in CSCW 
literature. Due to the subjectivity of the methods used, it is 
difficult for reflexivity researchers to open their work to 
future scrutiny. Geirbo [39] states that reflexivity itself is 
important as a kind of methodological consideration, which 
can guide researchers as they attempt to enter a community, 
phenomenon, or practice considered foreign to the 
researchers. In the present, it is possible for researchers to 
share 
sense-making 
between 
practitioners 
and 
an 
ethnographer in terms of gaining performative knowledge of 
professional expertise. Researchers also have the capability 
to articulate and analyze such performative knowledge 
gained through an insider role [40]. In this effort, it is 
possible to bridge the practice–research gap by enacting 
researcher-practitioner roles across community boundaries, 
developing and disseminating new knowledge, and engaging 
field professionals outside the CSCW community.  
Thus, in line with this specific theoretical concept, 
CSCW researchers can be reflexive about how their 
ethnographic accounts will affect the research process. This 
action can help CSCW peers gain a better understanding of 
the choice the researcher has made during the entire research 
process, including the design, data collection, and 
interpretation 
phases. 
Reporting 
and 
discussing 
the 
theoretical struggles of interpretive empirical research can 
also help fulfill the principles of “dialogue” [41] through 
languages in between the fieldwork material with the 
reflectivity thinking and engineering projects. The core of 
the “dialogue” interpretation relates to the experience, so that 
CSCW peers can understand what the researcher has seen 
and experienced, and learn how to evaluate that work. In 
turn, they can sense the socio-technical gap within the 
CSCW research itself, as well as that between humanity and 
engineering in general. Meanwhile, in most cases, CSCW 
researchers have to contribute to other engineering fields. 
Researchers’ writings and insights are also considered in 
other research and development activities. Thus, evaluating 
the application of the CSCW insights in dialogue is useful 
not only for CSCW peers but also for others through some 
meaningful forms.  
B. Language Games 
To make sense of the CSCW insights in a dialogue for 
non-CSCW systems developers in engineering projects, 
language games [13][35] have been considered in the 
literature for a long time [1][14]. Wittgenstein speaks of 
coming to understand what people mean by having someone 
explain the meanings of the words. He emphasizes that one 
needs to be trained to learn language games. That is, being 
able to speak and understand what one said—knowing what 
it means—does not mean that you can say what it means, or 
is that what you have learned. Wittgenstein [42, p. 32] gave 
an example in his book, Philosophical Investigations: 
“Augustine describes the learning of human language as if 
the child came into a strange country and did not understand 
the language of the country; that is, as if it already had a 
language, only not this one.” In other words, you might see 
whether systems developers know techniques, notations, and 
norms by asking the developers what the expressions mean. 
However, that is not how CSCW researchers can tell whether 
systems developers can read thick descriptions of identified 
design issues from the system development. Moreover, it is 
not what systems developers learn when they learn to 
practice the technical languages and skills of systems design. 
Thus, the mandatory skill of using different forms of 
descriptions of CSCW insights now seems vital to CSCW 
researchers.  
In his Blue book, Wittgenstein encourages us to analyze 
our own ordinary language as though we want to discover 
something that goes on in our language as we speak it, but 
which we cannot see until we take this method of getting 
through the mist that enshrouds it [20]. As he [13, p. 17] puts 
it, “The study of language games is the study of primitive 
forms of language or primitive languages. If we want to 
study the problems of truth and falsehood, of the agreement 
and disagreement of propositions with reality, of the nature 
of assertion, assumption, and question, we shall with great 
advantage look at primitive forms of language in which these 
forms of thinking appear without confusing background of 
263
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

highly complicated process of thought. When we look at 
such simple forms of language the mental mist which seems 
to enshroud our ordinary use of language disappears. We see 
activities, reactions, which are clear-cut and transparent. On 
the other hand, we recognize in these simple process forms 
of language not separated by a break from our more 
complicated ones. We see that we can build up the 
complicated forms from the primitive ones by gradually 
adding new forms.” Wittgenstein further emphasizes in his 
Brown book [42, p. 81]: “We are not, however, regarding the 
language games which we describe as incomplete parts of a 
language, but languages complete in themselves, as complete 
systems of human communication.” With this in mind, 
CSCW researchers might see people who are taught their 
“native” language (i.e., engineering techniques, etc.) by such 
a language game in which they even have their own forms of 
games. The CSCW researchers’ duty is to convert our 
writing of system design into simple languages that can be 
useful tools (i.e., activities, reactions, and other forms that 
are clear-cut and transparent) for the entire systems of 
communication of the development team. In this sense, we 
(CSCW researchers and systems developers) are all on the 
same team and use the same simple languages.  
Language games as the second concept are fruitful in this 
endeavor. This is because they help CSCW researchers move 
further from reflectivity positions—a somewhat struggling 
social invention in CSCW system design toward ostensive 
expression [20] of our writing in CSCW research and 
engineering projects. Language games encourage CSCW 
researchers to state their insights not only for their peers but 
also for the outsiders of the CSCW community. A few 
researchers believe that language games might be a method 
for helping researchers (CSCW researchers and other 
researchers in design disciplines) to shorten the distance 
between humanities and engineering, thus building a bridge 
to help systems developers recognize what we write and 
know what we mean through the “signs” [20] that we use, 
such as Use Case language [3], systems modeling language, 
or contractual statements [43].  
C. Methods 
For a long time, the role of CSCW researchers in the 
maritime domain has been questioned. The researchers 
struggled to answer this question, because the contributions 
of CSCW might not remain in their area (i.e., interpretive 
ethnography) but extend to a foreign context in which 
CSCW researchers would have to change their tone and 
voice so that those living there could understand the 
researchers. Although the initial question in 2015 was, 
“What is going on in designing maritime technology?” when 
fieldwork at sea was conducted, other questions were asked 
by the project owner about how maritime technology was 
produced, assembled, and maintained then. These questions 
were frustrating but somehow easy to answer. After 
addressing these questions, the researcher successfully 
demonstrated the importance of CSCW insights in analyzing 
maritime operations for better maritime technology designs 
[14]. As an extension of that successful analysis of maritime 
operations, remote-control systems were chosen, because the 
ongoing research on automated ships might benefit from the 
researcher’s previous work.  
The remote-control systems were designed on land. Due 
to the natural complexity of the projects, multi-site projects 
[44] were conducted at sea and on land to observe and 
interview the people who would become the users of these 
systems. Seminars, workshops, and conferences were held in 
which shipowners and various stakeholders, such as systems 
developers, policymakers, and other relevant participants, 
celebrated their technical achievements. The researcher is 
part of a land-based maritime design team. In addition, he 
also observed, conducted interviews, and then wrote about 
findings from the fields after conducting fieldwork in 
different workplaces, such as on board, design companies, 
education conferences and seminars, and videoconferences. 
The fieldwork began in the first year when the researcher 
was a doctoral student at the University of Oslo and 
continued after he received his doctorate degree.  
Although the research project required long-term 
engagement in the maritime domain, fortunately, the 
heterogeneous group has not changed much since 2015. A 
group of professionals, including operators, systems 
developers, educators, and shipowners, are involved in the 
study. The present work is a long-term project to observe and 
interview them in different places at sea and on land 
throughout European countries. An online platform was 
established in which systems developers could share 
information via email, conduct videoconferences, and chat 
and leave comments on documents. Topics that the 
researcher did not understand were posted so that someone 
could explain them by leaving comments and observations. 
In addition, interactions with systems developers were 
carried out through individual emails and videoconferences 
to construct an ethnography of their experiences in design 
work. Several new participants joined the long-term study, 
but others have been part of the study since the beginning. 
Thus, informed consent was not required, and the research 
was only verbally introduced to the newcomers. Several 
stopped participating as they were starting new career paths. 
264
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

However, they kept in touch occasionally in case any 
questions needed to be followed up.  
Table I illustrates the research activities conducted since 
2015. Notes were taken during the interviews, seminars, and 
workshops, but no audio-recordings were made due to 
ethical considerations. At sea and in land-based simulator 
rooms, the observations were video-recorded. However, not 
all videos were transcribed. Instead, only those that were 
relevant to engineering projects, particularly the design 
process, were transcribed. This is because cooperation 
between seafarers at sea and on land is essential. 
TABLE I.  
RESEARCH ACTIVITIES SINCE 2015 
Settings 
Methods 
Number of 
Interviews 
Hours of 
Observation 
Year 
At sea, on board 
72 
1838 
Autumn 2015–
Spring 2016 
Land-based 
simulator room 
18 
48 
Autumn 2016 
Conferences on sites 
4 
- 
Autumn 2017–
Autumn 2019 
Seminars 
9 
- 
Autumn 2016–
Autumn 2020 
Workshops 
7 
72 
Autumn 2016–
Autumn 2020 
Emails 
232 
- 
Autumn 2015–
Spring 2020 
Videoconferences 
4 
- 
Spring 2018–
Autumn 2020 
 
The data analysis has been ongoing since 2015, which 
involved thematically indexing words, such as “cooperative 
work,” “design,” “remote-control,” “systems collaboration,” 
“team’s cooperation,” “remote control,” and so forth. 
Themes were also identified. However, these themes were 
used to describe not only the remote-control system design 
but also the other works of the project. They were also 
emphasized during investigation and design in the maritime 
domain in general. The purpose of the data analyses is to 
offer an ethnographic account of the practice and 
associations orchestrated by crossing multiple sites off- and 
online, particularly in the case of a remote-control system. 
Moreover, the analyses aimed to direct attention to the 
researcher’s self-reflectivity [45], focusing on language 
games [1][14][15][35], to bridge the gulf between what 
Dourish calls the “sociotechnical gap” [23] and Ackerman’s 
definition of “the divide between what we know we must 
support socially and what we can support technically” [21] 
without pre-conditions. In other words, this paper addresses 
the gap between CSCW research and CSCW practice in 
industrial contexts.  
V. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF CSCW INSIGHTS IN AN 
ENGINEERING PROJECT 
In the maritime domain, operators are rarely involved in 
the design process. As previously stated, they are used as 
subjects for testing purposes when a product is being 
developed. Educators are also rarely involved, because they 
teach operators without considering their concerns about 
technology. Moreover, CSCW researchers are also not 
typically involved in a maritime design project, because their 
expertise is invisible in the engineering field. Likewise, 
shipowners are rarely consulted in design projects for various 
reasons. Thus, in this study, a group of stakeholders was 
assembled to balance their interests in design for a 
sustainable solution for all based on the CSCW perspective.  
A. Involving Stakeholders in the Implementation Process 
In 2016, various challenges emerged. The operators 
thought the researcher was a systems developer or at least 
someone who knew how to develop their computer systems. 
They thought that the researcher was only concerned about 
examining their work. However, that was not the case, as he 
was a CSCW researcher who was also trained as an 
ethnographer. The researcher was on board to evaluate work 
but also to observe what was going on. The researcher also 
wanted to interview the operators. Based on those findings, 
the researcher would work with systems developers to design 
the remote-control systems.  
After the explanation above was provided to the 
operators, they were worried that what the researcher 
observed and heard would be documented as evidence for 
changing the vessel design to automatic shipping. They 
thought that the researcher could be a spy who was studying 
them and would try to create a technology that would replace 
human operators. Although the purpose for being on board 
was thoroughly explained, and they had given informed 
consent to participate in the study, they initially 
misunderstood the researcher’s basic objectives. However, 
later, the operators apologized and added that they actually 
hoped that their expertise and knowledge could someday be 
acknowledged rather than overlooked when remote-control 
systems are designed. Since then, the researcher also noticed 
that not everyone welcomed the possibility of shifting to a 
remote-control system.  
On board, one of the operators expressed his concern that 
he did not believe the systems could do what he was good at. 
He felt that his experience at sea could not be simply cloned 
265
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

into a machine. He also felt anxiety thinking about the 
possibility that the shipowners just wanted to save costs and 
did not care about the operators. The researcher did not know 
how to respond to such concerns at that time, because it was 
hard to promise that they would be assisted rather than 
replaced by the remote-control system. It was also not easy 
to say that their expertise would be acknowledged and used 
in designing maritime technology. Moreover, the systems 
developers adopted a concept called “human-in-the-loop” 
anyway, which meant that the machines would interact 
without human assistance, and human operators would 
simply serve as a backup if a problem arises.  
This concern was not unique. In 2018, the same worry 
about remote-control systems was expressed by maritime 
educators. These educators expressed their concern during a 
conference on upgrading the skills of maritime operators for 
digitalization in the future. In a panel discussion, several 
educators questioned remote-control operations and worried 
that no one knew how to teach the technology as no one had 
actual experiences using it. Although the educators believed 
that re-training themselves was needed, they did not believe 
that the simulator-based system was the best solution. In 
addition, although the educators said they might be re-
trained, systematic training was not available. Simply put, 
remote-control systems have yet to be fully delivered to 
users. The work was mainly conducted in engineering 
projects firms, and only systems developers ran the design 
work. However, systems developers assumed that they had 
knowledge of remote-control technology, and that it was less 
important to observe current maritime operations or consider 
the concerns raised by other stakeholders. During a design 
workshop at a company held during the autumn of 2018, a 
question was asked: “What was the purpose of the remote-
control technology?” One system developer replied that a 
remote-control system aimed to replace human beings on 
board due to the unsafe operations brought about by human 
errors. In this case, human operators must be relocated on 
land to learn new abilities to control an object that they 
would not actually touch. Another concern was also raised at 
this point: the cybersecurity issue.  
The answer was not convincing, as the skills referred to 
by the systems developer were not clear. The developer was 
asked about the new skills, the issue of cybersecurity, and 
who would take responsibility for the control vessels. A 
satisfactory nswer was not given. Instead, the systems 
developer assumed that skills were about interaction. 
Operators must take responsibility for handling any problems 
and make decisions or interventions if needed. To give a 
reasonable answer, the systems developer guided the 
researcher to a lab, in which a huge screen with much 
information was presented. A systems developer sitting in 
front of the screen brought out four small screens to simulate 
a case. The case was about a vessel that was remotely 
controlled but under attack from unknown hackers. The 
systems developer said he would lose control of the vessel, 
so he was finding ways to solve the problem. The solution 
was to protect the user interfaces through developed 
software. Using the mouse, the systems developer opened a 
software application and ran it to protect his user interfaces. 
The developers believed that it was a method related to 
remotely controlling a system and that no operators had had 
a chance to learn it. It was not surprising that systems 
developers expected to train everyone to use the new 
technology. However, it was strange that operators needed to 
be trained to click a software application to protect the 
vessel.  
In terms of other factors, such as the weather, waves, and 
swimmers in the fjord, if the simulation was not real, why 
would educators worry about training? Operators could 
become familiar with the interaction styles in the new 
technology. However, although the educators were eager to 
welcome remote-control systems, they often mentioned that 
their goal was to obtain educational funding and not 
improved outcomes of their teaching and students’ learning. 
They said nothing about learning how to interact with 
computers. However, this is not new in maritime studies. 
When the researcher discussed this issue with an educator at 
another conference in 2019, the educator replied that 
simulator-based training was a kind of computer game and 
not a true operation at all. Thus, the whole shipping industry 
may have misunderstood a basic question: “What learning 
outcome and what level do we expect to achieve in 
simulator-based training?”  
Interestingly, the educator knew it might be questionable 
to accept the systems developers’ proposal to conduct 
training with simulators. However, the entire maritime 
domain seems to follow the systems developers’ wishes. The 
educator cannot challenge that value. Although the 
researcher tried to play a mediating role between the 
engineers and operators, there were invisible hands pushing 
for engineering projects to be conducted as quickly as 
possible.  
B. The Role and Activities of the CSCW Researcher in 
Implementation for Design 
The scenario above indicates that intervening directly in 
the design process is difficult. This situation is not like an 
empirical study conducted before the actual design process 
266
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

has begun. In the maritime domain, systems developers 
assume that software and computer systems follow 
mathematical models, but this assumption is incorrect [46]. 
In 2019, by chance, the researcher was able to observe the 
application process for innovative educational programs for 
maritime studies. There was a call for applications by 
nautical science departments at universities to use a bottom-
up approach to position students in the center of designing 
new study programs. The objective of the call was to 
establish an ecosystem to support life-long relationships 
among technology, engineering companies, educational 
institutions, and most importantly, operators. As the 
researcher was engaged with the educators, he invited 
systems developers during the application process and 
wanted to contribute to making the voices of operators heard. 
However, it did not happen in the beginning, because how 
they would react to such a call was vital. In that case, the 
researcher might help with translated CSCW insights in the 
following workshop with systems developers. In CSCW 
research, balancing outsider–insider roles and avoiding 
inserting the researcher’s biases into the project are 
important. Although CSCW insights may help design 
technology, it is unclear whether those insights would pose 
difficulties 
for 
systems 
developers, 
challenge 
their 
professional expertise, or even interfere with their work on 
the ground. The same applies to working with educators. In 
addition to using CSCW insights to shape technology design, 
the intention is to scrutinize the usefulness of such insights 
outside the CSCW community. The power relations between 
different stakeholders could be balanced by their own 
interests rather than by an external force, such as the role of 
the researcher in the present project. Thus, instead of 
interviewing the stakeholders, as most ethnographers would 
have done, a few challenging, structured questions were 
asked, with the aim of fostering a new way of thinking about 
design. 
The researcher participated in a design workshop again in 
2019, in which the systems developers were asked how they 
understood a bottom-up approach in the design process. The 
goal of the researcher was to investigate how CSCW insights 
can be used in engineering project. There were no clear 
answers. However, no one doubts that in systems 
developers’ eyes, a user is the person who pays for the 
project: the shipowner. During the dialogue in the workshop, 
the operators were not mentioned even once. The researcher 
reflected on the fact that multidisciplinary design is a 
challenge that requires the reconciliation of diverging design 
perspectives [47]. Although software engineers and CSCW 
researchers in software design projects in the CSCW 
community can share and integrate their viewpoints in the 
design process, such a process could still miss important 
aspects of the design problem [48]. If that were the case in 
the CSCW community, then this would also apply to the 
engineering field [49]. Systems developers lacked the ability 
to demonstrate the effects of their design concepts because of 
their insufficient thinking and reflection about such effects. 
CSCW researchers may also be unaware that systems 
developers are also the end-users of CSCW insights. In line 
with these arguments, during the workshop, the researcher 
translated what he observed from the remote-control design 
into Use Case techniques. A diagram-based description [15] 
of the system was used to show the systems developers how 
operators work in reality and how current systems failed to 
support the operators’ work. If we are trying to move 
cooperative work on board to the land control room, we must 
support their natural work practices as they are offshore. 
Then other technical considerations, such as cybersecurity, 
will make sense to operators. In this case, systems functions 
for the needs of products fully respect the expertise and 
professions of the operators. The final component, training 
through simulators (a colon version of a true remote-control 
center) could answer the educator’s question: "What is the 
final outcome of learning?" 
This workshop was successful. The systems developers 
were happy to design together with the researcher, and they 
stated that this workshop was different from other CSCW 
research in which only storytelling was delivered. In this 
workshop, the researcher stood in their situations to discuss 
with them how systems functions could be designed from the 
stretch. The researcher was not just a researcher in the 
project; he also played roles as a systems developer and an 
operator to draw a comprehensive image of maritime 
operations—something that no systems developer has ever 
experienced.  
For CSCW researchers in the maritime domain, the work 
is about breaking the circular relationship: “shipowner–
engineering designer–shipowner.” In the article “Located 
Accountabilities in Technology Production,” Suchman 
reflected on her experience in addressing a similar problem 
as “a central dilemma of CSCW researchers’ participation 
in increasingly complex divisions of labor and professional 
specialization were the layers of mediation between each of 
us and the consequences of our work” [50]. Although it was 
the responsibility of the research to the process of technology 
production, the researcher, his or her participation, of course, 
can break the relationship into pieces. The question for the 
systems developers was about investigating whether they 
wanted to take responsibility for tracing the usefulness of the 
267
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

production. However, they simply hand off the production 
after delivery, and they might never revisit it until someone 
requests updates or changes. In the present study, one of the 
systems developers discussed the following with the 
researcher privately after the conference: “The whole 
industry works in a mechanism like a design-test-deliver-
maintenance loop. It is about business. Our motto is that 
users know very little about what they do and what they 
want.” This is not, however, a convincing explanation. 
Bannon [51] warned that users are as professional as anyone 
else about their workplace and tasks in designing computer 
systems. They have an insiders’ overview of their work and 
the tools (including technology) that assist them.  
CSCW researchers are challenged in thinking about how 
to assemble different insights to propose balance between 
design and use. According to Suchman, she dwelt 
uncomfortably in the gap between design and use for many 
years in the 1980s. Trying to find a balance between design 
and use forced her to think about her role in technology 
design projects. She concluded that she, as an anthropologist 
of technology, could only translate her practice into design 
terms. However, because of the division of professional labor, 
the problem was caused by neither her ability nor that of the 
design team [50].  
After studying the maritime domain for several years, the 
researcher’s feeling is different. As the researcher is part of 
the new generation of CSCW research, the origin of the 
problem is known: the mismatch of design problems across 
multiple disciplines, such as design, science, and engineering. 
We also knew where, when, and how to contribute to a 
project to benefit everyone. However, we could not fully 
address the issue. The reason was not the capability but the 
role of the CSCW researchers in the projects: There was 
simply no chance to intervene in the design process from the 
very beginning. Due to the rapid marketing changes and 
technological development in the shipping industry, 
technology companies would like to respond quickly to 
shipowners’ expectations. Thus, CSCW researchers will 
always intervene late in a project. In fact, in the worst cases, 
CSCW researchers are expected to focus on how their 
studies can be used in future projects based on the results of 
investigating current technology. However, could this also be 
a good chance to make a contribution? 
On this occasion, the situation was changed. Although no 
one has actually developed remote control, for various 
reasons, researchers could intervene during an early stage to 
learn how to position themselves in potential projects. In this 
case, the researcher must be sensitive about the ongoing 
discussion in the industry, as well as the intersection between 
engineering departments at various research institutions and 
project funding organizations.  
Thus, 
when 
continually 
asked 
whether 
systems 
developers can predict the future of remote control, none 
could provide a definite reply. Instead, the chief developer 
said there were too few opportunities for them to learn from 
the operators. The systems developers knew where to gain 
knowledge, but they chose to ignore the chance because they 
had very limited time to read the thick and rich descriptions 
written by CSCW researchers. When the researcher was 
continually asking and inviting operators to design 
workshops, however, recruiting even one participant became 
a challenge due to various reasons. Although the operators 
did not accept the invitation, they seemed happy that their 
messages were delivered through the study. However, to 
some degree, it seemed that the researcher not only managed 
to get the developers to accept the idea that other opinions 
are also important in technology design but also inspired 
systems developers to read the diagram-based design texts to 
work from scratch. Moreover, the researcher inspired the 
operators to share their experiences and expertise with others. 
The researcher unconsciously stepped into the project to play 
the two roles of designer (i.e., guiding systems developers) 
and user (i.e., inspiring operators). On several occasions, the 
researcher formatted and reformatted the ideas and opinions 
of the operators, educators, and systems developers, and 
even his own reflections, into a language game [19] between 
investigation and design [41].  
C. Evaluating the CSCW Research Outcomes as 
Contributions to Implementation for Design 
Including only operators, educators, and systems 
developers in this study was not enough. As previously 
stated, the design requirements are given by shipowners. 
Without their participation, the design work would be 
unrealistic, and there would be problems if requirement 
conflicts arose among the operators, educators, and 
shipowners. The research results were documented in 
various formats. However, considering the differences 
between traditions in CSCW research across the Atlantic, it 
is notable that a few previous studies concentrated on how 
cooperative technologies could be created with a focus on 
articulating the work of users [52], as in the European 
CSCW tradition. Some studies focused on how to intervene 
in the design process and how such an intervention is 
implemented in design [18]. In interviews with Volker Wulf 
and Myriam, Lewkowicz, Richter, and Koch [53] observed 
that the term practice-based CSCW was descriptive. 
Lewkowicz argued that the importance of CSCW was that it 
268
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

enabled designers and social scientists to use the same 
communication channel. However, the researcher of the 
present work does not fully agree, because according to 
many CSCW studies, at least in the European context, the 
true design process is conducted by systems developers. 
Thus, it would be questionable how an intervention could be 
implemented realistically without a monitor. Moreover, most 
CSCW researchers have evaluated the outcome of the 
design, which can actually be seen as the performance of 
technology. However, only a few studies utilized CSCW 
insights during the engineering design process. The problem 
of how we can evaluate the quality of the CSCW research in 
engineering projects, that is, the design work in connection 
with CSCW research, remains. 
Bratteteig and Wagner [54], in the field of participatory 
design, asked the following question: “What is a 
participatory design result?” They argued that “[i]deally, a 
project outcome should be evaluated in a real-use situation 
when users have had a chance to integrate it into whatever 
they are doing and (eventually) develop a new form of 
practice” (p. 142). As a participant in designing remote 
control systems, did the researcher improve the knowledge 
of the systems that are supposed to be designed? Through the 
activities to assemble participants, did the research introduce 
a better “tool” for all stakeholders in the projects? Did it 
inspire them to understand that all their voices were 
important (but no one had priority)? Similar to the reply of 
the chief developer, they acknowledged that without 
information from operators, it would be impossible to ensure 
the quality of remote-control systems in the future. The 
educators replied in a similar manner. Therefore, to evaluate 
the quality of the CSCW research in the engineering project, 
the researcher interviewed three shipowners at their offices at 
different times from August 2019 to February 2020. The aim 
was to enable them to develop a realistic expectation of 
remote control and evaluate CSCW research in engineering 
projects from an outsider’s point of view. In turn, it was also 
an opportunity for the researcher to communicate his 
descriptive findings in a language that might not be difficult 
for outsiders to understand. Videos of several cases based on 
fieldwork conducted in 2015 and 2018 at sea and in land-
based simulators were shown to the owners. The shipowners 
expressed their astonishment after they watched those videos. 
They saw a great difference between realistic operations and 
training using simulators. Although they all invested money 
in training courses for the operators, after seeing the videos, 
the owners expressed uncertainty as they addressed the 
usefulness of the current training programs. It seemed no one 
was sure that there was a link between training and real work 
in ensuring safer operations. However, everyone wanted to 
hear from the operators, at least the most experienced ones, 
and recognize their voices in decision making about 
technology design, including decisions about material 
artefacts on board (e.g., dynamic positioning systems).  
In February 2020, while talking with the operators and 
educators during a seminar in Athens, both were offered a 
chance to participate in designing a remote-control system. A 
positive answer was given this time: “If that could happen, it 
would be great that we were not just treated as tools. We do 
not need to bind ourselves to the terms and conditions 
offered by systems developers through their productions. We 
will not outsource our decision-making and capabilities to 
someone who has no knowledge of our business. We are the 
core elements of technology.”  
Today, operators, educators, and shipowners gather in 
public and in private to discuss their opinions regarding 
design. One example is the joint call for proposals funded by 
the Education, Audio-Visual and Culture Executive Agency 
(EACEA) of the European Commission, the European 
Shipowner Association, and the European Transportation 
Workers’ Foundation. They are meant to develop a bottom-
up approach and a learner-centered, lifelong action plan 
involving education, research, shipping, and maritime 
technology, which are considered vital and mandatory [55] 
[56]. It seems timely for the maritime domain to respond to 
such calls rather than for the researcher to work on re-
assembling them. In this way, the CSCW research work will 
not only describe the bottlenecks of the designed systems but 
also will become truly engaged in design work, representing 
knowledge from operators, the other stakeholders, and most 
importantly, the language games of the CSCW researchers.   
VI. 
DISCUSSION: STAKEHOLDERS' DESIGN AND REFORM 
DESIGN POLICY OF ENGINEERING PROJECTS 
Being a CSCW researcher is about helping design 
stakeholders and shaping the work policy of the projects. It is 
about guiding various user activities to help CSCW 
researchers 
and 
project 
stakeholders 
comply 
with 
communication and facilitate research activities at the same 
time. Traditionally, however, CSCW researchers have not 
yet gained sufficient experience to do both jobs. The 
researchers mainly focus on reporting what is going on in the 
field, but somehow fail to technically shape the direction of 
the project to support cooperative work and privilege local 
knowledge from all stakeholders. In this section, a reflection 
from the experience of designing maritime technology is 
presented. The CSCW researcher is involved in the process 
of co-investigation and co-participation, and is a co-subject 
269
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

of the change and evaluation activities of the engineering 
projects. Through the experience, it is important to reflect 
stakeholders’ design and the roles of CSCW researchers in 
shaping research policies and activities in various 
engineering projects.  
A. Stakeholders’ Design 
User participation is currently being discussed in the 
CSCW community. Thus, it is essential for CSCW 
researchers to involve end-users, particularly weak parties - 
operators, during the design process [54]. Thus, CSCW 
researchers bring invaluable discussion on how to inform 
design to meet users’ needs or in CSCW terms, the 
“usefulness of the technology” [57]. This discussion is 
similar to participatory design researchers’ argument 
regarding the evaluation of the outcomes after participation.  
However, CSCW researchers might have traditionally 
overlooked systems developers as end-users. In addition, 
shipowners are end-users, too. Thus, how can CSCW 
researchers balance all the interests of different stakeholders 
to achieve a good design outcome? Bratteteig and Wagner 
[54] asked the same question in participatory design research 
(i.e., "Should researchers take sides in a project?"). This 
question is relevant to the CSCW community. Traditionally, 
CSCW researchers have not been involved in the political 
issues surrounding design projects. Thus, can CSCW 
researchers represent different interests for an effective 
design solution? 
In the present study on remote-control systems, the 
researcher took one side. In the beginning, the researcher 
started the fieldwork at sea to learn how operators work and 
see what was actually happening. After half a year, it was 
clear that the operators were not following the work 
procedures as instructed by systems developers on land. The 
stories and observations from the sea pushed the researcher 
to think about his role in the project. The question was, "As a 
CSCW researcher, am I learning at sea and informing myself 
to develop systems to support cooperative work for the 
operators?" As stated in the beginning of this paper, it was 
not as simple as the researcher supposed. Control theory, 
automation, and many related fields are the core concepts in 
the maritime domain. Although the researcher’s background 
was in software engineering, this helped only with 
understanding some basic principles of designing maritime 
technology in the very beginning.  
After a few field studies, the researcher’s role shifted 
from a systems designer to a facilitator. Informing design 
was out of the scope of the CSCW researcher; instead, the 
important task was to convince systems developers to use 
CSCW insights from the field in a practical sense. This led 
the researcher to work on translating the insights into 
language that might be familiar to developers. The 
translations of the CSCW insights should be seen as 
activities and reactions that were clear-cut and transparent 
[20], just as the CSCW researcher did in the present project 
(i.e., gathering participants and evaluating his own work 
from a non-CSCW viewpoint). In that case, CSCW peers can 
recognize in these simple process forms of language not 
separated by a break from our more complicated ones. 
Thanks to the multidisciplinary background, this 
translation work was not difficult, but it still required the 
CSCW researcher to spend some time understanding how 
systems developers work. This translation work also pushed 
the researcher to jump from the CSCW community to seek 
an external evaluation within the engineering project 
regarding the quality of CSCW research. For example, 
through several workshops from 2016 to 2019, a brighter 
picture of systems developers’ work practices emerged. Not 
surprisingly, systems developers in the maritime domain 
perform the same tasks as the software engineers. Their work 
involves following orders from the project owners and 
carrying out their own work habits. Operators are not truly 
“users,” as their work is to respond to the requests of the 
owners via the fastest and cheapest approach. Systems 
developers stated, “The whole industry works in a 
mechanism like a design-test-deliver-maintenance loop.” 
The researcher learned that knowledge from the participatory 
design field might help.  
To involve participants to achieve a win-win situation 
[58], the researcher considered that a design process should 
respect the operators’ cooperative work, as well as respect 
the systems developers’ work practices. Additionally, the 
process must gain support from shipowners and show them 
that there is room for improvement if they want a safer and 
better workplace for the operators. In addition, if shipowners 
want more professional operators, the owners need to know 
who might have first-hand knowledge in the field. Although 
such knowledge might not be directly useable by systems 
developers, at least shipowners should acknowledge that the 
maritime technology might not be as good as they believe.  
These 
relationships 
among 
systems 
developers, 
operators, educators, and shipowners helped the researcher 
draw a picture of the complexities of designing maritime 
technology. User involvement and the desire to understand 
work practices and processes are different. The researcher 
realized that it should be the responsibility of the CSCW 
community to coordinate all the considerations from various 
participants so that they all fit with their production and to 
270
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

come up with a schedule of completion for a design project 
[59]. The engineering project team had various types of 
knowledge about the work of users in the maritime domain. 
This was a side taken by the researcher to allocate the 
different interests and lead the communication to drive the 
design progress. Achieving good design in an engineering 
project seems to be a challenge for the new generation of 
CSCW community to balance the interests of stakeholders 
with better cooperative systems from the CSCW viewpoint. 
The decision making for a design process depends on how 
CSCW researchers lead the project with professional 
judgment based on several kinds of cooperation: between 
operators and maritime technologies, between operators and 
systems developers, between CSCW researchers and systems 
developers, and between CSCW researchers and project 
sponsors. Without this capability, it would be difficult for 
CSCW to step outside its own community.  
Conducting CSCW research in engineering projects 
pushes a researcher to reflect on whether to keep the 
traditional CSCW work practices, focusing on the 
technology performance to support cooperative work, rather 
than adjusting the research to achieve the goal of creating 
something new by applying methodology against some 
design principle. However, the CSCW researcher may lose 
the chance to develop cooperative systems in the process. 
Carr [59, p. 9] states, “The systems designers in either the 
instructional design or performance technology context must 
address issues of power and resistance, working with the 
leaders to help them see the hazards of leaving the users 
out.” Thus, the present work with stakeholders might create 
an ideal design team and empower users to create visions 
apart from the agenda of the engineering project. Instead of 
controlling the stakeholders group, stakeholders must engage 
in the different takes of negotiating and working with the 
researcher toward a better maritime technology. This shift 
from expert systems developer in an engineering project to 
design facilitator exemplifies the design of systemic change 
movement, which facilitates the evaluation of CSCW 
insights and the work of CSCW researchers in engineering 
projects.  
B. Shaping Engineering Projects with CSCW Insights 
The dynamic role of CSCW researchers in an 
engineering project requires a long-term engagement in the 
investigated domain. Normally CSCW researchers must 
follow the domain effectiveness variables of performance 
and other indicators after one project is complete. In the 
present study, informing the design of a maritime technology 
should be successful outside the maritime context for which 
the technology has been developed. To achieve such a goal, 
CSCW researchers should provide a workable framework for 
generating and sharing sufficient knowledge about a solution 
that may be potentially transferred to other contexts. For 
example, when researchers discuss remote control and safety 
with shipowners, the researchers must know how to use their 
knowledge to tell the shipowners what can be done 
technologically and what should be avoided through the 
policies of the project. As Balka et al. [60] argued, 
developing a framework or tool to open up discussions about 
planning and implementation of information systems is 
important. This discussion is a step toward using CSCW 
insights to shape an engineering project, from the policy 
level to work practices.  
For years, CSCW researchers have called for reforming 
policies through CSCW insights; however, researchers have 
had few opportunities to engage in political discussions and 
policy making [2][5]. In the present study, the researcher 
showed the possibility of shaping the policy of engineering 
projects through language games with systems developers, 
educators, and shipowners. He also used his knowledge to 
draft a scientific infrastructure and expertise [5] of the 
organizational complexities of distributed collaborative 
practices among systems developers, educators, shipowners, 
and operators. Using the form of CSCW insights into an 
engineering project, systems developers would no longer 
struggle to understand the effects of individual users and the 
ties of their own roles in the engineering projects with other 
stakeholders. The researcher removed the barriers of design 
models in the engineering fields and established crucial 
relationships among systems developers, operators, tools, 
and all aspects of practical work, thus demonstrating how 
CSCW can make a great contribution to supporting and 
improving policies, designs, and practices in engineering 
projects. This likely goes beyond the debate of power issues 
in participatory design research [54][58][61] (e.g., power to 
and power over [62][54]), but mainly addresses how CSCW 
researchers can use power as a leverage point [63] among 
stakeholders for designing engineering projects based on 
CSCW insights. Although the present work achieved a small 
success in shaping the engineering project, more studies can 
further explore how CSCW insights could guide policy 
making before the start of an engineering project.  
VII. REFLECTION: BEING A REFLEXIVE INSIDER 
This reflection may help CSCW peers understand the 
choice to combine reflexivity, language games, and CSCW 
research in exploring the maritime domain. The CSCW 
researcher is still active in the maritime domain and has 
271
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

helped introduce changes according to feedback based on 
observations, and where he must intervene to improve 
maritime technology. The intention of this combination is 
two-fold: 1) to deploy useful CSCW research in engineering 
projects, and 2) to contribute to CSCW research with 
practical feedback from the front line of engineering work. If 
the CSCW work on assembling participation and mediating 
outcomes between social and engineering phrases is a 
practical activity in language games, then the reflection on 
the roles and contributions of the researcher to the CSCW 
community is the highest achievement.  
A. Interest-driven CSCW Research in Maritime Design 
Nygaard and Bergo [64] suggested that designers, 
particularly participatory designers, take sides in considering 
the following: 1) improving the knowledge on which 
systems are built while aiming to build a better “tool” for 
users [60]; 2) enabling people to develop realistic 
expectations and reducing resistance to change [65]; and 3) 
increasing workplace democracy by giving the members of 
an organization the right to participate in decisions that are 
likely to affect their work [66]. Different from the objectives, 
the researcher does not side with operators, educators, 
shipowners, or systems developers. Nevertheless, the first 
two suggestions are firmly followed.  
Eyal [67] warned that researchers must consider carefully 
who are the actual experts and who are the lay experts. As 
outsiders in the maritime domain, CSCW researchers may 
not have convincing expert judgment. Although all 
stakeholders have an interest in improving maritime 
technology, “better” is understood differently. For example, 
operators and educators believe that their experience and 
expertise are vital in remote-control systems. Systems 
developers rely heavily on their procedure-based design 
process. Shipowners seek to effectively invest in a project 
and reap the benefits. All these interests involve few or no 
political conflicts. In this case, how could CSCW researchers 
dare to say who is a better participant in designing remote 
control systems? The only certainty is that CSCW 
researchers can balance these interests and explore a design 
point via languages for system developers, and that such 
languages could represent all stakeholders in designing 
organizational frameworks for actions and in designing 
industrial relations [54]. However, unlike participatory 
designers who discuss political and policy contexts in design 
projects, CSCW researchers are interested in collaborating 
with systems developers to bridge the gap between CSCW 
research and CSCW design practice. Some CSCW 
researchers focus on recognizing various materials that have 
different qualities depending on how they are used in 
specific places as intervention areas. However, regardless of 
how the material is bounded through time and space in a 
cooperative work among stakeholders, it is completely static, 
irrespective of the execution of the coordination the material 
prescribes. Thus, CSCW researchers must consider that 
materials stipulate articulation work (e.g., a standard 
operating procedure in a social order) as an invention [68] 
and that such materials can be inscribed as a result (language 
games) of the delegation of social roles to nonhumans [69] 
and humans. In this manner, CSCW researchers can identify 
different aspects of interest in a design project and find the 
most appropriate engineering language (techniques) to 
translate the CSCW insights into various formats that can be 
understood by different stakeholders. Although the formats 
differ, the core interest of the engineering projects is held by 
CSCW researchers; thus, it is a “win-win” situation [58] that 
simplifies, rather than complicates, engineering projects. In 
this way, CSCW researchers can be spokespersons who 
address interactive relations among end-users (operators), 
artefacts, computer systems, systems developers, educators, 
and project sponsors (i.e., shipowners in the present study), 
thus improving their cooperation in such actor networks. 
In the present case, as maritime technology becomes 
increasingly computer supported, the researcher feels that he 
has the responsibility to ensure that the final design benefits 
all stakeholders. By doing so, CSCW insights into designing 
maritime technology should be best used to change the 
mechanism of design in the maritime domain, including 
information technology [70]. In other words, stakeholders’ 
insights do not pertain only to requirement specifications that 
inform design. By representing their interests, the researcher 
should trigger a modus operandi [15] for intervening in the 
project, which can be done by taking specific actions 
regarding when, where, and what forms in the design process 
to support interactive relationships between actors within the 
social–technical 
associations 
between 
humans 
and 
nonhumans. Such interactions are badly needed in 
engineering-oriented fields. 
B. Insider Roles Across Communities 
Regarding the issue of whether CSCW researchers could 
potentially address the social–technical gap, the CSCW 
community is divided. Some believe that it is possible, but 
others think that it will take a long time to achieve the 
division of what we knew socially and what we can support 
technically. Although some researchers advocate for 
intervention [18] as a solution, their peers remain uncertain 
about how to follow the “the guidelines” [37] owing to the 
272
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

lack of reflexivity in interpretive writing. In the present 
study, the researcher worked with a heterogeneous group. 
The work of CSCW goes beyond the CSCW accounts of 
epistemological and theoretical bases. Instead, we must 
understand not only the nature of the ethnographic encounter 
and its methodology but also the data sets collected in 
engineering work. Instead of discussing people as the objects 
of study through the so-called participant observation, the 
present study points out that CSCW researchers must take 
their own embodied experiences in the context of personal 
relationships to gain and exchange knowledge with 
stakeholders. It is not just a matter of methodology, such as 
writing detailed field notes and showing videos about 
practices. It is also a matter of relational epistemology in 
which a kind of language game is used to translate the 
CSCW insights into images that make sense to the 
stakeholders. Otherwise, if a CSCW study is inherently 
experiential, then it loses the voice in its writing, which in 
turn, limits our insights into the data and our ability to use 
them in design. Thus, a constant assessment of the 
relationship between knowledge and “the ways of doing 
knowledge” must be undertaken. 
Positioning CSCW research in engineering projects also 
concerns reciprocal relationships with stakeholders [71]. In 
Beaulieu’s [71] definition, the value of relationships in 
different fields in ethnographic studies goes beyond the 
central notion of face-to-face interaction to the co-presence 
with the ethnographer during the research. As the present 
study shows, the relationships among the stakeholders and 
between the stakeholders and the researcher had nothing to 
do with negotiating the conflicts of interest. Rather, the 
relationships among them were based on self-interest and 
then extended to integrate their willingness to participate in 
the network of actors. The participants all want their interests 
to be traceable and consistently represented by someone. The 
researcher of the present study coincidentally crossed various 
sites and moments during the research to successfully 
formulate representations that were useful to all. Perhaps 
another researcher could do the same. 
Thus, a few years after completing the research work, the 
researcher feels that he has no value-neutral stance in his 
research work in the maritime domain. CSCW researchers 
should make themselves explicit to stakeholders so that the 
latter can better understand their own interests, which, along 
with their reasons and motivations, are articulated by CSCW 
research. In this manner, CSCW researchers should make 
explicit their ideological assumptions to allow CSCW peers 
to see the world in which a researcher is embedded. 
Moreover, 
CSCW 
peers 
could 
create 
their 
own 
interpretations of the case study of engineering projects and 
reflect on their own assumptions and mindsets relative to the 
projects. On one hand, the purpose is to triangulate the 
sources of evidence with other peers although they use 
different contexts. Regardless of whether the context is the 
maritime domain or the healthcare domain, they all work 
with and within a heterogeneous group. In such cases, how 
should they share their reflexive insiders’ views of 
epistemology and methodology in deploying CSCW insights 
in the design process? [39]. On the other hand, it is not a 
matter that only a CSCW researcher must address. It is also a 
matter of how CSCW researchers communicate with others, 
i.e., a way of creating opportunities to participate in an 
engineering project as early as possible. In the present study, 
the researcher, systems developers, and shipowners did not 
share the same mindsets in learning from experience. Thus, a 
dialogue between the three forms of knowledge helped 
promote mutual improvement and anchored the relevance of 
the CSCW research in policy making for design projects in 
the maritime domain. The change was created in the present 
work to influence epistemological assumptions, whereas the 
previous experience in the field influenced the dialogic 
process. It is likely that the best option is to position people 
(including the researcher) in the center when designing the 
usefulness of technology. Through the dialogue and the 
leverage point between stakeholders engaged in the research, 
it would be possible for peers to investigate and criticize the 
accounts of interventions, thus assessing whether the 
interpretations are valid. 
C. Connecting Communities of Practice  
Owing to the unique background of the researcher in the 
present work, his involvement in a group designing maritime 
technology was more than a quest to improve current design 
practices in multidisciplinary fields. To make sense of the 
problems, the researcher faced the issues in the maritime 
domain 
and 
attempted 
to 
create 
something 
new. 
Representing the group of practitioners–researchers in 
systems design, CSCW research is different in the 
engineering field, not only because it is new but also because 
it is considered a foreign element that is typically rejected by 
a group of professionals. The nature of the work practice of a 
professional community is to transform the status quo by 
new ways of working and interacting rather than by 
accommodating a completely new element. CSCW insights 
are examples in the present study.  
Jackson et al. [5] proposed that CSCW has fewer 
concerns about translating its theoretical knowledge into 
forms and instruments that can be used by wider 
273
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

communities. 
The 
researcher 
initially 
faced 
similar 
challenges while working on the design of maritime 
technology, in which remote-control systems comprised only 
one of several design projects. The new generation of CSCW 
researchers may be different from the first-generation 
predecessors in that the former know about human-centered 
computing, how to do fieldwork, and how to translate their 
findings 
into 
special 
formats 
that 
can 
be 
easily 
communicated to systems developers [7]. However, the new 
generation of CSCW researchers may miss long-term 
engagement and design-sensitive analysis in dealing with 
their reflections on how they connect different communities. 
Most CSCW research is iterative in terms of the design 
process and does not challenge the lack of reflective voices 
[45] in the community. When researchers seek intervention 
as a bridge between research and practice, they might fall 
into their existing cognitive knowledge and create their own 
artificial worlds as they seek their own language in doing 
design. They may focus on exploring the inner symbolic 
space of a paradigm and try to convince others to believe that 
their languages are universal and useful. This, however, 
might be wrong.  
If they do not accept procedure-oriented engineering 
work, is it correct to assume that CSCW can provide a 
solution? Suchman [72] suggested that we might need to find 
a customized solution rather than a universal solution for 
each engineering project. The challenge behind this idea is 
not only the cognitive aspect of engineering work and 
CSCW research. Rather, it requires the development of 
radically new forms of scientific inquiry. In this article, the 
researcher reported and discussed his theoretical struggles 
and success in interpretive empirical research to fulfill the 
forms of scientific inquiry in connecting communities of 
practice. In a heterogeneous group, collaboration in 
designing a remote-control system is not a straightforward 
process. When reading the CSCW literature, the researcher 
always turns on the software engineer mode to review praxis 
[40]. It is quite a challenge. Although he holds two sets of 
knowledge (CSCW and software engineering), he should 
have different perspectives on what has been read and should 
be considered equal contributions to knowledge. However, in 
a heterogeneous group, this inner attribute of his CSCW 
knowledge becomes both “he/him” and “others.” This is 
because the designer of remote-control systems is not the 
CSCW researcher or the CSCW practitioner. Instead, most 
of the work still depends on control engineering principles, 
and the scientific inquiry entails extensive empirical data and 
practical requirements, as well as a theoretical framework 
that might be perceived as disconnected from social 
construction [73]. Thus, for a CSCW researcher who has 
been uniquely trained in two fields, working in the complete 
unstructured maritime domain is a challenge. CSCW 
researchers must give their peers the tools to criticize their 
accounts of the work practice in the workplace. The 
researchers also need to play language games with systems 
developers to investigate the usefulness of the contribution 
from the CSCW perspective.  
In the present work, although no one forced the 
researcher to make notes and work-in-progress drafts made 
available to all members of the project, he realized that 
opening up the data sets helped fulfill hermeneutic cycles 
and multiple interpretations. In interviews with systems 
developers, the CSCW perspective of maritime technology 
led to further discussions. Thus, multiple interpretations of 
the benefits and why the project should design alternatives 
became possible. The CSCW approach also made it possible 
for the systems developers, operators, educators, and 
shipowners to discuss the situation and switch from a 
cooperative project in which everyone had his or her own 
spot to engage in truly collaborative work. Moreover, the 
systems developers and the CSCW researchers recognized 
the value of reflectivity and language games. This is 
important in the discipline of design within CSCW and 
engineering. All stakeholders of the engineering projects 
could find a way forward to be comfortable with the various 
interests presented and reflect on them via a language game 
to find the optimal solution.  
VIII. CONCLUSION 
This paper discussed the use of reflexivity and language 
games in CSCW research when working across different 
communities. A case study of reassembling participation to 
improve the design of remote-control systems for all 
stakeholders was used as the background story. The 
reflective writing in this article offers a view of how CSCW 
insights and engineering practices have been transformed 
during the engagement of the CSCW researcher in designing 
maritime technology. In the last seven years, the CSCW 
interpretation of designing maritime technology suffered 
from blind spots. 
However, following interpretive research and the 
knowledge and experience gained in CSCW research, the 
reward was not the creation of meaningful change. Instead, 
the reward came in the form of a better understanding of the 
challenges and opportunities related to bridging the gaps 
between applying CSCW insights and conducting research in 
CSCW within and outside the CSCW community to make 
real contributions to other fields.  
274
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

As a result, the article suggests that the development of 
CSCW insights in the engineering fields should strongly 
focus on the participation of stakeholders, not only those 
who would use the technology but also those who fund and 
develop the technology. By doing so, CSCW researchers 
could learn more about self-reflection, self-revelation, and 
self-evaluation in making a contribution to the industry and 
the positive influence they may have in terms of encouraging 
policymakers to rethink framework development in the 
engineering field. In conducting research in the maritime 
domain, the CSCW researcher found that the best way is to 
reinterpret one’s own research findings and activities and 
combine them in a wider scientific discourse by using the 
Wittgensteinian concept of the language games. 
If intervention is an unavoidable condition of CSCW 
research in engineering projects, then by being there, the 
researcher could connect communities of practice and help 
make a difference by affecting the practice being studied. 
The case in this paper, the translation of the research work, 
the qualitative inquiry developed in the paper, and the 
reflective materials the researcher wrote are all tools that 
could serve the CSCW community and the community from 
which the CSCW insights emerged. The rest is up to others, 
within and outside the CSCW community, who want to 
confirm their own values to balance their position with the 
CSCW insights in their own work. As a result, the gap 
between research and practice within and outside CSCW 
research could be reduced. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I wish to thank the anonymous reviewers for their 
informative and constructive comments on the early 
manuscript for the ACHI 2020 Conference. I also wish to 
thank the reviewers and the editor of Advances in Intelligent 
Systems. I am grateful for the sincere support of all the 
participants of the ongoing project since 2015. Thanks also 
go to Prof. David Randall for sharing his personal digital 
library with the author. This work is supported by the 
author’s home institution, the Research Council of Norway, 
and by the Norwegian Shipowner’s Association.    
REFERENCES 
[1] Y. Pan, “Being a Reflexive Insider: The Case of Designing 
Maritime Technology,” in ACHI 2020, The Thirteenth 
International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human 
Interactions, 2020, pp. 283–293. 
[2] S. J. Jackson, T. Gillespie, and S. Payette, “The Policy Knot: 
Re-integraing Policy, Practice and Design in CSCW Studies 
of Social Computing,” in ACM CSCW 2014, 2014, pp. 588–
602. 
[3] X. Li, Z. Zhang, and A.-K. Saeema, “The sources and 
methods 
of 
engineering 
design 
requirement,” 
Adv. 
Transdiscipl. Eng., vol. 1, pp. 1–10, 2014. 
[4] S. Bødker and O. S. Iversen, “Staging a professional 
participatory design practice - Moving PD beyond the initial 
fascination of user involvement,” in NordiCHI 2002, 2002, 
pp. 11–18. 
[5] S. J. Jackson, S. B. Steinhardt, and A. Buyuktur, “Why 
CSCW needs science policy (and vice versa),” in ACM 
CSCW’13, 2013, pp. 1113–1124. 
[6] K. Grønbæl, M. Kyng, and P. Mogensen, “CSCW challenges: 
Cooperative design in engineering projects,” Commun. ACM, 
vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 67–77, 1993. 
[7] Y. Pan, “From field to simulator: visualizing ethnographic 
outcomes to support systems developers,” PhD thesis, 
University of Oslo, 2018. 
[8] G. Button and W. Sharrock, “Project work: The organisation 
of collaborative design and development in software 
engineering,” Comput. Support. Coop. Work, vol. 5, pp. 369–
386, 1996. 
[9] J. Gärtner and I. Wagner, “Mapping actors and agendas: 
political frameworks of systems design and participation,” 
Human-Computer Interact., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 187–214, 1996. 
[10] J. Bansler and E. Havn, “Sensemaking in Technology-Use 
Mediation: 
Adapting 
Groupware 
Technology 
in 
Organizations,” Comput. Support. Coop. Work, vol. 15, pp. 
55–91, 2006. 
[11] L. Deng, G. Wang, and S. Yu, “Layout Design of Human-
Machine Interaction Interface of Cabin Based on Cognitive 
Ergonomics and GA-ACA,” Comput. Intell. Neurosci., pp.1-
12, 2016. 
[12] G. Pahl, W. Beitz, J. Feldhusen, and K.-H. H. Grote, 
Engineering design: A systematic approach, 3rd ed. Springer-
Verlag London, 2007. 
[13] J. A. Hughes, D. Randall, and D. Shapiro, “From 
ethnographic record to system design - Some experiences 
from the field,” Comput. Support. Coop. Work, vol. 1, no. 3, 
pp. 123–141, 1992. 
[14] Y. Pan and S. Finken, “Visualising Actor Network for 
Cooperative Systems in Marine Technology,” in Technology 
and Intimacy: Choice or Coercion: 12th IFIP TC 9 
International Conference on Human Choice and Computers, 
HCC12 
2016, 
Salford, 
UK, 
September 
7-9, 
2016, 
Proceedings, vol. 474, D. Kreps, G. Fletcher, and M. 
Griffiths, Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2016, 
pp. 178–190. 
[15] Y. Pan and S. Finken, “From Offshore Operation to Onshore 
Simulator: Using Visualized Ethnographic Outcomes to Work 
with Systems Developers,” Informatics, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1-
22, 2018. 
[16] R. Bentley and D. Randall, “Tutorial notes,” in CSCW 2004, 
2004. 
[17] K. Schmidt and L. J. Bannon, “Taking CSCW Seriously. 
Supporting Articulation Work,” J. Collab. Comput. Work 
Pract., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 7–40, 1992. 
[18] P. Bjørn and N. Boulus-Rødje, “The Multiple Intersecting 
Sites of Design in CSCW Research,” Comput. Support. Coop. 
Work CSCW An Int. J., vol. 24, pp. 319-351, 2015. 
[19] P. Ehn, “Language games: A Wittgensteinian Alternative,” in 
Work Oriented Design of Computer Artefacts, 1988, pp. 103–
122. 
[20] L. Wittgenstein, The Blue and Brown Books: Preliminary 
Studies for the “Philosophical Investigations,” 20th ed. 
Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing, 1958. 
[21] M. S. Ackerman, “Intellectual challenge of CSCW: the gap 
between social requirements and technical feasibility,” 
275
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Human-Computer Interact., vol.15, no. 2-3, pp. 179-203, 
2000. 
[22] A. Carbtree, “Talking work: Language-games, organisations 
and computer supported cooperative work,” Comput. Support. 
Coopeative Work, vol. 9, pp. 215–237, 2000. 
[23] P. Dourish, “Implications for design,” in Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in computing systems, 
2006, pp. 541–550. 
[24] J. A. Gershenson and L. A. Stauffer, “The creation of a 
taxonomy for manufacturability design requirements,” in Proc 
1995 
ASME 
Design 
Technical 
Conferences 
- 
7th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Design 
Theory 
and 
Methodology, 1995, pp. 305–314. 
[25] W. Brace and K. Thramboulidis, “From requirements to 
design specifications - a formal approach,” in International 
Design Conference, 2010, pp. 639–650. 
[26] DNV GL, “Remote-controlled and autonomous ships,” 
Technical Report, 2018. 
[27] T. Porathe, J. Prison, and Y. Man, “Situation awareness in 
remote control centres for unmanned ships,” in Human factors 
in ship design & operations, 2014, pp.1-8. 
[28] R. Rylander and Y. Man, “Autonomous safety on vessels,” 
Technical report, 2016. 
[29] M. A. Ramos, I. B. Utne, and A. Mosleh, “On factors 
affecting autonomous ships operators performance in a shore 
control center,” in Probabilistic safety assessment and 
management PSAM 14, 2018, pp. 1–12. 
[30] M. Wahlström, J. Hakulinen, H. Karvonen, and I. Lindborg, 
“Human factors challenges in unmanned ship operations - 
insights from other domains,” in 6th International Conference 
on Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics and the Affiliated 
Conferences, 2015, pp. 1038–1045. 
[31] Unkonwn, “Research on the Impacts of Marine Autonomous 
Surface Ship on the Seafarer’s Career and MET,” 2018. 
[32] Danish Maritime Authority, “Analysis of regulatory barriers 
to the use of autonomous ships,” Technical report, 2017. 
[33] A. Komianos, “The Autonomous Shipping Era. Operational, 
Regulatory, and Quality Challenges,” TransNav, Int. J. Mar. 
Navig. Saf. Sea Transp., 12, 2, pp. 335-348, 2018. 
[34] T. K. Lee, “Liability of autonomous ship: The Scandinavian 
perspecive: How the liability regimes shall be regulated in the 
Scandinavian region?,” Master Thesis, University of Oslo, 
2016. 
[35] M. B. Calas and L. Smircich, “Re-writing gender into 
organizational 
theorizing: 
directions 
from 
feminist 
perspectives,” M. R. M. Hughes, Ed. Thousand Oaks: Sage, 
1992, pp. 227–253. 
[36] M. Burawoy, “The extended case method,” Sociol. Theory, 
vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 4–33, 1998. 
[37] J. Malaurent and D. Avison, “Reflexivity: A third essential 
‘R’ to enhance interpretive field studies,” Inf. Manag., 54, 7, 
pp. 920-933, 2017. 
[38] S. Bødker, “When second wave HCI meets third wave 
challenges,” in ACM International Conference Proceeding 
Series, 2006, pp. 1-8. 
[39] H. C. Geirbo, “Knowing through relations. On the 
epistemology and methodology of being a relflexive insider,” 
Interacation Des. Archit., vol. 38, pp. 107–123, 2018. 
[40] W. J. Orlikowski and J. J. Baroudi, “Study information 
technology in organizations: research approaches and 
assumptions,” Infor.Syst.Res, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 1–28, 1991. 
[41] D. Randall, “Investigation and Design,” in Social Informatics 
- A practice-based perspective on the design and use of IT 
artifacts, V. Wulf, V. Pipek, D. Randall, M. Rohde, K. 
Schmidt, and G. Stevens, Eds. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2018, pp. 221–241. 
[42] L. Wittgenstein, Philosophical investigations, Transl. G. E. M. 
Anscombe, P. M. S. Hacker and Joachim Schulte, 4th ed.  
Oxford: Blackwell Publishing. 
[43] A. Gentes, The In-Discipline of Design Bridging the Gap 
Between Humanities and Engineering. Cham, Switzerland: 
Springer International Publishing, 2017. 
[44] G. E. Marcus, Ethnography through thick and thin. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1998. 
[45] J. A. Rode, “Reflexivity in digital anthropology,” in 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - 
Proceedings, 2011, pp. 123-132. 
[46] R. Turner, Computational artifacts: Towards a philosophy of 
computer science. Colchester: Springer Nature, 2018. 
[47] A. Dittmar and P. Forbrig, “Integrating personas and use case 
models,” in INTERACT 2019, 2019, pp. 666–686. 
[48] W. E. Mackay, “Educating multi-disciplinary design teams,” 
in Tales of the Disappearing Computer, 2003, pp. 1-5. 
[49] Q. Peng and J.-B. Martens, “Design requirements of tools 
supporting reflection on design impact,” in INTERACT 2019, 
2019, pp. 609–622. 
[50] L. Suchman, “Located accountabilities in technology 
production,” Scand. J. Inf. Syst., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 1–15, 
2002. 
[51] L. J. Bannon, “From human factors to human actors: the role 
of psychology and human-computer interaction studies in 
system design,” in Design at work: cooperative design of 
computer systems, R. M. Baecker, J. Grudin, W. A. S. 
Buxton, and S. B. T.-R. in H. I. Greenberg, Eds. Morgan 
Kaufmann, 1992, pp. 25–44. 
[52] P. Bjørn, L. Ciolfi, M. Ackerman, G. Fitzpatrick, and V. 
Wulf, “Practice-based CSCW research: ECSCW bridging 
arocss the Atlantic,” in CSCW ’16, 2016, pp. 210–219. 
[53] A. Richter and M. Koch, “Interviews with Volker Wulf and 
Myriam Lewkowicz on ‘The European Tradition of CSCW,’” 
Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng., vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 175–179, 2018. 
[54] T. Bratteteig and I. Wagner, “What is a participatory design 
result?,” in PDC’16, 2016, pp. 141–150. 
[55] European Commission, “Centres of vocational excellence,” 
European Union Official Website, 2019. [Online]. Available: 
https://eacea.ec.europa.eu/erasmus-plus/actions/centres-of-
vocational-excellence_en. [Accessed: 10-NOV-2020]. 
[56] E. 
Commission, 
“Improving 
impact 
and 
broadening 
stakholder engagement in support of transport research and 
innovation,” European Union Official Webpage, 2019. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://cordis.europa.eu/programme/id/H2020_MG-4-10-
2020. [Accessed: 10-NOV-2020]. 
[57] D. Randall, R. Harper, and M. Rouncefield, Fieldwork for 
design: theory and practice. London: Springer-Verlag 
London, 2007. 
[58] S. Bødker and P.-O. Zander, “Participation in design between 
public sector and local communities,” in 7th International 
conference on communities and technologies, 2015, pp. 49–
58. 
[59] A. A. Carr, “User-Design in the Creation of Human Learning 
Systems,” Educ. Technol. Res. Dev., vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 5–22, 
1997. 
[60] E. Balka, P. Bjorn, and I. Wagner, “Steps toward a typology 
for health informatics,” in Proceedings of the ACM 
Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 
CSCW, 2008, pp. 515-524. 
[61] E. Balka, “Broadening discussion about participatory design,” 
Scand. J. Inf. Syst., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 77–84, 2010. 
[62] P. Pansardi, “Power to and power over: two distinct concepts 
of power,” J. Polit. Power, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 73–89, 2012. 
276
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[63] D. Meadows, “Leverage Points: Places to intervene in a 
system,” Solutions, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 41-49, 1999. 
[64] K. Nygaard and O. T. Bergo, “The trade unions-New users of 
research,” Pers. Rev., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 5–10, 1975. 
[65] P. Bachrach and M. S. Baratz, “Power and Its Two Faces 
Revisited: A Reply to Geoffrey Debnam,” Am. Polit. Sci. 
Rev., vol. 69, no, 3, pp. 900-904, 1975. 
[66] G. Bjerknes and T. Bratteteig, “User participation and 
democracy: A discussion of Scandinavian research on system 
development,” Scand. J. Inf. Syst., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 258–266, 
1995. 
[67] G. Eyal, The crisis of expertise. Cambridge, UK: Polity, 2019. 
[68] K. Schmidt, “Of maps and scripts - the status of formal 
constructs in cooperative work,” in the International ACM 
SIGGROUP conference on Supporting Group Work: the 
integration challenge, 1997, pp. 138–147. 
[69] K. Schmidt and I. Wagner, “Ordering systems: coordinative 
practices and artefacts in architectural design and planning,” 
Comput. Coop. Work, vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 349–408, 2004. 
[70] I. Di Loreto and K. L. H. Ting, “Sense and sensibility: 
Designing a museum exhibition with visually impaired 
people,” Interact. Des. Archit., vol. 38, pp. 155–183, 2018. 
[71] A. Beaulieu, “From co-location to co-presence: Shifts in the 
use of ethnography for the study of knowledge,” Soc. Stud. 
Sci., vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 453-470, 2010. 
[72] L. A. Suchman, Human-Machine Reconfiguration. Plans and 
Situated Actions, 2nd ed. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press, 2007. 
[73] L. Mathiassen and A. Sandberg, “How a professionally 
qualified doctoral student bridged the practice-research gap: 
A confessional account of Collaborative Practice Research,” 
Eur. J. Inf. Syst., vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 695-726, 2013. 
 
277
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

