411
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
Towards an Optimal Positioning of Multiple Mobile Sinks in WSNs for Buildings
Leila Ben Saad, Bernard Tourancheau
LIP UMR 5668 of CNRS-ENS Lyon-INRIA-UCB Lyon
Lyon, France
{Leila.Ben.Saad, Bernard.Tourancheau}@ens-lyon.fr
Abstract
The need for wireless sensor networks is rapidly growing
in a wide range of applications specially for buildings
automation. In such networks, a large number of sensors
with limited energy supply are in charge of relaying the
sensed data hop by hop to the nearest sink. The sensors
closest to the sinks deplete their energy much faster than
distant nodes because they carry heavy trafﬁc which causes
prematurely the end of the network lifetime. Employing
mobile sinks can alleviate this problem by distributing the
high trafﬁc load among the sensors and increase the network
lifetime. In this work, we aim to ﬁnd the best way to relocate
sinks inside buildings by determining their optimal locations
and the duration of their sojourn time. Therefore, we propose
an Integer Linear Program for multiple mobile sinks which
directly maximizes the network lifetime instead of minimizing
the energy consumption or maximizing the residual energy,
which is what was done in previous solutions. We evalu-
ated the performance of our approach by simulation and
compared it with others schemes. The results show that
our solution extends signiﬁcantly the network lifetime and
balances notably the energy consumption among the nodes.
Index Terms
Wireless Sensor Networks, Sinks positioning, Mobile
sinks, Network lifetime, Integer Linear Programming.
1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed an increasing need for wire-
less sensor networks (WSNs) in a wide range of applications
specially for buildings automation. In fact, the WSNs can
be used as a way to reduce the waste of energy inside
buildings by reporting essential information from the in-
door environment allowing, for instance, to turn off the
unnecessary electric appliances in the rooms. Nevertheless,
wireless sensor networks deployment inside buildings is a
very challenging problem[1]. Such networks are composed
of low cost tiny devices with sensing, data processing and
communication capabilities. These sensors have a short oper-
ational life because they are equipped with a limited number
of batteries supplying energy. Moreover, it is usually imprac-
tical and even impossible to replace or recharge them. The
sensors, which are densely deployed in the area of interest,
measure and monitor their indoor environment (temperature,
humidity, light, sound, etc.,) and collaborate to forward these
measurements towards the nearest resource-rich collector,
referred to as the sink node. The sensor nodes which are
far away from the sink use multi-hops communication. This
mean of communication makes the sensors near the sinks
deplete their energy much faster than distant nodes because
they carry the packets of sensors located farther away in
addition to their own packets. Therefore, what is known as
a hole appears around the sinks and makes distant nodes
unreachable and unable to send their data. Consequently,
the network lifetime ends prematurely.
More and more efforts have been done recently to im-
prove the lifetime of WSNs. Many communication proto-
cols have been proposed including among others topology
control[2][3], routing[4][5] and clustering[6]. However, fur-
ther improvement can be achieved if we relocate the sinks in
order to change over time the nodes located close to them.
Thus, this can solve the energy hole problem and guarantee
balanced energy consumption among the nodes.
In this work, our purpose is to determine where to place
multiple sinks inside buildings, how long they have to stay
in certain locations and where to move them to extend
optimally the network lifetime. To answer these questions,
we propose an Integer Linear Program (ILP) for multiple
mobile sinks whose objective function directly maximizes
the network lifetime instead of minimizing the energy con-
sumption or maximizing the residual energy, which is what
was done in previous solutions[7][8].
The contribution of our work concerns not only the deﬁ-
nition of an ILP which determines the optimal locations of
multiple mobile sinks but also shows that relocating mobile
sinks inside a whole network is more efﬁcient than relocating
mobile sinks inside different clusters. Simulation results
show that with our proposed solution, the network lifetime
is extended and the energy consumption is more balanced
among the nodes. Moreover, the lifetime improvement that
can be achieved when relocating 3 sinks in a network with
hundred sensors is almost 230 % in our experiments. Such
results can provide useful guidelines for real wireless sensor
network deployment.

412
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section
2, we review the previously proposed approaches to solve
the energy hole problem and extend the network lifetime in
WSNs. Section 3 describes the system model including the
major assumptions. Section 4 presents the formulation of our
proposed ILP for multiple mobile sinks. Section 5 evaluates
the performance of the proposed solution and presents the
experimental results. Section 6 concludes the paper.
2. Related Work
In order to improve the network lifetime of WSNs, many
researchers looked for approaches that help to solve the
energy hole problem. Several solutions proposed to place
more sensor nodes around the sink[9][10][11]. This solution
is called nonuniform node distribution and consists in adding
nodes to the areas with heavier trafﬁc in order to create
different node densities. However, these solutions are not
always feasible in practice and result in unbalanced sensing
coverage over different regions of the network.
Another way of optimizing the network lifetime is to use
multiple sinks instead of one in order to decrease the average
of packets that has to pass through the nodes close to the
sinks. The location of these sinks has a great inﬂuence on
the network lifetime. For this reason, many works focused
on the optimal placement of multiple static sinks in WSNs.
The majority of the sinks placement problem formulations
are NP-complete depending on the assumptions and network
model. Therefore to reduce this complexity, approximation
algorithms were used[12] and heuristics were adopted to
reduce the energy dissipation at each node[13]. In [14], the
problem was formulated by a linear programming model to
ﬁnd the optimal positions of static sinks and the optimal
trafﬁc ﬂow rate of routing paths in WSNs.
Most of the optimal multi-sinks positioning approaches
described previously contribute to increase the network
lifetime. Nevertheless, it was proved in [15] that using a
mobile sink is more efﬁcient than a static one and achieves
further improvements in network lifetime by distributing the
load of the nodes close to the sink. Furthermore, the sink
mobility has many other advantages. In fact, it can improve
the connectivity of the isolated sensors and may guarantee
the sink security in case of malicious attacks.
The majority of related works studied the mobility of
a single sink[15][16][17][18][19][20]. But, very few re-
searches focused on the mobility of multiple sinks. In [17],
the solution of repositioning a single sink is extended to
a network with several sinks by dividing it into several
clusters. Each sink can only move in its cluster.
There are basically three categories of sink mobility.
Mobile sink may move in a ﬁxed path[15], may take a
random path[21] or may move in optimal locations in terms
of network lifetime and energy consumption.
The authors of the paper [15] suggested that the sink
moves on the periphery of the network to gather the data
of the sensors deployed within a circle. The authors of [21]
proposed to use ”Data Mules” which move randomly on the
sensor ﬁeld and collect data from the nodes.
An often used way to determine the locations of mobile
sinks in the third category is to develop an algorithm.
Some proposed algorithms make a moving decision of
sinks according to the complete knowledge of the energy
distribution of the sensors. In [22], the sinks move towards
the nodes that have the highest residual energy. But, this
strategy requires that the sensors send periodically to the sink
additional information about their energy level to allow the
sink to found out the nodes which have the highest energy.
By doing so, a lot of energy will be wasted.
Some others algorithms ﬁnd the locations of mobile
sinks by solving a mathematical model[23][24]. In [23], the
algorithm minimizes the average distances between sensors
and nearest sinks. In [24], the algorithm selects the locations
of sinks in the periphery of the network in such way that the
difference between the maximum and the minimum residual
energy of nodes is minimized.
To ﬁnd the optimal locations of mobile sinks, some pro-
posals formulated the problem as an Integer Linear Program
ILP. In [8], the proposed ILP maximizes the minimum
residual energy over all nodes. In [7], the proposed ILP
minimizes the energy consumed at each node.
Most of proposed approaches to determine the locations
of multiple mobile sinks in WSNs are centered on energy
minimization. In our work, a different formulation of the
problem is proposed, where the ILP proposed directly max-
imizes the network lifetime instead of minimizing the energy
consumption or maximizing the residual energy. To us, this
is closer to the need of sensors deployment in building
monitoring for instance.
3. System Model
In order to deploy sensors and sinks inside buildings, we
made the following assumptions for the system model.
3.1. Network Model
- All sensors are statically placed in a bi-dimensional grid
of same size cells constructed from the building plan
as shown in Figure 1.
- All sensors have a limited initial energy supply and a
ﬁxed transmission range equal to the distance between
two nodes (i.e, cell size).
- Each sensor regularly generates the same amount of
data.
- The number of sinks is ﬁxed and known beforehand.
- The sinks can be located only in feasible sites where
they are connected to power supply and the Internet.

413
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
Figure 1. 10x10 Grid of cells with 100 sensors
- The sinks keep moving in the grid from one feasible
site to another one until the network lifetime end.
- The network lifetime is deﬁned as the time until the
ﬁrst sensor dies (i.e, it uses up its residual energy).
- The sinks should stay at a feasible site for at least a
certain duration of time. At the end of this duration,
they may stay or change of location.
- The traveling time of sinks between feasible sites is
considered negligible for analytical simplicity.
- The sensor nodes which are not co-located with any
sinks inside the grid, relay their generated data via
multiple hops to reach the nearest sink.
- An ideal MAC layer with no collisions and retransmis-
sions is assumed.
- In our assumptions, only the energy consumption for
communication is considered due to the fact that com-
munication is the dominant power consumer in a sensor
node.
3.2. Routing and Path Selection
The sensor nodes which are not co-located with any sinks
inside the grid send their generated data hop by hop to the
nearest sink. When a sensor node is located in the same
horizontal or vertical line of the nearest sink position, there
is only one shortest path between the two nodes. Otherwise,
there are multiple shortest paths. In our routing protocol like
in [18], we route ”per dimension”. We consider only the two
paths along the perimeter of the rectangle, i.e., paths 1 and
2 in Figure 2. These two routes are considered equivalent.
3.3. Power Consumption
To calculate the power consumption, we consider the same
realistic model as in [25]. Therefore, the power expended to
transmit a L1-bit/s to a distance d is:
PTx = L1γ1 + L1γ2dβ
(1)
Figure 2. Path selection
where γ1 is the energy consumption factor indicating the
power consumed per bit by the sensor to activate transceiver
circuitry, γ2 is the energy consumption factor indicating the
power consumed per bit by the transmit ampliﬁer to achieve
an acceptable energy per bit over noise spectral density and
β is the path loss exponent. The power expended to receive
L2-bit/s in the same radio model is:
PRx = L2α
(2)
where α is the energy consumption factor indicating the
power consumed per bit at receiver circuit. Thus, the total
energy consumed by a sensor node per time unit is:
Ptotal = PTx + PRx = L1(γ1 + γ2dβ) + L2α
(3)
4. Integer Linear Programming Formulation
The WSN is represented by the graph G(V, E), where
V = S ∪ F and E ⊆ V × V . S represents the set of
sensors nodes, F represents the set of feasible sites and
E represents the set of wireless links. We distinguish two
scenarios with mobile sinks. The ﬁrst one is when there are
multiple sinks moving in the entire network. The second one
is when there are multiple sinks moving separately inside
different clusters.
4.1. Mobile sinks moving in the entire network
The parameters and variables used to describe the
problem are the following:
• Parameters
- m is the number of sinks.
- T (s) is the minimum duration of common time
units for which the sink should stay at a certain
feasible site.
- e0 (J) is the initial energy of each sensor.
- eT (J/bit) is the energy consumption coefﬁcient for
transmitting one bit.
- eR (J/bit) is the energy consumption coefﬁcient for
receiving one bit.
- gr (bit/s) is the rate at which data packets are
generated.

414
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
- rk
ij (bit/s) is the data transmission rate from node
i to node j where the nearest sink stays at node k.
- N k
i is the set of i’s neighbors whose their nearest
sink is at node k.
- p
k1k2...km
i
(J/s) is the power consumed in sending
and receiving data by sensor node i when the
ﬁrst sink is located at node k1, the second sink is
located at node k2 etc. and the m-th sink is located
at node km.
- pk
i (J/s) is the power consumed in sending and
receiving data by sensor node i when the nearest
sink is located at node k, k ∈ F.
• Variables
- Z (s) is the network lifetime.
- lk1k2...km is an integer variable which represents
the number of times when the ﬁrst sink is located
at node k1, the second sink is located at node k2
etc. and the m-th sink is located at node km for
a duration of time T, k1 ∈ F, k2 ∈ F and km ∈ F.
max Z =
X
k1∈F
X
k2∈F
...
X
km∈F
T lk1k2...km
(4)
X
k1∈F
X
k2∈F
...
X
km∈F
T lk1k2...km p
k1k2...km
i
≤ e0, i ∈ S (5)
lk1k2...km ≥ 0, k1 ∈ F, k2 ∈ F, ..., km ∈ F
(6)
The equation (4) maximizes the network lifetime and
determines the sojourn times of all sinks at feasible sites. The
equation (5) assures that the energy consumed in receiving
and transmitting data by each sensor node doesn’t exceed its
initial energy. This energy is computed when the ﬁrst sink
is located at node k1, the second sink is located at node k2
etc. and the m-th sink is located at node km.
The power p
k1k2...km
i
is computed as following:
p
k1k2...km
i
= pk
i
(7)
where k=NearestSink(k1, k2, ..., km, i), NearestSink is
a function which returns the nearest sink node to sensor node
i. This sink node is determined by choosing the shortest path
as presented in Section 3.2.
In our model, the energy consumption coefﬁcient for
transmitting a bit denoted by eT and the energy consumption
coefﬁcient for receiving a bit denoted by eR are constant:
eT = γ1 + γ2dβ
(8)
eR = α
(9)
From the equation (3), the total power consumed at a
sensor node is:
Ptotal = eT L1 + eRL2
(10)
Therefore, the pk
i is calculated as follows[18]:
pk
i = eR
X
j:i∈N k
j
rk
ji + eT
X
j∈N k
i
rk
ij, i ∈ S, k ∈ F, i ̸= k (11)
pk
i = eT gr, i ∈ S, k ∈ F, i = k
(12)
At each node, the total of outgoing packets is equal to the
total incoming packets plus the data packets generated[18]:
X
j:i∈N k
j
rk
ji + gr =
X
j∈N k
i
rk
ij, i ∈ S, k ∈ F
(13)
Using the two equations (11) and (13), we obtain:
pk
i = eR
X
j:i∈N k
j
rk
ji+eT (
X
j:i∈N k
j
rk
ji+gr), i ∈ S, k ∈ F, i ̸= k
(14)
4.2. Mobile sinks moving separately in clusters
In this section, we formulate an ILP for a network
divided in different clusters. The movement of the sinks is
restricted to their cluster.
The variables and parameters that differ from section 4.1:
- Zj (s) is the network lifetime of the cluster j, j ∈
{1, 2, ..., m}
- lk is an integer variable which represents the number
of times when the sink is located at node k, k ∈ Fj for
a duration of time T.
- pk
i (J/s) is the power consumed in sending and receiving
data by sensor node i when the sink is located at node
k, k ∈ Fj.
- Fj is the set of feasible sites of cluster j, j
∈
{1, 2, ..., m} and F = ∪ Fj.
- Sj is the set of sensor nodes of cluster j, j
∈
{1, 2, ..., m} and S = ∪ Sj.
For each cluster j, j ∈ {1, 2, ..., m}
max Zj =
X
k∈Fj
T lk
(15)
X
k∈Fj
T lk pk
i ≤ e0, i ∈ Sj
(16)
lk ≥ 0, k ∈ Fj
(17)
The lifetime of network, which is the time until the ﬁrst
sensor dies, is determined by the following equation:
Z = min
j (Zj)
(18)

415
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
5. Simulation and Results
To evaluate the performance of the proposed ILP, we built
a simulator in Java environment with variable number of
sensors and sinks deployed on different grid sizes.
In order to determine the network lifetime and the opti-
mal locations of sinks, we solved the proposed ILP with
CPLEX[26] version 11.2. The calculation of the power
consumed by the sensor node when the nearest sink is
located at a certain node (pk
i ) was made by a program written
in Java.
The values of parameter variables were chosen according
to the following realistic assumptions. The initial energy at
each node was chosen equal to the energy found in two
Alkaline batteries AA of 1.5V usually 2600mAh i.e., eo=
28080 J. We also chose the energy consumption coefﬁcient
for transmitting and receiving one bit the same as vendor-
speciﬁed values for the Chipcon CC2420[27] where eT =
0.225 10−6 J/bit and eR = 0.2625 10−6 J/bit. We ﬁxed the
minimum duration of sojourn time T of the sinks to 30 days
because it is economically not efﬁcient to have technicians
relocating sinks in buildings very often. The rate gr at
which data packets are generated is equal to 1 bit/s which
is typical sampling rate for HVAC parameter control added
the network layer encapsulations. Notice that real micro-
controllers stop running when the battery voltage is below a
given threshold. This depends on the micro-controllers and
can not be taken into account here.
To get a deeper understanding of the efﬁciency of sinks
mobility according to our proposed ILP solution, we inves-
tigated the network lifetime, the pattern of the distribution
of the sinks sojourn times at the different nodes, the energy
consumption and the residual energy at each node. Further-
more, we made a comparative study with four other schemes.
Thus, the following schemes were implemented:
1) Static: Static sinks placed at their optimal locations
using the equation (19)
2) Periphery: Sinks moving in the periphery of the
network
3) Random: Sinks moving randomly
4) Cluster: Sinks moving separately in different clusters
according to ILP solution
5) ILP: Sinks moving in the entire network according to
ILP solution
To compute the network lifetime and the optimal locations
of stationary sinks, we used the following equation[18]:
Z = max
k {min
i ( e0
pk
i
)}, k ∈ F, i ∈ S
(19)
where k = NearestSink(k1, k2, ..., km, i), k1 ∈ F, k2 ∈
F, ..., km ∈ F.
5.1. Network lifetime
We compared the network lifetime of our proposed ILP
with the schemes described above by making a set of
experiments. These experiments aim to study the effect
of increasing, the number of sinks, the network size, the
sinks sojourn times and the number of feasible sites, on the
network lifetime.
In the ﬁrst part of this section, we assume that all the
sensor nodes are feasible sites.
(a) 5x5 grid network
(b) 10x10 grid network
Figure 3. The network lifetime
Figure 3 shows that in all the schemes and independently
of the size of the network, the network lifetime increases
notably when the number of sinks increases. Since the load
trafﬁc is distributed among a higher number of sinks, the
nodes near the sinks forward less packets which leads to the
reduction of energy consumption and lifetime improvement.
However in the Static scheme, the network lifetime is
clearly shorter than in the other schemes with mobile sinks
because nodes around the static sinks have to spend more en-
ergy to relay the packets of nodes farther away which leads
them to drain their energy faster. Moreover, the ﬁrst sensor
dies relatively quickly in Periphery, Random and Cluster
schemes comparing to the ILP scheme which manages to
place optimally the sinks in the whole network.
The lifetime improvement percentages obtained in a
10x10 grid by deploying 3 mobile sinks according to the

416
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
ILP solution are 68 % against 3 mobile sinks moving
randomly, 99 % against 3 mobile sinks moving separately
in different clusters, 100 % against 3 mobile sinks moving
in the periphery and 230 % against 3 static sinks.
Figure 4 shows that the network lifetime decreases con-
siderably when the network size increases. This is explained
by the fact that there are more data trafﬁcs. Hence, sensors
which are near the sinks must retransmit a higher number of
packets from their higher number of neighbors which leads
to faster energy depletion.
Figure 4. The network lifetime in different network size
We investigated the network lifetime with different sinks
sojourn times (see Table 1). The number of sinks was
ﬁxed to 3 and the number of sensors to 100. For Random,
Periphery, Cluster and ILP schemes, the table shows that
when the sojourn time of the sinks increases the network
lifetime decreases slowly. In fact, the longer the sojourn time
is, the less the sinks movements are which lead to shorter
lifetime.
Sinks sojourn times (days)
ILP
Cluster
Periphery
Random
10
7774
3900
3892
4686
20
7773
3899
3892
4661
30
7772
3899
3891
4595
40
7771
3898
3891
4558
50
7770
3898
3891
4540
60
7769
3897
3890
4510
Table 1. The network lifetime (periods) with different
sinks sojourn times
In the following, the sinks can move only on the feasible
sites of Figure 5. Each node in the 10x10 grid is localized
with its identiﬁer number. The nodes in cells colored in gray
are chosen as feasible sites.
We varied the number of feasible sites from 10 to 52 as
shown in Figure 6. The number of sinks was ﬁxed to 3,
the number of sensors to 100 and the period sojourn time
to 30 days. We notice that the network lifetime improves
considerably when the number of feasible sites increases.
In fact, the more the number of sites is, the more the sinks
(a) 10 feasible sites
(b) 16 feasible sites
(c) 22 feasible sites
(d) 28 feasible sites
(e) 34 feasible sites
(f) 40 feasible sites
(g) 46 feasible sites
(h) 52 feasible sites
Figure 5. The network with different number of feasible
sites
Figure 6. The network lifetime with different number of
feasible sites
to efﬁcient locations move which leads to longer lifetime.
Nevertheless, the choice of the feasible sites positions has a
great inﬂuence on the network lifetime.

417
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
5.2. The Sinks Sojourn Times
We studied the pattern of the distribution of the sinks
sojourn times at the different nodes. All the nodes of the grid
can be feasible sites. Figures 7, 8, 9, 10, and 11 show the
sojourn times of three sinks in 10x10 grid for respectively
Static, Periphery, Random, Cluster and ILP schemes.
Figure 7. Sinks sojourn times at the different nodes of
10x10 grid network with Static scheme
Figure 8. Sinks sojourn times at the different nodes of
10x10 grid network with Periphery scheme
Figure 9. Sinks sojourn times at the different nodes of
10x10 grid network with Random scheme
The optimal sinks locations obtained for static sinks are
the nodes which are almost at minimum distance i.e., number
of hops to all other nodes. In Random scheme, the sinks
sojourn time is variably distributed among all the nodes of
the network. In the Periphery scheme, it is fairly distributed
Figure 10. Sinks sojourn times at the different nodes of
10x10 grid network with Cluster scheme
Figure 11. Sinks sojourn times at the different nodes of
10x10 grid network with ILP scheme
among the nodes in the perimeter of the network. For the
Cluster scheme, the grid 10x10 was divided in 3 clusters
3x10, 3x10 and 4x10 in which the sinks move separately.
We notice that the sink sojourns most of the times at the
corners and the central grid area of its cluster. In the ILP
scheme where the sinks move in the entire network, the same
pattern is obtained, the sinks sojourn most of the times at
the corners and the central grid area as shown in Figure 11.
Independently of the size of the network and the number
of the sinks as shown in Figure 12 and 13, the optimal
locations of the sinks according to ILP solution are the four
corners of the grid, then the central grid area. The sojourn
of the sinks at the central grid area can be explained as
follows. If one of the sinks is located in the center of the grid
it will have four neighbors within the transmission range.
Contrarily, if it is located in the perimeter or the corner, it
will have respectively three and two neighbors. Obviously,
the more neighbors within the transmission range the sink
has, the better the trafﬁc load balanced among nodes is and
the higher lifetime is. However, independently of where the
sinks are located, the sensors in the corners drain less energy
on forwarding packets than the sensors in the center which
are always along a routing path to reach the sinks. For this
reason, the sinks sojourn more at the nodes in the corners
than the nodes in the central grid area in order to consume
the residual energy of the ”rich” sensors.

418
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
Figure 12. ILP sinks sojourn times at the different nodes
of 8x8 grid network
Figure 13. ILP sinks sojourn times at the different nodes
of 9x9 grid network
5.3. The energy distribution
We analyzed the impact of the ﬁve schemes on the energy
consumption at lifetime end in a network with 3 mobile sinks
and 100 sensors. The distribution of energy consumption
when the ﬁrst sensor dies is depicted in Figures 14(a),
15(a), 17(a), 16(a) and 18(a). A light color means a higher
percentage of energy consumption.
It is remarkable in all the ﬁgures that the energy consump-
tion is highly variable and depends on the sinks locations.
We notice that the nodes near the sinks have relatively higher
energy consumption compared to most of the others because
they have to receive and relay all other neighbors data in
addition to their own data. This leads them to consume more
energy.
In Figure 14(a), we observe that higher percentage of
energy consumption is concentrated around three nodes
in the grid which are the locations of the static sinks
whereas the other sensors have a lower amount of energy
consumption (dark color).
When the sinks move on the periphery of the network, the
highest energy consumption occurs in nodes closest to the
boundary of the network while the others nodes specially in
the center consume less energy as seen in Figure 15(a).
In the Cluster scheme as shown in the Figure 16, the
energy consumption is only balanced among the nodes of
every cluster and not in the whole network. This is because
of the restriction of sinks mobility to theirs clusters.
Figure 17(a) shows that Random scheme results in a better
(a) Energy consumption
(b) Residual energy
Figure 14. Static scheme in 10x10 grid network
(a) Energy consumption
(b) Residual energy
Figure 15. Periphery scheme in 10x10 grid network

419
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
(a) Energy consumption
(b) Residual energy
Figure 16. Cluster scheme in 10x10 grid network
(a) Energy consumption
(b) Residual energy
Figure 17. Random scheme in 10x10 grid network
(a) Energy consumption
(b) Residual energy
Figure 18. ILP scheme in 10x10 grid network
balancing of energy consumption than Static, Periphery and
Cluster schemes. In fact, we notice a larger area with light
color.
However, ILP scheme balances almost perfectly the en-
ergy consumption among the nodes. In fact, the majority of
the nodes depleted their energy at the same time except the
four corners as shown in Figure 18(a).
The distribution of the residual energy at each sensor node
in 10x10 grid with 3 mobiles sinks was also studied (see
Figures 14(b), 15(b), 17(b), 16(b) and 18(b)).
With static sinks, the majority of sensors have more
residual energy at the end of network lifetime than the
schemes with mobile sinks which have their initial energies
more depleted at the lifetime end.
For the ILP scheme, sensor nodes have less residual
energy than in the case of sinks moving in clusters. This
is due to the fact that the mobility of sinks in the whole
network changes the nodes acting as relays frequently and
leads to balanced energy consumption among nodes. While,
in the Cluster scheme, the movement of the sinks is restricted
to their own clusters. So, this approach prevents to have
global view of the entire network.
The ILP scheme results in a better distribution of residual
energy among the nodes compared to Cluster, Periphery,
Random and Static schemes. The results show that the
percentages of the residual energy that remain unused at the
network lifetime end for Static, Periphery, Random, Cluster
and ILP schemes are respectively 71 %, 45 %, 31 %, 31
%, 3 %. Moreover, the number of sensors which have more
than 50 % of their initial energies left at lifetime end is 80,

420
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
36, 20, 27 and 4 respectively for Static, Periphery, Random,
Cluster and ILP schemes
It is remarkable in the ILP scheme, as shown in the Figure
18(b), that the sensor nodes in the corners have higher energy
at the end of network lifetime than the others nodes. This can
be explained by the fact that they do not drain their energy
in forwarding neighbor’s data in addition to their own data.
Moreover, we observe that at the end of network lifetime
the distribution of residual energy in the grid is more bal-
anced among the nodes when the number of sinks increases
(See Figure 19). The use of more sinks results in the
reduction of the average path length between the sensors
and sinks thus enabling to achieve less trafﬁc load to the
nodes and increased network lifetime.
(a) 2 sinks
(b) 3 sinks
(c) 4 sinks
Figure 19. Residual energy distribution of ILP scheme
in 5x5 grid network with increasing number of sinks
These results are interesting since they are not pure
theory. We tried to approach realistic buildings deployment
parameters in our assumptions and especially with sinks that
can not move frequently.
6. Conclusion and future Work
In this paper, we have explored the problem of positioning
multiple mobile sinks in wireless sensor networks inside
buildings, in order to avoid the energy hole problem and
extend the network lifetime, which is really needed in
practice.
As a solution, we have proposed an ILP which directly
maximizes the network lifetime instead of minimizing the
energy consumption or maximizing the residual energy,
which is what was done in previous solutions. The proposed
ILP determines the best way to relocate sinks by giving their
optimal locations and the duration of their sojourn time.
A comparative study of the proposed solution with static
sinks, mobile sinks moving in the periphery of the network,
mobile sinks moving randomly and mobile sinks moving
separately in different clusters was made. Relocating sinks
with our solution and using realistic parameters assumptions
results in the sensor network lifetime extension and the
energy consumption more balanced among the nodes. The
lifetime improvements achieved in our experiments by de-
ploying 3 mobile sinks in the network with hundred sensors
are almost 99 % against 3 mobile sinks moving separately
in different clusters and almost 230 % against 3 static sinks.
The study of the pattern of the distribution of the sinks
at different locations showed that the sinks sojourn most
of times at the nodes in the central grid area and in the
corners. This corresponds to very interesting feasible sites
in buildings because the sinks can be easily relocated in the
corridors which are often in the center of the buildings and
provided with power and Internet access.
The weakness of the proposed approach is the scalability
problem in networks with thousands of sensors due to
the high ILP resolution complexity. In order to adopt this
solution in a large scale wireless sensor network with more
than hundreds of sensors, the network might be divided in
several sensor sub-networks which will be deployed in the
each part of the building. More than one sink can then be
placed inside each zone to collect the information of the
in-door environment. To implement the solution in a real
environment and apply the model in real time conditions,
technicians will be in charge of relocating the mobile sinks
in the open areas of the buildings after long periods (i.e.,
months).
In our future work, we intend to improve the proposed
ILP by including parameters and constraints that model
more realistic requirements of an indoor environment (e.g.,
collisions) and take into account the energy consumption of
sensing and data processing. We envisage also to introduce
optimization in data routing by considering relevant metrics
like latency, control overhead.
References
[1] L. Ben Saad and B. Tourancheau, “Multiple mobile sinks
positioning in wireless sensor networks for buildings,” in
3 rd International Conference on Sensor Technologies and
Applications SensorComm, 2009.
[2] J. Pan, Y. T. Hou, L. Cai, Y. Shi, and S. X. Shen, “Topology
control for wireless sensor networks,” in Proceedings of the
9th annual international conference on Mobile computing and
networking MobiCom, 2003, pp. 286–299.
[3] X. yang Li, W. zhan Song, and Y. Wang, “Topology control
in heterogeneous wireless networks: Problems and solutions,”
in Proceedings of the 23rd Joint Conference of the IEEE
Computer and Communications Societies INFOCOM, 2004.

421
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 4, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
[4] A. Sankar and Z. Liu, “Maximum lifetime routing in wireless
ad-hoc networks,” in Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Joint
Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communications So-
cieties INFOCOM, vol. 2, 2004, pp. 1089–1097.
[5] K. Fodor and A. Vid´acs, “Efﬁcient routing to mobile sinks
in wireless sensor networks,” in WICON ’07: Proceedings of
the 3rd international conference on Wireless internet.
ICST,
Brussels, Belgium, Belgium: ICST (Institute for Computer
Sciences, Social-Informatics and Telecommunications Engi-
neering), 2007, pp. 1–7.
[6] O. Younis and S. Fahmy, “Distributed clustering in ad-hoc
sensor networks: A hybrid, energy-efﬁcient approach,” in
Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE
Computer and Communications Societies INFOCOM, 2004,
pp. 629–640.
[7] S. R. Gandham, M. Dawande, R. Prakash, and S. Venkatesan,
“Energy efﬁcient schemes for wireless sensor networks with
multiple mobile base stations,” The IEEE Global Telecommu-
nications Conference GLOBECOM, 2003.
[8] W. Alsalih, S. Akl, and H. Hassanein, “Placement of multiple
mobile base stations in wireless sensor networks,” IEEE In-
ternational Symposium on Signal Processing and Information
Technology, 2007.
[9] X. Wu, G. Chen, and S. K. Das, “Avoiding energy holes in
wireless sensor networks with nonuniform node distribution,”
IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, 2008.
[10] ——, “On the energy hole problem of nonuniform node
distribution in wireless sensor networks,” IEEE International
Conference on Mobile Adhoc and Sensor Systems MASS,
2006.
[11] J. Lian, K. Naik, and G. B. Agnew, “Data capacity improve-
ment of wireless sensor networks using non-uniform sensor
distribution,” in International Journal of Distributed Sensor
Networks, 2005.
[12] A. Bogdanov, E. Maneva, and S. Riesenfeld, “Power-aware
base station positioning for sensor networks,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE INFOCOM, 2004, pp. 575–585.
[13] E. Oyman and C. Ersoy, “Multiple sink network design
problem in large scale wireless sensor networks,” IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Communications, 2004.
[14] H. Kim, Y. Seok, N. Choi, Y. Choi, and T. Kwon, “Optimal
multi-sink positioning and energy-efﬁcient routing in wireless
sensor networks,” Lecture Notes in Computer Science LNCS,
2005.
[15] J. Luo and J.-P. Hubaux, “Joint mobility and routing for life-
time elongation in wireless sensor networks,” In Proceedings
24th Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE Computer and
Communications Societies INFOCOM., 2005.
[16] K. Akkaya and M. Younis, “Sink repositioning for enhanced
performance in wireless sensor networks,” Elsevier Computer
Networks Journal, 2005.
[17] B. Wang, D. Xie, C. Chen, J. Ma, and S. Cheng, “Employing
mobile sink in event-driven wireless sensor networks,” IEEE
Vehicular Technology Conference VTC, 2008.
[18] Z. M. Wang, S. Basagni, E. Melachrinoudis, and C. Petrioli,
“Exploiting sink mobility for maximizing sensor networks
lifetime,” In Proceedings of the 38th Annual Hawaii Inter-
national Conference on System Sciences HICSS, 2005.
[19] S. Basagni, A. Carosi, E. Melachrinoudis, C. Petrioli, and
Z. M. Wang, “Controlled sink mobility for prolonging wire-
less sensor networks lifetime,” Wireless Networks, 2007.
[20] Y. Bi, J. Niu, L. Sun, W. Huangfu, and Y. Sun, “Mov-
ing schemes for mobile sinks in wireless sensor networks,”
Performance, Computing, and Communications Conference,
2007.
[21] R. C. Shah, S. Roy, S. Jain, and W. Brunette, “Data mules:
Modeling a three-tier architecture for sparse sensor networks,”
in IEEE International Workshop on Sensor Network Protocols
and Applications SNPA, 2003, pp. 30–41.
[22] M. Marta and M. Cardei, “Improved sensor network lifetime
with multiple mobile sinks,” Pervasive and Mobile computing,
2009.
[23] Z. Vincze, R. Vida, and A. Vidacs, “Deploying multiple sinks
in multi-hop wireless sensor networks,” IEEE International
Conference on Pervasive Services, 2007.
[24] A. Azad and A. Chockalingam, “Mobile base stations place-
ment and energy aware routing in wireless sensor networks,”
IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference
WCNC, 2006.
[25] D. Maniezzo, K. Yao, and G. Mazzini, “Energetic trade-off
between computing and communication resource in multi-
media surveillance sensor network,” 4th IEEE Conference
on Mobile and Wireless Communications Networks MWCN,
2002.
[26] CPLEX http://www.ilog.fr/products/cplex/.
[27] Chipcon. CC2420 2.4 GHZ IEEE 802.15.4 / ZigBee-ready
RF transceiver, 2004.

