Enabling People With Intellectual Disabilities to Participate in Design 
An Immersive Strategy to Facilitate Long-term Participatory Design Using Social Workers as Proxies 
Åsmund Dæhlen 
Department of Informatics, Faculty of Mathematics and 
Natural Sciences, University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
aasmunkd@ifi.uio.no  
Suhas Govind Joshi 
 Department of Informatics, Faculty of Mathematics and 
Natural Sciences, University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
joshi@ifi.uio.no
 
 
Abstract — People with Intellectual Disabilities (ID) are often 
neglected in decision-making, and this paper introduces an 
immersive strategy for the inclusion of people with ID in 
Participatory Design (PD) processes by using the social 
workers as proxies. We present immersion as a methodological 
strategy on how social workers could use their knowledge of 
the end-users’ capabilities to enable their participation in the 
design of technology. We draw on empirical data gathered 
through 180 workhours of voluntary fieldwork at an activity 
center in Norway for five months. Through immersion, we 
appropriated tools and techniques to the contextual concerns, 
and the results describe how the participation of people with 
ID enabled the social workers to co-explore concerns and ideas. 
This paper argues that the participation of people with ID can 
enable the social workers to explore their concerns through 
each user’s means of communication, effectively giving people 
with ID a voice in the decision-making processes of technology 
design.  
 
Keywords — participatory design; intellectual disabilities; 
immersion; proxy designer; cognitive impairment.  
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Participatory Design (PD) has long traditions of giving 
voices to different groups of overlooked or marginalized 
users by experimenting with ways to engage participants in 
co-design activities. This paper expands on previously 
reported results [1], and presents a long-term study of how 
we can include people with Intellectual Disabilities (ID) in 
the design processes of technology by addressing the 
overarching research question: “how can we facilitate 
design with people with different intellectual capabilities 
using Participatory Design?”.  
We report from a research project that involved 
collaboration with 82 participants and was conducted at an 
activity center in Norway. Our empirical work includes 
approximately 180 working hours of volunteer work, as 
well as the inclusion of participants in various ethnographic 
and design activities, over a period of five months. Our 
research project was structured into two phases: the first 
phase used an ethnographic approach where immersion was 
used as a strategy [1] to explore possibilities on how to 
include people with ID in future PD processes. This phase 
involved volunteer work and explorative workshops with 
both users and social workers at the activity center. Our 
empirical work generated a rich account of the daily 
activities, routines, and practices, on top of which we 
wanted to shape a PD process. The findings from this first 
phase included four themes governing future means of 
participation, and we operationalized these findings by 
shaping tools and techniques applied in the following phase. 
The second phase facilitated a design process where people 
with ID, along with their social workers, participated as co-
designers. The goal of this second phase was to investigate 
whether the contextual knowledge gained during the first 
phase could inform a PD process where people with ID 
could participate in decision-making during the design of 
technology. The results and analysis of the participation 
from the second phase allowed us to reflect on the role of 
social workers as proxies for people with ID. Our findings 
demonstrate different ways the presence of social workers 
enabled dialogue in ways that supported non-traditional 
forms of communication, strengthened core principles of PD 
such as mutual learning, and allowed people with ID to 
engage in decision-making. 
Based on our findings, we argue for the inclusion of 
social workers as proxies during PD processes involving 
people with ID. We point to concrete examples from our 
empirical context to demonstrate how including proxies 
have enabled new ways of engaging users that might 
otherwise not be included in PD activities. The findings 
presented in this paper offer both methodological and 
practical contribution to the PD community as well as other 
researchers engaging people with ID in design activities.  
This paper is structured as follows. We begin by 
introducing three areas within PD literature in Section II that 
we find most relevant to our research project. Section III 
presents the framing of our study along with research 
objectives, the empirical context, and our research 
methodology. Sections IV-VI reflect the two main phases of 
our study by chronologically presenting methods, results, 
and findings.  In Section VII, we return to our overarching 
research question to align our findings with ongoing 
discussions in related work. Our contributions and their 
relevance to the broader scope of discussion within the PD 
community end the paper in Section VIII. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In this study, we have conducted different ethnographic 
and design activities with people with varying degrees of 
229
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

agency to direct their own interests and needs. In the current 
discourse available, there is limited work that evaluates how 
people with ID can critically influence their own future 
regarding the involvement of technology. We have 
structured past related work after three, not mutually 
exclusive, 
means 
of 
achieving 
participation 
when 
collaborating with people with ID. 
 
A. Enabling stakeholders through mutual learning 
Two of the main principles in PD is mutual learning and 
having a say [2]. We begin by presenting literature that 
relates to how we can operationalize these principles: with a 
process supporting the informing of both researchers’ and 
participants’ understanding and imagination of possibilities. 
Redhead and Brereton [3] explain how short-term 
methods as a means to engage in design can be ineffective 
for communities of people. They argue that the researchers’ 
presence and activities are inherently academic, and might 
be too distant from the empirical context to understand and 
support local practice and interaction. Their suggestion on 
how to approach this challenge involves shifting from short-
term to long-term commitment. A similar point is also 
raised by Maraveji et al. [4]. 
A common denominator in studies about people with 
cognitive impairments is the need for highly contextualized 
understandings of the participants and their challenges and 
capabilities [5]–[7]. As Holone & Herstad suggest, working 
with kids with disabilities requires more time to get to a 
“starting line” where the design process can begin [7]. 
Blomberg & Karasti present an important perspective on 
ethnography in PD as a means of “channeling access” to the 
context [8]. Holone & Herstad also stress the importance of 
starting the design in the practice of users [7]. 
 
B. Expanding the space with tools and techniques 
The PD literature extensively covers the principle of co-
realization [2], i.e., applying different tools and techniques, 
and how they extend spaces for both understanding 
possibilities and supporting co-creation [9]–[11].  
The view of a method differs from the traditional view 
of a step-by-step recipe. It instead considers it to constitute 
general guidelines [2] that follow PD principles, which in 
combination with tools and techniques, stipulate how we 
can conduct design. Brandt et al. gather the essentials of 
what tools and techniques do into a framework of telling, 
making, and enacting [9]. They postulate that these 
principles are essential and happen in any situation where 
participation occurs. Hussain et al. elicit telling stories and 
explores possibilities using card sorting [12]. Galliers et al. 
utilize workshops where the end-users can enact current 
scenarios of use [13]. Kanstrup et al. propose a technique 
revolving around walking as a means to enable a sense of 
enacting and storytelling [14].  
Tools and techniques can give people the possibility to 
“express themselves visually and verbally” [15, p. 1]. 
Focusing on early exploratory phases of design, Sanders & 
Stappers describe that “the focus is on using making 
activities for making sense of the future” and later “[..] the 
prototype 
is 
a 
vehicle 
for observation, 
reflection, 
interpretation, discussion, and expression.” [11, p. 6]. In the 
case of a low-resolution prototype, which might itself be 
ambiguous, the collaborative act of telling or enacting 
stories of use can spur innovation [16]. These tools and 
techniques seek to be a bridge between the language gaps of 
designers and non-designers, where the physical objects can 
create visual languages [11], [15]. 
In the broader context of designing for and with people 
where limited cognitive or physical capabilities present 
different barriers to communication, offering several means 
of communication is crucial. Yekhlef & Essén argue for a 
phenomenological view and the body as a tool for 
innovation [17]. In the same manner as [18]–[20], they 
argue for a need to utilize already established practices to 
support the overall PD process. 
 
C. Communicative challenges to participation 
Previous studies also discuss the challenges of 
participation by proxy or mere presence as a means of 
tackling 
challenges 
that 
cognitive, 
physical, 
and 
organizational limitations present to participation. Brereton 
et al. argue that prototypes can be an important aspect in 
finding mechanisms that empower people with cognitive or 
sensory impairments and advocate alternative means of 
involving those in question [21]. Offering a similar 
perspective, Galliers et al. [13] and Dawe [22] suggest that 
words may not suffice if we want to empower users with 
cognitive or physical disorders.  
Previous studies have also explored the use of proxies in 
the context of PD involving both adults and children with 
ID (e.g., [23] and [21]). Brereton et al. present the initial use 
of proxies as an important step towards realizing 
requirements, 
imagining 
possibilities, 
and 
ensuring 
successful inclusion of people with ID into the process of 
design after design [21]. There are other examples of 
successful inclusion of people with ID in specific phases of 
design, e.g., Dawe [22]. Putnam & Chong seek to gather 
information on software and technology use for people with 
autism through surveys directed at adult proxies, as well as 
some adults living with autism [24].  
Francis et al. also characterize how challenges caused by 
highly individualized forms of communications among 
people with Asperger’s and autism can be tackled with the 
correct management of the co-design process [5]. Brosnan et 
al. also reflect upon PD practice, challenges related to 
engaging different stakeholders, and also points to pitfalls 
such as overlooking the value of inclusion [25]. Finally, 
Hendriks et al. advocate the uniqueness of each co-design 
study for people with cognitive and sensory impairments 
230
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

and the importance of understanding the context and people 
in-depth when adjusting the methods applied [6]. One 
technique to approach the uniqueness of each situation can 
be the specific technique of probing [10], which seek “a 
more deliberate and steered process of facilitation, 
participation, reflection, delving for deeper layers in the 
past, making understanding explicit, discussing these and 
bridging visions, ideas and concepts for the future” [11, p. 
8].  
 
III. 
RESEARCH  DESIGN 
To frame our study, we formulated one overarching 
research question along with two underlying research 
objectives. Our goal was to inquire into how we can adapt 
the design process to better suit the needs and desires of 
people with ID. To address our two research objectives, we 
organized our empirical work in two corresponding phases, 
namely Phase 1 and Phase 2.  
A. Overarching research question and research objectives 
Our overarching research question was “how can we 
facilitate design with people with different intellectual 
capabilities using Participatory Design?”. To address this 
research question, we outlined two research objectives: 
 
1. To present a rich account that can provide 
implications for how to intertwine contextual needs 
into a PD process. 
 
2. To demonstrate how a PD process could be adapted 
to the contextual needs of the activity center by 
carrying out the initial stages of the long-term 
process. 
 
Phase 1 utilized an ethnographic methodology in 
combination with PD to explore potentials for facilitating 
design with people with ID. Phase 2 applied the knowledge 
gained during Phase 1 to contextualize and adapt a PD 
process that prolonged the exploration of opportunities for 
participation.  
 
B. Empirical context 
The empirical context of our study is an activity center 
located in Norway with services offered to approximately 
40 people with ID. Their ages range from 22-70 years with 
non-significant differences in gender distribution. The 
impairments range from mild to profound mental 
capabilities but also extend to physical challenges as people 
may have bodily configurations that also complicate 
autonomous functioning. To support each person’s 
cognitive and physical capabilities, their everyday activities 
are individually tailored and organized to maximize the 
sense of autonomy. For some people, this requires one-on-
one assistance from social workers, while others can work 
in groups or even without any direct assistance. The social 
workers’ background ranges from non-related or lacking a 
higher education to domain-specific competencies such as 
social 
workers, 
social 
educators, 
teachers, 
and 
ergotherapists.  
The everyday dialogue between the people and their 
social workers is highly contextualized, e.g., through the use 
of visual aids (see Figure 1). Certain users can only 
communicate when using a limited and tailored vocabulary. 
However, the social workers rely on many forms of non-
verbal communication, most of which are directly tied to the 
context, e.g., objects, places, activities, and routines found at 
the activity center. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Illustrations were used as a visual aid offering an alternative form 
of communication 
 
Examples of such non-verbal forms of communication 
include icons, signs, physical gestures, and photographs. 
The activity center offers a wide range of both educational 
and recreational activities for the users such as therapeutic 
activities (e.g., music and light therapy), ludic activities 
(e.g., games and audiobooks), creative activities (e.g., 
painting and sewing), and physical actives (e.g., swimming 
and field trips). 
The employees of the activity center are hereafter 
defined as social workers, understood in its broadest 
definition: “social work remains a service focused on 
disadvantaged and marginalized individuals and group” [26, 
p. 1]. In the context of the activity center, a social worker 
carries out work that is essential for the day-to-day 
functioning of adults with physical or intellectual 
disabilities, who otherwise lack the capabilities to direct 
their cognitive or physical person in any given situation. 
Directly translated from Norwegian, employees hold 
positions of ‘environmental therapist’ or ‘environmental 
worker’, which quite aptly explains their role: to facilitate 
an environment for people with different capabilities to 
thrive. Similarly, we apply the word user throughout the 
paper to describe people with ID using the facilities or 
services offered at the activity center. This notion is derived 
from people being users of healthcare systems or services 
[27]. Linguistically, it also represents a neutral word that 
allows the social workers to talk about the people with ID 
without stigmatizing or revealing specific details about the 
users in everyday communication. We attempt to distinguish 
this notion from users in a design process by describing the 
latter as end-users rather than users. 
 
231
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

C. Research Methodology 
The overarching methodological approach of this study 
follows the traditions of Participatory Design (PD) – a 
worldview that emphasizes the inclusion of the people who 
will eventually use the technology in the design process as 
equal co-designers [3]. Central principles of PD include 
mutual learning, co-construction, and having a say [2], and 
our approach attempts to create a space for engagement 
supporting these principles while simultaneously allowing 
us to design technologies for and with users with ID. One of 
the central challenges in our long-term PD process is to 
support co-creation and autonomy without necessarily 
demanding participation from users in both phases and all 
activities. As mentioned, the study was split into two 
phases, hereafter referred to as Phase 1 and Phase 2. An 
overview of the key characteristics of the two phases is 
outlined in Table I. 
Phase 1 relies on immersion as a strategy to build up 
enough contextual knowledge about the users, their lives, 
and everyday activities, to represent their voices in activities 
where they are not interested in, or unable to, participate 
themselves. We see the PD process as a use-oriented design 
cycle that requires familiarity with both the real-life 
problem situation and the practice [2] before moving to the 
elicitation of needs and requirement descriptions. One of the 
arguments we present in this paper is that immersion 
constitutes a necessary component in studies involving 
proxy designers engaged on behalf of users with an ID, 
especially when representing the users’ voices in the design 
of technology intended to support them with their everyday 
goals and activities. 
Immersion, in our context, draws on ethnographic 
traditions and practices. More precisely, we align our view 
on immersion with Crang and Cook’s intersubjective 
perspective [28, p. 37]: “participant observation should not 
be to separate its ‘subjective and ‘objective components, but 
to talk about it as a means of developing intersubjective 
understandings between the researcher and researched”. 
We position ourselves as such due to the embedded 
emphasis on mutual learning in PD [29], and we argue that 
the contextual knowledge gained through immersion during 
the earlier stages of a long-term PD process is vital to the 
facilitation of later design activities. Thus, the results, 
findings, and discussions of this paper revolve around how 
non-users engaged as proxy designers can better connect 
with the everyday world of the users and actively change it 
and create new knowledge through immersive participation. 
The long-term commitment of the study was conducted 
every week, where one of the authors of this paper worked 
on a volunteer basis at the activity center. The volunteer 
work included working closely with the proxies and the 
users of the activity center, engaging in everyday activities, 
learning about their different means of communication and 
lives in general. The nature of the communicational 
difficulties experienced by the users suggested that the 
proxies were very important in bridging an apparent gap of 
knowledge 
that was 
required 
to have 
meaningful 
interactions with some of the users. On an everyday basis, 
the employees collaborate to bridge their differences in 
knowledge and ask each other questions about how to 
perform specific tasks or activities. The social workers are 
proxies to the users because they continuously try to 
mediate their wants and needs and facilitate for a workday 
that carries meaning to the users in some way. 
 
TABLE I. OVERVIEW OF THE KEY CHARACTERISTICS IN THE TWO PHASES 
Key characteristics 
Phase 1 – Exploration  
 
Phase 2 – Facilitation 
Methodology 
Ethnographically immersive/infused PD 
 
Participatory Design 
Focus 
Exploring possibilities for conducting 
design with people with ID 
 
Investigating assumptions about possibilities for the 
participation of people with ID 
Methods 
Participatory inquiry 
 
Generative workshops, interviews and group discussions 
In-situ workhours 
Approximately 100 workhours 
 
Approximately 80 workhours 
Participation 
Volunteer work and explorative 
workshops. 
 
Including people with ID into design making by utilizing 
proxies’ knowledge about capabilities 
Participants 
34 people with ID 
18 social workers 
2 researchers 
2 fellow researchers 
 
8 people with ID 
17 social workers 
1 manager 
Results 
Ethnographic account 
 
Outline of participation 
Main findings 
Four themes governing possible future 
means of genuine participation 
 
Two themes describing how social workers facilitated user 
engagement 
 
232
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Phase 2 is an attempt at operationalizing the learning 
outcomes from Phase 1 by utilizing the familiarity with the 
real-life situations, practices, and people to shape a PD  
process that seeks to include people with ID into the design-
making. Facilitating dialogue when engaging participants 
with reduced communicative capabilities, which is often the 
case when working with people with ID, is one of the 
challenges addressed by previous studies, e.g., [13], [21], 
[22]. In their review, Börjesson et al. [30] found that 
children with ID are relatively seldom included in the 
design, and when they are, they have a passive role. They 
found that children with ID were only included during the 
initial inquiries and the later testing, never during design. 
In Phase 2, we utilized some central concepts of PD: 
telling, making and enacting by Brandt et al. [9], which 
enables the participants to tell stories about what they make 
and enact scenarios of use. Sanders & Stappers [11, p. 6] 
say “the focus is on using making activities for making 
sense of the future” and that “[…]  prototypes is a vehicle 
for observation, reflection, interpretation, discussion, and 
expression.” [11, p. 6]. Brandt et al. [9] express that 
innovation can occur when combining low-resolution 
prototypes with the collaborative act of telling stories or 
enacting possible scenarios of use.  
Visser et al. [10] created a set of generative toolkits that, 
among other, seeks “a more deliberate and steered process 
of facilitation, participation, reflection, delving for deeper 
layers in the past, making understanding explicit, discussing 
these, and bridging visions, ideas and concepts [scenarios] 
for the future.” [11, p. 8]. The three techniques used in 
Phase 2 are sensitization, collaging, and drawing inspired 
by [10]. Between designers and non-designers, there is a 
language gap that these methods seek to bridge by using 
physical objects to create a visual language supporting 
participants in an exploration and expression of possible 
futures [11], [15]. We align our view with the concepts of 
having a say, creating opportunities for mutual learning, 
and co-create the future. In combination, these techniques 
seek to give people a language to tell, make, and enact their 
own futures. 
 
IV. 
PHASE 1 – EXPLORATION 
The first phase emphasized generating contextual 
knowledge at the activity center that could later scaffold a 
PD process with the users. The data was gathered through 
six research methods involving 56 participants, including 
people with ID, their social workers, one manager, and 
fellow researchers. Table II presents an overview of the six 
research methods and the participants involved in each 
activity. 
 
 
TABLE II. OVERVIEW OF THE RESEARCH METHODS  
# 
Research method 
Participants 
A 
Participatory inquiry 
30 users and 15 social workers 
B 
Contextual observation 
Researcher 
C 
Diary journaling 
Researcher 
D 
Explorative workshop I 
2 researchers and 1 design expert 
E 
Interviews 
Manager 
F 
Explorative workshop II 
6 social workers 
 
A. Phase 1 – Research Methods  
 
1) Participatory inquiry 
One of the authors of this paper immersed himself into 
the context by taking on the role of a volunteer social 
worker, receiving formal training and introduction similar to 
the training provided to all other social workers. The data 
presented here originates from the first four months of work, 
which equals approximately 100 working hours. The goal of 
this immersive activity was to gain knowledge through a 
first-hand experience of the context and the users we are 
designing for and with in the second phase of our study. The 
methods of inquiry included observations and shadowing of 
social workers and users during everyday activities, their 
interaction with technology, as well as their means of 
communication. The data produced from this activity 
consisted of notes, photographs, and mind maps. 
 
2) Contextual observation 
The purpose of the observation was to capture important 
contextual concerns in a medium suited for later design 
activities where the participants might not possess verbal 
communication skills. As such, the data was documented in 
the form of photographs. 50 suitable photographs that 
described important contextual relationships related to 
everyday activities, interaction between people, and 
technology were selected. Most of these photographs were 
taken after working hours to ensure that the authors’ 
presence did not disrupt or interfere with the users’ 
activities. We observed several relevant contextual concerns 
that included technologies (e.g., audio systems, massage 
chairs, and light projectors), objects used in activities (e.g., 
instruments, games, and drawings), places of interest (e.g., 
sensory rooms, resting places, and creative spaces), and 
different workshops (e.g., woodworking workshop, pottery 
and textile). Figure 2 depicts some specific examples: the 
top left image shows a knitting station; the top right image 
shows the multipurpose workshop; the bottom left shows 
the ball pit; the bottom right shows some of the paper 
shredders. 
 
233
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 2. Examples of contextual concerns 
 
3) Diary journaling 
After each full day of volunteer work, an entry was 
written in an elicitation diary describing the activities and 
communication challenges encountered. Important events, 
major issues, and concrete examples of situations requiring 
contextual insight constituted the main content of the diary. 
Similar to the contextual observation, most of the diary 
entries were produced after working hours or in the absence 
of users as the goal was to allow everyday activities to 
progress as normal despite being the subject of 
investigation. Throughout the first four months, 18 journal 
entries were written down, ranging from a couple of 
sentences to several pages. 
 
4) Explorative workshop I 
To explore design opportunities in the context of 
technology intended to support users with ID in their 
everyday activities, we engaged two fellow researchers in an 
explorative workshop. During the workshop, we presented 
data from the previous activities such as photographs, mind 
maps, and transcribed interviews as the basis for a 
discussion of how we can facilitate future design activities 
in our PD process. Furthermore, both researchers conducted 
an individual objective coding on the same data set, which 
later served as the basis for a reflection of the insight gained 
through immersion and how contextual knowledge directly 
affected our interpretation of the same set of data. 
 
5)  Interviews 
An important part of the immersive approach was 
facilitating easier access to both contextual and domain 
knowledge, which included in-depth details about the 
capabilities of each person using the activity center. One of 
the main sources of information was ten semi-structured 
interviews with the manager of the activity center. The 
interviews revolved around practical and organizational 
issues that were relevant to our facilitation of a PD process, 
including both the users and their social workers. These 
interviews revealed opportunities and limitations for 
participation, e.g., insight into the working schedule of the 
social workers, as well as suggestions on suitable social 
workers who could fit the role of participating proxy 
designers in later stages of our PD process. Each interview 
lasted between 30 to 60 minutes, and the interviews were 
scheduled throughout the first four months, depending on 
the manager’s availability. 
 
6) Explorative workshop II 
The final activity in our initial phase of the PD process 
was a second explorative workshop conducted with six 
social workers at the activity center during a morning 
meeting. The goal of this workshop was to compare how the 
social workers as potential proxy designers understood the 
everyday activities and communication challenges found 
within their own work context with issues we had identified. 
We also used their in-depth knowledge of users and 
everyday activities to facilitate a group discussion on how to 
scaffold the PD process around existing routines and 
preferences to best support our underlying PD principles, 
i.e., mutual learning, co-construction, and having a say. 
Another result was the surfacing of what the social workers 
perceived as meaning makers for the users. 
 
B. Phase 1 – Results 
The data gathered through the six activities outlined in 
the last subsection consisted of diary entries, transcribed 
interviews, observation notes, discussion summaries, mind 
maps, individual data coding from workshops, and 
photographs. From the data, we identified two recurring 
topics that were common across all the activities and 
mentioned by all participants, both users and non-users, 
namely activity and communication. These two topics also 
embody most of the underlying issues that were discussed 
during the two exploratory workshops. As such, we used 
these two overarching topics to help us structure our 
analysis of whether immersion could contribute to more in-
depth insight to help facilitate the future activities of our PD 
process. 
 
1) Activity 
As our empirical context was an activity center, there 
was an intrinsic emphasis on activities. Both the social 
workers employed at the activity center and the users 
rendering the services shared an activity-centric focus. 
Already during the first participatory inquiry, we registered 
that the social workers’ training revolved heavily around 
daily routines and how different users engaged in activities. 
Concerning how to engage the social workers as proxy 
designers in our PD process, the manager who was 
interviewed explained that the availability of these social 
workers was highly related to their work schedule, which in 
turn revolved around activities. This point was also raised 
during 
the 
first 
exploratory 
workshop, 
where 
the 
234
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

participants believed it would be easiest for both the social 
workers and the users if the PD process was structured 
around activities. 
From the users’ perspective, we registered through the 
diary entries that most of their autonomy, as well as the 
sense of pride and accomplishment, were related to both the 
activity and the context in which it took place. One of the 
reasons for selecting activity as a common denominator was 
that users who engaged in activities experienced a multitude 
of personal reactions and rewarding sensations based on 
their particular capabilities and background. We also 
learned during the second exploratory workshop that 
participation in activities was itself an important catalyst for 
the users’ sense of mastery. In some cases, the act of 
carrying out an activity was of greater importance to the 
user than the purpose or end-goal of the activity. The 
photographs from the contextual observation complemented 
this point by revealing that most of the equipment present at 
the activity center was not intended at problem-solving, but 
rather as means to enable engagement in activities without 
necessarily having a fixed end-goal. Finally, we made 
multiple observations of how successful participation 
depended on the activity’s ability to acknowledge the user’s 
vulnerability, e.g., sudden urges to use bathroom facilities. 
 
2) Communication 
One of the main challenges when working for and with 
people with ID is facilitating communication. Previous 
studies have discussed the need for compensating strategies, 
e.g., [23]. This is especially important to our PD process and 
the emphasis on mutual learning. In our empirical context, 
we found multiple examples of how the activity center 
compensated for the lack of verbal communication skills. 
One such example was the labeling of the shelf shown in 
Figure 1, where photographs rather than text communicated 
different activities. 
Another prominent example was the users’ individual 
daily diaries where the social workers registered all entries 
and then communicated a summary back to the user. In later 
situations, the diary itself became a means of non-verbal 
between the user and the social worker. The social worker 
who participated in the second exploratory workshop also 
described how being seen and heard was vital to the users’ 
motivation. Most forms of communication were self-
developed and internalized by the different users and the 
contextual activity at hand. As such, one of the contextual 
insights gained through the participatory inquiry and the 
elicitation diary entries was instances of different, but highly 
specific, combinations of gestures and speech employed by 
the users to communicate with their social workers. To 
facilitate a proper dialogue where the users can 
communicate choices and selections, understanding these 
varying forms of communication is a necessity for all 
parties. In the most extreme cases that we observed, some 
users relied entirely on the social workers’ ability to 
interpret their language, or lack thereof, as well as the social 
workers’ ability to reduce the dialogue to questions that the 
user could answer with a simple yes or no by using their 
bodies.  
 
C. Phase 1 – Analysis 
We identified two recurring topics in our data, namely 
activity and communication, and we wanted to use these 
two topics to structure our analysis. While the emphasis on 
these two topics emerged from the empirical data itself, they 
align well with the goal of our overarching PD process, i.e., 
designing technology that supports people with ID in their 
everyday activities. The embedded nature of creating spaces 
for co-construction and mutual learning in PD also depends 
on our ability to facilitate communication between 
participants. As such, we used these two topics to structure 
our analysis. Figure 3 illustrates how the analysis included 
multiple people and different types of data. 
 
1) Inter-rater reliability analysis 
During the first analysis, we wanted to examine to what 
degree our immersion strategy actually provided contextual 
insight. The individual coding of the same data set 
performed by the two researchers in the first exploratory 
workshop yielded a total of 64 overlapping first-order codes 
shared by the two coders. The data included in this analysis 
consisted of photographs, observation notes, elicitation 
diary entries, and documents from the activity center. A 
thorough description of the analysis procedure we followed 
has been reported in [1]. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Examples of raw data (top row) used in the analysis (bottom row) 
235
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

We compared these two sets of individual codes to 
examine how a researcher without contextual knowledge of 
the users and their everyday lives identified opportunities 
and challenges relatively compared to the author who had 
gained contextual knowledge through 100 hours of in-situ 
volunteer work during the participatory inquiry. More 
precisely, we wanted to use the inter-rater reliability 
between these two coders to examine whether the researcher 
without any contextual knowledge rated each code similar 
to the researcher who had immersed himself into the 
context. To study the consensus, both coders individually 
labeled each of the 64 codes as either activity or 
communication. We then used Cohen's kappa to determine 
the exact level of agreement between the two coders. The 
result of the cross-tabulation is outlined in Table III, where 
Researcher A represents the immersed author, while 
Researcher B represents the researcher without any 
contextual knowledge. 
 
TABLE III. ANALYSIS OF INTER-RATER RELIABILITY 
 
Researcher B 
 
Communication 
Activity 
Total 
Researcher 
A 
Communication 
21 
7 
28 
Activity 
12 
24 
36 
Total 
33 
31 
64 
 
From the table, we can see that both researchers divided 
the number of codes between the two topics fairly equally: 
Researcher A labeled 28 codes as communication and 36 
codes as activity, while Researcher B labeled 33 codes as 
communication and 36 codes as activity. However, there 
were large discrepancies in which codes that were labeled 
under each topic. The coders agreed on 21 of the 64 codes 
(32.8 %) as examples of communication and 24 of the 64 
(37.5 %) as examples of activity. However, the level of 
inter-rater reliability was still only moderate, κ = .409 (95 % 
CI, .189 to .629), p < .001. As such, we see that the two 
researchers had a different understanding of the latent 
meaning behind similarly identified codes in the same data 
set. 
 
2) Thematic analysis 
During the second analysis, we conducted an inductive 
thematic analysis of all the data gathered to elicit themes 
related to our two topics activity and communication. The 
goal was to use the themes to summarize and exemplify the 
type of contextual knowledge that was accessible through 
our emphasis on immersive participation. To structure our 
inductive thematic analysis, we followed the procedure 
presented by Braun & Clarke [31] and used the two topics 
activity and communication as the overarching topics to tie 
together the different emerging themes. The preparation 
consisted of transcribing relevant audio recordings from 
workshops, annotating photographs, and a systematic 
structuring of all elicitation diary entries and notes from the 
participatory inquiry. We categorized the data into 40 first-
level codes that constituted the lowest level of patterned 
responses and opinions. The codes were collated into 15 
categories that were organized as four main themes. We 
ended our thematic analysis by mapping out the 
relationships between the different categories and themes, 
and by relating them to our overarching analytic topics 
activity and communication. Figure 4 illustrates the 
categories and themes identified. We omitted the 40 first-
level codes as they were all collated into the 15 categories 
outlined in the figure. 
 
D. Phase 1 – Findings 
 
1) Contextual insight gained through immersion 
Table IV presents a summary of the four themes 
identified in the data during the thematic analysis: meaning, 
practice, choices, and routines. These four themes represent 
the type of contextual insight gained through our immersive 
PD approach; the two former themes relate to activity as an 
overarching topic, while the two latter relate to 
communication. The table also lists the source methods for 
each of the themes, along with key quotes or observations. 
The four identified themes are examples of higher-order 
issues that we have separated to highlight the different types 
of contextual insight gained through immersion, as well as 
to demonstrate the variety of relevant considerations. As 
such, the themes are not four separate and independent 
examples of insight, but rather four overarching themes that 
represent a set of overlapping and intertwined factors.  
Meaning outlines an understanding of the meaning 
bearers for the users. Practice describes the context and the 
various kinds of work and activities carried out at the 
activity center. Choice describes the challenges the users 
and employees face during decision-making, as well as how 
they are resolved in situations involving different cognitive 
capabilities. Routine defines how we can understand the role 
and implications of the daily routines within the everyday 
lives of the users. 
  
2) The distribution of a difference in understanding 
The four themes and the underlying categories from the 
thematic analysis were also used to assess whether the 
differences in interpretation between researchers with and 
without contextual knowledge pertained to specific themes 
or created divergence across all themes. The 64 codes used 
to assess the level of agreement between the coders in the 
inter-rater reliability were compared to the 40 first-order 
codes used to structure the thematic analysis, and the 
differences were visualized. Figure 4 combines the four 
themes with the analysis of inter-rater reliability to 
demonstrate how the differences in understanding of 
contextual factors were distributed across all themes and 
underlying categories. The white circles indicate a similar 
understanding for all underlying codes; the striped-colored 
circles indicate disagreements in only some of the 
236
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

underlying 
codes; 
and 
the 
grey 
circles 
indicate 
disagreements in all underlying codes, i.e., the whole 
category itself. 
As we can see in Figure 4, the differences between the 
two coders were distributed across all four themes, as well 
as 11 of the 15 underlying categories. For instance, the two 
coders interpreted the whole theme of routine very 
differently, including all underlying categories. In other 
cases, the differences in interpretation of first-order codes 
did not propagate as the clusters of codes were identified 
and collated. One such example would be profession, where 
only one out of several codes was read differently without 
affecting the affiliated theme. As such, the contextual 
knowledge gained through immersion was not limited to 
certain aspects of activity or communication but pertained to 
most categories branching out of the four themes.  Stimuli is 
another example of how contextual knowledge created a 
divergence between the coders. For the researcher with 
contextual knowledge, this code was considered an in-vivo 
code, referring to a specific activity, while the researcher 
without contextual knowledge understood it as a matter of 
communication rather than activity. We saw similar 
differences with physical challenges; the researcher with 
contextual knowledge referred to communication challenges 
with this code as most users relied on bodily gestures to 
communicate, while the researcher without contextual 
knowledge saw this as a challenge related to participation  
 
 
Figure 4. Distribution of difference in coding between the two researchers 
 
 
 
TABLE IV. OVERVIEW OF THE FOUR THEMES AND MAIN FINDINGS 
Theme 
Main findings 
Source 
Key observations and quotes 
Meaning 
(Activity) 
• 
Meaning emerges through the context 
in which the activities take place. 
• 
The company of the social worker can 
affect the way in which meaning 
emerges. 
[A], [C],  
[F] 
Users have individually tailored activities and contexts to situate 
specific kinds of meaning 
“Examples of meaning bearer are social relations, safety, predictability, 
well-being, change of environment, learning and acknowledgment.” 
(social worker, [F]) 
 
Practice 
(Activity) 
 
• 
The practice involved in activities 
varies between users. 
• 
Activities need to be flexible 
regarding duration. 
[A], [C], 
[E] 
“Some activities require 1-on-1 assistance depending on the individuals 
involved and the context in which it is carried out.” (diary entry, [C]) 
“During the first day, I had to end an activity with a user because I was 
requested to help with something else” (diary entry, [C]) 
Choices 
(Communication) 
• 
Presentation of choices must be 
tailored to both the user and the 
context. 
• 
Limited language and cognition skills 
inhibit the presentation of choices. 
[A], [B], 
[C] 
“The user was presented with two alternatives, which I later discovered 
was a rather restricted choice considering the user’s capabilities” (field 
note, [A]) 
Representations of choices often require non-verbal forms of 
communication (see Figure 1, [B]) 
Routines 
(Communication) 
• 
Structure and daily routines affect the 
users’ ability to participate. 
• 
Routines promote autonomy by 
facilitating learning over time. 
[A], [C], 
[F] 
 
“For some users, it is a crisis to have a day off as it breaks routines” 
(social worker, [F]) 
“One user was frustrated when I communicated that I had to leave early 
because it disturbed some of the users’ routines” (diary entry, [C]) 
 
237
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

opportunities in activities.  
We argue that this distribution of the difference in 
understanding creates highly different outlooks for the 
facilitation of an inclusive and tailored PD process 
involving users with ID and their social workers as proxy 
designers.  
V. 
CONVERGING ON INTERMEDIATE LEARNING 
OUTCOMES 
 
This section links the two phases. As reported in [1], we 
summarized our findings from Phase 1 as three broader 
learning outcomes to guide future work: (1) build on 
established forms of mutual learning; (2) facilitate for social 
workers as proxies; (3) organize long-term. 
During the planning of Phase 2, the three learning 
outcomes 
directed 
the 
overarching 
methodological 
necessities, while the contextual knowledge about the 
activity center and its users directed pragmatic action-
oriented planning of tools and techniques. One requirement 
that emerged from Phase 1 was that the social workers still 
needed to be able to fulfill their roles as social workers. As a 
result, the process required that the users were engaged in 
design activities as though any other activity at the center. 
One of the main challenges would thus be to correctly 
manage the design process so that the social workers were 
enabled to both facilitate the inclusion of users, as well as 
conducting design workshops. As such, the social workers 
had to engage in two parallel design sessions: they needed 
to facilitate their own participation while simultaneously 
facilitating for the users to engage in the design process. 
In Phase 1, we explored the social workers' potential for 
working with the capabilities of the users to facilitate 
everyday activities. This is present in the understanding of 
the themes choice and routines, which mainly reflects the 
supporting role of the social workers in day-to-day 
communication. We also explored practice and how 
meaning emerged. The four themes, in combination with the 
three learning outcomes, created a baseline for making six 
action-oriented guidelines to the upcoming PD process in 
Phase 2. The three former aimed at enabling the users’ 
participation, while the three latter focused on proxies’ 
participation where established forms of mutual learning 
and general knowledge about the practice were utilized: 
  
1. Include a social component. 
2. Appear similar to existing activities. 
3. Offer flexibility through contextual adaption per 
the users’ needs. 
4. Introduce social workers to their roles. 
5. Utilize tools and techniques that enable reflection 
on the role of participants. 
6. Utilize tools and techniques that enable reflection 
on the role of facilitator for user participation. 
These guidelines helped us plan Phase 2 by facilitating 
participation for both the users and proxies. We utilized the 
guidelines to help us shape the use of tools and techniques 
applicable in future PD generative sessions. In Figure 5, we 
illustrate this move between the two phases. The use of 
social workers as proxies in the design process was vital in 
enabling the users to participate, hence the vertical orange 
arrow between users and proxies. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Moving between the two phases using the six guidelines 
 
VI. 
PHASE 2 – FACILITATION 
With the help of the six guidelines, we engaged 20 
participants in three generative workshops where tools and 
techniques were informed by the contextual knowledge 
gained during Phase 1. To help us organize and reflect upon 
the workshops, we conducted an initial preliminary 
interview with the manager, as well as one concluding set of 
participant interviews. In total, Phase 2 included 26 
participants and involved approximately 80 hours of in-situ 
presence. Table V outlines the main components of Phase 2. 
 
TABLE V. OVERVIEW OF RESEARCH METHODS 
# Research method 
Techniques 
Participants 
A Preliminary interview 
1on1 interview 
Manager 
B Three generative 
workshops 
Polaroid, collaging, 
and drawing. 
12 social workers 
and 8 users 
C Participant interview 
Group and single 
5 social workers 
 
Initiating a new dialogue between researcher and 
participants was carried out by targeting some of the already 
established routines and tools to organize meetings. We also 
had to spend time in context to recruit and introduce those 
who were unable to join. The main objective of the 
introduction was to sensitize the social workers to their role 
as facilitators and participants. A secondary motivation was 
to create a common goal, as emphasized by [12] and [13].  
 
 
238
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A. Research Methods 
 
1) Preliminary Interview 
We conducted a preliminary interview with the manager 
that guided most of the practical concerns of conducting our 
long-term PD process. One specific issue we wanted to 
overcome was the challenge of social workers participating 
without being aware of the goal and progress. Tailoring the 
design activities around their work schedules allowed us to 
maximize their opportunities for participation and mutual 
learning throughout the duration of the whole PD process. 
In addition, avoiding scheduling conflicts would help us 
circumvent fragmented participation from the social 
workers where we could risk them rejecting participation 
due to short burst facilitation [3]. It was also helpful to 
anchor a shared vision with the manager on how and what 
we wanted to achieve with the design process. 
 
2) Three Generative Workshops 
We utilized the three techniques outlined by Visser et al. 
[10]: sensitization, collaging, and drawing. There is a 
limitless number of tools and techniques available [9], as 
exemplified by [10, 12, 15, 32]. Generative techniques 
utilize tools that ideally are fitted to suit the context. Brandt 
et al. describe the role of such tools: “Today the generative 
tools describe a design language ideally suited by non-
designers. It is a full palette of predominantly visual 
components that enable participants to explore and express 
playful landscapes of past, present and future experiences.” 
[9, p. 159]. The generative workshops were organized in 
common spaces within the activity center, familiar to both 
the users and their social workers (see Figure 6). 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Examples of shared spaces where the workshops were organized 
 
a) Sensitization 
“In the sensitizing phase, participants perform exercises 
designed to let them think about past experiences, and make 
them ‘reflective practitioners (Schön, 1983) of their present 
experience” [10, p. 126]. The goal of the sensitization was 
to introduce the social workers to their roles as both proxies 
and facilitators for the inclusion of users. Attempting to 
create an engaging workshop, we crafted a toolkit, 
composed of different creative tools (Figure 7), a small 
booklet with directions and questions as well as an Instax 
Polaroid camera. We sought to utilize tools in completing 
simple tasks that both introduced the proxies to their roles, 
and also let them reflect on those.  
The sensitization was conducted by handing out the 
toolkit with a 20-minute introduction and discussion, as well 
as a small instructional chart answering questions they 
might have. We then left the toolkit at the center and did 
follow-up interviews in the coming days. Three introductory 
sessions were conducted with six participants over two 
workdays.  
 
Figure 7. Sensitization toolkit 
 
b) Picture Collaging 
Similarly to [33], the recruiting of participants depended on 
recruiting for single sessions, as the activities needed to be 
timed according to schedules, existing practice, and 
depended on the day-to-day health, wellbeing, and needs of 
the users.  
For the collaging session, one of the main goals was to 
co-create something intriguing for different people. The 
toolkit crafted consisted mainly of imagery targeted towards 
specific individuals as well as more generic imagery. The 
toolkit consisted of around 120 images, 40 words, and a 
large toolkit of creative artifacts (see Figure 8).  
 
 
 
Figure 8. A large toolkit of creative artifacts 
The images were chosen in several themes related to the 
design of technology, more specifically technologic 
239
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

possibilities, interfaces, emotions, contextual, accessibility, 
and individual and diverse iconography. The sessions were 
conducted by handing out the different tools, then 
instructing and continually guiding the participants through 
the creative process. A total of five sessions were organized 
with 20 participants in a span of eight workdays.  
 
c) Drawing 
The drawing workshop was initially intended to be as 
extensive as the collaging workshop. However, due to time 
constraints, as well as an extended amount of time spent 
conducting the collaging session, only one participant 
conducted the drawing session. In [10], the drawing session 
is integrated into the collaging, but we chose to separate 
them to accommodate the experienced need for flexibility in 
conducting any activity. 
 
3) Participant Interviews 
The participant interviews were conducted to follow up on 
the generative sessions. The reason for conducting follow-
up interviews was two-fold. First, they were conducted to 
make sure the social workers did not dismiss or reject the 
value of the workshops to innovate and design future 
solutions. Second, it was a reaction to the social workers not 
always being able to finish the sessions. We saw this as an 
opportunity for the social workers to discuss their thoughts 
surrounding the themes explored, even if they were unable 
to finish their participation.  
 
B. Phase 2 – Results and Analysis 
The data gathered through the three different activities in 
Phase 2 consisted of transcribed interviews, observation 
notes, discussion summaries, individual coding from 
workshops, photographs, resulting workshop artifacts, and 
Polaroid diaries. The analysis involved a coding process 
around two themes. First, social workers’ facilitation 
emerged as a cluster of all concerns related to whether the 
social workers had been able to implement the design 
activities of workshops. This also included its tools and 
techniques, and to what degree they could facilitate the 
inclusion of people with ID into the activities. Second, 
social workers’ exploration, gathered all observations of 
how the social workers utilized the presence and 
participation of the users to enact and explore ideas and 
assumptions about the capabilities of the users. 
 
1) Results 
A total of ten different generative sessions were conducted, 
along with seven follow-up interviews held in the span of 
ten workdays. 12 social workers actively participated in the 
generative workshops in collaboration with eight users. 
Without presuming to know the people with ID’s health 
conditions, we consider user participants to be within 
profound to severe ID [34]. The users’ age ranged from 
circa 35 to 60 years old with physical disabilities ranging 
from profound to negligible. 
  
a) Social workers’ facilitation 
Throughout the generative workshops, the social workers 
included the users in the workshops as active participants, 
using the different generative tools as well as their 
knowledge about users’ general capabilities. In discussions 
and interviews, the social workers focused almost 
exclusively on communicational aspects on how to include 
the users into the workshops, emphasizing their physical, 
cognitive, and language capabilities.  
The 
social 
workers 
often 
described 
how 
they 
accommodated the user’s cognitive capabilities. They also 
reflected on how to present choices. One such example was 
during the early stages, where one social worker reflected 
on asking leading questions and changing the wording after 
conducting the sensitization. In a group discussion 
following the sensitization, two social workers discussed 
how they had to change the wording of the sensitization kit. 
In another workshop, two social workers used the 
morning meetings and introductory talks to discuss the 
possibilities for one particular user’s participation. This user 
had had “a bad week”, and the social workers who had been 
working with the user previously were apprehensive about 
how they could adequately include the user. In the 
introductory talks, one social worker explained and reflected 
on this user’s need for social interaction to generate 
meaning. When they later worked with facilitating the user’s 
participation, they specifically focused on how to make the 
activity social, using both the tools available and their 
knowledge of the user’s capabilities. While they initially 
were apprehensive to include the user, they managed to co-
ideate a paper prototype for a planning and communication 
tool.  
 
b) Social workers’ exploration 
During the three generative sessions, we discovered how the 
social workers developed their understanding of the design 
problem through the users’ participation in the same 
workshops. One main reason was that the social workers 
could exploit the presence of the users to explore 
assumptions about their capabilities and help navigate their 
own design ideas. To achieve this variant of mutual 
learning, the social workers would often use pre-existing 
contextual tools, the toolkits, or even co-crafted new tools to 
explore.  
The social workers would also use the presence of the 
users to scaffold their understanding of how the users made 
choices and understood abstractions. In one instance, a 
social worker tested whether the user could make informed 
decisions on a screen-based interface by co-assembling two 
prototypes, one tangible and one screen-based (see Figure 
9), based on a selection of activities that the user enjoyed. 
The two prototypes helped the social worker further explore 
240
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

to what degree the user understood abstractions on the 
screen-based interface. This offered the social worker an 
even more in-depth understanding of the user’s ability to 
make an informed decision. 
 
Figure 9. Exploring how users understand abstraction with different 
interfaces 
 
In another session, a social worker explored how the 
user would perceive and understand different examples of 
iconography and pictures by using the toolkit to create non-
verbal means of communication based on their previous 
knowledge of the user’s capabilities and familiarity with 
symbols (see Figure 10). By engaging in such activities, the 
social workers matured their understanding of the user’s 
ability to comprehend different representations.  
 
 
 
Figure 10. Symbols used to explore the user’s ability to comprehend 
representations 
 
Learning about such opportunities in the user’s ability to 
participate offered great help in knowing how and when to 
involve the user in future proxy activities. The presence of 
users continuously confronted the social workers about their 
understanding of the user’s capabilities, which sometimes 
turned out to be incorrect, or in need of adjustment. By 
participating in co-design activities, the social workers 
gradually matured their ability to give the people with ID a 
voice in a PD process. More comprehensive descriptions of 
how these situations of mutual learning unfolded can be 
found in [34]. 
 
C. Phase 2 – Findings 
 
We summarize our findings around the two themes 
identified in the data during the analysis: social workers’ 
facilitation and social workers’ exploration. The two themes 
highlight the observed case-specific discoveries relating to 
the overarching research question. The two themes are 
examples of how social workers acted as proxies in both 
facilitating the inclusion of people with ID into the design-
making stages, and in turn, how this influenced the 
decision-making processes and explorations of possibilities 
that these generative techniques allowed.   
 
1) Social workers’ facilitation 
This theme outlines our understanding of how the social 
workers utilized their knowledge about their users’ 
capabilities to include them in the workshop using the tools 
that different techniques offered to facilitate for engaging 
user participation.  
Initially, we intended the activities to engage the users 
passively in similar, albeit arbitrary, activities such as board 
games, artistic activities, or any activity that resembled the 
generative sessions. The results, however, uncovered that 
the social workers utilized their understanding of the users, 
their communicational capabilities, and understanding of 
practice and meaning, to include the users into the 
generative design sessions. This effectively made the users 
more directly involved in the design activities than initially 
intended. 
 
2) Social workers’ exploration  
Throughout all stages of Phase 2, the social workers 
actively engaged the users in mutual learning. They 
explored their assumptions about users’ capabilities and 
concrete ideas utilizing both existing and new tools to 
engage the users. The inclusion of the users also opened up 
possibilities for the social workers to explore through 
discussion with peers and researchers by sharing ideas and 
furthering 
their 
understanding 
of 
capabilities 
and 
technology. Finally, they also matured their understanding 
of how they could involve people with ID into generative 
design activities when serving as proxies. Table VI 
summarizes the two themes and related main findings. 
 
241
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE VI. THE TWO THEMES AND RELATED MAIN FINDINGS 
Themes 
Main findings 
Social workers 
facilitation 
• 
Social workers can facilitate for 
engagement of user participation 
• 
Tools and techniques enable social 
workers to engage user participation 
Social workers’ 
exploration 
• 
User participation let social workers 
inform themselves and the researchers 
about the users’ capabilities 
• 
Social workers utilized and created tools 
to facilitate exploration 
• 
The social workers’ exploration opened 
possibilities for discussing with peers 
and researchers 
 
VII. USING SOCIAL WORKERS AS PROXIES TO FACILITATE 
PARTICIPATION 
In the immersive nature of our PD process, taking on the 
role of a volunteer social worker gave us a possibility to 
create and embed mutual learning in the context on the 
premise of the users and social workers. In Phase 2, the 
basis for further exploring possibilities for participation of 
people with ID was built on an understanding of the context 
through the four themes presented as our intermediate 
learning outcomes. We operationalized these themes as six 
guidelines that helped us inform the use of tools and 
techniques as a means to enable participation from the user 
through the inclusion of social workers as proxies. Having 
engaged with users and their proxies in generative 
workshops now allow us to structure a discussion around 
our overarching research question: “how can we facilitate 
design with people with different intellectual capabilities 
using Participatory Design?”. We have divided the 
discussion into two main arguments that reflect the core idea 
of the strategy we advocate for facilitating PD involving 
users with ID. 
 
A. Enabling appropriate proxies can facilitate the 
inclusion of people with ID into all design stages 
The use of proxies has been discussed in previous 
studies, e.g., as a way to help researchers learn about the 
goals of the end-users [24]. However, we argue that the 
social workers specifically constitute appropriate proxies 
due to their ability to break down language barriers (as seen 
in [23]) that may prevent equalized power relations. Both 
throughout the immersive process of Phase 1 and the 
generative sessions in Phase 2, the proxies were vital in 
bridging communicational gaps. This point is best 
exemplified by cases where the users relied on mixed forms 
of communication, e.g., hand signs, body language, and 
words, to express themselves. In such situations, both 
contextual knowledge and having the social workers 
explicitly tell you what they think the users were 
communicating, enabled participation from the users.  
While conducting the different generative sessions in 
Phase 2, the social workers actively engaged the users in all 
stages, 
utilizing 
their 
knowledge 
about 
physical, 
communicational, and general cognitive capabilities to 
activate and engage them in design-making using both 
existing and new tools [35].  
Balancing power relations is a common challenge found 
within PD [3, 5]. During both phases, the social workers’ 
presence during activities increased the researchers’ chances 
to successfully facilitate a space for mutual learning by 
supporting 
non-verbal 
and 
contextual 
forms 
of 
communication. Users were able to express themselves, 
make choices, and be properly understood. Being able to 
speak your native (to the context) language in the design 
process can avoid issues of “model monopoly” and expand 
the universe of discourse [2]. Facilitating sessions in a larger 
arena that allowed the users to practice collaborative 
working skills was seen as highly dependent on the presence 
of the social workers in our study, and other studies have 
suggested that this factor is often overlooked [25]. We also 
want to shed light on considerations related to the 
management of the design process [5] and advocate the use 
of social workers to help lower the threshold for 
participation as they know how to initiate design discussions 
without disrupting ongoing everyday activities. One such 
instance was during Phase 1 where the social workers 
approached us to discuss topics of interest. Another more 
prominent occurrence was in Phase 2, where the social 
workers actively engaged in planning when, where, and how 
we would conduct the different sessions, considering daily 
routines and needs of the users. 
To engage the participants differently, we used 
contextual probes [22, 36], both as a way to circumvent 
users finding themselves in a “passive role” [30] due to 
communication barriers, and as means of sensitizing the 
proxies, forcing reflections on their roles as design-proxies 
and facilitators for user-participation [10].  
 
B. The inclusion of people with ID by proxies lets proxies 
explore assumptions about user capabilities 
The people with ID participating in the generative 
sessions could inform the proxies about their different 
capabilities during the decision-making stages of design. In 
the field PD, it is mutually agreed that the heart of the 
tradition is participation [9, 37]. Brandt et al. [9, p. 147] 
point to Wenger [38, p. 56] and their definition of 
participation in a community of practice as a “complex 
process that combines doing, talking, thinking, feeling and 
belonging. It involves our whole person including bodies, 
minds, emotions, and social relations”. In our study, the 
bodily presence of people with ID helped enrich the design 
sessions, effectively giving the end-users another means of 
communicating needs [21]. 
242
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

While proxies constitute a vital part of bridging potential 
communication gaps and leveling power relations, we argue 
that generative tools and techniques, such as those described 
by [10], can open up the design space for the users by 
permitting different means of expressing wants and needs 
by utilizing channels of telling, making and enacting [9].  
In Phase 2, we observed that despite substantial 
limitations due to physical and cognitive capabilities, people 
with ID contributed to decision-making, through the 
presence of either mind or body. This expands on earlier 
studies that focus on the inclusion of people with ID, and 
other cognitive limitations, into initial inquiries and later 
testing stages [6, 7, 19, 20]. In their respective studies, [6, 
7], made it possible for users to “show, share and interact” 
in later testing stages by utilizing prototypes. Here, we 
enabled the proxies to “show, share and interact” during 
earlier stages, which granted the proxies a greater 
understanding of capabilities when ideating. We postulate 
that the inclusion of people with ID into the design-making 
makes it possible to fail fast and find solutions that better 
resonate with the end-users earlier in the design process. 
Through different generative sessions in Phase 2, proxies 
utilized the tools available, both existing and new, to 
generate or verify knowledge about the users’ capabilities. 
In their work, Brandt et al. emphasize enacting as an 
important component in any PD process, where we utilize 
the physicality and accessibility of the end-users to explore 
possibilities for future use: “With enacting we refer to 
activities where one or more people imagine and act out 
possible futures by trying things out (by use of the body) in 
settings that either resemble or are where future activities 
are likely to take place” [9, p. 164]. In the case of people 
with ID, who might be unable to express wants, needs, likes, 
or dislikes through traditional communicational means, we 
argue that the embodied means of communication becomes 
particularly important in exploring future use. In our study, 
the physical presence of the people with ID, and the 
possibility for proxies to enact scenarios of use by utilizing 
their knowledge about users’ physical and communicational 
capabilities let them explore future possibilities of use.  
 
VIII. ENABLING PEOPLE WITH ID TO PARTICIPATE 
We consider the main contribution of this paper to be our 
proposed immersive strategy on how to include people with 
ID in PD processes by engaging social workers as 
facilitators. We have put forward and discussed the two 
overarching arguments of our approach: that the process can 
(1) enable appropriate proxies as the facilitators of the 
inclusion of people with ID in all design stages, and (2) let 
proxies explore assumptions about users’ capabilities as 
they facilitate the inclusion of people with ID. Our findings 
demonstrate different ways the presence of social workers 
enabled dialogue in ways that supported non-traditional 
forms of communication, strengthened core principles of PD 
such as mutual learning, and allowed people with ID to 
engage in decision-making. As such, we consider our 
findings to contribute to ongoing discussions on a method 
level of how to engage people with ID in specific PD 
activities, as well as relevant to methodological discussions 
where we suggest using immersion as a strategy to facilitate 
long-term PD collaborations. We end the paper by 
positioning our propose strategy into two central discussions 
with the PD community, namely how our strategy builds on 
top of established forms of mutual learning and practice, 
and that it should be organized as a long-term commitment. 
 
A. The PD process should be built on top of already 
established forms of mutual learning and practice 
One core concept of PD is to enable participants to take 
control of their futures by affecting the technology that will 
help shape it [2]. Technology intended to support vulnerable 
users carries a responsibility of not affecting the users’ 
everyday lives in a negative manner, for instance, through 
use or even the inability to use. One such example is 
stigmatization through technology, which has previously 
been reported within our empirical context. Havgar [39] 
discusses the importance of not disrupting the sense of 
feeling “normal” for people with ID through technology that 
separates them from the rest of the world. Similar 
challenges have been reported in other demographics as 
well, e.g., PD involving older adults [40]. We argue that one 
of the essential reasons we have been able to include people 
with ID into decision-making processes has been based on 
utilizing established forms of mutual learning and practice. 
However, in order to get to a ‘starting line’ [7] where 
inclusion into ideation is possible, we argue that immersion 
offers a chance to learn about everyday activities where 
people with ID and their social workers already have 
established mutual learning through their everyday 
activities. We have demonstrated how building on top of 
established means of communication may contribute to the 
participants accessing a sensation of mutual learning quicker 
[24], as well as taking more ownership of the design process 
and its outcomes [41]. Scaffolding the PD process around 
existing routines and habits allows for easier participation 
for social workers who find themselves in a busy work 
environment. This may also reduce misunderstanding as 
social workers are more familiar with the individual users 
and can assist the researchers in their interpretation of non-
verbal forms of communication [42]. Lastly, we argue that 
building on top of already established practice, routines, and 
mutual learning has let us shape a PD process that omits 
problems such as described by Redhead & Brereton [3], that 
academic practice can be resisted by the local community.  
 
B. The PD process should be organized as a long-term 
commitment 
Identifying the appropriate point of departure in a PD 
process demands contextualized knowledge [7]. However, 
243
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

we argue that contextual insight over time contributes to 
mutual learning by allowing time and space to identify 
enough examples of the uniqueness of each situation being 
symbiotically shaped by the users, the context, and the 
social workers’ intimate knowledge of the situations. As 
such, we argue that long-term engagement is a way to 
converge on the uniqueness of each situation [6], as well as 
a way to avoid communities rejecting opportunities for 
collaboration due to short-burst facilitation [3].  
Furthermore, we saw from our empirical context that 
committing to long-term engagement also contributed to 
both respect and trust [7], and the development of social 
relationships and skills [24]. This gave the activity center 
more time to familiarize themselves with our academic 
practice. 
Finally, we also advocate long-term presence as a means 
to support “channeling” the access to the context and the co-
inhabitants’ needs [8], which we argue is not a static matter, 
but rather something “[…] continually in the making 
through everyday contestations among neighbors, relatives, 
colleagues and the material world they co-inhabit.” [43, p. 
15]. In these situations, the active engagement of social 
workers as proxies contributed significantly to adapting the 
process to both user needs and daily routines and practices. 
The long-term presence also meant that the social workers 
and researchers developed an understanding of how to work 
around issues such as the need for flexibility due to specific 
needs or physical and mental fatigue, a point also raised by 
[6, 19]. 
 
IX. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper has reported from the exploration and 
facilitation phase of a long-term PD process involving 
people with ID and social workers as proxies. We have 
proposed using immersion as a strategy to elicit contextual 
concerns that can later shape tools and techniques applied in 
PD activities. Concrete experiences were used to 
demonstrate how we built a PD process on top of daily 
activities and routines of the people with ID at the activity 
center. The results from our empirical work highlight 
examples of how we have managed to enable long-term 
participation by finding new ways to achieve mutual 
learning and decision-making. Our proposed strategy 
emphasizes the vital role of the social workers as the 
enablers of participation from people with ID.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Å. Dæhlen and S. G. Joshi, “Immersion as a Strategy to 
Facilitate Participatory Design Involving People With 
Intellectual Disabilities and Caretakers as Proxies,” in 
Proceedings of ACHI 2019, The Twelfth International 
Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions, 
2019, pp. 15–24. 
[2] 
T. Bratteteig, K. Bødker, Y. Dittrich, P. H. Mogensen, and 
J. Simonsen, “Organising principles and general guidelines 
for Participatory Design projects,” Routledge Handb. 
Particip. Des., p. 117, 2012. 
[3] 
F. Redhead and M. Brereton, “Growing local participation 
through long term design,” in Proceedings of Participatory 
Innovation Conference 2012, 2012. 
[4] 
N. Moraveji, J. Li, J. Ding, P. O’Kelley, and S. Woolf, 
“Comicboarding: using comics as proxies for participatory 
design with children,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
conference on Human factors in computing systems, 2007, 
pp. 1371–1374. 
[5] 
P. Francis, S. Balbo, and L. Firth, “Towards co-design with 
users who have autism spectrum disorders,” Univers. 
Access Inf. Soc., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 123–135, Aug. 2009. 
[6] 
N. Hendriks, L. Huybrechts, A. Wilkinson, and K. Slegers, 
“Challenges in doing participatory design with people with 
dementia,” presented at the Proceedings of the 13th 
Participatory Design Conference: Short Papers, Industry 
Cases, Workshop Descriptions, Doctoral Consortium 
papers, and Keynote abstracts - Volume 2, 2662196, 2014, 
pp. 33–36. 
[7] 
H. Holone and J. Herstad, “Three Tensions in Participatory 
Design for Inclusion,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, New 
York, NY, USA, 2013, pp. 2903–2906. 
[8] 
J. Blomberg and H. Karasti, “Positioning ethnography 
within participatory design,” Routledge Int. Handb. 
Particip. Des., pp. 86–116, 2012. 
[9] 
E. Brandt, T. Binder, and E. B.-N. Sanders, “Tools and 
Techniques, Ways to engage telling, making and enacting,” 
in Routledge International Handbook of Participatory 
Design, 2012. 
[10] 
F. S. Visser, P. J. Stappers, R. van der Lugt, and E. B.-N. 
Sanders, “Contextmapping: experiences from practice,” 
CoDesign, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 119–149, Apr. 2005. 
[11] 
E. B.-N. Sanders and P. J. Stappers, “Probes, toolkits and 
prototypes: three approaches to making in codesigning,” 
CoDesign, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 5–14, Jan. 2014. 
[12] 
S. 
Hussain, 
E. 
B.-N. 
Sanders, 
and 
M. 
Steinert, 
“Participatory 
design 
with 
marginalized 
people 
in 
developing 
countries: 
Challenges 
and 
opportunities 
experienced in a field study in Cambodia,” Int. J. Des., vol. 
6, no. 2, 2012. 
[13] 
J. Galliers et al., “Words are not enough: empowering 
people with aphasia in the design process,” in Proceedings 
of the 12th Participatory Design Conference on Research 
Papers: Volume 1 - PDC ’12, Roskilde, Denmark, 2012, p. 
51. 
[14] 
A. M. Kanstrup, P. Bertelsen, and J. Ø. Madsen, “Design 
with the feet: walking methods and participatory design,” 
presented at the Proceedings of the 13th Participatory 
Design Conference: Research Papers-Volume 1, 2014, pp. 
51–60. 
[15] 
E. B.-N. Sanders, “Generative Tools for Co-designing,” in 
Collaborative Design, S. A. R. Scrivener, L. J. Ball, and A. 
Woodcock, Eds. London: Springer London, 2000, pp. 3–12. 
[16] 
E. B.-N. Sanders, E. Brandt, and T. Binder, “A framework 
for organizing the tools and techniques of participatory 
design,” in Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory 
Design Conference on - PDC ’10, Sydney, Australia, 2010, 
p. 195. 
244
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[17] 
A. Yakhlef and A. Essén, “Practice innovation as bodily 
skills: the example of elderly home care service delivery,” 
Organization, vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 881–903, Nov. 2013. 
[18] 
E. Grönvall and M. Kyng, “On participatory design of 
home-based healthcare,” Cogn. Technol. Work, vol. 15, no. 
4, pp. 389–401, Nov. 2013. 
[19] 
S. G. Joshi and T. Bratteteig, “Assembling Fragments into 
Continuous Design: On Participatory Design with Old 
People,” in Nordic Contributions in IS Research, vol. 223, 
H. Oinas-Kukkonen, N. Iivari, K. Kuutti, A. Öörni, and M. 
Rajanen, Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 
2015, pp. 13–29. 
[20] 
S. A. Ballegaard, T. R. Hansen, and M. Kyng, “Healthcare 
in everyday life: designing healthcare services for daily 
life,” presented at the Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
2008, pp. 1807–1816. 
[21] 
M. Brereton, L. Sitbon, M. H. L. Abdullah, M. Vanderberg, 
and S. Koplick, “Design after design to bridge between 
people living with cognitive or sensory impairments, their 
friends and proxies,” CoDesign, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 4–20, 
Jan. 2015. 
[22] 
M. Dawe, “‘Let Me Show You What I Want’: Engaging 
Individuals with Cognitive Disabilities and Their Families 
in Design,” in CHI ’07 Extended Abstracts on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2007, 
pp. 2177–2182. 
[23] 
J. L. Boyd-Graber et al., “Participatory design with proxies: 
developing a desktop-PDA system to support people with 
aphasia,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2006, pp. 151–160. 
[24] 
C. Putnam and L. Chong, “Software and technologies 
designed for people with autism: what do users want?,” in 
Proceedings of the 10th international ACM SIGACCESS 
conference on Computers and accessibility, 2008, pp. 3–10. 
[25] 
M. Brosnan, S. Parsons, J. Good, and N. Yuill, “How can 
participatory design inform the design and development of 
innovative technologies for autistic communities?,” J. 
Assist. Technol. Hove, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 115–120, 2016. 
[26] 
V. E. Cree, Becoming a Social Worker. Routledge, 2009. 
[27] 
M. K. Bahus, “bruker,” Store norske leksikon. 19-Oct-2018. 
[28] 
M. Crang and I. Cook, Doing ethnographies. Sage, 2007. 
[29] 
T. Robertson, T. W. Leong, J. Durick, and T. Koreshoff, 
“Mutual learning as a resource for research design,” in 
Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference: 
Short Papers, Industry Cases, Workshop Descriptions, 
Doctoral Consortium papers, and Keynote abstracts-
Volume 2, 2014, pp. 25–28. 
[30] 
P. Börjesson, W. Barendregt, E. Eriksson, and O. 
Torgersson, 
“Designing 
Technology 
for 
and 
with 
Developmentally Diverse Children: A Systematic Literature 
Review,” in Proceedings of the 14th International 
Conference on Interaction Design and Children, New York, 
NY, USA, 2015, pp. 79–88. 
[31] 
V. Braun and V. Clarke, “Using thematic analysis in 
psychology,” Qual. Res. Psychol., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 77–101, 
2006. 
[32] 
M. Foverskov and T. Binder, “Super Dots: making social 
media tangible for senior citizens,” presented at the 
Proceedings of the 2011 Conference on Designing 
Pleasurable Products and Interfaces, 2011, p. 65. 
[33] 
S. G. Joshi and T. Bratteteig, “Designing for Prolonged 
Mastery. On involving old people in Participatory Design,” 
vol. 28, p. 35, 2016. 
[34] 
Å. K. Dæhlen, “Facilitating for Capabilities - Empowering 
People with Intellectual Disabilities Using Proxies to 
Facilitate Participation,” Master Thesis Dep. Inform. UiO, 
2019. 
[35] 
S. 
G. 
Joshi, 
“Designing 
for 
Capabilities: 
A 
Phenomenological Approach to the Design of Enabling 
Technologies for Older Adults (Doctoral dissertation),” Ser. 
Diss. Submitt. Fac. Math. Nat. Sci., vol. 1881, 2017. 
[36] 
H. Hutchinson et al., “Technology probes: inspiring design 
for and with families,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
conference on Human factors in computing systems, 2003, 
pp. 17–24. 
[37] 
T. Bratteteig, K. Bødker, Y. Dittrich, P. Holst Mogensen, 
and J. Simonsen, Routledge international handbook of 
participatory design. Routledge, 2012. 
[38] 
E. Wenger, Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, 
and identity. Cambridge university press, 1999. 
[39] 
P. K. A. Havgar, “Designing for Intellectual Disability: 
Combining User-Centered Design and Research through 
Design,” Master Thesis Univ. Oslo 2016, 2016. 
[40] 
S. G. Joshi, “Emerging ethical considerations from the 
perspectives of the elderly,” presented at the CaTaC’14: 
Culture, 
Technology, 
Communication: 
Celebration, 
Transformation, New Directions, Oslo, Norway, 2014, pp. 
186–203. 
[41] 
C. Bigby, P. Frawley, and P. Ramcharan, “Conceptualizing 
Inclusive 
Research 
with 
People 
with 
Intellectual 
Disability,” J. Appl. Res. Intellect. Disabil., vol. 27, no. 1, 
pp. 3–12, Jan. 2014. 
[42] 
L. C. L. de Faria Borges, L. V. L. Filgueiras, C. Maciel, and 
V. C. Pereira, “Customizing a Communication Device for a 
Child with Cerebral Palsy Using Participatory Design 
Practices: Contributions Towards the PD4CAT Method,” in 
Proceedings of the 11th Brazilian Symposium on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, Porto Alegre, Brazil, Brazil, 
2012, pp. 57–66. 
[43] 
J. Halse, Ed., Rehearsing the future. Copenhagen: The 
Danish Design School Press, 2010. 
 
245
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

