193
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Time-Efficient Techniques for Improving  
Student and Instructor Success in Online Courses 
 
Julie R. Newell 
Radow College of Humanities and Social Sciences 
Kennesaw State University 
Kennesaw, GA, USA 
jnewell2@kennesaw.edu 
Deborah Mixson-Brookshire 
Coles College of Business 
Kennesaw State University 
Kennesaw, GA, USA 
dmixson@kennesaw.edu 
Tamara Powell 
Radow College of Humanities and Social Sciences 
Kennesaw State University 
Kennesaw, GA, USA 
tpowel25@kennesaw.edu 
Tiffani Reardon Tijerina 
Affordable Learning GA Program Manager 
University System of Georgia 
Athens, GA, USA 
tiffani.tijerina@usg.edu  
Lauren Snider 
Radow College of Humanities and Social Sciences 
Kennesaw State University 
Kennesaw, GA, USA 
lsnider1@students.kennesaw.edu 
Stephen Bartlett 
Radow College of Humanities and Social Sciences 
Kennesaw State University 
Kennesaw, GA, USA 
sbartlet@kennesaw.edu 
Julie Moore 
Bagwell College of Education 
Kennesaw State University 
Kennesaw, GA, USA 
jmoor151@kennesaw.edu 
Sam Lee 
Radow College of Humanities and Social Sciences 
Kennesaw State University 
Kennesaw, GA, USA 
slee229@students.kennesaw.edu  
Brayden Milam 
Radow College of Humanities and Social Sciences 
Kennesaw State University 
Kennesaw, GA, USA 
bmilam3@kennesaw.edu 
Justin Cochran 
Coles College of Business 
Kennesaw State University 
Kennesaw, GA, USA 
jcochr48@kennesaw.edu  
Abstract—Researchers at a public (state-funded) institution in 
the United States seek to increase student success rates in online 
courses by encouraging faculty implementation of research-
based strategies in their online courses without significantly 
increasing faculty workloads. This goal was identified partially 
in response to a survey of faculty at the institution and partially 
in response to funding priorities.  In the first phase of the faculty 
development project, the researchers created a training 
program that provided short, research-based, student-success 
strategy segments to faculty already enrolled in faculty 
development. These teaching tools were largely based on 
pedagogical research and methods long understood within 
traditional education disciplines but not as obviously applied to 
online course delivery. In this sense, the professional 
development modules are innovations to traditional online 
training. After the training program, the researchers analyzed 
faculty response to the training to improve design principles and 
delivery for future development of eLearning materials. In the 
second phase of the project, the short segments were offered as 
standalone training modules to anyone who wished to view 
them. Users were then surveyed regarding their perceptions of 
the strategies. While the impact of the innovations developed in 
this student success endeavor are still largely to be determined, 
preliminary results indicate that faculty find the professional 
development modules helpful and will be implementing them in 
their courses.  
Keywords-student success rates; innovation; feedback; open 
educational resources; training transfer; social media 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
This research project, first presented at eLmL 2021: The 
Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and 

194
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
On-line Learning [1], aims to increase student success in 
online courses while being mindful of faculty workload as 
well as lack of time for faculty development and course 
redesign. Initially focused on courses offered in RCHSS 
(Radow College of Humanities and Social Sciences) at KSU 
(Kennesaw State University), the project has moved beyond 
that to create an OER (Open Educational Resource) available 
to any interested individual with internet access.  
This paper moves beyond that original conference 
presentation [1] to examine a wide range of published research 
that both provides context and underpins the resources we 
continue to develop. It then analyzes previously unpublished 
data from a fall 2019 faculty survey examining faculty 
motivations and expectations. Further, the paper describes the 
first and second phases of a research project seeking to 
develop faculty development resources that require minimal 
investments of institutional resources and faculty time and 
effort while facilitating the implementation of research-based 
techniques to improve student success in online instruction. 
II. OVERVIEW AND RATIONALE 
 In the United States, education is supported financially by 
a complicated combination of federal and state funding. In 
fact, state by state comparisons reveal huge differences in how 
much a state contributes to its higher education coffers. 
Government funding of higher education has dropped 
substantially in recent decades [2]. For example, overall, 
higher education state funding per student dropped 27% from 
2000-2014. State by state, the numbers vary widely. The state 
of Michigan cut funding by 53% overall during that time while 
North Dakota increased funding by 31%. Our own state of 
Georgia cut funding by 17% [3].  
When cuts are substantial, the difference is made up in 
budget cuts at the institutional level (such as reduction in 
library holdings and elimination of staff and programs) and 
tuition increases, among other strategies. But, in the United 
States’ political system, the same politicians who strive to cut 
funding to education also strive to claim that they keep taxes 
and other expenses low. Therefore, some states rarely allow 
public (that is, state-funded) institutions to raise tuition to 
make up for these budget cuts.  
With funding so tight, opportunities to gain additional 
funding to support faculty and students is highly prized, and 
competition is fierce when such opportunities are announced. 
Opportunity sometimes comes in the form of “student success 
dollars,” which is funding that can be awarded for initiatives 
with the intent of bolstering student success. In this case, 
student success is defined as decreased DFWI rates (students 
earning Ds or Fs, withdrawing from courses, or taking 
incomplete grades) and increased retention (the student stays 
in individual courses and in the university as a whole), 
progression (the student progresses through a degree 
program), and graduation (within a proscribed number of 
years). This definition is often abbreviated as RPG (Retention, 
Progression, and Graduation). While student success dollars 
are not tied directly to RPG, our Executive Director for 
Academic & Fiscal Operations at KSU, Dr. Michael 
Rothlisberger, explained, “Student success dollars are a 
systemic example of tying resources to strategy” because 
meeting RPG targets is seen as “a moral imperative” [4]. 
To compete for these highly prized student success dollars, 
our college wants to stand ready with research-based support 
to facilitate faculty implementation of techniques that foster 
student success. But just as there is a balancing act that goes 
along with cutting state funding to higher education and 
refusing to allow tuition to rise, there is also a balancing act 
with innovating to improve student success and being mindful 
of innovations that might challenge academic freedom or 
increase already strained faculty workloads. For example, for 
the past ten years, the RCHSS ODE (Office of Digital 
Education) has offered an award-winning “Build a Web 
Course Workshop” to support RCHSS faculty in creating and 
teaching online courses using research-based best practices. 
This workshop is time intensive, moving faculty through at 
least eight hours of in-person or synchronous virtual training 
and then at least another eight hours of training in a learning 
management system.  In preparing to apply for student success 
funding, college administrators recently looked at the DFWI 
rates of online courses offered pre-pandemic.  Surprisingly, it 
was determined that there was no significant difference in 
DFWI rates between classes where faculty had been trained to 
teach online using best practices versus online courses created 
and taught by faculty who had not received training.  
Our administration theorized the lack of discernable 
difference may stem from the fact that the ODE delivers 
training focused on best practices in online and hybrid 
teaching and not specifically on student success. That is, the 
courses created by trained faculty may have been better 
designed because the faculty who created and taught them had 
been trained in research-based best practices, but the courses 
may not have specifically implemented student success 
strategies. 
III. THEORY AND CURRENT PRACTICE 
In 1970, Paulo Freire first published Pedagogy of the 
Oppressed, taking issue with what he called the “banking 
method” of education, where a teacher deposits knowledge 
into the student, as if the student were a bank [5]. Freire called 
for a partnership between teacher and student to liberate 
students and recommended “[p]roblem-posing education” [5].  
While Freire did not envision the revolution in education that 
would be digital learning, his ideas are still the foundation of 
many of the current student success strategies that are 
modality agnostic, including transparent pedagogy and HIPs 
(High-Impact Practices).  
A. 
High-Impact Practices 
HIPs were identified by George Kuh in 2008 [6] and 
lauded throughout academia. Since then, many institutions 
have made concerted efforts to increase these practices 
throughout their educational offerings. The practices include 
“First-Year 
Seminars 
and 
Experiences,” 
“Common 

195
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Intellectual 
Experiences,” 
“Learning 
Communities,” 
“Writing-Intensive Courses,” “Collaborative Assignments 
and Projects,” “Undergraduate Research,” “Diversity/Global 
Learning,” “ePortfolios,” “Internships,” and “Capstone 
Courses and Projects” [6].  
Over a decade later, Indiana University’s Center for 
Postsecondary Research surveyed students regarding HIPs 
and recommended “three ways educators can assess high-
impact practices and ensure high-quality experiences for all 
students” [7]. The proposed strategies look at which HIPs 
practices students are being exposed to most and redesign 
current practices to include more HIPs, evaluate what “high 
quality” means and ensure that that measure is communicated 
and upheld, and evaluate student satisfaction with an 
awareness of critiques of HIPs that “HIPs are centered in the 
ideology of Whiteness” [7]. It is important to note that the 
researchers found that satisfaction levels with HIPs practices 
among students involved in them did not vary with regard to 
race and ethnic group identification [7].  
In a separate study, Kinzie and Kuh specifically analyzed 
over 15 major contributions to student success literature that 
covered “college impact, student effort and engagement and 
importance of the first college year for student success” [8]. 
Their findings showed that while the information about best 
practices 
for 
student 
success 
is 
widely 
available, 
implementation rates are still unacceptably low. “Institutions 
for various reasons do not faithfully and effectively 
implement the kinds of promising policies and practices that 
seem to work elsewhere” [8]. Kinzie and Kuh believe that the 
failures to effectively implement the strategies and changes 
to increase student success are due to an approach that is too 
broad and overwhelming. Schools use the smorgasbord 
approach for strategies instead of narrowing the options down 
to the specific strategies that would benefit their particular 
institutions best. Kinzie and Kuh’s suggestion is for 
institutions to implement Driver diagrams, to streamline 
goals as well as “to build and test theories for improvement 
and to clarify what is needed to achieve student success 
goals'' [8]. 
 In addition, Stewart and Nicolazzo take issue with HIPs 
practices, pointing out that activities like study abroad and 
internships may pose dangers to trans students. Overall, HIPs 
practices are more beneficial to students when those students 
experience fewer levels of oppression and higher levels of 
privilege. Stewart and Nicolazzo recommend instead that 
educators implement “trickle up high impact practices 
(TUHIPs)” creating practices that “recogniz[e] the central 
importance of working alongside multiply marginalized 
populations in higher education praxis” and see TUHIPs "as a 
process through which educators and redistribute human and 
financial resources toward those who are most vulnerable” 
[9].  
HIPs practices are well-known and widely recognized, and 
many of them do rely on institutional support (and funding) 
and financial resources and physical security on the part of 
students. But not all strategies for student success are 
dependent upon such resources.  
B. 
Low Resource Strategies 
Saundra Yancy McGuire’s revolutionary Teach Students 
How to Learn describes strategies to improve student 
metacognition, which, in turn, improves student learning 
across many areas [10]. McGuire’s strategies and examples 
are accessible to teachers and students and include fostering 
growth mindsets, providing clear expectations, and increasing 
student confidence and self-esteem [10]. As one can see, such 
strategies do not rely heavily on institutional support and 
student resources.  
Moving beyond metacognition, Mary-Ann Winkelmes 
identified factors “to promote equitable learning experiences” 
in higher education [11]. Dubbed “transparent teaching,” 
these practices do not assume that metacognition alone 
supports increased student learning. Winkelmes concludes 
practices such as low stakes projects, coaching models, and 
clear goals and criteria for courses and assignments foster 
student success [11].  
While McGuire and Winklemes do not address modality 
directly, Flower Darby looks directly at success in online 
learning in Small Teaching Online [12]. Darby, McGuire, and 
Winkelmes all recommend smaller changes that individual 
instructors can implement in courses regardless of modality to 
support student learning and success. Darby’s explanation of 
scaffolding content in courses is not original to her, but her 
explanation and examples and application to online learning 
are innovative.  
In 2010, Anya Kamenetz predicted the disruption that 
online learning would bring to education. She challenged 
educators to recognize the necessary changes that must be 
made for higher education to be relevant. She foresaw 
institutions needing to be clear about “meaningful objectives” 
[13], supporting diverse learners, embracing the benefits that 
technology can bring to education, and moving toward open 
educational resources [13]. 
By the end of the decade, however, when Hoyert and 
O’Dell examined educational practices at universities across 
the country, they found that most faculty still used the 
traditional lecture and textbook system [14]. This data shows 
that modern alternative pedagogical techniques are not being 
implemented to meet the needs of a wider range of students. 
“One of the factors limiting the expansion of the techniques is 
simply a lack of knowledge of the mechanics and the 
advantages of particular pedagogies on the part of college 
faculty” [14]. The authors developed a series of faculty 
communities that they refer to as pedagogical interest groups, 
and each group was an interdisciplinary team of six to eight 
faculty. Each of these groups analyzed and implemented 
different pedagogical techniques in their classes and shared 
the results. If a technique was found successful, the instructors 

196
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
redesigned the courses using that technique. “One of the most 
impressive outcomes of this project is that all the techniques 
improved aspects of student learning and with some 
techniques, the change was immediate” [14]. The authors 
suggest that “linking measures of teaching effectiveness and 
recognition for innovative teaching are needed to sustain 
pedagogical transformation” [14]. Also, it seems clear that 
small changes can support student learning.  
C. 
Student Expectations 
Other factors also challenge efforts toward increased 
student success. Arum and Roksa studied 2,322 college 
students “enrolled across a diverse range of campuses” [15]. 
The researchers found that students don’t have a clear idea of 
why they are in college, how it might benefit them, or how 
they might succeed in college. While teaching students to 
think critically is held as the main goal of college education, 
“[t]hree semesters of college education . . . have a barely 
noticeable impact on students’ skills in critical thinking, 
complex, reasoning, and writing” [15]. This statistic is 
measured without regard to whether students are succeeding 
or failing in their courses, meaning that strategies that improve 
DFWI rates need to also positively impact student learning 
and critical thinking skills in order to truly make a difference.  
What does the research say online students want? Two 
separate studies, one by Toufaily, Zalan and Lee [16] and one 
by Magda and Aslanian [17] found that students choose an 
online program because 1) it is the program they want, 2) it 
is the least expensive, and 3) it has a good reputation.  During 
their online study, students surveyed in the UAE responded 
that they value an instructor “who possesses good 
interpersonal skills, who is a good leader, who is prepared for 
class, is precise and teaches so that students can understand” 
[16].  They want responsive instructors. They want functional 
elearning platforms, and they value the use of social media 
platforms to gain a sense of belonging [16]. In a 2010 survey 
conducted by Penn State University, students were asked 
how they felt about the Quality Matters criteria. The results 
revealed that students wanted appropriate assessments, clear 
guidance on how to access resources in the course, and web-
based course components or course components that are easy 
to use offline [18]. 
Other studies specifically focused research on majors, 
groups of students, or interventions. One large study 
conducted by The Learning House, Inc. and Aslanian Market 
Research in 2018 surveyed 1500 online students to determine 
what students want once they are enrolled in online courses.  
In 2018, students’ first concern was for mobile-friendly 
course materials. Their second priority was for asynchronous, 
interactive course materials (videos and PowerPoints from 
the instructor, textbooks, and written assignments). Students 
were not enthusiastic about synchronous sessions and third-
party videos [17]. But, students were very attracted to 
“textbook free” courses or courses that use OERs (not courses 
without course materials) [17]. Finally, while a big advantage 
of online programs is that they are available to anyone, 
anywhere, surprisingly, students want their online programs 
close by. In fact, 78% of students surveyed lived within 100 
miles of their campus, with 44% living under 25 miles away. 
Students may study online, but they prefer the institution to 
be close [17].  
It does seem that one thing that has changed since the 
2010 Penn State survey is that now students are more 
desirous of mobile materials rather than downloadable ones; 
however, students still value knowledgeable instructors who 
have a clear presence in their courses.   
Muljana and Luo produced a systematic literature review 
of 40 studies published between 2010 and 2018 related to “the 
underlying factors that influence the gap between the 
popularity of online learning and its completion rate” [19]. 
Student success strategies identified in the study were grouped 
under common headings referencing early intervention, 
engagement, course design, and synergy of stakeholders. 
While the reviewers found significant discussion of 
“[p]rofessional development, training, and workshops to 
inform faculty practices associated with online learning 
theories, student engagement, students’ needs, dynamic 
dialogue, high quality feedback, appropriate delivery methods 
and technology,” they also noticed a lack of discussion on 
efficacy of faculty support, “such as professional development 
opportunities such as a summer institute, training, and 
workshop” [19]. Critically, the reviewers noted “while student 
characteristics are among determinants of student retention in 
online learning, the results of this study do not include a 
detailed discussion on suitable instructional strategies for 
fostering behaviors associated with academic success” [19]. 
D. 
The Criticality of Faculty Development 
All of these problems, goals, strategies, interventions, etc. 
require faculty development if they are to be addressed or 
implemented effectively. Faculty success in the in-person, 
online, and hybrid classroom is necessary, although it is not 
sufficient, to achieve student success. Brinkley conducted 
research focusing on how participation in a professional 
development program impacted faculty teaching effectiveness 
in the online environment and attitudes toward the 
effectiveness of the training [20]. Brinkley concluded “that 
instructors demonstrated (a) statistically significant changes 
in the incorporation of elements into the redesign of their 
syllabi, and (b) improvements in their teaching abilities, [but] 
there were no statistically significant differences in student 
evaluation scores of teaching pre- and post-training. Overall, 
the findings to the first research question revealed only modest 
improvements to the instructors’ teaching effectiveness.” As 
to the faculty attitude toward the training, “prior to the 
training, instructors were highly optimistic about their course 
redesign plans and the skills and knowledge they would 
develop in the training” and were “generally satisfied with the 
program” after the training. “However, after delivering their 
newly redesigned course online, participants were less 
optimistic and satisfied with their training experience than 
they had been prior to and following it, and multiple 

197
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
instructors cited a need for additional or continued training 
and support” [20].  Brinkley notes it is important we use 
multiple data sources, spanning greater periods of time to gain 
a better understanding of the impact of professional 
development. 
Daly analyzes grant-funded faculty learning communities 
at seven different institutions of higher education after 
determining a need for scholarship that analyzed why faculty 
learning communities are generally successful [21]. The 
research is grounded in social cognitive theory, which was 
chosen to “examine the relationship between faculty needs 
and the conditions for learning that are provided by the 
colleges and universities in which they work” [21]. Each 
learning community met weekly to “engage in professional 
reflection and initiate changes” over one semester, then met 
weekly over a second semester to implement projects that 
would address campus-wide diversity needs [21]. The 
learning communities were considered a success by the 
researchers, and the exit interviews of the participants aligned 
with “Deci and Ryan’s (2000) self-determination theory, 
which focuses on the needs of individuals for autonomy, 
competence, and relatedness,” and boosted self-confidence 
[21]. Ultimately, Daly indicated that topic-based learning 
communities “promote[d] specific types of pedagogical 
change” [21]. 
After analyzing 47 published studies on best practices in 
online learning and studying the rapid advancements of 
technology in the past century, Sun and Chen determined “that 
most online faulty have not received adequate training and 
support from their institutions” [22]. They define adequate 
training to include the following topics: “how to promote 
effective online collaboration for students, how to set high 
expectations, how to adjust instructors’ teaching to conform 
to the online environment, and how to create proper online 
teaching strategies,… [along with] adequate training in the 
technologies applicable to online teaching” [22].  Sun and 
Chen, like Daly, stressed the success of a learning community 
approach for both student learning and faculty development 
[22]. 
The Canadian Digital Learning Research Association 
(CLDRA) found that the most reported challenges in 
provision of digital education professional development were 
“culture change, work security, and unclear expectations” 
[23]. That is, there may be underlying factors beyond lack of 
training or lack of understanding of technology that hamper 
professional development efforts at the institutional level. In 
addition to analyzing faculty development programs 
themselves, it is important to realize that when we discuss 
faculty development, we may not mean “all faculty” at a 
particular institution. Brady studied the impact of professional 
development for adjuncts on student success, noting “adjunct 
instructors have not always been afforded the same training 
and development opportunities” as full-time faculty. [24]. It is 
also important to note that in the current teaching climate, with 
the popularity of online courses, faculty may now be asked to 
teach courses designed by others—colleagues, subject matter 
experts, and/or instructional designers.  Implementing student 
success strategies into a course that one did not initially create 
can pose its own challenges.  
Another 
strategy 
regarding 
faculty 
professional 
development is rooted in asking the faculty member to share 
the student’s experience. Utah Valley University created 
professional development for the teaching of its online 
English language program courses, based on parallel design, 
to mirror the educational experience of online students. This 
design incorporated three theories for developing learner 
autonomy – transactional distance, self-regulated learning, 
and collaborative control. Through the professional 
development, faculty learned the importance of decreasing 
transaction distance through the establishment of effective and 
timely 
communication 
and 
positive 
student-teacher 
relationships. Faculty learned to approach the course through 
phases of self-regulated learning - including forethought, 
performance, and self-reflection – to understand the factors 
affecting 
learning 
online. 
Lastly, 
faculty 
practiced 
encouragement of community building and learner autonomy 
through giving students more collaborative control of 
discussion boards. A key component in the training was 
helping instructors “recognize how they can incorporate their 
own voice through response to learners in order to make a 
course that may have been authored by someone else their 
own.” 
[25]. 
Results 
highlight 
the 
importance 
of 
“implementing the elements of goal-setting, learning and 
applying new teaching strategies or adapting known 
strategies, and reflection on the effectiveness of these 
strategies parallels effective student learning processes based 
on the theory of self-regulated learning,” and that “online 
learning is not an isolated activity. Socialization, support, 
team-building, and problem-solving can be developed 
through well-designed online course activities. These can 
result in ownership of learning, self-direction, and autonomy" 
[25]. 
In Southern Oregon University’s 2015-2016 Faculty 
Writing Fellows Seminar, eight instructors of first-year 
foundational courses across diverse disciplines learned about 
methods and implementation of various pedagogical 
techniques to strengthen their students’ writing abilities [26]. 
The seminar, structured similarly to a professional learning 
community, aimed to remedy the lack of faculty expertise in 
teaching writing skills to students by assigning faculty with 
readings and discussions, encouraging them to position 
themselves as learners. Researchers then compared fifty 
student compositions written in five participating instructors’ 
subsequent courses with those of students in courses taught by 
five non-participating instructors, noting that the former 
substantially outscored the latter. In addition, researchers 
surveyed participating instructors and observed an increase in 
“confidence as a writing instructor, … empathy for students, 
… knowledge about writing instruction, and … instructional 
practices that support students’ success” [26]. As the research 
shows, there is a thick web of complication surrounding the 

198
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
relationships among student learning, student success, and 
faculty development,  
A cornerstone to the effort to support student success is 
faculty development. A common refrain is “[s]tudent success 
is faculty success.” The work to increase student retention in 
college, progression through an academic program, and 
graduation from an academic program must include both 
effort toward pieces that support student success and pieces 
that provide faculty the support they need to support student 
success. This axiom is true in online courses as well as face 
to face and hybrid courses. The Student Success Minutes 
training was created to help gently nudge faculty in the 
direction of the research and take into account faculty 
conceptions and needs as well as research-based student 
success findings. 
IV. FACULTY SURVEY 
Our Build a Web Course training program is peppered 
with student success research from well-known experts like 
Saundra McGuire [10], Jessamyn Neuhaus [27], Flower 
Darby [12], Anya Kamenetz [13], and Richard Arum and 
Josipa Roksa [15], which we couple with advice and 
examples of successful strategies employed by our own 
faculty. However, research conducted by Karen Brinkley on 
the effectiveness of faculty development training [20] caused 
us to consider the effectiveness of our own training. Brinkley 
found that “prior to the [faculty development] training, 
instructors were highly optimistic about their course redesign 
plans and the skills and knowledge they would develop in the 
training” and were “generally satisfied with the program” 
after the training. “However, after delivering their newly 
redesigned course online, participants were less optimistic 
and satisfied with their training experience than they had been 
prior to and following it, and multiple instructors cited a need 
for additional or continued training and support” [20]. With 
this need for more training and support in mind, we 
conducted an informal survey in the spring 2021 of former 
Build a Web Course workshop participants and found that 
none of them remembered those aspects of the workshop that 
addressed student success in online courses. It seems that the 
focus of the faculty had been on the technology and general 
design of their courses rather than the details related to 
student success.  
Next, we combined our informal survey findings with 
those of a formal survey of 177 Kennesaw State University 
faculty conducted at the end of 2019.  A team of college-level 
online coordinators at KSU surveyed faculty regarding 
aspects of online teaching valued by higher education faculty 
in an effort to ascertain what students found to be the valuable 
part of an online course vs. what faculty found to be the 
valuable part of an online course. The purpose of the survey 
was to determine the similarities between what the research 
said students valued and what faculty valued. We then used 
that information to shape faculty development in a way that 
better responded to faculty assumptions and current faculty 
practices and preferences.  
KSU is made up of 11 different colleges, but over 80% of 
the survey respondents came from only three colleges: Coles 
College of Business (13%), Bagwell College of Education 
(16%), and RCHSS (55%).  The online teaching experience 
of the survey’s participants varied, with 22.35% having no 
online teaching experience in the past two years, and 22.35% 
having taught nine or more online sections in the past two 
years.  The majority of respondents, 53.53%, had taught no 
blended or hybrid sections in the past two years, with the next 
largest group, 28.82%, having taught 1-3 blended/hybrid 
sections in the past two years. Thirty percent of respondents 
had taught 1-3 years online, and 58.82% had developed 1-3 
online/hybrid/blended courses to teach.  
We asked faculty in the survey to identify the five items 
that they believe are most valuable in their online courses 
with regard to making a class better for them as the instructors 
(i.e., easier to manage, easier to teach) and for the students 
(i.e., learning effectiveness). 
The top five items that faculty felt made the course 
easier to teach and manage were 
1. Peer reviews of the online course by colleagues or 
instructional designers (90.32%) 
2. A course quality rubric such as Quality Matters 
(86.67%) 
3. Publisher course packs (76.74%) 
4. Proctoring tools such as Respondus and/or 
proctoring services such as the KSU Testing Center 
and ProctorU (76.47%) 
5. Tools such as SoftChalk and Kaltura/MediaSpace 
(71.76%) 
The top five items faulty felt were important for student 
learning were 
1. Clear guidance on how to access resources in a course 
(78.95%) 
2. Clear "start here" information (75.86%) 
3. Clear grading information (71.43%) 
4. Quick response time to emails and grading (67.21%) 
5. Mobile friendly (65.57%) 
As one can see (Fig. 1), there is little overlap between the 
two groups from the faculty perspective, which means faculty 
feel they must choose, as they design their courses, whether 
to focus on things that make the course easier to teach (such 
as publisher packs) versus things that they believe are 
important for student learning (such as clear guidance on how 
to access resources in a course).  
In addition, there is little overlap between what the 
research says students find valuable and what faculty believe 
students value (Fig. 2). As discussed above, students 
emphasize responsive instructors, functional e-learning 
platforms, use of social media to create a sense of belonging 
appropriate assessments, clear guidance on how to use 
resources in the course, instructor interaction, mobile friendly 
courses, asynchronous and interactive course materials, and 
open educational resources.  

199
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
Figure 1.  A comparison of the faculty perspective on what students and 
faculty find valuable in an online course. This information is from the 2019 
survey of KSU faculty.  
 
Figure 2.  A comparison of faculty responses to what is valuable in an 
online course from 2019 survey of KSU faculty vs. Student responses to 
what is valuable in an online course [16] [17] [18] [19].  
 
Of course, these differences in preferences do not mean 
that techniques that make teaching easier and those that 
support student success are mutually exclusive. For example, 
faculty do not appear to have made the connection that a 
course quality rubric such as Quality Matters supports faculty 
providing clear grading information in a course. It is worth 
noting that while faculty did not generally perceive items 
such as responsive instructors and guidance on how to access 
resources in the class as things that would be valuable to the 
instructor, clear guidance on how to use resources would cut 
down on email to instructors and explanations from 
instructors 
regarding 
how 
to 
use 
such 
resources. 
Additionally, while neither research on what students wanted 
nor the survey on what faculty value rated a clear course 
schedule very highly, such a tool would also both ease the 
burden on faculty regarding student emails and scheduling 
and support student success. Clearly, this discrepancy 
between research and perception merits further exploration.  
Fig. 3 includes the full set of responses to the question 
“Identify the five items that you believe are most valuable in 
your online courses with regard to making a class better for 
you as the instructor (i.e., easier to manage, easier to teach) 
and for the student (i.e., learning effectiveness)” on the 
original survey.
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Overall results of the survey question asking faculty to identify five items that they believe are most valuable for them in their online courses 
(with regard to making a class better for the instructor) and five items that are most valuable to the student. 

200
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
The survey also showed that students are the reason 
faculty take steps to improve their courses. One question in 
the study asked faculty, “What motivates you to make 
improvements to your online courses?” As shown in Table 1, 
the responses overwhelmingly stated students were the key 
motivator for course improvements along with learning and 
teaching. Feedback through student evaluations is also a 
motivator for improvement with course materials. The desire 
to improve the experience for students within the online 
environment can result in further professional development. 
The survey demonstrates there is no lack of desire on the part 
of faculty to improve online courses for students. Clearly, then, 
the fact that faculty assumptions regarding what students 
value in an online course do not equate to what students 
actually value is most likely the result of a lack of 
information. Furthermore, faculty were asked within the 
survey, “Is there anything preventing you from participating 
in distance education efforts (teaching, training, etc.) as a 
faculty member?” With the other obligations faculty are 
required to engage in on an annual basis, time is the number 
one reason preventing further training/education and/or 
teaching in the online environment. Faculty are concerned 
about the time it takes to train, create, and teach within the 
online environment, which causes them to discount the 
opportunity (Table 2). Additionally, faculty are concerned 
about the teaching workload and believe it takes a substantial 
amount of time to grade and offer continuous updating of 
materials etc. Faculty concern about time is reflected in Table 
II.  
We concluded from this survey that, while their 
motivations for participating in faculty development and 
updating their online courses were inspiring, faculty ideas 
about what supported student learning were sometimes at 
odds with the research, and their ideas about what faculty 
need to create effective online courses were sometimes at 
odds with what students needed (for example, OERS) or not 
even on student radar (mobile-friendly—although perhaps 
students take this for granted). Instructors want to help 
students succeed, but there is an incongruous response pattern 
in the survey. What is important to the student and what is 
important to the instructor are not always in alignment.  It 
seems clear, then, that providing faculty with information 
regarding what students value and what strategies support 
student success would help faculty achieve their goals.  
Additionally, training and opportunities to further faculty 
development and support faculty in planning online courses 
and reflecting on course design and delivery can be 
advantageous for the student and the instructor.  
V. RESEARCH PROJECT 
We realized that we needed a more focused strategy to 
supply faculty with information regarding implementing 
strategies for student success in their own online courses. We 
initially sought to emphasize student success information 
within the existing training without adding significant time 
and work for the faculty participants. We then realized that by 
embedding the information within a larger faculty 
development workshop, we were creating barriers to faculty 
adoption of the techniques and limiting the audience. That 
realization led us to develop phase two of the project.  
We already included a wealth of student success strategies 
in the workshop. However, the information was provided 
along with information on research-based best practices in 
course design and technology tutorials for creating course 
materials. Student success strategy information was not 
prioritized or emphasized for faculty participants.  
Especially for faculty new to online teaching, we could see 
how workshop participants would prioritize “how do I create 
the class,” “how do I make it accessible to students who use 
screen readers or who need captioning,” and “what software 
do I use to create course materials” over “how do I strategize 
for student success.” The faculty participants had finite time 
and energy to complete the training and create the course. But 
could we also call attention to student success strategies in 
hopes of encouraging faculty participants to add a few of those 
to their courses, as well?  
A. 
Research Project 
As mentioned earlier, the chief impetus of this research 
was to prepare the college for successful request of student 
success funding. Beyond that, we wanted to be able to 
demonstrate that we had identified a way to increase and 
support student success. And of course, the heart of our 
motivation was to assist our students in achieving their 
academic goals. 
 
TABLE I.  
WORD FREQUENCY IN THE RESPONSES TO THE 2019 KSU 
FACULTY SURVEY QUESTION "WHAT MOTIVATES YOU TO MAKE 
IMPROVEMENTS IN YOUR ONLINE COURSE?"  
Word 
Frequency 
Student(s) 
188 
Learn(ing) 
77 
Teaching (material updates) 
33 
Feedback (from students) 
27 
Experience (better for students) 
21 
Desire (to improve) 
15 
Professional (development) 
15 
TABLE II.  
WORD FREQUENCY IN THE RESPONSES TO THE 2019 KSU 
FACULTY SURVEY QUESTION "IS THERE ANYTHING PREVENTING YOU FROM 
PARTICIPATING IN DISTANCE EDUCATION EFFORTS (TEACHING, TRAINING, 
ETC.) AS A FACULTY MEMBER?"   
Word 
Frequency 
Time (teaching, training, 
creating) 
71 
Online/distance (challenge) 
37 
Training/education (effort) 
29 
Teach(ing) 
27  
  

201
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
The researchers designed a two-phase research project. 
Phase 1 (completed) involved creating stand-alone student 
success content, sharing it with faculty within an existing 
professional development workshop, and following up with a 
survey to measure their intent to adopt student success 
strategies into their courses. In phase two (ongoing), we 
extracted the student success modules from the faculty 
development workshop and created a standalone faculty 
development training available as an open educational 
resource. This training is available online and on demand to 
anyone who wishes to access it through Affordable Learning 
Georgia’s Open Educational Resources: ALG Repository. 
Throughout this phase of the research, we are asking 
participants to complete a survey to measure their intent to 
adopt student success strategies into their courses.  
B. 
Phase I: Lower Barriers to Adoption 
To begin phase one, the researchers did three things: 1) 
isolated the research-based, student-success content from the 
general content of the faculty training modules and 
emphasized it in highlighted segments of the training called 
Student Success Minutes; 2) added an activity to each of the 
Student Success Minutes to support the faculty in 
remembering the content; 3) surveyed faculty at the end of the 
training to see if they recall and plan to use the Student 
Success Minutes information (intent to transfer) [28].  
The researchers designed each Student Success Minutes 
segment to be less than 10 minutes, including the activity, so 
as not to overburden the faculty with more training content.  
In this initial, pilot phase of the project, our goals were to 
create the segments and present them to the faculty 
participating in the spring 2021 “Build a Web Course 
Workshop” and then survey faculty participants, as described 
above, regarding intent to transfer. We started with a small 
number of faculty participants (8). Because of low faculty 
enrollments, in this first phase of the project we were able to 
gather little more than a handful of initial reactions.  
C. 
Phase II: Lower Barriers to Access 
Phase two shifted the content to a second, shorter, 
asynchronous training using the Student Success Minutes 
segments. This training initially targeted faculty who had 
previously completed the “Build a Web Course” Workshop 
but did not receive the redesigned content on research-based 
strategies for student success.  
The redesigned six-module, asynchronous, self-paced 
training takes participants less than two hours to complete. 
Other workshops focusing on student success strategies at the 
institution take more time and/or lack the flexibility and 
interaction of our Student Success Minutes training, which is 
hosted on the internet and freely available. The redesigned 
training and the accompanying survey of intent to transfer will 
be available indefinitely as we continue to refine the training 
content and collect data from users. The success of this project 
will be measured in the survey results and findings on intent 
to transfer techniques discussed in the training.  
D. 
 Next Steps 
While measuring DFWI rates at our institution might also 
be helpful in determining impact of a singular initiative, the 
truth is that we have so many student success efforts ongoing 
that it would be impossible to tell which one or ones had what 
impact. In addition, the researchers are cognizant that students 
drop courses for many reasons that may have nothing to do 
with the professor or the course content. Use of DFWI rates is 
also sensitive due to the potential for professors to feel 
targeted by attention to such information. For this reason, we 
chose not to measure individual DFWI rates in this research. 
At the end of the project, we will gather aggregate data on 
DFWI rates as a measure of overall student success trends 
within the College. 
After the two phases of the project, the researchers plan to 
use the information gathered to assess whether highlighting 
student success strategies in faculty development training can 
encourage faculty to implement these strategies. If we find we 
have a successful strategy, we will be able to use this 
information to better position our college to receive student 
success funding when future opportunities arise.  
VI. RESEARCH-BASED MODULES ON STUDENT SUCCESS 
In the first phase of this project, the research team created 
six Student Success Minutes segments. This section will 
describe each segment, provide the research it is based on, and 
describe the activity provided with it and faculty participant 
results, if available.  
A. 
Student Success Minutes 1: Scaffolding 
This Student Success Minutes segment was based on the 
work of Flower Darby (Fig. 4). Darby explains scaffolding 
through her experience teaching jazz dance. She writes,  
[B]eginning dancers get frustrated and demotivated if I 
constantly throw new things at them. Better to practice one 
new step for a while, get feedback from me on their 
progress, and build confidence and self-efficacy before 
introducing a slightly more complex step or one that 
requires greater skill. [12] 
Darby extrapolates this idea to other academic realms. 
While scaffolding in college classes is not a brand-new idea, 
Darby provides an excellent explanation and rationale for the 
practice. For example, in a research paper assignment, instead 
of assigning a 10-page research essay, ask students to turn in 
a topic early in the course; a few weeks later, ask students to 
turn in an annotated bibliography with a tentative thesis; and 
two weeks before the paper is due, ask students to turn in (or 
share on a discussion board) a PowerPoint with the title and 
thesis on slide 1 and the topic sentence and paragraph 
supporting points for each paragraph in the paper.  
 
 

202
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Student Success Minutes 1:a video explaining Flower Darby’s 
approach to scaffolding.  
 
Figure 5.  Student Success Minutes 2: a short, self-paced, interactive 
presentation on the social media tool GroupMe.  
Of course, the faculty member would be expected to 
provide timely and helpful feedback on each phase before the 
next phase is due. To introduce (or remind) faculty of this 
student success strategy, in a three-minute video, Tamara 
Powell, Director of the RCHSS ODE, explained the concept 
of scaffolding and asked participants to share a reflection on 
when they might use the strategy to support student success in 
a class. In the reflection assignment, 100% of faculty 
participants in phase one indicated that they already used 
scaffolding strategies in their courses to some degree.  
B. 
Student Success Minutes 2: GroupMe 
The second Student Success Minutes segment was based 
on a need within the institution. At Kennesaw State 
University, student culture results in the creation of a 
GroupMe (Fig. 5) for each class in which students are 
enrolled—bypassing the professor. This student-created 
classroom community harkens back to Kamenetz’ prediction 
that faculty and institutions will need to change and adapt to 
the disruptions that technology brings. Kamenetz told us 
there would be “rough spots” [13], and the “do it yourself” 
approach to community building in online courses that 
students have taken with GroupMe certainly can be one of 
those rough spots. But faculty can work to lessen the negative 
impact and increase the positive through knowledge and 
deliberate action.  
GroupMe is a social media application that allows a group 
to chat via mobile app or website without exchanging 
personal information [29]. On the one hand, GroupMe is 
excellent for creating community and support in an online 
course. On the other hand, some students with the best 
intentions have been tempted to use GroupMe to commit 
breaches of academic integrity.  
In response to these problems, Sam Lee, a student at 
Kennesaw State University as well as a teaching assistant in 
the Spanish and French programs and an assistant 
instructional designer in the RCHSS ODE, created an 
interactive presentation using Articulate Storyline 360.  
The presentation walked faculty participants through an 
overview of GroupMe and provided suggestions to faculty 
regarding how to minimize student cheating with it and how 
to use it with students to support student success. 
This presentation concluded with a short quiz to support 
comprehension of the main ideas. Faculty participants were 
allowed to attempt the quiz multiple times, and all faculty 
participants in phase one scored 100% on their final attempts.  
C. 
Student Success Minutes 3: Open Educational 
Resources and Creative Commons 
In the past five years, a great deal of research has been 
done on the impact of OERs—or no-cost or low-cost course 
materials—upon student success efforts. In the United States, 
textbook prices have risen astronomically. In the last 10 
years, the “average cost of college textbooks has risen four 
times faster than the rate of inflation,” and “65 percent of 
students . . . skip buying required texts” to save money or 
simply because they cannot afford them [30].  
As an alternative to expensive textbooks, many faculty 
members turn to OERs. Research into OERs has shown that 
OERs increase student participation, satisfaction, learning, 
retention, and course and program completion. They reduce 
student debt not only by lowering textbook costs in individual 
classes but also by allowing students to take more courses in 
a term, thereby graduating more quickly and accruing less 
student loan debt [31]. Kamentez predicted the rise of OERs 
in her 2010 work DIY U: Edupunks, Edupreneurs, and the 
Coming Transformation of Higher Education [13]. Kamenetz 
did not predict the power with which for-profit publishing 
houses would attempt to subvert OERs and even try to 
monetize them. It can be difficult, now, for some faculty to 
envision teaching without high-priced publisher supplements 
to their instructional materials. But for many students, OERs 
are one of the most important factors a faculty member can 
implement into a course. And, OERs become a social justice 
issue as textbook prices climb.  

203
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Student Success Minutes 3: a short video and quiz on Open 
Educational Resources. 
Tiffani (Reardon) Tijerina (Fig. 6), the Program Director 
for the Affordable Learning Georgia initiative, created a 
Student Success Minutes segment on OERs for this project. 
In the two minute and 37 second video, Tijerina defines open 
educational resources and explains their benefits as well as 
Creative Commons licensing. The Creative Commons 
licensing explanation is provided to support understanding of 
the types of resources that can be used as OERs in classes.  
Tijerina’s Student Success Minutes segment concludes 
with an ungraded self-assessment on the terms and concepts 
presented in the segment and then a graded quiz on the same 
terms and concepts. Faculty participants were invited to 
practice with the ungraded self-assessment as much as 
desired before taking the graded quiz on the same 
information. Every faculty participant in phase one scored 
100% on the graded quiz. Ungraded self-assessments [32] 
will be the topic of a future Student Success Minutes 
segment.  
D. 
Student Success Minutes 4: The Quick Write 
Saundra McGuire recommends a reflection activity as 
part of a class to engage students and enhance self-esteem 
[10]. It is hard to imagine that something so simple to 
implement can be such a powerful tool for student success. 
Stephen Bartlett, Associate Director of the ODE, created a 
short video on a type of reflection assignment called “The 
Quick Write” (Fig. 7).  
As Bartlett explains, McGuire uses the Quick Write as a 
confidence booster. She asks students to remember a thing 
they learned that was hard and recall how they learned it [10]. 
Bartlett also recommends using the Quick Write as a 
reflection assignment to help cement information students 
have learned in a class period and to “check in” on students 
regarding to their progress in the class.  
Asking students to take just one to three minutes to write 
about an aspect of the material that was just presented is a 
great way to support learning and engagement, and it also 
allows the professor to see whether students are paying 
attention or “getting the material” in an online class.  
 
Figure 7.  Student Success Minutes 4: a short video on the power of 
reflection. 
E. 
Student Success Minutes 5: Weekly Modules 
Universal Design for Learning Theory states that 
consistency is a key component for supporting increased 
success as it lightens cognitive load, freeing up more time and 
mental energy to assist the student in learning the course 
content [33]. 
It is important to be consistent in scheduling expectations 
for students in online courses. Students are used to organizing 
their college schedules by weeks in in-person classes, and it 
makes sense to use that structure in online courses as well. It 
also makes sense to create folders, organized by weeks, with 
everything a student needs in that folder to complete that 
week of class.  
When faculty instead create modules of random lengths 
(module 1 is three weeks, module 2 is four days, module 3 is 
seven weeks, etc.), students who already struggle with time 
management can suffer severely. When faculty create overly 
long modules (one 16-week course with only four, four-week-
long modules), students who wait until the last minute find out 
four weeks into the course that they have fallen too far behind 
to succeed.  
Student Success Minutes 5: Weekly Modules (Fig. 8) 
provides the rationale for organizing the online course in a 
weekly fashion and examples of why it is the easiest way to 
support student success in an online course. 
Weekly organization of online classes supports student 
success by providing consistency, reducing cognitive load, 
and helping students to organize their time [34]. This segment, 
created by Tamara Powell, ended with a quiz over the material 
presented in the short video. All faculty participants in phase 
one scored 100% on the quiz.  

204
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Student Success Minutes 5: a short video on weekly modules.  
F. 
Student Success Minutes 6: Timely and Effective 
Feedback 
A great deal of research on student success supports not 
only feedback, but timely and effective feedback [12], [27] 
[35]. For our last Student Success Minutes segment in the 
pilot, Sam Lee created a website that included an interactive 
presentation on the importance of timely and effective 
feedback.  
As Darby points out, “It’s easy for online students to feel 
isolated and unsupported” [12]. Feedback, even small notes 
about low or no stakes assignments, can motivate students to 
invest more time in the course. Such feedback can also alert 
students that they are not doing enough to succeed in the 
class—or are on the wrong track—long before they fail a high 
stakes assignment. In this way, timely and effective feedback 
promotes student success.  
As the reader may remember, this project was inspired 
partly as a way to provide student success strategies to faculty 
who were already strapped for time. And, as we know very 
well, suggesting faculty take time to provide more feedback is 
not a timesaver. However, in the age of technology, faculty 
can often use the learning management system to “work 
smarter, not harder.” Specifically, many learning management 
systems have automated feedback tools to allow faculty to set 
up bots to, for example, send out a congratulatory email to 
students who did well on a test or send study tips to students 
who did not do so well on a test.  
Solutions that support student success and reduce faculty 
workload are not always possible, but in this case, the student 
success strategy was able to support both positive outcomes 
This module included the interactive presentation, 
mentioned above, along with a practice quiz that allowed 
participants to check their understanding of the material. After 
the practice quiz, participants in phase one took a graded quiz 
with the same questions. The quiz was worth 20 points, total, 
and the average grade was 75%. This information suggests 
that the presentation on timely and effective feedback needs 
adjustment to increase participant retention of the information.  
 
Figure 9.  Student Success Minutes 6: a website with interactive exercises 
and a quiz that provide information about the importance of timely and 
effective feedback.  
VII. OER STUDENT SUCCESS RESOURCE 
In the literature review, it was noted that faculty often did 
not have access to professional development [22] or 
professional development was limited to full time faculty 
[24]. Additionally, in the survey of KSU faculty, time was the 
number one reason preventing further training/education 
and/or teaching in the online environment. To address these 
concerns, phase two of the project was created. As referenced 
previously, phase two of the project included offering the 
modules described above in a standalone format in SoftChalk 
and hosted on the internet. This training is called “Student 
Success Workshop” [36]. These modules were available 
online to anyone, anywhere, and users were asked to 
complete a survey at the end. The survey measured, among 
other things, intent to transfer. The SoftChalk ScoreCenter 
showed that 51 people accessed the open, online training. 
However, only five persons completed the cumulative 
assessment and received a certificate by December 2021. 
Clearly, at this point, we need to examine why the training is 
not engaging users and moving them to completion of the 
certificate requirements.  
A. 
Survey Results 
Of the 51 people who accessed the training, only eight 
completed the survey linked to phase two of the training. All 
of this information was reported anonymously. Of those 
eight, four indicated they were faculty at Kennesaw State 
University, and two indicated that they were not. Two did not 
respond to that question. Six respondents indicated that they 
remembered all six topics presented to them in the training, 
and two did not respond. This result indicated that moving 
the training into a standalone format seemed to make it easier 
for participants to recall the topics.  
The segment that respondents indicated they found most 
helpful was the “Timely and Effective Feedback” segment 
created by Sam Lee. All six participants who were still 
responding to the survey found that segment helpful. Four 
found the “GroupMe” segment helpful—also by Lee. 

205
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Participants were queried regarding their intent to transfer 
the information presented in training using this survey 
question: “The following are the titles of the six strategies. 
Select any you plan to incorporate into your own course(s). 
In addition, please share your ideas regarding implementing 
these strategies in your course(s).” Of the four participants 
who responded to this question, at least one person found 
each strategy helpful and intended to incorporate it in a 
course. While “Timely and Effective Feedback” and 
“GroupMe” were deemed the strategies participants would 
use the most, “OER and Creative Commons” had only one 
user indicate that that information would be used in future 
courses. 
Participants were also asked to share their ideas regarding 
implementing these strategies in their courses. With regard to 
“GroupMe,” participants shared that they would start to make 
their own GroupMe in line with the workshop suggestion to 
try to deter student cheating with the social media tool. One 
participant wrote, “I have been largely ignoring GroupMe 
until this semester and one class. In the future, I will try using 
the create my own GroupMe strategy.” Responses to the 
“Timely and Effective Feedback” segment indicated that 
participants engaged with the material. One participant 
wrote, “I like the rubric method, and it does reduce grading 
time. Maybe I should create lower stakes activities to provide 
more beneficial feedback.” Another shared, “I will 
specifically separate out a ‘for next time’ in my feedback.” 
And a third response was 
very enthusiastic: “I’m re-working office hours to gain more 
attendance—love the Doodle survey idea!”  
As might logically follow, the “OER and Creative 
Commons” had very few responses. One respondent wrote, “I 
was not aware of the various types, and I would like to become 
more familiar to prevent misusing OER material.” This 
response might indicate that the segment was too packed with 
information for users to easily digest. Alternately, inclusion of 
OER may be seen as a larger, more systematic change than the 
incremental adjustments needed to incorporate the other 
techniques presented.  
“Scaffolding,” “The Quick Write,” and “Weekly 
Modules” were also moderately popular. The written 
responses to the survey that addressed scaffolding and weekly 
modules indicated that these were familiar strategies that were 
already widely used in online classes. However, the “Quick 
Write” or reflection segment seemed to also spur participants 
to consider this small change in a course. One participant 
responded, “I have heard of this method, but I have not tried 
it yet. I plan to use it in my upper-level courses.” Another 
respondent shared, “Small reading sections could really 
benefit from quick writes.”  
An additional survey question asked, “If you are not going 
to use any of these strategies, please share your reasons.” One 
answer referenced content, that the OER material wasn’t 
relevant to that instructor’s courses because the instructor 
taught ancient languages and the material was already out of 
copyright. Another shared that the strategies were already 
familiar. A third shared that some were already in use in that 
instructor’s course, concluding that “If this were new to me, 
I’d be plugging in everything you taught and be excited about 
it!”  
When asked if we should continue the workshop in this 
format, three participants answered, “Yes,” and two answered, 
“Other.” No one answered, “No.” The two persons who 
marked, “Other” provided explanations. One wrote, “I think 
they should be part of a series covering each strategy more in 
depth and providing assistance in creating them.” A second 
shared, “It would depend on that person’s level of familiarity 
with the pedagogy,” which we interpreted as the person 
thought we were asking if the workshop should be 
recommended to another person.  
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The project was borne of several motivations: a foundation 
for securing student success funding, a desire to increase 
student success, and a desire to provide easily accessible and 
time-efficient faculty development. The execution of the 
project was facilitated by the fact that faculty surveyed 
showed that they were intrinsically motivated to engage in 
professional development to improve their courses. The 
survey from KSU faculty also showed that faculty needed 
guidance regarding what students want in online courses. In 
addition, faculty did not always recognize what key elements 
of an online course support student success.  The team’s work 
resulted in an openly available faculty development resource 
that attempts to support faculty development needs while 
respecting faculty workloads. The team used information 
gleaned from both primary and secondary research to deliver 
a product that served a wide range of needs.  
In phase one of the project, the summaries of each Student 
Success Minutes segment showed that faculty participants did 
engage with the materials—although they were least 
successful with the assessment included in segment 6. Four 
faculty members completed the survey regarding intent to 
transfer. (The survey is anonymous.) The faculty members 
remembered all of the Student Success Minutes and liked 
segments 2, 5, and 6 (GroupMe, weekly modules, and 
feedback) the best. All faculty members indicated that they 
intended to implement at least one of the strategies in the 
course they were building. When asked if these three 
segments should be included in future trainings, three of the 
respondents answered “yes.” The fourth shared that it 
depended. Even respondents with previous training made 
comments such as “This was good--well put-together. 
Thanks! It added a few small changes that I think will have 
big effects to my class, so it was worth the time.” 
In phase two, the segments were isolated and offered as a 
freely available, online, asynchronous faculty training on 
student success, and participants were surveyed in those 
trainings as well. While we would have liked for the 51 
persons who accessed the training to have completed the 
training and the survey, user feedback to date has been 
constructive and positive. For instance, when asked, “Is there 
anything else you would like to share regarding the ‘Strategies 
for Student Success’ workshop?” one participant responded, 
“I think the short sessions are fantastic. It would be nice to 
have these minute sessions posted on the faculty information 

206
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
website,” in reference to the training segments. The team 
appreciated that feedback and promptly did so. Another 
respondent wrote, “I really liked multiple styles of feedback 
to really reach different learning styles.” With the limited 
feedback that we were able to obtain, we did see that those 
who participated in the survey intended to transfer the 
information to their teaching practice. While that is 
heartening, it is also clear that there is a need for extended 
research into application of these student success initiatives 
across time.  
In the future, we will make the survey more prominent and 
include an explanation of how we will use the information in 
hopes of enticing more people to participate. Our goal is to 
have a set of strategies all faculty can easily incorporate into 
their courses to support student success and to gather data 
showing a reduction in DFWI rates. Preliminary results 
indicate that faculty who engage with the Student Success 
Minutes find them helpful and will be implementing them in 
their courses. However, we will continue to work to collect 
more data to create a stronger argument with regard to the 
effectiveness of this project across time. We will also 
incorporate user suggestions into our revision strategies for 
future offerings.  At the end of the next several semesters, we 
will collect DFWI information for the entire college to see if 
the needle moves in a positive direction with regard to student 
success. To reiterate our earlier statements, many student 
success efforts are ongoing at KSU, and a moving needle 
would not indicate that this project alone made a difference. 
To determine whether our work is making a difference 
directly, we will need to solicit volunteers to allow us to 
survey students in classes where these specific strategies are 
being applied. With that information, we will have a clearer 
picture whether to continue in this direction with follow-up 
success strategies or pursue another path.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] T. Powell, J. Newell, S. Bartlett, S. Lee, B. Milam, L. Snider, 
“Student Success Innovations vs. Faculty Workload Concerns: 
How to Find a Balance for Success,” eLmL 2021: The 
Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and 
On-line Learning. Conference Proceedings, Nice, France,  pp. 
15-20, 
July 
18-22, 
2021. 
Available 
from:  
https://www.thinkmind.org/download_full.php?instance=eLm
L+2021 2021.12.08 
[2] Pew Trusts Foundation, “Two decades of change in federal and 
state higher education funding: Recent trends across levels of 
government,” 
October 
15, 
2019. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/issue-
briefs/2019/10/two-decades-of-change-in-federal-and-state-
higher-education-funding 2021.12.08  
[3] S. Baum and M. Johnson, “Financing public higher education: 
the evolution of state funding,” Research Report. The Urban 
Institute. 
pp. 
1-24, 
2015. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.urban.org/research/publication/financing-public-
higher-education-evolution-state-funding/view/full_report 
2021.12.08. 
[4] M. Rothlisberger. Executive Director for Academic & Fiscal 
Operations at Kennesaw State University. Personal Interview, 
2021.05.02.  
[5] P. Freire. Pedagogy of the Oppressed. 30th anniversary edition. 
Translated by Myra Bergman Ramos. Contiuum. New York, 
2005. 
Available 
from: 
https://envs.ucsc.edu/internships/internship-readings/freire-
pedagogy-of-the-oppressed.pdf 2021.12.08 
[6] G. D. Kuh, “High-Impact Educational Practices: What They 
Are, Who Has Access to Them, and Why They Matter.” Qtd in 
“High Impact Educational Practices: A Brief Overview.” 
Association of American Colleges and Universities. Available 
from: https://www.aacu.org/node/4084 2021.12.08 
[7] J. Kinzie, A. C. McCormick, R. M. Gonyea, B. Dugan, and S. 
Silberstein. “Assessing Quality and Equity in High-Impact 
Practices.” Center for Postsecondary Research.” Indiana 
School 
of 
Education. 
Available 
from: 
https://nsse.indiana.edu/research/special-projects/hip-
quality/index.html 2021.12.08 
[8] J. Kinzie and G. Kuh. “Reframing student success in college: 
Advancing know-what and know-how," Change, vol. 49, no. 
3, 
pp. 
19–27, 
May 
2017, 
doi:10.1080/00091383.2017.1321429. 
[9] D. Stewart and Z. Nicolazzo, “High impact of [whiteness] on 
trans* students in postsecondary education,” Equity & 
Excellence in Education,” vol. 51, no.2, pp. 132-145, 2018, 
doi:10.1080/10665684.2018.1496046. 
[10] S. McGuire. Teach Students How to Learn: Strategies You Can 
Incorporate 
Into 
Any 
Course 
to 
Improve 
Student 
Metacognition, Study Skills, and Motivation. Sterling, VA: 
Stylus, 2015.  
[11] M. Winkelmes, “The National Teaching and Learning Forum.” 
National Teaching and Learning Forum, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 1-4, 
Feb. 2015, doi:10.1002/ntlf.20019. 
[12] F. Darby. Small Teaching Online. San Francisco, CA: John 
Wiley and Sons, 2019. 
[13] A. Kamenetz, DIY U: Edupunks, Edupreneurs, and the Coming 
Transformation of Higher Education. Hartford, VT:  Chelsea 
Green Publishing, 2010. 
[14] M. S. Hoyert and C. D. O’Dell, “Developing faculty 
communities of practice to expand the use of effective 
pedagogical tecniques,” Journal of the Scholarship of Teaching 
and Learning, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 80–85, Feb. 2019. 
[15] R. Arum and J. Roksa, Academically Adrift: Limited Learning 
on College Campuses. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago 
Press, 2011. 
[16] E. Toufaily, T. Zalan, and D. Lee. “What do learners value in 
online education? An emerging market perspective,” E-Journal 
of Business Education and Scholarship of Teaching, vol. 12, 
no. 2, pp. 24-39, 2018. 
[17] A. J. Magda and C. B. Aslanian, “Online College Students 
2018: Comprehensive Data on Demands and Preferences,” 
Louisville, KY: The Learning House Inc. Available from: 
https://distance-educator.com/online-college-students-2018-
comprehensive-data-on-demands-and-preferences/ 2021.12.08 
[18] P. Ralston-Berg, “What Makes a Quality Online Course? A 
Student Perspective,” Presented at Distance Teaching and 
Learning 
2009, 
Madison, 
Wisconsin. 
August 
7, 
2009. Available from: https://www.slideshare.net/plr15/what-
makes-a-quality-online-course-the-student-perspective-
18294402021.12.08 
[19] P. S. Muljana and T. Luo, “Factors contributing to student 
retention in online learning and recommended strategies for 
improvement: A systematic literature review,” Journal of 
Information Technology Education: Research, vol. 18, pp. 19-
57, 2019, doi:10.28945/4182.  
[20] K. E. Brinkley, “Learning to Teach Online: An Investigation of 
the Impacts of Faculty Development Training on Teaching 
Effectiveness and Attitudes toward Online Instruction," PhD 
diss., University of Tennessee, 2016. Available from: 
https://trace.tennessee.edu/utk_graddiss/4127 2021.12.08 

207
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
[21] C. J. Daly, “Faculty learning communities: Addressing the 
professional development needs of faculty and the learning 
needs of students,” Currents in Teaching & Learning vol. 4, no. 
1, pp. 3-16, 2011. 
[22] A. Sun and X. Chen, “Online education and its effective 
practice: A research review,” Journal of Information 
Technology Education vol. 15, pp. 157–190, 2016, 
doi:10.28945/3502. 
[23] C. A. VanLeeuwen, G. Veletsianos, O. Belikov, and N. 
Johnson, “Institutional Perspectives on Faculty Development 
for Digital Education in Canada,” Canadian Journal of 
Learning & Technology, vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 1–19, Dec. 2020, 
doi:10.21432/cjlt27944. 
[24] T. L. Brady, Implementing an Adjunct Training and 
Development Model to Increase Student Success A Mixed 
Method Study, PhD Diss., William Howard Taft University, 
April 2020. 
[25] M. S. Andrade, “Teaching online: A theory-based approach to 
student success,” Journal of Education and Training Studies, 
vol 
3, 
no. 
5, 
pp. 
1-9, 
September 
2015, 
doi:10.11114/jets.v3i5.904. 
[26] M. Perrow, “Designing professional learning to support student 
success: Lessons from the Faculty Writing Fellows Seminar,” 
College Teaching, vol. 66, no. 4, pp. 190–198, Oct. 2018.  
[27] J. Neuhaus. Geeky Pedagogy. Morgantown, WV; West 
Virginia University Press, 2019. 
[28] K. Hye-Sook and S. Yu. “Structural relationship among 
environment, motivation, engagement and transfer of training 
of teachers in distance education.” KEDI Journal of 
Educational Policy, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 221–245, Dec. 2020, 
doi:10.22804/kjep.2020.17.2.004. 
[29] GroupMe, 
Homepage, 
2021. 
Available 
from: https://groupme.com/ 2021.12.08 
[30] K. Kristoff, “What’s behind the soaring cost of college 
textbooks,” Moneywatch, CBSNews, January 26, 2018. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.cbsnews.com/news/whats-
behind-the-soaring-cost-of-college-textbooks/ 2021.12.0.08 
[31] N. B. Colvard, C. E. Watson, and H. Park, “The impact of open 
educational resources on various student success metrics,” 
International Journal of Teaching and Learning in Higher 
Education, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 262-276, 2018. Available from: 
https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1184998.pdf 2021.06.10 
[32] J. Eustace and P. Pathak, “Retrieval practice, enhancing 
learning in electrical Science,” Proceedings of the 11th 
International Conference on Computer Supported Education 
(CSEDU 
2019), 
vol. 
1, 
pp. 
262-270, May 
2019, 
doi:10.5220/0007674102620270. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/332858972_Retriev
al_Practice_Enhancing_Learning_in_Electrical_Science 
2021.12.08 
[33] S. Johnson, “Design, consistency, access,” Online Course 
Development Resources. Vanderbilt University. Available 
from: https://www.vanderbilt.edu/cdr/module1/design-
consistency-and-access/ 2021.12.08 
[34] S. Negash and T. Powell. "What if We Put Best Practices into 
Practice?: A Report on Course Design Beyond Quality 
Matters,” Proceedings, Learner Conference (2013) University 
of 
the 
Aegean, 
Rhodes, 
Greece. 
Available 
from: 
https://radow.kennesaw.edu/ode/docs/BestPractices.Powell.N
egash.2013.doc 2021.06.10. 
[35] S. Laato, E. Lipponen, H. Salmento, H. Vilppu, and M. 
Murtonen. “Minimizing the Number of Dropouts in University 
Pedagogy Online Courses.” CSEDU 2019 11th International 
Conference on Computer Supported Education. Heraklion, 
Crete, Greece. May 2-4, 2019. Proceedings, Volume 1. Edited 
H. Lane, Susan Zvacek, and James Uhomoibhi.  pp. 587-596 
[36] Student 
Success 
Workshop, 
Homepage, 
2021.  
https://alg.manifoldapp.org/projects/student-success-
workshop 2021.12.08 
 
 

