24
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Applying Motivational Theories and Personalization in a Mobile Application within 
the Domain of Physiotherapy-Related Exercises 
 
 
Marie Sjölinder 
RISE 
Stockholm, Sweden 
marie.sjolinder@ri.se  
Anneli Avatare Nöu 
RISE 
Stockholm, Sweden 
anneli.nou@ri.se 
 
 
Vasiliki Mylonopoulou 
University of Gothenburg 
Gothenburg, Sweden 
vasiliki.mylonopoulou@ait.gu.se 
Olli Korhonen 
University of Oulu 
Oulu, Finland 
Olli.Korhonen@oulu.fi
 
 
Abstract—This paper describes motivational features and 
personalization in a mobile application for physiotherapy-
related exercises. Motivational and personalization theories are 
discussed in terms of being relevant for the developed 
application. The motivational features that were applied 
supported goal setting, possibilities to follow progress, 
personalization and possibilities to compare one’s own 
progress or performance with other users. During the iterative 
development of the application, an explorative study was 
conducted in which the participants were interviewed about 
the aspects related to motivation and personalization. In the 
study, the participants emphasized the importance of goal 
setting together with the physiotherapist and of being able to 
track progress. With respect to being able to compare 
performance or progress with other users, the outcome of our 
work is in line with previous research in which comparisons 
have been rejected. Based on the outcome of the study and on 
insights with respect to applying motivational theories, the 
implications and usefulness of the applied theories are 
presented and discussed. 
Keywords - movement-related disorders; mobile application 
for performing exercises; motivational theories; goal setting; 
social comparison; personalization 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper is an extension of the work described in 
Sjölinder et al. [1], where the development of a mobile 
application 
for 
physiotherapy-related 
exercises 
was 
described. This extended paper focuses on the usefulness and 
applicability of different motivational theories. 
Movement-related disorders is one of the most common 
occupational hazards in the European Union, and workers in 
all sectors and occupations are affected [2]. This is an 
increasing problem and one of the key causes of long-term 
sickness leave. Early detection and early intervention could 
reduce the number of serious movement-related problems. 
By gathering and analyzing movement data from large 
groups of people over a long period of time, different 
movement-related patterns can be categorized. Based on this 
categorization, a person’s movement pattern can be placed 
into one cluster and early signs of problems and movement-
related disorders can be detected before they have started to 
cause problems or pain. Based on this knowledge, 
personalized support and exercises can be suggested using a 
smartphone application. However, the challenge is to 
motivate the users to perform the suggested exercises based 
on personalized recommendations from the physiotherapist, 
and to comply with training programs aimed at solving 
possible future problems. 
In this study, motivational features and personalization 
were applied in a mobile application for physiotherapy-
related exercises. The features were related to goal setting, 
providing support in tracking progress, personalization and 
possibilities to compare one’s own performance with others. 
Conducting interviews and gathering feedback from users 
was a part of a larger process in which the application was 
developed in an iterative way with different user groups. The 
aim of the interviews was to gain a deeper understanding of 
how to apply motivational features and personalization when 
developing applications based on large amounts of 
aggregated movement-related data. Based on the outcome of 
the study and on previous work, the implications and 
usefulness of the applied theories are discussed. In the 
following text, Section 2 describes the project and the 
concept that the developed application was part of. Section 3 
to Section 5 present previous research and the background to 
this work. Section 3 gives an overview of motivational 
theories, and Section 4 gives an overview of personalization 
theories and approaches. In Section 5, the theories and the 
central concepts are discussed in terms of possibilities to be 
applied in the context of the developed application. Section 6 
describes the explorative study that was conducted, and it 

25
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
presents the outcome of the study, which was a part of the 
iterative development. Based on the study, Section 7 
discusses implications and usefulness of the applied theories. 
Finally, Section 8 discusses the work conducted and suggests 
possible future work. 
II. 
AN APPLICATION FOR SUPPORTING PHYSIOTHERAPY-
RELATED EXERCISES 
Physiotherapy is a profession in healthcare that aims at 
improving the functional ability and health of the healthcare 
user [3]. The core of physiotherapy is to involve the 
healthcare user in such a way that the user can participate in 
the physiotherapy process and the decisions that are made 
regarding their own health [4]. Although physiotherapists are 
positive towards technological applications, the adoption of 
technological applications in physiotherapy has remained 
low [5]. One of the major challenges in physiotherapy is that 
the healthcare users are not provided with information that 
allows them to actively participate in the care process. 
Because of this, there is a continuous need for technological 
applications that could provide both the physiotherapist and 
the healthcare user with easily interpretable personalized 
data [6]. 
As there is a niche in the market for such technological 
interventions, Qinematic, a small Swedish startup, developed 
a software service that records and analyzes body 
movements using 3D digital video. The users stand in front 
of a Kinect sensor and follow instructions about which 
movements to conduct. Based on these sessions, 3D data is 
gathered and stored. As an extension to this service, a 
research project with two aims was formulated. The first aim 
was to develop machine-learning algorithms to analyze 
gathered movement data, and the second aim was to develop 
user applications to provide information about dysfunctional 
movement patterns, facilitate contact with healthcare 
providers, make it possible for physiotherapists to suggest 
exercises, and allow the users to set goals and track their 
progress (Figure 1). 
Figure 1.  Application for health providers to the left, and for their clients 
to the right 
Via the application, the healthcare provider had the 
possibility to gather further information by asking the 
healthcare users health-related questions, with the aim of 
providing better and more personalized care. The entire 
system consisted of several parts, including machine learning 
and categorization of dysfunctional movement patterns. The 
work presented in this paper focuses on the development of 
motivational features in the application targeted towards 
healthcare users with possible dysfunctional movement 
patterns. However, the larger concept surrounding the 
application, with a machine-learning module and a 
healthcare provider application, placed other demands 
related to how to apply motivational features than what are 
faced when developing applications that only support users 
to be more physically active or to perform exercises.  
III. 
MOTIVATION AND BEHAVIOR CHANGE THEORIES 
This section describes some of the most important 
motivational and behavior change theories and their relation 
to the design of technological applications. These theories 
shaped the starting point of our design discussions and some 
of them played a central role in the final design of the 
application presented in this paper. 
A. Models and theories focusing on the individual  
The Health Belief Model (HBM) is one of the most used 
behavior change models [7]. The aim of the model is to 
provide explanations of behaviors related to health 
prevention [8]. The focus of the model is on the individual’s 
beliefs and attitudes. It suggests that the individual’s 
perception determines success in terms of behavior change 
[7]. For the health behavior to trigger, there must be an 
external stimulus or a cue prompting the appropriate action 
[7]. 
Basic 
individual 
variables 
are 
(1) 
perceived 
susceptibility, i.e., how possible it is to have the condition; 
(2) perceived seriousness, i.e., how severe the impact of the 
condition will be on the person’s life; and (3) perceived 
benefits of and barriers to taking action (an example of a 
benefit is the belief that taking a preventive action will have 
a positive health outcome, and a barrier could be that the 
action the individual has to take is expensive). A fourth 
individual factor was added in 1982 [9]: self-efficacy from 
social cognitive theory (a social behavior change theory 
described below). Perceived self-efficacy is one’s own belief 
in their ability to perform a task [10]. The figure below 
(Figure 2) visualizes the main components of the HBM. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Main components of the Health Belief Model 
In the field of technology and health, the HBM is used in 
combination with other behavior change and motivation 
theories to design technology for physical activity/wellbeing 
[11], and for more (medical) condition-focused applications 
[12][13]. The field of technology and health – apart from 
using the HBM – has extended it and combined it with other 
theories to better suit the technological context [14][15]. 
 

26
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Self-determination theory (SDT) is a motivational 
theory focused on the types of motivation a person has 
towards different behaviors. It consists of concepts such as 
intrinsic motivation (motivation that comes from within) and 
extrinsic motivation (external driver). Further, the theory 
focuses on individual differences with respect to intrinsic and 
external motivation, basic needs, goals, and relatedness to 
others [16]. SDT has two important characteristics. First, it is 
more focused on the type of motivation than the amount of 
motivation. Second, it underlines the importance of three 
components: autonomy, competence, and relatedness [17]. 
Autonomy is related to the feeling of being in control of our 
own self and our actions. Competence is related to the ability 
to perform a task. Relatedness is related to our will to 
interact with others. SDT is a complex theory, and its 
detailed description is beyond the scope of this work. 
In the field of technology and health/wellbeing, SDT has 
been used in the evaluation and design of technologies. 
Some examples of where it has been applied are to serve as a 
basis for the creation of heuristics for healthcare wearables 
[19], to get integrated in the evaluation process of wearable 
technology for physical activity [20], and to enrich 
commonly used design tools such as personas [21].   
Stage models are different models that focus on people’s 
readiness to change and categorize them based on that. These 
models have a clear definition of each stage, and clearly 
defined factors one must fulfill to move to the next stage 
[22]. One must pass through all the stages before reaching 
the final behavior. However, relapsing to previous stages is 
expected and this is not necessarily sequential [22]. 
Moreover, one can stay in a stage eternally [22]. The most 
well-known stage model is the Transtheoretical Model 
(TTM) first used for smoking cessation and addictions, and 
later expanded to physical activity and eating habits [23]. 
The TTM has six time-based stages, each of these including 
ten factors [23]. Table 1 presents the different stages of the 
TTM. 
TABLE I.  
DESCRIPTION OF THE TTM STAGES 
TTM Stages 
Description 
Pre-
contemplation 
The person is not intended to act soon 
(usually in the next 6 months) 
Contemplation 
The person is intended to act soon (usually 
in the next 6 months) 
Preparation 
The person intends to act in the next 30 
days and may have taken actions in the past 
Action 
The person changed behavior but kept it for 
less than 6 months 
Maintenance 
The person changed behavior but kept it for 
less than a year 
Termination 
The person changed behavior and kept it for 
more than a year 
The Precaution Adoption Process Model (PAPM) is 
another stage model [24][25] that takes a different approach 
than the TTM. The PAPM has seven stages of change that 
are based on the psychological state of the person rather than 
the time duration the person practices the new behavior; see 
Table 2 [26]. It has clearly defined and stage-specific factors 
for each transition between the stages [27]. The PAPM was 
created to meet the need for a qualitative approach to 
adopting new complex behaviors that cannot be fully 
described by cost-benefit individual models such as the 
HBM [26]. 
TABLE II.  
DESCRIPTION OF THE PAPM STAGES 
PAPM Stages 
Description 
Stage 1 
Unaware of an issue 
Stage 2 
Unengaged by the issue 
Stage 3 
Undecided about acting 
Stage 4 
Decided not to act 
Stage 5 
Decided to act 
Stage 6 
Acting 
Stage 7 
Maintenance 
 
In the field of technology and health/wellbeing, the stage 
models have been used mainly to evaluate the effect of the 
technology on users’ behavior change. An illustrative 
example of such usage is the well-cited study involving the 
Fish’n’Steps interactive computer game, in which users 
could track their own progress as visualized by the growth of 
a virtual character [28]. The stage models are used today in 
similar ways [29]. 
B. Motivational and behavior change theories focusing on 
social aspects 
Social cognitive theory (SCT) focuses on the interplay 
between individual factors, behaviors, and the environment 
[30]. It is based on Bandura’s social learning theory [31], 
which supports learning within a social context, i.e., that 
people bring with them knowledge and experience and that 
learning happens by imitating others. In SCT, concepts from 
cognitive psychology and social learning are merged [22] 
into five categories: psychological determinants of behavior 
(which 
include 
self-efficacy, 
goals, 
and 
outcome 
expectations) [30], observational learning, environmental 
determinants of behavior, self-regulation, and moral 
disengagement. Goals that people set for themselves can be 
both short-term and long-term goals [30]. Self-efficacy – the 
belief in one’s own ability to conduct a task or take action – 
is a vital component of the theory [10]. 

27
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
In the field of technology, SCT has been used to support 
the design of applications related to health and wellbeing, 
such as physical activity [11][32]. Moreover, it has been 
used to develop applications that target behaviors by 
involving multiple actors, such as patients and caregivers. An 
example of such a case is the development of an application 
supporting children with asthma and their parents [33]. 
Another example is a breastfeeding application that was 
aimed at motivating fathers to support their partners in 
continuing to breastfeed [34]. 
Social comparison theory (SCT) suggests that people, 
in the lack of standard measurements, compare themselves to 
others for self-evaluation [35], self-enhancement [36], self-
projection [37], and coping [38][29]. People often confuse 
comparison with competition due to the close relationship 
between these words; however, this relationship is rarely 
studied [40]. Regardless of the positive results from 
psychological studies on social comparison [38][39], people 
often refuse to engage in comparisons due to social norms 
[41], different perceptions of the term “comparison” [42], or 
a confusion of “comparison” with “competition” [1]. Social 
comparison has shown potential in the field of psychology, 
and it is often used in the field of technology. 
In the field of technology, social comparison is often 
applied as a gamification feature for behavior change 
[1][43]. Its design is challenging as it needs special care if 
the designer wants to avoid promoting competition while 
still promoting one or more of the other aspects, such as 
social learning [44]. In general, the design field has designed 
comparison features without specifically referring to the 
theory, such as in the well-cited Fish’n’Steps study we 
referred to in the TTM model [23], involving a computer 
game in which the users can compare the states of their 
avatars and draw conclusions about each other’s physical 
activities. 
C. Goal setting 
Goal-setting theory (GST) has proven to have a positive 
effect on behavior change [45] and has also been used in 
healthcare in relation to physical activity [46]. Moreover, 
goal setting is part of other behavior change theories such as 
SDT and SCT. GST focuses on the goals, as the name 
implies, which can be divided into sub-goals and into 
different levels of difficulty [47]. Locke and Latham [48] 
identified three types of goals assignment: (1) self-set, (2) 
assigned, and (3) participative-set. Self-set goals are those 
the individual sets and usually have personal significance. 
An assigned goal is set for the individual by someone else 
and a participatory-set goal is a goal that the individual has 
contributed to define. The GST has evolved since it was first 
defined, and the goals can now be defined as learning and 
performance goals [46], with the first being more relevant to 
people who are new in the particular behavior change as they 
learn the new behavior. 
In the field of technology, GST has been the second most 
popular theory after the TTM stage model [49]. Goals have 
also been used in combination with gamification [50]. One 
example of goal-setting theory in persuasive technology is 
CALFIT, which shows the results of daily progress between 
users who have personalized goals and those who do not 
[51]. Another example is the design of applications that 
target physical activity for people with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease by implementing goals in different ways 
[52]. GST can be combined with other theories and applied 
in design, such as in the MS application where the user, a 
multiple sclerosis patient, learns to estimate the energy they 
will consume by doing various activities [53]. 
IV. 
PERSONALIZATION THEORIES AND APPROACHES 
This section describes some of the most important 
personalization theories and approaches that can be 
considered in the design of technological applications. 
Personalization theories and approaches have their roots in 
service marketing [54], but information technology has 
increasingly become the main enabler for personalization 
[55]. Personalization approaches and theories introduced in 
this section provided a starting point for our design as they 
helped us to consider the design at the different levels. 
Personalization at the level of the technological 
application. The first personalization approach focuses on 
the design of personalization at the level of the technological 
application itself. At this level, personalization can be 
defined as a process that changes the functionality, interface, 
information content, or distinctiveness of a technological 
application to increase its personal relevance to an individual 
[56]. Personalization theories and approaches at this level 
have 
often 
focused 
on 
classifying 
and 
describing 
personalization in different dimensions.  
One of the most well-known and comprehensive 
classifications for personalization was provided by Fan and 
Poole [57], who classify personalization into three main 
dimensions: The dimensions are: 1) “What to personalize?,” 
which refers to the aspect of the technological application 
that is adjusted to provide personalization, for instance, user 
interface (UI); 2) “To whom to personalize?”, which refers to 
the target of personalization – whether the personalization is 
targeted at a single individual or a group of users; and 3) 
“Who personalizes?”, which refers to the party that is 
providing personalization, meaning whether personalization 
is done by the system/service provider or by the user [57]. 
These dimensions and the aspects in these dimensions are 
intended to support the design of personalization at the level 
of the technological applications. When it comes to 
personalization, developers have often lacked the theoretical 
frameworks for personalization [58]. These dimensions have 
also been considered in the design of technological 
applications in the domain of healthcare [59]. 
Personalization through technological application. 
The 
second 
personalization 
approach 
considers 
personalization more broadly than in terms of just the 
technological application itself, focusing instead on 
personalization 
that 
can 
be 
mediated 
through 
the 
technological 
application. 
Personalization 
through 
technological application is referred to as technology-
mediated personalization (TMP) [60]. Shen and Ball [60] 
classify personalization through technological application 
into three main categories: 1) “Interaction personalization”, 
which refers to the use of technological applications to 

28
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
address the user by name, for example, through personalized 
emails 
or 
greetings; 
2) 
“Transaction 
outcome 
personalization”, which refers to the use of technological 
applications to allow the user to personalize certain aspects 
of the product of service, for instance, in the form of a 
webpage layout in which the user is allowed to make 
adjustments based on his/her preferences; and 3) “Continuity 
personalization”, which refers to continuous personalization 
based on the learning and knowledge of the user and where 
the gained expertise is used to provide even more 
personalized products and services to this individual user 
[60]. The TMP approach connects to personalization 
literature in the field of service marketing, where 
personalization takes place in the service interaction between 
the customer and the service provider [61][62], and where 
the role of the service provider is emphasized in 
personalization [63]. 
Role 
of 
the 
technological 
application(s) 
in 
personalization. 
The 
third 
personalization 
approach 
considers personalization even more holistically, at the level 
of the entire service process, where instead of a single 
technological application, several different technologies can 
support the service process to make the service pathway 
more personalized for the individual user. The focus at this 
level is on the role technological applications can play in the 
personalization of the entire service pathway. According to 
Korhonen and Isomursu [64], the role of technological 
applications in the personalization of the entire service 
pathway can be classified into three categories: 1) “Coercive 
personalization” in which personalization is provided 
automatically by technological applications without the 
involvement of the human actor (for instance, based on 
predefined personalization parameters); 2) “Data display 
personalization” in which personalization is provided 
automatically 
by 
technological 
applications, 
but 
is 
interpreted manually by the human actor; and 3) 
“Collaboration-based 
personalization” 
in 
which 
personalization is supported by technological applications, 
but the focus is on the interpretation and co-creation of 
personalized services between the human actors. 
V. 
APPLYING MOTIVATIONAL FEATURES AND 
PERSONALIZATION IN A MOBILE APPLICATION FOR 
PHYSIOTHERAPY 
This section describes how different motivational and 
personalization theories were applied as features in the 
developed application. 
A. Applying motivation and behavior change theories 
GST influenced the design of the application in relation 
to creating goals and different types of rewards (see Figures 
3 and 4). Goals could be set by the physiotherapist or by the 
user him/herself. In the design, the goals were closely related 
to each exercise. Both proximal (short-term) and distal (long-
term) goals could be set within the application. Although 
originating from GST, the distinction between short-term 
and long-term goals can also be found in the autonomy part 
of SDT. Short-term goals were set by the physiotherapist and 
were related to the exercises, and the long-term goals were 
set by the user. The users self-evaluated their progress on 
their long-term goals in terms of reduced pain (Figure 3). 
One social outcome was the evaluation that was conducted 
by the physiotherapist, which could be seen from the 
perspective of SDT’s relatedness. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Possibilities to see progress in relation to the set goals 
 
 
Figure 4.  Reward for doing the exercises every day for a week 
SDT consists of different types of motivation, and the 
external motivational aspects were relevant for the design of 
the application. The concept of autonomy – the freedom of 
choices a user has – was applied through GST and 
particularly by implementing self-set goals. The concept of 
competence – the person’s belief in the extent to which they 
can conduct a task – was applied through personalization of 
services, in this case through discussion with the 
physiotherapist in which they together set exercises, 
repetitions and goals in a way that made the healthcare user 
feel competent and capable. This was also covered in the 
concept of self-efficacy – the belief in one’s own ability to 
conduct a task – which is part of SCT. 
To cover the relatedness part of SDT and the social 
aspect of SCT, social comparison theory was applied. Due to 
the tight timeframe of the project, it was a challenge to apply 
social comparison theory fully since a number of different 
users are needed for comparisons. However, potential users 

29
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
of the application were asked during the interviews about 
what types of comparisons they would like to be engaged in. 
The phrasing was altered in order to avoid the word 
comparison due to its challenging nature (i.e., people often 
reject comparisons). In the application, comparisons were 
implemented in relation to the physiotherapist’s advice and 
the healthcare user’s adherence to it. Such comparisons 
between the healthcare users could be related to performing 
the exercises suggested by the physiotherapist in a consistent 
manner, or in relation to the completion of the medical 
questionnaires that had been made available by the 
physiotherapist. 
The HBM was applied in relation to the visualizations of 
the scans. For example, perceived severity and susceptibility 
could be influenced through the 3D scan visualizations. The 
idea behind this was that people are unaware of how their 
body moves, but by looking at the visualizations they could 
be able to better understand harmful movement patterns that 
on a long-term basis could lead to problems and chronic 
pain.  
Stage theories such as PAPM and TTM were found to be 
difficult to apply. The TTM is time-based and at least one 
month to one year of interaction with a functional prototype 
of the application is needed in order to be able to see any 
changes in the user’s behavior. However, we used the PAPM 
to understand the users’ initial intentions and readiness to 
change. 
B. Applying personalization approaches 
Personalization approaches can provide support at 
different 
levels. 
Personalization 
approaches 
at 
the 
technological 
application 
level 
[57] 
can 
help 
in 
understanding what can be personalized, for instance, in the 
training program. On the other hand, personalization through 
technological applications [60] can provide insights to 
consider, for instance, how the physiotherapist can adjust the 
training program based on the feedback. Finally, the role of 
technological applications in personalization [64] can help in 
considering the role of technology, whether it can provide 
data-display support for the physiotherapist only, or whether 
it is intended more as a tool for collaborative decision-
making 
between 
the 
user 
and 
physiotherapist 
for 
personalization. Personalization approaches in the developed 
application were connected to the use of the technological 
application in order to understand the user needs, but also to 
the use of the technological application in order to 
personalize the physiotherapy services for these needs. 
VI. 
EXPLORATIVE USER STUDY 
As a part of the iterative development, a set of user tests 
were conducted. One of these tests focused on motivational 
features and personalization. This was an explorative study 
in which the aim was to gather feedback from possible users 
about how motivational features could be integrated into the 
application in a meaningful way. 
A. Method 
There were seven participants in the test, five men and 
two women, in an age range between 33 and 52 years. All 
participants had university educations and held a Master of 
Science degree or higher. The materials used were a digital 
mock-up prototype designed in Figma [65] and a scenario 
description (Figure 5).  
 
Scenario: You have done the scan and discussed your result with your 
physiotherapist. Imagine that a hip problem has been detected (or 
another problem that you want to choose). You have received a training 
program from the physiotherapist to improve the hip problem and to 
prevent hip pain. In the web app, you can see what exercises to do and 
how often, as well as the number of repetitions. You can also see the 
results of the scans. 
Figure 5.  The scenario presented to the participants 
Semi-structured interviews were conducted based on an 
interview guide. The guide was formulated to collect 
information about motivational features and personalization, 
for example, types of features that would motivate the 
participants to use the system and follow the exercise plan, 
how they would like to receive feedback on their progress, if 
they would like to be able to see the progress of other users, 
or to which extent they wanted the system to be adapted to 
their preferences and needs or to support the individualized 
treatment in physiotherapy. Each interview lasted about an 
hour. The interviews were recorded, and the data collected 
was transcribed and thematically analyzed. 
B. Results 
Motivational profile. The participants’ general profile, 
based on the interviews, was that they were extrinsically 
motivated to follow their physiotherapist’s advice based on 
progress improvement and pain reduction. All the 
participants were aware and engaged with the matters related 
to physical posture, physical activity, and pain issues due to 
bad posture or sedentary life. All participants had at some 
point been instructed to act to reduce the risk of posture 
issues. However, they had been acting on this on different 
levels, e.g., they were exercising but often had to skip it 
because daily life got in the way. Finally, all described issues 
with maintenance, e.g., when the pain stopped, they started 
to neglect their physiotherapist’s advice. 
Being able to see progress. One of the most motivating 
factors was being able to see progress. The participants 
described the possibility of being able to see improvement as 
the most motivating feature, for example by comparing their 
past scan data with the results from the latest scan or being 
able to see progress with respect to goals or in terms of 
reduced pain. Being able to track the progress was described 
as one of the most important features, because the lack of 
progress could be demotivating. This showed that the 
participants were extrinsically motivated to adhere to the 
physiotherapist’s instructions. However, if the outcome was 
negative or stable, there was risk of getting the feeling of 
doing something wrong, which could lead to reduced 
motivation to continue exercising. The lack of pain (external 
motivator) could also lead to forgetting to do exercises 
prescribed by the physiotherapist. 
Goal setting and feedback from the physiotherapist. 
Goal setting and feedback from the physiotherapist was 
described as vital. The participants thought that frequent 

30
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
personalized interaction with and feedback from the 
physiotherapist would increase their motivation to continue 
to do exercises, answer questionnaires and report pain. In 
general, goal setting was perceived as positive among the 
participants. However, they were hesitant towards setting 
their own goals. They perceived the physiotherapists as 
experts and were expecting them to set the goals. Even 
though the users had full confidence in the physiotherapist 
when it came to planning/rehabilitation, there was a desire to 
do the planning and set the goals together with the 
physiotherapist. 
Reminders. Adherence to the exercises could be 
externally motivated by discomfort induced by pain. The 
participants also pointed out that it is easy to forget to do 
exercises when the pain is no longer present. The possibility 
to get reminders was described as important by the 
participants, regardless of the existence of pain. However, 
they pointed out that the reminders should be adjustable and 
optional. 
Sharing health-related information. To be able to 
connect with others, there is a need to share information and 
be able to see other people’s information. In practice, this 
raised a lot of questions in relation to data handling, security, 
and reasons for collecting the data. Data handling and 
sharing were described as important aspects for using this 
kind of feature. 
Sharing progress with other users. Sharing progress 
with other users was a feature that some participants liked, 
and others strongly disliked. For some, it might be too 
personal to share health-related aspects, but for others it is a 
way of sharing experiences and motivating each other. To 
apply relatedness, we used social comparison theory. We 
asked the users to report how it would influence their 
motivation to see other people’s data on their persistence in 
following the physiotherapist’s advice (doing the exercises 
regularly) and in terms of filling in personalized health-
related questionnaires. Most of the participants (6 out of 7) 
thought that we asked them to compare their health progress, 
but it was clarified that we were asking only about their 
persistence in sticking to the training program or filling in 
the health-related questionnaires. Their reply was generally 
that they were uninterested in knowing about how persistent 
other users were in following their training programs or 
filling in their health-related questionnaires. However, the 
participants pointed out that gamification features in the 
application could make it more interesting to relate to other 
people’s data if, for example, the data was used for 
contributing to a group target or used in competing about 
being the most persistent user. Table 3 shows some of the 
comments the participants shared about their persistence in 
sticking to the training program or filling in the health-
related questionnaires. 
Personalization as a motivating factor. It was 
important for the users to understand how the technology 
used the information they provided in the health-related 
questionnaires. The participants pointed out the importance 
of a clear connection between questionnaires and the 
feedback that was given by the physiotherapist. They stated 
that if they could not understand this connection, they would 
hesitate to answer health-related questions because the value 
of answering the questions would not be clear. Being able to 
report pain and to get personalized feedback specifically 
based on pain level were described as important aspects. This 
was understandable, because one of the primary goals for a 
healthcare user is to get rid of the pain. The importance of 
personalized feedback can also be seen by the need to have 
direct contact with the physiotherapist.  
For the participants, personalization was connected 
primarily to being treated as individuals, rather than to 
interaction with the technological application. In this case, 
the technology generated additional data points through user 
reporting that could be used in personalization. The 
participants expected that the generated data would not only 
support the physiotherapist in prescribing the most optimal 
exercises or treatment for them, but also help the 
physiotherapist to track their progress. In the study, some of 
the participants expected that the technology would enable 
advanced forms of personalized feedback from the 
physiotherapist in terms of care progress and potential 
improvement in condition. Other participants expected that 
the technology would generate data in a way that could 
trigger a personalized intervention based on input from the 
user. That is, if the user were to report an increased level of 
pain, the physiotherapist could use the data and contact the 
user with a personalized intervention. 
TABLE III.  
COMMENTS FROM THE PARTICIPANTS ABOUT SOCIAL 
COMPARISON 
Comments about comparing exercise persistence 
A. “If I could see how much I contributed to the group, in a 
gamified group goal” 
B. “So as to get the feeling that you are in this together” 
C. “If we collected points together, I would be more interested than 
if competing. If other people were persistent, then I would be more 
persistent” 
D. “I would be more motivated by competing against the others in 
the group and try to beat them” 
E. “Competition is sometimes good but not here, if you make it 
more like collaboration” 
F. “It matters more to me if I am doing it than if other people are 
doing it” 
Comments 
about 
comparing 
questionnaire 
completion 
persistence 
G. “If I was the only one who didn’t fill them in, it would have 
motivated me to fill them in” 
Other insights 
H. One participant would have liked to be compared only to a 
standard value or to a value close to a standard based on a statistical 
average. 
I. One participant compared their scan results with those of a 
colleague to understand how their bodies were crooked. This was 
perceived by the researchers as a comparison that promoted 
awareness. However, the participant thought that this was a novelty 
effect and could not see any value in continuing to compare future 
data. 
 
VII. IMPLICATIONS AND USEFULNESS OF THE APPLIED 
THEORIES 
A good understanding of the most common behavior 
change and motivation theories is an advantage when 

31
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
designing applications within this area. It increases the 
understanding of users’ attitudes to performing exercises, 
their behavior, and their motivation. For example, we 
expected users to be reluctant when it came to comparison 
since theory supports that many people will refuse to engage 
in comparisons for sociocultural reasons [41][42]. Therefore, 
alternative ways to apply comparison were considered. The 
design presented in this work was strongly based on theories 
of motivation, behavior, and personalization. However, the 
design process of an artifact is complex since it seeks to 
solve “wicked problems” in the real world [66]. According 
to Buchanan, a “wicked problem” is a complex problem that 
has many dependencies, contradictory or incomplete 
information and changing conditions. Buchanan furthermore 
links this to the need to understand the problem in its context 
in order to be able to develop solutions that are valuable 
from the user’s point of view. Therefore, a combination of 
theories was applied in the development of the application. 
A. Goal-setting theory 
Goal-setting theory (GST) is a commonly applied theory 
for health-related behavior change [67]. In the health-related 
area, the goal setting should be designed with care as it may 
harm the healthcare users, e.g., if the goal is too difficult to 
reach and the healthcare users strive to reach it. Locke and 
Latham [67] define a goal as “the object or aim of an action, 
for example, to attain a specific standard of proficiency, 
usually within a specified time limit” [48]. Four principles 
specified in the theory of goal setting – ability, commitment, 
feedback and situation resources [68] – can be taken into 
account when setting performance goals. 
Individuals need the ability to achieve a specific, 
challenging performance goal: “People cannot attain goals if 
they do not know how to do so” [68]. Studies have shown 
that difficult and specific performance goals can be 
detrimental to performance when people have not acquired 
the abilities or skills for a particular task [69]. Performance 
goals should not be set if the necessary ability is lacking 
[46]. To meet the ability of the health care user, support in 
setting the goals could be provided. The need for this was 
also shown in the conducted interviews, where the 
participants descried a desire to have goals set either by the 
physiotherapist or in cooperation with a physiotherapist. 
Goals should also be realistic and appropriate for each 
participant’s situation. Otherwise they may be too hard or too 
easy to achieve, and this can cause the user to become 
demotivated [45]. This was also something that was 
mentioned during the interviews. Besides being realistic, 
goals need to be concrete and measurable, and it could also 
be beneficial to have explanations of the goals. Motivation 
can be further supported by making it possible for the user to 
track progress towards the goals, and to see goals that have 
been reached.  
Being committed to the goals is an important prerequisite 
for success. The individual him/herself needs to be involved 
in the goals. They must be seen as important if people are to 
be committed to achieving the goals. “A goal that one is not 
committed to attain will not affect that person’s actions” 
[68]. The participants in the study described themselves as 
more committed to and more confident about goals that had 
been set together with a physiotherapist. 
Feedback should be given regularly throughout the 
treatment or process to provide support in achieving the 
goals. If the healthcare users set goals that are difficult to 
achieve, they must be able to get feedback about their 
performance in relation to their goals [70]. In the absence of 
feedback, the healthcare users have no information that could 
support whether they should change their strategies to 
achieve the goals or whether they should just continue in the 
same way as previously [46]. Therefore, it is important to 
understand and receive feedback regarding goals in order to 
be able to track progress towards the goals or see if you are 
moving away from them. It should be noted [46] that it may 
not only be enough to set performance goals; other strategies 
such as self-monitoring may also be needed to make it easier 
to achieve the goal. Self-monitoring is a personality trait that 
involves the capacity to regulate and monitor behaviors and 
emotions in different situations. Here, an individual focuses 
on skills that lead to the achievement of the goals. The 
individual can complement this with their own checklists 
and/or take notes about their own development of the 
performance of the exercises. A user should also be able to 
understand the connection between the goals and the overall 
objective. This should be done by the physiotherapist, and it 
could be beneficial to have explanations of the goals in the 
app. 
According to Latham [68], the resources that are 
necessary must be available (such as equipment needed for 
the exercises), as the lack of these may otherwise influence 
the individual’s ability to achieve the goals. 
Goal-setting theory is consistent with the results obtained 
from the conducted study (see Section 6) in terms of need for 
feedback. The participants pointed out that it is significant to 
gain feedback about progress, and that information about 
progress is one of the most important features to include in 
an application like this. This can be achieved, for example, 
by showing improvements in terms of comparing past and 
present performance, or in relation to the goals that have 
been set.  
B. Theories that include social aspects 
To apply the relatedness aspect of self-determination 
theory, social comparison theory was applied. Social 
comparison theory suggests that people evaluate their 
abilities and that they have a willingness to improve. When 
people feel insecure about their abilities, they usually 
compare themselves with others. If an individual has several 
people to compare themselves with, it is likely that he/she 
will choose someone with abilities at a similar level (e.g., in 
terms of fitness) for comparison [35]. The more different one 
individual is from others, the less he or she tends to compare 
him/herself with them. Other studies, on the other hand, 
show that some people compare themselves with people they 
are different from [71]. 
Sharing health-related data is related to the relatedness 
aspect of SDT and our will to interact with others. The 
participants in this study pointed out that they were reluctant 
to share health data since they perceived their situation and 

32
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
their health data as unique. They therefore did not wish to 
have any comparisons, and they were also uninterested in 
seeing other people’s health-related data. However, they 
were positive to sharing data in relation to the adherence to 
their 
physiotherapist’s 
advice 
and 
with 
respect 
to 
questionnaire completion, particularly if the comparison was 
applied in the shape of gamification [1]. One thing that is 
important to note for the comparison to be meaningful is that 
the people compared should perceive each other as similar 
[35]. One solution to this is to categorize users into different 
groups based on their condition and/or exercises they have to 
do. This would enable the healthcare users to see the group 
they belong to and recognize that there are several other 
people in the same cluster. Being in contact with people who 
are 
struggling 
with 
similar 
issues 
could 
provide 
psychological support for negative feelings such as feelings 
of deviance or isolation [38]. 
In the study, some of the participants were positive 
towards sharing advice to help others or asking for advice 
from those who had managed to follow the physiotherapist’s 
advice better than they had. Healthcare users who are unable 
to keep up with new exercise routines could thus benefit 
from having the possibility to ask for advice from people 
who have managed to engage in new routines [44]. It is 
recommended that this be designed in a way so as to not 
trigger competition if that is unwanted. However, not 
everyone in the study disliked competition related to 
adherence to the physiotherapist’s advice, and several also 
thought that gamified competition could support motivation 
[43]. 
C. External motivation and rewards 
Extrinsic or external motivation is behavior driven by 
external rewards. Extrinsic motivation is a concept that 
applies every time an activity is performed in order to 
achieve a desirable outcome. Extrinsic motivation thus 
contrasts with intrinsic motivation, which refers to doing an 
activity simply for the enjoyment of the activity itself, rather 
than its contributing value [72]. SDT suggests that extrinsic 
motivation can vary greatly in the extent to which it is 
autonomous (related to the feeling of having control over our 
own selves and our actions). This can be exemplified by 
comparing two students doing their homework [72]. One 
does the homework only so as to not be “punished with 
sanctions” by his parents, and the other student does the 
homework because he personally thinks it is good for his 
future career. Neither is doing it because they find it 
interesting to learn. Both cases are extrinsically motivated, 
but the latter example has a sense of personal feeling and 
approval while the former example is only about external 
control. Both represent conscious behavior, but the two 
examples of extrinsic motivation differ in their relative 
autonomy.  
Feedback that is based on data from other users could 
also serve as external motivation. Progress may be shown 
based on reported data from another group of users. For 
example, it can be shown how successful the proposed 
exercises have been in terms of rapid progress. 
The participants in the study pointed out that they were 
motivated to follow the physiotherapist’s advice based on 
situation and existence of pain, which could be described as 
external aspects for motivation. Even if exercises are 
forgotten, their value was understood. Therefore, the 
participants expressed the need for reminders. Reminders are 
related to the HBM and its cues to action. Reminders in 
combination with motivational messages can support the 
users in remembering to do the exercises, especially when 
health improves and pain has vanished. Within an 
application, motivational messages could be based on the 
user’s actions, for example referring to a situation in which 
the healthcare user had performed the exercises. However, it 
is important that reminders are adjustable, that they are based 
on the users’ needs, and that the user can deactivate them if 
desired since they can be overwhelming. 
Another feature that might be motivating for some users 
is to add gamification. This feature is based on external 
motivation in terms of different kinds of rewards, such as 
being rewarded for performance in comparison with other 
users. Comparison, in this case, can be used for compliance 
in performing exercises and in answering health-related 
questionnaires. This can be done regardless of progress and 
without users sharing sensitive information about their 
health. Another comparable measurement is the streak (the 
number of days in a row the user did the exercises). This 
shows the user’s compliance on a daily basis. Compliance is 
also a usable motivational aspect when there has been no 
progress since it will still be possible to give rewards [73]. 
VIII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Due to the nature of the application, motivational aspects 
related to goal setting and social motivational theories were 
the most relevant aspects to apply in the development of the 
application. Goal setting and being able to follow progress 
were important features to include. It was also shown that the 
goals for the user’s exercises needed to be realistic and set 
together with the physiotherapist. This was explained in 
terms of that the physiotherapists were experts in the 
physiotherapy domain and could therefore estimate true 
progress. However, it was important that the goals were 
meaningful and motivating for the user as otherwise 
compliance and performance could be affected [48]. 
With respect to being able to compare performance or 
progress with other users, our results were in line with the 
research conducted in the psychological field regarding the 
rejection of comparison [41][42]. However, if the 
comparison was disguised as a gamification element, the 
participants thought that people would be more willing to 
compare with others for competing, for feeling a part of a 
group or for contributing to a team. Due to the rejection of 
comparison in this study, it was impossible to get detailed 
user specifications about the design of social comparison 
features. For example, if they would like to compare specific 
individuals, compare random users of the application, or 
compare with statistics created by all the users. More 
research is needed to understand how we can make the users 
feel comfortable talking about comparisons they engage in. 

33
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The need for personalization was mainly related to 
receiving personalized feedback from the physiotherapist in 
a way that takes into consideration the user’s condition. 
Users described that the frequent interaction with the 
physiotherapist and the individualized exercise plan based on 
input from the users was an important aspect for sharing 
health-related data with the system. The users in our study 
were willing to provide a variety of personal information as 
long as it was used in a meaningful way that supported their 
progress. Other studies have also shown the importance of 
social interaction and of being seen by the physiotherapist. 
For some users, this social aspect might be the most 
important motivational feature [73]. 
Finally, one motivational feature that was not initially 
discussed with the participants but which came up during the 
interviews was awareness of body posture and that the 
visualization of the body could be a motivating feature. This 
could provide the user with feedback about their existing 
posture and goals showing what to strive for [73]. 
To summarize, this study conveys insights about 
applying motivational theories and provides suggestions for 
developing motivational features in applications that support 
performing exercises based on recommendations from a 
physiotherapist. We have not systematically investigated the 
use of different motivational theories and are not suggesting 
which motivational theories can be most successfully applied 
in this context. In an exploratory manner, and for this 
particular application, practical combinations of different 
theories were applied. Future work needs to be conducted, 
both in terms of applying other motivational theories and in 
terms of evaluating the applied motivational features. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors would like to thank EIT Digital, which 
funded the project that this work was conducted within. We 
would also like to thank the participants, who provided us 
with valuable information during the interviews. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. Sjölinder, A. Avatare Nöu, V. Mylonopoulou, and O. Korhonen, 
“Motivational features in an application for presenting dysfunctional 
movement patterns and for providing support in conducting 
exercises,” CENTRIC 2019, The Twelfth International Conference on 
Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms, 
Technologies, and Services, pp. 37–42, 2019. 
[2] 
1 EUMSUC (2008-2013) Musculoskeletal Health in Europe Report 
v5.0. EUMSUC, Executive Agency for Health and Consumers. 
[3] 
K. Areskoug-Josefsson and A. C. Andersson, “The co-constructive 
processes in physiotherapy,” Cogent Medicine, vol. 4, no. 1, 2017, 
doi: 10.1080/2331205X.2017.1290308. 
[4] 
M. Batalden et al., “Coproduction of healthcare service,” BMJ Qual 
vol. 25, no 7, pp.509–517, 2016, doi: 10.1136/bmjqs-2015-004315. 
[5] 
G. Postolache, R. Oliveira, and O. Postolache, “Designing digital 
tools for physiotherapy,” Interactivity, Game Creation, Design, 
Learning, and Innovation, pp. 74–88. Springer, Cham. 2016 
[6] 
T. J. Hoogeboom, J. J. Dronkers, E. H. Hulzebos, and N. L. Meeteren, 
“Merits of exercise therapy before and after major surgery,” Curr 
Opin Anaesthesiol, vol. 27 no. 2, pp. 161–166, 2014, doi: 
10.1097/ACO.0000000000000062. 
[7] 
I. M. Rosenstock, “Historical origins of the health belief model,” 
Health Education Monographs, vol. 2 no. 4, pp. 328–335, 1974. 
[8] 
N. K. Janz and M. H. Becker, “The Health Belief Model: A Decade 
Later,” Health Education Quarterly, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 1–47, 1984. 
[9] 
V. J. Strecher and I. M. Rosenstock, “The health belief model,” 
Health behavior and Health Education: Theory, Research and Practice 
(2nd ed.), 1997. 
[10] A. Bandura, “Perceived self-efficacy in the exercise of personal 
agency,” Journal of Applied Sport Psychology, vol. no. 2, pp. 128–
163, 1990. 
[11] S. U. Ayubi and B. Parmanto, “PersonA: Persuasive social network 
for physical activity,” Annual International Conference of the IEEE 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, pp. 2153–2157, 2012. 
[12] G. Giunti, V. Mylonopoulou, and O. R. Romero, “More stamina, a 
gamified mHealth solution for persons with multiple sclerosis: 
research through design,” JMIR mHealth and uHealth, vol. 6, no. 3, 
2018. 
[13] J. A. Naslund et al., “Health behavior models for informing digital 
technology interventions for individuals with mental illness,” 
Psychiatric Rehabilitation Journal, vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 325–335, 2017. 
[14] R. Wahyuni, “Explaining acceptance of e-health services: An 
extension of TAM and health belief model approach,” 5th 
International Conference on Cyber and IT Service Management, 
IEEE press, pp. 1–7, 2017. 
[15] A. S. Ahadzadeh, S. P. Sharif, F. S. Ong, and K. W. Khong, 
“Integrating health belief model and technology acceptance model: 
An investigation of health-related internet use,” Journal of Medical 
Internet Research, vol. 17, no. 2, 2015. 
[16] R. M. Ryan and E. L. Deci, “Self-determination theory: Basic 
psychological needs in motivation, development, and wellness,” 
Guilford Publications, 2017. 
[17] E. L. Deci and R. M. Ryan, “Self-determination theory: A 
macrotheory of human motivation, development, and health,” 
Canadian Psychology/Psychologie canadienne, vol. 49, no. 3, pp. 
182–185, 2008. 
[18]  M. Becker, “The health belief model and personal health behavior,” 
Slack, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 324–508, 1974. 
[19]  S. Asimakopoulos, G. Asimakopoulos, and F. Spillers, “Motivation 
and User Engagement in Fitness Tracking: Heuristics for Mobile 
Healthcare Wearables,” Informatics, vol. 4, no. 1, p. 5, 2017. 
[20] C. Kerner and V. A. Goodyear, “The motivational impact of wearable 
healthy lifestyle technologies: a self-determination perspective on 
Fitbits with adolescents,” American Journal of Health Education, vol. 
48, no. 5 pp. 287–297, 2017, doi: 10.1080/19325037.2017.1343161 
[21] A. Jansen, M. Van Mechelen, and K. Slegers, “Personas and 
behavioral theories: A case study using self-determination theory to 
construct overweight personas,” Proceedings of the 2017 CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 2127–
2136, 2017. 
[22] K. Glanz, B. K. Rimer, and K. Viswanath, “Health behavior and 
health education: Theory, research, and practice,” (4th ed.), Jossey-
Bass, 2008. 
[23]  J. O. Prochaska and W. F. Velicer, “The Transtheoretical Change 
Model of Health Behavior,” American Journal of Health Promotion, 
vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 38–48, 1997. 
[24]  E. Haas, “Applying the Precaution Adoption Process Model to the 
Acceptance of Mine Safety and Health Technologies,” Occupational 
Health Science, vol.  2, pp. 43–66, 2018. 
[25] J. Chapin, Adolescents and Cyber Bullying: The Precaution Adoption 
Process Model Education and Information Technologies volume 21, 
pp. 719–728, 2016. 
[26] N. D. Weinstein, “The precaution adoption process,” Health 
psychology, vol. 7, no. 4, p. 355, 1988. 
[27] N. D. Weinstein and P. M. Sandman, “The precaution adoption 
process model and its application,” Emerging Theories in Health 
Promotion Practice and Research, Jossey-Bass, pp. 16–39, 2002. 
[28] J. J. Lin, L. Mamykina, S. Lindtner, G. Delajoux, and H. B.  Strub, 
“Fish’n’Steps: Encouraging physical activity with an interactive 

34
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
computer game,” International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing, 
Springer, pp. 261–278, 2006. 
[29] S. R. Paige, J. M. Alber, M. L. Stellefson, and J. L. Krieger, “Missing 
the mark for patient engagement: mHealth literacy strategies and 
behavior change processes in smoking cessation apps,” Patient 
Education and Counseling, vol. 101, no. 5, pp. 951–955, 2018. 
[30]  A. Bandura, “Health promotion from the perspective of social 
cognitive theory,” Psychology and Health, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 623–
649, 1998. 
[31] A. Bandura and R. H. Walters, “Social learning theory,” Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, vol. 1, 1977. 
[32] M. Duncan et al., “Effectiveness of a web- and mobile phone-based 
intervention to promote physical activity and healthy eating in 
middle-aged males: randomized controlled trial of the ManUp study,” 
Journal of Medical Internet Research, vol. 16, no. 6, e136, 2014. 
[33] M. Iio, “Beneficial Features of a mHealth Asthma App for Children 
and Caregivers: Qualitative Study,” JMIR mHealth and uHealth, vol. 
8, no. 8, e18506, 2020. 
[34] B. K. White et al., “Theory-based design and development of a 
socially connected, gamified mobile app for men about breastfeeding 
(Milk Man),” JMIR mHealth and uHealth, vol. 4, no. 2, e81, 2016. 
[35]  L. Festinger, “A Theory of Social Comparison Processes,” Human 
Relations, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 117–140, 1954, doi:10.1177/0018-
72675400700202. 
[36]  R. L. Collins, “For better or worse: The impact of upward social 
comparison on self-evaluations,” Psychological Bulletin, vol. 119, no. 
1, pp. 51–69, 1996, doi:10.1037/0033-2909.119.1.51. 
[37]  J. Suls, R. Martin, and L. Wheeler, “Social comparison: Why, with 
whom, and with what effect?,” Current Directions in Psychological 
Science, vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 159–163, 2002, doi:10.1111/1467-
8721.00191. 
[38]  S. E. Taylor, J. V. Wood, and R. R. Lichtman, “It Could Be Worse: 
Selective Evaluation as a Response to Victimization,” Journal of 
Social Issues, vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 19–40, 1983. 
[39]  J. V. Wood, S. E. Taylor, and R. R. Lichtman, “Social Comparison in 
Adjustment to Breast Cancer,” Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, vol. 49, no. 5, pp. 1169–1183, 1985, doi:10.1037/0022-
3514.49.5.1169. 
[40]  S. M. Garcia, A. Tor, and T. M. Schiff, “The Psychology of 
Competition: A Social Comparison Perspective,” Perspectives on 
Psychological Science, vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 634–650, 2013, 
doi:10.1177/1745691613504114. 
[41]  K. J. Hemphill and D. R. Lehman, “Social Comparison and Their 
Affective Consequences: The Importance of Comparison Dimension 
and Individual Difference Variables,” Journal of Social and Clinical 
Psychology, vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 372–395, 1991. 
[42]  F. X. Gibbons and B. P. Buunk, “Individual Differences in Social 
Comparison: Development of a Scale of Social Comparison 
Orientation,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, vol. 76, 
no. 1, pp. 129–142, 1999, doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.76.1.129. 
[43] S. A. Mummah, A. C. King, C. D. Gardner, and S. Sutton, “Iterative 
development of Vegethon: a theory-based mobile app intervention to 
increase vegetable consumption,” International Journal of Behavioral 
Nutrition and Physical Activity, vol. 13, no. 1, p. 90, 2016. 
[44]  V. Mylonopoulou, “Design for Health Behavior Change Supportive 
Technology: Healthcare Professionals’ Perspective,” NordiCHI '18, 
pp. 82–92, 2018. 
[45] S. Consolvo, P. Klasnja, D. W. Mcdonald, and J. A. Landay, “Goal-
Setting Considerations for Persuasive Technologies that Encourage 
Physical Activity,” Persuasive ’09, Article 8, pp. 1-8, 2009. 
[46] C. Swann et al., “Updating goal-setting theory in physical activity 
promotion: A critical conceptual review,” Health Psychology Review, 
vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 34–50, 2020, doi:10.1080/17437199.2019.1706616. 
[47] V. J. Strecher et al., “Goal setting as a strategy for health behavior 
change,” Health Education Quarterly, vol.  22, no. 2, pp. 190–200, 
1995. 
[48]  E. A. Locke and G. P. Latham, “Building a Practically Useful Theory 
of Goal Setting and Task Motivation: A 35-Year Odyssey,” American 
Psychologist 57, pp. 705–717, 2002. 
[49] R. Orji and K. Moffatt, “Persuasive technology for health and 
wellness: State-of-the-art and emerging trends,” Health Informatics 
Journal, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 66–91, 2018. 
[50] D. L. Kappen and R. Orji, “Gamified and persuasive systems as 
behavior change agents for health and wellness,” XRDS: Crossroads, 
The ACM Magazine for Students, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 52–55, 2017. 
[51] M. Zhou et al., “Evaluating machine learning-based automated 
personalized daily step goals delivered through a mobile phone app: 
Randomized controlled trial,” JMIR mHealth and uHealth, vol. 6, no. 
1, e28, 2018. 
[52] Y. K. Bartlett, T. L. Webb, and M. S. Hawley, “Using persuasive 
technology to increase physical activity in people with chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease by encouraging regular walking: A 
mixed-methods study exploring opinions and preferences,” Journal of 
Medical Internet Research, vol. 19, no. 4, e124, 2017. 
[53]  G. Giunti, V. Mylonopoulou, and O. R. Romero, “More stamina, a 
gamified mHealth solution for persons with multiple sclerosis: 
Research through design,” JMIR mHealth and uHealth, vol. 6, no. 3, 
e51, 2018. 
[54]  A. Tuzhilin, “Personalization: The state of the art and future 
directions,” Business Computing, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 3–43, 2009. 
[55] A. Sunikka and J. Bragge, “Applying text-mining to personalization 
and customization research literature – Who, what and where?,” 
Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 39, no. 11, pp. 10049–10058, 
2012. 
[56]  J. Blom, “Personalization: a taxonomy,” CHI'00 Extended Abstracts 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 313–314, 2000. 
[57] H. Fan and M. S. Poole, “What is personalization? Perspectives on 
the design and implementation of personalization in information 
systems,” Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic 
Commerce, vol. 16, no. 3–4, pp. 179–202, 2006. 
[58] D. Wu, I. Im, M. Tremaine, K. Instone, and M. Turoff, “A framework 
for classifying personalization scheme used on e-commerce 
websites,” 36th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences, 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
IEEE, 
2003, 
doi: 
10.1109/HICSS.2003.1174586. 
[59] A. B. Kocaballi et al., “The personalization of conversational agents 
in health care: Systematic review,” Journal of Medical Internet 
Research, vol. 21, no. 11, e15360, 2019. 
[60] A. Shen and A. D. Ball, “Is personalization of services always a good 
thing? Exploring the role of technology‐mediated personalization 
(TMP) in service relationships,” Journal of Services Marketing, vol. 
23 no. 2, pp. 79–91, 2009, doi:10.1108/08876040910946341. 
[61] C. F. Surprenant and M. R. Solomon, “Predictability and 
personalization in the service encounter,” Journal of Marketing, vol.  
51, no. 2, pp. 86–96, 1987. 
[62] K. P. Gwinner, M. J. Bitner, S. W. Brown, and A. Kumar., ”Service 
customization through employee adaptiveness,” Journal of Service 
Research, 8(2), 131-148, 2005. 
[63] B. Mittal and W. M. Lassar,” The role of personalization in service 
encounters,” Journal of Retailing, vol. 72, no. 1, pp. 95–109, 1996. 
[64] O. Korhonen and M. Isomursu, “Identifying personalization in a care 
pathway: A single-case study of a Finnish healthcare service 
provider,” 25th European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS) 
pp. 828–841, 2017. 
[65]  “Figma: the collaborative interface design tool,” [Online]. Available 
from: https://www.figma.com/ 2021.06.29. 
[66] R. Buchanan, “Wicked problems in design thinking,” Design Issues, 
vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 5–21, 1992. 
[67] G. Latham and E. A. Locke, “New developments in and directions for 
goal-setting research,” European Psychologist, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 
290–300, 2007. 

35
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[68] E. A. Locke and G. P. Latham, “The development of goal setting 
theory: A half century retrospective,” Motivation Science, vol. 5, no.  
2, pp. 93–105, 2019,  doi:10.1037/mot0000127. 
[69] K. Williams, “Goal setting in sports,” New Developments in Goal 
Setting and Task Performance, New York, NY: Routledge, pp. 375–
398, 2013. 
[70] A. Bandura and E. A. Locke, “Negative self-efficacy and goal effects 
revisited,” Journal of Applied Psychology, vol. 88, no. 1, pp. 87–99, 
2003. 
[71] S. Hesse-Biber, P. Leavy, C. E. Quinn, and J. Zoino, “The mass 
marketing of disordered eating and Eating Disorders: The social 
psychology of women, thinness and culture.” Women's Studies 
International 
Forum, 
29(2), 
208–224, 
2006. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wsif.2006.03.007 
[72] R. Ryan and E. Deci, “Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivations: Classic 
Definitions and New Directions,” Contemporary Educational 
Psychology, 
vol. 
25, 
no. 
1, 
pp. 
54–67, 
2000, 
doi:10.1006/ceps.1999.1020. 
[73]  M. Sjölinder et al., “Perspectives on Design of Sensor Based 
Exergames Targeted Towards Older Adults,” In: Zhou J., Salvendy 
G. (eds) Human Aspects of IT for the Aged Population, Applications 
in Health, Assistance, and Entertainment, ITAP 2018. Lecture Notes 
in Computer Science, vol 10927, Springer, Cham, pp. 395–414, 2018, 
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-92037-5_29.
 

