Guidelines for Participatory Design with People Living with Mild Acquired 
Cognitive Impairments
Klaudia Çarçani 
Faculty of Computer Science 
Østfold University College 
Halden, Norway 
email: klaudia.carcani@hiof.no 
Harald Holone 
Faculty of Computer Science 
Østfold University College 
Halden, Norway 
email: harald.holone@hiof.no 
Abstract –Mild Acquired Cognitive Impairment(s) (MACI) are 
called invisible impairments. This invisibility of symptoms 
makes that researchers often overlook people with MACI. This 
is the case in the field of Participatory Design (PD). In this 
paper, we investigate how to involve people with MACI in 
designing together digital solutions meant for them. Hence, how 
to involve people with MACI in Participatory Design. 
Considering the lack of literature in PD focused on MACI 
patients, we conducted a borderer investigation of the literature 
and derived a set of guidelines proposed by PD practitioners for 
involving people with cognitive impairments in PD. We have 
collected data on conducting PD with MACI patients from two 
empirical cases as part of two projects in a rehabilitation 
hospital in Norway, which offers specialized rehabilitation to 
people with MACI. We conducted 5 PD workshops with three 
different workshop outlines. Seventeen people with MACI 
participated. We present a detailed list of reflections-on-action 
for each workshop outline. We discuss the reflections with 
findings from the literature and conclude with a list of 
guidelines that researchers and designers should consider when 
involving people with MACI in conducting PD. The paper aims 
to attract the attention of PD practitioners to the MACI user 
group with the possibility of expanding the guidelines list in the 
future. 
Keywords-Participatory 
Design; 
Mild 
Acquired 
Cognitive 
Impairments; Guidelines.  
I. INTRODUCTION 
There is an increase in chronic diseases in our aging 
society, and technology is considered as one of the means to 
cope with the increasing number of people living with chronic 
conditions. A notable case is individuals with Acquired Brain 
Injury (ABI) affecting cognitive capacities. For this user 
group, the use of technology has become a fundamental part 
of their daily lives by providing a wide range of useful 
services and tools to use at home, work, or anywhere else. 
This paper expands on previously reported results on how to 
involve people with ABI in designing new technologies that 
can facilitate their everyday life challenges [1]. Intensive 
research is ongoing regarding technologies that support 
patients with moderate or severe cognitive impairments (i.e., 
[2][3][4]). However, less attention had been paid to people 
suffering from mild cognitive impairments after an Acquired 
Brain Injury (ABI), even though mild acquired cognitive 
impairments are a critical global public health problem and 
listed among the major causes of permanent impairments 
[5][6]. In this paper, the abbreviation “mild acquired 
cognitive impairment(s)” (MACI), coined from Eghdam, 
Scholl, Bartfai, and Koch [7], will be used to refer to these 
people. Note that this is not an official abbreviation for the 
clinical condition. MACIs are usually described as invisible 
impairments and might include problems with memory, 
attention, executive functioning, language, and fatigue. 
People suffering from MACIs typically have a very 
challenging daily life, given the invisible nature of the 
condition.  
An essential factor for the design of new technologies that 
can assists MACI people is their involvement in the design of 
these solutions that will be used by them in the future. User 
participation constitutes the core of Participatory Design [8]. 
PD is that design approach that promotes the involvement in 
the design process of everyone that will be influenced by the 
newly 
designed 
technological 
solution. 
Thus, 
new 
technologies aiming to assist individuals who have had an 
ABI would, from a PD perspective, require people with 
MACIs to be involved in the design process. However, 
involving people that have cognition problems to envision 
future solutions or discuss abstract terms is challenging. PD 
researchers should consider how to promote involvement and 
participation. The research question we raise in this paper is 
What should be taken into consideration when conducting 
Participatory Design with people with MACIs? 
PD has, in decades, been concerned with marginalized 
groups and research on how to involve people with dementia, 
aphasia, amnesia, cognitive impairments, elderly, etc. in the 
design of new solutions. While the case of people with MACI 
is different from these diseases, some symptoms are similar. 
Thus, a look into the existing literature and how other 
researchers have described guidelines for working with user 
groups similar to MACI is relevant for building preliminary 
knowledge. In this paper, we initially present a summary of 
guidelines for involving people with cognitive impairments 
in PD projects. The guidelines are from a systematic literature 
review conducted by the authors of this paper. The findings 
were cross-checked and refined with the findings of a 
literature review of conducting PD with people with dementia 
by Hendriks, Truyen, and Duval [9]. 
Further, we present two empirical cases of conducting PD 
with MACI people. We take a reflective practitioner analysis 
approach to derive a set of reflections for involving MACI 
people in PD. These reflections, which emerged from the 
empirical data from 5 workshops with a total of 17 MACI 
patients as participants, have been further cross-analyzed with 
the list of guidelines found from the literature. The cross-
analysis is also influenced by the literature on MACI people, 
their symptoms, and advice for leaving with cognitive 
challenges from medical practices. We have concluded with 
a list of guidelines for conducting PD with MACI people.  
59
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

We contribute by expanding the knowledge of conducting 
PD with a special user group like MACI people who represent 
a huge share of the society [6] and can benefit from 
technology to facilitate their daily life. Moreover, we 
contribute by bringing the attention of the PD researcher to 
this user group, which due to the “silent” characteristics of the 
disease, are usually forgotten or overlooked and left alone to 
fight a challenging daily life.   
The next section gives a more detailed overview of the 
user group, the symptoms they have, and some suggestions 
from the medical perspective on how the MACI people can 
adapt their life to the cognitive challenges. This is followed 
by a section on what PD is and why it is relevant to conduct 
PD with MACI people. We present a detailed summary of 
guidelines deriving from previous research on conducting PD 
with people with cognition challenges as part of our 
background literature. Further, we describe our methods for 
collecting the data and analyzing it, followed by the empirical 
material from two projects done with MACI people. We 
describe three workshop outlines applied in 5 PD workshops 
in the two projects. A list of methodological reflections [10] 
follows each workshop outline. We further analyze and 
discuss the findings from the empirical cases with the data 
from the list of guidelines coming from the literature review. 
In conclusion, we present a set of guidelines for conducting 
PD with MACI people.  
 
II. 
MILD ACQUIRED COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENTS 
AND THE IMPLICATIONS IN A PERSON’S 
LIFE 
In this section, we first describe what it means for a 
person to live with MACIs. Further, we define what 
cognitive rehabilitation is and how this service is offered in 
a rehabilitation hospital in Norway, where we conducted our 
research.   
A. What does it mean to live with Mild Cognitive 
Impairments (MCI) after Acquired Brain Injury (ABI)? 
Cognition is the individual’s capacity to acquire and use 
the information to adapt to environmental demands [11]. 
However, cognition can be challenged, and cognitive 
impairments can surface [12]. Cognitive impairments may be 
associated with cognitive decline due to aging, more-serious 
decline as dementia, or can be the consequence of an ABI. 
The latest is the category of patients involved in this study. 
ABI is brain damage acquired after birth. The causes of 
ABI can be from non-traumatic brain injury (i.e., stroke, brain 
tumors) and traumatic brain injury (i.e., accidents, falls). It 
can affect cognitive, physical, emotional, social, or 
independent functioning. The consequences can vary from 
mild to severe [13].  We specifically focus on those people 
who have been affected in mildly their cognitive functioning. 
Eghdam, Scholl, Bartfai, and Koch [7] and Nilsson, Bartfai, 
and Löfgren [14] use the term Mild Acquired Cognitive 
Impairment(s) (MACI) “to describe a subgroup of patients 
with mild cognitive impairment(s) (MCI) who are expected to 
reach a stable cognitive level over time. This patient group is 
generally young and have acquired MCI from a head injury 
or mild stroke” (ibid). As this is similar to the user group we 
are interested in this paper, we borrow their terminology. 
Cognitive impairments often persist after the ABI, and 
they can significantly affect an individual’s abilities to 
perform everyday tasks, fulfill previous roles, and maintain 
personal-social 
relationships 
[14][15][16][17]. 
Thus, 
people's life becomes challenging, based on the severity of 
their injury. These people can experience difficulties in 
cognitive and emotional processing while having no or 
limited movement disorders and being independent in self-
care [14][18]. Cognitive impairments after a brain injury can 
cause the following problems to people: 
• 
They can feel a lack of energy for doing many things 
within a specific time frame. 
• 
They can face problems with memory, which can be 
related to working memory or long-term memory. This 
creates difficulties in remembering and learning new 
things. 
• 
They can face problems to keep the attention and 
concentrate on a specific issue and be able to eliminate 
the other unimportant information around them.  
• 
They can face a reduced tempo of performing activities 
and engaging only those activities that are relevant to 
them.  
• 
They can face a reduced multitasking capacity. The 
person becomes very tired if s/he has to manage too 
many activities at the same time. 
• 
They can face an increased response time due to a slower 
process of thinking. 
• 
They can face difficulties to start or initiate something, 
sometimes caused but a lack of motivation. 
• 
They can face challenges in making mental changes 
from one topic to another.  
• 
They can face difficulties in stopping, which relates to 
impulsivity, overactivity, and difficulties in controlling 
unwanted or inappropriate responses.   
• 
They can face a reduced understanding of oneself, which 
involves a reduced ability to perceive one's own 
mistakes, to take into account the impression one makes 
on others, or to assess a social situation accurately. 
• 
They can face thinking specifically and taking 
everything literally. This can also be associated with a 
loss of the ability to plan, look ahead, and think 
purposefully.  
• 
They can have difficulties with using language and 
communicating, such as not finding a word, repeating 
the self in a conversation, having difficulties in making 
a point in a conversation, mixing words, or having 
difficulties in understanding humor or irony. 
• 
They can face difficulties in processing the information 
received, solving problems, and executive functioning.  
• 
They can face changes in how they engage in social life 
and social communication. 
(the list presented above is a translated summary from 
[19][20]) 
60
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The list of cognitive challenges that can be faced by 
patients that have had an ABI and suffer cognitive 
impairments shows how heterogeneous this user group is. In 
MACI people, these symptoms are mild, and the person in 
most cases continues having an active life, working or 
participating in social activities, running a house, or following 
hobbies. However, their life is not the same [21].  
The symptoms of MACI patients mentioned above have 
similarities with other user groups as dementia and amnesia 
when memory problems are present, aphasia when 
communication problems are present, executive functioning, 
memory, attention, reduced tempo, and slow reactions are 
elements that are also associated with getting old. Moreover, 
problems with problem-solving can be similar to other 
cognitive impairment that patients have had from birth. 
In the following subsection, we will describe the case of 
cognitive rehabilitation as the setting on which we conducted 
our research. In this paper, we have used interchangeably 
different variations to refer to people living with MACIs, 
such as “people with MACIs, MACI people or MACI 
person”. Instead, from now on, we will use “patient(s) with 
MACIs, or MACI patient(s)” to refer to people with MACIs 
who are patients in a rehabilitation institution, which is the 
setting of our study. Moreover, in some cases, we will use 
the term patient(s) even when referring to the home context 
because people with MACI have a chronic disease, which 
makes them chronic patients in a rehabilitation context. 
When we describe our case, present the findings, and discuss 
them, we use the term “patients” as it better represents our 
participants. Instead, when we present the final guidelines, 
we refer to MACI people in general in any setting where they 
can be involved in designing new technologies useful to 
them.   
B. MACI Treatment – Cognitive Rehabilitation  
“Cognitive rehabilitation can be defined as a learning 
experience aimed at either restoring impaired higher 
cerebral functioning or improving performance in the real-
world using substitution or compensation techniques” [16]. 
Cognitive 
rehabilitation 
is 
offered 
in 
specialized 
rehabilitation institutions. The cases presented in this paper 
are related to two projects that we did in collaboration with 
the Department of Cognitive Rehabilitation (DCR) of 
Sunnaas rehabilitation hospital in Norway.  
Sunnaas offers multidisciplinary rehabilitation to people 
with complex functional impairments following illness or 
injury. We focused only on the cognitive rehabilitation 
process. The rehabilitation at the hospital (inpatient) is carried 
forward by a multidisciplinary team that helps the patient to 
define realistic and attainable rehabilitation goals and then 
define, in collaboration with the patient, a set of interventions 
that the patient should do for achieving the goals. The goals 
and respective interventions make a rehabilitation plan. The 
rehabilitation plan is imprinted in the “Goal-Plan” document. 
This Goal-plan is at the core of the rehabilitation process in 
the hospital. It helps to coordinate the activities that both the 
patient and the multidisciplinary team get involved in during 
the patient’s hospitalization period. In every activity at the 
hospital, both the multidisciplinary team and the patient 
should refer to the Goal-Plan. For the team, the Goal-Plan 
resides in the hospital Electronic Medical Record system. 
Instead, for the patient, the Goal-Plan is a printed paper 
document. The patient continues with the rehabilitation plan 
at home and returns to the hospital after 2-6 months for short 
follow-up and further adjustments of rehabilitation goals. A 
more detailed description has been presented in Becker, 
Kirmess, Tornås, and Løvstad [22]. 
As part of the rehabilitation plan, different kinds of 
rehabilitation therapies, customized to each patient's needs, 
are applied. Some suggestions of rehabilitation techniques for 
working with patients that have had an ABI retrieved from the 
literature are:  
• 
When communicating with an MACI patient, it is 
important to give her/him time, use short and concrete 
sentences, be clear, and try to receive confirmation that 
s/he understood what was said. Moreover, it is relevant 
to pay attention to how the patient feels that day. 
• 
In order to increase understanding, remembrance, and 
better communication with MACI patients, repetition is 
necessary.  
• 
Giving patients more time to do things or discuss is 
another strategy suggested. Moreover, considering the 
low capacity and high level of fatigue, pauses are 
recommended [19][20].  
• 
In order to improve executive functioning Haskins, 
Cicerone, and Trexler [23] highlight the Goal-Plan-Do-
Review (GPDR) model as helpful. GPDR requires the 
patients to increase awareness toward a specific goal that 
they want to achieve, plan carefully on how to achieve 
this goal, do the activity, and evaluate that after.  
• 
In order to improve memory deficiencies, Haskins, 
Cicerone, and Trexler [23] describe different techniques 
which are in analogy with a “divide and conquer” 
approach where a bigger task is divided into smaller 
steps, and these steps are used to train by repetition. 
Considering that memory is fragile, an errorless 
approach in the rehabilitation techniques is used [18]. 
This aims to teach the patients only the right things so 
s/he might not risk preserving the error instead of the 
right information. Visual cues are also considered useful 
in helping to train memory deficits [24]. Cicerone et al. 
[25] suggest using references from patients’ daily life 
because it is easier and more likely to remember the 
information when it is silent and personally meaningful.  
The techniques mentioned above were both presented as 
in individual therapy sessions or group therapies. Patients 
with MACIs can find group therapies specifically helpful 
when it comes to discussing their problems and expressing 
more about their story in front of other patients with similar 
challenges. Now that an overview of the patient group 
symptoms and the rehabilitation process which s/he goes 
through has been presented, we further describe PD and how 
that might be relevant for this user group.  
III. 
PARTICIPATORY DESIGN 
PD was established at the end of the 1970s to democratize 
both the working life and the design process of new 
information technologies [26].  PD emphasizes the idea that 
61
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

those who will be affected by the design of new information 
technologies or digital artifacts, should get involved and have 
a say during the design process of these technologies [27].  
PD considers users “domain experts” of the realities in which 
they live, so they must undertake the role of the designers 
[27].   
In Routledge Handbook of Participatory Design, 
Simonsen, and Robertson [8] define PD as: 
“a process of investigating, understanding, reflecting upon, 
establishing, developing and supporting mutual learning 
participants 
in 
collective 
“reflection-in-action”. 
The 
participants typically undertake the two principal roles of 
users and designers where the designer strives to learn the 
realities of users’ situation while the users strive to articulate 
their desired aims and learn appropriate technological 
means to obtain them.” 
At the core of PD is the idea of genuine participation in 
decision making. Genuine participation stands on a political 
rationale where the voice of marginalized groups is heard in 
the decision making that will influence them. Thus, designing 
technologies for patients with MACIs require their 
participation in the design process. Their marginalized voices 
in a paternalistic healthcare system where the patient follows 
what the doctors say should be raised and heard. By applying 
PD, these patients can have a say and genuinely participate in 
the design of new technologies, which will be used by them. 
Moreover, as we describe above, MACI is a silent 
condition and often overlooked. This makes this group 
marginalized for the technologies that have paid more 
attention to more severe cases. We use the general term 
“technology(s)” because, in every technology type, digital 
solutions, 
tangible 
solution, ICTs (Information 
and 
Communication Technologies), etc. people that will be 
influenced by the new technology should be involved in its 
design. Moreover, different technologies can help MACI 
patients in different situations. For example, a tangible alarm 
button can be used in the case of a fall. Instead, an application 
can be designed to serve as a calendar.  
PD is applied as a set of general principles that should be 
adapted to the specifics of the project. One of the principles 
of PD is “equalizing power relations”. Thus, PD is concerned 
with questions such as “whom we may risk leaving out of the 
design space, how we can act upon such challenges and how 
to provide for alternative perspectives on participation and 
democratization” [28], and finding ways to give voice to 
those who may be invisible or weaker in organizational power 
structures [29] and beyond, thus building a democratic 
process.  
Greenbaum and Kensing [29] point out that democracy is 
often propagated as a concept that is assumed to happen by 
itself. However, it requires educated and engaged people 
acting on their own interests and in the interests of the 
common good. Another principle of PD is mutual learning, 
where both designers and users should learn from each other 
in the design process. Learning also is cognitively 
demanding. Thus, the requirement for active participation and 
mutual learning poses a requirement for people to have a 
certain level of cognition. The number of people who live 
with cognitive impairments is high. To have a truly 
democratic process, we should not risk leaving this user group 
out of the design process.  
Greenbaum and Kensing [29, pp. 33-34] have listed tools 
and techniques among the principles in PD. Different tools 
and techniques are used by designers and researchers to 
involve users in the design process. The designer should 
reflect which tools and techniques fit her/his user group and 
then adapt them with the practice at hand [30]. Choosing the 
right techniques and tools is as relevant as challenging when 
the focus group of the research is people who suffer cognitive 
impairments. A technique’s goals, structure, and participation 
model can pose cognitive requirements to the participants. 
Some aspects of these requirements are fundamental to the 
activity (for example, a group discussion must involve 
communication), 
while 
other 
aspects 
are 
flexible 
(communication can be verbal, gestural, etc.). This flexibility 
can suggest ways in which a technique may be modified or 
adapted to people's cognitive abilities. However, what tools 
and techniques are chosen in a PD project would influence the 
true level of participation of the users in the design process 
[29].  
A. Participatory Design with people with ABI 
In PD, the active participation of people with disabilities 
in designing new technologies has been discussed 
significantly in conferences and workshops. Dementia 
patients or specific severe clinical conditions affecting 
cognition have been in the focus of many publications 
(examples [31][32][33][34]). Regarding the mild cognitive 
impairments, extensive research has been done with old 
adults or people with intellectual disabilities. However, little 
research has been conducted specifically on patients suffering 
from MACI [1] [35].  
Augstein, Neumayr, Ruckser-Scherb, and Dielacher [36] 
have designed an interactive tabletop in the rehabilitation 
setting of people after an ABI by using a PD approach. 
However, they have involved in the design rehabilitation 
specialist as proxies of people that have had an ABI.  
More research has been conducted with people that had a 
stroke. Balaam et al. [37] and Threatt et al. [38] have 
described some cases of involvement of stroke patients in the 
design process. However, this involvement is mostly in terms 
of interviews and observations and further during testing. The 
design is handled either by the designers or designers and 
clinicians together. The involvement of clinicians in design is 
as well described in Faria and Sergi Bermúdez [39]. Instead, 
Magnusson et al. [40] describe a case where stroke patients 
are involved in focus groups and as well in co-design 
workshops 
were 
brainstorming, 
and 
body-storming 
techniques are used. 
62
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Table 1. List of guidelines for conducting PD with people with cognitive impairments 
No. 
Guidelines 
Reference 
DG_PP1 Get the consent of the participant on various moments throughout the research process 
[9] 
DG_PP2 Communicate about project goals without intermediaries 
[9] 
DG_PP3 Give yourself enough time for general practicalities 
[9] 
DG_PP4 Get to know your target group, try to understand their cognitive deficit and become sensitive to 
their needs and situation 
[9][41][42] 
DG_PP5 Assess abilities through standardized tests 
[4][9][43] 
DG_PP6 Recruit and plan well in advance 
[44]  
DG_T1 
Involve users in design in appropriate and familiar environments 
• 
The location should hold an appropriate social status  
• 
The choice of location should take into account the deficits of the participants and 
ensure easy access to the meeting room 
• 
Using the person’s home might help to make the participant feel at ease 
[9][45][46] 
[47] 
DG_T2 
Adapt the language to participants 
[2][9][41][44] 
[48][49] 
DG_T3 
As the verbal might be a problem, make use of non-verbal elements such as visual stimuli like 
photos of objects or physical artifacts (notes, etc.) 
[9][50][51] 
[52][53][54] 
DG_T4 
Use distinctive contextual cues (like nametags) 
[4] 
DG_T5 
Consider the fidelity of the tools used to design 
• 
Consider using physical artifacts 
[4] 
DG_M1 
Consider activities that facilitate challenges in envisioning future solutions 
• 
Boost sharing personal experiences [9][41][44][46][55][56] 
• 
Support the building of IT literacy [57] 
• 
Provide more hands-on activities and collective prototyping [55][58][59] 
• 
Use visual cues [41][42][55][59] 
• 
Make use of fictional characters in different scenarios [60] 
• 
Try to avoid appealing to the person fantasy; avoid too much choice [9] 
[2][9][42][44]
[48][54] 
DG_M2 
Consider activities that facilitate challenges with abstract concepts 
• 
Explain technological concepts in an easy-to-understand way [41] 
• 
Consider the fear of sketching [61] abstract ideas  
• 
Let the designer do the sketches if needed as a start for discussion [62] 
[41][50] [59] 
DG_M3 Involve people in designing valuable solutions, real purpose, interesting 
[9][44][63] 
DG_M4 Plan activities to surpass challenges in continuity 
• 
Using a document design history or summary documents of each session 
[41][43][51] 
[64] 
DG_M5 Use previously known activities and natural tasks 
[9][55][59] 
DG_M6 For each activity create a relatively open artifact and brief  
[48] 
DG_M7 
Provide alternative activities so to engage all participants 
• 
Adapt methods so that it will take into account the difficulties in the comprehension and 
production of language, both verbal and textual  
• 
Adapt methods so that it can overcome impairments of memory 
• 
Facilitate participants to stay on track based on their individual needs 
[9][48][50] 
[65][66] 
63
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

No. 
Guidelines 
Reference 
• 
If working in a group, modify the method considering the different impairments each 
member of the group is facing 
• 
Consider the possibility of organizing individual participatory design sessions 
• 
Consider personalization and individuality for each patient  
DG_M8 
Consider activities that can be flexible and empathic to adapt to the needs of the group: 
• 
Activities that can help create a friendly environment [44][46][67] 
• 
Activities that can boost participants self-esteem and confidence [52][68] 
• 
Activities that can include elements of playfulness [42][52][55] 
[9][42][49] 
[50][54] 
DG_F1 
Researchers should clearly explain the purpose of events and the role of the participants 
[9] 
DG_F2 
To enclose personal info from the facilitators will boost participants confidence and make it 
easier to share things 
 
[9][69] 
DG_F3 
Incorporate Structure and Review in activities 
• 
It is important to foresee enough time for participants to get to know each other, 
repetition and constant reviewing of the different research/design phases 
[2][9][43][46]
[54][59] 
DG_F4 
During a participatory design session, try to minimize distraction and keep participants on focus 
[9] 
DG_P1 
Consider a one to one or group work in a PD session 
• 
Try to overcome the challenge of working in groups [70] 
• 
Try to diminish the risk of the designer strong position [45] 
• 
Try to overcome deficits by pairing persons with different deficits into one subgroup [9] 
[9][54][71] 
DG_P2 
Carefully decide the session duration and number of participants 
• 
In people with dementia [9] suggests working in small groups 
[2][9][46][52] 
DG_P3 
Involve caregivers as support in conversation with participants   
• 
Third-party involvement [56][59] 
[2][9][41][51]
[59] 
DG_P4 
Involve caregivers as domain experts in the design process 
[41][51] [72] 
DG_P5 
Eliminate usability problems with the carers of the patients 
• 
Specialist are relevant in generalizing solution [51] 
• 
Use persons who do not suffer from a deficit to get rid of general design problems [2][9] 
[4][9] 
DG_P6 
Promote the involvement of family members; However, the involvement should be associated 
with a critical attitude 
[73][74] 
DG_A1 
Try not to over-analyze the utterances of the participants 
[9] 
DG_A2 
Be critical towards the representativeness of the participants 
[9] 
B. Participatory design with people with cognitive 
impairments 
Research in PD with people with cognitive impairments 
is not novel. Researchers have been conducting PD with 
people with dementia, aphasia, amnesia, stroke patients, or in 
general, in older adults’ populations, etc. for more than two 
decades. A set of workshops focused on people with cognitive 
impairment has been taking place in conferences [33][73] 
[74][75]. Moreover, a considerable number of papers had 
been published [4][9][33][44][76]. The papers are mostly 
focused on describing and analyzing single PD projects and 
deriving implications for involving people with cognitive 
impairments in the participatory design process. Hendriks, 
Truyen, and Duval [9] present a broad review of conducting 
PD with people with Dementia and list a set of guidelines for 
participatory design together with persons with dementia. In 
their review, they have looked into PD projects with other 
user groups that have similar symptoms as persons with 
dementia such as amnesia, aphasia, and elderly. We build on 
their findings and expand them further with some findings 
from a literature review that we conducted in January-June 
2019. The findings from the literature review are presented in 
Table 1.  
As stated above, as a research question in this paper, we 
investigate what a researcher should take into consideration 
when conducting PD with people with MACIs. However, as 
mentioned above, the number of publications specifically 
related to this user group is low, and only a few other 
64
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

publications refer to PD with stroke patients. Hence, in order 
to have a broader overview of how to conduct a PD project 
with our user group, we did a systematic search in the 
literature of conducting PD with people with any kind of 
cognition challenges considering the similarity in symptoms.  
We limited our search to the ACM and Springer databases 
since they are the main publishing venues for conferences and 
journals in design. We initially planned to investigate 
publications in specific conferences.  However, in order to 
mitigate the risk of leaving out any relevant publication, we 
decided to expand the search generally for the two databases. 
We used several search terms in both databases. The constant 
search term was “participatory design” or “codesign” (and 
variations of it), qualified by more specific searches for user 
groups that experience cognitive impairments such as older 
adults, people with dementia, aphasia, cognitive decline, 
brain injury, and stroke. 
Moreover, we added search terms that relate to the 
symptoms that people with cognitive impairments face, such 
as memory, attention, and tiredness. The search gave us an 
extensive set of papers. After removing duplicates, we ended 
up with 326 papers in ACM and 146 in Springer. The initial 
phase was to read through the abstract and quickly scan the 
papers’ headings if there was any part that was dedicated to 
PD or the design process. Based on this, we decided if we 
needed to read the paper further. From the first scan, we 
decided to read 105 ACM papers and 38 Springer papers 
thoroughly. 
After this, we discarded papers found to be out of scope. 
Some because they did not explain a specific case of 
participatory design with people facing some form of 
cognitive impairments, some for just mentioning a PD 
process without additional information, and somewhere the 
design process was not a true participatory design process 
with the involvement of users as partners in design. We 
concluded the selection with 105 papers. We classified the 
papers into Technology papers (18); Methods papers (49); PD 
practice papers (28) - in which the PD process and the tool 
developed were explained; and General PD challenges papers 
(17) - focused more in a conceptual discussion of what 
implications and what concepts are important on co-
designing with people with disabilities. It was not a precise 
positioning of the papers in one of the categories mentioned 
above, and some could belong to all. However, each paper 
was assigned to only one category based on the paper’s main 
contribution.  
To analyze the data from the literature review, we were 
guided by content analysis and grounded theory approaches 
[77]. The content analysis starts by assigning specific 
descriptors to blocks of text in the collected data, a process 
called “coding”. The coding can be emergent or a priori. The 
emergent coding is the core of the grounded theory approach, 
and the codes emerge from the data under review. Apriori 
coding involves the use of an established theory or hypothesis 
to guide the selection of codes. These categories might come 
from previously published work in related areas, or own prior 
investigations of the topic at hand. 
We started by openly coding our data. Codes that 
described similar guidelines were grouped into concepts. 
Concepts were further grouped into categories (axial coding). 
Throughout the coding process, both authors of the paper 
were engaged in intensive discussions to find meaningful 
codes or concepts (i.e., topics). 
To compare the results and refine and enrich our emergent 
codes, we used apriori coding in the second round of analysis. 
The apriori codes used derived from Hendriks, Truyen, and 
Duval [9]. Moreover, Hendriks, Truyen, and Duval [9] have 
categorized their guidelines. We preserve these categories 
and introduce a set of guidelines and actions to take for each 
guideline suggested by different authors (cross-checked with 
the guidelines from Hendriks, Truyen, and Duval [9]) for each 
of the categories.  
In Table 1, we have listed guidelines for conducting PD 
with people with cognitive impairments, and group these 
guidelines into the following categories: Preparation (coded 
as DG_PP), Tools (coded as DG_T), Moderator (coded as 
DG_F where F stands for the facilitator, inspired by [78]), 
Methods (coded as DG_M – instead of methods we will refer 
to this category as Techniques inspired from the Simonsen, 
and Robertson [8]. We save the letter M in coding as the letter 
T has been used for the Tools category already) and 
Participants (coded as DG_P) and Analysis (coded as DG_A).  
IV. 
METHODS 
In this section, we initially present the data collection 
method, followed by the method used for analysis.  
A. Data collection 
The study aims to define a set of guidelines for conducting 
PD together with people with MACI. For defining the 
guidelines, we build on two empirical cases where we 
conducted PD with people with MACI.   
In the first case, the aim was to redesign the Goal-Plan 
document used as a central document of patient rehabilitation 
at the DCR. The redesign aimed to make the document more 
useful for the patients during their rehabilitation. 
Table 2. A summary of activities on how empirical data was collected 
 
Workshops 
Participants 
Recordings 
Facilitators 
Reflection-on-action 
Preparation 
meetings 
Workshop 
Outline 1 
Workshop 1 
4 patients 
1h:10m 
2 
Facilitators + clinical 
representatives 
3 
Workshop 
Outline 2 
Workshop 2 
Workshop3 
4 patients 
2 patients 
1h:10m 
2 
2 
Facilitators + clinical 
representatives 
2 
Workshop 
Outline 3 
Workshop 4 
Workshop 5 
2 patients + 3 staff 
5 patients + 5 staff 
1h:45m 
2 
2 
Facilitators 
2 
2 
65
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

We participated in the project as researchers pursuing our 
aim of investigating how to involve MACI patients in PD and 
designers to help the DCR to redesign the Goal-Plan.  
Different methods and techniques can be applied in PD 
projects to involve the users in design. In the PD handbook, 
Brandt, Binder, and Sanders [30] describe a set of techniques 
that emphasize different parts such as telling, making, and 
enacting or the possible combination of these. We decided to 
involve MACI patients in PD workshops as our method of 
investigation. Workshops give the possibility to evaluate 
different traits of user involvement in the design, thus giving 
us the possibility to explore more on MACI patients and how 
to conduct PD with them. In a workshop, several techniques 
can be combined. 
For redesigning the Goal-Plan project, we worked 
together with a project committee with representatives from 
the multidisciplinary team at the DCR. We prepared and 
conducted three workshops with a total of 10 participants.  All 
three workshops were audio recorded. Moreover, after the 
workshops, a reflection meeting was conducted between 
facilitators and clinical representatives to discuss the 
workshop and the participants' engagement. The first author 
kept notes from these meetings electronically.  
The second case is a continuation of the first case. The 
aim is to design a digital Goal-Plan that can be used by 
patients and staff in the process of defining rehabilitation 
goals and keeping track of the goals throughout the time that 
the patient is at the DCR. Thus, the digital tool would work 
as an enhancement or substitution of the current paper 
document. Two workshops with people with MACI, where a 
total of 7 patients and 7 multidisciplinary team members 
participated, were organized as part of the project.  
The authors of this paper were involved in the project as 
researchers and designers. Both authors worked in the 
preparation of the workshops. The first author was as well a 
facilitator in the workshops. Both workshops for this 
digitalization of the Goal-Plan project were audio-recorded, 
and the reflections from the workshops were as well audio 
recorded. A summary of the data collection is presented in 
Table 2.   
B. Analysis  
To analyze the experience of conducting PD with people 
with MACI, we build on Schön’s [79] approach of the 
reflective practitioner. Schön describes two types of 
reflections: 
Reflection-in-action is undertaken in the indeterminate 
zones of practice. The reflective practitioner “thinks up and 
tries out new actions intended to explore the newly observed 
phenomena, test tentative understandings of them, or affirm 
moves invented to change things for the better. What 
distinguishes reflection-in-action from other kinds of 
reflection is its immediate significance for action.” ([79, pp. 
28-29]). Referred to as a reflective conversation with the 
situation. 
Schön's use of the term reflection-on-action refers to the 
process of making sense of an action after it has occurred. It 
serves to extend one's knowledge base. 
The two PD projects described in Sections V and VI have 
involved both reflections in action and reflection-on-action. 
Some reflections for the first case (Section V) have already 
been presented in a previous publication [1]. Those 
reflections were made before the literature review. The 
reflections presented in this paper have been refined further 
due to the findings in the literature review.  
The analysis was conducted in two parts. Initially, for 
each of the cases, the authors, based on the experience of 
conducting PD with MACI patients, made a list of reflections 
on each of the workshops. The list of reflections for the three 
workshops in Case 1 started in June 2018 and was published 
in March 2019 [1]. However, we expanded the list of those 
reflections in January-February 2020, where additional 
elements of the workshops or the preparation phase were 
listed as reflections. For Case 2 and its two workshops, the 
list of reflections was made in February 2020. The reflections 
list is what Schön [79] defines as reflections-on action. The 
reflections on action presented in this paper are the ones from 
the perspective of the facilitator in the PD sessions and not 
through an evaluation of the sessions from the patients’ 
perspective.  
We present the reflections for each workshop outline 
because the same outline had mostly the same reflections. If 
there were different reflections among workshops in the same 
outline, we have made sure to capture and include it in the 
reflections by referring specifically to the workshop.  
The second part of the analysis was the refining of the 
reflections drawn on existing literature guidelines for 
conducting PD with people with cognitive impairments. The 
initial reflections list for each workshop outline was put in an 
excel sheet where each reflection was inserted in a different 
column. Instead, in the rows, we listed the guidelines found 
in the literature (as in Table 1). Figure 1, the under excel sheet, 
shows this part of the analysis. We started a qualitative 
“correlation 
analysis” 
based 
on 
reflections 
and 
interpretations. We initially went through the guidelines from 
the literature and analyzed which of our reflections from the 
empirical cases were compatible with specific guidelines 
found in the literature.  Some of the guidelines in Table 1. 
helped the authors reflect on topics we had taken for granted 
in the initial reflective analysis, leading to updates in our 
reflections’ lists.  
Moreover, a second round of reflective interpretative 
qualitative “correlation analysis” was undertaken. Again, we 
read through the guidelines from the literature and analyzed 
which of the reflections were compatible with them, leading 
to further refinements of the reflections list. 
In the third round, we started grouping our list of 
reflections based on the categories that we had in the 
guidelines from the literature in Table 1. These categories are 
borrowed from Hendriks, Truyen, and Duval [9], and are 
Preparation, Tools, Techniques, Facilitators, Participants, 
Analysis. We present the reflections for each workshop 
outline divided into each of these categories.  
In the fourth round of analysis, we created a new version 
of the excel file and created separate sheets for each of the 
categories, as shown in Figure 1, the top excel sheet. The 
reflective interpretative analysis in this phase led to a set of 
guidelines for conducting PD with MACI patients, emerging 
from the literature of PD guidelines with people with 
66
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

cognitive impairments and the experience of conducting PD 
with MACI patients in two projects. 
The correlation analysis was also influenced by the 
characteristics of cognition challenges that the MACI patients 
have and the suggestions coming from rehabilitation theories, 
as described in the “Cognitive Rehabilitation Manual” [23]. 
The final list of guidelines for conducting PD with MACI 
patients is included in this paper’s discussion. 
 
Figure 1. Visualization of the excel sheet used for the analysis and the 
smaller sheet of analysis for tools guidelines for conducting PD with 
MACI patients 
V. 
CASE 1: REDESIGNING THE GOAL-PLAN 
Above we presented the cognitive rehabilitation process 
in a hospital in Norway. The structure within the hospital, 
which is specialized in cognitive rehabilitation for patients 
with MACI, is the DCR. One of the primary working 
documents at the DCR, as explained above, is the Goal-Plan. 
Intending to empower the patient, the DCR wanted to 
redesign the layout of the document so it would fit more 
patients’ needs and consequently make the patients make 
more and better use of the document during their stay at the 
hospital. We will refer to this project in this paper as “the 
redesign project”. 
As stated above, the authors were involved in the project 
in the role of researchers and designers to investigate patients’ 
needs and, together with the patients, redesign a new version 
of the Goal-Plan that would fit those needs. Both authors 
worked in the preparation phase and the reflective analysis 
presented in this paper, and the first author participated and 
facilitated the workshops described below. 
In collaboration with a project committee with 
representatives from the multidisciplinary team at the DCR, 
we prepared and conducted three workshops with the patients.  
The title of the workshops was: Redesign the Goal-Plan: A 
patient’s perspective. The workshops aimed to get an 
understanding of what experience the patient has had with the 
Goal-Plan and discuss ideas on how to redesign that 
document so that patients can integrate it more in the activities 
during their rehabilitation period at the hospital.  
In total, ten patients participated. In the first two 
workshops, patients that had been at the hospital for more 
than a week were invited, so they were familiar with the 
document to be redesigned. Four patients participated in the 
first two workshops. In the last workshop, only two patients 
participated, who were back at the hospital for their follow-
up week, six months after their discharge. We were two 
facilitators – the first author in the role of facilitator and 
designer and as well one representative from the hospital who 
had an experience of working with this patient group but was 
not their direct therapist at the DCR. We refer to this second 
facilitator as a “knowledgeable third party” [1].   
Below we describe the preparation process for the 
workshops and present and reflect on two workshop outlines  
A. Preparation 
In the preparation phase, we collaborated with a 
multidisciplinary team at the DCR. This team was assigned 
as a leading committee for the project, and we refer to it in 
another publication as the multidisciplinary project 
committee.  
The committee was compounded by therapists who had 
high expertise in working with MACI patients. We refer to 
these people as “domain experts”.  
In order to facilitate the collaboration in the planning 
phase, prior to workshop 1, the first author conducted a PD 
workshop with the multidisciplinary project committee. The 
aim was to introduce the committee to some of the techniques 
used in PD and also for the first author in the role of researcher 
and designer to learn more about the user group. The 
workshop was initially seen with skepticism from the 
committee members, but once they understood the aim, they 
expressed that it was useful to learn about the PD approach 
and be able to contribute to “design” better workshops to 
enhance MACI patients’ engagement.   
Based on an agreement with the project committee and 
some shared editing iteration, the DCR staff members gave 
patients before the workshop a consent form, including an 
invitation to the workshop and a description of the project. 
The consent form was written in a very simple language to 
make it easier for the patient to follow. However, it was a 
detailed and consequently long description, to make sure that 
all the ethical issues were covered.  
The project committee members tried to recruit their 
patients, asking if they would be interested in participating in 
the project. The patients that showed interests were then 
presented with the project invitation and the consent form. 
We were aware that the description might be excessive for the 
patient and could make her/him neglect reading it carefully. 
To make sure that the patient understood the consent form, 
one of the staff members at DCR spent time with the patient 
(that had expressed the willingness to participate) before the 
workshop, going through the document, and provide further 
explanations where needed. The workshop time was included 
in the participant's weekly plan. This is a calendar document 
where all the activities of a patient at the hospital are listed. 
The participants said that listing the workshop in the calendar 
helped them remember.  
Regarding ethical concerns, we decided together with the 
committee that no personal patient data would be recorded. 
However, the sessions would be audio recorded so we could 
analyze the data later. The data collected through recordings 
are considered not anonymous (they are identifiable data), so 
they would be stored carefully in a safe location. In 
accordance with the project agreement, all digital data was 
stored in a personalized folder at the hospital servers.  
67
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

During the first workshop, we noticed that some patients 
did not have a clear idea of what they had committed and 
needed a reminder. Thus, before workshops 2 and 3 in the 
morning of the workshop day, the nurses at the DCR talked 
with the patients again, to make sure the patients understood 
the scope of the project and were reminded and more prepared 
for what they were participating in later in the day. This was 
especially useful for patients with memory problems. 
Moreover, we decided to conduct the workshops in 
environments that were familiar for the patients at the unit and 
would be adequate not to distract the patient and influence in 
their attention.   
B. Workshop Outline 1 
We organized Workshop 1 in two parts.  
The first part was “storytelling”. The title was “Sharing 
your experience”. We invited participants to talk about their 
experience with the Goal-Plan. Moreover, we provided 
participants a whiteboard with a print out of the old Goal-Plan 
was set in the middle and sticky notes in different colors. The 
patients could use those to write down keywords to facilitate 
remembering what they had to say when their turn would 
come. 
In the second part, we challenged participants to think, 
“How would they want their Goal-Plan to look like” and 
design the idea afterward. The technique chosen was drawing 
and discussion. 
For the second part, we removed the Goal-Plan and gave 
each of the participants a white sheet of paper, where they 
could design their ideal Goal-Plan.  
The first author led the session. The second facilitator was 
facilitating the communication with the patient when that was 
needed.   
C. Reflections-on-action 
In this subsection, we present a set of reflections-on-
action from workshop outline 1. Reflections are grouped 
based on the categories borrowed from Hendriks, Truyen, 
and Duval [9] and also used in Table 1 above. The reflections 
are presented as insights on best practices or problems we 
faced based on a look back on our experience while 
conducting PD with MACI patients. We refer to these 
reflections again in the discussion section when we analyze 
these reflections from a theoretical perspective and conclude 
with a set of guidelines for conducting PD with MACI 
patients. Numbering the reflections has no specific meaning, 
but it useful to refer to after in the discussion.  
Preparation 
• 
WO1_1 – Involving domain experts in planning the PD 
process for the MACI patients resulted in arranging a 
workshop which was enjoyable for the participants and 
provided the researchers with relevant information. 
Moreover, for a researcher or designer would be very 
difficult to gain deep knowledge of the patients’ needs 
in the timeframe of a project. Thus, having in the 
planning team, the domain experts facilitates having a 
broader perspective for the patient group and planning 
better.  
• 
WO1_2 – Having a PD introduction to the project 
committee compounded by domain experts helped the 
mutual learning and made the planning easy. We, as 
designers and researchers, learned more about the user 
group, their needs, and challenges. During the mutual 
learning period, the first author had in situ conversations 
with the domain experts about the patients and how to 
design with MACI patients. Relevant tips and literature 
were exchanged in the conversation. Moreover, the 
domain experts gained new knowledge about the PD 
techniques and gave more specific recommendations on 
the activities that could be adequate or not for the 
workshop participants.  
• 
WO1_3 – Explaining the consent form individually and 
verbally to the patients that had shown interest to 
participate in the workshop helped in increasing their 
understanding of the workshop's aim and how the data 
would be collected and stored. The lack of a verbal 
explanation would have caused one of the participants 
not to understand what was signing for. The person was 
diagnosed with dyslexia. 
• 
WO1_4 – The project committee facilitated the 
recruiting process. The patients were already in the 
hospital unit, so it was easier to invite them to participate. 
However, in order to establish a relationship with the 
hospital and receive permission to conduct research in 
the DCR, it was a long process. In this process, we had 
two significant gatekeepers that supported us.  
• 
WO1_5 – Planning was done well in advance, but the 
recruiting process was mostly done on a one week before 
notice. This because the persons invited were at the 
hospital, which was easily accessible for the authors. 
However, the process was limited in time because the 
persons would be patients at the hospital only for five 
weeks. Moreover, the domain experts suggested that 
even if recruited well in advance there is a risk that the 
patient might forget about the workshop date or in 
another scenario, the change in his/her condition from 
one week to another can influence them to drop the 
participation (some can feel too tired, not motivated, 
etc.).  
Tools 
• 
WO1_6 – Involving the DCR patients in a workshop at 
the hospital, which was a familiar environment for the 
patients, created an easy-going atmosphere. We used a 
room the patients had been in before for some of the 
activities at the hospital. Moreover, the room was easily 
accessible to everyone. 
• 
WO1_7 – We distributed the materials on the table. The 
participants liked to look through these carelessly 
distributed workshop materials on the table, but they did 
not use any of them. Any of the four participants did not 
embrace the unstructured and open way of presenting 
materials.  
Techniques 
• 
WO1_8 – The participants did not use the sticky notes at 
all in the first part. They instead expressed themselves 
verbally and shared their stories easily with the others—
three of the participants engaged in talking about their 
68
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

stories and their Goal-Plan in the first part. Instead, 
writing down in sticky notes, the main points in their 
story was difficult, and the participants seemed 
uncomfortable to do. Thus, the facilitators dropped the 
idea and instead investigated more through in situ 
questions. One of the participants was more reluctant to 
share his stories. After the workshop, we found that the 
participant's cognitive impairments had influenced his 
ability to articulate himself.   
• 
WO1_9 – The fear of white paper, the blank page 
syndrome [31][32], was made visible in the second half 
of the workshop. The participants were good at 
articulating their needs verbally, but they were not able 
to create a visual image of their needs and consequently 
design ideas. Participants received the white paper and 
felt uncomfortable to write something on it. Instead, they 
started telling the facilitators what they wanted to have in 
a new version of the Goal-Plan. Both facilitators, ones 
noticing the hesitation, immediately reacted and 
suggested the participants to not focus on the white paper 
but more telling us their ideas about a new Goal-Plan. All 
the participants received the white paper with them, and 
only one of the participants came back the next day with 
a design suggestion and talked personally to the first 
author. Joyce [33], in her dissertation, discusses the role 
of open options in creativity and finds how the openness 
of the design space can constrain creativity. That is what 
we experienced with the MACI patients. 
• 
WO1_10 – Realizing the hesitation on writing in the 
sticky notes and designing on the white paper, both 
facilitators abandoned the writing and drawing idea and 
started bringing up the questions of the workshop as 
discussion points to elicit ideas and needs from the 
patients. This flexibility toward the participants' needs 
and comfortability made it possible to end the workshop 
with some interesting data from the participants and, 
most importantly, have an enjoyable session for the 
participants, which expressed the enjoyment to the 
facilitators.    
• 
WO1_11 – The broad approach of the workshop was 
distracting for the participants. Opening the workshop by 
asking the participants to talk about their experience with 
the Goal-Plan resulted problematic. It made them focus 
more on their goals and their specific problems rather 
than the main project aim, the Goal-Plan layout. Noticing 
the distracting reaction that the initial more general 
questions about the Goal-Plan created, the facilitators 
started asking the participants more specifically about the 
Goal-Plan layout. This resulted in participants being 
more focused on the main aim of the workshop and 
giving feedback specifically for the issue at hand. In the 
planning phase, the domain experts warned facilitators 
about the patients’ willingness to tell their story and the 
possibility of getting distracted and get lost in detail. We 
experienced this with our participants. The presence of 
the second facilitator contributed in improving the 
communication and bringing the participants in focus.  
• 
WO1_12 – The participants had different MACI, which 
meant they had different cognitive challenges. This 
required that within the aim of the workshop to adapt to 
each of the participants' cognitive needs. We noticed that 
two of the participants were more focused on discussing 
personal goals than contributing to the layout of the 
document. Thus, to them, we started asking more specific 
questions with short, clear sentences. Instead, one 
participant was more reluctant to share his stories. Thus, 
we tried to ask indirect questions so the participant could 
start sharing some ideas, and also, we were careful not to 
push the participant out of the comfort zone. 
• 
WO1_13 – The aim of the project concerned the 
participants directly. Thus, they were interested in 
contributing as much as possible. One of them expressed 
that the contribution to designing a new Goal-Plan would 
help maybe not them directly but others after them in 
their rehabilitation. The same participant had discussed 
the workshop in the evening with the kin, and they had 
together designed something in the white paper.  
• 
WO1_14 – Building on the participants’ personal 
experience and opinion resulted in being a positive 
experience because the participants where used at the 
hospital to share their stories with different therapists. 
Moreover, talking about the Goal-Plan from their 
experience created an environment that was friendly and 
boosted the participants’ self-esteem as there was no 
right or wrong answer.  
• 
WO1_15 – A thorough review of the literature about the 
patients’ clinical condition as well as observing the 
patients in the unit, made clear that it is a very special 
user group. The committee suggested focusing on the 
patients’ abilities and how to strengthen those abilities 
during the workshops. The staff highlighted the patients’ 
willingness to share their stories and express themselves 
both through words and as visual imagery.  
• 
WO1_16 – Based on the committee expertise, the 
optimal workshop duration would be 1 hour, divided into 
two parts, each of 20-30 minutes with a 5-10-minute 
break in between. In this way, it would be possible to 
have the patient concentrated all the time without 
fatiguing him/her. This was the case during the first 
workshop. The activities in each part lasted enough to not 
be overwhelming for the participants. The participants 
seemed happy after the workshop.  
• 
WO1_17 – Creating a friendly environment with coffee 
and biscuits and long breaks was stated as a positive trait 
of the workshop from the participants. The had the 
possibility to talk more with each other and with the 
facilitators during the break. However, the participants 
knew each other from before as they had been involved 
in group therapies. This created a friendly relationship 
between them and, from our interpretation, influence 
positively during the workshop by boosting the 
participants’ willingness to share their opinions and 
experiences.  
Facilitators 
• 
WO1_18 – Having as a facilitator, a “knowledgeable 
third party” improved the communication process for 
those participants whose communication ability was 
affected by brain injury. Discussing the issue of 
facilitators with members of the committee, we 
69
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

considered an extension of the workshop team by 
someone from the clinical side that knows how to work 
with the patient group but is not directly involved with 
the participating patients. The committee suggested a 
member from the Learning and Mastering Center at the 
hospital, which was specialized in providing patients 
with a deeper insight regarding their health. The member 
might have met the patients during other activities 
around the hospital but was not part of the DCR staff and 
not directly involved with the patients. The involvement 
of a person that fulfills this requirement as a facilitator in 
the workshop was very useful in smoothing the 
communication 
and 
boosting 
the 
participants' 
contribution.   
• 
WO1_19 – Facilitator’s challenges of not being fluent in 
the Norwegian language created a fun atmosphere that 
helped the participants to feel at ease and not be shy to 
highlight their challenges. Moreover, as a facilitator 
keeping up with a positive and humble attitude helped 
the facilitators to communicate with the participants 
better. Facilitators were speaking on a slow tempo and 
not in a feeling of rush. Moreover, facilitators used a 
simple language and showed respect for the participants' 
knowledge and experience with their situation.  
• 
WO1_20 – The broad approach of the workshop 
diminished the direct participants' contribution to the 
design of the Goal-Plan document. Thus, the facilitators 
had to intervene to help the participants get back on track 
and focus them on the aim of the workshop.  
Participants 
• 
WO1_21 – The number of facilitators should balance the 
number of participants. We decided that two facilitators 
(the first author having design skills and the 
knowledgeable third-party having domain knowledge) 
would be sufficient in a workshop with four participants. 
This saved the balance during the workshop. The 
participants were in the majority, so they were not put in 
the spotlight, which could have created stress. However, 
having one leading facilitator helped to keep the focus in 
one direction. 
• 
WO1_22 – The committee suggested that the maximum 
number of participants per workshop should be around 4 
or 5. In this way, the participants would feel more 
comfortable and have the right space to share their stories 
and opinions. Indeed, that worked well in workshop 1 
with the four participants. Each of the participants had a 
dedicated time to express her/himself.  
• 
WO1_23 - Recruiting MACI patients at the hospital 
through domain experts made the process of recruitment 
easy. Moreover, the domain experts served as the 
gatekeepers for involving in the workshops MACI 
patients based on the standardized tests that the patient 
has had at the hospital. 
Analysis 
• 
WO1_24 – We conducted a reflective analysis with the 
two facilitators and representatives from the DCR. 
Analyzing the findings in an interdisciplinary group 
helped in making a better sense of the participants’ 
behavior during the workshop (reflected in this paper) 
and their feedback (integrated into the new Goal-Plan 
design). The assessment of the participants at the hospital 
and knowing their diagnosis was useful in triangulating 
the findings and make out meaning from them.  
After the first workshop with workshop outline 1, we 
reflected on the things that did not work perfectly during the 
workshop, and we made another plan for the next workshop. 
This leads us to workshop outline 2.  
D. Workshop Outline 2 
The workshop was organized as an updated version of a 
future workshop, as presented by Jungk and Müllert [80]. 
Future workshops have been widely used in PD. The aim is 
to make people critically discuss a current situation and then 
envision possible improvements for the issues critiqued in a 
fantasy phase. After a phase of envisioning any solution, it 
comes to the realization phase. In the realization phase, 
feasible solutions based on what the technology allows are 
discussed further. We ideated an updated version of the future 
workshop, as presented below.  
The workshop was divided into three parts.  
In the first part, the participants got a version of the old 
Goal-Plan printed out. Next, to each of the fields in the 
document, we added two icons, thumb up and down. We 
asked the participants to mark with thumb up those fields that 
they considered important for their rehabilitation. After 
choosing to thumb up or down, the participants were asked to 
share their choices with the others and tell a little bit why they 
decided so. The aim was that the participants could discuss 
the choices among each other and maybe build on the ideas 
of each other. To structure the discussion, the knowledgeable 
third-party facilitator started going from one field to another 
and asking participants for their choice. Thus, it made it easier 
for the participants to follow and contribute to the discussion.  
In the second part, the participants were asked to try to 
rewrite the fields (words used in the document) that they 
found important, in a way that they thought would be easier 
to understand and read. The participants were suggested to 
add additional fields if they thought they would be important 
in the Goal-Plan. Again, they had to work initially on their 
own and then present their suggestions to others. The other 
participants could ask questions or comment. The facilitators 
asked questions to enable the participants to articulate more 
of their needs and sometimes ask questions to understand 
better what the participant meant, to not risk misinterpretation 
during analysis. 
The third part was called “rearrange”. In this part, the 
participants were asked to rearrange the fields of the 
document which they had selected and rewritten in the first 
two parts. They could arrange the document as they wanted, 
add new fields or, change the structure of the document. At 
this point, participants could use the template of the old Goal-
Plan or get a white sheet and design on it individually. 
Colored sticky notes and pens were provided.    
In the third part, the participants were also provided with 
some examples of designs made by the multidisciplinary 
project committee in the workshop with the designer. 
Participants could have a look at those sketches for a short 
70
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

period for inspiration. This exemplars' aim was to help 
participants surpass the white page syndrome.  
The same workshop format was used in the third 
workshop, where two patients that came back for a follow-
up week participated. The only change was that in order to 
customize the discussion for these two participants and adapt 
to their experience, we focused mostly during the workshop 
on how the continuity of the rehabilitation plan could be 
achieved when the patient leaves the hospital.  
E. Reflections-on-action 
In this subsection, we present a set of reflections-on-
action from workshop outline 2. Reflections are grouped 
based on the categories borrowed from Hendriks, Truyen, 
and Duval [9] and also used in Table 1 above. Here we do 
not have any reflections in the category “Analysis”, so this 
category is not included below. The reflections are presented 
as insights on best practices or problems we faced based on 
a look back on our experience while doing workshops 2 and 
3 with MACI patients. Here we include only reflections that 
were additional in workshop outline 2. The reflections from 
workshop outline 1 had already been taken into consideration 
before planning workshop outline 2.  
Preparation 
• 
WO2_1 – In workshop 2, we found that repeating the 
information about the workshop and the participation for 
the patients that had committed to participate and were 
suffering from memory problems resulted in them being 
more focused during the workshop and more prepared on 
what they were going to discuss. The nurse, as in 
workshop 1, had a meeting with the prospective 
participants to help them understand the consent form. In 
addition, the nurse talked again with the patients in the 
morning before the workshop to remind them about the 
workshop. This brought a more engaged and wider 
feedback from the participants during the workshops. 
Tools 
• 
WO2_2 – Distributing the sticky notes and the colored 
pens in an organized way in each of the parts of the 
workshop was noted to stimulate the participants to 
engage with the tools. They did not have the hesitation to 
chose among the tools because they had a structured set 
of tools for each part of the workshop.   
• 
WO2_3 – Having the Goal-Plan in a printed version in 
front of each of the participants individually as part of the 
workshop toolkit, helped them be more engaged with it. 
Participants could customize the printed piece of paper 
as they wished – they owned it. Moreover, using the 
workshop 
tools 
to 
collect 
data facilitated 
the 
interpretations. For example, we could count how many 
thumbs up or down were related to a field in the Goal-
Plan. 
Techniques 
• WO2_4 – We implemented a task-oriented approach in 
the workshop. Each of the parts was framed as a clear task 
that would serve a specific purpose. Participants liked this 
approach. They engaged in significant discussions with 
each other and the facilitators. Moreover, they started 
building on the ideas of each other. If someone brought 
up a new idea that would also trigger a discussion among 
other participants.  
• WO2_5 – We observed aiding the participants through 
specific cues such as marking thumb up and thumb down 
in the Goal-Plan, made it easier for them to starts the 
discussion and elicit their ideas. The usage of thumbs up 
and down was associated with more personal stories and 
individual opinions about why a specific field in the 
document was relevant or not.  So, having a structured 
way where to start the discussion was useful in helping the 
patients to build up ideas and relate those to personal 
experiences. The cues included in the tasks facilitated 
participants’ ideas and discussion. This created the 
opportunity for the facilitators to ask more questions to 
elucidate the meaning of participants’ ideas.   
• WO2_6 – Having a narrower scope of the PD session 
helped participants to stay focused and contribute 
significantly. While these reflections are not new, they 
appear very important in the case of patients with MACI.  
• WO2_7 – In the critique phase of the future workshop, we 
did not organize a real critique session. Instated, we asked 
what the participants liked and what the participants 
thought needed to be improved further in the current Goal-
Plan.  Providing both the thumb up and down options 
enabled the patient to think that some things need to be 
improved, but at the same time, that there are other things 
that are extremely relevant and need to be preserved. This 
was useful to keep participants’ good feelings and not 
expose them toward a negative mindset. Thus, 
considering ways of using positive rhetoric that can 
elucidate a critical perspective from the MACI patients in 
workshops is very relevant. 
• WO2_8 – The second part of the future workshop is the 
fantasy phase. It was clear from the first workshop that the 
MACI patients could not produce much information while 
moving directly to the fantasy phase (hesitation of the 
white paper). Thus, before jumping to the fantasy phase, 
we introduced a transition phase by asking participants to 
rewrite some of the fields in the Goal-Plan that they 
thought could have been written better for them. 
Rewriting aided participants to start envisioning a better 
solution for the Goal-Plan but still be connected to the 
things that they knew, meaning to the Goal-Plan that they 
had seen many times. In another publication [1], we refer 
to this as “the teaser of future envisioning”. The teaser is 
a simple known task that helped participants in 
transitioning toward the fantasy phase of the workshop 
and be able to design a new version of the Goal-Plan either 
by rearranging the old one or by designing in a white 
paper. The white paper syndrome was defeated, and 
participants could come up with design suggestions for a 
new version of the Goal-Plan.  Figure 2 shows some of 
these design suggestions provided by patients. 
71
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

• WO2_9 – The use of exemplars in the “rearrange” part of 
the workshop, might lead and influence participants’ 
ideas. We were skeptical about the usage of these 
exemplars, but we wanted to observe what their influence 
could be and how the patients would react toward that. 
However, screening participants’ designs did not reveal a 
noticeable influence from the exemplars presented. Based 
on our reflective analysis the reason the exemplars did not 
influence the design ideas was that they were presented to 
participants in the last part of the workshop, and 
participants had already built up a mental vision of their 
Goal-Plan in the previous phases. Moreover, we exposed 
the exemplars only for a short period and explained that 
they were supposed to be triggers for possible options of 
how a Goal-Plan could look like. Integrating exemplars 
was inspired by research through design and Gaver’s 
work with the ludic design [81][82][83]. Looking at the 
amateur designs from the staff inspired MACI patients 
participating in the workshops to get the colored pens and 
sticky notes, and start designing, overcoming the fear of 
the white paper. However, this is a very delicate usage, 
and more investigation is needed. 
 
Figure 2. Workshop 2 - Patient's design suggestion 
Facilitators 
• WO2_10 – Providing structure and review helped 
participants to give more ideas and articulate their 
thoughts more deeply. The knowledge third party going 
from one field of the Goal-Plan to another to ask if the 
participants had marked that with thumb up and down 
facilitated the initiation of the discussion among 
participants. Moreover, asking additional questions 
helped participants to express their ideas better. 
Participants 
• WO2_11 – In the third workshop, the two participants 
were of different natures. One of them was more 
expressive, and the other more reserved. Hence, the 
facilitator had to make sure that both were getting the 
same time and attention by providing the same time and 
attention to both participants.  
• WO2_12 – Participants with different backgrounds but 
similar cognition levels seemed to work better with each 
other. This was noticed, especially in workshop 2. The 
four participants had different MACI but more or less 
similar functional level. This helped in keeping up at the 
same speed and feeling motivated by each other.  
• WO2_13 – We noticed that participants were comfortable 
with the group work. They were used in working in 
groups, from previous group therapies at the hospital. 
Many showed during the workshop confidence point to 
another patient on things they thought were similar. 
Moreover, we noticed that some participants who had 
different ideas from the group felt confident enough to 
share them with others. Especially if the idea they had was 
related to a story in their life. However, the situation was 
different in workshop 3 when one of the participants was 
perceived as influencing the ideas of the other. Facilitators 
had to intervene through more strategic questions to 
retrieved more hidden ideas. A helpful thing was that each 
of the participants had to work initially on their own and 
then discuss with the others in the group in its own turn. 
This helped in preserving the individuality of opinions.  
• WO2_14 – Participants that were present in workshops 2 
and 3 had a milder ACI (acquired cognitive impairments). 
Thus, they could contribute better in giving feedback on 
design details as well. 
VI. 
CASE 2: DESIGNING A DIGITAL GOAL-PLAN 
In June 2019, as a joint collaboration among our research 
institution and the DCR of the rehabilitation hospital, we 
started “The interactive Goal-Plan” project. The project aims 
to develop a digital version of the Goal-Plan, which can 
support the patients to take more control over their 
rehabilitation at the hospital and outside it. We will refer to 
this project in this paper as “the digitalization project”.  
 
Figure 3. Participants working in pairs patient-therapist during workshop 5 
The aim of supporting the patient to take more control 
over her/his rehabilitation starts with the patients deciding 
themselves what they would like to have in a technological 
tool designed for them. This philosophy of the hospital is 
compatible with the PD principles. Thus, a PD process started 
in January 2020, where the authors of this paper in the role of 
researcher and designers were involved in two PD workshops 
organized respectively 22nd of January and 5th of February 
2020 at the rehabilitation hospital premises with patients with 
MACIs and staff from the DCR. These workshops will be 
described below. 
72
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A. Preparation 
In this project, a multidisciplinary project committee was 
created again. The first author in the role of the designer and 
researcher worked in close collaboration with few 
representatives from the DCR. One member of the DCR, 
which was involved directly with the patients, was in charge 
of the recruitment and deciding on a venue and time suitable 
for all. The planning of the workshops was done in 
collaboration among the authors of this paper and an 
Occupational Therapist (OT) that had been working at the 
DCR before but was now in other duties at the hospital. This 
person had been a crucial person in the first case described 
above. Thus, she had created knowledge about the design 
process and the PD principles previously. As she was not 
directly involved with the patients but had high expertise in 
working 
with 
the 
patients, 
she 
represented 
the 
“knowledgeable third party” in this project. A more elaborate 
plan was made considering the experience of the facilitators 
and the lessons learned from the first case.  
For workshop 4, the plan was to recruit 5 patients. 
However, only two patients responded positively to the 
invitation. The workshop was planned to have a room that 
could support groups working in pairs, but the room available 
had only one single long table. We needed to be flexible to 
the positioning of the participants, so not much noise was 
created and distract the patients. Workshop 5 was planned for 
the 29th of January, but we needed to postpone it due to a 
small number of patients willing to participate. Workshop 5 
was organized in a room called the “Idea Lab” suitable for 
bigger group workshops.  
Participants in this case workshops were patients and 
DCR staff members. Hence, we prepared two invitations and 
consent forms in order to make the call more personalized. 
The consent forms this time were shorter and more precise. It 
had a clear part highlighted in colors where the aim of the 
workshop and each of its parts were presented. This was 
followed by a description of how the data collected would be 
handled. The one-page invitation resulted in being easier for 
the patients to read through and understand. The 
“knowledgeable third party” mentioned above contributed 
substantially to writing the consent form. Moreover, together 
with the designer (first author), they drafted the workshop 
description and presentation. The presentation was planned to 
stay on the screen, and the written material was distributed to 
the participants as a cue for understanding better the tasks in 
each of the parts. 
B. Workshop Outline 3 
In workshop 4, two patients and three therapists from the 
DCR participated. The workshop was called “My Interactive 
Goal-Plan – Defining goals”, and the aim was to envision and 
discuss requirements for a digital tool that can support the 
patients to be more involved in setting their rehabilitation 
goals during their first week at the hospital. The workshop 
was planned to have three parts. The duration of the workshop 
was planned for 1.5 hours, with each part having 25 min and 
10 min break between parts. We ended doing only the first 
two parts in 1.5 hours because more general preparations took 
time, such as sitting in the right place, explaining the tasks, 
and showing examples.  
The first part consisted of a set of cue cards with possible 
functionalities for a digital Goal-Plan. Each of the patients' 
participants had a set of cue cards in different colors. The 
participants had to read the cue cards individually and chose 
among the set of cue cards, those cards that involved 
functionalities that they liked. There were no limitations in 
the number of cards to choose from. Participants were also 
given empty cards so they could add more functionalities if 
they wanted.  
As a second task of the first part, participants were asked 
to choose the five most favorite cue cards. These five cards 
should be presented later to the other participants in the 
workshop. After presenting the five cards chosen to the other 
participants and telling them why the person thought the card 
was relevant, all participants had to discuss in the group and 
agree on a set of five cards that all thought were the most 
important functionalities to have in a digital Goal-Plan that 
could support them in defining their rehabilitation goals. In 
the workshop in parallel with the patients' table, we had a 
table of therapists (staff members) from the DCR doing the 
same tasks. The set of cue cards that they had was targeted to 
therapists needed and desired functionalities in a digital Goal-
Plan that could support their work in facilitating patient’s 
rehabilitation.  
 
The second part of the workshop required each of the 
patient participants to work in pairs with one from the 
therapists. The task the duo patient-therapist had was to make 
a story. The story would be on how the digital tool, which had 
the functionalities the patients and therapists had concluded 
in the first part as the most desirable ones, would be 
implemented in the processes at the DCR.  
A paper storyboard was given to each of the pairs. The 
storyboard was divided into three parts to help the patient and 
the therapist to think about the activities the patient does 
alone, or activities the therapist does alone or activities they 
do together. A set of animated pictures picturing an animated 
fictional patient in specific moments at the hospital, home, or 
at the outpatient clinic was provided to the patient and the 
therapist as facilitating cues to make possible the creation of 
the storyboard. Facilitators told that if participants wanted, 
they could as well draw, or in case that they wanted to 
represent some functionalities of the digital tool, they could 
Figure 4. Storyboard created from one of the patient-therapist teams in 
workshop 5 
73
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

just paste in the storyboard one of the cue cards of the first 
session.  
The last task was to provide the patient and staff with 
some choice of technology layouts such as phone, tablet, PC, 
and some cut out of possible icons and ask them to try to 
design the interface of the digital solution. However, the time 
spent in the first two parts did not create the opportunity for 
doing the last part, so we dropped the idea.  
In the workshop, two facilitators participated - the first 
author and the “knowledgeable third party”. Differently from 
the first case, the “knowledge third party” in this case was not 
only facilitating the communication but was as well in charge 
of leading specific sessions together with the first author - 
designer. The patient workshop was facilitated by the 
knowledge third party and the staff workshop by the first 
author. In the second part, each of the facilitators had to lead 
one of the pairs workshops, sitting on the two opposite 
corners of the table. We had one therapist more participating 
in the workshop. Hence, one of the therapists in the second 
part worked on the tasks alone in order to not shake the 
balance in the pair’s groups.  
Workshop 5 had the same outline. This time knowing the 
limitation in time, we scheduled only the first two parts of the 
workshop and gave time to other practicalities. The workshop 
was called “My Interactive Goal-Plan – Owning my 
rehabilitation”. The workshop aimed to discuss how a digital 
tool can contribute to support the patient to be more in control 
and involved in her/his rehabilitation process after the patient 
has defined the goals. 5 patients and 5 therapists from the 
Sunnaas DCR participated. Two facilitators participated. A 
third person was involved in supporting materials distribution 
and making sure that everything was in place while the two 
facilitators were leading the sessions.  
C. Reflections-on-action 
In this subsection, we present a set of reflections-on-
action from workshop outline 3. Reflections are grouped 
based on the categories borrowed from Hendriks, Truyen, 
and Duval [9] and also used in Table 1 above. The reflections 
are presented as insights on best practices or problems we 
faced based on a look back on our experience while 
conducting PD with MACI patients. Here we include only 
reflections that were additional in workshop outline 3. The 
reflections from workshop outline 1 and 2 have already been 
taken into consideration before planning workshop outline 3. 
The following reflections are focused only on the MACI 
patients. Even though the DCR staff members participated in 
the workshops together with the patients, their involvement 
in the process is out of the scope of this paper.  
Preparation 
• 
WO3_1 – Dividing the tasks of reDCRitment and 
planning as described above helped in doing better 
planning because more time was dedicated to discussing 
the workshop outline and refining how the tasks in each 
part would be represented. Moreover, the person in 
charge of reDCRiting had more time available to 
dedicate to explain to the patients that had expressed 
their will to join the workshop, the aim of the workshop, 
and why their participation would be relevant.     
• 
WO3_2 – The involvement of a knowledgeable third 
party in the planning of the workshops was relevant for 
formulating better the workshop aim considering her 
expertise in the patients’ group and the process of 
rehabilitation. Moreover, her engagement helped in 
formulating better invitation and workshop description 
that was suitable for the MACI patients and their 
challenges in communication.  
Tools 
• WO3_3 – Adding a written material given to participants 
during the workshop facilitated the information 
processing for them. Participants that had difficulties in 
understanding the requirements in each part of the 
workshop read what the task was about in the material 
written as a manual step by step with clear bullet points. 
The printed material helped them stay focused and have 
a higher level of understanding of the tasks.  
• WO3_4 – Having short sentences and in a simple 
language suitable for the participants improved 
understanding and engagement. Moreover, the material 
was given in Norwegian. This helped the patient 
understanding and reduced the level of fatigue that 
speaking and reading on a foreign language can require. 
• WO3_5 – Using low fidelity tools like the paper printouts 
in cue cards or in the animated images made it easier for 
the MACI patients to contribute to the workshop. The 
paper tools provided participants with the possibility to 
rewrite and move around based on their needs. Moreover, 
there was no fear that a card or a visual image was 
destroyed as we had a bunch of extra print outs ready to 
be distributed on needs. 
Techniques 
• WO3_6 – Cue cards facilitated the process of envisioning 
a future solution. The patient could agree or not with the 
hints mentioned in the cue cards. Sometimes an 
explanation of the cue cards information was needed. In 
that case, the facilitator would tell a little bit more on 
what was the aim behind those cards. Having initial cues 
helped to bring on participants' attention things that they 
might have forgotten on their own. Moreover, working 
on the cards and refining the ideas of the cards was 
expressed from the participants to be easier than having 
to initiate the thoughts themselves.  
• WO3_7 – The openness of the cue cards gave the 
possibility to the patients to add their personal 
experiences. Some of the participants gave the cards 
other meanings based on their understanding and will. 
Thus, having cue cards not too detailed opened the 
opportunity for the participants to not just agree with the 
cues but be able to customize them, as shown in Figure 
5.  
• WO3_8 – Participants expressed that they found the 
project relevant and interesting for them and for other 
patients with MACIs in need or rehabilitation. This was 
74
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the main reason they had committed to participate. 
Moreover, as stated above, most MACI patients are still 
working, and they are familiar with the notion of 
workshops. One of the participants was working on 
service design and was very familiar with the techniques 
used.  
• WO3_9 – During workshop four, considering the time 
spent on the previous tasks, both facilitators agreed to 
drop the third part of the workshop. After the workshop, 
both facilitators expressed that the participants needed a 
long time to read the cue cards and discussing them. This 
had created a delay in the previous tasks. Moreover, both 
facilitators noticed during the workshop, that the tempo 
of information processing was slower for some 
participants. Thus, providing them with the time they 
need is relevant to take into consideration. 
• WO3_10 – In the second part of the workshops, we had 
created a fictional character for the storyboard. In both 
workshops, we saw that patients’ participants were not 
influenced by this fictional character that we called 
“Anna”. They quite often referred to this character as 
“me” – “I am the one in the story”. 
• WO3_11 – The second part of the workshop outline was 
more demanding than the first one. Participants had to 
discuss on the cue cards, make sense of them together 
(patient and therapist) and then make a story. These tasks 
put a high burden on cognition. However, the usage of 
the visual cues in the animated form facilitated the 
envisioning of the future solutions made more concrete 
in the case of the storyboard. The visual images enhanced 
creativity and sparked ideas for the story. Patient 
participants and therapists enjoyed having the visual cues 
and, as in the case of cue cards, took the freedom to 
interpret these visual images as they wished.  Moreover, 
in this part, we introduced participants with an example 
of the storyboard created by the facilitators. Participants 
had the exemplar as inspiration and did not look at it in 
detail. However, the exemplar helped them envision what 
they had to do in the task.  
• WO3_12 – Structuring the storyboard and how to build 
the story helped in making an abstract idea more concrete 
and the story more approachable for the participants, both 
patients, and therapists. The duo patient-therapist could 
divide the activities as instructed in the storyboard. 
Moreover, the structured way of creating the storyboard 
served for initiating a discussion on what activities the 
patients would like or should do alone and as well in 
which activities during their rehabilitation they can or 
should interact with the therapist. The structured way of 
thinking, and building the storyboard facilitated the 
patients’ contribution to the workshop.  
Facilitators 
• 
WO3_13 – Coordinating 5 patient participants and 5 
therapists as participants required more than two 
facilitators. In workshop 4, the facilitators had the 
possibility to sit with the therapist and the patient 
individually and try to ask in-situ questions when 
needed. Instead, in workshop 5, both facilitators were 
moving among groups but were not constantly present 
while the groups were working. Momentos, in which 
more investigative questions could have been asked, 
were lost. These were only realized afterward when 
hearing the recording.  
Participants 
• WO3_14 – One patient participant in workshop 4 was 
tired at the end of the workshop. Instead, all the 5 patient 
participants in workshop 5 stayed overtime and seemed 
to enjoy the tasks. From this, we want to highlight that 
MACI patients capacity variates, and in order to involve 
everyone and not risk tiring the participants, either 
participant with the same capacity should be grouped 
together in workshops, or we should design the workshop 
based on the capacity of the most fragile participant. This 
can be established before the workshop while knowing 
the participants' clinical condition. 
• WO3_15 – The patients and the therapists participating 
in the workshops had a good collaboration. They both 
collaborated into making the story. Some patients 
initially struggled in the understating, but the respective 
therapists supported them by explaining the task so the 
patients could contribute significantly. The involvement 
of the staff members as participants in the workshop was 
not to ask them what the patients need in a digital Goal-
Plan (the patients can speak for themselves) but to ask 
them about their share in the digital solution. Sitting a 
patient and a therapist together in designing a shared 
digital solution that will be used by them is not a common 
practice. Thus, in a future publication, we will expand 
more on how the collaboration in a PD workshop worked 
between these two user groups.  
Analysis 
• 
WO3_16 – Both facilitators conducted a fast round of 
reflections-on-action after each of the workshops. 
Facilitators discussed their individual and common 
impressions about the workshop and highlighted strong 
points and downsides in each of the sessions that they 
were in charge. This was audio recorded for future 
analysis and reflections. Those immediate reflections-
on-action were very helpful in refining the list of 
reflections presented in this paper because the 
immediate reflections captured feelings and perceptions, 
which usually are lost when data is analyzed later in 
time.  
VII. 
DISCUSSION 
In this subsection, we discuss the findings from the 
reflective analysis from the literature review perspective. We 
conclude with a list of guidelines for working with people 
with MACIs for each of the categories initially introduced by  
Hendriks, Truyen, and Duval [9].  
75
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A. Preparation 
In our experience, the preparation phase was conducted in 
close collaboration with domain experts. Thus, the experience 
that we describe is seen from the perspective of involving 
domain experts and people experienced with specific patient 
groups for planning the PD process. The literature 
recommends getting the consent of the participants at various 
moments throughout the research process [8]. Our 
participants did not participate for an extended period in the 
research. In our workshops, we experienced that the consent 
prior to the workshop was sufficient. Nevertheless, 
throughout the workshop, both facilitators were closely 
observing the participants for signs of fatigue or irritation and 
informally getting approval that the process was going well 
for each of the participants. An important insight from our 
study was the need to provide the information described in the 
invitation and consent form in different forms (verbal, visual, 
etc.)  to the participants and repeat the informing process 
many times to ensure that the information is processed, and 
the person is aware of what s/he is committing to (WO1_3, 
WO2_1).  
Another guideline from the literature is to communicate 
about the project goals without intermediaries [9] (DG_PP2).  
In our two cases, the domain experts communicated the 
project goal to prospective participants. Further, during the 
workshop, the facilitators repeated the project goal as a 
precaution to assure that all participants were aware about 
what they were contributing to. When the intermediaries are 
people that have knowledge about the cognition challenges of 
the patient group and are experienced and trained in 
communicating with them, the intermediaries can be an asset 
in establishing the communication with the prospect 
participants and explaining the project goals (WO1_3, 
WO2_1).  
Moreover, in analogy to the literature (DG_PP3), we 
experienced that there was a need to establish an extra time 
for general practicalities [9]. However, this time could be 
managed better if the preparation phase was handled by a 
group of people who are part of the PD project. Dividing the 
recruiting and planning process among different persons 
created more space for ideating better the workshops in 
workshop outline 3 and as well manage better the recruiting 
process (WO3_1). The literature states that it is relevant to 
know the target group well [9][41][42] (DG_PP4), know the 
patients' deficits so you can adapt to their situation. For 
researchers and designers, a higher understanding of the 
MACI patients' cognition challenges can come due to the 
close collaboration with the domain experts – the 
rehabilitation specialists working with MACI patients in 
cognitive rehabilitation. They have deep knowledge about the 
patient group and can contribute to informing designers. 
However, PD requires mutual learning and applying this 
perspective to teach domain experts how designers work can 
help them provide more knowledge about the patient group 
(WO1_1). In our case, the selection of the participants was 
made through the clinic. Assessing abilities through 
standardized tests [9][4][43] (DG_PP5) was helpful in 
defining the patients' abilities and disabilities, and for us to 
plan adequately. They were also useful in the analysis. Ability 
assessment was not done by the designer but by the healthcare 
practitioners.  
The literature states that it is beneficial to plan and 
reDCRit participants well in advance (DG_PP6). In the case 
of MACI patients, we experience that planning well in 
advance is recommended, especially when the designer 
leading the PD project is new to working with MACI patients 
and need to learn more about the patients’ needs and situation 
from the healthcare practitioners. However, the reDCRiting 
process was done over a short period. This because patients 
do not stay at the hospital long, and some of them can forget 
about participation in the workshop if they were reDCRited 
well in advance. Moreover, patients’ condition varies from 
one day to another (WO1_5). Thus, planning for absent 
patients is required. 
In the preparation phase, we finalized these guidelines for 
conducting PD with MACI people: 
1. Invite the patients and present the information regarding 
the project in different ways, either text, verbal 
explanations, images, audio, etc. and make sure to repeat 
the 
information 
several 
times 
during 
the 
workshops/activities based on the participants' needs. 
2. Benefit from the knowledge of domain experts (in this 
case, the rehabilitation specialists) to recruit and convey 
the information about the project. They know how to 
work with MACI people. 
3. Plan the PD workshops in collaboration with a 
multidisciplinary group. Establish mutual learning and 
make better preparation for the PD process by benefiting 
from the expertise of everyone. 
4. Plan the project well in advance and recruit in a short 
time. Prepare for absences. 
B. Tools 
The literature emphasizes the need to involve users in 
design in appropriate and familiar environments, which take 
into consideration the deficits of the participants [9][45] 
[46][47] (DG_T1). The same is true for MACI patients. The 
hospital environment was familiar, and the participants had 
previously been in the areas where the workshops took place 
(WO1_6). Moreover, these areas at the hospital are designed 
to offer easy accessibility for everyone. Another important 
element mentioned in the literature is to adapt the language to 
the participants (DG_T2). In the case of MACI patients, this 
is extremely relevant. Our reflections from the workshops 
(WO3_4) and existing literature [19][20] show the 
importance of using short sentences and an understandable 
language when addressing MACI patients.  
Regarding tools used during workshops as supporting 
materials for techniques, we found that sometimes using text 
might be a problem, and it can be more useful to make use of 
non-verbal elements such as visual stimuli like photos of 
objects or use physical artifacts [9][50][51][52][53][54]. In 
our empirical data, we found that having the Goal-Plan in a 
printed version served as a stimulus for the participants 
(W02_3). Moreover, we experienced that MACI patients felt 
more motivated to use workshop tools if these tools were 
individualized. The MACI patients worked well in 
76
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

manipulating the tools provided initially individually and then 
sharing the outcome with others.  
We did not use contextual cues such as nametags as it has 
been proposed in the literature [9] (DG_T4). This because the 
participants coming to the workshops knew each other from 
before.  
In our experience, using low fidelity tools part of the 
workshop toolkit made it easier for the participants to 
contribute. However, we lack experience with digital toolkits, 
and further investigation of conducting PD building on digital 
toolkits is needed. Despite our lack of experience with digital 
toolkits, we argue that being aware and considering the 
fidelity of the toolkit [4] used in a PD project should be a 
priority.  This should be carefully considered with regard to 
patients' abilities tested through standardized tests.  
Finally, in WO1_7 and WO2_2, we highlight how the 
structuring of the tools became relevant for motivating 
participants' contributions to the workshops. This is 
compatible with the rehabilitation theories for building 
structure in remembering things and focus attention [25] and 
should be taken into consideration when presenting PD tools 
in workshops.   
Regarding tools, we have the following guidelines for 
conducting PD with MACI people: 
1. Involve users in a familiar environment  
2. Use distinctive contextual cues in the toolkit materials  
3. Consider the fidelity of the tools in relation to patient-
specific cognitive challenges 
4. Use a simple language with a positive tone  
5. Use visual stimuli which are individually targeted  
6. Have clear tools for each part of the workshop and have 
a structured way of delivering the tools.  
C. Techniques 
Having clear guidelines and techniques for conducting PD 
with 
MACI 
patients 
that 
involves 
a 
significantly 
heterogeneous group is difficult. Moreover, techniques can 
variate based on the technology to be designed. This may put 
other requirements in place. Here we highlighted insights 
from our experience within the two projects and five 
workshops, and we invite other researchers working with 
MACI patients to refine and supplement the list.  
People with cognitive impairments find it challenging to 
envisioning future solutions [2][9][42][44][48][54]. In the 
literature, different ways of supporting the envisioning of 
future solutions are proposed (listed in DG_M1).  
In our work with  MACI patients, we have found that a 
task-oriented approach of activities (WO2_4) and narrow 
scoping of a session (WO2_6) can help the patient to process 
a line of information at once and to be able to envision more 
future usage of the solutions. The fear of using the white paper 
showed the challenge that MACI people have in envisioning 
a future solution and how the fantasy ability can be 
undermined when too many options are presented. Thus, as 
stated in the literature, trying to avoid appealing to the person 
fantasy and avoid too much choice [8] is adaptable for the 
MACI patients as well.  
A relevant finding influencing the future envisioning is 
what we called the “teaser of future envisioning” (WO2_8) in 
the workshop outline 2. The aim is not to ask the participants 
directly to enter into a fantasy phase but use intermediary 
tasks that can aid the fantasy of the participants. In the 
literature is emphasized the relevance of making participants 
share personal experiences as a start for boosting future 
envisioning [9][41][44][46][55][56]. The teaser of future 
envisioning should build on personal experiences that make 
the participants think about the future. 
Another important element for surpassing the challenge in 
envisioning future solution was the usage of cues in the form 
of written text cue cards (WO3_6) or cue cards with pictures 
(WO3_11). The usage of visual cues is recognized in the 
literature [41][42][55][59].  
What we found interesting in our workshops was trying 
out the power of exemplars as a way to enhance creativity 
(WO2_9). The usage of examples of designs as a means to 
aid the fantasy of people with MACIs needs more 
consideration and further study. However, we can state that it 
was helpful for our participants who had different aspects of 
MACIs. It aided their creativity by making them think outside 
of the box. We observed that the exemplars presented in the 
form of amateur and not finished designs helped the 
participants relate more to them and feel more confident in 
designing themselves as they noticed that no finished and 
polished designs were expected by them. 
In [9], using fictional characters has been defined as 
useful in envisioning future solutions. However, our 
participants seemed not to be keen on that. They wanted to be 
represented and talk about themselves instead of a fictional 
person. This is also related to rehabilitation theories where 
patients are motivated to accept and embrace their new selves.  
In the literature, providing more hands-on activities and 
collective prototyping [55][58][59] is seen as contributing to 
participants' ability to envision a future solution. We 
experienced that for MACI patients, the envisioning process 
required a break down into smaller activities that could help 
the patient create a bigger picture by putting the pieces in each 
smaller activity together. This is similar to the memory 
rehabilitation theories [25], which suggest breaking down an 
activity in smaller steps and train each of the steps slowly, 
adding one step at the time. Using activities that are familiar 
is as well helpful to consider in techniques with MACI 
patients similarly to the findings from the literature [9] 
[55][59].  
Another challenge that people with cognitive impairments 
face is abstract concepts [41][50][59] (DG_M2). From our 
cases, we found that MACI patients also have a fear of 
sketching and the white paper syndrome, hesitating to draw. 
Based on this, designing more narrowed down (WO2_6) and 
structured activities (WO3_12) and tell personal stories or 
personal opinions (WO1_14) can help in surpassing the 
challenges of MACI patients with abstract concepts.   
We also found that people with cognitive impairments are 
keener on getting involved in designing solutions that are 
interesting, valuable, and have a real purpose [9][44][63]. We 
have highlighted the same point in WO3_8 reflection.  
Another element to consider in deciding about PD 
techniques to apply with MACI patients is to provide 
alternative activities that can support all the participants to 
engage [9][48][50][65][66] (DG_M7). With the MACI 
77
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

patients, we found that it is important to make an appeal to 
the individual participants' abilities (WO1_15). Moreover, 
alternative ways to present the tasks are needed, so it fits the 
patients' needs. MACI patients experience an increase in the 
time needed to perform activities. This is called the tempo of 
performing activities. Adapting to MACI patients' needs in 
the tempo of activities is very relevant for assuring that 
patients do not feel overwhelmed and rushed.  
In DM_8 we found that it is relevant to consider activities 
that are flexible and empathic enough to adapt to the needs of 
the group, for example, activities that can help create a 
friendly environment [44][46][67], activities that can boost 
participants self-esteem and confidence [52][68], and 
activities that can include an element of playfulness 
[42][52][55]. We experienced that being flexible was 
required when working with MACI patients. Moreover, 
serving coffee and biscuits during the breaks helped to create 
a friendly environment. One of the patients made a video in 
workshop 5 and shared that with us to express his enthusiasm.   
Regarding techniques, we have the following guidelines 
for conducting PD with MACI people: 
1. Having 
a 
task-oriented 
approach 
where 
more 
complicated activities are presented in small steps that 
build on each other. 
2. Having a narrowed scope for the PD sessions and not 
distracting people with MACIs with general questions. 
3. Using cues that can support future envisioning. It is 
important to consider different ways of presenting the 
cues. Both text-based and images are useful. The cues 
should be open so they can offer the possibility for 
personal interpretations from the participants in the PD 
workshops.  
4. Introduce in workshops “the teaser of future 
envisioning” and activity that builds on people with 
MACIs current experiences and ask them to think how 
these specific experiences can be improved in the future. 
5. Take into consideration using exemplars that present 
examples of what the MACI people are expected to do. 
6. Use positive rhetoric when asking for critical opinion. 
The aim is to not influence MACI people to enter in a 
negative mindset. 
7. Prepare alternative activities that can include all the 
participants in the workshop independent of their 
disability.  
8. Create a friendly environment by showing empathy and 
respect toward participants’ experience. 
9. Involve MACI people in PD projects that are relevant 
and interesting for them.  
10. Structure the activities as much as possible so it can be 
easier for the MACI people to conceptualize. 
11. Try to avoid fictional characters in the design process. 
MACI people prefer to refer to themselves in the design.  
12. Adapt to the MACI people's tempo while conducting 
activities in a PD session. 
13. Be flexible to changes activities, drop activities, repeat 
the explanation of activities based on the needs, and the 
requirements of the MACI people involved in the PD 
session. 
D. Facilitators 
The literature emphasizes that one of the facilitators' 
responsibility is to explain clearly the purpose of the events 
and the role of the participants [9] (DG_F1). Similarly, this 
was important with the MACI patients were repeating the aim 
of the event in a clear language, and having it printed out 
during workshops 4 and 5 helped the participants stay focused 
and contribute significantly to the workshops. Moreover, the 
facilitator should try to appeal to the patients' challenges 
(WO_10) by highlighting that not everyone is perfect [9][69]. 
The MACI patients all come from a life without their current 
disability. Thus, making them feel good by emphasizing that 
the challenges are common among other people without the 
ABI can break the ice.  
The literature also emphasizes that the facilitators should 
incorporate 
structure 
and 
review 
in 
activities 
[9] 
[2][43][46][54][59] (DG_F3). They should give time to 
participants to know each other, have the possibility to repeat, 
and review parts of the workshops. With MACI patients, this 
was very relevant. The facilitator should also consider having 
a slower tempo to adapt to the patients' ability to process 
information.  
Moreover, trying to minimize distraction and keep 
participants focused [9] (DG_F4) is also a challenging task 
when working with MACI patients. This can be supported by 
having more structured and narrowed down workshops where 
patients have short and clear tasks to perform.  
One important finding from our work can be found in 
WO1_18, the involvement of the “knowledgeable third party” 
as a facilitator in the workshop. Considering the variations in 
MACIs, it would be impossible for a designer to be able to 
have the ability to communicate properly with every variation 
of cognitive impairment. A person that is specialized for 
working with MACI patients can support communication. 
Moreover, in the digitalization project, we saw the 
knowledgeable 
third 
party 
not 
only 
facilitating 
communication but also leading the PD sessions. This was the 
result of a long mutual learning process in which the designer 
and the knowledgeable third party had been involved 
throughout the “redesign” and “digitalization” projects 
described above. However, involving the knowledgeable 
third party and the number of facilitators in a session, in 
general, should be balanced to the number of participants in 
order to avoid putting MACI patients in the spotlight.  
Regarding Facilitators, we have the following guidelines 
for conducting PD with MACI patients: 
1. Involve a knowledgeable third party as a facilitator for 
facilitating communication and ultimately leading the 
sessions. 
2. The facilitators should explain clearly the purpose of the 
events and the role of the participants for each part 
during the workshop. 
3. The facilitators should incorporate a structure in the 
activities and the review of the activities.   
4. The 
facilitators 
should 
enclose 
some 
personal 
information about themselves. 
5. The number of facilitators should be balanced with the 
number of participants so the facilitators can devote 
more time to each of the participants or participants 
78
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

groups and ask in-situ questions to uncover meaning in 
the ideas or provoke new ideas.   
E. Participants 
Using participant groups with few members is suggested 
in conducting PD with people with cognitive impairments 
[2][9][46][52]. This is also true for MACI patients. A number 
of 4-5 patients were suggested by the domain experts to be a 
good group size. The duration of the workshops should be 
short and adapted to the number of participants involved. 
Thus, enabling everyone to have a say and to not rush the slow 
tempo of some of the MACI patients. In DG_P1, the guideline 
is to consider one to one group work in PD sessions with 
people with cognitive impairments [9][54][71]. Moreover, 
Yaghoubzadeh, Kramer, Pitsch, and Kopp [70] state that 
cognitive impairments could be challenging for working in 
groups. From our reflections (W02_13), we found that 
participants had experience and worked well in a group. They 
were able to build on the ideas of others while still keeping 
their stand if they had a different opinion. The benefit of 
group work is also compatible with the rehabilitation theories, 
where group therapies are considered very effective 
[24][25][84]. However, we stated that not all MACI patients 
have the same abilities. When working in groups, it should be 
the facilitator’s responsibility to give the same time, attention, 
and possibility to everyone.  
Another guideline from the literature is to pair persons 
with different deficits into one subgroup [9]. This aims to 
surpass challenges in individual deficits by working as a 
group and contributing each with their abilities. In our 
experience, we noticed that participants who had different 
cognitive impairments, but the same functioning level could 
work better in the same group (W0_12).  
The literature also recognizes the involvement of 
caregivers as support in conversation with participants 
[2][9][41][51][59]. In our case, we had direct caregivers as 
participants in the same workshop with the patients. 
Caregivers have usually been involved in the design process 
as patients’ proxies for patients with some forms of cognitive 
impairments. MACI patients have the capacity to be involved 
and speak for themselves. Using caregivers as proxies is 
useful when the user group being represented in not able to 
be involved. In the MACI patients' this is not the case. In PD 
with MACI patients, domain experts can support the process 
of planning the work with patients and make sense of the 
patients’ needs. Meanwhile, MACI patients can participate in 
PD activities. 
In the digitalization project, an MACI patient and a 
therapist had to work together in making the storyboard.  All 
seven pairs in both workshops 4 and 5 had a good 
collaboration. Thus, involving in a PD project as participants, 
both the MACI patients and the therapists in designing digital 
solutions can result in a positive experience.  
 Moreover, the literature discusses the elimination of 
usability problems with the carers of the patients [4][9] and 
using persons who do not suffer from a deficit to get rid of 
general design problems [2][9]. In our reflections, we found 
that the participants in workshop 2 with a milder ABI had the 
possibility to contribute more in design details.  
The literature also highlights the need to involve the kin 
and the family in the design [73][74] (DG_P6). We have not 
experienced this in our cases. However, we want to argue that 
the involvement of the family members or kin should be done 
only when it is necessary, and the solution designed involves 
them as well. One of the patients in the workshop, when asked 
about family involvement, said: “I should decide if I should 
involve my family”.  
Regarding Participants, we have the following guidelines 
for conducting PD with MACI people: 
1. Involve participants in group activities where they can 
work on their own and together with others. 
2. Consider a small number of participants for a short 
period of time. 
3. Involve a “knowledgeable third party” to support the 
conversation with the MACI participants.  
4. Use persons with milder cognitive impairments for 
exploring design details. 
5. Promote the involvement of family members as 
participants only in the design of the solution that 
involves them and when the MACI person agrees.  
F. Analysis 
Hendriks, Truyen, and Duval [9] suggest that the 
researcher should try not to over-analyze the utterance of the 
participants. Moreover, they suggest being critical to the 
representativeness of participants. These guidelines are also 
useful when designing with MACI patients. However, from 
our experience, we suggest that the reflexive analysis can 
benefit from the involvement of a team from different 
disciplines. This can also eliminate the problem of over-
analyzing the utterance of the participants because a caregiver 
can take things less seriously than a designer that is new to 
the patient group.  
Furthermore, implementing a structured reflection on the 
action right after the workshop where the facilitators reflect 
on the workshop in general, tools, techniques, participants, 
and their behavior can be very relevant to the analysis later 
because it captures the feelings at the moment, which often 
can pass undocumented.  
Regarding Analysis, we have the following guidelines for 
conducting PD with MACI people: 
1. Try not to over-analyze the utterance of the participants. 
2. Have a critical attitude toward the representativeness of 
participants.  
3. Involve people from different disciplines in the analysis, 
especially rehabilitation specialist in MACIs. 
4. Incorporate a reflection-on-action structure among the 
facilitators right after the workshop.  
VIII. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we present a set of guidelines for researchers 
and designers to conduct PD with people with MACIs. We 
have initially presented in Table 1 a summary of guidelines 
drawn from previous studies of conducting PD with people 
with cognitive impairments. Then, we have presented two PD 
projects that we conducted with MACI patients and presented 
a set of reflections from each of the workshop outlines we 
79
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

have been working with. The reflections have been further 
discussed in regard to the existing literature, and finally, a set 
of guidelines for conducting PD with MACI people has been 
introduced. While the guidelines are the final outcome of the 
paper, the rich description of the reflections-on-action is also 
a contribution to PD, which put emphasis on the situated 
knowledge generated in PD workshops. These rich 
descriptions in some cases are even more relevant to PD 
because they represent a story derived from the experience of 
the PD researcher that has conducted the study and highlight 
things that are usually overlooked on more formal guidelines. 
Hendriks, Slegers and Duysburgh [85] state that a good way 
to go forward on a codesign approach for people suffering 
from some form of impairments is “facilitating researchers 
and designers to share experiences, best practices, lessons 
learned, and so on …in the form of method stories” 
People with MACIs compound a significant part of our 
society. This is increasing with the increase in the tempo of 
life. People are more in danger of accidents and consequently 
are at risk of having more accidental brain damage. In people 
with MACI in many cases, there are no physical impairments. 
MACI people work, go to school and try to live their life to 
the fullest. However, their daily life is challenging due to 
fatigue, memory problems, attention problems, loss of 
executive functioning, etc. Thus, they need to adapt their 
lifestyle to their new self and make use of aids to keep up with 
daily life activities. Technology can help in assisting MACI 
people.  
In designing these new technologies for them, we need to 
involve the MACI people in design. They can significantly 
contribute to the design if the right means for enabling their 
contribution are provided. That is what we want to achieve 
with this paper.  
We contribute by giving PD practitioners a list of 
guidelines for working with MACI people. Moreover, 
through these guidelines, we aim to make technologists turn 
attention to the MACI people and design more supportive 
technologies for them.  
The number of participants involved in our study is small 
in comparison to the heterogeneity of the MACI people 
group. Our guidelines are not a final list, and we hope that 
more researchers will investigate on this user group and 
expand our lists. These guidelines are in the form of 
recommendation, and they should be combined based on the 
situation at hand, in which PD researchers and designers 
critically reflect on what can be adapted in their specific case 
and what not and what is the consequence in the PD process 
if one of the guidelines is not taken in consideration.   
In the future, we will continue testing our guidelines in 
further projects with this user group. Additionally, we want 
to investigate how to involve more digital tools in designing 
together with MACI people and how we can involve in the 
best way possible the MACI people in the co-development of 
different types of digital tools meant for them, besides the 
cases presented in this paper. Furthermore, we want to 
investigate how much are the MACI people willing to 
participate in PD practices, and where do we, as researchers 
and designers draw the line. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We are grateful to all those patients at Sunnaas rehabilitation 
hospital that participated in our workshops. Their 
participation made this publication possible. Moreover, we 
want to deeply thank all our partners at the hospital, 
specifically the Department of Cognitive Rehabilitation that 
worked with us in building the PD process and who share the 
same values as we do in terms of involving the patients in 
designing technologies or services meant for them. The 
activities of the case 2 presented in this paper were financed 
by the INTERREG Sverige-Norge project “VITAL - för den 
goda hälsan", under the grant number: 20202391. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Çarçani and H. Holone, "Participatory Design “Method 
Story”: The Case of Patients Living with Mild Acquired 
Cognitive 
Impairments," 
ACHI 
2019, 
The 
Twelfth 
International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human 
Interactions, pp. 210-217, 2019. 
[2] 
S. Lindsay, K. Brittain, D. Jackson, C. Ladha, K. Ladha, and 
P. Olivier, "Empathy, participatory design and people with 
dementia," In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 521-530. 
[3] 
J. McGrenere, R. Davies, L. Findlater, P. Graf, M. Klawe, K. 
Moffatt, B. Purves, and S. Yang, “Insights from the aphasia 
project: designing technology for and with people who have 
aphasia,” SIGCAPH Comput. Phys. Handicap., no. 73-74, pp. 
112-118, 2002. 
[4] 
K. Moffatt, J. McGrenere, B. Purves, and M. Klawe, "The 
participatory design of a sound and image enhanced daily 
planner for people with aphasia," In Proceedings of the 
SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, 
pp. 407-414. 
[5] 
A. Eghdam, “Understanding how persons with mild acquired 
cognitive impairment use and experience information and 
communication technology: an exploratory study,” 2016. 
[6] 
C. A. Taylor, J. M. Bell, M. J. Breiding, and L. Xu, “Traumatic 
brain 
injury–related 
emergency 
department 
visits, 
hospitalizations, and deaths—United States, 2007 and 2013,” 
MMWR Surveillance Summaries, vol. 66, no. 9, pp. 1, 2017. 
[7] 
A. Eghdam, J. Scholl, A. Bartfai, and S. Koch, “Information 
and communication technology to support self-management 
of patients with mild acquired cognitive impairments: 
systematic review,” Journal of medical internet research, vol. 
14, no. 6, pp. e159, 2012. 
[8] 
J. Simonsen and T. Robertson, "Participatory Design: an 
introduction," 
Routledge 
international 
handbook 
of 
participatory design, pp. 21-38: Routledge, 2012. 
[9] 
N. Hendriks, F. Truyen, and E. Duval, "Designing with 
dementia: Guidelines for participatory design together with 
persons with dementia," In: IFIP Conference on Human-
Computer Interaction,  pp. 649-666. 
[10] D. A. Schön, “The reflective practitioner: How professionals 
think in action,” Routledge, 2017. 
80
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[11] J. 
Toglia, 
“Cognitive-perceptual 
retraining 
and 
rehabilitation,” Willard and Spackman’s occupational 
therapy, pp. 607-629, 2003. 
[12] K. D. Cicerone, L. C. Smith, W. Ellmo, H. R. Mangel, P. 
Nelson, R. F. Chase, and K. Kalmar, “Neuropsychological 
rehabilitation of mild traumatic brain injury,” Brain Injury, 
vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 277-286, 1996. 
[13] L. Turner-Stokes, “Evidence for the effectiveness of multi-
disciplinary rehabilitation following acquired brain injury: a 
synthesis of two systematic approaches,” Journal of 
rehabilitation Medicine, vol. 40, no. 9, pp. 691-701, 2008. 
[14] C. Nilsson, A. Bartfai, and M. Löfgren, “Holistic group 
rehabilitation–a short cut to adaptation to the new life after 
mild acquired brain injury,” Disability and rehabilitation, vol. 
33, no. 12, pp. 969-978, 2011. 
[15] J. Toglia, “A dynamic interactional approach to cognitive 
rehabilitation,” Cognition and occupation across the life 
span: Models for intervention in occupational therapy, vol. 2, 
pp. 29-72, 2005. 
[16] G. 
P. 
Prigatano, 
“Principles 
of 
neuropsychological 
rehabilitation,” Oxford University Press, 1999. 
[17] J. M. Krogstad, “Hva er ervervet hjerneskade?,” Konsis 
Grafisk AS, 2011. 
[18] G. E. Carlsson, A. Möller, and C. Blomstrand, “Managing an 
everyday life of uncertainty–a qualitative study of coping in 
persons with mild stroke,” Disability and rehabilitation, vol. 
31, no. 10, pp. 773-782, 2009. 
[19] Sunnaas, “Hverdagsliv med kognitive endringer: Praktiske 
råd for deg som lever hverdagslivet med kognitive endringer,” 
Sunnaas Sykehus HF, Flisa Trykkeri AS, 2011. 
[20] Sunnaas, “Sosialt liv med kognitive endringer: Praktiske råd 
for deg som lever livet med kognitive endringer,” Sunnaas 
Sykehus HF, Flisa Trykkeri AS, 2011. 
[21] R. M. Ruff, G. L. Iverson, J. T. Barth, S. S. Bush, D. K. 
Broshek, N. Policy, and P. Committee, “Recommendations 
for diagnosing a mild traumatic brain injury: a National 
Academy of Neuropsychology education paper,” Archives of 
Clinical Neuropsychology, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 3-10, 2009. 
[22] F. Becker, M. Kirmess, S. Tornås, and M. Løvstad, “A 
description 
of 
cognitive 
rehabilitation 
at 
Sunnaas 
Rehabilitation Hospital–balancing comprehensive holistic 
rehabilitation and retraining of specific functional domains,” 
NeuroRehabilitation, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 87-100, 2014. 
[23] E. C. Haskins, K. D. Cicerone, and L. E. Trexler, “Cognitive 
rehabilitation 
manual: 
Translating 
evidence-based 
recommendations into practic,” ACRM Publishing, 2012. 
[24] B. A. Wilson, F. Gracey, J. J. Evans, and A. Bateman, 
“Neuropsychological rehabilitation: Theory, models, therapy 
and outcome,” Cambridge University Press, 2009. 
[25] K. D. Cicerone, C. Dahlberg, K. Kalmar, D. M. Langenbahn, 
J. F. Malec, T. F. Bergquist, T. Felicetti, J. T. Giacino, J. P. 
Harley, D. E. Harrington, J. Herzog, S. Kneipp, L. Laatsch, 
and P. A. Morse, “Evidence-based cognitive rehabilitation: 
Recommendations for clinical practice,” Archives of Physical 
Medicine and Rehabilitation, vol. 81, no. 12, pp. 1596-1615, 
2000/12/01/, 2000. 
[26] G. Bjerknes and T. Bratteteig, “User participation and 
democracy: A discussion of Scandinavian research on system 
development,” Scandinavian Journal of information systems, 
vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1, 1995. 
[27] T. Robertson and I. Wagner, “Engagement, representation and 
politics-in-action,” The Handbook of Participatory Design, 
edited by J. Simonsen and T. Robertson, pp. 64-85, 2012. 
[28] E. Björgvinsson, P. Ehn, and P.-A. Hillgren, "Participatory 
design and democratizing innovation." pp. 41-50. 
[29] J. Greenbaum and F. Kensing, "Heritage: having a say," 
Routledge International Handbook of Participatory Design, 
pp. 41-56: Routledge, 2012. 
[30] E. Brandt, T. Binder, and E. B.-N. Sanders, "Tools and 
techniques: ways to engage telling, making and enacting," 
Routledge international handbook of participatory design, 
pp. 165-201: Routledge, 2012. 
[31] D. Corring, R. Campbell, and A. Rudnick, “Cognitive 
remediation 
for 
inpatients 
with 
schizophrenia 
or 
schizoaffective disorder using "smart" technology in a 
simulated apartment: a feasibility and exploratory study,” in 
Proceedings of the 9th international conference on Toward 
useful services for elderly and people with disabilities: smart 
homes and health telematics, Montreal, Canada, 2011, pp. 
286-289. 
[32] A. L. Culén and M. van der Velden, "The digital life of 
vulnerable users: designing with children, patients, and 
elderly," 
In Scandinavian 
Conference 
on 
Information 
Systems, pp. 53-71. 
[33] N. Hendriks, K. Slegers, and P. Duysburgh, “Codesign with 
people living with cognitive or sensory impairments: a case 
for method stories and uniqueness,” CoDesign, vol. 11, no. 1, 
pp. 70-82, 2015. 
[34] R. B. Rosseland, “Design and evaluation of an interactive 
music system for exercise and physical activity with 
Alzheimer’s patients,” SoundEffects-An Interdisciplinary 
Journal of Sound and Sound Experience, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 4-
22, 2016. 
[35] I. Nakarada-Kordic, N. Hayes, S. D. Reay, C. Corbet, and A. 
Chan, “Co-designing for mental health: creative methods to 
engage young people experiencing psychosis,” Design for 
Health, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 229-244, 2017/07/03, 2017. 
[36] M. Augstein, T. Neumayr, R. Ruckser-Scherb, and S. 
Dielacher, "Collaboration Around an Interactive Tabletop in 
Rehabilitation Settings," Collaboration Meets Interactive 
Spaces, pp. 425-442: Springer, 2016. 
[37] M. Balaam, S. Rennick Egglestone, G. Fitzpatrick, T. 
Rodden, A.-M. Hughes, A. Wilkinson, T. Nind, L. Axelrod, E. 
Harris, and I. Ricketts, "Motivating mobility: designing for 
lived motivation in stroke rehabilitation," In Proceedings of 
the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, pp. 3073-3082. 
81
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[38] A. L. Threatt, J. Merino, K. E. Green, I. Walker, J. O. Brooks, 
and S. Healy, "An assistive robotic table for older and post-
stroke adults: results from participatory design and evaluation 
activities with clinical staff," In Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 
673-682. 
[39] A. L. Faria and I. B. Sergi Bermúdez, “Development and 
evaluation of a web-based cognitive task generator for 
personalized cognitive training: a proof of concept study with 
stroke patients,” in Proceedings of the 3rd 2015 Workshop on 
ICTs for improving Patients Rehabilitation Research 
Techniques, Lisbon, Portugal, 2015, pp. 1-4. 
[40] C. Magnusson, H. A. Caltenco, D. McGookin, M. Kytö, I. 
Hjaltadóttir, T. B. Hafsteinsdóttir, H. Jónsdóttir, and I. 
Bjartmarz, “Tangible Interaction for Stroke Survivors: Design 
Recommendations,” in Proceedings of the Eleventh 
International Conference on Tangible, Embedded, and 
Embodied Interaction, Yokohama, Japan, 2017, pp. 597-602. 
[41] J. Galliers, S. Wilson, A. Roper, N. Cocks, J. Marshall, S. 
Muscroft, and T. Pring, "Words are not enough: empowering 
people with aphasia in the design process." pp. 51-60. 
[42] J. M. Mayer and J. Zach, “Lessons learned from participatory 
design with and for people with dementia,” in Proceedings of 
the 15th international conference on Human-computer 
interaction with mobile devices and services, Munich, 
Germany, 2013, pp. 540-545. 
[43] M. Wu, B. Richards, and R. Baecker, “Participatory design 
with individuals who have amnesia,” in Proceedings of the 
eighth conference on Participatory design: Artful integration: 
interweaving media, materials and practices - Volume 1, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2004, pp. 214-223. 
[44] S. Lindsay, D. Jackson, G. Schofield, and P. Olivier, 
"Engaging older people using participatory design," 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in 
computing systems, pp. 1199-1208. 
[45] E. Grönvall and M. Kyng, "Beyond Utopia: reflections on 
participatory design in home-based healthcare with weak 
users," Proceedings of the 29th Annual European Conference 
on Cognitive Ergonomics, pp. 189-196. 
[46] S. Frennert, B. Östlund, and H. Eftring, “Capturing seniors' 
requirements for assistive robots by the use of attention 
cards,” in Proceedings of the 7th Nordic Conference on 
Human-Computer Interaction: Making Sense Through 
Design, Copenhagen, Denmark, 2012, pp. 783-784. 
[47] J. Wherton and D. Prendergast, "The building bridges project: 
involving older adults in the design of a communication 
technology to support peer-to-peer social engagement," 
Symposium of the Austrian HCI and Usability Engineering 
Group, pp. 111-134. 
[48] R. M. Branco, J. Quental, and Ó. Ribeiro, "Playing with 
personalisation and openness in a codesign project involving 
people with dementia," Proceedings of the 14th Participatory 
Design Conference, pp. 61-70. 
[49] A. Martin-Hammond, S. Vemireddy, and K. Rao, “Engaging 
Older Adults in the Participatory Design of Intelligent Health 
Search Tools,” in Proceedings of the 12th EAI International 
Conference on Pervasive Computing Technologies for 
Healthcare, New York, NY, USA, 2018, pp. 280-284. 
[50] S. K. Kane, B. Linam-Church, K. Althoff, and D. McCall, 
“What 
we 
talk 
about: 
designing 
a 
context-aware 
communication tool for people with aphasia,” in Proceedings 
of the 14th international ACM SIGACCESS conference on 
Computers and accessibility, Boulder, Colorado, USA, 2012, 
pp. 49-56. 
[51] L. C. L. d. F. Borges, L. Filgueiras, C. Maciel, and V. Pereira, 
“A customized mobile application for a cerebral palsy user,” 
in Proceedings of the 31st ACM international conference on 
Design of communication, Greenville, North Carolina, USA, 
2013, pp. 7-16. 
[52] S. Baker, J. Waycott, F. Vetere, and T. Hoang, "The 
technology explorers: Partnering with older adults to engage 
with virtual reality and virtual avatars," Ageing and Digital 
Technology, pp. 231-246: Springer, 2019. 
[53] O. K. Richards, “Exploring the Empowerment of Older Adult 
Creative Groups Using Maker Technology,” in Proceedings 
of the 2017 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, Denver, Colorado, USA, 
2017, pp. 166-171. 
[54] M. Massimi, R. M. Baecker, and M. Wu, "Using participatory 
activities with seniors to critique, build, and evaluate mobile 
phones," Proceedings of the 9th international ACM 
SIGACCESS conference on Computers and accessibility, pp. 
155-162. 
[55] V. Orso, A. Spagnolli, L. Gamberini, F. Ibañez, and M. E. 
Fabregat, “Involving Older Adults in Designing Interactive 
Technology: The Case of SeniorChannel,” in Proceedings of 
the 11th Biannual Conference on Italian SIGCHI Chapter, 
Rome, Italy, 2015, pp. 102-109. 
[56] A. Talamo, M. Camilli, L. Di Lucchio, and S. Ventura, 
“Information from the past: how elderly people orchestrate 
presences, memories and technologies at home,” Universal 
Access in the Information Society, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 739-753, 
2017. 
[57] W. Kopec, R. Nielek, and A. Wierzbicki, "Guidelines toward 
Better Participation of Older Adults in Software Development 
Processes Using a New SPIRAL Method and Participatory 
Approach,” Proceedings of the 11th International Workshop 
on Cooperative and Human Aspects of Software Engineering,    
pp. 49-56. 
[58] R. J. Wirth, C. W. Yuan, B. V. Hanrahan, J. M. Carroll, M. B. 
Rosson, and J. Bindá, “Exploring Interactive Surface Designs 
for Eliciting Social Activity from Elderly Adults,” in 
Proceedings of the 2016 ACM International Conference on 
Interactive Surfaces and Spaces, Niagara Falls, Ontario, 
Canada, 2016, pp. 403-408. 
[59] L. M. Muriana and H. Hornung, "Towards Participatory 
Prototyping with Older Adults with and without Cognitive 
82
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Impairment: Challenges and Lessons Learned," IFIP 
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, pp. 344-363. 
[60] A. Dearden, A. Lauener, F. Slack, C. Roast, and S. Cassidy, 
"Make it so! Jean-Luc Picard, Bart Simpson and the design of 
e-public services," Proceedings of the ninth conference on 
Participatory design: Expanding boundaries in design-
Volume 1, pp. 67-76. 
[61] K. Hara, C. Chan, and J. E. Froehlich, “The Design of 
Assistive Location-based Technologies for People with 
Ambulatory Disabilities: A Formative Study,” in Proceedings 
of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, San Jose, California, USA, 2016, pp. 1757-1768. 
[62] R. Davies, S. Marcella, J. McGrenere, and B. Purves, “The 
ethnographically informed participatory design of a PD 
application to support communication,” ACM SIGACCESS 
Accessibility and Computing, no. 77-78, pp. 153-160, 2003. 
[63] W. Kopec, K. Skorupska, A. Jaskulska, K. Abramczuk, R. 
Nielek, and A. Wierzbicki, “LivingLab PJAIT: towards better 
urban participation of seniors,” in Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Web Intelligence, Leipzig, 
Germany, 2017, pp. 1085-1092. 
[64] K. Rodil, M. Rehm, and A. L. Krummheuer, “Co-designing 
social robots with cognitively impaired citizens,” in 
Proceedings of the 10th Nordic Conference on Human-
Computer Interaction, Oslo, Norway, 2018, pp. 686-690. 
[65] A. Hornof, H. Whitman, M. Sutherland, S. Gerendasy, and J. 
McGrenere, “Designing for the "Universe of One": 
Personalized Interactive Media Systems for People with the 
Severe 
Cognitive 
Impairment Associated 
with 
Rett 
Syndrome,” in Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, Denver, Colorado, 
USA, 2017, pp. 2137-2148. 
[66] K. Slegers, N. Hendriks, P. Duysburgh, R. Maldonado 
Branco, B. Vandenberghe, and E. Brandt, "Sharing Methods 
for Involving People with Impairments in Design: Exploring 
the Method Story Approach," Proceedings of the 2016 CHI 
Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, pp. 3331-3338. 
[67] M. Zancanaro, S. Gabrielli, A. Jameson, C. Leonardi, E. Not, 
and F. Pianesi, "Virtual helper or virtual card player? 
Contrasting responses of older users," Your Virtual Butler, pp. 
70-78: Springer, 2013. 
[68] W. Kopeć, B. Balcerzak, R. Nielek, G. Kowalik, A. 
Wierzbicki, and F. Casati, “Older adults and hackathons: a 
qualitative study,” Empirical Software Engineering, vol. 23, 
no. 4, pp. 1895-1930, August 01, 2018. 
[69] M. Wu, R. Baecker, and B. Richards, "Participatory design of 
an orientation aid for amnesics," Proceedings of the SIGCHI 
conference on Human factors in computing systems, pp. 511-
520. 
[70] R. Yaghoubzadeh, M. Kramer, K. Pitsch, and S. Kopp, 
"Virtual agents as daily assistants for elderly or cognitively 
impaired people," International workshop on intelligent 
virtual agents, pp. 79-91. 
[71] V. A. Vanden Abeele and V. Van Rompaey, "Introducing 
human-centered research to game design: designing game 
concepts for and with senior citizens," CHI'06 extended 
abstracts on Human factors in computing systems,  pp. 1469-
1474. 
[72] I. Colonius, S. Budde, and R. Annicchiarico, "Participatory 
design for challenging user groups: a case study," 
Proceedings of the 28th Annual European Conference on 
Cognitive Ergonomics, pp. 339-340. 
[73] N. Hendriks, L. Huybrechts, A. Wilkinson, and K. Slegers, 
"Challenges in doing participatory design with people with 
dementia," Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design 
Conference: Short Papers, Industry Cases, Workshop 
Descriptions, Doctoral Consortium papers, and Keynote 
abstracts-Volume 2, pp. 33-36. 
[74] K. Slegers, A. Wilkinson, and N. Hendriks, “Active 
collaboration in healthcare design: participatory design to 
develop a dementia care app,” in CHI '13 Extended Abstracts 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Paris, France, 
2013, pp. 475-480. 
[75] K. Slegers, P. Duysburgh, and N. Hendriks, “Participatory 
design with people living with cognitive or sensory 
impairments,” in CHI '14 Extended Abstracts on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 
2014, pp. 49-52. 
[76] J. McGrenere, R. Davies, L. Findlater, P. Graf, M. Klawe, K. 
Moffatt, B. Purves, and S. Yang, "Insights from the aphasia 
project: designing technology for and with people who have 
aphasia," Proceedings of the 2003 conference on Universal 
usability, pp. 112-118. 
[77] J. Lazar, C. Woglom, J. Chung, A. Schwartz, Y. G. Hsieh, R. 
Moore, D. Crowley, and B. Skotko, “Co-design process of a 
smart phone app to help people with down syndrome manage 
their nutritional habits,” Journal of usability studies, vol. 13, 
no. 2, pp. 73-93, 2018. 
[78] J. Löwgren and E. Stolterman, “Thoughtful interaction 
design: A design perspective on information technology,” Mit 
Press, 2004. 
[79] D. A. Schön, “Educating the reflective practitioner,” Jossey-
Bass San Francisco, 1987. 
[80] R. Jungk and N. Müllert, “Future Workshops: How to create 
desirable futures,” Institute for Social Inventions London, 
1987. 
[81] W. 
Gaver 
and 
J. 
Bowers, 
“Annotated 
portfolios,” 
Interactions, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 40-49, 2012. 
[82] W. Gaver, "What should we expect from research through 
design?," Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human 
factors in computing systems, pp. 937-946. 
[83] W. W. Gaver, J. Bowers, A. Boucher, H. Gellerson, S. 
Pennington, A. Schmidt, A. Steed, N. Villars, and B. Walker, 
"The drift table: designing for ludic engagement," CHI'04 
extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems, 
pp. 885-900. 
83
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[84] C. Wilson, L. Sitbon, M. Brereton, D. Johnson, and S. 
Koplick, “'Put yourself in the picture': designing for futures 
with young adults with intellectual disability,” in Proceedings 
of the 28th Australian Conference on Computer-Human 
Interaction, Launceston, Tasmania, Australia, 2016, pp. 271-
281. 
[85] N. Hendriks, K. Slegers, and P. Duysburgh, “Codesign with 
people living with cognitive or sensory impairments: a case 
for method stories and uniqueness,” CoDesign, vol. 11, no. 
1, pp. 70-82, 2015. 
 
 
 
84
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

