410
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Spectrum Sharing Transforms Mobile Broadband Networks Towards Markets  
Analysis of Sharing Economy Antecedents for Recent Spectrum Sharing Concepts 
 
Seppo Yrjölä 
Nokia 
Oulu, Finland 
e-mail: seppo.yrjola@nokia.com 
Miia Mustonen 
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland  
Oulu, Finland 
e-mail: miia.mustonen@vtt.fi 
Marja Matinmikko 
University of Oulu 
Oulu, Finland 
e-mail: mmatinmi@ee.oulu.fi 
Petri Ahokangas 
Oulu Business School 
Oulu, Finland 
e-mail: petri.ahokangas@oulu.fi
 
 
Abstract—The exponential growth of wireless services with 
diversity of devices and applications depending on connectivity 
has inspired the research community to come up with novel 
concepts to improve the efficiency of spectrum use. Recently, 
several spectrum 
sharing system 
concepts have 
been 
introduced and widely researched to cope with spectrum 
scarcity, though, to date, only a few have reached the policy 
and standardization phase. Moreover, only a subset of these 
concepts has gained industry interest with pre-commercial 
deployments and lucrative business model characteristics. This 
paper analyzes sharing economy business antecedent factors of 
the three topical regulatory approaches for spectrum sharing: 
global TV White Space (TVWS), Licensed Shared Access 
(LSA) from Europe, and Citizens Broadband Radio Service 
(CBRS) from the US. A comparison is made between these 
concepts to identify similarities and differences for developing 
a successful scalable sharing concept. Key factors for a sharing 
economy enabled scalable business model are introduced 
including platform, reduced need for the ownership, leverage 
of underutilized assets, adaptability to different policy regimes, 
trust, and value orientation. The results indicate that all 
analyzed sharing concepts meet basic requirements to scale, 
TVWS radically lowering entry barrier, LSA leveraging key 
existing assets and capabilities of mobile network operators, 
and CBRS extending the business model dynamics. By 
reducing the costs of spectrum coordination, spectrum sharing 
concepts will lead to an overall shift from hierarchies towards 
more use of markets to coordinate economic activity related to 
spectrum assets. The Sharing Economy and Markets and 
Hierarchies frameworks provide a dynamic framework for 
analyzing and developing the spectrum sharing business 
models. 
Keywords-business model; cognitive radio; markets and 
hierarchies; sharing economy; spectrum sharing. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
We have seen the exponential growth of wireless 
services, applications and devices, requiring connectivity. 
Furthermore, the number of mobile broadband (MBB) 
subscribers and the amount of data consumed is set to grow 
significantly, leading to increasing spectrum demand 
discussed in the COCORA 2017 [1]. Both the European 
Commission (EC) [2] and the US President’s Council of 
Advanced Science & Technology (PCAST) [3] have recently 
emphasized the need for novel thinking within wireless 
industry to cope with the growing capacity crunch in 
spectrum allocation, utilization and management. The 
prominence of dynamic spectrum access and spectrum 
sharing has been emphasized in improving the efficiency of 
the spectrum utilization through balancing across domains 
with different spectrum dynamics. For any spectrum sharing 
framework to emerge and scale, close cooperation between 
research, regulation and across industry domains is essential. 
The collaboration between research and industry is essential 
in 
validating 
enabling 
platforms, 
technologies 
and 
innovations. The spectrum regulation and standardization has 
played a central role in enabling current multibillion business 
ecosystems: For the MBB via exclusive Quality of Service 
(QoS) spectrum usage rights, and at the same time for the 
unlicensed wireless local area network (Wi-Fi) ecosystem 
drawing from the public spurring innovations. Without 
sound and sustainable business models for all the key 
industry stakeholders, new concepts will not become 
deployed in a large scale. 
To date, only few of the Dynamic Spectrum Access 
(DSA) concepts from research have crossed the threshold 
into policy domain. Furthermore, several spectrum sharing 
concepts supported by National Regulatory Authorities 
(NRA) and standardization have not to date scaled up in the 
wireless services market, the TV White Space (TVWS) 
being the latest example. After a decade of profound 
unlicensed TVWS concept research, standardization and 
trials in the US [4] and the UK [5] with their key learnings, 
license and database based sharing models have recently 
emerged and are under regulatory discussion, standardization 
and pre-commercial trials. The most prominent novel 
spectrum sharing concepts are the Licensed Shared Access 
(LSA) [6] from Europe and the three-tiered Citizens 
Broadband Radio Service (CBRS) from the US [7]. 

411
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
For all the three spectrum sharing concepts there is no 
prior work available regarding their business model design 
comparative analysis. An initial evaluation of the general 
spectrum sharing concept from the business modeling point 
of view can be found in [8]. Business modelling for the 
TVWS network was discussed in [9], and the LSA focused 
strategy and business model analysis in [10][11]. Business 
model typology and scalability analysis for the LSA and the 
CBRS were done in [12]. We extend that work by focusing 
on analyzing and comparing the viability and attractiveness 
of all three spectrum sharing concepts using sharing 
economy [13] antecedent factors and markets and hierarchies 
analytic framework [14]. This paper investigates: 
 
1) How do recent spectrum sharing concepts support 
the antecedents for business model scalability in the sharing 
economy framework? 
2) How spectrum sharing concepts can be positioned in 
the markets and hierarchies analytic framework? 
 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. First, the 
TVWS, the LSA and the CBRS sharing concepts are 
introduced in Section II. Theoretical backgrounds for the 
sharing economy and the markets and hierarchies analytic 
frameworks are introduced in Section III. The business 
model characteristics and the sharing economy antecedents 
for the TVWS, the LSA, and the CBRS spectrum sharing 
concepts are derived and analyzed in Section IV. 
Implications to ecosystem and market – hierarchy 
positioning are summarized in Section V. Finally, 
conclusions are drawn in Section VI. 
II. 
OVERVIEW OF RECENT SPECTRUM SHARING 
CONCEPTS 
This section presents the three prominent spectrum 
sharing frameworks and system model concepts under 
discussion in regulatory domain: the TVWS, the LSA and 
the CBRS. The common intention of the concepts is to 
improve spectrum usage efficiency by allowing new users to 
access a spectrum on the space or time basis when not being 
used by the incumbent system(s) currently holding the 
spectrum usage rights. Detailed description and the status of 
the TVWS, the LSA, the CBRS, and the concepts and 
technologies, under continuous revision can be found for 
example in [4][5], [15][16], and [17][18], respectively. 
A. TV White Space (TVWS) 
In this section, the opportunistic TV White Space concept 
utilizing terrestrial broadcasting Ultra High Frequency 
(UHF) spectrum is discussed in general level. TVWS 
standardization is spread to several organizations around the 
world, and there is no single dominant standard, technology 
or solution to date. In addition to Wi-Fi IEEE 802.11 
standards based technologies focused on in this paper, also 
other radio technologies like the Long Term Evolution 
(LTE) and the Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave 
Access (WiMAX) have been experimented for the TVWS. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Overview of TV White Spaces framework in the UK. 
The TVWS aims to improve spectrum efficiency through 
utilizing the unused and underutilized spectrum in space and 
time based on databases. In this concept, license-exempt 
White Space Devices (WSDs) obtain the available channel 
information via a certified Geo-Location Database (GLDB), 
which optimizes the effective reuse of the spectrum, and 
ensures interference free operation for the incumbent 
licensed users. The GLDB stores and periodically updates 
TV licensees’ Digital Terrestrial TV (DTT) network 
infrastructure and channel occupancy information, and in the 
case of the UK, the Program Making and Special Events 
(PMSE) service usage data. In the operations phase, to 
access the TVWS spectrum, WSD base stations (BS) reports 
locations to a GLDB, which computes and returns the 
available TV channels for WSDs. Figure 1 depicts an 
overview of the TVWS framework, and how access to white 
spaces based on the GLDB would work in the UK case. In 
the preparatory phase, the GLDB will deploy the basic 
operational 
dataset 
provided 
by 
the 
Office 
of 
Communications (Ofcom) consisting of DTT coexistence 
data, location agnostic data, PMSE data, and unscheduled 
adjustments data. A master WSD would first consult a list of 
DBs provided by Ofcom hosted Website. Then, it would 
select its preferred GLDB from the list, and send to it its 
location and device parameters. The GLDB would then 
return details of the allowed frequencies and power levels 
[5]. 
In the US, the FCC has finalized the TVWS regulation 
[19], followed by the Infocomm Development Authority 
(IDA) of Singapore [20] in 2014 and Ofcom from the UK in 
2015 [5]. The ECC prepared European level technical 
framework in the European Conference of Postal and 
Telecommunications (CEPT) FM53 working group [21]. 
The TVWS regulatory frameworks to date have been 
unprotected and license-exempt, applicable for deploying the 
most prominent TVWS Wi-Fi version of IEEE 802.11af 
[22]. The FCC has temporarily certified several companies 
including Google, Microsoft, and Spectrum Bridge as 
geolocation database operators. In UK, Fairspectrum, 
Nominet UK, Sony Europe, and Spectrum Bridge are 
qualified to provide database services for the TVWS. The 
first use cases of the TVWS in the US have been fixed 
Wireless Internet Service Provisioning (WISP) for rural 
communities 
and 
industry 
verticals, 
where 
another 
connection technology, typically Wi-Fi, is needed between 
Ofcom list
of databases
DTT coverage
database
PMSE usage
database
Slave
Master
3rd party
GLDB
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

412
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the User Equipment (UE) and the TVWS Customer Premises 
Equipment (CPE). 
B. Licensed Shared Access (LSA) 
The EC communication based on an industry initiative 
promoted spectrum sharing across wireless industry and 
diverse types of incumbents [23]. In 2013, the Radio 
Spectrum Policy Group (RSPG) of the EC defined LSA as 
[2] “a regulatory approach aiming to facilitate the 
introduction of radio communication systems operated by a 
limited number of licensees under an individual licensing 
regime in a frequency band already assigned or expected to 
be assigned to one or more incumbent users. Under the LSA 
framework, the additional users are allowed to use the 
spectrum (or part of the spectrum) in accordance with 
sharing rules included in their rights of use of spectrum, 
thereby allowing all the authorized users, including 
incumbents, to provide a certain QoS.”  
The recent development in policy, standardization and 
architecture has focused on applying the LSA to leverage 
scale and harmonization of the Third Generation Partnership 
Project (3GPP) ecosystem. This would enable MBB systems 
to gain shared access to additional harmonized spectrum 
assets not currently available on exclusive basis, particular 
the 3GPP band 40 (2.3-2.4 GHz) as defined by the CEPT 
[24]. The European Telecommunications Standards Institute 
(ETSI) introduced related system reference, requirements 
and 
architecture 
documents 
[16][25][26] 
from 
the 
standardization perspective. In the LSA concept, the 
incumbent spectrum user, such as a PMSE video link, a 
telemetry system, or a fixed link operator, is able to share the 
spectrum assigned to it with one or several LSA licensee 
users according to a negotiated sharing framework and 
sharing agreement. The LSA model guarantees protection 
from harmful interference with predictable QoS for both the 
incumbent and the LSA licensee.  
The LSA architecture consists of two new elements to 
protect the rights of the incumbent, and for managing 
dynamics of the LSA spectrum availability shown in Figure 
2: the LSA Repository (LR) and the LSA Controller (LC). 
The LR supports the entry and storage of the information 
about the availability, protection requirements and usage of 
spectrum together with operating terms and rules. The LC 
located in the LSA licensee’s domain grants permissions 
within the mobile network to access the spectrum based on 
the spectrum resource availability information from the LR. 
The LC interacts with the licensee’s mobile network in order 
to support the mapping of LSA resource availability 
information (LSRAI) into appropriate radio transmitter 
configurations 
via 
Operation, 
Administration 
and 
Management (OAM) tools, and to receive the respective 
confirmations from the network. The LSA system for 2.3-2.4 
GHz band has been validated in field trials in Finland, Italy 
and France. Architecture, implementation and field trial 
results are presented, e.g., in [27] – [30]. 
 
 
Figure 2.  The LSA architecture reference model. 
The second use case currently being considered in 
European regulation is the application of LSA to the 3.6-3.8 
GHz band [31]. For this band, the incumbent usage is less 
dynamic, and the LSA band availability is guaranteed in the 
license area for a known period. This allows extension to 
more innovative use cases, such as local networks using 
small cells, as there is no need for additional frequency 
resource or existing infrastructure to support dynamic 
handover. The ETSI Reconfigurable Radio Systems 
Technical Committee (ETSI RRS) initiated a feasibility 
study “temporary spectrum access for local high-quality 
wireless networks” [32] in 2017 to study LSA evolution 
towards 5G spectrum, localization of spectrum for novel 5G 
use cases, and to enable horizontal sharing and sub-licensing 
for efficient use of the spectrum assets. 
C. Citizens Broadband Radio Service (CBRS) 
As the LSA policy discussion started in Europe, in the 
US the CBRS concept started to gain interest as a 
complementary spectrum management approach. In the US, 
the PCAST report [3] in 2012 suggested a dynamic spectrum 
sharing model as a new tool to the US wireless industry to 
meet the growing crisis in spectrum allocation, utilization 
and management. The key policy messages of the document 
were further strengthened in 2013 with Presidential 
Memorandum [33] stating “…we must make available even 
more spectrum and create new avenues for wireless 
innovation. One means of doing so is by allowing and 
encouraging shared access to spectrum that is currently 
allocated exclusively for Federal use. Where technically and 
economically feasible, sharing can and should be used to 
enhance efficiency among all users and expedite commercial 
access to additional spectrum bands, subject to adequate 
interference protection for Federal users.” 
In Figure 3, the US three-tier authorization framework 
with the FCC’s spectrum access models for 3550-3650MHz 
and 3650-3700MHz spectrum segments are illustrated. 
While the general CBRS framework could be applied to any 
spectrum and between any systems, the current regulatory 
efforts in the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) 
are concentrated on the 3550-3700 MHz band as the first use 
case [7]. 
LSA 
Controller
Regulator
Incumbent
LSA 
Repository
LSA3
LSA2
LSA1
Operator
OAM
LSAOAM
LSRAI

413
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 3.  The US 3-tiered CBRS spectrum access model and band plan.  
The standardization process for the CBRS is ongoing in 
the Wireless Innovation Forum (WinnForum) [18], and for 
the specific spectrum band in the 3GPP [34]. The three tiers 
depicted in Figure 3 are: 
1) Incumbent Access (IA) layer consists of the existing 
primary operations including authorized federal users and 
Fixed Service Satellite (FSS) earth stations. The IA is 
protected from harmful interference from the CBRS users by 
geographic exclusion zones and interference management 
conducted by the dynamic Spectrum Access System (SAS), 
2) Priority Access (PA) layer includes critical access 
users like hospitals, utilities, governmental users, and non-
critical users, e.g., Mobile Network Operators (MNOs). PA 
users receive short-term priority authorization (currently, a 
three-year authorization is considered) to operate within 
designated geographic census track with Priority Access 
Licenses (PALs) in 10 MHz unpaired channel. PALs will be 
awarded with competitive bidding, and with ability to 
aggregate multiple consecutive PALs and census tracks in 
order to obtain multi-year rights and to cover larger areas. 
Any entity eligible to hold a FCC license could apply for a 
PAL and is protected from harmful interference from the 
General Authorized Access (GAA) layer. 
3) General Authorized Access layer users, e.g., 
residential, business and others, including Internet service 
providers are entitled to use the spectrum on opportunistic 
license-by-rule 
regulatory 
basis 
without 
interference 
protection. In addition to the 50% GAA spectrum availability 
floor specified to ensure nationwide GAA access availability, 
the GAA could access unused PA frequencies. GAA 
channels are dynamically assigned to users by a SAS. The 
addition of the third tier is intended to maximize spectrum 
utilization, and to extend usage from centralized managed 
BSs to stand-alone GAA access points. 
The SAS dynamically determines and assigns PAL 
channels and GAA frequencies at a given geographic 
location, controls the interference environment, and enforces 
exclusion zones to protect higher priority users as well as 
takes care of registration, authentication and identification of 
user information. In 2016, the FCC finalized rules for CBRS 
[7], and introduced the light-touch leasing process to make 
the spectrum use rights held by PALs available in secondary 
markets. Under the light-touch leasing rules, PA Licensees 
are free to lease any portion of their spectrum or license 
outside of their PAL protection area (PPA) without the need 
for the FCC oversight required of partitioning and 
disaggregation. This allows lessees of PALs to provide 
targeted services to geographic areas or quantities of 
spectrum without additional administrative burden. Coupled 
with the minimum availability of 80 MHz GAA spectrum in 
each license area, these rules will provide the increased 
flexibility to serve specific or targeted markets. Furthermore, 
the FCC will let market forces determine the role of a SAS, 
and as such, stand-alone exchanges or a SAS-managed 
exchanges are permitted. 
The CBRS devices (CBSDs) are fixed or portable BSs or 
access points, or networks of such, and can only operate 
under the authority and management of a centralized SAS, 
which could be multiple as shown in Figure 4. Both the PA 
and the GAA users are obligated to use only certified the 
FCC approved CBSDs, which must register with a SAS with 
information required by the rules, e.g., operator identifier, 
device 
identification 
and 
parameters, 
and 
location 
information. In a typical MNO deployment scenario, the 
CBSD is a managed network comprising of the Domain 
Proxy (DP) and Network Management System (NMS) 
functionality. The DP may be a bidirectional information 
routing engine or a more intelligent mediation function 
enabling flexible self-control and interference optimizations 
in such a network. In addition to larger MNO-operated MBB 
networks, DP enables combining, e.g., the small cells of a 
shopping mall or sports venue to a virtual BS entity that 
covers the complete venue. The DP can also provide a 
translational capability to interface legacy radio equipment in 
the 3650–3700 MHz band with an SAS to ensure compliance 
with the FCC rules. A, MNO could utilize a DP and/or 
operator-specific SAS in protecting commercially sensitive 
details of their network deployment data. In the dialog 
between industries [35], the FCC and the main incumbent 
user, United States Department of Defense (DoD), it is 
assumed that in addition to informing database approach, 
there is a need to introduce a Non-Informing Approach, 
requiring Environmental Sensing Capability (ESC). 
Figure 4.  The US 3-tiered 3 CBRS concept and functional architecture. 
SAS 1
FCC 
Databases
Incumbent 
Detection 
(ESC)
SAS-SAS Interface
SAS 2
SAS-User Interface
Tier 3
CBSD
Tier 
2/3
CBSD
Tier 
2/3
CBSD
Tier 
2/3
CBSD
Network Management 
System (NMS) (opt)
CBSD 
Sensing(opt)
Informing
Incumbent
Domain 
Proxy
EUD
EUD
EUD
Tier 3
CBSD
Tier 3
CBSD
Domain 
Proxy
NMS
(opt)
Operator1
domain
User1
domain
User2
domain
User n
domain
Federal radiolocation
3550
3600
3650
3700
FSS earth stations
Priority Access License 
(PAL)
Wireless 
Broadband 
Service
General Authorized Access (GAA)
3GPP Band 48

414
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The ESC architecture and implementation scenarios 
discussed include a dedicated sensing network for a SAS, 
collaborative sensing by commercial network BSs, or their 
combination. According to the FCC rules [7], the SAS must 
either confirm suspension of the CBSD’s operation or its 
relocation within 300 seconds after the ESC detection 
communication, or other type of notification from the current 
federal user of the spectrum band. 
The White House aims to expand wireless innovation in 
spectrum sharing further through identifying an additional 2 
GHz of federal owned spectrum below 6 GHz for future 
commercial sharing [35]. The success of the CBRS is critical 
to future federal–commercial spectrum sharing. Moreover, 
the FCC has already proposed the use of the three-tier model 
and the SAS for 5G in several cmWave and mmWave bands. 
III. 
BUSINESS MODEL AND SHARING ECONOMY 
ANTECEDENTS 
Development of business models for spectrum sharing 
can benefit from the previous work on business models in 
the Internet business domain. Scalable business model 
analysis has been developed by Amit and Zott [36] as a 
model of e-business based on four independent dimensions: 
efficiency, complementarities, lock-in, and novelty. Rappa 
[37] classified the Web-based business models as brokerage 
model, advertising model, information-intermediary model, 
merchant model, manufacturer direct model, affiliate model, 
community model, subscription model, and utility and hybrid 
models. Bouwman et al. [38] differentiate in their business 
model analysis business model effects: organizational 
structure, services, technology, revenue, and environmental 
factors: regulation, technology, market. Hallowell [39] stated 
a scalability paradox that while the reduction of scalability is 
often caused by human intervention, the competitive 
advantage based on differentiation is also gained by human 
intervention. Stampfl identified and categorized the 
antecedents of business model scalability into five mutually 
exclusive factors in the explorative business model 
scalability model [40], which Stephany adapted into his 
sharing economy definition [41]. 
Next, the theoretical frameworks used to analyze how 
business models and their key elements could evolve and 
scale in response to novel spectrum sharing models are 
introduced. 
A. Business Models and Ecosystems 
Business models in general are built to exploit a business 
opportunity [42], in connection with the company and its 
external business environment [43]. In order to gain and 
sustain competitive advantage, companies must continuously 
develop and renew their business models. In the 
development of any new spectrum sharing concept, it is 
essential to consider the underlying business opportunities 
and the business model elements that are attractive and 
feasible for all the key stakeholders. Authors in [44] define 
business model in general as a framework across three 
analytical building blocks: a) focus of the business (activities 
that provide the basis for value creation and capture), b) 
locus of the business (i.e., defining the potential and 
scalability of business), and c) modus of business (simplicity 
and dynamism of business). The discussed spectrum sharing 
concepts confront the MBB and the wireless industry with 
strategic 
environmental 
changes, 
such 
as 
emerging 
competitive market structures, policy and regulatory changes 
as well as technology complexity, which all require 
companies to adapt or reinvent one or more aspects of their 
business model designs within their ecosystem.  
Ecosystems [45] are created and emerge around 
synergistic value co-creating and co-capturing activity-
systems between stakeholders. Based on the ideas of Moore 
[45], stakeholders of the ICT specific businesses have started 
to discuss digital business ecosystems that comprise the 
converged information and communications technology 
networks, social networks and knowledge networks. 
Contemporary research on digital business ecosystems is 
mostly technology and platform focused, but authors in [46] 
argued that software components, applications and services 
could be regarded as digital “species” in global competitive 
selection process. Regulation, technology and business co-
evolve within ecosystemic settings. 
B. Business Model Saclability  
Potential for scalability is an important aspect when 
developing a business model, and synchronizing it to the 
respective business opportunity is crucial. The scalability of 
the business model and its key elements has been shown to 
be the primary driver for the venture growth [47], and the 
attractor towards venture capital investments [48]. Vertical 
scalability approach scales-up a system by adding more 
resources into the system nodes, while the horizontal scale-
out approach adds more nodes to the complete system. 
Stampfl [40] identified and categorized the antecedents of 
business model scalability into five mutually exclusive 
factors in the explorative business model scalability model: 
technology, cost and revenue structure, adaptability to 
different legal regimes, network effects, and user orientation. 
The emerging sharing economy framework has leveraged 
these scalability factors with focus on resource efficiency 
and on-demand platform [49]. Through studying recent early 
adopters of the framework, Stephany [41] defined sharing 
economy as “the value in taking the underutilized assets and 
making them accessible online to a community, leading to a 
reduced need for ownership of those assets.” Furthermore, 
the framework originated from collaborative individual peer-
to-peer community consumption has lately evolved to 
corporations and governments participating the ecosystem as 
buyers, sellers or lenders [50]. Proposed sharing economy 
antecedent factors used in assessing business model 
characteristics of the spectrum sharing concepts are: 
a) Platform for online, on-demand accessibility,  
b) Reduced need for the ownership, 
c) Utilization of underutilized assets, 
d) Adaptability to different legal and policy regimes, 
e) Communities and trust, and 
f) Value creation and user orientation. 

415
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Each of these antecedent factors relate to the specificities 
of the focus, locus and modus of the business in question. 
C. Market and Hierarchies 
The basis of all business activities is the transformation 
of resources and capabilities into goods and services. The 
goods dominant logic views services in terms of a type of 
intangible goods whereas the service-dominant logic 
considers service – a process of using one’s resources for the 
benefit of and in conjunction with another party – as the 
fundamental purpose of economic exchange. Value creation 
in service dominant logic stems from the use of internal and 
external resources and overcoming the internal and external 
resistance for co-creating and co-capturing value in 
exchange. The service dominant logic together with the 
resources/capabilities discussion extends nicely to future 
mobile broadband businesses in large that are characterized 
with increasing sharing of resources from spectrum to 
infrastructure with various business models. 
Economies have traditionally considered to have two 
basic mechanisms for coordinating the flow of assets or 
services through adjacent steps in the value chain: markets 
and hierarchies, depicted in Figure 5 [14]. 
Malone [14] studied the change in how firms and markets 
organize flow of goods and services. He defines hierarchies 
as “Visible Hand” that coordinate the flow of goods through 
adjacent steps by controlling and directing it at higher level 
in the managerial hierarchy within a firm and its value chain. 
Typically, in hierarchies, production costs are relatively high, 
and coordination costs low. These coordination costs 
consider the costs of gathering information, negotiating 
contracts, and protecting against the risks of “opportunistic” 
bargaining [52]. Coordination costs are a part of the 
transaction costs that cover all costs that are involved in 
making and carrying out a transaction between two parties or 
more [53]. On the other hand, markets can be defined as 
“Invisible Hand” coordinating the flow through supply and 
demand forces and external transactions between firms and 
individuals. 
Figure 5.  Communication, brokerage, and process & service integration 
transform spectrum licensing towards markets. 
Coordination cost of the markets are relatively high, and 
production costs low. Naturally, variants of the two pure 
relationships exist, but can usually be categorized as 
primarily one or the other. 
Figure 5 illustrates Malone’s Market-Hierarchy analytic 
framework [14]. Complexity of product description can be 
defined as amount of information needed to specify the 
attributes of a product in enough detail to allow a buyer to 
make a selection. Because highly complex product 
description requires more information exchange, they also 
increase coordination cost advantage of hierarchies over 
markets. Asset specificity measures the extent to which 
investments made to support a particular transaction have a 
higher value to that transaction than would have if they were 
redeployed for any other purpose. Specificity relates, e.g., to 
single function, location, skills, time or lengthy process of 
development in close collaboration with suppliers. 
IV. 
ANALYSIS OF THE SPECTRUM SHARING CONCEPTS 
The three spectrum sharing models, the TVWS, the LSA, 
and the CBRS, introduced and discussed in Section II are 
next analyzed and compared against the sharing economy 
criteria presented in Section III. The summary of the sharing 
economy antecedent analysis is given in Table I. 
A. Platform 
Sharing economy business models are hosted through 
platforms and automatized processes across connectivity, 
content, context and commerce layers that enable a more 
precise, real-time measurement of available capacity, and the 
ability to dynamically making that capacity accessible. From 
commerce perspective, platform is a business based on 
enabling value-creating interactions between external 
producers and consumers. Platform provides an open, 
participative infrastructure for these interactions and sets 
governance conditions for them. 
At the connectivity layer, this dynamic adaptability to 
short-term changes, and automatic configuration of radio 
infrastructure and user equipment is the key differentiator to 
static sharing concepts, e.g., in the Industrial, Scientific and 
Medical (ISM) spectrum bands. The global 3GPP ecosystem 
with scale and harmonization will be the common 
technology scalability factor for the LSA and the CBRS 
approaches, while the TVWS has heritage on the Institute of 
Electrical 
and 
Electronics 
Engineers 
(IEEE) 
Wi-Fi 
ecosystem at the ISM bands. 
Compared to the LSA and the CBRS, regulatory and 
standardization actions for the TVWS have been concluded. 
However, to date the TVWS platform has not reached a 
tipping point, despite support from several major IT 
companies providing the GLDB. Interference constraints and 
strict technical requirements entail dedicated radio designs. 
Furthermore, radio ecosystem has not scaled due to scattered 
standardizations, lack of mobile operators’ interest, and the 
lack of certainty for the long-term availability of white 
spaces. 
High
Low
Low
High
Asset specificity
Complexity of product description
Hierarchy
Market

416
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE I.  
SPECTRUM SHARING BUSINESS MODEL ANTECEDENT FACTORS. 
Antecedents 
Sharing model 
 
TVWS 
LSA 
CBRS 
a) Platform 
+ Technology platform standardized and may 
thus be adopted quickly 
- Based on evolving technologies scores on 
flexibility, but may lack scale and 
harmonization 
- Interference constraints and strict technical 
requirements requires specialized radios 
- Uncertainty of spectrum assets has limited 
interest of major technology vendors and 
MNOs. 
+ Utilizes existing 3GPP ecosystem assets and 
scale 
+ Network management system automatization 
based spectrum control function (LC) 
+ Simple repository function (LR) fullfills static 
and semi-static use cases 
+ Protects and leverages MNOs infrastructure 
investments 
+ Extend 3GPP ecosystem to unlicensed and 
standalone LTE unlicensed 
+ Dense urban deployments have additional 
utility and infra assets to share, e.g., fixed 
optical infra 
- Requires new intelligent and near real time 
SAS and ESC sensing functions.  
- New capabilities in big data & spectrum 
analytics needed to manage horizontal 
interference, co-existence and transactions 
- New spectrum band and introduced dynamism 
impacts BS and UE radios 
b) Reduced 
need for the 
ownership 
+ Offers access to practically free spectrum 
+ Scores well in terms of efficiency of 
frequency bands utilization and rapidity of 
access 
- Unlimited number of users administratively 
imposed, rather than voluntarily chosen 
+ Enables faster access to lower cost capacity 
spectrum without coverage obligations 
+ Protects the turf on existing MNO infra with 
radio upgrades 
+/- Based on traditional exclusive licensing 
model with relatively high up front license 
payment 
+ Expands sharing into other assets, e.g., with 
local venue owners 
+ Unbundles investment in spectrum, network 
infrastructure and services 
+ Spectrum access with low initial annuity 
payments 
+ Access to local spectrum driven by business 
needs, when and where 
+ Expands sharing into other assets, e.g., with 
local venue owners. 
c) Utilization 
of 
underutilized 
assets 
- Future availability of the shared UHF 
spectrum assets is uncertain particularly in 
dense urban areas 
- Heterogeneous incumbent users and TV 
channels properties 
- Non-guaranteed QoS may limit scope of 
services 
 
+ Availability of spectrum assets dependent on 
regulation, currently LSA  considerd for 2.3 
GHz and 3.6 GHz spectrum band. 
+ MNO connectivity model as is 
+ Differentiation  through extra data capacity 
and high speed enabling QoS and QoE pricing 
+ Option to expand to capacity wholesale 
service 
+ For MNOs low cost offloading 
+ Nomadic Wi-Fi type of Internet access on 
dense urban environment hot spots 
+ PAL – GAA tier flexibility 
+ Spectrum and small cell hosted solution 
(SCaaS)  
+ Enables new vertical segments: IoT 
- Concerns over the QoS predictability 
particularly with and at GAA layer and 
neighboring users across census tracks 
- Transaction costs increase in early 
development with increased complexity 
d) 
Adaptability 
to different 
legal and 
policy regimes 
+/- Regulated and standardized the US and 
Europe / UK with variants, e.g., in Singapore 
and Canada. 
+ Low administrative burden 
+ Low entry barrier enables quick access to 
the market 
 
+ Legal certainty and security with existing 
regulatory framework  
+ Requires a harmonized framework in regional 
standardization and regulation in order to reach 
economies of scale 
+ Initial European focus but very generic 
concept adaptable to other regimes 
- National regulation with incumbent ecosystem 
+ Low administrative burden with low entry 
barrier on GAA 
- Uncertainty with short PA license term and 
GAA with opportunistic access only 
- Need regulation and standardization with 
incumbent ecosystem (DoD) 
- Initially US federal specific, need adaptability 
to other regimes 
e) 
Communities 
and trust 
+ Geo-location database is trust vehicle to 
protect incumbent users’ QoS 
- Heterogeneous GLDB operators in terms of 
services and business models 
- Rules out the possibility of decentralized 
agreement over accepted interference levels 
- The tragedy of the commons 
- Business model uncertainty limits 
incentives to invest 
+ Trust in predictability of QoS and pragmatic 
incumbent protection build on binary 
agreements and implemented in LR. 
+ Protection of LSA licensee business critical 
information quaranteed 
+ Use existing consumer ownership on 
connectivity with existing known services for 
lock-in 
+ Small cell ecosystem could introduce new 
players & shared asset opportunities 
+ Trust implemented using the SAS  
+ Internet giants ‘innovation’ ecosystems to 
trigger communities 
+ Customer data ownership on apps and 
services for customer lock-in 
+ Small cell ecosystem introduces new players 
and shared asset opportunities 
+/- Complemented by sensing as defense 
incumbents lack of trust in GLDB 
- Protection of MNOs business sensitive 
information assets in SAS uncertain 
- DoD OPSEC requirements 
f) Value and 
user 
orientation 
+ Main current use case is to provide Internet 
to rural unserved areas 
+ Free spectrum facilitates local niche 
services, e.g., for various IoT vertical start-
ups 
+/- Spectrum market related new value-added 
service opportunity for database providers 
utilizing positive network externality 
- Unlicensed users’ QoS not protected 
- Requires special user equipment 
+ Clear business model as is 
+ Additional capacity to serve customers with 
improved QoS and QoE 
+ Customer experience management as a tool 
for value differentiation 
+ Can open the market to new players with 
local licenses 
+ Flexible regulatory framework allows 
facilitates introduction of innovative local 
business model designs  
+ Local and Internet players offer 
differentiation based on user knowledge. 
+ Enables heterogeneous segments, e.g., 
consumers, enterprises, IoT 
+ Introduces new roles: SAS admin, broker and 
sensing 
+ Local services, e.g., media broadcasting and 
advertisement 
 
 
 
 

417
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The deployment of the LSA system will require 
relatively minor changes to the existing mobile broadband 
infrastructure. MNOs can utilize existing network off-the-
shelf, and build additional LSA controller as an added Self 
Organizing Network (SON) functionality on top of the OAM 
system. In the LSA system, envisaged for the 2.3-2.4 GHz 
band, spectrum control is inside the MNO domain, and 
diffusion towards cognitive networks, in large, could be 
retained within MNOs control. Furthermore, the LR has low 
complexity compared other sharing concepts as sharing will 
be static or semi-static and binary between the incumbent 
and the licensee. 
In the CBRS model with higher dynamics, the third 
opportunistic GAA layer and sensing function will require a 
more complex SAS system. In managing a higher volume of 
dynamic transactions, big data analytics capabilities of 
Internet players could become of need and bring competitive 
advantage. In the radio access side, higher dynamics in the 
spectrum control across the PA and the GAA layers and 
operator service areas will necessitate advanced spectrum 
analytics 
and 
horizontal 
co-existence 
management. 
Furthermore, with tight response time requirements this 
could also affect radio design of BSs. On the other hand, the 
PAL and the GAA layers with the common SAS will offer 
opportunities to common markets for licensed and licensed-
by-rule equipment, and services across customer segments. 
Higher frequency and the small cell focus layer enables 
CBRS operators to utilize their fixed optical infra assets in 
backhauling. In addition to this, the GAA layer has an 
optimal opportunity to leverage emerging LTE unlicensed 
and Wi-Fi ecosystems to scale and complement LTE 
operator and stand-alone solutions. 
B. Reduced Need for Ownership 
The second factor deals with the superior value 
proposition and transactions that offer access over 
ownership, and ability to realize more choices with rapidity 
and lower initial costs. Sharing economy are spawning a 
variety of efficient new as-a-service (aaS) business models. 
In the unlicensed TVWS concept, only device 
authorization is needed before starting operations on 
practically free spectrum, which radically lowers the entry 
barrier compared to two other concepts. Unlimited number 
of users are administratively imposed, rather than voluntarily 
chosen. Concept scores well in terms of efficiency of 
frequency bands utilization and rapidity of access. In the UK 
TVWS concept, the unlicensed approach is complemented 
with a licensed option for devices that must be manually 
configured. 
The LSA concept offers lower cost spectrum without 
coverage obligations, with QoS guaranteed by licensing. For 
a greenfield operator, the up-front investment in spectrum 
license combined with needed infrastructure continues to set 
an entry barrier. Therefore, the second use case of LSA on 
the band 3.6-3.8 GHz envisaged for more local licenses and 
deployment without need for existing mobile infrastructure 
or specific network management tools provides opportunities 
that are more prominent for new entrants. Extra capacity 
could in addition offer a scale-out opportunity with a 
wholesale service. The PAL operator in the CBRS could 
deploy similar kind of business model designs.   
The CBRS three-tiered regulatory approach can 
disruptively unbundle investment in spectrum, network 
infrastructure and services, and transform spectrum sharing 
further towards markets. Access to low cost spectrum with 
lower initial annuity payments for spectrum rights enables 
local ‘pro-competitive’ deployments, and further expands 
sharing mechanism for infra resources between operators. 
Furthermore, the light-touch leasing process will make the 
spectrum use rights held by a PA licensee available in 
secondary markets. The CBRS concept has potential on a 
longer term to reduce the need for parallel network 
infrastructure when spectrum, and related radio access infra 
assets are tradable, and hosted and shared on-demand and as-
a-Service. 
C. Utilization of Underutilized Assets 
Access and deployment of the underutilized assets on-
demand is essential to generate continuous revenue early. 
The value of the shared spectrum resources is highly 
dependent on the availability, liquidity and predictability. 
 Future availability of the shared TVWS spectrum assets 
is uncertain particularly in the dense urban areas. In rural 
area, TVWS operators are optimally positioned to create 
revenues from savings in spectrum costs, extended coverage 
and increased relative capacity. Coverage has potential to 
extend the customer base, while capacity could increase the 
Average Revenue Per User (ARPU). On the other hand, non-
guaranteed QoS, heterogeneous incumbent users, and TV 
channel properties limit usability and the scope of services of 
the shared resources. 
In the LSA approach, a sharing framework and binary 
sharing agreement negotiated between regulator, incumbent 
and licensee guarantee QoS and statistically known 
availability in advance. The LSA sharing framework could 
be initiated on a voluntary basis, but the regulator also may 
impose it. Availability of spectrum assets is highly 
dependent on the regulation, and the LSA was studied in the 
context of 2.3 GHz spectrum band as the starting point. The 
second use case currently under discussion is the 3.6-3.8 
GHz band, in which case the predictability of spectrum 
availability is even higher, as dynamic changes in spectrum 
availability do not occur. Similar predictability is possible 
for the second tier PAL operator in the CBRS. Utilizing extra 
capacity established MNOs could create differentiating value 
proposition around QoS and Quality of Experience (QoE), 
and have option to expand to capacity wholesale and hosting 
services. 
While the third opportunistic GAA layer offers the 
unlicensed Wi-Fi ecosystem type innovation environment, 
the availability, and particularly the QoS is not guaranteed. 
This has limited MNOs interest, based on traditional 
business models with need for the high upfront investments. 
On the other hand, both traditional MNOs and alternative 
operators could use the GAA layer with free spectrum 
resource for offloading and nomadic Wi-Fi type of Internet 
access. On dense urban environment, new business model 
designs and revenue structures could emerge combining 

418
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
spectrum with other shared assets, e.g., small cell hosted 
solution as-a-service (SCaaS), advertisement & transaction 
based models, and enabling new vertical segments within 
Internet of Things (IoT). Furthermore, the three-tier model 
offers network operators unprecedented flexibility and 
scalability through the ability for to move between the PA 
and the GAA tiers. This allows for the use of much shorter 
leasing periods, one to three years, without requiring a lessee 
to forgo their investment if their lease does not renew via 
simply converting from PA to GAA tier. For a new market 
entrant, this enables to try out their new service utilizing the 
GAA tier without having to invest in spectrum with future 
option to choose to buy a PA license when / where needed 
depending on the market and interference protection needs. 
In the system level, this flexibility and scalability between 
tiers combined with the secondary market provisions will 
improve spectrum efficiency in capacity, and particularly in 
value as spectrum can be regularly re-allocated to the most 
valuable use. The complexity of the CBRS introduces new 
independent or integrated roles to the ecosystem related to 
SAS administration, sensing operator and future spectrum 
broker that could increase deployment costs in early 
development. New technology introduction should be 
continuously assessed in relation with added complexity and 
deployment costs. 
D. Adaptability to Different Legal and Policy Regimes 
The 
harmonization 
of 
spectrum 
management 
is 
indispensable to unlock a wide range of positive externalities 
throughout the entire value chain. Scalability of all sharing 
concepts could be limited by fragmented national incumbent 
use 
cases, 
related 
different 
incumbent 
protection 
mechanisms, 
and 
regulatory 
differences 
affecting 
repository/database and spectrum management system 
architectures and implementations. 
 The TVWS concept is regulated and standardized the 
US and Europe / the UK with variants, e.g., in Singapore and 
Canada. While having a negative impact on the platform 
scale, the low administrative burden approach of the TVWS 
offers low entry barrier to the market.  
Existing European LSA regulatory framework offers 
legal certainty and security with relatively high initial 
administrative burden. This protects the turf for established 
players, but limits the scalability through high entry barrier 
during the early macro deployments on the 2.3 GHz band. 
While the LSA offers visibility and predictability needed for 
high up-front investments in spectrum and infrastructure, 
both the CBRS and the TVWS regulatory approaches are 
pro-competitive targeting to lower administrative burden and 
entry barrier. The higher frequency small cell use cases of 
the LSA envisage opportunities that are more prominent for 
new entrants, and similar kind of business model designs 
than the PAL layer in the CBRS. 
The CBRS will have advantage on leveraging the 
common US market. Sharing concepts in Europe require a 
harmonized framework in regional standardization and 
regulation to reach economies of scale. The regulatory and 
standardization actions needed with regulated or highly 
political incumbents’ ecosystem (like defense, media and 
broadcasting) will potentially limit the scalability of all the 
frameworks. Uncertainty is introduced with the short PA 
licensing terms, and the GAA with opportunistic access only. 
E. Communities and Trust 
Making spectrum accessible is not enough; the 
underutilized assets need to move within the community. 
The trust is the trigger of collaborative shared consumption 
that makes the system grow and scale. The creation of a 
critical mass ecosystem with positive network effects is 
important for all three approaches with new context model 
based spectrum administrator and broker roles. 
The TVWS concept rules out the possibility of 
decentralized agreement over accepted interference levels 
and is prone to the tragedy of the commons as number of 
competitive users grows. Heterogeneous GLDB operators in 
terms of services and business models may have additional 
negative impact to the community and the trust factor. 
The repository or database is the vehicle to accomplish 
trust in all the models. Trust in the predictability of QoS and 
pragmatic incumbent protection is built on binary 
agreements and implemented in LSA Repository. In the 
CBRS, the database approach is complemented by the ESC 
for defense incumbents. Additional challenge for the CBRS 
is protection of MNOs business critical information assets in 
a SAS, and to meet stringent DoD’s Operational Security 
(OPSEC) requirements. 
In network externalities, business model designs 
represent a co-opetitive situation between MBB, wireless 
Internet and Internet domains. TVWS operators leverage 
their niche through tailoring according to local customer 
segment they serve benefiting of extended coverage. 
Furthermore, particularly in rural use cases, communication 
bit rates could be increased to level that enables access to 
Internet and media services to new user group. 
In case LSA licensees have existing infrastructure and 
dedicated resources in other mobile bands, they can utilize 
their connectivity scale and customer base to achieve instant 
critical mass, and use existing consumer ownership on 
connectivity for lock-in. New entrants in the case of LSA 
and CBRS could build their critical mass and lock-ins using 
Internet ‘innovation’ ecosystems, and consumer and 
customer data ownership on apps and services.  
Shared spectrum local small cell deployments in all the 
sharing concepts scale out ecosystems from legal and real 
estate aspects to radio planning and site camouflaging, as 
small cells will attach to structures and building assets not 
owned by traditional operator. This creates additional 
opportunities for sharing and collaboration between 
operators and various specialist companies like infrastructure 
owners and providers, real estate and street furniture owners, 
utility service companies and backhaul providers. 
F. Value Creation and User Orientation 
Sharing economy platforms create reciprocal economic 
value. Simplicity of the offer built around user knowledge 
driven ‘demand pull’ is critical in differentiating with 
existing service, as well as in scaling new spectrum sharing 
enabled services. 

419
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
In the TVWS concept, unlicensed users’ QoS is not 
protected. To date, the primary commercial ‘niche’ use case 
has been the non-competitive Fixed Wireless Access (FWA) 
WISP, in which a single GLDB serves a set of unlicensed 
WSDs belonging to local WISP providing Internet access to 
unserved rural areas. Free spectrum facilitates local niche 
services, e.g., for various IoT vertical start-ups. FWA use 
cases need specialized devices seen as extra complexity by 
users. 
MNOs could utilize the surplus LSA spectrum in 
strengthening 
customer 
satisfaction 
through 
fulfilling 
existing need pull with familiar services and simplicity of the 
offer built on existing customer data via customer experience 
management tools. In general, spectrum sharing technologies 
should only be visible to end user through benefits offered in 
availability, coverage, capacity, data rates, or as decreased 
service costs. Both the LSA and the CBRS can also facilitate 
introduction of innovative local business model designs. For 
MNOs, they enable differentiation opportunities in serving 
more heterogeneous customer segments, e.g., consumers and 
enterprises, and for alternative type operators like Internet 
players faster efficient access to new systems and services. 
Local and Internet players are uniquely positioned to offer 
differentiation around existence of their extensive user 
knowledge. On one hand, operators prefer specialized 
services, or enhanced QoS traffic delivery for a fee to 
content, application, or over-the-top service providers. New 
entrants from Internet domain, in particular, on the GAA 
layer would like to see broadband as a utility, transparent and 
non-exclusive basis.  
In addition to providing mandatory spectrum availability 
information brokerage, the LSA repository, the SAS, and the 
GLDB administrators can capture value through selling 
advanced information regarding the quality of the shared 
spectrum based on information from both the incumbents 
and other sharing users. These value-added services will be 
framed by regulatory action, and their value will increase 
with the number of service users, creating a positive network 
externality. On the other hand, for operators the added 
complexity of the spectrum management can be seen as 
increased transaction and opportunity costs. 
V. 
IMPLICATION: TOWARD MARKETS FOR SPECTRUM 
SHARING BUSINESS EVOLUTION 
In this section, the analysis of spectrum sharing concepts 
discussed in Section IV are summarized using the markets 
and hierarchies analytic framework, presented in Section III. 
The summary of the anticipated changes into the mobile 
broadband ecosystem is depicted in Figure 6 and market-
hierarchy positioning in Figure 7. 
A. Value Creation and Capture Mechanism 
Transformation in the Ecosystem 
As a continuation to the sharing economy analysis, we 
used the concepts of ecosystems and business model to 
provide a framework regarding the resources, business 
model, value and trust, shown in Figure 6. Specific attention 
in the framework is paid to value creation and capture 
mechanisms and their evolution over time.  
Figure 6.  Value creation and capture mechanism transformation in the 
ecosystem. 
At resource level, a clear transition from controlling 
spectrum and infrastructure toward sharing of spectrum and 
infrastructure assets can be observed. At the business model 
level, it could be expected that that the role of openness in 
business models would gain in importance. Regarding value, 
the spectrum sharing appears to conform more the “value 
from service” -approach than what traditionally has been the 
case in the industry. In the value creation process, firms may 
work as an integrator, collaborator, transaction broker or 
bridge provider, and correspondingly take care of resource 
configuration microprocesses like streamlining, sorting, 
resource crowdsourcing or continuous testing. The theme 
trust was seen to play a crucial role in the spectrum sharing 
and future 5G business ecosystem in large. The security and 
privacy concerns remain in providing services from the 
customers’ perspective, but the role of transparency within 
the ecosystem was seen as becoming more pronounced. 
There can be seen two developmental processes ongoing 
towards spectrum sharing and 5G. On one hand, MNOs are 
striving for technologies that enable more efficient use of 
existing spectrum assets, such as Carrier Aggregation (CA), 
Multiple-Input and Multiple-Output (MIMO) antenna 
technologies, and LTE on unlicensed spectrum concepts. On 
the other hand, regulators on their part strive to increase the 
amount of available spectrum. Both streams of action 
influence the value of spectrum, either from technological 
cost perspective or through new stakeholders entering the 
ecosystem. 
From 
conceptual 
perspective, 
these 
aforementioned developmental processes give us a layered 
view on value creation and capture. Accepting that business 
models are the devices for creating and capturing value, both 
openness and integration of business models are essential 
elements for understanding the ongoing dynamics toward 
5G. Sharing of resources, whether spectrum or infrastructure, 
influences both integration of different players’ business 
models and the required degree and type of openness of 
these business models, and in turn having an impact of the 
value creation and capture achieved within the ecosystem. At 
the second layer, where regulators strive to increase the 
amount of available spectrum for 5G, also the different types 
of operators such as existing MNOs or upcoming micro-
operators [53] that could offer local services, influence value 
creation. However, the creation of trust, that also influences 
From security and
privacy
To transparency
From seeing value
in strategic resource
To the seeing
value of services
From integration of
business models
To openness of 
business models
From controlling
spectrum and
infrastructure
To sharing spectrum 
and infrastructure
Time
Value creation and capture mechanism
Resources
Business
Model
Value
Trust

420
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
value creation and capture, is a more multifaceted issue as it 
cannot only be created through regulative control: it requires 
also a certain level of openness that needs to be adopted 
within the future 5G ecosystems. 
B. Positioning of the Spectrum Sharing Concepts in the 
Markets and Hierarchies Analytic Framework 
As discussed in Section III, there are three major forces 
transforming industries towards markets through reducing 
asset specificity and complexity of product description: 
communication, brokerage, and integration [14]. Based on 
the recent platform economy research [55], spectrum sharing 
markets can be seen to provide the several benefits compared 
to hierarchies in the communication and IT domain. Markets 
scale more efficiently by eliminating gatekeepers and 
utilizing network effects, unlocking new sources of value 
creation and supply, and providing superior marginal 
economics of production and distribution. Moreover, 
commerce platforms de-links ownership of assets from the 
value it creates, and aggregates unorganized markets with 
lower transaction costs. 
We used the concepts of sharing economy and markets 
and hierarchies to provide a framework regarding the 
positioning of the spectrum sharing concepts as depicted in 
Figure 7. We argue that all the six sharing economy 
antecedent factors have positive effect in transforming 
towards markets. Complexity of product description is seen 
to be lowered particularly by platform, adaptability and value 
creation and user orientation antecedents. Assets specificity, 
on the other hand, is impacted by reduced need for the 
ownership, 
utilization 
of 
underutilized 
assets, 
and 
communities and trust. As a summary, resulted positioning 
of the analyzed spectrum sharing concepts is depicted in the 
Figure 7. In asset specificity, the high site specificity of the 
TVWS concepts impacts it’s low score. For the LSA, the 
time specificity of the availability of the spectrum limits it’s 
market characteristics. On the other hand, the CBRS score 
well due to scalable and flexible three-tiered model, fine-
grained spectrum allocation in time and location, and the 
sub-leasing option that enables vertical disintegration.  
Figure 7.  The positioning of the spectrum sharing concepts in the markets 
and hierarchies analytic framework. 
Low complexity of product description favors the LSA, 
which builds on existing licensing regulatory regime with 
guaranteed QoS, predictability and legal certainty. TVWS on 
the other hand, stems from most mature regulatory and 
standardization landscape globally, and the simplicity of 
offer to specific niche use case. The CBRS extends the offer 
to heterogeneous local use cases and service providers. 
Though, the flexibility and dynamism of the CBRS result in 
increased system complexity at early deployment phase.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Recently, several spectrum sharing system concepts have 
been introduced and widely studied to cope with spectrum 
scarcity, though to date only a few has developed into pre-
commercial deployments. This paper discussed business 
model characteristics and sharing economy scalability 
criteria, and evaluated recent spectrum sharing concepts, the 
TV Whites Space, the European Licensed Shared Access and 
the US Citizens Broadband Radio Service, with respect to 
these criteria.  
For a spectrum sharing concept to be adopted, it is 
essential not just to develop technology enablers to meet 
regulatory criteria but also to provide a scalable business 
model design for all the stakeholders. Harmonization and 
scalability of the platform and automation of processes will 
drive economies of scale and trigger early market opening. 
The model must be able to offer superior value proposition 
that offer access over ownership and ability to realize more 
choices with lower initial transactions costs compared to 
exclusive models. Value of the shared spectrum resources 
are highly dependent on its availability, liquidity and the 
predictability. 
Access, 
resource 
orchestration 
and 
configuration of the underutilized assets on-demand is 
essential to generate continuous revenue early. Scalability of 
all sharing concepts could be highly impacted by fragmented 
national incumbent use cases, related different incumbent 
protection mechanisms and regulatory differences. Trust is 
the trigger of all collaborative shared consumption that 
makes system grow and scale. The creation of a critical mass 
ecosystem with positive network effects is important for all 
three approaches with new database spectrum administrator 
and broker roles. Simplicity of the offer built around user 
knowledge driven ‘demand pull’ is critical in value 
differentiation for existing services as well as in scaling new 
spectrum sharing enabled services.  
By reducing the costs of spectrum coordination, spectrum 
sharing concepts will lead to an overall shift from hierarchies 
towards more use of markets to coordinate economic activity 
related to spectrum assets. This transition is triggered by 
communication, brokerage, and integration enablers from 
technology, policy and business domains that reduce asset 
specificity and complexity of product description.  
The analysis indicates that the TVWS concept actively 
promoted by the US and the UK administrations, benefits 
from practically free spectrum and low entry barrier. 
However, to date the level of market acceptance has 
remained low mainly due to uncertainties related to the 
available spectrum assets, platform scale, and predictability. 
Moreover, unlicensed non-guaranteed QoS has limited the 
High
Low
Low
High
Asset  specificity
Complexity of product description
Hierarchy
Market
TVWS
LSA
CBRS

421
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
scope of services and business model designs. The LSA 
provides high predictability and certainty for both the 
incumbent and the LSA licensee, leverages existing 
platforms and capabilities, and preserves low impact to the 
ecosystem and business models. The opportunistic third tier 
of the CBRS concept lowers entry barrier to new alternative 
operators, scale out ecosystem with new roles, and foster 
service innovation particularly. Similarly, the higher 
frequency small cell use cases of the LSA envisages more 
flexible and scalable opportunities for new entrants, and 
novel business model designs. On the other hand, introduced 
dynamism will increase system complexity, and requires 
novel technology enablers in building trust and ensuring 
pragmatic predictability in the spectrum management 
platform while minimizing additional transaction costs. 
At resource level, a clear transition from controlling 
spectrum and infrastructure toward sharing of spectrum and 
infrastructure assets can be observed. At the business model 
level, it could be expected that that the role of openness in 
business models would gain in importance, and the spectrum 
sharing appears to conform more the “value from service” -
approach than what traditionally has been the case in the 
industry. We argue that all the six sharing economy 
antecedent factors have positive effect in transforming 
towards markets. Complexity of product description is seen 
to be lowered particularly by platform, adaptability and value 
creation and user orientation antecedents. Assets specificity, 
on the other hand, is impacted by reduced need for the 
ownership, 
utilization 
of 
underutilized 
assets, 
and 
communities and trust. 
The sharing economy and market and hierarchies analytic 
theories provide a dynamic framework for analyzing and 
developing the spectrum sharing business models. In the 
future, spectrum sharing concept business modelling studies 
will need to be expanded to cover novel ecosystem roles and 
stakeholders in resource orchestration and configuration. In 
particular, co-operative business model with traditional 
mobile network operators and local alternative micro-
operators will be an important aspect to research. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by Tekes – the Finnish Funding 
Agency for Technology and Innovation. The author would 
like to acknowledge the 5thGear CORE++ and uO5G project 
consortia. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Yrjölä, M. Matinmikko, M. Mustonen, and P. Ahokangas, 
"Analysis of Sharing Economy Antecedents for Recent 
Spectrum Sharing Concepts," In Proc. The Seventh 
International Conference on Advances in Cognitive Radio 
(COCORA), Venice, pp. 1-10, 2017. 
[2] RSPG Opinion on Licensed Shared Access. RSPG13-538, 
Radio Spectrum Policy Group, Nov. 2013. 
[3] The White House, Realizing the Full Potential of 
Government-Held Spectrum to Spur Economic Growth, 
President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology 
(PCAST) Report, July 2012. 
[4] FCC, Second Memorandum Opinion and Order (FCC 08-
260), FCC, Washington, DC, USA, Sep. 2010. 
[5] Ofcom, Statement on Implementing TV White Spaces. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/binaries/consultations/white-
space-coexistence/statement/tvws-statement.pdf 2017.11.06 
[6] ECC, Licensed Shared Access (LSA), ECC Report 205, Feb. 
2014. 
[7] FCC, FCC 16-55: The Second Report and Order and Order on 
Reconsideration finalizes rules for innovative Citizens 
Broadband Radio Service in the 3.5 GHz Band (3550-3700 
MHz). 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/FCC-16-
55A1.pdf 2017.11.06 
[8] J. Chapin and W. Lehr, "Cognitive radios for dynamic 
spectrum access - The path to market success for dynamic 
spectrum access technology," IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 45, 
no. 5, pp. 96-103, 2007. 
[9] Y. Luo, L. Gao, and J. Huang, "Business Modeling for TV 
White Space Networks, " IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 53, pp. 
82 – 88, 2015. 
[10] P. Ahokangas, M. Matinmikko, S. Yrjölä, H.Okkonen, and T. 
Casey,""Simple rules" for mobile network operators' strategic 
choices in future spectrum sharing networks," IEEE Wireless 
Commun., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 20-26, 2013. 
[11] P. Ahokangas et al., "Business models for mobile network 
operators in Licensed Shared Access (LSA)," IEEE 
International Symposium on Dynamic Spectrum Access 
Networks (DYSPAN), pp. 263 – 270, 2014. 
[12] S. Yrjölä, P. Ahokangas, and M. Matinmikko, "Evaluation of 
recent spectrum sharing concepts from business model 
scalability point of view," IEEE International Symposium on 
Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks (DYSPAN), pp. 241-
250, 2015. 
[13] A. Sundararajan, "The Sharing Economy: The End of 
Employment and the Rise of Crowd-Based Capitalism," MIT 
Press, May 2016.  
[14] T. Mallone, J. Yates, and R. Benjamin, "Electronic Markets 
and Electronic Hierarchies," Communications of the ACM 
vol. 30, no. 6, pp. 484-497, 1987. 
[15] M. Mustonen et al., "Cellular architecture enhancement for 
supporting the European licensed shared access concept," 
IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 37 – 43, 2014. 
[16] ETSI, System Architecture and High Level Procedures for 
operation of Licensed Shared Access (LSA) in the 2300 
MHz-2400 MHz band. TS 103 235, 2015. 
[17] M. Sohul, M. Yao, T. Yang, and J. Reed, "Spectrum Access 
System for the Citizen Broadband Radio Service," IEEE 
Commun. Mag., vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 18-25, 2015. 
[18] The WINNF Spectrum Sharing Committee, "SAS Functional 
Architecture," 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://groups.winnforum.org/d/do/8512 2017.11.06 
[19] FCC, 
White 
Spaces. 
[Online]. 
Avaialable 
from: 
http://www.fcc.gov/topic/white-space 2017.11.06 
[20] Info-Communications Development Authority of Singapore. 
"Regulatory framework for TV White Space operations", June 
2014. 
[21] CEPT, the regulatory framework for TV WSD (White Space 
Devices) using a geolocation database and guidance for 
national implementation, ECC report 236, May 2015. 
[22] IEEE Standards Association. "Part 11: Wireless LAN 
Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) 
Specifications, Amendment 5: Television White Spaces 
(TVWS) Operation", 2013. 
[23] EC, Promoting the shared use of radio spectrum resources in 
the internal market, COM (2012) 478, European Commission, 
Sept. 2012. 

422
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[24] CEPT, Harmonised technical and regulatory conditions for 
the use of the band 2300-2400 MHz for Mobile/Fixed 
Communications Networks (MFCN), CEPT, ECC Decision 
(14)02, June 2014. 
[25] ETSI, Mobile Broadband services in the 2300-2400 MHz 
frequency band under Licensed Shared Access regime. ETSI 
TR 103.113, 2013. 
[26] ETSI, System requirements for operation of Mobile 
Broadband Systems in the 2300 MHz -2400 MHz band under 
LSA. ETSI TS 103 154, 2014. 
[27] M. Matinmikko et al., "Cognitive radio trial environment: 
First live authorized shared access-based spectrum-sharing 
demonstration," IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 
30-37, 2013. 
[28] S. Yrjölä et al., "Licensed Shared Access (LSA) Field Trial 
Using LTE Network and Self Organized Network LSA 
Controller," Wireless Innovation Forum European Conference 
on Communication technologies and Software Defined Radio 
(WInnComm-Europe), pp. 68-77, Oct. 2015. 
[29] Italy, "World's first LSA pilot in the 2.3-2.4 GHz band," Input 
contribution to ECC PT1 #51, ECC PT1(16)028, Jan. 2016.  
[30] RED Technologies, "Ericsson, RED Technologies and 
Qualcomm Inc. conduct the first Licensed Shared Access 
(LSA) 
pilot 
in 
France," 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.redtechnologies.fr/news/ericsson-red-
technologies-and-qualcomm-inc-conduct-first-licensed-
shared-access-lsa-pilot-france 2017.11.06 
[31] ECC PT1, "Operational guidelines for spectrum sharing to 
support the implementation of the current ECC framework in 
the 3 600-3 800 MHz range", ECC PT1(16)82 Annex 20, Apr. 
2016. 
[32] ETSI RRS, DTR/RRS-0148: Feasibility study on temporary 
spectrum access for local high-quality wireless networks, 
Early draft 0.0.6, June 2017. 
[33] The White House, Expanding America's Leadership in 
Wireless Innovation, Presidential Memorandum, June 2013. 
[34] The 3GPP R4-168006: Relevant requirements for Band 48 
introduction 
in 36.104, 
TSG-RAN4 
Meeting 
#80bis, 
Ljubljana, Slovenia, Oct. 2016. 
[35] FCC, Amendment of the Commission's Rules with Regard to 
Commercial Operations in the 3550-3650 MHz Band, FCC, 
Docket 12-354, 14-49, 2014. 
[36] R. Amit and C. Zott, "Value creation in e-business," Strategic 
Management Journal, vol. 22, no. 6/7, pp. 493-520, 2001. 
[37] M. A. Rappa, "The utility business model and the future of 
computing services," IBM Systems Journal, vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 
32-42, 2004. 
[38] H. Bouwman and I. MacInnes, "Dynamic business model 
framework for value Webs," in the Proceedings of the 39th 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, Hawaii, 
USA, vol. 2, p. 43, Jan. 2006. 
[39] R. Hallowell, "Scalability: the paradox of human resources in 
e-commerce," International Journal of Service Industry 
Management, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 34-43, 2001. 
[40] G. Stampfl, R. Prügl, and V. Osterloh, "An explorative model 
of business model scalability," Int. J. Product Development, 
vol. 18, nos. 3/4,  pp. 226-248, 2013. 
[41] A. Stephany, The Business of Sharing: Making it in the New 
Sharing Economy, Palgrave and Macmillan, 2015. 
[42] C. Zott and R. Amit, "Business model design: An activity 
system perspective. Long Range Planning, vol. 43, no. 2-3, 
pp. 216-226, 2010. 
[43] D. 
Teece, 
"Business 
models, 
business 
strategy 
and 
innovation," Long Range Planning, vol. 43, no. 2-3, pp. 172-
194, 2010. 
[44] A. Onetti, A. Zucchella, M. V. Jones, and P. P. McDougall-
Covin, 
" 
(2012) 
Internationalization, 
innovation 
and 
entrepreneurship: business models for new technology-based 
firms. J Manag Gov, vol 16, pp. 337-368, 2012. 
[45] J. F. Moore, "Predators and prey: a new ecology of 
competition," Harvard business review, vol. 71, no. 3, pp. 75-
83, 1993. 
[46] J. 
Wang 
and 
P. 
D. 
Wilde, 
"Evolution-generated 
communications in digital business ecosystems", IEEE 
Conference on Cybernetcis and Intelligent Systems, pp. 618-
623, 2008. 
[47] L. Berry, V. Shankar, J. Parish, S. Cadwallader, and T. 
Dotzel, "Creating new markets through service innovation," 
MIT Sloan Management Review, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 56-63, 
2006. 
[48] N. Franke, M. Gruber, D. Harhoff, and J. Henkel, "Venture 
capitalists' evaluations of startup teams: trade-offs, knock-out 
criteria, and the impact of VC experience," Entrepreneurship: 
Theory & Practice,  vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 459-483, 2008. 
[49] S. Choudary, M. Van Alstyne, and G. Parker, "Platform 
Revolution: How Networked Markets Are Transforming the 
Economy--And How to Make Them Work for You," John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc., Mar. 2016. 
[50] A. Sundararajan, "From Zipcar to the Sharing Economy" 
HBR, June 2013. 
[51] O. E. Williamson, “Markets and Hierarchies,” Free Press, 
New York, 1975. 
[52] O. E. Williamson, “The economics of organization: The 
transaction cost approach. Am. J. Sociol., vol. 87, no. 3, pp. 
548-575, 1981. 
[53] D. C. North, “Transaction costs, institutions, and economic 
performance,” San Francisco, CA: ICS Press, 1992. 
[54] M. Matinmikko, M. Latva-aho, P. Ahokangas, S. Yrjölä, and 
Timo Koivumäki, “Micro operators to boost local service 
delivery in 5G,” Wireless Personal Communications journal, 
Springer, May 2017. 
[55] M. Van Alstyne, G. Parker, and S. Choudary, “Pipelines, 
Platforms, and the New Rules of Strategy,” Harvard Business 
Review, 
vol. 
94, 
no. 
4, 
pp. 
54-62, 
2016.
 

