361
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Ecologies of Spaces for Enjoyable Interactions 
 
Alma L. Culén and Rune B. Rosseland  
Department of Informatics, Group for Design of Information Systems 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
almira@ifi.uio.no, runebro@ifi.uio.no 
 
 
 
Abstract— In this paper, interplay of diverse factors related to 
the space where public interactions take place is discussed.  
The technology itself, the physical space, activities and social 
interactions around them are all important for the user 
experience, particularly so when enjoyable interactions are in 
focus.  We call this plethora of factors and relations between 
them the ecology of an interactive space. Concepts such as 
visual immediacy, impetus and impedance, related to exhibits 
access and entry points are introduced in order to discuss 
engagement with installations, but also the space and social 
interactions. We illustrate this using the installation for 
enjoyment that we designed, implemented and subsequently 
evaluated in three public settings. Drawing on our findings 
from the experience with the exhibit, as well as conceptual and 
practical research related to interactive exhibits, we conclude 
that the concept of ecologies of spaces is useful for deeper 
understanding and design of public interactions.     
Keywords— interactive installations; play; public space 
interaction; user experience; Kinect; ecology. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Public spaces are increasingly also interactive spaces [1]. 
Small portable devices such as i-beacons, large and small 
interactive screens, diverse sensors, mobile and tangible 
devices enable design of interactive zones in public spaces 
relatively 
easily 
and 
inexpensively. 
Consequently, 
interactivity in public space is becoming ubiquitous. Some 
interactive installations have a specific functional purpose, 
e.g., touch based information boards, check inn points, etc. 
Others are more geared towards inspiration, reflection, art or 
entertainment. Interactions in this latter group are often 
designed for specific places, e.g., museums (Fig. 1), 
bookstores, cafés (Fig. 2) or galleries, often with no other 
purpose than to provide enjoyable experiences.   
 
Figure 1.  The New Children’s museum in San Diego offers an interactive 
DJ table with graphic display. Photo: Culén. 
 
Figure 2.  Funky Forest exhibit at Moomah café in New York offers young 
visitors an interactive experience of a forest ecosystem, photo from [2]. 
These places differ in how they engage their audiences. 
The galleries often focus on sensory experiences and wow 
factors, museums on new learning and knowledge 
constructing opportunities, while cafés and bookstores may 
extend a more commercial variety of offerings.  
An interesting new arena for enjoyable interactions is a 
workspace. There is increasing evidence that mood and 
creativity are deeply intertwined, see an analysis of a 25 
years long study on this relationship in [3]. Supporting good 
work environment seems to facilitate creative processes and 
collaboration [4][5]. Thus, many companies, e.g., Google 
[6], are trying the lighten the mood of their employees using 
playful and enjoyable interactions, and capitalize on 
heightened employees’ creativity. A likely future trend is 
expansion beyond museums, galleries, workspaces etc. into 
hospital waiting rooms, centers for elderly, airports, elevators 
and all other less grand public places where people may 
benefit from lightening up. 
Thus, as multi-sensorial, playful interactions enter the 
public sphere, it makes sense to look into what kinds of 
public space configurations are suitable for interactive 
installations that provide enjoyable, open-ended experiences 
and co-experiences. In [1], Rosseland, Berge and Culén 
discuss how user experiences with an interactive installation 
were influenced by the contextual setting of the installation. 
The installation was designed to provide multiple, co-located 
users with an enjoyable audio-visual experience in response 
to gestures and bodily movements, and was tested publicly in 
two different settings: a university library and a Mini Makers 
Faire at a science museum. The success of the installation 
was measured in terms of engagement time.  

362
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
This paper uses the same case as Rosseland, Berge and 
Culén’s paper [1]. The novel contribution presented in this 
extended paper is that of a conceptual framework, which can 
be used to discuss the design and evaluation of enjoyable 
interactions in public spaces. To this end, we propose the 
concept ‘ecology of interactive spaces’. The term is used to 
denote the complexity of material and social relationships 
that exist in any public setting with interactive technology. 
The paper aims to start a dialogue that examines the role of 
the material space and social practices when designing for 
enjoyable and social public space interactions. 
The structure of the paper is as follows: in Section II, we 
provide some background needed to understand how our 
framework relates to previous research in the field. We also 
discuss the work related to enjoyment, pleasure, play and 
games. Entry and access points to installations are briefly 
discussed. In Section III, we present our concept of the 
ecology of interactive spaces, with physical space attributes, 
technologies, activities, people and values as central 
components of the proposed concept. Section IV provides 
details from our case study of enjoyable interaction. In 
Section V, the concept of ecology is applied to the described 
case. Discussion and conclusion follow in Sections VI and 
VII, respectively.  
II. 
THE BACKGROUND 
The concept of the ecology of interactive spaces was 
conceived under the influence of Nardi and O’Day’s work 
[7], our previous work, and work by others, most notably 
[8]–[13]. From [8], we take with us the importance of 
designing beyond products and including activity spaces 
around interactive products into consideration. From [9][10] 
we learn to pay attention to entry and access points and that 
tangible interactions can enrich interactive spaces. Papers 
[11][12] address issues of understanding experiences and 
defining a concept of co-experience. Co-experiences are 
defined as user experiences through social interactions, and 
are central for public space interactions. From [13], we 
understand how even simple chaining of displays into 
different shapes influences by-passers and users, single and 
in groups Fig. 3. 
 
Figure 3.  Diverse screen configurations lead to different behaviors, [13]. 
A. Enjoyment: Pleasure, Fun and Play 
In order to design installations for public spaces that 
build on fun, pleasure and play, a co-located presence of 
other people, both acquaintances and total strangers, 
becomes an important factor for engagement. HCI research 
in this area may draw on social science research within the 
museum field such as [14], as well as on HCI research 
related to shareability [10] and enjoyment, e.g., Blythe and 
Hassenzahl’s work [15], where the semantics of pleasure and 
fun is discussed. We consider the enjoyment first. 
Enjoyment can be thought of as an experience fleeting 
somewhere between distraction and absorption, where, on 
one end, fun represents distraction, and pleasure represent 
the absorption side of the scale. In short, fun is described as 
the counterpart to seriousness. As a distraction, it represents 
a spontaneous escape from the tasks and worries of everyday 
life. The self, the hedonic ‘be-goals’ of UX, does not matter 
in this short-lived break from reality, but fun still satisfies an 
important psychological need.  
Pleasure is found on the opposite end of the enjoyment 
scale, taking on the role of absorption. It represents a deeper, 
longer lasting, more meaningful experience. Here, the 
connection to people’s inner self is made through immersion 
and devotion to an activity. Elements of challenge, 
progression, and demand for absolute concentration can be 
present, and thereby overlaps with Csikszentmihaly’s 
concept of flow; see [16] and [17].  
Play is another fuzzy term to corner, as illustrated quite 
well by Sutton-Smith who has dedicated a whole book to this 
topic: “We all play occasionally, and we all know what 
playing feels like. But when it comes to making theoretical 
statements about what play is, we fall into silliness. There is 
little agreement among us, and much ambiguity”, [17, p. 1]. 
Although the term play represents a myriad of 
experiences, it has been broadly described as a "free 
movement within a more rigid structure" [18]. 
Some of the most influential work on play is done by the 
French sociologist Caillois. He divides play into four forms 
and two types of play [19]. The four forms of play are 
competition, chance, simulation and vertigo, and the two 
types of play are free play and formal play [20].  
Playful behaviour is described as an oscillation between 
exploration and engagement [21]. Playful behaviour starts 
with exploration, and play occurs when the unfamiliar 
becomes familiar [22]. When the familiar gets boring, the 
focus returns to exploration. In this context, the goal of 
exploring is best described by contemplating “what can this 
object do?” The goal of play, though, is related to the 
question “what can I do with this object?” 
Games, as opposed to play, have a structure, as well as an 
objective to reach. It has been shown that play and playful 
design, including games and gamification, have a large effect 
on users’ motivation and engagement [23]. 
B. Entry and Access Points Re-visited 
In [10], Hornecker, Marshall and Rogers discuss the 
concept of shareability. Shareability is defined as a design 
principle that refers to how a system, interface, or device 
engages a group of co-located and co-present people with the 

363
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
same content or the same object. The authors propose entry 
and access points as the aspects of shearability. These 
concepts are related to two levels of user engagement: the 
user needs to 1) be motivated to use the installation 2) know 
how to use it.  
Entry points denote “design characteristics that invite 
people into engagement with a group activity and entice 
them to interact. Access points denote characteristics that 
enable the user to actually interact and join a group’s 
activity” [10, p. 3]. 
However, 
rather 
than 
distinguishing 
different 
components of entry and access points as described in [10], 
e.g., honeypot effect, minimal barriers, perceptual access  
and others, we propose a somewhat different approach, 
starting from the work of Gardner. According to Gardner’s 
theory of human intelligences, [24], people posses unique 
combinations of  visual–spatial, verbal–linguistic, logical–
mathematical, bodily–kinaesthetic, musical, interpersonal 
and intrapersonal intelligences, which orchestrate our 
understanding of the world and define our actions in it. So, 
naturally, these will have effect on how each person enters 
and accesses the sharable space. When entering a shared 
interactive space, the visual-spatial input would be of highest 
significance [24], as an overall assessment of the space, and 
activities in it. However, in the case of the installation that 
we describe in Section IV, it is easy to see that musical, 
body–kinaesthetic, intra and interpersonal intelligences 
strongly relate to the experience of the installation.  
In discussing entry and access points, we propose the use 
of concepts of immediacy, impetus and impedance, as well as 
fluidity of sharing introduced in [10, p. 3,9]. Visual 
immediacy, see [25][26], is proposed as a characteristic of 
visual–spatial intelligence, to help reason around interactive 
space initially. Immediacy gives the first impression of the 
space in terms of safety and appeal, as well as the initial 
understanding of the activities taking place within the 
interaction area. Impetus gives a nudge to engage in 
activities and impedance represents barriers, resistance or 
hindrances to enter the interactive space. Thus, the honeypot 
effect, for example, may be considered as a factor that gives 
impetus to majority of people to enter an interactive space. 
Lastly, in contrast to affordance, a design characteristic 
referring to just those action possibilities that are readily 
perceivable by an actor, impedance is a characteristic related 
to action possibilities that are difficult to perceive due to the 
existence of barriers, hindrances or resistances.  
Given that interactions in public spaces are strongly 
influenced by other co-located and co-present people, we 
need to consider both experiences and co-experiences. 
Fluidity of sharing captures how easy it is for people to 
engage in joint interaction and creation of co-experiences.  
C. Interactive spaces 
The spaces that come to mind in relation to public space 
interactive installations that have been already researched to 
some extent are museums, libraries and workspaces. 
Museums are increasingly involved in providing digitally 
responsive exhibits, as part of their strategy to attract visitors.       
These exhibits, as Heath and Lehn point out in [14], often 
involve diverse displays enabling either individuals or 
groups to promote thinking and discussion around material 
presented in the museum, thus providing additional 
possibilities for learning and understanding. Enabling 
learning is often the main goal of museums. Consequently, 
museums’ approach to evaluation of their interactive exhibits 
favours standard methods used in the museum field: focus 
groups, interviews and questionnaires, focusing on the 
learning outcomes. Thus, the experiences and co-experiences 
during the interactions are usually not the focus when 
applying the above methods. In addition, although people 
often come to the museum in groups, very few exhibits are 
explicitely designed for co-experiences [27], [28], or, as 
mentioned, for pleasure.  
Similarly, workspaces are also increasingly focusing on 
playful and enjoyable experiences at work, reasoning that 
such experiences may increase satisfaction with the work 
place, increase productivity and provide an easy entry point 
for people to meet each other [29]. 
In their paper [8], Kaptelinin and Bannon propose for the 
field of interaction design to move beyond design of 
products and into design of technology-enhanced activity 
spaces. The article presents three related arguments. The first 
one has to do with the fact that technological development so 
far has provided more support towards extrinsic rather than 
intrinsic human practices. This concern is related to opening 
the space for practices that are initiated by users. This leads 
to the second argument, the one concerning the ‘ecological 
turn’, nudging the field of interaction design to develop 
methods that allow intrinsic practice transformations. This is 
raising some of the same concerns as those in [30], 
employing the ‘semantic turn’, focusing on meaning of 
technological design interventions in the real world. The 
third argument is a direct invitation for the field of 
interaction design to expand to include creating technology-
enhanced activity spaces.  
The word ecology and related concepts such as habitat, 
species and environment, has been used in HCI for a while. 
After information ecology was introduced in [7], it became a 
common metaphor for describing complex relations between 
local environments, technology and people. 
III. 
THE  ECOLOGY OF INTERACTIVE SPACES 
Taking up the challenge presented by [8] to engage with 
design of interactive spaces, we choose to use the concept of 
ecology. 
When considering ecologies of spaces for public 
interaction, we propose five main components:  
• 
Space - including its properties such as materials, 
spatial layout, acoustics, light, and aesthetics, as well 
as the larger space of which it is part of, e.g., a 
hospital, a museum etc. 
• 
Technology - the installation itself, but also 
technology that is either part of the environment or 
brought in by people, e.g., smart phones, sensors in 
the room. 

364
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
• 
People – who use and inhabit the space; decision 
makers/owners of the space; designers and other 
stakeholders 
• 
Activities - that are conducted in the space, using the 
installation, the space and other people to create 
experiences and co-experiences.   
• 
Values - the explicit and implicit values, norms, rules 
that co-exists within a given location. 
In terms of design for public installations, each of these 
five main components of the ecology opens for new design 
opportunities. Being aware of all five, and that they need to 
work well together, may help designers to design better 
installations for enjoyment in public spaces. For example, the 
above mentioned paper by Hornecker, Marshall and Rogers 
[10] introduces shareability as a design principle for design 
of interfaces that engage co-located, co-present users in 
shared interactions. More concepts such as that of 
shareability are needed in order to generate a set of design 
principles covering all aspects of the ecology.  
In terms of evaluation, we do not know of any previous 
work concerned with evaluation of an installation as a whole, 
including all components of the ecology. What we find in the 
literature are frameworks for evaluation of diverse aspects of 
interactive installations, e.g., [20], [28]. Furthermore, in [28], 
it is pointed out that there are no frameworks for evaluating 
social interactions and co-experiences in museums, and we 
find this to be true for other public spaces as well. Yet, 
public interactive spaces are designed for technology 
supported social interactions, see [31] as an example. We are 
unaware of any framework for evaluating installations as a 
whole. Our previous paper also focuses only on the 
comparison of spaces, and only based on the length of time 
that participants engaged with the installation. In this paper, 
we take initial steps towards a broader and more systematic 
view when evaluating the installation, a view supported by 
the introduced concept of the ecology of interactive spaces.  
We now present details of how the installation was 
designed and tested in the lab, as well as what we learned 
from the lab testing, much along the lines presented in [1]. In 
Section V, we relate introduced concepts, not only as they 
pertain to the interface, but also the space, activities, people 
and the social component of the ecology.  
IV. 
THE CASE OF AN INSTALLATION FOR ENJOYMENT  
We now describe the basic set up of the installation. The 
set up description is followed by results related to the 
concepts of fun, play and pleasure (as discussed in the 
Section II) from user evaluation of the installation in the lab.  
The installation was designed to give a pleasurable 
experience. It did not solve a problem, nor did it aspire to 
help people reach meaningful life-goals. Its purpose was, 
ultimately, to be a research tool and give us as designers and 
researchers the opportunity to observe, evaluate and learn 
something about user enjoyment and behaviour in both 
public (library and museum) and a more private context of 
the lab. The installation was designed for pleasure, to be 
enjoyed individually, or with others, familiar or total 
strangers.  
The installation consisted of: 
• 
A long and narrow table placed by a wall. 
• 
Two Kinect sensors mounted on the table on top of 
each other. 
• 
One Shake ‘n’ Sense device [32], fastened to one of 
the sensors to eliminate interference. 
• 
A wall-mounted screen, either a flat screen TV or a 
canvas lit by a projector. 
• 
Two amplified speakers placed on the table on each 
side of the screen. 
• 
Two Mac laptops placed outside of the installation 
area, one running the audio and the other the visual 
system. 
In all locations, the installation was exhibited in the setup 
as shown diagrammatically in Fig. 4, and in the actual space 
in Fig. 5. Each of the locations had, at least, an area of four 
by four meters in front of the Kinect sensors. The installation 
consisted of two completely separate systems, one 
controlling the audio and one controlling the visual display. 
The systems were tuned to work together and appeared for 
the user as a single installation. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Diagram representing the physical setup of the installation. 
When a user, or several users, walked into the range of 
the sensors, the system automatically identified them, and 
started tracking their movement and playing music.  
 
Figure 5.  Actual setup of the installation in the museum during the Maker 
Faire, with interaction area marked on the floor. Photo: Berge. 

365
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The main way a user could interact with the installation 
was by extending an arm away from their body. More 
specifically, a horizontal hand movement away from the 
chest would trigger the system and start the calibration 
processes, engaging both audio and visuals.  
Before testing the installation in a public setting, we 
conducted lab evaluations to get some feedback on how the 
installation was perceived by users who had never seen it 
before, as well as identify opportunities for improvement. 
The lab, as a space, is a large room, with a single door 
access, not allowing any view of activities from the outside 
when the door is closed. Thus, it was ideal for private and 
personal exploration of interaction, allowing it to unfold 
without having to consider how the process looks like for 
others. We invited people in pairs in order to see how having 
to share the same interaction space affected the participants. 
All kinds of explorations were welcome, both on an 
individual level and in pairs. 
The ten participants were all either current or former 
students at the Department of Informatics. The sessions were 
videotaped, 
and 
the 
participants 
were 
interviewed 
immediately after finishing the test of the installation.  
Through the analysis of our evaluation sessions in the 
private lab context, we located many statements indicating 
an enjoyable experience. In this section, we want to look at 
aspects of the participants experiences related to the concepts 
the terms enjoyment, as discussed in Section II. 
A. Fun 
The installation in itself was described by most as ‘fun’. 
Blythe and Hassenzahl defined fun as a short-lived 
distraction from everyday life [33], coinciding well with the 
way the word is used in describing the experience by the 
participants. But what exactly was fun about the installation? 
The participants’ answers point first and foremost to the 
exploration of the installation and its functionality, and then 
secondly, to the immediate responses the installation gave to 
movement, and the sensory aesthetic experiences these 
movements resulted in. 
Pleasure 
was 
never 
mentioned 
directly 
by 
the 
participants, but several interviewed participants described 
an experience of ‘flow’ [34] when they were interacting with 
the exhibit, which can be linked to pleasure [15]. These 
experiences were described in terms of being ‘lost’, 
mesmerized, having a break from thinking and entering a 
relaxed ‘kind of mode’. The majority of the participants 
agreed on this being an essential part of their experience. It is 
worth noting that some of the participants pointed out, both 
explicitly and implicitly, that this flow-like state disappeared 
over time as the participants ran out of elements of the 
installation to explore. 
B. Play  
Several of the participants described the installation and 
the experience as playful. Their descriptions indicated that 
they placed the experience more in line with the definition of 
free play, rather than structured play (game). 
The playfulness that the installation enabled was deemed 
as very important, and the participants linked it strongly to 
the exploration and the open-endedness of experience, but 
also to the lack of control. The openness of the installation 
was described as an advantage, in the way that it encouraged 
interpretation and exploration. The lack of control was 
described as not important by one participant, as the point is 
not to steer something, but to play with the system and get 
responses from it, which resulted in a ‘good feeling’. In 
relation to the concepts of goals, rules, and competitive 
elements of play, even the self-proclaimed ‘competition-
focused’ participants acknowledged that those concepts were 
not the point of this installation.  
In the playful behaviour there is an oscillation between 
exploration and play, where play is triggered by learning or 
discovery and exploration is triggered by boredom [21], [22], 
[35]. We found multiple instances of this in the way 
participants described their explorative behaviour, which 
strongly resembles the process of playful behaviour, 
emphasizing the strong relation between playing and 
exploring: “It is just exploring, really. Until you feel you 
master (the installation) a bit, then it’s really exciting and 
makes you want to continue. You never know if you have 
explored everything and that’s positive, you never reach an 
end.” 
C. Aesthetics  
In terms of aesthetics, both the audio and the visuals were 
described as fascinating, atmospheric, different, beautiful 
and soothing. The participants thought the combination of 
the two fit well together and resulted in a coherent 
expression and created a good ambiance. It was also pointed 
out in a positive manner that the expression was kept to an 
abstract nature. That way it became easier to accept the 
audio-visual expression, in comparison to trying to depict or 
simulate something concrete. 
D. Exploration  
As stated earlier, exploration was the main activity that 
the installation was designed for, and the experiences during 
the exploration were deemed to be the most important, 
successful, aspect of the installation. Several of the 
participants expressed bluntly that exploration is the 
installation. The exploration was fuelled by the responses 
given by the installation and their abstract, mysterious, 
unknown nature. Or, to put in other words, the immediate 
responses to movement and actions, combined with lack of 
explanation, made the participants curious and eager to 
investigate. Their descriptions also highlighted one of the 
common characteristics of the human brain, namely the 
constant search for patterns and connections, which was 
described as an essential part of the process of exploring. 
E. Discovery, learning and understanding  
On some aspects of the experience, the participants were 
quite divided in their opinions. One of these aspects was the 
lack of explanation, or guidance, in the user interface of the 
installation. The majority of participants highlighted the 
absence of explanations as something positive. It was seen as 
a catalyst for, and a component of, exploration. However, 
some found it confusing, frustrating and incomprehensible.  

366
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
One of the participants, who favoured minimal 
explanations, pointed out that an installation such as ours 
would not be suitable for people who are not interested in 
exploring. 
The discovering and learning were described as closely 
related to exploration. For example, one participant 
described discovery as a direct result of the exploration. 
The process of understanding was the challenging part of 
the installation. When exploration led to discoveries and 
understanding, the participants had a sense of progress and 
achievement, giving them motivation to continue to explore. 
However, the lack of ‘new things’ to discover and explore 
eventually led to boredom and loss of interest. 
F. Progression  
Progression was the aspect of enjoyable user experience 
that was originally overlooked in the design process, but 
which surfaced through the evaluation of the prototype as the 
most important missing aspect of the participants’ 
experience. As mentioned earlier, Blythe and Hassenzahl 
link the concept of pleasure to the concept of flow, but they 
also argue that pleasure can in fact be thought of in terms of 
progression [15]. In retrospect, this actually comes across as 
self evident, when comparing our findings to the overlapping 
definitions of flow and pleasure, as a longer lasting, more 
meaningful and immersed experience devoted to an activity. 
The participants wanted more depth to the experience. 
They wanted more to explore, with gradual increase in 
variation and difficulty. When they felt they had exhausted 
their possibilities for exploration, they became bored, and 
this coincided with the earlier mentioned loss of the state of 
flow. 
G. Control  
The second most sought after aspect was control. On this 
point, the participants of the prototype evaluation were close 
to unanimous. They expressed frustration over not getting 
the expected responses from the system, and this put 
limitations on what they could do. It prevented them from 
being creative and expressing themselves through the 
installation, both in terms of visual and audio expression, and 
this was considered to be of large importance for them. Some 
acknowledged that they attained a certain degree of control, 
but they expressed that the threshold for gaining this control 
should be much lower in order to make this aspect of the 
installation accessible to more people. 
The lack of control linked very strongly to the absence of 
mastery, and on this point the feedback from one of the users 
was quite direct: “[The installation] lacks possibility for 
mastery.” And another user on the same topic: “I don’t think 
I would master it more if I used it for another 20 minutes.” 
The feedback we got from the participants brought forth 
the distinctions between the second and the third paradigm of 
HCI [36], and between usability and user experience. In our 
phenomenological approach, the focus was on enjoyable user 
experiences, and not so much on usability and ease of use. 
Also, the explorative and abstract nature of the installation 
meant that it was difficult to define specific usability criteria 
for it.  
This is not to say that control was not a focus in our 
design, but the lack of precision in the tracking data from the 
Kinects, and our experiential focus led us to design a system 
that, we thought, did not need very specific and precise 
controls. Nevertheless, our findings clearly show that lack of 
control detracted from the experience.  
The first public test of our installation, apart from one 
exhibit in the lab open to general audience, was at the 
Science Library at the University of Oslo, in two different 
locations. Subsequently, the installation was tested in a 
museum setting during the Makers Faire days. We now 
present our findings from these public exhibits of the 
installation and from the perspective of ecologies of 
interactive spaces.  
V. 
ECOLOGIES OF SPACES FOR ENJOYABLE INTERACTIONS  
A. Ecologies of space for enjoyable interactive installations 
in an academic library 
The science library actively encourages students to 
develop and use different kinds of systems and technologies, 
in the library. We were invited to set up our installation in 
the foyer on the ground floor of the library building for three 
consecutive days. This provided a good opportunity to 
observe how people react to and interacted with the 
installation in the wild, in the realistic public setting where 
the exhibit could be a more permanent one.  
1) The space 
The Science library is a large three stories high brick 
building, with lots of open space just across the main 
entrance into the building, see Fig. 6.  
 
Figure 6.  The entrance area is used as a café, a stage, for sharing 
information etc. The  screen used for the exhibit is marked. Photo: Juell. 
The facade and doors on the ground floor on the entrance 
side are covered with floor-to-ceiling windows, providing 
ample daylight and allowing people from the outside to see 
what is going on inside. Fig. 7 shows the exact position of 
the installation during the first two days of observation. This 
is a location directly opposite the main entrance and part of 
the very open area, as shown in Fig. 6. 

367
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 7.  The installation at the open space, across from the main entrance 
into the building, giving a different perspective of the space. Photo: Culén. 
 
Figure 8.  The same local environment, the library, with different exhibit 
space – less exposed to others. Photo: Berge. 
On the third day, a more secluded area of the library was 
used, see Fig. 8. This was done, in part, to allow people to 
feel freer when exploring the installation. 
2) The people 
The people frequenting the library are mostly students, 
and some faculty and other staff. They are either alone or 
clustered in small groups of 2-5 people. On the third day set 
for our observations, there was an event for graduating high-
school students on the ground floor. During the event, the 
area filled up with 70-100 pupils, but relatively few found 
the installation, and only 10 pupils actually engaged with the 
installation. 
The predominant kinds of relationships between the 
people at the library include friends, classmates, strangers, 
the significant other, colleague, employee, faculty, student, 
and the occasional sibling / parent / spouse. 
3) The activities 
Typical activities in the ground floor of the library 
include eating, studying / working, socializing, flirting, 
waiting, and walking. Most people were preoccupied with 
their own activities, and were not paying much attention to 
what other people were doing. They were there because they 
had some business there, either going to or from a lecture or 
the library, or to kill time until the next activity on their 
schedule.  
However, the activities in this space can change quite 
dramatically, with little or no warning for its unsuspecting 
regular visitors. A good example of such a change is the 
infusion of scores of high school seniors, which influenced 
the usual activity patterns. Thus, the open area on ground 
floor of the library is not entirely predictable space in terms 
of the activities that may take place there. 
4) The technology 
There is very little technology in the library foyer that is 
part of the normal inventory. There is the usual set up at the 
stage, see Fig. 6, with a projector and diverse points to 
connect laptops and mobiles in order to show presentations, 
movies and mediate discussions. Otherwise, there are just a 
few computer terminals and a few large screens, two of 
which were used for the installation.  
The TVs on the wall were hanging there permanently, 
usually displaying information regarding activities in the 
library, and the visitors were quite used to their presence. 
Our installation introduced a table with two speakers at 
either end, and two Kinects mounted above each other in the 
middle of the table. This constituted a fairly unnoticeable 
change from the usual setting.  
5) The values and norms 
There are numerous rules, norms, and values about how 
to conduct oneself in a particular public space. The library is 
no exception. Here, though, most of the norms are implied, 
rules unwritten, and are only enforced to the extent that 
people feel bound by them. Prevalent values at the library 
can be described as: be cool, different, similar, attractive, 
helpful, friendly, tolerant, competent and capable, curious 
and inquisitive, do not disturb others, be quiet, apply 
yourself, but do not overdo it.  
6) Findings from the library 
During the three days period when interactions with the 
installation were observed, we have spent a total of 7 hours 
49 minutes, distributed as follows: 2h on the first day, 2h 
36m on the second, and 3h 13m on the third day. 52 
interaction sessions were observed, some of them involving 
groups. The participants were mostly in the age group 
between 17-40 years old, with few older exceptions. 
The granularity of time-registration was not fine enough 
to draw any certain conclusions regarding time spent with 
the installation, other than that hardly anyone spent more 
than three minutes. However, when comparing the average 
time spent on group vs. individual interactions, we see that 
groups spent more than twice as much time then individuals 
interacting with the installation alone (1.2 minutes vs. 0.5 
minutes in average).  
Perhaps in contrast to the usual absence of music in the 
library, people soon learned that whenever the music started, 
there were people interacting with the installation. This 
allowed them to look up whenever the installation was in 
use, thereby slowly building an understanding of how it 
worked. This also allowed them to build both curiosity and 
courage to engage with the installation. We saw several 

368
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
examples of people coming up to investigate after having 
observed others interacting with it for a while. There were 
also examples of single persons and groups of people who 
were hanging around in the background, queuing when 
others were interacting with the installation. As soon as the 
people using the installation left, they would walk up and 
give it a try. This worked like a honeypot effect, a positive 
feedback loop, where use attracted attention and instigated 
more use. However, the installation was unable to keep 
people’s interest for more than a minute or two, which meant 
that there would have to be a constant stream of people to 
keep the installation in continuous use. When the installation 
was allowed to go into standby mode, people quickly 
returned their attention to whatever they were otherwise 
doing. 
In terms of the level of engagement, people who explored 
the installation together with others seemed to get more out 
of it than those who were alone. They would talk to each 
other 
and 
explore 
cooperatively, 
discovering 
more 
functionality. There were also several examples of people 
who had been interacting with the installation earlier came 
back with friends. 
Verbal reactions were usually immediate and short, 
perhaps also because the observers were hidden, looking just 
like everyone else, so people were more or less talking either 
to themselves or to their friends: 
“Awesome! Motion sensor, cool!” – Man X 
“Shit! Wow!” – Girl A  
“Very cool!” – Man Y 
“Pretty cool!” – Man Z  
There were also more reflective statements:  
“It responds to my movement.” – Man W  
After exploring for a minute, one man, of about 60 years 
old, exclaimed: “One could stand here all day, fooling 
around!” – Man P.  
Many participants explicitly mentioned the word cool. 
Coolness of technological objects may be an important factor 
for their acceptance, as well as a design goal, see [37]. 
 
Figure 9. The Maker Faire takes place in diverse locations within the 
Norwegian Science Museum. Photo: Juell. 
B. Ecologies of space for enjoyable interactive installations 
science Museum / Maker Faire 
The second public test took place at the Norwegian 
Science Museum, at the Mini Maker Faire in Oslo, Fig. 9.   
In the Museum, we observed users just one day, for 42 
minutes. During the observation time, 33 individuals 
interacted with the system, some alone and others in groups, 
see Fig. 10 and Fig. 11. The age span of participants was 
from ca. 1 year old to elderly well over 70.  
1) The space 
The Norwegian Science Museum is a large museum, 
receiving about 250 000 visitors per year. The museum 
offers many different exhibits in exhibit rooms and in open 
areas. Similar to the library, the main entrance leads into a 
large open area with a reception directly in front of the 
entrance, a cafeteria to the right, and an open area to the left 
leading into diverse permanent exhibit areas. 
During the Oslo Mini Maker Faire, this open area was the 
main exhibition area, and was filled with tables and stands 
with a plethora of different projects and technologies on 
display for visitors to explore. 
The area that our installation was set up in was within the 
area for permanent exhibits, in a D-shaped room, see Fig. 10. 
 
Figure 10.  Interacting with the system at the Norwegian Science Museum. 
Photo: Culén. 
We used a projector to project the graphics onto the 
straight wall, and mounted the Kinects on a table directly 
below the projection area. We used black tape on the floor to 
delimit a triangular interaction area corresponding to the 
horizontal field of view of the Kinects, in order to make it 
more comprehensible for the visitors where they needed to 
stand to interact with the installation. Furthermore, in 
anticipation of visitors arriving in small groups of friends or 
families, we placed small sitting cubes along the sides of the 
interaction area where onlookers could sit down and wait 
while their friends / children / grandchildren explored the 
installation. 
2) The people 
Typical visitors at the Norwegian Science Museum are 
families with children in the pre-, primary-, and middle 
school ages, as well as classes from schools around the city. 

369
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
However, during the Oslo Mini Maker Faire, which we 
were a part of, the visitors included a wider mix of people. 
This was to a great advantage for the evaluation of the 
installation, as there were more people with expectations to 
be surprised and engaged. There were university students, 
researchers, volunteers, model train enthusiasts, people 
dressed in medieval and science-fiction costumes, and 
makers and tinkerers of all ages.  
The predominant relationships among the people in this 
space were family, friends, or strangers. There were some 
colleagues, classmates, neighbours, and other acquaintances, 
but visitors mostly arrived with family and friends, in small 
groups of 2 to 6 people. To them, practically everyone else 
was a stranger. 
1) The activities 
People come to the museum to experience, learn, and 
enjoy themselves. But within the Maker Faire context, there 
is much more focus on the social, there is more noise, more 
exploration and interaction, and more of hands-on 
experiences, when compared to permanent exhibits. In part, 
the focus in on innovation and mastery of do-it-yourself 
variety.  
Regarding the installation, before arriving to the exhibit 
area, there was not much that deterred attention. If one chose 
to follow the way to the opening of the room with the 
installation, one was usually drawn in to engage with the 
exhibit, or, to sit and observe others engage with it.  
2) The technology 
The museum on the day of the Faire had many new 
makers projects utilizing diverse types of technologies. 
Permanent installations, mostly around technology, were 
also present.  
Our installation utilized different display than in the 
library.  Rather than using a TV display, we used the 
projector and the white wall in this space. The remaining 
technological components of the installation were not 
changed. Here, as in the library, people had their own mobile 
phones, cameras, headphones and other small mobile 
devices. 
3) The values and norms 
In contrast to the library, there are fewer norms to follow, 
in particular during the Mini Makers Faire days. The values 
are different and oriented towards innovativeness, creativity, 
mastery, joy, play, experience and socialization.  
4) Findings from the Maker Faire 
In terms of the level of engagement, people have been 
engaged with the exhibit for a longer time than in the library, 
even when interacting alone, as was the case of a young boy, 
ca. 5 years of age, who spent 5 minutes exploring. For 
groups, spending 4-5 minutes was common. The group 
members would talk to each other and explore cooperatively, 
indicating, in line with the library observations, that it was 
fun to share. Here too, there were examples of people who 
came back with friends or family. 
Verbal reactions were similar to those at the library: 
 “Cool!” – Boy X 
“This was fun!” – Boy Y  
“This was really fun!” – Boy Z 
“Do I influence the music? … Oh, I see, I do!” – Lady A. 
Comparing the engagement with that in the library, we 
found also that people had a lot lower threshold to join 
someone who was already exploring the system. It was 
interesting to observe that intergenerational interactions were 
not uncommon. Children would freely join adults whom they 
did not know. Very young children also tried the installation, 
as shown in Fig. 11. 
We are now in a position to present overall findings from 
our exploration of this installation, focusing primarily on the 
space, and measuring engagement in terms of the length of 
engagement. 
 
Figure 11.  The installation engaged all age groups, also frequently the children shared the space with adults, even when they did not know them. The child 
on the right hand side of the photo, was under two years old. Photos: Culén. 

370
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
C. Overall findings related to differences in enjoyment 
between the library and the Maker Faire  
Most of our interviewees from prototype testing sessions 
in the lab readily admitted that they would restrain their 
involvement with the installation in a public setting, if they 
would be willing to interact with it at all. The most central 
reason they gave for this was the fear of breaking social rules 
and norms, and of “behaving like an idiot”, as one participant 
put it. It was their fear of being perceived by others as doing 
something people do not normally do in public that would 
keep them from getting too involved. There were also 
comments to the opposite effect, indicating that breaking 
social rules and norms can be liberating and empowering. 
However, the prevailing notion was that social rules and 
norms would have a dampening effect on people’s level of 
involvement with such an installation in public settings. 
Some participants consistently underlined that they would be 
less likely to interact with the installation on the street or in 
the shopping center, than a destination like a museum or a 
gallery. One of the participants expressed this as follows: “It 
would be a lot more socially acceptable in a museum to 
interact with it. I would say my experience would have been 
much better in a context like that. If the installation were set 
up in Karl Johan [note: central shopping street in Oslo] I 
wouldn’t have stopped to check it out, also because I’m 
going somewhere”.  
This concern seemed particularly evident at the library. 
The openness of the location and the number of people in the 
surrounding area seemed to make people self-conscious and 
vulnerable when they triggered the installation, particularly if 
they were alone. At the museum, there was clearly more 
headroom for expansive and un-impeded behaviour. Many of 
the permanent museum exhibitions are designed for 
interaction and exploration, and the wide variety of strange 
projects taking part in the Maker Faire clearly made people 
less concerned about how their behaviour would be 
perceived by others, as this behaviour was expected in this 
context. Nevertheless, there were examples at both locations 
of people showing an interest in the installation but being too 
shy to try it for themselves. But by having the opportunity to 
watch others interact with it and build an understanding of 
how it worked, the shyness was sometimes overcome by 
curiosity, i.e., the impetus to engage became stronger than 
the impedance. 
 Our initial approach to grasp differences between the 
two locations and experiences people had while interacting 
with the installation in the library or at the Makers Faire, was 
to use grounded theory and coding. The main method was 
passive observation with coding. Three coders were used, 
two in the library, and a third person in the museum. This 
was done in order to minimize subjectivity. Furthermore, the 
coding schemas and outputs were compared and discussed 
among the three coders. Only data where there was 
agreement between all three was taken into account. Some 
measurements, such as taking time, were relatively 
straightforward. The main difficulty there was in keeping 
track of people getting in and leaving interaction space 
during one interactive session. The other measurements were 
more complex, such as recording people’s facial expressions 
and body language.  
In terms of time spent by participants interacting with the 
installation in the two locations, we found out that the time 
spent at the museum was significantly higher. At the library, 
no one spent more than three minutes with the installation, 
41% spent less than one minute and 72% of the observed 
spent two minutes or less. At the museum, the time spent 
with the installation is spread much more evenly across the 
intervals noted: 59% spent two minutes or more interacting, 
and some people seen outside the time frame of observations 
were exceeding the intervals noted significantly.  
Looking at the distribution of facial expressions observed 
in the two different contexts (Fig. 12 and Fig. 13), 
expressions of a positive nature are the predominant ones in 
both settings, but at the museum as many as 86% were 
smiling and even though 5% were noted as indifferent, 95% 
of the observed were deemed to have a positive experience.  
 
Figure 12.  Body language and facial expression distributions at the library. 
 
Figure 13.  Body language and facial expression distribution at the museum. 
Comparing the observations of body language between 
the contexts, a high degree of curiosity is observed in both 
settings, with 47% recorded as displaying a body language 
suggesting curiosity in the library setting, while 37% were 
recorded at the museum. The most striking difference 
between the library and the museum contexts was the high 
percentage of joyfulness (27%) and the low percentage of 
shyness (4%) of the museum setting, contrasting the low 
degree of joyfulness (3%) and high degree of self-
consciousness (15%) and shyness (5%) (combined 20%) 
seen at the library. The reason for combining self-
consciousness and shyness is that they are very similar traits. 
Seen in retrospect, separating these terms into two coding 
categories might have been unnecessary, considering their 
similarities and the fallibility of observation. 
If we look at the distribution of the differences observed 
in the body language, it seems that the library context was 
perceived as a less comfortable one. The given percentages 
may be directly related to impetus (curiosity, joyfulness, 
engagement) and impedance (shyness, self-consciousness, 
inhibitions), as these various attributes are just diverse 

371
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
aspects of impetus or impedance. What we can then see at 
once is that nearly a third (33%) of participants in 
interactions at the library experienced some form of 
impedance, vs. only 8% in the museum. 
Whole 95% of people who participated in the museum 
had expressions of satisfaction, vs. only 79% in the library. 
On the other hand, the percentage of those who found 
themselves fascinated was 41% in the library, vs. only 9% in 
the museum. This might suggest that fascination was 
expected to happen in the museum, while it was unexpected 
in the library. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION OF THE GENERAL FINDINGS 
The previous paragraph described our best effort at the 
time to evaluate suitability of spaces for our installation and 
measure differences in terms of the time spent on the 
installation at different locations. Here, we take a look at 
how considering ecologies of interactive spaces (with space, 
people, technology, activity and values as main components) 
through the use of concepts of immediacy, impetus, 
impedance, and the fluidity of sharing, may give a richer 
perspective on design and evaluation of installations for 
enjoyment in public spaces. 
A. Immediacy 
Entering the library, the installation, unless in use, was 
not immediately noticeable. Thus, the space itself did not 
provide for immediacy. As noted earlier, the visitors were 
used to information screens that were used for the 
installation, and physical changes to the space were minimal. 
Display blindness is a term used to describe the 
phenomenon where people can selectively ignore screens. 
Interaction blindness refers to the fact that it is difficult for 
people to understand whether a given display is interactive. 
Houben and Weichel [33] have described how display 
blindness and interaction blindness can be overcome by use 
of curiosity objects, e.g., objects that are designed to draw 
attention by sparking interest and curiosity. The term we use, 
impetus, is closely related to curiosity objects, being defined 
as all that (by design) nudges curiosity, interest, and activity.  
When the installation was in use, people entering the 
library would have immediate understanding that something 
different is happening in the open area. The music and the 
interactive movements are, normally, not part of the library 
experience.  
The situation was different at the museum during the 
Makers Faire. The installation was the only activity 
happening in the room. It was immediately understandable 
that there was an activity available in the room by observing 
the triangle on the floor, the lit-up screen and the sitting 
blocks (see Fig. 6). Thus, even if the installation was not in 
use at the moment of the entry to the room, the 
understanding that some activity is available in the room was 
immediate. An overview of the situation in the room was 
available at a glance, whether the installation was in use or 
not. 
The two different spaces that were used for the 
installation within the library illustrate the importance of 
considering how immediacy, in relation to understanding the 
space, influences interaction with installation. 
Immediacy can also be used to address the interface and 
its properties: is it easy to understand what one should do to 
engage with the system?  Are activities in the space properly 
understood at the glance?  
While it is not clear how to apply immediacy to values, 
one can pose the question when designing for a specific 
location: who are the people frequenting the location and 
what are their values? Is this information available at a 
glance at this location, or, are these aspects something that 
has to be found out gradually? 
B. Impetus 
The sound, graphical design and body movements are 
considered to be the most important, designed, ways of 
providing impetus for this installation. Perhaps in contrast to 
the usual absence of music in the library, people who were 
sitting in the open area, for example, in the café, soon 
learned that whenever the music started, there were people 
interacting with the installation. This allowed them to look 
up whenever the installation was in use, thereby slowly 
building an understanding of how it worked. This also 
allowed them to build both curiosity and courage to try the 
installation for themselves. We saw several examples of 
people coming up to investigate after having observed others 
interacting with it for a while. There were also examples of 
single persons and groups of people who were hanging 
around in the background, queuing when others were 
interacting with the installation. As soon as the people using 
the installation left, they would walk up and give it a try. 
This worked like a honeypot effect, a positive feedback loop, 
where use attracted attention and instigated more use. So use 
was also an impetus, a call for engagement. However, the 
installation was unable to keep people’s interest for more 
than a minute or two, which meant that there would have to 
be a constant stream of people to keep the installation in 
continuous use. When the installation was allowed to go into 
standby mode, people quickly returned their attention to 
whatever they were otherwise doing. 
Further impetus was provided for by-passers by starting 
the system whenever someone came into the detection range 
for Kinect devices. 
In the museum, further nudging was provided by clearly 
marking the interactive space on the floor, so it was easy to 
understand that there was enough space for more than one 
person, and this feature has enabled more group interactions 
than we observed in the library, also with total strangers, see 
Fig. 11. It was also clear that the norms and values in two 
places were different, the level of impetus that people 
needed, was lower in the museum than in the library. 
Impetus, thus, can be a part of design considerations 
when developing the interface, reflecting over the physical 
location of the installations, and as part of the activities the 
installation provides. If successful, the use of installation 
increases the positive effects.  

372
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
C. Impedance 
The two locations at the library were exposed and 
crowded, particularly the first one. This meant that anyone 
interacting with the installation would draw attention from 
not only the immediate surroundings, but also from galleries 
on the floors above. The sounds naturally draw attention 
from the surroundings. Thus, for many people this attention 
from the surroundings is not desirable and prevented them 
from engaging with the installation. The people who 
interacted with the system in the library on the third day, in a 
bit more protected area, often took the elevator shaft as some 
sort of extra protection from onlookers, see Fig. 8. 
Other impeding factors in the library were related to the 
activities, the lack of time, sense of the work environment, as 
well as the norms and values related to the space.  
The space we were assigned at the museum during the 
Maker Faire was partially confined, making it close to 
impossible for others to observe the installation, or the 
people interacting with it, from afar. This seemed to give 
participants a sense of privacy and allowed them to let 
themselves get more carried away than at the library. Also, 
having sitting blocks for onlookers to sit on was very 
beneficial, Fig. 5. It allowed the ones who did not want to try 
the installation to sit down and relax, but still be able to 
communicate and take part in the experience with their 
friends who were interacting with the installation. Thus, 
impedance was minimized by providing sense of privacy, 
safety, some level of comfort and ability to participate, even 
when sitting on the sidelines. 
D. Fluidity of sharing 
The system used for our installation was designed with 
fluidity of sharing in mind. Kinect naturally enables multiple 
users to interact with the system, but our application used 
abstract graphical interfaces, allowing, ideally, everyone to 
enjoy interacting and sharing. In addition, we observed that 
the fluidity of sharing was much higher in the museum. 
There, we could observe strangers interacting (see Fig. 11) 
along the side of those who were friends or family, while the 
group interactions in the library involved mostly friends.  
This suggests that fluidity also depends on the norms and 
values of the space.  
VII. CONCLUSION  
We have defined the ecology of interactive spaces as a 
function of the physical properties of the space, people, 
activities, technologies and values and norms associated with 
the location for the installation. Looking at the ecology of 
interactive spaces is both timely, as public space interactions 
are becoming ubiquitous, and desirable since concepts for 
evaluating experiences are still few and divided by 
disciplines, e.g., social sciences, HCI. Combining the 
technical, social, architectural and human aspects of the 
space for which interaction is designed, significantly 
increases chances to succeed in creating enjoyable 
interactive installations in the public room. In order to 
facilitate reflection and design of ecologies of interactive 
spaces, we have introduced concepts of immediacy, impetus, 
impedance and fluidity of sharing as aid in “getting the big 
picture” first. We believe that if we had this framework at the 
start of our own design process, the outcome of that process 
would have been different, and better. It would aid 
understanding and study of relationships between the space, 
people, technology, interaction with it and values. 
Our hope is that the concept will grow and get to be 
better defined through other examples and studies, yielding a 
set of principles and guidelines not only for design, but also 
for the evaluation of interactive installations in public spaces. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Rosseland, S. Berge, and A. L. Culén, “Publicly Displayed 
Interactive Installations: Where Do They Work Best?” 
Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on 
Advances in Computer-Human Interactions, 2014, pp. 1–8. 
[2] “Design I/O - Funky Forest Moomah.” [Online]. Available 
from: http://design-io.com/projects/Moomah/. Accessed on 
Dec. 5, 2014. 
[3] M. Baas, C. K. W. De Dreu, and B. A. Nijstad, “A meta-
analysis of 25 years of mood-creativity research: hedonic tone, 
activation, or regulatory focus?” Psychol. Bull., vol. 134, no. 
6, pp. 779–806, Nov. 2008. 
[4] S. Doorley and S. Witthoft, Make Space: How to Set the Stage 
for Creative Collaboration, 1st edition. Wiley, 2012. 
[5] A. P. McGinn, K. R. Evenson, A. H. Herring, S. L. Huston, 
and D. A. Rodriguez, “Exploring Associations between 
Physical Activity and Perceived and Objective Measures of 
the Built Environment,” J. of Urban Health, vol. 84, no. 2, pp. 
162–184, Mar. 2007. 
[6] “Do Google’s playful perks spark creativity?” SmartPlanet. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.smartplanet.com 
/blog/bulletin/do-googles-playful-perks-spark-creativity/. 
Accessed on Dec. 5, 2014. 
[7] B. A. Nardi and V. L. O’Day, Information ecologies: using 
technology with heart. Cambridge, Mass., MIT Press, 1999. 
[8] V. Kaptelinin and L. J. Bannon, “Interaction Design Beyond 
the Product: Creating Technology-Enhanced Activity Spaces,” 
Human–Computer Interaction, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 277–309, 
2012. 
[9] E. Hornecker and J. Buur, “Getting a grip on tangible 
interaction: a framework on physical space and social 
interaction,” Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on 
Human Factors in computing systems, 2006, pp. 437–446. 
[10] E. Hornecker, P. Marshall, and Y. Rogers, “From Entry to 
Access: How Shareability Comes About,” Proceedings of the 
Conference on Designing Pleasurable Products and Interfaces, 
New York, NY, USA, 2007, pp. 328–342. 
[11] K. Battarbee, “Defining Co-experience,” Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Designing Pleasurable Products 
and Interfaces, New York, NY, USA, 2003, pp. 109–113. 
[12] J. Forlizzi and K. Battarbee, “Understanding experience in 
interactive systems,” Proceedings of the 5th conference on 
Designing interactive systems: processes, practices, methods, 
and techniques, 2004, pp. 261–268. 
[13] M. T. Koppel, G. Bailly, J. Müller, and R. Walter, “Chained 
displays: configurations of public displays can be used to 
influence actor-, audience-, and passer-by behaviour,” 
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2012, pp. 317–
326. 
[14] C. Heath and D. von Lehn, “Configuring ‘Interactivity’ 
Enhancing Engagement in Science Centres and Museums,” 
Social Studies of Science, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 63–91, Feb. 2008. 

373
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[15] M. Blythe and M. Hassenzahl, “The Semantics of Fun: 
Differentiating Enjoyable Experiences,” Funology, M. A. 
Blythe, K. Overbeeke, A. F. Monk, and P. C. Wright, Eds. 
Springer Netherlands, 2005, pp. 91–100. 
[16] M. Csikszentmihalyi, Flow: the psychology of optimal 
experience. New York, N.Y.: Harper Perennial, 1991. 
[17] B. Sutton-Smith, The ambiguity of play. Cambridge, Mass., 
Harvard University Press, 1997. 
[18] K. Salen and E. Zimmerman, Rules of play: game design 
fundamentals. Cambridge, Mass., MIT Press, 2003. 
[19] R. Caillois, Man, Play, and Games. University of Illinois 
Press, 2001. 
[20] B. Costello and E. Edmonds, “A Tool for Characterizing the 
Experience of Play,” Proceedings of the Sixth Australasian 
Conference on Interactive Entertainment, New York, NY, 
USA, 2009, pp. 2:1–2:10. 
[21] B. Costello and E. Edmonds, “A study in play, pleasure and 
interaction design,” Proceedings of the conference on 
Designing pleasurable products and interfaces, New York, 
NY, USA, 2007, pp. 76–91. 
[22] J. N. Lieberman, Playfulness: its relationship to imagination 
and creativity. New York: Academic Press, 1977. 
[23] J. Ferrara, Playful Design, 1st edition. Rosenfeld Media, 2012. 
[24] H. Gardner, Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple 
Intelligences. New York. Basic Books, 1983. 
[25] A. Karabeg, M. N. Akkok, and K. Kristensen, “Towards a 
language for talking about information visualization aimed at 
presentation on the Web,” Proceedings of the Eighth 
International Conference on Information Visualisation, IV 
2004, 2004, pp. 930 – 937. 
[26] A. L. Culén, “Visual Immediacy for Sense-Making in HCI,” 
Proceedings of the international Conference on Interfaces and 
Human Computer Interaction, 2014, pp. 265–270. 
[27] F. Garzotto and F. Rizzo, “Interaction Paradigms in 
Technology-enhanced Social Spaces: A Case Study in 
Museums,” Proceedings of the Conference on Designing 
Pleasurable Products and Interfaces, New York, NY, USA, 
2007, pp. 343–356. 
[28] R. Castro, “Var det alt? En studie av brukeropplevelser i TV-
studio på INSPIRIA science center,” M.S. Thesis, University 
of Oslo, 2014. 
[29] S. C. Bolton and M. Houlihan, “Are we having fun yet? A 
consideration of workplace fun and engagement,” Employee 
Relations, vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 556–568, Oct. 2009. 
[30] K. Krippendorff, The Semantic Turn: A New Foundation for 
Design. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 2005. 
[31] “The Royal London Hospital Play Space | Room to Bloom.” 
[Online]. Available from: http://www.room-to-bloom.com 
/blog/the-royal-london-hospital-play-space/. Accessed on Dec. 
5, 2014. 
[32] A. Maimone and H. Fuchs, “Reducing interference between 
multiple structured light depth sensors using motion,” 
Proceedings of IEEE Virtual Reality Conference, VRW 2012, 
2012, pp. 51–54. 
[33] S. Houben and C. Weichel, “Overcoming interaction blindness 
through curiosity objects,” Extended Abstracts on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’13, New York, NY, 
USA, 2013, pp. 1539–1544. 
[34] “Go 
With 
The 
Flow.” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/4.09/czik_pr.html. 
Accessed on Dec. 5, 2014. 
[35] B. M. Costello and E. A. Edmonds, “Directed and emergent 
play,” Proceedings of the Seventh ACM conference on 
Creativity and cognition, New York, NY, USA, 2009, pp. 
107–116. 
[36] S. Harrison, D. Tatar, and P. Sengers, “The three paradigms of 
HCI,” in Alt. Chi. Session at the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, San Jose, California, 
USA, 2007, pp. 1–18. 
[37] A. L. Culén and A. Gasparini, “Situated Techno-Cools: factors 
that contribute to making technology cool and the study case 
of iPad in education,” PsycNology Journal, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 
117–139, 2012. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

