299
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Picking and Assortment Operation Assistance Systems with the Depth Camera 
 
Yoshitoshi Murata, Yuki Takehara 
Faculty of Software and Information 
Science 
Iwate Prefectural University 
Takizawa, Japan 
e-mail: y-murata@iwate-pu.ac.jp,  
g031m104@s.iwate-pu.ac.jp 
Yoshihiro Uda 
Graduate School of Software and 
Information Science, Iwate Prefectural 
University 
Takizawa, Japan 
e-mail: uda@ieee.org 
Takamichi Yoshikawa 
Aioi Systems Co., Ltd 
Ota-ku, Tokyo, Japan 
e-mail: yoshikawa@hello-aioi.com 
 
Abstract—Industry 4.0 is a well-regarded concept for 
automation in manufacturing. However, a shortage of high-
skilled workers has necessitated realistic solutions for 
establishing high productivity and quality. We propose an 
information and communications technology (ICT) picking 
assistance system to lower human errors for high quality. In this 
system, a depth camera detects whether a hand is inserted into 
the correct cell of a shelf to pick items and whether a hand is 
inserted into the correct box in a cart to put items in. MS-
KINECT is used as a depth camera. The misdetection rate for 
wrong operation in the picking process is very low in an 
experimental evaluation, and we expect it to be very close to zero 
in the near future. We determine that the proposed picking and 
assortment error detection function would be useful for business. 
In this system, projection mapping technologies are used to 
indicate which cell items should be picked from, instead of using 
a lamp. The indicating system, which uses a projector, has a 
lower introduction cost than those using a lamp. We clarify that 
gray sandpaper is one of the best materials to serve as a tag for 
MS-KINECT to recognize indicated colors and digits. 
Keywords—Smart factory; Industry 4.0; picking; depth 
camera; MS-KINECT; projection mapping. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
We are developing picking assistance system [1]. The 
German government’s Industry 4.0 (ID4) initiative Industrie 
4.0 has revolutionized Germany’s manufacturing industry [2], 
with goods in “smart factories” being moved, picked, and 
delivered automatically [3]. ID4 technologies are useful for 
establishing high productivity and quality in light of a 
shortage of high-skilled workers. If the latest manufacturing 
robotics and custom assembly lines were introduced in model 
factories for ID4, products would be automatically conveyed 
and assembled, and there would be fewer workers. However, 
it is impossible for most existing factories to replace all of 
their manufacturing lines with more advanced ones. Realistic 
solutions for establishing high productivity and quality in light 
of a shortage of high-skilled workers are as follows: 
(1) 
Developing 
and 
introducing 
information 
and 
communications technology (ICT) systems to bring low-
skilled workers closer to the level of high-skilled workers 
and to lower human errors. 
(2) Replacing workers with robotics step by step. 
 
As in manufacturing, picking processes have been widely 
introduced in logistic centers. Several kinds of robot 
warehouses are being developed and introduced [4–6]. These 
robot warehouses save workers from having to navigate large 
warehouses to accomplish picking. Bins or shelves in which 
goods are stored come to work stations for workers or robots 
to place the goods into a box. The goods robots can pick are 
limited, such as stationaries or packaged goods. Robots have 
difficulty picking food materials or diversely shaped goods. 
Therefore, workers are still required in the picking process.  
In this paper, we propose an ICT picking and assortment 
assistance system to lower human errors in the picking process. 
The picking process is when a worker picks items, such as 
assembly parts out of numbered cells on shelves and puts them 
into assortment boxes. For example, in an automobile 
assembly factory, a worker takes different parts from cells of 
a shelf and puts them into assortment boxes corresponding to 
production orders. The parts in each cell are the same, and 
different items are stored in different cells. Assortment boxes 
are carried to workers on an assembly line. If a worker picks 
parts from an incorrect cell and the parts are subsequently 
assembled into a product, it would take too much time to 
detect the incorrect parts and exchange them with correct ones. 
In the worst case, an automobile assembled with incorrect 
parts could be shipped.  
Even though picking operations are monotonous, 
completely preventing mistakes is difficult because workers 
are human. Therefore, there are several kinds of picking 
assistance systems for decreasing incorrect pickings. Aioi 
Systems Co. Ltd., to which one of the co-authors belongs, 
provides the digital picking system “L-PICK,” which 
indicates the cells of a shelf and the number of items to pick 
from those cells by lighting a lamp mounted on each cell [7]. 
However, since L-PICK does not have a function that detects 
incorrect picking, completely preventing it is impossible. 
Many companies request Aioi Systems Co. Ltd. to develop 
and provide the picking error detection system to lower 
recovery cost. Hence, we developed an operation error 
detection system for the picking process with MS-KINECT 
[8] as the depth camera in first version [9]. In this system, two 
sets of MS-KINECT traced a hand wearing a colored glove 
from diagonally backward and monitor whether the hand was 
inserted into a cell. Since this system used a color tracing 
function to measure the position of a hand, it could not be 
applied to a food material delivery service because of 
differences in food color. Therefore, we proposed the new 
picking assistance system as the next version in ACHI 2018 
[1]. In case of the picking assistance system, a set of MS-
KINECT was mounted on the top of a shelf. Since our partner 
Aioi Systems Co. Ltd. developed a new cell lighting 

300
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
technology that used a projector [7], we used it in our new 
system. The system recognized the position of a cell lit by a 
projector and the number presented on a tag, detected the 
position of a cell into which a hand was inserted, counted the 
number of times a hand had been inserted into the cell, and 
compares them with recognized ones.  
In addition to the picking assistance system, we also 
developed an assortment assistance system. In this system, 
MS-KINECT was mounted above an assortment of boxes to 
detect whether a hand that had items was inserted into the 
correct assortment box. The misdetection rate for wrong 
operations during picking was low in an experimental 
evaluation, and we expect it to be close to zero in the near 
future. However, the assortment detection accuracy was 
determined to be unacceptable in the experimental evaluation. 
In this paper, we propose not only a picking assistance 
system but also a new assortment assistance system for boxes, 
in which the misdetection rate for wrong operation is low. 
After introducing related works in Section II, detection 
methods for incorrect operations are introduced in Section III. 
Detection technologies in which MS-KINECT is used are 
introduced in Section IV. Experiments and results are 
described in Section V. Conclusions and future work are 
described in Section VI. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Human beings have excellent abilities. Workers in an 
automobile assembly factory can use their sense of vision and 
touch to detect subtle depressions or distortions that a 
computer system cannot. On the other hand, human beings 
sometimes make mistakes. Several kinds of assistance 
systems that decrease the number of mistakes have therefore 
been developed. Existing picking assistance systems are 
introduced in this section. 
A picking assistance system has some of the following 
four functions: 
(1) Indicating a cell of a shelf from which an item should be 
picked and the number of items that should be picked 
from that cell. 
(2) Detecting whether a worker has picked the correct number 
of items from the correct cell. 
(3) Indicating the box or cell of a tray in which picked items 
should be stored. 
(4) Detecting whether a worker has put items in the correct 
box or cell of a tray. 
 
There are several kinds of system for indicating cells. Aioi 
Systems Co. Ltd. provides the digital picking system “L-
PICK,” which indicates cells of a shelf and the number of 
items to pick from those cells by lighting a lamp mounted on 
each cell [3]. There are several systems in which a Head-Up 
Display (HUD) and augmented reality technology are used to 
assist picking operations. Schwerdtfeger used a semi-
transparent HUD and augmented reality technology enabling 
a worker to see an arrow or frame displayed in front of a cell 
of a shelf [10]. Baumann used a single-eye HUD, and a 
worker recognized a cell from which he or she would pick up 
items with guidance displayed on a mirror of the HUD 
[11][12]. Guo compared the HUD-based systems with the 
cart-mounted display (CMD), Light, and Paper Pick List as 
picking assistance systems [13]. This system also provided 
the delivery assistance function. They concluded that the 
pick-by-HUD and pick-by-CMD were superior by all metrics 
than the current pick-by-paper and pick-by-light systems, but 
the differences between the HUD and CMD were not 
significant and did not show that a HUD was better than a 
CMD. However, experimental results should be different in 
other experimental conditions. In practical situations, the 
number of cells (in that paper they were called bins) is usually 
less than 12, and a worker can see a lighted lamp at a glance. 
And multiple lamps are not lighted simultaneously; a single 
lamp is lighted for each occurrence where an item is picked 
up. Therefore, the practical error rates and task times 
recorded in this study would produce better results than those 
in that study. Furthermore, it is not certain whether a worker 
should have a palm-size PC and wear a HUD for extended 
periods. In our research, most workers would not like to carry 
a barcode reader. 
As described above, systems indicating a cell by a lamp 
have been used in business. Likewise, indicating systems 
using a HUD have been developed in research.  
We consider a picking and assortment error detection 
method in the next section. 
III. 
PICKING AND ASSORTMENT ERROR DETECTION 
METHODS 
In this section, prospective methods for detecting whether 
items are picked from the correct cell and assorted to the 
correct box are introduced and evaluated. This time, in 
addition to detecting when items are picked from a cell, these 
methods determine when a hand is inserted into a cell, when 
a tag, such as the barcode attached to a cell is read, and when 
a picked item is dropped, and a new item is picked. The 
following are the prospective methods: 
(1) Reading a barcode attached on a cell with a barcode  
reader. 
(2) Reading a passive Radio Frequency (RF)-ID set on a 
cell with a RF-ID reader. 
(3) Reading an active RF-ID set on a cell with a RF-ID 
reader. 
(4) Detecting change of weight with a load sensor. 
(5) Detecting when a hand and/or arm is inserted into the 
correct cell with a photoelectric sensor. 
(6) Detecting when a hand and/or arm is inserted into the 
correct cell with a depth camera, such as MS-KINECT. 
 
The above methods are narrowed down by the following 
evaluation criteria: 
(1) Additional cost to introduce a detection function. 
(2) Additional operations for a worker. 
(3) Detection accuracy. 
An evaluation of the picking error detection methods is 
shown in Table I. As for barcodes, the cost of attaching a 

301
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
barcode to each cell is cheap, and barcode readers are not 
expensive. However, carrying a barcode reader and scanning 
barcodes are cumbersome for workers.  
Passive RF-ID presents the same difficulties as barcodes. 
In addition to having to carry a RF-ID reader, the weak signal 
strength of passive RF-ID requires positioning the reader in 
close proximity to a RF-ID tag. 
As for active RF-ID, despite having to carry the reader, it 
does not need to be positioned in close proximity to a RF-ID 
tag because the signal strength is strong. However, because 
of their strong signal strength, active RF-ID readers 
sometimes read RF-ID tags placed in other cells. 
As for load sensors, their detection accuracy is high. 
However, they are usually expensive, and each sensor must 
be wired to a PC. Introduction costs are therefore high. The 
same holds true for photoelectric sensors.  
A depth camera using MS-KINECT usually cost a few 
hundred dollars. While introduction costs would be high 
under our proposed system because one MS-KINECT set 
would be required per shelf, our system alleviates the need 
for workers to carry a reader, and the detection accuracy is 
high. We have determined that the depth camera would be the 
best method overall for our picking assistance system. 
The following three prospective methods are considered 
for delivery: 
(1) Detecting change of weight with a load sensor. 
(2) Detecting whether a hand is inserted into the correct box 
with a photoelectric sensor. 
(3) Detecting whether a hand is inserted into the correct box 
with a depth camera, such as MS-KINECT. 
 
The evaluation criteria for delivery is the same as those 
for picking. The evaluations for the above three methods are 
the same as those in Table I. We think a method using a depth 
camera camera is the best for delivery when its accuracy is 
high. 
TABLE I. EVALUATION OF PICKING ERROR DETECTION METHODS 
Method 
A. Cost 
A. Operation 
Accuracy 
Barcode 
Low 
Big 
Middle 
Passive RF-ID 
Middle 
Big 
Low 
Active RF-ID 
Middle 
Little 
Middle 
Load 
High 
Little 
High 
Photoelectric 
High 
Little 
Middle 
3D camera 
Low 
Little 
This paper 
IV. 
WRONG OPERATION DETECTION TECHNOLOGY IN 
PICKING 
In this section, wrong operation detection technology in 
which a worker picks an item from an incorrect cell is 
introduced. Here, the incorrect cell is not the indicated cell 
from where an item should be picked. 
A. Detection algorithm for wrong operation 
As described in the previous section, a technology that 
detects whether a worker picks items from an indicated cell 
is in demand. Because detecting whether a worker is picking 
items from a cell is difficult, we decided to focus on detecting 
whether a hand is inserted into a cell instead of detecting 
whether a hand picks an item from a cell. 
The MS-KINECT is widely used to estimate the motion 
of the human skeleton. In addition to its skeleton estimation 
function, it has several useful functions for detecting whether 
a hand is inserted into a cell such that the positions of joints 
on the body, the position of an indicated point, and the depth 
of a position can be measured, and the edges of the body can 
be recognized. And, its introduction cost is reasonable. Hence, 
we decided to use MS-KINECT to detect whether a hand is 
inserted into an indicated cell. The following schemes were 
considered as alternatives: 
(1) Skeleton scheme: position of the hand’s joint in the 
skeleton is used. 
(2) Body edge scheme: position of a recognized hand edge is 
used.  
(3) Color tracing scheme: position of a hand wearing a 
colored glove is used. 
(4) Depth change scheme: position of a change in depth is 
used.  
 
Because the skeleton estimation function in MS-KINECT 
needs video of a hand, an MS-KINECT must be placed from 
0.5–5 m in front of a body. And, the accuracy of an estimated 
position is best when it is placed right in front of the body. Its 
accuracy worsens when it is placed more diagonally. Because 
a worker stands in front of a shelf, this scheme is not suitable 
for picking operations. As with the skeleton scheme, placing 
the MS-KINECT in a suitable position for detecting the edge 
of a hand is difficult. 
Therefore, we experimentally evaluated the color tracing 
scheme and depth change scheme as follows. 
 
B. Color tracing scheme 
Because setting an MS-KINECT in front of a worker in a 
factory or delivery center is impossible, we set the MS-
KINECT behind the workers. In this setting, because it is 
impossible for a single camera to always watch a hand that is 
hidden by the placement of its body, we placed two MS-
KINECTs on both sides of a worker as shown in Fig. 1. And, 
because the skeleton estimation function and body edge 
recognition function are not used to trace a hand, the Open-
CV color tracing technologies [14] are used to trace hands. 
From experience, red, orange, yellow, and yellow-green are 
used for color tracing.  
The coordinates of the four corners of each cell are pre-
set before estimating the cell number. Because we use a shelf 
as shown in Fig. 2 in the following experiments, the 
coordinates of 16 corners are pre-set as in Fig. 3.  

302
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
Figure 1. Layout of a worker, shelf, and MS-KINECTs (top view) 
 
 
Figure 2. Shelf used in experiment 
 
 
Figure 3. Pre-set coordinates for corners of cells in shelf 
 
The error detection system that uses this scheme may 
count picking operations multiple times in one operation 
because of graphical noise or worker motions. The following 
procedures were used to decrease the multiple counts; 
(1) Recognition times of a decided color pixel: Because the 
position of graphical noise artifacts changes randomly, 
we recognized that the decided color should be detected 
multiple times at the same position. In the following 
experiment, five times was used as the number of 
determination times.  
(2) Recognition guard time: Because most workers could not 
quickly pick an item from a cell, we set a guard time in 
which the system does not count formerly recognized 
operations again. In the following experiment, we use 
0.25 sec as the guard time. 
(3) Recognition position of re-detected glove: The system 
loses sight of a glove when the glove is hidden by a 
worker’s body. Because the glove’s position is usually in 
the same position as when the glove is lost, the system 
does not count the glove’s motion as a picking operation. 
 
We performed two experiments. The shelf shown in Fig. 
2 was used in these experiments and had nine cells. In the 
first experiment, participants picked items from each cell ten 
times without any operation guidance. In the second one, 
participants performed operations the same as they did in the 
first experiment after receiving operation guidance. The 
guidance cautioned participants about picking motions that 
caused misrecognition. The practical cautions are described 
later. The number of participants in the first experiment was 
six, and for the second experiment, five. Some participated in 
both experiments, and others in only one of them. 
We independently counted the number of times that each 
MS-KINECT recognized a worker picking an item from a 
correct cell (a correct operation is detected) and the number 
of times each MS-KINECT recognized a worker picking an 
item from an incorrect cell (a correct operation is interpreted 
as being incorrect). From these two data sets, we calculated 
that either of the two MS-KINECTs detected a worker 
picking from a correct cell or from an incorrect cell. Beer 
cans were used as picking items.  
The results of the first experiment are shown in Table II. 
The number of correct detections and the erroneous 
recognition rate are averaged for nine cells. Because the 
accuracy of recognition in the proposed system may be 
affected by the height of the MS-KINECTs, we placed the 
MS-KINECTs at 1.6 m and 1.8 m.  
Unfortunately, the proposed system sometimes counted 
one operation as two operations or recognized an incorrect 
operation. Since the participants B, C, and D moved their 
bodies naturally, the number of correct detections was low, 
and the misdetection rate was also low. However, because 
participant A did not move in accordance with the position of 
a cell, his posture was unnatural. The system lost sight of his 
hand, which was hidden by his body. Participant E moved his 
hand close to the aperture of a shelf. Therefore, the system 
sometimes counted one operation twice and mistook the cell 
from which an item was picked. Because participant F 
operated slowly, the system sometimes counted one 
operation twice. 
Based on our reflections in the first experiment, we 
cautioned the participants to perform the following 
operations in the second experiment: 
(1) Move the body in front of a designated cell prior to 
picking an item.  
(2) Do not pick an item from a cell extremely slowly (items 
should be picked at normal speed). 
(3) Pick an item vertically from a cell or move a hand along 
the aperture of a shelf.  
 
TABLE II. RESULTS OF FIRST EXPERIMENT (WITHOUT GUIDANCE) 
 
 
Number of cerrect
detection
Erroneous
recognition rate (%)
Number of cerrect
detection
Erroneous
recognition rate (%)
A
1.74
9.2
0
8.8
0.44
B
1.7
10
0
9.9
0.33
C
1.62
9.8
0.11
9.8
0.11
D
1.75
10
0
9.9
0.11
E
1.66
9.6
0.22
9.7
1.78
F
1.69
10.4
0
10
0.44
Average
1.71
9.83
0.055
9.68
0.54
Participant
Height of
participant
(m)
Hight of MS-KINECT
1.6 m
1.8 m

303
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
The results of the second experiment are shown in Table 
III. Because participant G forgot about the above cautions 
halfway through experiment, his experimental data were not 
good. However, the experimental data of other members were 
good. And, data gathered from the MS-KINECT at 1.6 m 
were better than those gathered at 1.8 m.  
 
TABLE III. RESULTS OF THE SECOND EXPERIMENT (WITH A GUIDANCE) 
 
 
C. Depth change scheme 
The detection rate of correct operation in the color tracing 
scheme is good enough, and the erroneous recognition rate is 
low. However, the system needs two MS-KINECTs for each 
shelf. Because the color tracing scheme is used, applying the 
scheme to picking colored items such as vegetables is 
difficult. Hence, we decided to measure the change of depth 
when a hand is being inserted into a cell.  
From past experience, we have determined that the best 
mount position for an MS-KINECT to detect whether a hand 
enters a cell is just above the surface of a shelf aperture. The 
MS-KINECT 3D camera searches for a hand and arm just 
over the surface of a shelf aperture as shown in Fig. 4. The 
MS-KINECT must be set at a position in which its 3D camera 
can observe the entire shelf aperture. This system detects 
whether a hand is inserted by changing the depth in front of 
a cell. When a hand and/or arm is inserted into a cell, the 
depth in such a view is changed from Lf to Lh. A change in 
depth Lh corresponds to the length between the MS-KINECT 
and the hand and/or arm. Its position is within the cell 
aperture in which the hand and/or arm is inserted. 
 
 
Figure 4. Mounting position of MS-KINECT and searching zone 
 
The coordinates of the four corners of each cell are pre-
set before estimating the cell number. In Fig. 4, the 
coordinates of 16 corners are pre-set. The number of the cell 
in which a hand is inserted is estimated by comparison 
between a coordinate of the detected hand and the coordinates 
of four corners for each cell ○
n . 
We developed an experimental shelf as shown in Fig. 5. 
An MS-KINECT is mounted 65.5 cm away from the shelf. 
The shelf consists of 3 x 3 cells. The size of the shelf is 67.5 
x 64.5 cm, and the size of each cell is 22.5 x 21.5 cm. The 
length between the floor and the bottom of the shelf is 98 cm. 
The reason a shelf in this experiment is different from the 
shelf showed in Fig. 2 is that it was returned to its owner 
factory. We measured the error rates for detecting a hand 
inserted into a cell and whether the MS-KINECT can 
recognize a lit tag and the number on it using the 
experimental shelf.  
Before estimation, the coordinates of the corners of each 
cell are pre-set using the pre-set windows shown in Fig. 6. 
The corner number is selected with the corner number button. 
The coordinates of each corner are entered by clicking a 
corner or inputting digits. The red grid of the shelf aperture is 
generated by clicking the grid button. 
 
Figure 5. Experimental shelf 
 
 
Figure 6. Pre-set window 
 
The erroneous recognition rate for picking operation 
would change depending on the width D of the searching 
zone, the searching period, the cell position, and the threshold 
width to detect a hand and/or arm. We measured the 
erroneous recognition rate under conditions in which the 
Number of cerrect
detection
Erroneous
recognition rate (%)
Number of cerrect
detection
Erroneous
recognition rate (%)
A
1.74
10
0
10
0.11
F
1.7
9.9
0
10.1
0.33
G
1.62
9.9
0.11
9.6
0.44
H
1.75
10
0
9.9
0
I
1.66
10.1
0
10
0
Average
1.69
9.98
0.022
9.92
0.176
Average
exclude G
1.71
10
0
10
0.11
Participant
Height of
participant
(m)
1.6 m
1.8 m
Hight of MS-KINECT

304
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
width D of the searching zone is 1 cm / 3cm / 5 cm / 10 cm, 
the searching period is 500 msec. / 1000 msec., and the 
threshold width for detecting a hand and/or arm is 1 cm. Beer 
cans were used as picking items. The number of participants 
was ten. Each participant picked an item from each cell five 
times. The average detection error rates of every cell vs. the 
width of searching zone D are 1 cm / 3cm / 5 cm / 10 cm as 
shown in Fig. 7. The parameter of this figure is the searching 
period. The detection error rate in 500 msec. is lower than 
that in 1000 msec. in each the searching width D. The average 
error rate for each cell in which the searching period is 500 
msec. is shown in Table IV. The erroneous recognition rate 
increases in accordance with an increase in width D. This is 
because a participant tends to insert his/her hand into a cell 
through the searching zone in front of other cells. 
 
Figure 7. Average erroneous recognition rates for every cell  
TABLE IV. AVERAGE ERRONEOUS RECOGNITION RATES (%) FOR EACH CELL 
 
 
The most serious problem in the picking error detection 
system is that the system recognizes wrong operations to be 
fair. We measured the misdetection rate for wrong operation. 
In this experiment, a correct cell is No. 5. The number of 
participants is ten. Each participant picks an item from cells 
around the No. 5 cell five times. The detection rate for wrong 
operations to be wrong, detection rate for wrong operation to 
be fair and practical detected wrong operations are shown in 
Table V. Average detection rate for wrong operations to be 
wrong is 95.7 %. And, the proposed system did not recognize 
wrong operations to be fair, completely detected wrong 
operations.  
TABLE V. MISDETECTION RATE FOR WRONG OPERATIONS 
 
 
However, the system recognized that a participant picked 
an item from the No. 6 cell, even though he picked it from the 
No. 3 cell. The reason of this error detection is that the system 
detects an item in front and within 1 cm from the No. 6 cell 
after picking from the No. 3 cell.  
D. Discussion 
The depth change scheme is superior to the color tracing 
scheme concerning the number of MS-KINECT devices and 
no-limitation for color of goods. However, the misdetection 
rate of the depth change scheme is higher than that of the 
color-tracing scheme, as mentioned in Section IV-B. This 
may be due to the insufficient monitoring accuracy of 
operation in the depth change scheme. We plan to constitute 
a few cm non-detection area around each cell, and guard time 
not to detect after detecting an item to be picked from a cell. 
We think these constitutions would lower the detection rate 
for wrong operation to be fair exceedingly close to zero. 
V. 
WRONG OPERATION DETECTION TECHNOLOGY IN 
DELIVERING 
We imagine a delivery cart as shown in Fig. 8. An MS-
KINECT is mounted to search the surface of an assortment 
of boxes and to detect when a worker puts an item into an 
incorrect box. In this section, the detection technology for 
wrong operations is introduced.  
 
 
 
Figure 8. Image of delivery cart 

305
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
We consider the best position to which the MS-KINECT 
is mounted to be the front part of the cart. When the MS-
KINECT is mounted on the side of the cart, and its position 
is between an assortment of boxes and a shelf, a worker must 
pick an item from a cell passing over the cart. We consider 
this operation to be a bad operation. Hence, we selected the 
front position for the MS-KINECT. 
 
A. Detection algorithm for wrong operation 
We decided to use the MS-KINECT to detect whether a 
hand is inserted into an indicated cell for item placement. The 
following schemes were considered as alternatives: 
(1) Skeleton scheme: position of the hand’s joint in the 
skeleton is used. 
(2) Body edge scheme: position of a recognized hand edge is 
used.  
(3) Color tracing scheme: position of a hand wearing a 
colored glove is used. 
(4) Depth change scheme: position of a change in depth is 
used.  
 
Because the position to which the MS-KINECT is 
mounted would be the side of the cart in the first two 
alternatives, these two schemes are not suitable. And, the 
skeleton estimation application sometimes mistakenly 
estimates the position of a hand when the hand is hidden 
because of its insertion into a box. The reason is that the 
application tries to find a hand as shown in Fig. 9, even 
though the hand is hidden by a box. In this figure, the 
application recognizes a part of the box’s partition as a left 
hand. As for body edge estimation, it sometimes recognizes 
boxes as being part of a body, as shown in Fig. 10. These are 
also reasons why we did not select these schemes. Because 
the third scheme, color tracing, is not suited to colored items 
such as vegetables, this one also tends to detect wrong 
operations. 
 
 
Figure 9. Example of skeleton estimation when a hand is hidden by a box 
 
 
Figure 10. Example of body edge estimation 
Hence, we selected the fourth scheme using a change in 
depth to detect wrong operations. The MS-KINECT searched 
just over the surface of the apertures of the boxes as it did in 
the picking operation in the first experimental system. The 
maximum depth was far from a screen that was set near a 
handle. Unfortunately, it is not accurate enough for 
commercial usage. Therefore, we changed the target area 
from the screen to the side wall of each box that faces MS-
KINECT. 
B. The first system using the depth change scheme 
The search zone is just above the mass of boxes. When a 
hand/arm or item is inserted into a box, the PC on this cart 
detects whether a hand/arm or item is inserted into the box by 
the change in depth.  
The number of the box that a hand is inserted into is 
estimated to compare it with a coordinate of the detected hand 
and the coordinates of four corners for each box, the same as 
for a cell in Section IV-C. 
We measured the delivery error rate using six boxes on a 
table as shown in Fig. 11 instead of using a delivery cart. The 
MS-KINECT is placed on another table. It was placed 60 cm 
from the top of the boxes. From the results of experiment in 
Section IV-C, we decided that the searching period is 500 
msec. and that the width of the search zone is 1 cm.  
Since we noticed that our system easily detected multiple 
boxes, we constituted a 5 cm wide non-detection area on 
boxes that are on the near side of a worker, as shown in Fig. 
11. When the depth far from the boxes was not fixed, the 
detection accuracy was poor and unstable. We set the screen 
near the box1 and 2 to fix the maximum depth from the MS-
KINECT. The average error rate for each box is shown in 
Table VI. The number of participants was five, the same as 
in the picking experiment. Each participant puts an item into 
each box five times. Overall, the error rate, especially the 
double count rate, is high.  
 
 
Figure 11. Experimental system for measuring delivery error rate 
TABLE VI. AVERAGE DELIVERY ERROR RATES (%) FOR EACH BOX 
 

306
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
C. The second system using the depth change scheme 
Because of the accuracy of detecting wrong operations in 
the above scheme, we developed the other detection 
technology. In practical terms, we changed the target area 
from the screen to the side wall of each box that faces the 
MS-KINECT. The practical layout between the MS-
KINECT and assortment boxes and the target areas for 
detecting the depth change are shown in Fig. 12. Red bars in 
Fig. 12 are the detection target areas, which are the far edges 
of each box aperture. Three dimensions of data (x, y, z) from 
the MS-KINECT of these areas are pre-measured at pixel 
units and are pre-stored. When a hand hides these areas from 
the MS-KINECT, the Z values of hidden areas become 
shorter than the original values. In the case of Fig. 12, the Z 
values of the 3rd to 6th boxes are changed in accordance with 
a hand entering the 3rd box to place an item in it. Therefore, 
we introduced the box decision algorithm as shown in Fig. 13. 
In this figure, a worker stands to the right side of an MS-
KINECT and puts his/her hand into the box from the right 
side. The relationship between the box into which a hand is 
put and the boxes of which the Z values at the target area 
become shorter are as follows: 
 
Figure 12. Layout and detecting target areas  
 
 
Figure 13. Box decision algorithm  
(1) 1st box:  Every box. 
(2) 2nd box: 2nd, 4th, and 6th box. 
(3) 3rd box: 3rd, 4th, 5th, and 6th box. 
(4) 4th box: 4th and 6th box. 
(5) 5th box: 5th and 6th box. 
(6) 6th box: 6th box. 
 
When a worker is standing to the right side of MS-
KINECT, the relationship between the box into which a hand 
is put and the boxes of which the Z values at the target area 
become shorter are changed. This wrong operation detection 
scheme must detect a direction that a hand enters from and 
change the box detection algorithm.  
We implemented the application shown in Fig.14 that 
counts the number of times an item is put into an indicated 
box. The experimental equipment is shown in Fig. 15. We 
used copy paper boxes as the assortment of boxes. In the pre-
experiment, we noticed that MS-KINECT could watch every 
aperture and that its height was as low as possible. The 
practical layout between the MS-KINECT and assortment 
boxes is shown in Fig. 16.  
The number of participants is twelve, and they put a beer 
can into each box five times. Experimental results are shown 
in Table VII. The experimental application perfectly detects 
every participant except participant H. The application made 
one misrecognition for participant H, recognizing that 
participant H put an item into the 4th box, not the 2nd box. 
Participant H was left-handed and put an item into the 2nd box 
with his left hand. After taking his hand out of the 2nd box, 
his hand moved over the 4th box, causing the application to 
make the misrecognition. This misrecognition would be 
solved by changing the direction of the cart for him so as to 
enable him to move his hand smoothly, making this scheme 
for recognizing wrong operation in delivery useful for 
commercial usage. 
We think this depth change scheme is effective to 
improve the misdetection rate in the picking operation.  
 
 
Figure 14. Count application for detecting assortment operation 
 
 
Figure 15.  Experimental equipment for delivery 

307
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
Figure 16. Layout between a worker, MS-KINECT, and assortment of 
boxes 
 
TABLE VII. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS OF RECOGNITION IN ASSORTMENT 
OPERATION 
 
 
VI. 
LIGHTING A TAG AND NUMBER 
Since our partner AIOI System Co. Ltd. has developed 
the new lighting method into which the projection mapping 
technology is used to indicate a picking cell, our experimental 
system uses this projection mapping technology. A very short 
focal projector mounted near the MS-KINECT lights a tag 
attached to a cell and projects a digit on it to indicate the cell 
and the number of items to be removed as shown in Fig. 17.  
A computer knows which tag of a cell is lit, so there is no 
need for it to detect which tag is lit with the MS-KINECT. In 
this case, the MS-KINECT is connected to a computer. 
However, we plan to develop a picking robot that picks items 
up and puts them into an indicated box in the near future. 
Since the robot must detect which tag is lit and read a digit 
on it, we developed a technology that realizes the above 
functions with the MS- KINECT. In this system, the font used 
for digits is a seven-segment font as shown on the right side 
of Fig. 17. Our system recognizes which kind of number is 
presented by detecting which segments are white. 
We noticed that the color through the video camera of the 
MS-KINECT was very different from the color we 
recognized and that the color through the video camera of the 
MS-KINECT changed in accordance with the color and luster 
of a tag. Example colors on a sheet of white paper, black 
paper, and gray sandpaper are shown in Fig. 18. The 
differences between the colors as displayed on a smartphone 
and those as displayed on the MS-KINECT are shown in Fig. 
19. The colors displayed on a smartphone are almost equal to 
those seen with the naked eye. We selected red, green, and 
blue as the colors projected on a tag. The color characteristics 
of the MS- KINECT are very different from those of a 
smartphone. As a result, gray sandpaper is the best material 
for representing original colors. Our system can read every 
number perfectly on a red, green, or blue background. When 
implementing systems, these three colors are usable.  
We think the reason that colors through the MS-KINECT 
is different from those through the naked eye or displayed on 
a smartphone is that the white balance of MS-KINECT would 
be unbalanced. Unfortunately, since the driver of MS-
KINECT does not provide adjustment function for the white 
balance, we recommend persons who use the MS-KINECT 
as same as our usage to change a material of tag. 
 
Figure 17. Layout of projector and cells 
 
 
Figure 18. Colors on tags as displayed on video camera of MS-KINECT 
 
 
Figure 19. Colors as displayed on smartphone and MS-KINECT 
 
VII. CONCLUSION  
One of realistic solutions for establishing high 
productivity and quality for the picking process in light of a 
shortage of high-skilled workers is to introduce a picking 
1
2
3
4
5
6
A
5
5
5
5
5
5
B
5
5
5
5
5
5
C
5
5
5
5
5
5
D
5
5
5
5
5
5
E
5
5
5
5
5
5
F
5
5
5
5
5
5
G
5
5
5
5
5
5
H
5
4
5
5
5
5
I
5
5
5
5
5
5
J
5
5
5
5
5
5
K
5
5
5
5
5
5
L
5
5
5
5
5
5
Det. rate
100%
98%
100%
100%
100%
100%
Participant
Number of detectiing correct operation for each box

308
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
assistance system that detects incorrect operations by 
workers. We introduced a picking and assortment assistance 
system in which the depth camera detects whether a hand is 
inserted into the correct cell of a shelf to pick items and 
whether a hand is inserted into the correct box on a cart to put 
items in.  
The misdetection rate for wrong operation is low in these 
systems, and it is possible to be exceedingly close to zero in 
a near future. We determine that the proposed picking error 
detection function would be useful for business.  
In this paper, MS-KINECT is used as the depth camera. 
However, Microsoft stopped to provide MS-KINECT. The 
other hand, Intel provides the RealSense [15] as the depth 
camera. That would be usable as the picking and assortment 
operation assistance systems.  
A marketing manager in our partner company, Aioi 
Systems Co. Ltd which develops and provides picking 
assistance systems, evaluated the proposed systems. 
However, he requests systems that do not require a PC for 
each shelf or delivery cart and a system that can detect 
incorrect operations by several workers simultaneously. We 
plan to develop a system in which a stereo-camera is used 
instead of a MS-KINECT device; results in this paper are 
applied. 
  
ACKNOWLEDGEMNT 
Thanks to Kazuhiro Yoshida for help in performing this 
research. This project is partially supported with the 
competitive research funding by Iwate Prefectural University. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Y. Takehara, Y. Murata, T. Yoshikawa, “Picking Assistance 
System with MS-KINECT and Projection Mapping,” IARIA, 
ACHI 2018, pp. 219-223, March 2018. 
[2] Industrie 4.0;  
http://www.bmwi.de/Redaktion/EN/Dossier/industrie-40.html, 
[retrieved: Augugst, 2018]. 
[3] What is a smart factory?; 
http://www.bmwi.de/Redaktion/EN/FAQ/Industrie-4-0/faq-
industrie-4-0-03.html, [retrieved: November, 2018]. 
[4] AutoStore; https://www.autostoresystem.com/, 
[retrieved: November, 2018] 
[5] Introducing the Ocado Smart Platform automated fulfilment 
solution (promo video); 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iogFXDWqDak, 
[retrieved: November, 2018]. 
[6] Amazon Warehouse Robots: Mind Blowing Video, 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cLVCGEmkJs0, 
[retrieved: November, 2018]. 
[7] AIOI SYSTEMS Co., LTD Digital Picking System Products 
Introduction; 
 
https://www.hello-aioi.com/en/product/product-list/,  
[retrieved: November, 2018]. 
[8] Meet Kinect for Windows;  
https://developer.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/kinect, 
[retrieved: November, 2018]. 
[9] Y. Uda, K. Yoshida, and Y. Murata, “Operation Error Detection 
System in Picking Processes by Camera Depth Sensors,” IPSJ, 
Transaction of Consumer Device and Service, Vol. 6, No. 1, pp. 
1-12, 2016, [written in Japanese]. 
[10] B. Schwerdtfeger, and G. Klinker, “Supporting order picking 
with augmented reality,” Proceedings of 7th IEEE/ACM 
International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality, pp. 
91–94, 2008. 
[11] H. Iben, H. Baumann, C. Ruthenbeck, and T. Klug, “Visual 
based picking supported by context awareness: Comparing 
picking performance using paper-based lists versus list 
presented on a head mounted display with contextual support,” 
Proceedings of 11th International Conference on Multimodal 
Interfaces, pp. 281–288, 2009. 
[12] H. Baumann, T. Starner, H. Iben, and P. Zschaler, "Evaluation 
of graphical user-interfaces for order picking using head-
mounted 
displays," 
Proceedings 
of 
13th 
International 
Conference on Multimodal Interfaces, pp. 377–384, 2011. 
[13] A. Guo et al., “A comparison of order picking assisted by head-
up display (HUD), cart-mounted display (CMD), light, and 
paper pick list, “Proceedings of 2014 ACM International 
Symposium on Wearable Computers, pp. 71–78, 2014. 
[14] Open-CV; https://opencv.org/, 
 [retrieved: November, 2018]. 
[15] Intel RealSense; https://realsense.intel.com, 
 [retrieved: November, 2018]. 
 
 

