Guidelines for Designing Interactions Between
Autonomous Artiﬁcial Systems and Human Beings
to Achieve Sustainable Development Goals
Muneo Kitajima
Nagaoka University of Technology
Nagaoka, Japan
Email: mkitajima@kjs.nagaokaut.ac.jp
Makoto Toyota
T-Method
Chiba, Japan
Email: pubmtoyota@mac.com
J´erˆome Dinet
Universit´e de Lorraine, CNRS, INRIA, Loria
Nancy, France
Email: jerome.dinet@univ-lorraine.fr
Abstract—Human beings live in an environment that consists of
various artifacts, such as physical or virtual tools, information
systems, and social systems. With IT advancement, the wider
the network of artifacts, the more autonomous they become.
However, the ultimate goal of developing these artifacts is to
achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) through
the exploration of the design space for realizing a sustainable
society. The artifacts that human beings interact with apply this
mechanism for utilizing the artifacts, by selecting the subsequent
actions for a given situation. This mechanism includes Perceptual,
Cognitive, and Motor (PCM) processes and the memory process.
The cognitive process is characterized by the bounded rationality
and by the satisﬁcing principle proposed by Simon, and Two
Minds of unconscious and conscious processes proposed by Kah-
neman. The state-of-the art cognitive architecture, Model Human
Processor with Realtime Constraints (MHP/RT), developed by
Kitajima and Toyota, deﬁnes these processes as autonomous
systems and proposes a resonance mechanism between the PCM
and memory processes. The purpose of this study is to propose
guidelines to conduct strategical explorations in design space.
Based on the simulation of human–artifact interaction processes
through the MHP/RT cognitive architecture, the guidelines are
grouped into three levels: goal, mode, and process levels. More-
over, hints are provided for applying the proposed guidelines to
narrow down the design space.
Keywords—Design guidelines, Human–artifact interaction; Au-
tonomous systems; Cognitive architecture; MHP/RT.
I. INTRODUCTION
This paper is based on the previous work originally pre-
sented in COGNITIVE 2022 [1]. It extends the concepts
described in Section IV by providing a new Section IV-A.
When viewed as an individual, each human being is com-
posed of autonomous systems that control perception, cogni-
tion, and movement in synchronization with changes in the
environment, in addition to a memory autonomous system
that works to link perception and movements
[2][3]. The
environment in which humans interact and live is composed of
various artifacts. With the progress of networking technology,
a large number of artifacts have become related to each other,
overcoming the physical constraints of time and space. In this
case, the central management method of the set of artifacts and
the environment design to achieve their goals is not effective.
It would rather be effective to design the environment as a
set of autonomously operating artifacts equipped with Parallel
Distributed Processing (PDP), which can be referred to as the
Artiﬁcial PDP (A-PDP) system, and to design them so that
they function as a whole and achieve their goals.
There exist interfaces between the above-mentioned au-
tonomous systems, which have to be properly designed for
well-being. The interfaces and internal algorithms deﬁning
their behaviors must support activities conducted by human
beings; they attempt to achieve their happiness goals by
utilizing artifacts. A research question that arises is – how
can such interfaces and internal algorithms be designed for
the two autonomous systems? Our daily life is based on
interactions with a wide variety of artifacts. The purpose of in-
teractions, for human-beings, is to achieve well-being through
activities in domains such as health (e.g., bio-monitoring),
mobility (e.g., driving an electric vehicle), education (e.g.,
learning on Massive Open Online Course (MOOC)), and
entertainment (e.g., playing e-sports). The artifacts support
human activities through the interface at each moment of
interaction. There are multiple autonomous systems on both
sides of the interface with complex relationships. The purpose
of this study is to propose a set of guidelines that should be
applied when designing the interfaces of autonomous artifacts,
for supporting activities carried out by autonomous human
beings. Traditionally, designers adopt a top-down or a bottom-
up approach. It is advised to combine both approaches while
designing; the proposed guidelines are useful for this task.
The top-down design would be implemented without deviating
from the objective by following the guidelines; the bottom-
up design would be facilitated by observing user behavior to
ensure that the design is in line with the guidelines.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II outlines the human-artifact interaction to deﬁne the
speciﬁc perspective for considering the complex situation of
interaction, i.e., both sides are autonomous systems. Sec-
tion III brieﬂy reviews the Model Human Processor with
Realtime Constraints (MHP/RT), developed by Kitajima and
Toyota [2][3] and deﬁnes a framework for developing the
guidelines. A set of guidelines are described. In general, guide-
lines are intended to provide direction for designing artifacts,
188
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

not to indicate how to proceed with the design according to
the speciﬁc guidelines provided. Therefore, designers cannot
immediately use them in their design activities. To address
this issue, Section IV introduces some hints that will be useful
in designing interactions according to the guidelines given in
Section III.
II. HUMAN–ARTIFACT INTERACTION
There are human beings on this side of the interface and
artifacts on the other side. From the viewpoint of a user that
perceives the information provided on an interface to select
the next action for accomplishing his/her goal, a complete
understanding of the detailed processing of an artifact to
generate information on the interface, e.g., the knowledge of
implementing the internal algorithms, is unnecessary; simi-
larly, a detailed understanding of the internal processing of
an input to an artifact is unnecessary for them to continue
the interaction cycle of execution and evaluation. Although
the internal processes are not known to the user, s/he has
to comprehend the mechanism at the interface level in order
to proceed, i.e., “bridging the gulf between execution and
evaluation [4, Figure 3.2].” This also applies to the artifacts.
For designers to specify the interfaces of the I/O for the
systems by developing internal algorithms to support human
activities, there is no need for them to have a complete
understanding of human reactions to the output of the artifacts
and of human expectations attached to the input to the artifacts.
As Simon pointed out [5], an interface is characterized by
an artiﬁcial system between two environments – inner and
outer, i.e., human beings and artifacts, respectively. These
environments lie in the province of “natural science” where
the systems of artifacts and human beings are the focus
of research, but the interface linking them is the realm of
“artiﬁcial science.” Therefore, the research question that this
study addresses is in the realm of artiﬁcial science. The two
sides, i.e., the behaviors of human beings and artifacts, are
governed by their own principles, and they have to interact
with each other by simultaneously considering the behaviors
of the either side at the appropriate approximation levels in
hope of a successful development. Their articulation could be
formalized as guidelines, which is the form of an answer to
the research question that this study addresses.
The interface between the two systems can be conceived
from a variety of perspectives or dimensions. One of them is
the dimension that focuses on the Perceptual, Cognitive, and
Motor (PCM) processes and the manner in which memory is
acquired, used, and developed in the use of artifacts. This study
speciﬁcally focuses on the ongoing PCM processes and the
manner in which they use the memory in the human–artifact
interaction process. Our previous study [6] focused on the
acquisition and development process, and proposed guidelines
for designing artifacts, which could cause the evolution of
artifacts. In the process of evolution, the techniques used in
the development of artifacts are received and absorbed by
users as skills by applying the PCM and memory processes,
which is simulated by MHP/RT. The techniques could turn
into skills if the conditions derived by the simulations based
on MHP/RT are satisﬁed. When this spiral evolution occurs,
the socio-cultural ecology, wherein the artifacts are embedded,
evolves to exhibit a splicing evolution. The focus of this paper
is not on the evolution that occurs at the interfaces but on the
ongoing events.
Another dimension, which this study effectively focuses on,
is the structure of human goals, which can be used by human
beings to organize their behaviors. Our previous paper [7]
proposed an effective method for achieving Sustainable De-
velopment Goals (SDGs) through the behavior of individual
human beings, by applying the knowledge of cognitive sci-
ence; the idea is to connect the daily activities of human
beings when trying to accomplish task goals through real
world problem-solving [8], i.e., activities in the COGNITIVE
Band of Newell’s time scale of human action [9, page 122, Fig.
3-3], through any of the SDGs, that concerns social ecology
and resides in the SOCIAL Band by ﬁnding the non-linear
mappings between the goals in different bands. The interfacing
situation this study deals with is analogous to the one above.
Each individual human being conducts activities to accomplish
his or her behavioral goal. This activity is non-linearly mapped
onto the autonomous artifacts, which have the goal of any of
the SDGs, where the gulfs of execution and evaluation have
to be bridged.
III. INTERACTION LEVELS AND GUIDELINES
Figure 1 shows the top-level view of the human–artifact
interaction. The artifacts placed at the center should exist as
entities for achieving any of the SDGs by providing appropri-
ate support for the individual human beings who try to achieve
any of the seventeen happiness goals. This section begins by
introducing MHP/RT [2][3] in Section III-A focusing on the
levels of interactions with artifacts. It follows Section III-B
and Section III-C with suggestions for enabling conditions
that artifacts have to satisfy to help human beings achieve
a smooth coordination between System 1 and System 2.
Section III-D presents the relationships between the happiness
goals of human beings and the SDGs that the artifacts are
expected to achieve. The top-level constraint for developing
guidelines is that any artifact that complies with the guidelines
has to provide a stable human-artifact interaction; unstable
interactions should result in unpredictable results, which do
not come with the SDGs.
A. MHP/RT and Interaction Levels
Kitajima and Toyota [2][3] constructed a comprehensive
theory of action selection and memory, MHP/RT, that provides
a basis for constructing any model to understand the daily
behavior of human beings. MHP/RT is an extension of the
Model Human Processor (MHP) proposed by Card, Moran,
and Newell [10], which can simulate routine goal-directed
behaviors. MHP/RT extends the MHP by the following as-
sumptions to consider the fact that the processes involved in
action selection are a dynamic interaction that evolves in the
irreversible time dimension:
189
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 1. Top-level view of human–artifact interaction. (adapted from [1])
1) The fundamental processing mechanism of the brain is
PDP [11], which leads to a collection of the autonomous
systems having speciﬁc functions for generating an
organized human behavior. It consists of autonomous
systems for perception, cognition, motor movements,
and memory, which collectively form the Organic PDP
(O-PDP) system in the development of MHP/RT.
2) Human behavior emerges as a result of the cooperation
of the dual processes of System 1, i.e., fast unconscious
processes for intuitive reaction with feedforward control,
which connect perception with motor movements, and
System 2, i.e., slow conscious processes for deliberate
reasoning with feedback control. System 1 and System 2
are referred to as Two Minds [12].
3) Human behavior is organized under 17 happiness
goals [13].
Human beings use artifacts to accomplish certain behav-
ioral goals for realizing the desired state of affairs. The
human–artifacts interaction is a cycle of PCM processes. The
MHP/RT simulates the PCM processes as follows. The cog-
nitive process is to select the next actions that are appropriate
for accomplishing the behavioral goals, given the comprehen-
sion results of the perceived information. System 1 directly
connects to the motor process, whereas System 2 can only
indirectly affect the motor process via System 1. The MHP/RT
assumes a resonance mechanism for connecting the PCM
processes and memory, where the records of the results of
the PCM processes are accumulated in a layered and partially
overlapped structure of multidimensional memory frames. The
cognitive process is carried out by coordinating System 1 and
System 2 appropriately to accomplish the behavioral goals.
System 1 and System 2 interact simultaneously with the
multi-dimensional memory frames to select an appropriate
action and carry it out in a timely manner in the ever-
changing environment. The former is the issue of coordination,
while the latter is that of synchronization. Section III-B and
Section III-C will address these issues.
B. Mode Level: Coordination of Two Minds According to the
Goals
Individual beings interact with artifacts to accomplish their
behavioral goals by selecting appropriate actions, by running a
cycle of PCM processes. The MHP/RT assumes that the action
selection processes are controlled by System 1 and System 2.
System 1 and System 2 cooperate to connect perception with
motion, and the degree of cooperation varies depending on the
external environmental conditions, i.e., the state of the artifact
that the MHP/RT is interacting with.
1) Four Operation Modes: The conduction of the coopera-
tion can be understood by observing the interaction processes
for a certain amount of time, to identify the feature of the
interaction in terms of the mode. The processes carried out
190
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE I
FOUR OPERATION MODES OF MHP/RT. (ADAPTED FROM [1])
Synchronous Modes
- Mode 1: Unconscious mechanism driven mode
A single set of perceptual stimuli initiates feedfor-
ward processes at the BIOLOGICAL and COG-
NITIVE bands to act with occasional feedback
from an upper band, i.e., COGNITIVE, RATIO-
NAL, or SOCIAL.
- Mode 2: Conscious mechanism driven mode
A single set of perceptual stimuli initiates a feed-
back process at the COGNITIVE band, and upon
completion of the conscious action selection, the
unconscious automatic feedforward process is
activated at the BIOLOGICAL and COGNITIVE
bands for action.
Asynchronous Modes
- Mode 3: In-phase autonomous activity mode
A set of perceptual stimuli initiates feedforward
processes at the BIOLOGICAL and COGNITIVE
bands with one and another intertwined occa-
sional feedback process from an upper band, i.e.,
COGNITIVE, RATIONAL, or SOCIAL.
- Mode 4: Heterophasic autonomous activity mode
Multiple threads of perceptual stimuli initiate
respective feedforward processes at the BIO-
LOGICAL and COGNITIVE bands, some with
no feedback and others with feedback from the
upper bands, i.e., COGNITIVE, RATIONAL, or
SOCIAL.
by System 1 and System 2 are independent for some time
durations but are totally dependent on each other in other
domains. This provides a macroscopic view of the manner
in which the human–artifact interaction is organized.
Four qualitatively different modes are identiﬁed [14]. Sys-
tem 1 is a fast feedforward control process with the char-
acteristic time range of <150 ms to connect the perceptual
process with the motor process, which makes it possible to
behave synchronously with the ever-changing environment.
There could be multiple System 1 processes that correspond
to active perceptual–motor controls. However, System 2 is
a slow feedback control process, which takes a signiﬁcantly
longer time. The time range can be months or years as long
as feedback from the past event could affect the ongoing
processing. System 2 is a serial process. It can process only
one thing at a time; the process could be monitoring one of
the active threads of System 1 to check for possible deviations
of the results of System 1 from the expected course of actions.
Table I lists four modes, each of which is characterized by
the relationships between System 1 and System 2. Modes 1
and 2 are characterized by a single major System 1 process
monitored by System 2. The differences between them is
the degree of intervention of System 2 for checking the
output of System 1. In Mode 1, the occasional feedback from
System 2 is sufﬁcient to conduct the behavior. In Mode 2,
a frequent monitoring is necessary to organize the behavior
appropriately in the environment. Mode 3 corresponds to the
situation wherein a single set of perceptual stimuli initiates
System 1 processes with one and another intertwined occa-
sional feedback processes by System 2. Mode 4 corresponds
to the situation where multiple threads of perceptual stimuli
initiate the corresponding System 1 processes, some with no
feedback and others with feedback from System 2.
2) Guidelines for Supporting Mode Level Interactions: The
human–artifact interaction is carried out in one of the four
operation modes of MHP/RT. For the viewpoint of a sound
human–artifact interaction, the artifacts should support the
interactions that are carried out in Mode 1 and Mode 2. Mode
3 and Mode 4 include unmonitored feedforward System 1 pro-
cesses, which might cause an instability in the human–artifact
interaction. The safety of the human–artifact interaction is
realized by allowing the artifact to intervene through System 2,
causing the human being to restore to the normal interaction.
In other words, the resilience of the human–artifact interaction
is realized by maintaining the interaction in Mode 1 and
Mode 2. Achieving resilience is a necessary condition for the
sustainability of the artifacts to achieve the SDGs.
a) Supporting Mode 2 Interaction: In Mode 2, Sys-
tem 2 frequently intervenes the PCM processes conducted by
System 1. More precisely, the pace of interaction with the
artifact is controlled by System 2. The role of System 1 is to
carry out the necessary PCM processes, to advance the main
System 2–artifact interactions. Because System 2 operates on
language, the appropriate input from the artifact by means of
language is of critical importance. Because the processes of
System 1 are carried out in the context deﬁned by those of
System 2, the appropriate interactions from the artifact for
supporting the processes of System 1 have to be provided
considering the context.
Guideline [A]


1. Converse with System 2.
2. Intervene System 1 for facilitating the main conver-
sation with System 2.


b) Supporting Mode 1 Interaction: In Mode 1, where
the intervention of System 2 is weak, language is not an
appropriate medium for communication. The interaction from
the artifact has to support the unconsciously carried out
automatic processes by System 1. However, in Mode 1, the
timely examination of the progress is critical for a smooth
interaction. The triggers for initiating the examinations carried
out by System 2 could be provided internally or externally,
i.e., from the artifact. There could be a situation where the
examination by System 2 has not been carried out when
necessary. In this situation, the intervention from the artifact
191
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

is necessary for maintaining Mode 1 interaction.
Guideline [B]


1. For a normal Mode 1 interaction, provide infor-
mation to both System 1 and System 2, so that
System 1-led processes can run smoothly.
2. For an intensive Mode 1 interaction, e.g., video
games and e-sports, focus on System 1 support.


c) Supporting Transition Between Mode 1 and Mode 2:
When the interaction running in Mode 1 breaks down, it
becomes impossible to continue. In this case, the accomplish-
ment of the goal via the interaction being advanced is either
given up or a remedial action is taken to return from the failed
state to the original normal state and resume to the execution
in Mode 1. Mode 2 addresses the recovery process.
Guideline [C]


1. On the detection of the intensive behavior of Sys-
tem 2 during Mode 1 support, switch from Mode 1
support to Mode 2 support.


C. Process Level: Synchronization of Two Minds with the
Environment
The mode-level support described in Section III-B is deﬁned
for the interactions that span the extended time along the time
dimension. Therefore, its basis is a macroscopic bird’s-eye
view of the interactions. However, process-level support is
deﬁned for each event that occurs along the time dimension.
Its basis is a microscopic view for the interaction at the level
of each PCM process. The MHP/RT deﬁnes four processing
modes by considering the manner in which System 1 and
System 2 concern the event occurring at time T.
1) Four Processing Modes: Conscious/Unconscious Pro-
cesses Before/After an Event: Experiences associated with
the activities of an individual are characterized by a series of
events, each of which is recognized by a person consciously.
As shown in Figure 1, the behavior is deﬁned as a time series
of events, “· · · → [Event at TN−1]
→ [Event at TN]
→
[Event at TN+1] · · · .” focus on a particular event that occurs
at the absolute time TN. For the event to occur at TN, the
MHP/RT assumes that there should have existed the conscious
processes of System 2 and unconscious processes of System 1
before TN. For the executed event at TN, the MHP/RT as-
sumes that there should exist unconscious System 1 processes
and conscious System 2 processes, concerning the event after
TN. The behavior of the MHP/RT appears as though it works
in one of four processing modes [2][15] at a time before
and after the event at TN. They are shown at the bottom of
Figure 1.
Two of the four processing modes concern the processes
carried out before the event:
-
System 2 Before Mode: In the time range of TN − β ≤
t < TN − β′, where β′ ∼ 500ms and β ranges a few
seconds to hours or even to months, the MHP/RT uses a
part of the memory for System 2 to consciously prepare
for future events.
- System 1 Before Mode: In the time range of TN − β′ ≤
t < TN, the MHP/RT unconsciously coordinates motor
activities to the interacting environment. This mode uses
the part of the memory for System 1.
The other two modes concern the processes carried out after
the event:
- System 1 After Mode: In the time range of TN < t ≤
TN +α′, where α′ ∼ 500ms, the MHP/RT unconsciously
tunes the connections between the sensory inputs and
motor outputs for a better performance for the same event
in the future. This mode updates the connections within
the part of the memory for System 1.
- System 2 After Mode: In the time range of TN + α′ <
t ≤ TN +α, the MHP/RT consciously recognizes an event
in the past and then modiﬁes the memory concerning the
event, where α ranges a few seconds to minutes or even
to hours. This mode modiﬁes the connections of the part
of the memory for System 2.
2) Guidelines for Supporting Process Level Interactions:
The human–artifact interaction needs to be synchronized for
the cyclic PCM processes to run smoothly in any mode, i.e.,
Mode 1 through 4 deﬁned in Section III-B, the interaction
is in. The synchronization between the artifact and user is
discussed in [16] in the case of a multi-modal interaction using
the concepts of four processing modes. “Synchronization” and
its derived concept of “weak synchronization” are deﬁned as
follows [17]:
· · · a system and a user is synchronized if every
system event at Tsys occurs as a user event at
Tuser with some amount of time allowance of ∆,
|Tuser − Tsys| < ∆, where the actual values of ∆
depend on the nature of interactions.
· · ·
However, a person’s activity related with an event
has to be considered from the four processing modes,
which ranges relatively long time before and after
the actual time the event happens. Therefore, “syn-
chronization” has to be considered alternatively as
the phenomena a person’s activities during the time
range of [T − β, T + α], which are linked with
the speciﬁc recognizable system event at time T
through a sequence of processes carried out in either
of the four processing modes: all the processes have
some link with the system event at T. When this
is satisﬁed, the event is considered synchronized
with a person’s activities, which is called weak
synchronization [16].
The human–artifact interaction has to provide a smooth ﬂow
of the four processing modes. It can break when a person
has to adjust his/her activity while s/he is in the System 1
192
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE II
HAPPINESS GOALS [13] AND THEIR RELATION TO SOCIAL LAYERS. (ADAPTED FROM [1])
Social Layers
Category No.
Name of Happiness
Types
Individual layer
Community layer
Social-system layer
I
8
Painful Happiness
The Masochist
+++
11
Tranquil Happiness
The Mediator
+++
14
Chemical Happiness
The Drug-taker
+++
15
Fantasy Happiness
The Day-dreamer
+++
II
7
Rhythmic Happiness
The Dancer
+++
+++
16
Comic Happiness
The Laugher
+++
+++
4
Genetic Happiness
The Relative
+++
+++
5
Sensual Happiness
The Hedonist
+++
+++
III
10
Selective Happiness
The Hysteric
+++
++
13
Negative Happiness
The Sufferer
+++
++
IV
9
Dangerous Happiness
The Risk-taker
+++
++
+
6
Cerebral Happiness
The Intellectual
+++
+++
++
V
1
Target Happiness
The Achiever
+++
+++
+++
17
Accidental Happiness
The Fortunate
+++
+++
+++
VI
12
Devout Happiness
The Believer
+++
++
2
Competitive Happiness
The Winner
+++
+++
3
Cooperative Happiness
The Helper
+++
+++
+’s denote the degree of relevance of each goal to each layer, i.e., Individual, Community, and Social system, respectively.
+++: most relevant, ++: moderately relevant, and +: weakly relevant.
Before Mode in such a way that his/her movement should
be in synchrony with the current environment. This is the
situation that the interaction has to avoid. This is because
when this happens, the condition for weak synchronization
is not satisﬁed. To remedy this, s/he has to make extra efforts
to re-establish a weak synchronization by adjusting his/her
movement. This leads to the following guidelines.
Guideline [D]


1. Provide appropriate language-level support for
System 2 while the user is in System 2 Before Mode,
TN − β ≤ t < TN − β′.
2. Provide appropriate perceptual- and motor-level
support for System 1 while the user is in System 1
Before Mode, TN − β′ ≤ t < TN.


D. Goal Level
The mode-level support described in Section III-B and the
process-level support described in Section III-C concern direct
interactions with the environment, to accomplish behavioral
goals in problem-solving activities, e.g., real-world problem
solving [8], or routine goal-oriented skilled activities by apply-
ing well-organized knowledge of Goals, Operators, Methods,
and Selection rules (GOMS) [10]. As shown in Figure 1, the
MHP/RT assumes that the behavioral goals are subordinate to
happiness goals; the accomplishment of the behavioral goals
are likely to be accompanied by the unconscious feeling of
happiness, i.e., achieving a certain happiness goal.
1) Happiness Goals and their Relationship with the Behav-
ioral Goals: Morris [13] listed 17 happiness goals. The left
portion of Table II presents them, including goals such as “the
inherent happiness that comes with the love of a child,” “the
competitive happiness of triumphing over your opponents,”
“the sensual happiness of the hedonist,” and so on. Each
happiness goal is associated with a type, e.g., the people “the
achiever” should have “target happiness,” “the winner” should
have “competitive happiness,” and “the drug-user” should have
“chemical happiness.”
Kitajima et al. [18] proposed the maximum satisfaction
architecture (MSA). MSA assumes that the human brain
pursues one of the 17 happiness goals deﬁned by Morris [13]
at every moment and switches to another happiness goal when
appropriate by evaluating the current circumstances. Each of
the happiness goals is associated with one or multiple layers
of society. The right portion of Table II presents tentative
assignments of the degree of relevance of each happiness
goal to each social layer. The middle portion of Figure 1
suggests that any activities for achieving speciﬁc behavioral
goals would be conducted by individual persons in the pursuit
of any of the 17 happiness goals in the social layers presented
in the right portion of Table II. Happiness goals deﬁne the
value structure of the person when he or she makes decisions
by running the PCM and memory processes under speciﬁc
circumstances, while selecting his or her next actions. As such,
193
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Society of Linear Systems
Society of Autonomous Systems
Dimensionality
All systems are 4 dimensional systems
Each system has its own cognitive dimensions
Communication Method
Synchronization
Cooperative autonomous synchronization
Coordination Method
Reconstruction of the entire systems
Autonomous coordination by each system
Number of Systems
Small number of systems acceptable
Large number of systems can participate
Soft Link between Humans
Large burden
Small burden
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2. Society of linear systems and society of autonomous systems.
it is vital to assume the correct happiness goal when supporting
the next action selection process of a person, to accomplish
the behavioral goals.
There could be associations between the processes of ac-
complishing behavioral goals and the recognized happiness
goals, which could be useful to connect a behavioral goal
with a happiness goal. The associations, however, could be
vary among individuals. A single observed behavior under a
behavioral goal, described in terms of the four operation modes
and four processing modes, may have multiple associations
with the happiness goals. This is because the condition for
feeling happiness is strongly related with individual experi-
ences and the manner in which the reward system functions
for that experience [19]. Therefore, the mappings between the
behavioral and happiness goals have signiﬁcant individual and
situational differences; a single person could feel different
types of happiness when accomplishing a single behavioral
goal for different contexts.
2) Guidelines for Supporting Goal Level Interactions: The
purpose of designing artifacts has to be linked with any of
the SDGs. The design space for artifacts could be explored
strategically by associating the targeted SDGs with possible
happiness states the user may want to achieve, which is
indirectly connected with the behavioral goal of the user [7].
The mode and process level support are truly at the level
at which the user could directly interact with. However, the
goal-level support is at the level of motivation. The types
of happiness goals have discernible aspects of behavioral
ecology characterized by individual and contextual differences.
Therefore, goal- and contextual-dependent support are needed.
The happiness goals listed in Table II are sorted into six cat-
egories according to the degree of relatedness with the social
layers, i.e., individual, community, and social-system layers.
The categories roughly deﬁne the context that the associated
behavioral goals are trying to accomplish. The happiness goals
in category I could be accomplished individually without any
connections with the community or social-system. Those in
the category II could be accomplished individually or with the
members the individual belongs to. The rest of the categories
could be characterized in a similar way. The interface for
supporting happiness goals could be designed by category.
Guideline [E]


1. Provide individually appropriate support for the
identiﬁed happiness goal that the user might hold
when trying to accomplish the behavioral goal.
2. Provide contextually appropriate support for the
social layer in which the interaction might be
conducted.


IV. APPLICATION OF THE GUIDELINES: TWO HINTS
In general, guidelines are policies that indicate the direction
to take when designing artifacts, and they do not indicate how
the design can be carried out according to the speciﬁcally
presented guidelines.
The guidelines given in Section III primarily narrow down
the design space in A-PDP while designing artifacts, as
displayed in the center of Figure 1. This can be accomplished
194
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Function A 
Function B 
Function C 
Function D 
Function E 
Function F 
Function G 
activity range
adjustment range 
for connection
Function refers to a spatio-temporal activity of an autonomous system.
Fig. 3. Successive functions are connected within the adjustable band in the spatio-time dimension (adapted from [17, Figure 6]).
through two approaches. The ﬁrst approach, presented in Sec-
tion IV-A, involves deriving a speciﬁcation of the autonomous
decentralized A-PDP system introduced in Section I. This
system will enable it to function as a whole and achieve its
goals, which are any of the SDGs, and then to apply to it
the guidelines derived from human operating principles. The
second approach, presented in Section IV-B, involves a re-
verse engineering approach. First, the interaction process with
successful artifacts is observed ethnographically via MHP/RT
to understand how the guidelines function in the interaction
with the artifact in question. This approach helps ensure that
artifacts designed as derivatives of successful artifacts are in
line with the guidelines.
A. Autonomous Systems Interaction Design (ASID)
Users behave autonomously, and hence it seems natural to
design interactive systems as autonomous systems, which are
displayed in Figure 1 as A-PDP. This section reviews a frame-
work for designing interactions between the two autonomous
systems, A-PDP for artifacts and O-PDP for individuals,
proposed brieﬂy by [20]. Design activities are expected to
proceed smoothly by following the design guidelines proposed
in Section III.
1) Deﬁning Design Space for ASID: Traditional interactive
systems transform their input from the environment to output
in the environment by using a set of rules. However, these
systems are not intelligent enough to respond to an ever-
changing environment including users. Therefore, inputs to a
system may drift too far to be treated by the set of rules,
and the system might respond inappropriately. In these cases,
users may have to deal with the output of the system with
some efforts that would not be needed if the system is well
designed.
The key idea is to treat interactive systems as autonomous
systems that interact with users that are other autonomous
systems, and designing interactive systems implies designing
autonomous systems interaction that establishes natural co-
operation among them. By deﬁnition, autonomous systems
establish appropriate relationships among themselves at any
moment by means of autonomous cooperative synchronization.
The environment of an autonomous system is deﬁned by the
rest of the autonomous systems. As such, the relationships
among autonomous systems are symmetric. In other words,
there is no asymmetry in the autonomous systems interaction
such as “System A transmits data X (output of System A) to
System B (input of System B).” The focus of interactive sys-
tem design shifts from designing the I/O relationship between
the systems and its environment to designing autonomous
cooperative synchronization among systems, which we call
autonomous systems interaction design (ASID).
Living organisms, O-PDP, establish appropriate relation-
ships with their surrounding environment, A-PDP, by means
of autonomous cooperative synchronization. This mechanism
is ﬂexible and robust enough to achieve timely and automatic
coordination with the environment. The mechanism is modeled
by MHP/RT, and the design guidelines shown in Section III
are derived by considering the conditions for realizing ﬂexible
and stable interactions between O-PDP and A-PDP. When de-
termining the speciﬁcations of autonomous systems operating
on A-PDP, it is possible to narrow the scope by considering
the characteristics of the O-PDP that will be interacting with
them. For this purpose, the guidelines described in Section III
should be applied.
2) Society of Autonomous Systems: The environment hu-
man beings interact with also includes interactive systems.
This section starts by describing a society of systems that
is linear or autonomous, followed by the needs that those
systems must satisfy and the proposal of autonomous system
interaction that should meet the requirements.
a) Linear Systems: Behaving objects in the environment
are deﬁned in four-dimensional space-time coordinates. A
human being viewed as a linear system acquires the informa-
tion of behaving objects, i.e., humans other than oneself and
artifacts surrounding oneself, via its sensory organs as two-
dimensional data. The four-dimensional data are reduced to
two-dimensional data in this process. The axes that make up
these two dimensions are the time axis and a one-dimensional
axis representing the feature to which attention is directed.
195
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 4. An illustration of ASID.
The input data are used for representing their characteristics
by means of static linear functions. The purpose of the linear
functions is to predict the future states of objects. When an
objective of a behavior is given, the linear system will behave
by deriving static solutions through the use of the linear
functions that best match the current situation.
Figure 2(a) illustrates a society of linear systems manag-
ing various situations by tuning the relationships among the
constituent systems. However, there are situations where the
current organization of the systems causes a large amount of
stress in spite of efforts made to resolve the situations, and
they cannot behave properly. In these situations, the systems
have to change themselves. However, the change may or may
not produce good results. In the worst cases, the change may
cause a rapid increase of stress and crash the system.
b) Autonomous Systems: Human beings viewed as au-
tonomous systems represent behaving objects, i.e., humans
other than oneself and artifacts surrounding oneself, in the
four-dimensional space-time environment via sensory organs.
For example, the sense of taste is represented by six-
dimensional data, and the sense of sight is represented by
four-dimensional data. The input data are processed mainly
by System 1 and optionally by System 2, and they are
used to deﬁne functions that work in the multi-dimensional
memory frames and MSA for accomplishing some of the
happiness goals under the real-time constraints for establishing
stable synchronization with the environment. The functions
accumulate personal experience continuously in the multi-
dimensional memory frames to be used in the distinctive
layers of Newell’s Biological, Cognitive, Rational, and Social
Bands [9]. When an objective of a behavior is given, the
autonomous system will behave by deriving effective regions
so that the self will behave properly by using the functions.
When an autonomous system communicates with another one,
it uses the effective region at each moment. This assures
less stressful communication among autonomous systems than
among linear systems (Figure 2(b)).
The stable synchronization described above is accomplished
by means of weak synchronization [17]. Autonomous elements
are weakly synchronized with the external world, and the way
they actually work indirectly reﬂects the circularity of the
existing environment, i.e., autopoiesis [21], and ﬂuctuations
inherent in the environment. This situation is schematically
shown by Figure 3. A function, C, is connected with another
function, D, using the region of the overlapping edge for main-
taining continuity of the activities. Function C can be a series
of conscious activities performed in the Rational Band [9]
to plan ahead a sequence of actions for controlling the car
by consulting the contents of the relation multi-dimensional
memory frame. Function C is followed by Function D, which
can be an unconscious activity for tuning the planned activities
for the particular road conditions by using the bottom layer
of the memory structure, i.e., the perceptual, behavior, and
motion multi-dimensional memory frames.
c) An Illustration of Autonomous Systems Interaction
(ASI): Using the example presented in Figure 4, the following
196
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Ethnographical Field Observation
1
Mapping the Observed Phenomena on Cognitive Architecture
2
Identifying Study Parameters through Model-Based Simulation
3
Design CCE Study
4
Conduct CCE Study
5
Refinement of the Original Study Parameters
7
6 Refinement of the Original Mapping
REPEAT
CCE Study
Cognitive Architecture
Construction of Socio-Ecological Structure Model
Model-Based Simulation
Situation Dependent Simulation of Interaction Processes
Fig. 5. The CCE procedure [3, Figure 5.1].
illustrates what the interaction of an autonomous system looks
like. In real-world interactions between autonomous systems
in the A-PDP, the only thing that is predetermined is the
communication protocol. Information ﬂows over a bus to an
unspeciﬁed number of autonomous systems. Figure 4 displays
an extract of a portion of this information. A total of ﬁve
autonomous systems are shown in Figure 4, four in the A-
PDP system and one in the O-PDP system, labeled as “User”.
The two systems in the A-PDP, the personal decision support
system and operation service system, interact directly with
the user and provide information or issue warnings when the
user requests information or executes operations or commands.
Another system in the A-PDP, the public service system, inter-
acts directly with the two systems mentioned above, provides
information, and issues warnings in response to requests for
support and the given information from them.
The last system in the A-PDP behaves differently from
the other systems. This system is the mobile communication
system, indicated by the dotted oval in Figure 4. The purpose
of this system is to allow the autonomous systems in the
A-PDP and O-PDP to synchronize with each other and to
facilitate processing. To achieve this, this autonomous system
monitors other autonomous systems unnoticed and intervenes
with them unnoticed.
As demonstrated in the next section, this autonomous
system, which monitors and intervenes unnoticed by other
autonomous systems, plays a major role in synchronizing and
organizing the interactions among the autonomous systems in
A-PDP and O-PDP. However, it is not generally guaranteed
that the results of an unnoticed intervention will be meaning-
ful. It depends largely on the circumstances. Therefore, it is
necessary to create a feedback system to monitor the impact
of the intervention, and if the transition is not in a favorable
direction, further interventions to return the system to a normal
state are necessary. This would give the autonomous systems
in A-PDP and the user in O-PDP the resilience to return to
the normal state, thus allowing the entire system to operate in
a stable manner.
d) Application of the Guidelines to ASID: The guidelines
presented in Section III apply to the design of the portion of
the interface displayed in orange in Figure 4. When designing
“Provision of Information” and “Warning” displayed in Fig-
ure 4, those guidelines that mention “provide · · · support”,
the Guidelines [D], should be applied. For guideline [D],
depending on whether the user is in System 1 Before Mode
or System 2 Mode, [D-1] or [D-2] shall apply. It is preferable
to determine the user’s state unnoticeably to not affect the
natural interaction between the user and the system. For this
reason, it is necessary to use the mobile communication system
displayed in Figure 4 when applying this guideline.
Guidelines [A], [B], and [C] are to be applied based on the
determination of which mode the user is interacting with the
system. As this judgment should be made without disturbing
the natural interaction between the user and the system, the
mobile communication system displayed in Figure 4 should
be used. For example, the system intervenes in the interaction
between the user and the system without being noticed by the
user, naturally prompting the user to request information from
the system or providing information from the system to the
user that matches the user’s operation mode.
B. CCE
This section introduces a methodology for conducting ﬁeld
experiments to understand human behaviors as a hint for
carrying out a strategically principled search in the design
space to obtain design speciﬁcations that conform to the guide-
lines this study proposes. The methodology, cognitive chrono-
ethnography (CCE) [22], should complement the MHP/RT
by providing the real data of human behavior for speciﬁc
situations that should deﬁne constraints on the functioning of
PCM and memory processes.
1) CCE for Narrowing Down the Design Space: CCE
combines three concepts. “Cognitive” declares that CCE deals
with interactions between consciousness and unconsciousness
197
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

in the PCM cycles. “Chrono (-logy)” is about time ranging
from ∼100 ms to days, months, and years, and CCE focuses
on these time ranges. “Ethnography” indicates that CCE takes
ethnographical observations as the concrete study method
because in daily life, the Two Minds of people tend to re-use
experientially effective behavioral patterns, which are biases
and might have individual and contextual differences.
To conduct a CCE study, study participants (elite monitors)
are selected. Each deﬁning study ﬁeld has values. The study
question is “what would certain people do in certain ways
in certain circumstances (not average behavior)?” Therefore,
elite monitors, certain persons, are selected by consulting
the parameter space. In this process, it is necessary that
the points in the parameter space, which correspond to the
elite monitors, are appropriate for analyzing the structure and
dynamics of the study ﬁeld. The methodology is not for
human–artifact interaction but for every aspect of the daily life
of human beings. Regarding the relationship between CCE and
the design space, CCE focuses on understanding the process
of interaction between successful artifacts and users and is
intended for existing artifacts. Therefore, it is out of scope to
predict the kind of interaction that occurs between the user and
a non-existent artifact that no one has discussed. The role of
CCE is to enable the design space to be narrowed down by a
solid understanding of the success stories of existing artifacts,
thereby deﬁning the successful areas of new designs. With
that in mind, it will be possible to come up with alternatives
to successful artifacts. Whether or not new and innovative
artifacts are accepted by users is discussed in another guideline
paper published by us [6].
2) CCE Procedure for the Human–Artifact Interaction:
Figure 5 shows the seven steps to conduct a CCE study [3,
Figure 5.1]. The following describes the CCE steps adapted
to human–artifact interaction. Necessary additions appear after
the general descriptions for the CCE procedures.
(1) Ethnographical Field Observation: Use the basic ethno-
graphical investigation method to clarify the outline of the
structure of social ecology that underlies the subject to study.
The subject of study is to understand the manner
in which the existing artifacts in question are used
successfully by the current users. The ultimate goal of
the artifacts is to achieve any of the SDGs through
their use by potential users; the current users may be a
part of them. The range of users could be widened
by appealing appropriately to the right segments of
the users. The users could be characterized as an
individual, a member of a community or a social-
system. Depending on the social layers the users belong
to, the happiness goals that could be achieved could
vary. The kinds of SGDs that the artifacts with the
current or appropriately enhanced speciﬁcations could
achieve may be widened or corrected. In this step, it is
necessary to clarify the outline of the structure of social
ecology in terms of the segment of potential users, the
social layer they belong to, and the happiness goals
they may achieve by referring to Table II.
(2) Mapping the Observed Phenomena on Cognitive Archi-
tecture: With reference to the behavioral characteristics of
people which have been made clear so far and cognitive
architectures, consider what kind of characteristic elements of
human behavior are involved in the investigation result in (1).
This study proposes the use of MHP/RT as the cogni-
tive architecture for this step. As this study proposes,
the human–artifact interaction is characterized at three
levels, i.e., the mode, the process, and the goal levels.
This is based on the MHP/RT cognitive architecture.
Because the artifacts in question realize successful
interactions with the users, it is assumed that their
design should conform to the guidelines in speciﬁc
ways. In this step, it is necessary to describe the manner
in which they conform to the guidelines, i.e., the mode-
level support provided, the process-level support, and
the goal-level support.
(3) Identifying Study Parameters through Model-Based Simu-
lation: Based on the consideration of (1) and (2), construct an
initial simple model with the constituent elements of activated
memories, i.e., meme, and the characteristic PCM processing
to represent the nature of the ecology of the study space.
In this step, the “what” question answered in (2) is
operationalized by turning it into the “how” question.
This is answered by constructing an MHP/RT model
that could simulate successful users of the artifact in
question. The model could run by specifying (a) the
likely happiness goals, (b) the possible modes of the
assumed interaction, (c) the possible ways of weak
synchronization establishment, and (d) the kinds of
memes of the simulated user [23][24]. The successful
users could be characterized by combining the values
assigned to (a) ∼ (d), which constitute the study
parameters.
(4) Design a CCE Study: Based on the simple ecological
model, identify a set of typical behavioral characteristics from
a variety of people making up the group to be studied. Then
formulate screening criteria of elite monitors who represent
a certain combination of the behavioral characteristics, and
deﬁne ecological survey methods for them.
This step follows the standard CCE procedure.
(5) Conduct CCE Study: Select elite monitors and conduct
an ethnographical ﬁeld observation. Record the monitors’
behavior. The elite monitors are expected to behave as they
normally do at the study ﬁeld. Their behavior is recorded
in such a way that the collected data is rich enough to
consider the results in terms of the parameter space and as
un-intrusively as circumstances allow.
This step follows the standard CCE procedure.
(6) Reﬁnement of the Original Mapping: Check the results
of (5) against the results of (2) for appropriateness of the
mapping. If inappropriate, back to (2) and redo from there.
198
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

This step follows the standard CCE procedure.
(7) Reﬁnement of the Original Study Parameters: If the result
of (5) is unsatisfactory, go back to (4) and re-design and
conduct a revised CCE study, otherwise go back to (3) to redo
the model-based simulation with a set of reﬁned parameters.
This step follows the standard CCE procedure.
On completion of the CCE cycle, the existing social ecol-
ogy that characterizes the successful use of the artifact is
understood. This understanding is used to widen the range of
successful use of the artifact and contribute to determining the
direction of strategic development for the maximum utilization
of the artifact.
V. CONCLUSION
The purpose of this study was to contribute to realizing a
sustainable society of human beings and artifacts. The focus
was on the human–artifact interaction, which occurs at the
interface between human beings (the interface is composed
of multiple autonomous systems, i.e., PCM and memory
systems), and artifacts, which are a collection of autonomous
systems. This study used a theory-based approach to derive
guidelines for application when designing artifacts that should
realize a sustainable society.
The constraints imposed on the derivation were: 1) the
ultimate purpose of artifacts for realizing a sustainable society
should be the achievement of any of the SDGs, and 2) human
interactions with the artifacts should be theorized by the
MHP/RT cognitive architecture. These constraints were related
with each other via the concept of resilience of the interaction
processes. On the one hand, the stability of the human–artifact
interaction at the mode level, i.e., either System 2 dominant or
System 1 dominant processes should be carried out stably, was
the necessary condition for the accomplishment of behavioral
goals using the artifact. On the other hand, the accomplishment
of behavioral goals is linked with the feeling of achieving
any of the 17 happiness goals, deﬁned at the three social
layers. The behavioral goals do not necessarily have a direct
connection with the SDGs; rather, the accomplishment of
behavioral goals indirectly contributes to the achievement of
any of SDGs as by-products [7]. Because both the happiness
goals and SDGs focus on social ecology, the mapping between
them could be established [7]. This would complete the links
from the stable accomplishment of behavioral goals to the
achievement of happiness goals and SDGs for realizing a
sustainable society.
Generally, guidelines are useless, unless they are practiced.
The second hint is related to a method for applying the
derived guidelines based on CCE, which deﬁnes the exper-
imentation procedure for complementing the theory of cog-
nitive architecture, MHP/RT. CCE and MHP/RT are the two-
wheels of a vehicle to understand the daily behavior of human
beings [22]; evidently, the human–artifact interaction is part of
it. CCE is used to understand observed behavior. Therefore, it
is most useful for extending the existing interaction processes
by deliberately extrapolating them by the provision of new
interface designs, which should conform to the relevant guide-
lines. For example, at the process level, weak synchronization
has to be realized in the interaction process between the new
design and the user. If this interaction is carried out as routine
goal-oriented skills in Mode 1, the behavior of the users could
be represented as several versions of the GOMS models [10]
that are suitable for accomplishing respective behavioral goals.
The appropriateness of the new design has to be considered, as
to whether it could establish weakly synchronized interaction,
given the existing GOMS models.
An artifact is deﬁned as a set of speciﬁcations, which are
sufﬁcient for engineering to realize a working product. The
raison d’ˆetre of the artifact would be to contribute to the
achievement of any of the SDGs and to make its users feel any
of the happiness goals, to realize a sustainable society through
the human–artifact interaction. This study proposed a method
for bridging these goals as a set of guidelines on the basis
of the scientiﬁc understanding of human behavior, provided
by the cognitive architecture, MHP/RT, the methodology for
experimentation, CCE, and the design concept for autonomous
systems, ASID, to narrow down the design space.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Num-
ber 20H04290. The author would like to thank Editage
(www.editage.com) for English language editing.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Kitajima, M. Toyota, and J. Dinet, “Guidelines for Designing Inter-
actions Between Autonomous Artiﬁcial Systems and Human Beings,”
in COGNITIVE 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on
Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications, 2022, pp. 23–31.
[2] M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Decision-making and action selection
in Two Minds: An analysis based on Model Human Processor with
Realtime Constraints (MHP/RT),” Biologically Inspired Cognitive Ar-
chitectures, vol. 5, pp. 82–93, 2013.
[3] M. Kitajima, Memory and Action Selection in Human-Machine Interac-
tion.
Wiley-ISTE, 2016.
[4] D. A. Norman, “Cognitive engineering,” in User Centered System
Design: New Perspectives on Human-Computer Interaction. CRC Press,
1986, ch. 3, pp. 31–61.
[5] H. A. Simon, The Sciences of the Artiﬁcial, 3rd ed.
Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press, 1996.
[6] M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Guidelines for designing artifacts for
the dual-process,” in Procedia Computer Science, BICA 2015. 6th
Annual International Conference on Biologically Inspired Cognitive
Architectures, vol. 71, 2015, pp. 62–67.
[7] M. Kitajima, “Cognitive Science Approach to Achieve SDGs,” in
COGNITIVE 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced
Cognitive Technologies and Applications, 2020, pp. 55–61.
[8] V. Sarathy, “Real World Problem-Solving,” Frontiers in human neuro-
science, vol. 12, p. 261, 2018.
[9] A. Newell, Uniﬁed Theories of Cognition (The William James Lectures,
1987).
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1990.
[10] S. K. Card, T. P. Moran, and A. Newell, The Psychology of Human-
Computer Interaction.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
1983.
[11] J. L. McClelland and D. E. Rumelhart, Parallel Distributed Processing:
Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition : Psychological and
Biological Models.
The MIT Press, 6 1986.
[12] D. Kahneman, “A perspective on judgment and choice,” American
Psychologist, vol. 58, no. 9, pp. 697–720, 2003.
[13] D. Morris, The nature of happiness.
London: Little Books Ltd., 2006.
199
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[14] M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Simulating navigation behaviour based
on the architecture model Model Human Processor with Real-Time
Constraints (MHP/RT),” Behaviour & Information Technology, vol. 31,
no. 1, pp. 41–58, 2012.
[15] ——, “Four Processing Modes of in situ Human Behavior,” in Biologi-
cally Inspired Cognitive Architectures 2011 - Proceedings of the Second
Annual Meeting of the BICA Society, A. V. Samsonovich and K. R.
J´ohannsd´ottir, Eds.
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: IOS Press, 2011,
pp. 194–199.
[16] J. Dinet and M. Kitajima, “Immersive interfaces for engagement
and learning: Cognitive implications,” in Proceedings of the 2018
Virtual Reality International Conference, ser. VRIC ’18.
New York,
NY, USA: ACM, 2018, pp. 18/04:1–18/04:8. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3234253.3234301[retrieved:December, 2022]
[17] M. Kitajima, J. Dinet, and M. Toyota, “Multimodal Interactions Viewed
as Dual Process on Multi-Dimensional Memory Frames under Weak
Synchronization,” in COGNITIVE 2019 : The Eleventh International
Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and Applications,
2019, pp. 44–51.
[18] M. Kitajima, H. Shimada, and M. Toyota, “MSA:Maximum Satisfaction
Architecture – a basis for designing intelligent autonomous agents on
web 2.0,” in Proceedings of the 29th Annual Conference of the Cognitive
Science Society, D. S. McNamara and J. G. Trafton, Eds.
Austin, TX:
Cognitive Science Society, 2007, p. 1790.
[19] M. Kitajima and M. Toyota, “Two Minds and Emotion,” in COGNITIVE
2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Cognitive
Technologies and Applications, 2015, pp. 8–16.
[20] ——, “Autonomous Systems Interaction Design (ASID) based on
NDHB-Model/RT,” in Proceedings of the 31th Annual Conference of
the Cognitive Science Society.
Cognitive Science Society, 2009.
[21] H. Maturana and F. Varela, Autopoiesis and Cognition (Boston Studies in
the Philosophy and History of Science), softcover reprint of the original
1st ed. 1980 ed.
D. Reidel Publishing Company, 8 1991.
[22] M. Kitajima, “Cognitive Chrono-Ethnography (CCE): A Behavioral
Study
Methodology
Underpinned
by
the
Cognitive
Architecture,
MHP/RT,” in Proceedings of the 41st Annual Conference of the Cogni-
tive Science Society.
Cognitive Science Society, 2019, pp. 55–56.
[23] M. Toyota, M. Kitajima, and H. Shimada, “Structured Meme Theory:
How is informational inheritance maintained?” in Proceedings of the
30th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society, B. C. Love,
K. McRae, and V. M. Sloutsky, Eds.
Austin, TX: Cognitive Science
Society, 2008, p. 2288.
[24] M. Kitajima, M. Toyota, and J. Dinet, “The Role of Resonance in the
Development and Propagation of Memes,” in COGNITIVE 2021 : The
Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technolo-
gies and Applications, 2021, pp. 28–36.
200
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

