370
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A Virtual Navigation in a Reconstruction of the Town of Otranto 
in the Middle Ages for Playing and Education 
 
Lucio Tommaso De Paolis, Giovanni Aloisio 
Department of Innovation Engineering 
University of Salento 
Lecce, Italy 
lucio.depaolis@unisalento.it 
giovanni.aloisio@unisalento.it 
Maria G. Celentano, Luigi Oliva, Pietro Vecchio 
Scuola Superiore ISUFI 
University of Salento 
Lecce, Italy 
mariagrazia.celentano@unisalento.it 
luigi.oliva@isufi.unile.it 
pietro.vecchio@unisalento.it  
 
 
 
Abstract— The aim of the MediaEvo Project is to develop a 
multi-sensory platform for the edutainment in Cultural 
Heritage towards integration of human sciences and new data 
processing technologies, for the realization of a digital didactic 
game oriented to the knowledge of medieval history and 
society. The developing of the project has enhanced 
interactions among historical, pedagogical and ICT researches, 
by means of the definition of a virtual immersive platform for 
playing and educating and has permitted to investigate some 
navigation and interaction modalities among players for 
education purposes. In this paper we present some results of 
the MediaEvo Project that has led the researchers to use the 
reconstruction of the city of Otranto in the Middle Ages in 
order to determine the conditions for testing more elements of 
interaction in a virtual environment and a multisensory 
mediation in which merge objects, subjects and experiential 
context. With the aim to make interaction easier for users 
without any experience of navigation in a virtual world and 
more efficient for trained users, we use the Wiimote and the 
Balance Board of Nintendo in order to increase the sense of 
immersion in the virtual environment.  
Keywords - simulation; edutainment; Virtual Cultural 
Heritage; navigation; virtual treasure hunt 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Edutainment, a neologism created from the combination 
of the words education and entertainment, refers to any form 
of entertainment aimed at an educational role. The 
videogame is one of the most exciting and immediate media 
of the edutainment applications because the game enables a 
type of multisensory and immersive relationship of the user 
through its interactive interface; moreover, the cyberspace 
of the videogame is a privileged point of sharing and 
socializing among players. 
Edutainment is an up-and-coming field that combines 
education with entertainment aspects; thus, it enhances the 
learning environment and makes it much more engaging and 
fun-filled. 
One of the most important applications of edutainment is 
undoubtedly the reconstruction of 3D environments aimed 
at the study of cultural heritage; the use of Virtual Reality in 
this field makes it possible to examine the three-dimensional 
high-resolution 
environments 
reconstructed 
by 
using 
information retrieved from the archaeological and historical 
studies and to navigate in these in order to test new 
methodologies or to practically evaluate the assessment. 
Virtual Reality (VR) technology makes it also possible to 
create applications for edutainment purposes for the general 
public and to integrate different learning approaches.  
The building of three-dimensional renderings is an 
efficient way of storing information, a means to 
communicate a large amount of visual information and a 
tool 
for 
constructing 
collaborative 
worlds 
with 
a 
combination of different media and methods. By recreating 
or simulating something concerning an ancient culture, 
virtual heritage applications are a bridge between people of 
the ancient culture and modern users. 
One of the best uses of the virtual models is that of 
creating a mental tool to help students learn about things 
and explore ancient cultures and places that no longer exist 
or that might be too dangerous or too expensive to visit. In 
addition, it allows students to interact in a new way, using 
many possibilities for collaboration. A very effective way to 
use VR to teach students about ancient cultures is to make 
them enter the virtual environment as a shared social space 
and allow them to play as members of that society. 
The development technologies of video games are today 
driven by strong and ever-increasing request, but there are 
very few investments related to teaching usage of such 
technologies, they are still restricted to the entertainment 
context. Several VR applications in Cultural Heritage have 
been developed, but only very few of these with an 
edutainment aim. 
The Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) technology is 
concerned with methodologies and methods for designing 

371
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
new interfaces and interaction techniques, for evaluating 
and comparing interfaces and developing descriptive and 
predictive models and theories of interaction. 
The HCIs improve interactions between users and 
computers by making computers more usable and receptive 
to the user's needs. 
Researches in HCI field focus on the developing of new 
design methodologies and new hardware devices and on 
exploring new paradigms and theories for the interaction. 
The end point in the interface design would then lead to a 
paradigm in which the interaction with computers becomes 
similar to the one between human beings. 
This paper presents some results of the MediaEvo Project 
that has led the researchers to use the reconstruction of the 
city of Otranto in the Middle Ages in order to determine the 
conditions for testing more elements of interaction in a 
virtual environment and to develop a multi-channel and 
multi-sensory platform for the edutainment in Cultural 
Heritage. 
In the following is reported the virtual reconstruction of 
the town of Otranto in the Middle Ages, the interaction 
modalities and rules of the navigation in the virtual town 
and has been also tested the possibility to navigate in a 
complex virtual environment by means of the Nintendo 
Wiimote and Balance Board [1] and the idea of the use of 
the Augmented Reality technology in a treasure hunt. 
II. 
PREVIOUS WORKS ON THE NAVIGATION WITHIN 
VIRTUAL ENVIRONMENTS 
The 
techniques 
for 
navigation 
within 
virtual 
environments have covered a broad kind of approaches 
ranging from directly manipulating the environment with 
gestures of the hands, to indirectly navigating using hand-
held widgets, to identifying some body gestures and to 
recognizing speech commands. Perhaps the most prevalent 
style of navigation control for virtual environments is 
directly manipulating the environment with gestures or 
movements of part of the user’s body.  
Some developed systems are based on a head-directed 
navigation technique in which the orientation of the users 
head determines the direction and speed of navigation [2]. 
This technique has the advantage of requiring no additional 
hardware besides a head tracker, but has the disadvantage 
that casual head motions when viewing a scene can be 
misinterpreted as navigation commands. In addition, a 
severe drawback of this and other head-based techniques is 
that it is impossible to perform the common and desirable 
real-world operation of moving in one direction while 
looking in another. 
Another direct body-based navigation technique is found 
in some systems that use sensors to measure the tilt of the 
user’s spine or the orientation of the user’s torso in order to 
determine the direction of the motion and to enable the 
decoupling of the user’s head orientation from their 
direction of movement [3]. 
Another category of techniques for motion control is 
based on speech recognition. Speech allows a user to 
indicate parameters of navigation and can often be used in 
conjunction with gestures to provide rich, natural immersive 
navigation controls [4]. Speech controls should play a role 
in virtual environment navigation, but it is also critical to 
support an effective navigation based on speech-free 
techniques. 
In the last few years, systems based on locomotion 
interfaces and on control navigation by walking in place for 
the navigation in a virtual environment have also been 
developed. 
String Walker [5]is a locomotion interface that uses eight 
strings actuated by motor-pulley mechanisms mounted on a 
turntable in order to cancel the displacement of the walker. 
String Walker enables users to maintain their positions 
while walking in various directions in virtual environments 
because, when the shoes move, the strings pull them in the 
opposite direction and cancel the step. The position of the 
walker is fixed in the real world by this computer-controlled 
tension of the strings that can pull the shoes in any direction, 
so the walker can perform a variety of gaits, including side-
walking or backward walking 
The CirculaFloor [6] locomotion interface uses a group of 
movable floors that employ a holonomic mechanism in 
order to achieve omni-directional motion. The circulation of 
the floors enables users to walk in arbitrary directions in a 
virtual environment while their positions are maintained. 
The CirculaFloor creates an infinite omni-directional 
surface using a set of movable tiles that provide a sufficient 
area for walking and a precision tracing of the foot position 
is not required. This method has the potential to create an 
uneven surface by mounting an up-and-down mechanism on 
each tile. 
Powered Shoes [7] employs roller skates actuated by 
motors and flexible shafts and supports omni-directional 
walking, but the walker cannot perform a variety of gaits. 
Powered Shoes is a revolutionary advance for entertainment 
and simulation applications, because it provides the 
proprioceptive feedback of walking. 
III. 
IMPROVING KNOWLEDGE THROUGH THE VIRTUAL 
REPRESENTATION  
Evolution in research methodology corresponds to a 
general debate on communication and education closely 
linked to the characteristics of a changing perception of 
teaching, oscillating between experimental impulses and 
conservative attitudes. 
The improvement in technological capabilities enriches 
the possibilities for research and protection and enhances 
the value of cultural heritage, thus halting their demise. 

372
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Firstly, the increased speed of communication and data 
exchange within the research community offers the 
dimension of real time interconnectivity.  
Secondly, the overall amount of information originating 
from both qualitative and quantitative exploration with the 
support of technologically advanced equipment, compared 
with that of a few decades ago, leads to the possibility of an 
extremely detailed description of reality. 
The ancient town, as an information unit made up of 
ontological entities [8], can be defined as a cultural unit 
code which locates and describes the process of 
territorialisation of human society. It represents the space-
time relation between man and environment at a certain time 
[9]. Apart from this assertion of uniqueness of space and 
time the educational purpose of the work requires a 
perceivable synthesis of culture, civilization and place 
referred to a perceivable and sufficiently extended phase of 
civilization [10]. 
Until recently, "historic vision" was limited to only a few 
professionals, scholars and researchers, who shared the 
interpretation codes for extracting the ancient landscape 
from the actual one. In this new stream of experimentation, 
geared towards interaction and edutainment, the researcher 
becomes part of a larger system through which to study and 
interpret space. In a virtual interactive town, the possibilities 
of information exchange increase dramatically, moving 
from static reconstruction to simulation. 
Simulation permits the construction of a platform that 
adds the definition of game rules and plots to interaction and 
immersion. The final goal of the definition of the historic 
landscape is a cybernetic world that will create infinite 
possible simulations, not necessarily bonded to physical 
reality, based on the algorithms that encode the 
understanding of ancient situations [11]. 
At 
present, 
many 
experiences 
of 
interactive 
reconstruction take place on the net or have been presented 
during the course of international conferences. These 
primarily concern the elaboration of algorithmic models in 
order to better comprehend and reconstruct the sites, 
technological applications for Augmented Reality on 
cultural heritage and ontological systems and data 
management.  
Other applications facilitate access to and reading of the 
cultural patrimony both within the museum and online, for 
example: 
• 
The reconstruction of the site of Faragola (Foggia) 
by the University of Foggia, undertaken as part of 
the Itinera Time Machine Project, fits within the 
trend of an experiential relationship within an 
archaeological context [12]; 
• 
Appia Antica Project, a digital archive of the 
monuments of the park, employing many different 
technologies for 3D representation of the landscape 
and integrating instruments for topographic relief 
and methodologies of surveying on site [13]; 
• 
Virtual Rome Project [14]; 
• 
Ancient Rome on Google Earth [15]; 
• 
Medieval Dublin [16]; 
• 
Nu.M.E. Project, a virtual museum concerned with 
the city of Bologna [17]. 
On a strongly interactive level and related specifically to 
multichannel 
edutainment, 
examples 
of 
applications 
utilizing Virtual Collaborative Environments are: 
• 
City Cluster [18]; 
• 
The Quest Atlantis Project [19]; 
• 
Integrated Technologies of Robotics and Virtual 
Environment in Archaeology Project [20]. 
IV. 
THE MEDIAEVO PROJECT: LEARNING ABOUT THE 
MIDDLE AGES IN OTRANTO 
The MediaEvo Project aims to develop a multi-channel 
and multi-sensory platform in Cultural Heritage and to test 
new data processing technologies for the realization of a 
digital didactic game oriented to the knowledge of medieval 
history and society [21], [22]. 
The framework has features of strategy games, in which 
the decision-making capacities of a user have a big impact 
on the result, which in our case is the achievement of a 
learning target. The idea is to create competition between 
the players, during the learning process. 
The game is intended as a means to experience a loyal 
representation of the possible scenarios (environments, 
characters and social roles) in the historic-geographical 
context of Otranto during Frederick Age (XIII century).  
We chose Otranto as an example town; Otranto is located 
in the easternmost tip of the Italian peninsula, in Puglia, in 
the so-called Italy’s heel. Due to its geographical position, 
Otranto was like a bridge between East and West and it 
played an important connective role in the Middle Ages 
from a historical and cultural point of view. For these 
reasons many publications and lectures have looked at and 
partly explained the ancient role of this town by focusing on 
the historical happenings and on the development of urban 
institutions within it [23]. 
Otranto was a Byzantine and a Gothic centre, later ruled 
by the Normans, Swabians, the Anjou and the Aragonese. 
After a long siege, on 14 August 1480 the town was caught 
and the inhabitants were massacred by the Turkish army. 
This mix of history can be seen in the enigmatic mosaic of 
the Cathedral, a Romanesque church built during the 
Norman domination in the 10th century on the axis that 
joined Rome to Byzantium. The mosaic, done by the monk 
Pantaleone in the 12th century, covers almost the entire 
floor of the Cathedral, for over 16 metres; its size is nothing 
compared to the complexity of images and references that 
mixes Biblical narration from the Old and New Testaments 

373
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
with some pagan elements and others of Eastern derivation. 
The implementation of an edutainment platform is 
strongly influenced by the definition of the scenery that is 
the world in which the framework is placed with the related 
learning objects and learning path, the characters, the 
scene’s objects, the logic, hence, the rules of the game, the 
audio content, the texts and anything related to its use. 
The framework will have features of strategy games, in 
which the decision capabilities of a user have a big impact 
on the result, which in our case is the achievement of a 
learning target. Nevertheless, the strategy and tactics are in 
general opposed by unforeseeable factors (provided by the 
game), connected with the edutainment modules, in order to 
provide a higher level of participation, which is expressed in 
terms of the ease with which it is learnt. The idea is to 
provide a competition between the players, during their 
learning. 
The system, on the basis of a well-defined learning target 
and eventually based on the knowledge of the user, will 
continuously propose a learning path (learning path 
composed by a sequence of learning objects), in order to 
allow the achievement of particular learning results.  
The use of digital entertainment and performance media, 
then, can enhance the communication of cultural heritage 
and history in order to increase our knowledge of such a 
relevant part of our history. 
Given the knowledge we have of the town in the Middle 
Ages, it may be almost impossible to carry out a full 
reconstruction, what could be experienced in the game is the 
immersion in a virtual environment that can easily enhance 
the communication of historical research and understanding 
of the birth and life of cultural heritage. 
During its definition, the platform that has been planned 
for educational purposes has proved to be useful for testing 
researchers’ hypotheses about the ancient town and its 
everyday life.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Scheme of project work organization for MediaEvo Project 
At the end of project, other application fields have been 
tested on the game: new peripherals for motion and 
interaction, virtual treasure hunts, Augmented Reality and 
evaluation of the scheme for territorial marketing and 
touristic promotion. 
The scheme of the MediaEvo Project work organization 
is reported in Fig. 1. 
V. 
RECONSTRUCTION OF THE VIRTUAL TOWN 
For reconstructing the natural place and its surroundings a 
Digital Terrain Model (DTM) of the site was produced 
using ESRI ArcGIS and imported in the game engine 
Torque Game Engine of GarageGames. Characters and 
animation are made using 3ds Max. 
 
 
Figure 2.  The reconstruction of defensive wall and its surroundings. 
Architectural contents were modelled using the Torque 
Constructor editor of the Torque 3D engine. The first 
dwelling consists of a unit cell surrounded by a rectangular 
court, this is considered the initial settlement model for all 
ancient towns; the second one is the terraced house unit. 
Composing and varying those units on the particular scheme 
leads to the reconstruction of the urban medieval space in 
the game. The modular elementary residential units have 
been designed according to the local medieval unit system. 
They have been used as bricks for composing the urban 
landscape in which monuments, infrastructures and playing 
are located. In Fig. 2 the reconstruction of the defensive 
wall and its surroundings is shown.  
Torque Constructor has proved to be an efficient tool for 
the direct implementation of basic 3D graphics models but 
we found some difficulties in modelling complex buildings 
because of the lack of many useful features implemented in 
professional 3D software. For this reason, the reconstruction 
of big monuments has been carried out using a CAM in 
order to obtain a more accurate definition of the 
architectural structures. All the models have been imported 
into the Torque 3D engine. 
St. Peter's Church was found to be useful for testing the 

374
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
importing system both for its characteristic modularity and 
for its historical relevance as a single byzantine building 
located in a medieval context.  
In Fig. 3 is shown the internal and external reconstruction 
of the Otranto Cathedral.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  The reconstruction of the Otranto Cathedral. 
Other parts, walls and external structures such as towers 
or gates, complete the original landscape for the game. 
For the context of edutainment for cultural heritage, in 
this issue various virtual interactions into the Torque Game 
Engine platform have been produced.  
A new algorithm has been implemented to realize a 
preliminary Artificial Intelligence with the ability to 
establish stable textual or vocal connections between the 
different virtual players placed in the game mission. 
Interactions have been placed into some checkpoints of 
the Torque virtual environment; these checkpoints make it 
possible to trigger particular audio or/and video events 
during the navigation of the game player. 
It is also possible to implement the interactions in the 
Torque platform, allowing developers to bind appropriate 
actions to a given event. Each event manages a particular 
action in the game mission and in this sense the events can 
be used for controlling textual or multimedia mode. 
It is possible to control the movements of each game 
player in the game mission in the collisions with game 
objects placed in the virtual environment. 
VI. 
INTERACTION MODALITIES AND RULES 
In Fig. 4 is shown a diagram of interactions of the avatar-
player. There are 2 levels, as it is described below: 
A. Level I. Educational 
When the game starts, the player sees a multimedia 
presentation (a videoclip developed by experts in medieval 
history/art) with a short introduction to the history of 
Otranto; s/he can then choose the possible destinations 
(Cathedral, St. Peter’s Church, Castle and Town Walls) and 
see the corresponding videoclips or skip the presentation 
and start the application. Here s/he goes to the second level. 
B. Level II. Interaction and surfing 
This is an interactive level where the player enters the 
virtual world. S/he will meet a guide and could choose to 
navigate with him/her - surfing with a guide (level II.1) - or 
free surfing without the guide (level II.2). 
 
 
Figure 4.  Access and interaction levels of the avatar-player 
In the definition of the interaction with the 3D 
environment in the case of level II.1, two possible scenarios 
were created and, therefore, two possible tasks for the 
avatar-guide: 
a) 1st choice: Facilitator Guide (F-Guide) 
The guide is a facilitator and gives the player suggestions 
to follow a specific navigation path. The player can start 
multiple paths with the F-Guide and select among four 
different Interest Points (IPs): the Cathedral (IP1), St. 
Peter’s Church (IP2), the Castle (IP3) and the Town Walls 
(IP4). Fig. 5 shows the Interest Points of the game. 
In the journey from the starting point (Ø) to the selected 

375
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
IP, the guide will not be available for other players 
accessing the game. These players can wait for the guide or 
start free surfing without a guide. 
b) 2nd choice: Tele-Transportation Guide (T-Guide) 
The player can ask the guide to be tele-transported to 
some points of interest. This option is a learning strategy to 
turn the player’s attention to specific educational objectives.  
All interest points have the option to locate the T-Guide 
with the task to tele-transport the player to another IP. It is 
possible a case in which the player, without the help of a 
guide, can freely surf the virtual environment; in this case 
the only helping tools are some "road signs" located at the 
road intersections to direct the player to the Points of 
Interest. 
All the possible interactions between the player and the 
IPs are planned and properly designed. 
The main interactions are: 
• 
Surfing inside the IP; 
• 
Surfing outside (all around) the IP; 
• 
Asking the guardian of the IP to recount its history; 
• 
Asking the guardian of the IP to view the 
educational/information library associated with the 
IP; 
• 
Asking the guardian to benefit from tele-
transportation to another IP. 
There are also "intermediate Interest Points" (IIPs), such 
as the workshop, the blacksmith shop, the olive tree grove, 
etc. These IIP will provide more multimedia educational 
contents for the player (videos, texts, audio files, images).  
 
 
Figure 5.  The Interest Points in the MediaEvo game 
VII. PLAYERS AND ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
Inside MediaEvo Project there has also been implemented a 
module 
to 
manage 
the 
Interactions 
with 
Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) [24]. 
The artificial intelligence is necessary to establish a 
connection with some characters in the virtual game and to 
receive multimedia information and commands in real time. 
The ability to interact with AI characters is the principal 
key for retrieving knowledge and experiences from the 
virtual reality environment.  
In the MediaEvo Project, the component of Artificial 
Intelligence is based on a graphical interface, with the 
following specifications:  
• 
The interface should allow the starting of the 
interaction by pushing a default button on the 
keyboard;  
• 
The 
interface 
should 
provide 
a 
choice 
of 
applications to be given as instructions to the virtual 
character;  
• 
The 
interface 
should 
display 
all 
workable 
interactions with a virtual character.  
For this purpose, a reconfigurable database of 
instructions has been generated. 
The configurable database has direct access to the AI 
Interactive module. The result of the proposed approach is 
shown in Fig. 6. 
 
 
Figure 6.  The GUI implemented. 
The AI Interactive Module has been realized according to 
the guidelines of the scripts implemented in Torque Game 
Engine [25].  
The algorithm to manage the Artificial Intelligence that 
can be divided into two main modules:  
• 
The AIT Server Management Code; 
• 
The AIT GUI Management Code.  
When the player selects an item of the AIT Queries 
database, the GUI interface establishes a communication 
between the player and a virtual AI character and the 
selected item contains the instruction that could be imparted 
to the AI character. The instruction is straight managed from 
the AIT GUI Management Code module that encapsulates 
the information into a single system call. 
Finally, the system call is routed to the AIT Server 

376
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Management Code module and then it is interpreted to 
identify the corresponding action, into the AIT Actions 
database. 
 
 
Figure 7.  The opening of a multimedia clip video. 
The game has been designed for enabling multi-playing 
in order to provide the real-time ability to interact with other 
game sessions localized in different places of the 
reconstructed virtual environment. 
In the MediaEvo platform are available some multimedia 
elements; in particular, it is possible to insert audio elements 
and to run video clips when the player reaches some 
checkpoint. 
In Fig. 7 is shown the opening of a multimedia clip video 
when the character reaches the S.Peter’s church. In addition 
it is visualized a virtual radar in order to know the positions 
of the other players in the virtual environment. 
VIII. TESTING INPUT PERIPHERALS: THE NINTENDO 
WIIMOTE AND BALANCE BOARD 
In recent years some systems based on the control of the 
navigation in a virtual environment by walking have been 
also developed. 
We present an application of navigation and interaction in 
a virtual environment using the Wiimote (word obtained as 
a combination of "Wii" and "Remote") and the Balance 
Board of Nintendo [26]. 
The aim is to make interaction easier for users without 
any experience of navigation in a virtual world and more 
efficient for trained users; for this reason we need to use 
some intuitive input devices oriented to its purpose and that 
can increase the sense of immersion.  
Wii is the last console produced by Nintendo; it was 
released in October 2006 and, according to official data of 
2010, has surpassed 70 million units sold. The reasons for 
this success can be undoubtedly found in the new approach 
that the gaming console gives the user in terms of 
interaction that effectively makes it usable and enjoyable by 
a large part of users. The secret of this usability is the 
innovative interaction system; the Wiimote replaces the 
traditional gamepad controller type (with cross directional 
stick and several buttons) with a common object: the remote 
control.  
The Wiimote is provided with an infrared camera that can 
sense the infrared LED of a special bar (Sensor Bar) and it 
can interpret, by means of a built-in accelerometer, the 
movements of translation, rotation and tilt. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Interaction modalities of Wiimote and Balance Board. 
The Wiimote has been equipped with a series of 
accessories that increase its potential, such as the Balance 
Board, that, by means of four pressure sensors at each 
corner, is able to interpret the movements of the body in 
order to control the actions of the user in a videogame. 
Because we walk on our feet, controlling walking in 
Virtual Reality could be felt as more natural when done with 
the feet rather than with other modes of input. For this 
reason we used the Nintendo Balance Board as an input 
device for navigation that offers a new and accessible way 
to gain input. It is a low-cost interface that transmits the 
sensor data via Bluetooth to the computer and enables the 
calculation of the direction the user is leaning to. 
Fig. 8 shows the interaction modalities of Wiimote and 
Balance Board. 
In addition, in order to implement the control of different 
views and to change the point of view of the user, in our 
application we use the Nintendo Wiimote and the 
interaction by means of this device has the aim to simulate 
the use of the mouse.  
 
 
Figure 9.  Use of Wiimote and Balance Board in the MediaEvo game. 

377
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Fig. 9 shows the use of Wiimote and Balance Board in 
the MediaEvo game. 
Since the frequency of communication between the Wii 
console and the Wiimote/Balance Board is that of the 
standard Bluetooth, these devices can be used as tools to 
interact with any computer equipped with the same 
technology. Appropriate libraries have been realized in 
order to allow the interfacing between these devices and a 
computer. 
A software layer that allows the Balance Board and the 
Wiimote to be used as input devices for any application that 
runs on a computer has been realized. The aim is to make it 
possible to receive signals and commands from the Wiimote 
and the Balance Board and to translate these into commands 
for the computer in order to emulate the keyboard and the 
mouse. 
The application, created to provide a new system of 
interaction in the virtual world of the MediaEvo Project, can 
be coupled to any application of navigation in a virtual 
world.  
The modalities of interaction provided by the application 
involve the use of the Wiimote and Balance Board 
simultaneously. In particular, the user is able to move the 
avatar in the virtual environment by tipping the scales in the 
direction in which he wants to obtain the move; an 
imbalance in forward or reverse leads to a movement 
forward or backward of the virtual character, while the 
lateral imbalance corresponds to the so-called "strafe" in 
video games, where the movement is made on the horizontal 
axis while maintaining a fixed pointing direction of the 
gaze. 
 
 
Figure 10.  Configuration interface of the Wiimote and Balance Board. 
To run the application, it is first necessary to configure 
the keys able to emulate any type of movement, to set the 
sensitivity of the Balance Board and then to connect the 
device; the information on the data received from the device 
are displayed in real time. 
The interface that visualize the data received from the 
Wiimote and Balance Board is divided into two main 
sections: the left panels contain the control with all the data 
received via Bluetooth from the devices, whereas in the 
right side it is possible to set the associations among the 
command given to the device and the equivalent command 
simulated from the computer, the levels of sensitivity and 
threshold beyond which the interactions occur. 
For these operations the software uses two open-source 
libraries in C# and the WiimoteLib InputSimulator; the 
WiimoteLib is a library for interfacing the Nintendo 
Wiimote and other devices (such as the Balance Board) in 
an environment .NET [27]. The purpose of this library 
within the application is to simulate the use of a mouse and 
a keyboard starting from the properly interpreted and 
translated inputs received from the Wiimote and Balance 
Board. 
Regarding the interaction by means of the Wiimote, the 
aim is to simulate the mouse using two modalities of 
interaction. 
"Mode 1" uses the movement on the X and Y axes of the 
accelerometer to move the mouse (and, in the 3D 
environment, the user’s point of view) on the longitudinal 
and 
latitudinal 
axes; 
the 
value 
provided 
by 
the 
accelerometer is compared with the sensitivity set during 
configuration. 
"Mode 2", that is the default mode, allows to move the 
mouse (and, then, the user’s point of view) using the 
direction arrows of the Wiimote. 
Fig. 10 shows the configuration interface of the Wiimote 
and Balance Board devices. 
 
 
Figure 11.  Navigation in the MediaEvo virtual environment. 

378
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Fig. 11 shows a user during the navigation in the 
MediaEvo virtual environment using the Wiimote and the 
Balance Board. 
IX. 
VIRTUAL TREASURE HUNT 
Within the MediaEvo Project it has been also developed a 
“virtual treasure hunt” placed in the old town of Otranto 
using an iPhone as a device to find and read the clues of the 
game.  
The Augmented Reality [28] has been used as an 
edutainment-oriented technology for geo-locating the points 
of interest (POI) and the visualization of useful and 
interesting data that are overlapped on the video stream of 
the iPhone camera. 
The working modalities of the virtual treasure hunt are 
shown in Fig. 12.  
 
 
Figure 12.  Working modalities of the virtual treasure hunt. 
The main components of the developed application are: 
• 
The management of the treasure hunt guides the 
logic of the game in every aspect and. It also has the 
task of interfacing with the database to retrieve the 
information that helps players during the treasure 
hunt. It is possible to obtain additional data through 
Internet on a specific POI. 
• 
Augmented Reality manages the information 
regarding the user geo-location and the visualization 
of the information associated with the POI.  
These components take advantage of the GPS and 
compass interfaces and provide the user with a map of the 
city in order to facilitate moving in the town and easy 
reaching the clues. 
The user menu allows visualizing the last clue or a map 
where are shown the location of the player in the town and 
the location of the next point to be reached. 
The tools that the player can use during the treasure hunt 
are the following: 
• 
A radar that provides the location of the POI during 
the player's walk; 
• 
A GPS signal display; 
• 
A user menu; 
• 
A radius that shows the distance within which the 
radar can detect the POIs. 
In Fig. 13 is shown the graphic interface with the tools. 
During the treasure hunt the player can use radar that 
provides the location of the POI, and a menu with the 
possibility to increase or decrease the distance within which 
the radar can detect the POIs.  
 
Figure 13.  Visualization of the POI. 
Once the player is close to a POI, a marker that indicates 
the presence of a clue is visualized on the on the iPhone 
screen and superimposed on the images captured by the 
camera; this is a typical visualization in Augmented Reality. 
Touching the marker in the screen, a brief description of 
the stage is shown and two new buttons appear in the 
toolbar:  
• 
The first one is a link to the resources available 
through Internet if the POI has an associated web 
page;  
• 
The second gives more detailed information (in 
terms of text, move or audio) to reach the next 
stage. 
In Fig. 14 are shown some video and audio clues. 
 
   
 
Figure 14.  Visualization of video and audio clues. 

379
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 4 no 3 & 4, year 2011, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2011, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
X. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The aim of the MediaEvo Project is the development of a 
multi-channel 
and 
multi-sensory 
platform 
for 
the 
edutainment in Cultural Heritage. 
This paper presents some results of the project that has 
led the researchers to use the reconstruction of the city of 
Otranto in the Middle Ages in order to determine the 
conditions for testing more elements of interaction in a 
virtual environment and a multisensory mediation in which 
merge objects, subjects and experiential context. 
Taking into account the potential of a virtual scenario, a 
series of properties have been defined to give the game 
platform an effective educational value. 
By incorporating historical, technical and educational 
considerations, the final product presents itself as a 
“complete-open-interactive” environment for the acquisition 
of knowledge, the enhancement and safeguarding of cultural 
heritage. 
In the MediaEvo Project has been also tested the 
possibility to navigate in a complex virtual environment by 
means of the Nintendo Wiimote and Balance Board and the 
idea of the use of the Augmented Reality technology in a 
treasure hunt. 
Possible 
future 
developments 
could 
include 
the 
conversion of the application in external library, by adding 
specific methods and attributes to be directly integrated into 
other applications, and the porting of the developed 
application in a multi-platform language in order to be used 
in different development environments. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. T. De Paolis, M. Manco, and G. Aloisio, “Navigation and 
Interaction in the Virtual Reconstruction of the Town of 
Otranto in the Middle Ages”, The 4th International 
Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions 
(ACHI 2011), February 23-28, 2011, Gosier, Guadeloupe, 
France, pp. 120-124. 
[2] A. Fuhrmann , D. Schmalstieg, and M. Gervautz, “Strolling 
through Cyberspace with Your Hands in Your Pockets: Head 
Directed Navigation in Virtual Environments”, the 4th 
Eurographics Workshop on Virtual Environments, Springer-
Verlag, 1998, pp. 216-227. 
[3] P. R. Cohen, M. Johnston, D. McGee, S. Oviatt, J. Pittman, I. 
Smith, L. Chen, and J. Clow, “QuickSet: Multimodal 
interaction 
for 
distributed 
applications”, 
the 
Fifth 
International Multimedia Conference (Multimedia ’97), ACM 
Press, 1997, pp. 31-40. 
[4] D.A. Bowman, S. Coquillart, B. Froehlich, M. Hirose, and Y. 
Kitamura, “3D User Interfaces: Theory and Practice”, Boston, 
MA, Addison-Wesley, Pearson Education, 2005, pp. 342-344. 
[5] H. Iwata, H. Yano, and M. Tomiyoshi, “String Walker”, 
International 
Conference 
on 
Computer 
Graphics 
and 
Interactive Techniques ACM SIGGRAPH 2007,  August 
2007, San Diego, California. 
[6] H. Iwata, H. Yano, M., H. Fukushima, and H. Noma, 
“CirculaFloor”, IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications, 
Jan-Feb. 2005, Vol. 25 pp. 64 – 67. 
[7] H. Iwata, H. Yano, M., and H. Tomioka, “Powered Shoes”, 
International 
Conference 
on 
Computer 
Graphics 
and 
Interactive Techniques ACM SIGGRAPH 2006, Boston, 
Massachusetts. 
[8] G. Kassel, "A formal ontology of artefacts", Applied 
Ontology, vol. 5, no. 3-4 / 2010, IOS Press, pp. 223-246. 
[9] S. Pescarin and L. Valentini, "Databases and Virtual 
Environments: a Good Match for Communicating Complex 
Cultural Sites", ACM SIGGRAPH 2004, Los Angeles, 2004. 
[10] M. 
Forte, 
“Mindscape: 
ecological 
thinking, 
cyber-
anthropology, and virtual archaeological landscapes”, The 
reconstruction of Archaeological Landscapes through Digital 
Technologies, M. Forte and P. R. Williams, Eds., Boston, 
2003, pp. 95-108. 
[11] S. Pescarin, “Reconstructing Ancient Landscape”, Budapest: 
Archaeolingua, 2009, pp. 21-23. 
[12] Itinera 
Time 
Machine 
Project. 
Available: 
http://www.itinera.puglia.it 
[13] Appia Antica Project. Available: http://www.appia.itabc.cnr.it 
[14] Virtual Rome Project. Available: http://3d.cineca.it/storage 
[15] Ancient Rome. Available: http://earth.google.it/rome 
[16] Medieval Dublin. Available: http://www.medievaldublin.ie 
[17] F. Bocchi, "The city in four dimensions: the Nu.M.E. 
Project", J. of Digital Information Management, vol. II(4), 
2004, pp. 161-163. 
[18] City Cluster. Available: http://www.fabricat.com 
[19] Quest 
Atlantis 
Project. 
Available: 
http://atlantis.crlt.indiana.edu 
[20] Integrated Technologies of Robotics and Virtual Environment 
in 
Archaeology 
Project. 
Available: 
http://www.vhlab.itabc.cnr.it 
[21] L.T. De Paolis, M.G. Celentano, P. Vecchio, L. Oliva, and G. 
Aloisio, "Otranto in the Middle Ages: a Virtual Cultural 
Heritage Application", 10th VAST International Symposium 
on Virtual Reality, Archaeology and Cultural Heritage (VAST 
2009), September 22-25, 2009, Malta. 
[22] L.T. De Paolis, M.G. Celentano, P. Vecchio, L. Oliva, and G. 
Aloisio, " A Multi-Channel and Multi-Sensorial Platform for 
the Edutainment in Cultural Heritage", IADIS International 
Conference Web Virtual Reality and Three-Dimensional 
Worlds 2010, July 27-29, 2010, Freiburg, Germany. 
[23] H. Houben, “Otranto nel Medioevo: tra Bisanzio e 
l'Occidente”, Congedo, Galatina , Italy, 2007. 
[24] K. C. Finney, “Advanced 3D game programming all in one”, 
Thomson Course Technology, 2005. 
[25] K. C. Finney, “3D game programming all in one”, Thomson 
Course Technology, Boston, USA, 2004. 
[26] Nintendo 
WiiMote 
and 
Balance 
Board. 
Available: 
http://www.nintendo.com 
[27] WiimoteLib - Managed Library for Nintendo Wii Remote, 
November 2008. Available: http://www.brianpeek.com 
[28] R. Azuma, “A Survey of Augmented Reality”, Presence: 
Tele-operators and Virtual Environments, 1997, 4(6), pp. 355-
385. 
 

