401
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
VASCO - Digging the Dead Man’s Chest of Value Streams
Ren´e Berndt, Nelson Silva, Christian Caldera,
Ulrich Krispel, Eva Eggeling
Fraunhofer Austria Research GmbH
Visual Computing
Email: {rene.berndt, nelson.silva, christian.caldera
ulrich.krispel, eva.eggeling}@fraunhofer.at
Alexander Sunk, Gerhard Reisinger, Wilfried Sihn
Fraunhofer Austria Research GmbH
Production and Logistics Management
Email: {alexander.sunk, gerhard.reisinger, wilfried.sihn}
@fraunhofer.at
Dieter W. Fellner
Institute of Computer Graphics and Knowledge Visualization (CGV), TU Graz, Austria
GRIS, TU Darmstadt & Fraunhofer IGD, Darmstadt, Germany
Email: d.fellner@igd.fraunhofer.de
Abstract—Value stream mapping is a lean management method
for analyzing and optimizing a series of events for production or
services. Even today the ﬁrst step in value stream analysis – the
acquisition of the current state map – is still created using pen
& paper by physically visiting the production line. We capture a
digital representation of how manufacturing processes look like
in reality. The manufacturing processes can be represented and
efﬁciently analyzed for future production planning as a future
state map by using a meta description together with a dependency
graph. With VASCO we present a tool, which contributes to
all parts of value stream analysis - from data acquisition, over
analyzing, planning, comparison up to simulation of alternative
future state maps. We call this a holistic approach for Value stream
mapping including detailed analysis of lead time, productivity,
space, distance, material disposal, energy and carbon dioxide
equivalents – depending in a change of calculated direct product
costs.
Keywords–Value stream mapping; lean management; content
authoring.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Value Stream Mapping (VSM) is an abstract lean manufac-
turing technique for optimizing the material and information
ﬂows from production up to the delivery of products to the
customers. Usually this is done by drawing current and future
state maps by hand, allowing the optimization of production
by identifying bottlenecks and wastes. With VASCO [1] we
introduce a tool, which supports the complete work ﬂow from
acquisition, to analysis of the current state, up to planning the
future state.
Figure 1 shows a typical hand-drawn board template for
data acquisition at the ”shop-ﬂoor”. The concepts of VSM are
usually represented by a set of standard symbols, which got
various properties attached. Typical properties, e.g., for a VSM
process (which represents a production step like welding or
assembly) include information about the process time, scrap
rate, workers involved in the production, but can also contain
data about published enhancements of traditional VSM, e.g.,
space usage for production and logistics, transport distance and
transport time [2].
The history of designing process maps and ﬂowcharts to
represent the ﬂows of materials and information in a factory
can be traced at least back to 1915, where in a book by Charles
Figure 1.
Typical hand-drawn VSM diagram created during a shop ﬂoor
acquisition in a production facility.
E. Knoeppel entitled ”Installing Efﬁciency Methods” we can
ﬁnd interesting graphical representations about the processes
and routing in a manufacturing plant [3].
Nowadays, value stream mapping with traditional pen &
paper method faces new challenges in practical utilization.
Relevant problems or limitations for the approach presented
here are: (1) indicators that are not aligned with a lean
approach; (2) Processes measurements – problems/difﬁculties
in measuring data in processes – cases where time data and
quantity measurements are impractical due to layout problems,
product complexity, or process type; (3) obsolescence of the
current state map. The authors mentioned, that these problems
and limitations can be addressed by use of ICT in data
collection in production and using standards in measurement
procedures. Thus, reproducibility and repeatability evaluation
of CSM and alternative FSMs will be possible in the sense of
supporting management in decision making. Furthermore, it is
mentioned that VSM supports management when improving
production conditions regarding Eco-design by identifying and
eliminating environmental wastes [4].

402
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Hence, it is necessary to have company wide standards
for drawing, data collection and analyzing current state maps.
Therefore, VASCO was established to close this gap for
standardized analysis of CSM as well as enabling the planning
of successful FSMs of value streams in a digital manner. As a
result, a better decision making on shop ﬂoor level is supported
when applying VASCO continuously.
The next section will give an overview of the related
work and programs which inspired the creation of VASCO.
Section 3 shows the main functionality of VASCO, how VSM
diagrams are modeled within the system and how the automatic
calculations are handled. Following, section 4 describes the
underlying model based approach to calculate VSM-KPIs by
entering resource consumption as input parameters. In section
5, a use case is presented to show VASCO in action and trying
to close the gap from a practical point of view. Section 6 shows
how VASCO can be used within dynamic simulation studies
to enhance traditional ”static simulation” of VSM. The last
section concludes our work and will give an outlook on further
research.
II.
RELATED WORK
VSM was originally developed as a method within the
Toyota Production System [5][6] and introduced as a distinct
methodology by Rother & Shook [7]. VSM is a simple, yet
very effective, method to gain a holistic overview of the con-
ditions of the value streams within a production environment.
Based on the analysis of the current state maps, ﬂow-oriented
future state maps are planned and implemented [7], [8], [9].
A value stream includes all activities, i.e., value adding,
non-value adding and supporting activities that are necessary
to create a product (or to render a service) and to make
it available to the customer. This includes the operational
processes, the ﬂow of material between the processes, all
control and steering activities and also the ﬂow of information
[10]. In order to assess possible improvement potential, VSM
considers, in particular, the entire process time (sum of time
of all production steps) compared with the overall lead time
(time from the customer ordering to the moment of delivery).
The greater the distinction between operating time and lead
time the higher the improvement potential [8].
Several organizations and researchers described sustainabil-
ity indicators in their works but, however, there is no universal
standard published yet. Further development of sustainability
reporting in the production practice can be identiﬁed [11].
This made it important to deﬁne criteria that help to develop
strategies for the evaluation and improvement of sustainability
[12]. Paju et al. list a compilation of indicators, which can
be used in a Sustainable Manufacturing Mapping [10]. In
the following widely used indicators, like used, i.e., in the
GRI standard [13], are explained. The following indicators are
necessary to evaluate:
(a) Disposal due to waste of the resource ’material’: Here,
the legal EU deﬁnition of waste ’(...) means any substance or
object which the holder discards or intends or is required to
discard’ [14]. Material waste means all non-productive output
(NPO) including solid and ﬂuid waste [15]. An established cat-
egorization for produced waste is taken from the ’DIRECTIVE
2008/98/EC OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF
THE COUNCIL’ [14], which orders the ’R’ strategies reuse,
recycle, recovery and disposal descending by importance. The
reduction of waste therefore begins with prevention, followed
by reuse or recycle and (thermal) recovery [16]. The efﬁciency
of a manufacturing system is deﬁned with the ratio of output
in comparison with the input. Despeisse et al. explain that a
system which utilizes the generated waste internally and sees
it as a resource is more efﬁcient than a system that does not
so. Additional approaches such as redesign and re-manufacture
[17] are not considered in this paper, since they are not applied
in VSM.
(b) Solvents: Depending on the manufacturing process
solvents are used in paints or adhesives. In the literature
solvents are used as sustainability indicators [13].
(c) Water: often used for cooling, heating or cleaning in
a production process [11]. E-VSM primarily focuses on water
[18].
(d) Energy and CDE/carbon footprint: Since non-
renewable energy has a direct impact on greenhouse gas,
energy must be seen as an important indicator for sustainability
[17]. Common energy and material forms in production which
are used as sustainability indicators are electricity, natural gas
and compressed air [10]. Furthere diesel or district heating can
be included [19] more diesel or district heating can be included
[19]. Several approaches exist in order to measure and improve
energy and CDE indicators:
(i) Usually, the energy efﬁciency as quotient of net pro-
duction value and primary energy consumption with the unit
EUR/MWh, is used as a characteristic value and the system
of the production is seen as a black box [11].
(ii) Modeling approaches in the traditional factory design
with the objective of energy and resource efﬁciency [20]; [21].
(iii) The speciﬁcation DIN EN ISO 50001 as amended,
supports companies to establish an energy management system
as well as during operation of the processes in order to achieve
an improvement in energy efﬁciency, the use of energy and the
energy consumption.
(iv) various approaches for CO2 assessment over the entire
product life cycle, while the phase manufacturing (production)
is usually represented as a single object in the entire modeling
[22]. Analogous to accounting, the resource deployments are
considered overall and calculated to the ﬁnished products [23].
(v) In the method carbon footprint analysis, the total
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are estimated in terms of
carbon equivalence (i.e. as tons of carbon dioxide equivalent
[tCO2e] or grams of CO2 equivalent per kilowatt hour of
generation [gCO2eq/kWh] from a speciﬁc product [24].
(vi) In Value Stream Mapping, different approaches are
known to set the focus on environmental sustainability in
order to obtain economic improvements as well. The method
Energy Value Stream Mapping [8] with focus on energy saving
examines each manufacturing step in energy intensity and
energy waste, both in operating and start-up and shut-down
phases. The work of Erlach is practical and supports direct
implementation of energy savings by guidelines [25]. But only
the resources and energy media Electricity, gas and compressed
air are examined. An overall CO2 assessment is not supported.
(vii) ’Multi-Layer-Stream Mapping’ (MSM) evaluates all
processes in the value stream by efﬁciency-data, by comparing
the value-adding to the total energy- and resource use. The
aim is to get 100% efﬁciency at all stages of production. A

403
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
visual indication of the waste supports the user communicating
the saving potential. This indication is not only applicable
to resource inputs with environmental impact, but the CO2
assessment is not supported [19].
(viii) the approach to assess energy value-streams in
production and logistics in respect of time- and energy-
consumption (EVSM) focuses on aligning use of energy to
value adding and non-value adding shares in operating times
with scope of periphery 1-3 in a detailed way. The views of
Hopf, Haag and Lourenco are combined in this approach [26].
(ix) SVSM is able to rate the waste-generation in value
stream using a model which is integrated in VSM-Tool VASCO
[27]. In summary, core ideas of the presented approaches are
implemented in the model of VASCO. This allows manage-
ment to identify possible improvement potentials and quantify
them. Hence, a goal-oriented prioritization of measures to
improve the value stream is supported.
Value stream simulation can be used in lean manufacturing
to support the optimization of production [28]. It allows an
early stage insight into productivity, effectiveness and service
level without the need of creating detailed and time consuming
simulation models. This means that a simulation in lean
management workshops can now be done by lean experts
instead of relying in simulation experts. Traditionally VSM
is a pen & paper tool that captures the state of the system at
the state it was drawn. Component based modeling divides the
simulation into a set of simulation blocks [29]. These blocks
can be used to create value stream maps that are generic and
reusable. In our application VASCO, we also support several
reusable blocks that allow the user to easily create value stream
diagrams that are reusable in a standardized way. By utilizing
standard simulation building blocks one can easily know the
state of the system under different circumstances allowing for
better decision making. Another important aspect of using
value stream maps and specially in a digital form, is that
the production and delivery processes are optimized from the
customers’ point of view [7].
In the seminal work of Wei Xia and Jiwen Sun [30] on
simulation guided value stream and lean improvement, the
authors give a good description of a typical value stream
mapping application. This typical application is then enhanced
by the usage of event simulation in the manufacturing process.
The authors discuss how that greatly contributes to a better
perception of the entire value stream mapping (VSM) and
simulation processes. In the work of [31] a simulation model
is used to evaluate the performance of an automotive manu-
facturing system as a function of demand. Prakash and Chen
[32] developed a simulation model of a ﬂexible manufacturing
system, and investigated its performance. In the work of
Welgama et al. [33] two cell designs were analyzed, for a
manufacturing facility taking in consideration operator and
material handling utilization factors. Kyukab et al.[34] used
simulation to identify parameters to improve system perfor-
mance at a motor production facility. Bischak [35] describes
simulation in performance evaluation of a textile manufactur-
ing module with moving workers. Park, Matson and Miller
[36] describe a simulation approach used to verify that the
daily throughput requirements can be met at a new assembly
plant, and it is used to determine the maximum throughput
of the facility, and to characterize how the component buffers
behave in terms of quantity ﬂuctuations and identiﬁed possible
system bottlenecks. Shang et al. [37] uses a combination
of simulation and optimization to evaluate the design of a
cellular manufacturing system. In the work of Persson [38]
the author investigates the impact of a varying level of system
structure detail, when modeling a manufacturing system. Suri
et al. [39] used simulation to validate analytic models and
predict the system performance for a single material handling
device case. In addition to using simulation to directly analyze
and predict system performance, simulation has been used to
validate analytic models [39]. There is not much work reported
regarding manufacturing and simulation based methodology
[40]. Additional and detailed examples of VSM simulation are
needed in different types of actual production settings.
VSM is also seen as a tool to show the outcomes in a
shorter period of time at minimal costs. The lean consultants
can now represent and capture the current state of the process
at a certain state and time and start projecting the future
proposed state of the value stream. Based on lean concepts
the two states can be simulated and key measurements are
assessed. These simulation results can easily demonstrate the
improvements [41]. In manufacturing, there are three types of
operations that are undertaken to represent a type of waste
that might occur: non-value adding, necessary but non-value
adding and value-adding operations [42]. The ﬁrst type is pure
waste with unnecessary actions that should be completely elim-
inated. The second type involves actions that are necessary but
might be wasteful. The third type are value-adding operations
representing processes that convert raw materials into ﬁnished
products.
The capture of information to a digital form is often
not sufﬁcient. From the point of view of using a digital
tool to capture the state of a process, there are several
applications that can be used and are available. However, in
their paper, Shararah et al. [29] introduce the Value Stream
Map Simulator using ExtendSim (VSMSx) as a powerful tool
designed to facilitate the implementation of lean manufacturing
by simulating the value stream map through standardized
simulation building blocks. The company Siemens created as
part of their Product Life-cycle Management - PLM product
line, an optional extension library called Plant Simulation
Value Stream Mapping (VSM) Library [43]. The company
immediately reported productivity increases by as much as
20 percent and improvements of 60 percent related with the
reduction of inventories and cycle time. Other beneﬁts such
as investment risk reduction (through early feasibility analysis
capabilities), better line planning and allocation and signiﬁcant
increases in the resource utilization were also highlighted. The
capability of being able to deﬁne what-if scenarios without
disturbing existing production systems during the planning
process is pointed as one of the most important features of
any value stream mapping planning tool. Plant simulation
is also referred as an important feature of such systems,
because it facilitates the comprehension of complex production
systems and processes. Resource utilization, material ﬂows
and supply chains maybe therefore optimized. The question
of ”Why perform value stream mapping in Plant Simulation?”
is also debated in this technical report. Factors such as the
reduction of cost for data collection by reducing the number of
objects describing the processes (by utilizing pre-deﬁned logic
blocks) or the reduction in analysis effort through automated
analysis modules have an important role in deciding to use

404
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
VSM. In order highlight the dynamic effects (which remain
hidden in the static paper based mapping of the value chain),
a digital representation (through computer simulation) of the
value stream is required.
According to Nash & Poling [44], the value stream map-
ping has some disadvantages associated with it. It points to the
fact that originally, VSM did not include any signiﬁcant mon-
etary measure for value. It is the stakeholders responsibility to
determine determine which activity can be marked as value as
well as which activity can be marked as waste. The task of
decision-ﬁnding may take a lot of valuable time.
Another important challenge arises from the fact that there
is the need to not only capture data and information about
the processes and the information ﬂows involved, but also
it is beneﬁcial to have a digital representation of how these
processes look like in reality [45], in fact ultimately we would
like to achieve what is sometimes called ”The Digital Twin
Concept Model” [46]. Similarly, in our approach we are taking
the steps necessary to provide this type of vision. When we
analyze the current arrangement of an assembly line and we
capture this information on a VSM diagram (current state). At
a later stage we do not want to come back to the production
area to visual re-check the arrangement of machines, workers,
to discover how are the parts actually delivered and stored or to
know what are the space constrains to be able to describe and
demonstrate how the actual work of the existent implemented
processes is being performed. To have a better view of what
should be improved when preparing the future state VSM, it
is desirable that the new digital tool for the creation of VSMs
can allow the users to capture and then to ﬁnd annotations in
the form of pictures, videos or 3D representations of the past,
current and future reality of the production sites. Therefore,
every time a user is handling a VSM diagram, he will be able
at any step of the process to access these digital catalog of
the different processes, that are now linked to the VSM digital
representation.
A ﬁeld research on available standard software tools
showed a lack in possibility of detailed analysis. While some
tools just provide basic drawing aids for creating value stream
maps (e.g. Microsoft Visio [47]), other tools like iGrafx [48],
Plant Simulation [49] or SmartDraw [50] also support lead
time calculations and basic simulation. None of them considers
the availability of data in production lines, which is a big deal
nowadays in order to cope with all the complexity and achieve
transparency. Nevertheless, detailed analysis and transparency
of value streams are needed to reveal improvement potentials.
To address the challenges in mastering the increasing
complexity in the VSM data models, we are developing a
highly customizable tool for authoring and managing value
streams. The next section gives an insight on the key features
of VASCO.
III.
VASCO MAIN FUNCTIONALITES
VASCO is implemented as a Microsoft Visio Plugin. This
allows to reuse the drawing and connecting shapes functional-
ity already provided by Visio. A VASCO value stream diagram
can be combined with other shapes and features included by
Visio or other 3rd-party AddIns. One important aspect in the
design of the VASCO focuses on the user experience. Figure
2(a) shows the ribbon toolbar for VASCO. All available control
elements are optimized for the fast creation of VSM diagrams,
(a) The VASCO ribbon which offers a support for fast generation of VSM
diagrams.
(b) Drawing a simple VSM.
Figure 2.
With minimum user interaction the drawing process in Figure 2(b)
can be achieved with our VASCO toolbar shown in Figure 2(a)
especially adding and positioning process or buffer symbol.
Typical repeating tasks are automated like the adding of serial
process/buffer symbols, where VASCO already connects the
two symbols using an internal ﬂow connector. The inserted
process/buffer stays selected, so that the user can immediately
use the commands ”Add serial process”/”Add serial buffer”
multiple times. Figure 2(b) shows how to create a VSM
diagram. From (1) to (4) using only mouse clicks - or if you
are on a touch device, then only 4 touch events are needed,
which is much faster then a hand-made drawing. Therefore, the
usual manual steps of transforming the hand-made drawings
into digital documents is now completely obsolete when using
VASCO.
A. Deﬁnition of VASCO symbols
As seen in ﬁgure 3 a value stream consists of a variety of
standardized shapes and information. VASCO adds properties
and the calculation logic to the VSM shapes to the main VSM
symbols:
Figure 3. The standard VSM symbols (from left to right): Supplier, Customer,
Process, Buffer, External ﬂow, Internal ﬂow.
•
The supplier is the manufacturer which ships the
goods into the factory.
•
The customer is a company, merchant or another en-
tity who orders goods and requires them to be shipped
regularly. The customer determines the demand and
the resulting takt time, which is a key value driving
almost all calculations within a value stream.
•
The process is a step, which adds value to goods by
altering or modifying it.
•
The buffer is an intermediate step where the factory
goods are stored. This storage might be an input for
the next process, a general depot for delivering goods
to the customer or from the supplier.
•
The external ﬂow connects a supplier or a customer
with a buffer or a process.

405
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(a) The complete property model of the stamp-
ing process.
(b) Selected attributes of
the property model dis-
played below the process
symbol. 4(a).
Figure 4.
The properties of the stamping process and how the process is
displayed on the VASCO sheet.
•
The internal ﬂow connects buffers and processes with
each other. The main difference between an external
and an internal ﬂow is that a internal ﬂow might
connect a process with multiple buffers or processes.
This means that the internal ﬂow is augmented with a
property called material spreading which deﬁnes how
many percent of material spreads from one process or
buffer to their successors.
A valid value stream graph consists of one supplier at
the start, one or more customers at the end, one or multiple
processes, and zero or multiple buffers. Each of the processes
and buffers are connected with internal ﬂows and two external
ﬂows connecting the supplier and customer with the network.
B. Intelligent Symbols
One of the signiﬁcant features of VASCO is that all
symbols deﬁned in Section III-A, are fully customizable by
a conﬁguration ﬁle. This conﬁguration ﬁle deﬁnes which
properties are added to the symbol. These properties can be
classiﬁed into two major categories: manual input values or
calculated values. The manual values are entered by the user,
whereas the calculated values depend on a formula consisting
of manually entered or other calculated values. The formula
deﬁnition is also part of the conﬁguration ﬁle and can be
modiﬁed even at run-time.
For example, let’s have a process which drills a hole into
a plate. This process has two manual input values. The value
adding time which is the time period when the drill actually
drills the hole and the setup time. The setup time is the
time period needed for positioning the drill and the time the
assembly line needs to bring the plate into position. With these
two values in the process it is possible to add a third value,
the process time which automatically calculates the sum of the
setup time and the value adding time. This automatic calculated
value can be displayed on a databox in the process shape (see
Figure 4). If a value of these properties changes, all dependent
values are updated immediately (see Figure 4(a)).
One special case of calculated values is when the values
not only depend on the local process, like in the example
above, but also in other places from other symbols, like
the following processes. These special calculations are called
graph calculations. The graph calculations are also deﬁned
in the conﬁguration ﬁle, but require a complete value stream
graph in order to perform their calculations. For this, VASCO
has two different modes. The ﬁrst mode, is the design mode.
In this mode the user can add processes, buffers and connect
them with each other. The calculations which are only local are
calculated in this mode. The second mode, is the calculation
mode, where all graph calculations calculate their value. In this
mode it is not possible to add, remove or connect symbols with
each other.
To get a better picture about the calculation mode consider
a customer who requires 100 items. We have 3 processes which
are connected in series. Each process has a scrap rate of 10%.
Now each of the processes has to accommodate the scrap rate
of the following processes and produce more goods. That in the
end the customer gets his 100 items. Therefore, in our example
the ﬁrst process requires 139 items. This example can become
arbitrarily complex with parallel processes and the material
spreading in internal ﬂows. In the calculation mode all values
are live updated and displayed. So if the customer requests that
the factory delivers more items, it is then immediately visible
how many more raw material the ﬁrst process requires. This is
also the reason why it is not allowed to edit the path, remove
or add further processes during the calculation mode, as all
values would be invalid with a unﬁnished value stream graph.
When a user adds a new intelligent symbol to a diagram,
e.g., a buffer, this symbol becomes now automatically the
current selected symbol. This allows the automation of the
possible next choices for symbols that can be added to the
diagram (connected to the current symbol). In this way, when
the user looks to the application main toolbar, only symbols
that are possible to be connected to the previous symbol, are
available for a next drop in the diagram. When the user intent
is to connect two symbols, e.g., the user wants to connect a
buffer with a process, the user pre-selects these two symbols.
After this step, the application automatically highlights the
possible connections that can be added between the selected
symbols. The users reported that these methods signiﬁcantly
improve the productivity and the usability of our application
interface. These and other improvements will be the target of
future studies, where we will access the overall usability of
the tool and compare it with other existent VSM applications.
C. Key Performance Indicators (KPI) and Data Lines
As referred in the related work section, an important
aspect in the analysis of VSM diagrams is the extraction and
automatic calculation of Key Performance Indicators (KPI).
Key performance indicators can be calculated locally, e.g.,
for a single process (e.g. OEE rate) or buffer (e.g. local
lead time) - but also for the value stream (e.g. total lead
time) as a graph-based calculation. These values are calculated
automatically and are visualized in several data lines below the
drawn value stream.
When discussing with the main key holders (manufacturing
and production consultants or VSM and processes simulation
owners) involved in the event of capturing processes and
information ﬂows (as well as many other related information
captured now in a digital form), one of the most desired fea-
tures is the capability of calculating improved business metrics.

406
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 5.
The Comments plugin allows to annotate VSM symbol with photos
and videos taken from the camera of a tablet.
These metrics allow the evaluation of factors that are critical
to the success of an organization. In our tool we calculate and
present metrics that are related with human resources, costs,
performance and workload balancing management. These are
essential to the reduction of costs and to the improvement of
performance of processes and persons.
We present results to the users in a concise way through
resume maps in each step of the calculations procedures. This
is a realistic and simple way to digitally represent the past,
current and future reality inside all manufacturing sites.
D. Extensibility
One key-feature of VASCO is extensibility. While self
being an Microsoft Visio addin, it can be customized by
plugins itself. The basic version of VASCO is already shipped
with three plugins, extending the basic functionality of the tool:
•
Comment-Plugin VASCO was designed to make the
acquisition and calculation of a new value stream
easier and to replace the pen & paper acquisition.
With the pen & paper method it is always possible
to add different comments to the different symbols.
In order to give the VASCO user a similar feature
during the acquisition a comment plugin was created.
This comment plugin enhances every symbols on a
VASCO page with a comment tab (see Figure 5).
When we observed during the data acquisition process
that users sometimes only copied key ﬁgures from a
machine into this comment tab, we further enhanced
the comment-plugin with a snapshot ability. With this
snapshot ability the user doesn’t need to copy the
values himself. The user only has to take a snapshot
with the tablet. It is also possible to record a video
with the comment plugin. This can be done to record
different views of the machine or to record the voice of
the person who does the acquisition so that there is not
even the need to write textual facts in the comments
box.
•
KPI-Plugin The KPI-Plugin adds an additional visual
features (see Figure 6) to the Visio page. This shape
displays the key performance indicators of the factory
in a clear fashion. Once a VASCO graph is complete
and VASCO itself is in calculation mode, the values
are calculated and automatically updated when a value
in the graph changes.
Figure 6. The Key Performance Indicator giving an overview of the operating
numbers in the factory.
Figure 7.
OBC showing the process time in relation to the takt time.
•
OBC-Plugin The operator balance chart (OBC) vi-
sualizes the total amount of work of each process
compared to the takt time. An OBC supports the
critical task of redistributing work elements among
operators. This is essential for minimizing the number
of operators needed by making the amount of work for
each operator very nearly equal to, but slightly less
than, takt time [51]. Figure 7 shows the OBC chart of
the given example.
IV.
MODEL-BASED, PROCESS-ORIENTED CALCULATION
OF RESOURCE CONSUMPTION
This section describes the ’ideal-typical re-utilization cy-
cle’. It is the basis for evaluation of sustainability indicators
in value streams. In each process of the value stream an
ideal-typical re-utilization cycle is underlain virtually. Each
ideal-typical re-utilization cycles includes the mentioned cate-
gories to handle waste: reuse, recycle, recovery and disposal.
However, usually additional material is required in production
which is not used for producing ﬁnished products. This creates
waste of material resources. Waste of material resources is
assigned to each ideal-typical re-utilization cycle of a process.
Waste occurs depending on process technology. This waste can
be reused, recycled, recovered or brought to the disposal site.
But before immersing into the ideal-typical re-utilization cycle
and the calculation of sustainability indicators, the connection
of the elements of a value stream as process chains need to
be discussed. A series of processes combined with parallel
material ﬂows lead to highly dependent elements (processes,
buffers, transports) of the value stream.
A. Cumulated Scrap Rate
With a serial sequence of processes of a value stream and
the occurring scrap rates at processes, each upstream process
has to produce more to ﬁnally provide the required amount
to the customer. Contrary to the direction of material ﬂow the
cumulated scrap rate increases for each process of the value

407
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
stream accordingly. As a result, the calculation of cumulated
scrap rate for each process in a serial sequence is:
Scum(i) = 1 − Q1
i=n(1 − si)
(1)
•
scum – cumulated scrap rate along a value stream [%]
•
si – scrap rate of a process i [%]
Starting from the actual customer demand Dnet, the cus-
tomer demand per process (i) results in:
Dnet.p(i) =
Dnet
1−scum(i)
•
Dnet.p(i) – increased net demand per process due
to cumulated scrap rate at process i [parts per time
period]
•
Dnet – net demand of customer [parts per time period]
•
scum – cumulated scrap rate [%]
This formula is essential for the calculation of total waste
along a value stream. Another effect of the cumulated scrap
rate is not considered in this paper, but should be mentioned
because of practical relevance in Value Stream Mapping: The
cumulated scrap rate causes an increase of the required net
demand per process upstream the considered value stream.
Therefore, the customer tact time is not assumed to be constant
for each process. Strictly speaking, the speciﬁc tact time of
each process has to be reduced due to an increased required
net demand while keeping available net working time constant.
B. Calculation of waste at single processes
The waste of material resources for each process in the
value stream is, as described above, associated with the ideal-
typical re-utilization cycle. This waste can generally occur in
three ways; see Formulas 3, 4 and 5.
Wnok = (Dnet.p − Dnet) · dn
•
Wnok – waste due to cumulated scrap rate [kg per
time period]
•
Dnet.p – increased net demand of customer [parts per
time period]
•
Dnet – net demand of customer [parts per time period]
•
dn – net weight of input resource [kg per part]
Wnok is the waste because of not fulﬁlling quality require-
ments such as damaged or improperly manufactured parts. The
gross material input is dg. Due to the chosen manufacturing
process additional resource input Wok is often necessary and
calculated as follows:
Wok = Dnet.p · (dg − dn)
•
Wok – waste due to material input difference [kg per
time period]
•
Dnet.p – increased net demand of customer [parts per
time period]
•
dg – gross weight of input resource [kg per part]
•
dn – net weight of input resource [kg per part]
The net material input is dn, e.g., the material input dif-
ferences between gross and net is sprue in injection moulding
or paint sludge in the painting processes. As a third category,
waste because of set-ups Wb(i) is introduced. This waste is
usually produced in batch production or discontinuous shift
models. The above proportions of all waste depend on the
considered time period. The waste proportion because of set-
up is usually not in the same observation period as the required
amount of the customer Dnet. For this reason, the following
proportionality is presented:
Wr(i)
Dnet.p(i) ∝ Wb(i)
b(i)
•
Wr – waste due to set-ups [kg per time period]
•
Dnet.p – increased net demand per process due to
cumulated scrap rate [parts per time period]
•
Wb – waste per batch [kg per batch]
•
b – batch size [parts per batch]
Wb presents the average waste per batch; b is referred to
as batch size. The sum of waste per observation period, e.g.,
shift, is calculated as follows:
W = Wnok + Wok + Wset−up
•
W – total waste [kg per time period]
•
Wnok – waste due to cumulated scrap rate [kg per
time period]
•
Wok – waste due to material input difference [kg per
time period]
•
Wset−up – waste due to set-ups [kg per time period]
To convert the waste per unit the calculated waste per
observation period must be divided by the observation period.
Thus, the waste per part w(i) for each process i is:
w(i) =
dg(i)
1−scum(i) − dn(i) + Wb(i)
b(i)
•
w(i) – total waste per ok part [kg per ok part]
•
dg – gross weight of input resource [kg per part]
•
scum – cumulated scrap rate [%]
•
dn – net weight of input resource [kg per part]
•
Wb – waste per batch [kg per batch]
•
b – batch size [parts per batch]
The waste per unit can be calculated for each process
and each resource which is used. This waste of material
resources is supplied to the ideal-typical utilization process and
rated. Simplifying the mathematical model, only the primary
resource is considered, which excludes process water, solvents
or packaging.
C. Ideal-typical re-utilization cycles for each process
In this chapter, the ideal-typical re-utilization cycle gets
introduced. The three types of waste of each process get
assigned to the introduced categories reuse, recycle, recovery
and disposal. In all categories but disposal, material gets used
somehow else again, whereas disposals get transported to
landﬁll. Each process of a value stream gets layers for the re-
utilization categories (see Figure 8). One speciﬁc re-utilization
cycle then consists of ﬁve transport activities, three buffers
and the re-utilization process itself to become an ideal-typical
re-utilization cycle. This ideal-typical re-utilization cycle is
applicable for all kinds of production/assembling processes.
An example to illustrate is an injection moulding process. Due
to set-ups, sprue and scrap rate waste is created to produce

408
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 8.
Principle of an ideal-typical re-utilization cycle.
customer demand; 80% of total waste is recycled to produce
other products (e.g. a linoleum covered ﬂoor) and 20% is
disposal so we have two layers. The machine operator puts
all types of waste into one or more containers, which get
transported by forklift to a silo for shredding. After shredding,
the ready-to-recycle material waits in bags on a pallet. All
efforts like space, transport distance and time for re-utilization
can be assessed similar to classic VSM approach. Furthermore,
one can separate between several resource types in value
stream to distinguish types of disposals. On the one hand, this
modeling of resource ﬂows at processes seems not replicable
when drawing value streams with paper and pen, but on the
other hand it is suitable to be represented in a VSM software
tool. Figure 8 shows system boundaries and layers of an ideal-
typical re-utilization cycle of a process in a value stream.
D. Calculation of sustainability indicators and disposals data
line
Applying ideal-typical re-utilization cycles at processes
of a value stream enables the calculation of sustainability
indicators such as disposals by the presented model. This
model can then be applied to calculate waste and disposal for
all resource types in the same way. Practical examples next to
primary input resources are solvents, drinking water, process
water and packaging materials. Finally, all criteria needed for
sustainability and/or customer reporting can be calculated in
the same way with the presented model. When calculating
total lead time of a value stream, all waiting times in buffers
are added; same when calculating total process time with
adding up all process times in processes. These two values
are represented in the time data line at the very end of a value
stream. We use the same approach for the disposals data line.
All types of resource disposals are summed up to calculate the
total disposals value. As an example to illustrate, a speciﬁc
value stream consists of four serial processes and the process
technologies are injection moulding, painting, assembling and
sequencing. Types of disposals of primary input resources are
therefore synthetics, coating and parts from bill-of-material
in unit kilogram per part. Other resources may be solvents
and process water at coating process as well as cardboard
and synthetics of packaging material at assembly process. All
categories of disposals can be summed up apart from each
other and/or altogether to represent the disposals of a whole
value stream. The ﬁnal disposals data line of a value stream
is shown in Figure 10; sustainability indicators are calculated
per part to be comparable.
E. Data Model and Calculations
This section describes the data model used in VASCO and
discusses some implementation aspects.
1) Graph Structure: Naturally, the elements of a drawn
value stream map correspond to a graph structure. Generally,
a graph G = (N, E) consists of a set of nodes (or vertices)
N together with a binary relation E on the set [52], each two
nodes whose relation evaluates to true are called connected,
and such relations are called edges. If the edges have an
associated direction, the graph is called a directed graph.
Our design rationale for a consistent data model for a VSM
map is a graph that represents all aspects of the map. Therefore,
each concept of a VSM (e.g. a process or a ﬂow) is represented
by a node n ∈ N in the graph, relations between VSM
concepts are represented by a directed edge e ∈ E between the
corresponding nodes. Each node, or concept, contains a set of
named properties. Each property is associated to a value, which
can either be ﬁxed, i.e., the value is entered as a numerical
value, or calculated, therefore, it depends on the values of
other properties, in some cases even from other nodes. Edges
in this data model do not contain properties. We call this data
model the concept graph.
2) Evaluation of Calculated Values: Naturally, the de-
pendencies of calculated values impose an ordering on the
evaluation of such values. One could implement such an
ordering by assigning priority values to properties under the
assumption that all dependencies will be correctly handled if
the nodes are evaluated in priority order, however, all nodes
would have to be re-evaluated if a value changes, which is
•
slow, as many values will be recalculated even if they
do not depend on a changed value which is a problem
especially for larger graph, i.e., a scaling problem
•
error-prone, as the implementation has to make sure
that the assumption holds, i.e., changing one formula
may require to change priority values of many other
formulas
Furthermore, while such constraints can be maintained
without much effort for some calculations, e.g., one value
of a concept depends on another value of the same concept,
there may exist more complicated dependencies, e.g., one value
depends on another value of all concepts of type process.
Our solution to this problem is to represent the depen-
dencies of calculated values in an additional graph structure,
the dependency graph, which allows to re-evaluate just the
dependent values if a value is altered. An example can be
seen in Figure 9: the main VSM structure is encoded using
the blue rounded rectangle concept nodes (e.g. Buffer) and
black dashed edges. The nodes of the second graph consist of
properties of VSM concept nodes, represented by green elliptic
nodes, the dependencies of calculated values are represented
by blue dotted edges. Dependencies are encoded as inﬂuences,
i.e., each value points to all values that depend on it in their
calculation.
First experiments implemented this second graph structure,
the dependency graph, explicitly. However, this approach did

409
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Buffer
Flow
Property A
Process
Property A
Property A
Property B
Property B
Property B
Figure 9.
The data model of VASCO captures the structure of the VSM
graph.
not scale well as all structural changes to the VSM graph also
need to be propagated to the dependency graph. Therefore, we
propose a meta representation for any calculated value in the
system that separates dependencies from calculations
•
an identiﬁer function that identiﬁes all dependent
nodes of a given concept graph, and
•
a evaluation function that performs the actual calcu-
lation reading the values from identiﬁed nodes and
returns the calculated value.
These two methods help for an efﬁcient evaluation, as there
are situations where the dependency information depends on
a concrete concept graph structure (e.g. dependency on all
concepts of type ﬂow). In these cases, the dependencies and
consequently the calculation will change if the concept graph
structure changes.
Using the identiﬁer function, the dependency graph can
be built straightforward: For each calculated value, its de-
pendencies are determined using the identiﬁer function, each
dependency is mapped to an inﬂuence edge in the dependency
graph. In our implementation, the dependency graph is rebuilt
on each structural change of the concept graph. We call the
complete dependency of a value, i.e., all dependent values, and
their dependencies and so on, the inﬂuence hierarchy.
If the user changes a ﬁxed value using the VASCO GUI,
the inﬂuence hierarchy is identiﬁed via a graph traversal
(e.g. breadth-ﬁrst search or depth-ﬁrst search) of the directed
dependency graph, starting at the changed value. Thus, the
traversal also yields the correct ordering for evaluation, and
all values are re-calculated by calling the evaluation function
for each node of the traversal.
V.
USE CASE: ASSESSMENT OF DISPOSAL AND CO2 IN
VALUE STREAM
The following use case is based on a simpliﬁed example
from the automotive supplier industry, which has been exten-
sively modeled and evaluated in practice. To reduce complexity
here, a simple serial value stream is selected. The described
process chain is represented by ’thermoforming’, ’injection
moulding’, ’welding’, ’assembly’ and ’shipping’ (see Figure
10). It should be noted, that the process steps, their sequence
and frequency as well as the present conditions of process pa-
rameters are ﬁctitious. The contemplated automotive supplier
manufactures modules for various OEM, the production of side
interior door panels has been selected as the product family.
A. Input of related resource consumption in VASCO
By opening the properties of the process shapes, the user
is able to input relevant resource consumption to calculate the
disposal and CDE-value per part. Due to the use of resources
and the three types of waste, for each process the share of
disposal can be calculated. Here the disposal is 0.25 kg per
part, which is entered into the input mask (see Fig. 11 Input
of Disposal). Measures to reduce disposal share may be, for
example (a) allocating the waste to one of the other types
reuse, recycle or recovery or (b) reducing the total waste by
investing into new processes or design changes.
Next, the resource consumption to calculate the CDE-value
per part are entered. In this use case these are direct input of
energy resources as ’energy intensities’, which can be mea-
sured at the process (equals ’2. Energy direct’ Fig. 4). At the
selected process thermoforming, 3 kWh electric energy input
per part is entered into the text ﬁeld ’Electricity’. Furthermore,
energy input values of the infrastructure (indirect), for example
lightning, heating/cooling and compressed-air, can be entered.
In practice, this is done by measuring these values directly at
the process. Indirect energy input values are measured, e.g., at
the circuit breaker panel and assigned to processes and buffers
by allocation dependent on space. As a result, additional
calculations apart from VASCO are needed, which are very
extensively in practice. The situation is similar to the elements
’buffer’ and ’transport’. Furthermore, the traditional aspect of
VSM should not get lost, so certain simpliﬁcations have to
be made when input indirect energy consumption, e.g., for
lightning, etc. Nevertheless, the signiﬁcance to management is
still given.
Therefore, it is required for buffers to collect and enter
all energy input values in VASCO. For transports, only direct
energy inputs are gathered; the indirect energy input value
of the needed space cannot be assigned to a speciﬁc product
family. To avoid inaccuracies, it is recommended to assign the
indirect proportion of transport to the inventory space. In Fig. 5
the input mask for transports and stocks is displayed. Here the
user enters the total energy consumption for current (0.0230
kWh per part), gas (0.01 kWh per part) and compressed air
(here: none).
The ideal-typical re-utilization cycle, which has been de-
ﬁned in section 3.3, is assessed by analogy with the previously
presented elements in VASCO value ﬂow (see Fig. 14). First,
for each recycling category (here: Reuse), the energy-input-
values in kWh are entered in the period of customer require-
ments (for example, per shift or working day). Following
VASCO calculates the energy inputs per manufactured good
part and also the Carbon Dioxide Equivalent (CDE). The
conversion is explained in the following chapter.
B. Entering the conversion factors for CO2 assessment as
CDE-value
VASCO has a tab ’CDE’ in the general VASCO properties
in which, among other cost rates, shift patterns and transports
can be deﬁned. These unique requirements apply to the entire
value stream, so that the energy inputs for electricity, gas,
compressed air and other resource inputs, such as solvents,
can be entered.
The values entered here are location-speciﬁc conversion
factors, which for example depend on the energy mix of the
electricity supplier or the chemical composition of the solvent.
Here, the CDE conversion factors for current (0.43 kg CO2
per kWh), gas (0.18 kg CO2 per kWh), compressed air (0.2
kg CO2 per kWh) and solvents (1.22 kg CO2 per kWh) are

410
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 10.
Input of resource consumption to calculate disposal per part
Figure 11.
Input of resource consumption to calculate disposal per part
Figure 12.
Input of the direct energy consumption of a process in VASCO
Figure 13.
Input of the energy consumption at the VSM elements ’transport’
and ’buffer’ in VASCO
values according to the energy contracts of production site
entered by the user in VASCO.
C. Displaying the CO2 assessment in value stream
The CO2 assessment of production is done through accu-
mulation of direct and indirect energy inputs over the entire
value stream that is, for all processes, transports and stocks
/ buffers
and subsequent conversion to the equivalent CO2-
value (CDE) per produced part. It should be noted that total
energy consumption is calculated by number of good parts
(here: Dnet - cp. Cumulated scrap rate) produced and shipped
to the customer.
Figure 14.
Energy consumption and CDE assessment in ideal-typical re-
utilization cycle (here: Reuse) in VASCO
Figure 15.
Input for the CDE conversion factors in VASCO
D. Visual representation of the value stream in VASCO
The following ﬁgure (Fig. 17) shows the holistically an-
alyzed value stream with focus on time, disposal and CDE-
value. This visual representation of the value stream deposited
with meaningful and generally accepted indicators
makes it
possible to search speciﬁcally for potential improvements in
resource use and derive the best possible improvement mea-
sures. In addition, further possible measures can be evaluated
in a secure laboratory situation to support investment decisions

411
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 16.
KPI overview with focus on CDE-value per good part (accumu-
lated over whole value stream)
on a resilient basis. The upper data line is the traditional time
line indicating the ranges of each stock / buffer compared to the
total time of the processes. The middle data line displays the
disposals in kg per good part (here: ok-p.) that occur at every
process. The values at the right show the sum of disposals
of every process, while T-DISP is the total disposal including
packaging. In this use case, these are 0.25 kg per part, while no
disposal for packaging occurs. The lower data line represents
the CO2 assessment along the value stream. The upper stairs
correspond to the direct energy consumption in kWh/part, the
lower stairs are the sum of direct and indirect (structural)
energy consumption per part (here: good part which leaves the
process). The arrows in opposition to the direction of material
ﬂow are for the energy consumption in the ideal-typical re-
utilization cycle. In this example use case 5.2486 kg CO2 per
good part (here: ok-p.) are emitted as carbon dioxide equivalent
(for electricity, natural gas, compressed air and solvents) into
the atmosphere.
VI.
THE ROLE OF SIMULATION
The ultimate goal of lean manufacturing is to reduce waste
in human resources, inventories and time to market [30]. This
allows a company to be more responsive to customer demands,
while producing high quality products in an efﬁcient and
economical way [53].
Value Stream Mapping (VSM) is one important principle in
lean manufacturing, because it provides understanding on how
product and information ﬂows affect each other. Traditionally
VSM only provided a static picture of a process, but not in our
VASCO VSM tool. VASCO VSM allows the user to see where
value is added into the value stream, and calculations can
be performed automatically. Through the adding of additional
simulation capabilities, we can now evaluate behavioral issues
of processes.
With lean manufacturing and VSM, the company can
easily recognize and eliminate sources of waste. It is visible
how each operation contributes to the whole, so that change
decisions can be made when bottlenecks exist. It provides
the ability to visualize information and product ﬂows, and it
allows the study of where, when, and how waste occurs. The
implementation of lean principles involves applying concepts
like Kanban, layout planning, visual control, and takt time
calculations [54]. There are several reasons why waste usually
occurs, and they are well described in the literature [55].
These seven types of waste are: over production, unnecessary
inventory, long waiting (e.g. including long inactivity and
lead times), excessive transportation, defects (e.g. in materials,
causes rework or quality problems), ineffective motion (e.g.
process not well designed), and inappropriate processing (e.g.
due to wrong set of tools, in procedures or in systems).
The integration between VSM and simulation improves
processes in general, because it makes visible both the static
and the behavioral characteristics of a process [30].
A. Simulated Guided VSM – Design Approach
Firstly, VSM is usually applied as part of the lean pro-
duction tools portfolio. It highlights process inefﬁciencies,
transaction and communication mismatches, and it also guides
improvement areas.
Secondly, simulation is used to reduce uncertainty and
create common and justiﬁable overviews. This is done by
visualizing dynamic processes. It is a complementary tool for
VSM because it provides the quantiﬁable evidence needed to
justify a lean approach. A simulation model is developed to
replicate the operation of the existing system, and also the
improved future system which should modify or replace the
current implemented system. This is done with the objective
of incorporating better lean principles.
Usually, the approach [30] is to construct a comprehensive
model for the manufacturing process. Distinct scenarios are
derived to uncover an optimal future state of the process,
according to the VSM analysis. Various simulation scenarios
are then developed. The simulated results are acquired and
investigated, and they are matched against real production data
to verify the respective model accuracy.
Simulation is therefore a guiding tool to assist organiza-
tions with the decision to implement improved lean principles.
This is achieved by quantifying ﬁrst the beneﬁts of applying
VSM. Then, a road map is created to help illustrate how VSM
can be used to design the future states. Lastly, the developed
simulation scenarios mimic the real behavior of past and future
manufacturing processes.
B. Considerations on Applying Simulation
Like stated before, VSM has been traditionally viewed as a
paper-and-pencil exercise. Several paper drafts (digital format
in VASCO), are developed to answer speciﬁc questions on efﬁ-
ciency and technical issues related to lean tool implementation
[56].
However, sometimes the future state map cannot be de-
signed just by having an idea of what to change. The prediction
of inventory ﬂows and levels, is not feasible only with static
data. Most traditional VSM applications do not use simulation,
because in the past these required a long preparation time and
effort. The development of a useful simulation model tended to
be a lengthy process, which required thoughtful validation (i.e.
experiments and statistical data). Usually, this development
was also not well aligned with the quicker cycle time needed
for manufacturing.
Nowadays, simulation is sometimes seen as not worth of
the additional time and money investment. When simulation
models are developed and well validated, the company gets
trusted statistical data which will be valuable for the optimiza-
tion of future states. Nevertheless, in today’s world, simulation
is also used as a way to reduce uncertainty and to create
a common view. It helps explore alternatives generated by
different responses to VSM design questions. If simulation is

412
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 17.
Representation of a holistically analyzed value stream in VASCO with data lines Lead Time, Disposal and CDE
integrated into a VSM tool, it can be ﬂexible and robust to
detail changes in VSM.
C. Creating a Common View Through Simulation Guided VSM
Work-ﬂows
According to previous work in this ﬁeld [30], a key
problem in getting everybody to a common view is related to
the absence of visual depictions, i.e. the ability of being able
to explain to others about the current state dynamics. After
this challenge, comes the inability to communicate an action
plan that can be understood by all stake-holders. To this end,
VSM and an integrated simulation tool can deﬁnitely help in
visually capturing and demonstrating current and future states
that can accommodate changes.
A value stream is a collection of actions (both value-
added and non-value-added) required to produce a product or
product family, which uses the same resources, starting with
raw material and ending with the customer [57]. The VSM is
deﬁned as “the simple process“ of directly observing the ﬂows
of information and materials as they currently occur, visually
summarizing them, and then envisioning a future state with
much better performance [53]. The primary objective of the
VSM is to identify all kinds of waste in the value stream and to
take actions to eliminate these [56]. Researchers have created
many lean tools to optimize individual operations. However,
most of them fail in providing a clear visual representation
of the material and information ﬂows throughout the entire
process [58]. The VSM creates a common base for the process,
thus facilitates more thoughtful decisions to improve it [59].
This helps plan and link lean initiatives through a systematic
data capture and analysis. The VSM has emerged as the
preferred way to implement lean principles, inside facilities
and at the supply chain level [60].
Sometimes, management decisions rely only on external
results and expected beneﬁts reported by VSM implementa-
tions external to the company. However, this is always an
insufﬁcient justiﬁcation, and lacks the quantiﬁable evidence
needed to convince to adopt lean principles [61].
VSM was literally drafted by answering speciﬁc questions
on issues related to efﬁciency and on technical lean tool imple-
mentation [56]. In some cases, however, the future state map
cannot be designed by solely using static data. For example,
predicting the inventory ﬂows and levels is impossible having
only static data.
Developing a useful simulation model tended to be a time
consuming task, not well aligned with the relatively quicker cy-
cle times. However, simulation as a process simulation model,
is often used to reduce uncertainty and create a consensus
view. This is done by visualizing dynamic process views for a
given future state. Additionally, it helps explore alternatives
generated by different responses to those design questions.
Simulation is capable of generating resource requirements and
performance statistics whilst remaining ﬂexible to speciﬁc
organizational details.
Simulation has been considered as one of the most ﬂex-
ible analytic tools in the manufacturing system design and
operation areas. It is used to handle uncertainty and create
dynamic views of lead time and machine utilization. This
enables quantiﬁcation of results, and provides a possibility
to compare the expected performance relative to that of the
present one. Thus it can be used to assist organizations with
the decision to implement the VSM, by quantifying beneﬁts
from applying lean principles in their speciﬁc situation. The
majority research in this ﬁeld describes the use of simulation
to analyze existing or planned manufacturing systems.
Value stream mapping simulation is useful also for value
stream mapping training. Each process has a deﬁned cycle
time. These cycle times are not the same, and because the
work cells are interlinked, inventory builds up in between each
cell. One can change many parameters, such as: cycle time, up
time percentage, number of shifts, or the total available time,

413
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
for each station. This is where the simulation comes into play,
e.g., by simulating the ﬁrst stations with a fast processing time,
and the last station with slow times, we get as a result a “ton“
of inventory in the middle (bottleneck). Parameters can also be
entered based on group’s discussion. The group can ﬂip back
and forth between the simulation and the VSM, to check how
changes affect the simulated processes.
D. Value of Simulation and the Future State of VSM
Here, we refer again to the seminal work of Wei Xia and
Jiwen Sun [30], where the authors give clear explanations on
the value of having a simulation guided VSM work-ﬂow. In
both VSM and simulation, many “what-if“ scenarios can be
tested and a choice is made regarding the optimal one(s).
These scenarios have distinctive key points, like the addition
or subtraction of machines, and balancing of work shifts.
The simulated results are used to understand accumulation of
work-in-progress (WIP) before and after each process, e.g.,
to compare a machine efﬁciency or to properly account for
variability. They are utilized to balance throughput, WIP and
production lead time. The simulation model is a general tool
for future shift, product mix and expansion decisions. Being
able to achieve a higher production volume and fulﬁll the
demand of the customer within shorter lead times is a great
marketing advantage. Driven by these simulated results the
company modiﬁes the layout plan and the future state diagram.
The so called, simulation guided VSM [30], allows the
management to distinguish between value added and non-value
added activities. It has the potential to be a strategic decision
making tool for process redesign and continuous improvement.
With detailed information obtained from the simulation guided
VSM, it is for example possible, to determine if cost savings
or increased revenues can be made with additional capital
investment.
For the operational staff, implementing simulation guided
VSM can be more convenient, interactive, and straightforward
than the traditional paper-and-pencil based VSM.
VSM is not always sufﬁcient to describe the current state
of a manufacturing process and design a desired future state.
Simulation is then utilized to enhance but not replace the VSM
by visualizing better dynamic features of the future state before
implementation. Different simulation scenarios are developed
by observing the actual processing times of activities in the
manufacturing process and then characterizing their variation
by statistical distributions.
Simulation also adds a fourth dimension, i.e. time, to the
value stream map. After being simulated, the VSM is no longer
just a snapshot. VSM is now a moving picture, which offers
insights that may have been missed if only VSM alone had
been used. Simulation of the VSM allows the lean team to
quickly implement try changes, without interruptions in the
production processes.
VSM is a valuable tool in lean manufacturing and in
the continuous improvement effort. Simulation makes testing
ideas easier, cheaper, and quicker, and gives an immediate
assessment of the future proposed changes to the system. The
VSM process provides the model and the data, making it easier
to prepare and perform all the simulation work. Therefore,
VSM and simulation complement each other very well.
E. Integration of VASCO VSM with Process Simulator
In VASCO, we developed an integration between the act of
preparing VSM state diagrams, and a process simulation ap-
plication called, ProModel - Process Simulator [62]. The main
goal is to provide a simulation function from within our VSM
tool VASCO. Besides the usual visualization and calculation
of production processes, our partner manufacturing companies,
also expected the development of a simulation function. This
function should contribute to a signiﬁcant increase in quality
results of the production process analysis, Which allows to
check important parameters, such as:
•
Process capacities
•
Buffer capacities
•
Overall output in a certain period of time
We based our decision for the selection of the simulation
tool (ProModel – Process Simulator), on the analysis of some
of the following requirements:
•
a discrete event simulation of manufacturing processes
•
the user interface used to transfer data between
VASCO VSM and the simulation tool, should be easy
to use
•
the tool should have a strong credibility in automotive
industry, as well as in other industries
•
require a minimum amount of integration and pro-
gramming effort
•
low costs involved in terms of licensing
•
support MS–Visio and Excel import/export function-
ality
•
integrate the VSM data directly into the simulation
•
include batching/un-batching, shift models, routes and
resources, order system and dispatching rules (FIFO,
LIFO, percentage, conditional)
•
clear and visually appealing results (include parame-
ters like: throughput per day/shift, process utilization,
waiting and blocking percentage and visualization
capabilities, i.e. histograms and other charts)
•
allow to compare multiple scenarios and allow for
multiple runs with different distributions (accurate
results)
We considered feedback from several partners which are
experts in applied VSM and simulation of processes. The
company ProModel helped, by providing development licenses
for our integration development. Process Simulator proved
to be efﬁcient by fulﬁlling all the major requirements of
our partners. Manual and automatic integration between VSM
and the simulation was developed. The automatic integration
allows users to transfer bi-directional data between VASCO
VSM and the simulation tool. Nevertheless, the users are still
able to manually edit and transfer all the VSM and simulation
parameters if necessary. It was necessary to introduce in
our tool minor modiﬁcations regarding the automatic exit
representation of process scrap, as required by the simulation
tool (Figure 18).
Many other parameters (e.g. buffer capacity analysis) will
be available during the ﬁnal integration version between VSM
and Simulation.

414
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 18.
Simulation prototype: scrap-exit per process represented by new
percentage arrows (inside red squares).
Figure 19.
Example results (red squares) obtained from our VSM-Process
Simulator integration. Histograms show expected capacities/through-puts of
buffers and processes. In (1) we can observe the work unit results. In (2) the
different processes and buffers percentages (operation, setup, idle, waiting,
blocked, down). In (3) the total number of product produced and average
times.
In this work we present preliminary results obtained in our
simulation prototype tool. It is not yet a full implementation
with Process Simulator (Figure 19).
The integration between VASCO VSM and Process Simu-
lator has multiple beneﬁts. Firstly, there is no need to manually
exchange VSM parameter’ values between a separated VSM
tool and a simulation tool. These steps are now fully automatic
and integrated in one tool. Secondly, users with different
levels of expertise in the manufacturing site or on-training,
can now experiment with both tools (VSM and simulation)
in an integrated way, and try out different scenarios. Users
can now test real changes very quickly and experiment while
learning about VSM and lean manufacturing. Thirdly, multiple
scenarios can be tested, leading to an optimal deﬁnition of the
VSM future state.
VII.
FUTURE WORK & CONCLUSION
With VASCO it is possible to use only one tool throughout
the complete work-ﬂow of value stream analysis. It dramat-
ically simpliﬁes the data acquisition at the shop-ﬂoor and
offers a large tool set for analyzing and improving the pro-
duction/logistic value chain.
Also the extraction of production metrics can be done at
any stage of the work-ﬂow creation, allowing the users to
immediately have calculations feedback about the impact of
their changes when designing future state maps. Lastly, by
using our tool the users can capture information along the
entire value stream analysis process, starting with visits to
the production sites, where the users can capture images and
videos of the working processes as side annotations, up to
the creation of a new diagram based on previous processes
work-ﬂow states with comparisons between multiple state
realities of the existent manufacturing processes, where the
users can still access all the annotated information about
old and current manufacturing processes. The integration of
sustainability criteria within a VSM will signiﬁcantly help
manage and reduce the amount of waste, resulting from the
manufacturing processes. This provides new metrics and KPI’s
that help to capture each company production reality in a
digital way.
One minor extensibility limitation is that calculations are
coded into the core system. While we are able to supply new
functionality to the users using the plugin system, we plan
to enable the deﬁnition of any type of calculation to the end
user This deﬁnition should be ﬂexible enough to handle all
types of calculations, but simple enough without the need for
complex programming tasks. This will be achieved by using a
domain speciﬁc language (DSL) for calculations that contains
important abstractions for the speciﬁcation of VSM concepts.
Another important aspect is the integration of continuous
improvement routines like CIP in VSM and VASCO, that will
signiﬁcantly help manage and reduce several types of waste
(MUDA), resulting from the manufacturing processes. This
will also provide new ways to improve metrics and KPIs of
VSM
User experience is always a primal focus in all industrial
applications. We are planning experiments where the users will
perform fundamental tasks with our tool. With the help of an
eye tracker equipment we will record data about the way users
perform their tasks and about their individual preferences.
It is our intention to assess how our tool is used in reality
by the ﬁnal users and to study it’s usability. We expect to be
able to use this data to improve the overall experience of the
users and as a way to boost the productivity of the users when
working with our tool.
REFERENCES
[1]
R. Berndt, N. Silva, C. Caldera, U. Krispel, E. Eggeling, A. Sunk,
T. Edtmayr, W. Sihn, and D. W. Fellner, “VASCO - Mastering the
Shoals of Value Stream Mapping,” CONTENT 2016, The Eighth
International Conference on Creative Content Technologies, 2016, pp.
42–47.
[2]
P. Kuhlang, T. Edtmayr, and W. Sihn, “Methodical approach to increase
productivity and reduce lead time in assembly and production-logistic
processes,” CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology,
vol. 4, no. 1, 2011, pp. 24–32.
[3]
C. E. Knoeppel, Installing efﬁciency methods.
New York, The
Engineering Magazine, 1915.
[4]
A. J. D. Forno, F. A. Pereira, F. A. Forcellini, and L. M. Kipper,
“Value Stream Mapping: a study about the problems and challenges
found in the literature from the past 15 years about application of
Lean tools,” The International Journal of Advanced Manufacturing
Technology, vol. 72, no. 5-8, Feb. 2014, pp. 779–790.
[5]
T. Ohno, Toyota Production System: Beyond Large-Scale Production.
Productivity Press, Mar. 1988.
[6]
J. K. Liker, The Toyota Way: 14 Management Principles from the
World’s Greatest Manufacturer.
Munich: McGraw-Hill, 2004.
[7]
M. Rother and J. Shook, Learning to see: value stream mapping to add
value and eliminate muda. Cambridge: Lean Enterprise Institute, 2003.
[8]
K. Erlach, Wertstromdesign.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2010.
[9]
T. Klevers, Wertstrom-Mapping und Wertstrom-Design. Verschwendung
vermeiden - Wertsch¨opfung steigern, 1st ed.
Landsberg am Lech: mi-
Fachverlag, Jan. 2007.

415
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[10]
P. M., H. J., H. M., A. Heikkil, J. B., and L. S., Framework and
Indicators for a Sustainable Manufacturing Mapping Methodology.
Lyons, 2010.
[11]
M. Mani, J. Madan, J. H. Lee, and K. W. Lyons, “Sustainability
characterization for manufacturing processes,” K. Gupta, Sustainability
characterisation for manufacturing processes, Int. J. Prod. Res., Bd,
vol. 52, 2014.
[12]
C. Jasch, “environmental performance evaluation and indicators,” J.
Clean. Prod., Bd. 8, Nr, vol. 8, no. 1, Feb. 2014.
[13]
G. R. Initiative, “Global reporting initiative,” [Online] Available at:
https://www.globalreporting.org/Pages/default.aspx (30, vol. 12., 2014.
[14]
E.
Commission,
“Directive
2008/98/EC
on
waste
(Waste
Framework
Directive),”
[Online]
Available
at:
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/framework/ (06, vol. 11., 2014.
[Online]. Available: http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/framework/
[15]
M. Kurdve, S. Shahbazi, M. Wendin, and C. Bengtsson, “Waste ﬂow
mapping to improve sustainability of waste management: a case study
approach,” Wiktorsson, Waste ﬂow mapping to improve sustainability of
waste management: a case study approach, J. Clean. Prod., Bd, vol. 98,
2015.
[16]
M. Despeisse and M. R. Oates, “Sustainable manufacturing tactics and
cross-functional factory modeling.” D. Ball, Sustainable manufacturing
tactics and cross-functional factory modeling, J. Clean. Prod., Bd,
vol. 42, 2013.
[17]
W. Faulkner and F. Badurdeen, “Sustainable Value Stream Mapping
(Sus-VSM): methodology to visualize and assess manufacturing sus-
tainability performance.” Badurdeen, Sustainable Value Stream Map-
ping (Sus-VSM): methodology to visualize and assess manufacturing
sustainability performance, J. Clean. Prod., Bd, vol. 85, 2014.
[18]
A. S. J. Torres and A. M. Gati, Environmental Value Stream Mapping
(EVSM) as sustainability management tool.
M, 2009.
[19]
E. J. Loureno, A. J. Baptista, and J. P. Pereira, “Multi-Layer Stream
Mapping as a Combined Approach for Industrial Processes Eco-
efﬁciency Assessment,” Re-engineering Manufacturing for Sustainabil-
ity, vol. 98, 2013.
[20]
H. Hopf, Methodik zur Fabriksystemmodellierung im Kontext von
Energie- und Ressourcenefﬁzienz. Wiesbaden: Springer Vieweg, 2016.
[21]
H. Haag, Eine Methodik zur modellbasierten Planung und Bewertung
der Energieefﬁzienz in der Produktion.
Stuttgart: Fraunhofer Verlag,
2013.
[22]
Y. Kishita, Y. Ohishi, M. Uwasu, M. Kuroda, and H. Takeda, Evaluating
the life cycle CO2 emissions and costs of thermoelectric generators
for passenger automobiles: a scenario analysis.
Hara, Evaluating the
life cycle CO2 emissions and costs of thermoelectric generators for
passenger automobiles: a scenario analysis, J. Clean, 2016.
[23]
R. Feiz, J. Ammenberg, L. Baas, M. Eklund, and A. Helgstrand,
“Improving the CO2 performance of cement, part I: utilizing life-
cycle assessment and key performance indicators to assess development
within the cement industry,” Marshall, Improving the CO2 performance
of cement, part I: utilizing life-cycle assessment and key performance
indicators to assess development within the cement industry, J. Clean.
Prod., Bd, vol. 98, 2015.
[24]
T. J. Roosen and D. J. Pons, Environmentally Lean Production.
Pons,
Environmentally Lean Production: J, 2013.
[25]
E. K., “Energiewertstrom,” Stuttgart, Springer Verlag, 2009.
[26]
E. Mller and T. Stock, “A method to generate energy value-streams in
production and logistics in respect of time- and energy-consumption,”
Schillig, A method to generate energy value-streams in production and
logistics in respect of time- and energy-consumption, Prod. Eng., Bd,
vol. 8, 2014.
[27]
A. Sunk and T. Edtmayr, Ansatz zur Bewertung der Abfallentstehung
im Wertstrom.
Sihn, Ansatz zur Bewertung der Abfallentstehung im
Wertstrom, in Industrial Engineering und Management, H, 2016.
[28]
M. St¨arz and T. Strigl, “Using value stream simulation to support
lean manufacturing workshops,” Proceedings of the Winter Simulation
Conference, 2012.
[29]
M. Shararah, K. El-Kilany, and A. El-Sayed, “Component based mod-
eling and simulation of value stream mapping for lean production
systems,” Proc. of FAIM Conference, 2010, pp. 881–888.
[30]
W. Xia and J. Sun, “Simulation guided value stream mapping and lean
improvement: A case study of a tubular machining facility,” Journal
of Industrial Engineering and Management, vol. 6, no. 2, 2013, pp.
456–476.
[31]
F. T. S. Chan, “Using simulation to predict system performance:
a case study of an electrophoretic deposition plant,” Integrated
Manufacturing Systems, vol. 6, no. 5, 1995, pp. 27–38. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/09576069510093451
[32]
A. Prakash and M. Chen, “A simulation study of ﬂexible manufacturing
systems,” Computers & Industrial Engineering, vol. 28, no. 1, 1995, pp.
191–199.
[33]
P. S. Welgama and R. G. J. Mills, “Use of simulation in the design
of a JIT system,” International Journal of Operations & Production
Management, vol. 15, no. 9, 1995, p. 245.
[34]
K. Cho, I. Moon, and W. Yun, “System analysis of a multi-product,
small-lot-sized production by simulation: A Korean motor factory case,”
Computers and Industrial Engineering, vol. 30, no. 3 SPEC. ISS., 1996,
pp. 347–356.
[35]
D. P. Bischak, “Performance of a manufacturing module with moving
workers,” IIE transactions, vol. 28, no. 9, 1996, pp. 723–734.
[36]
Y. H. Park, J. E. Matson, and D. M. Miller, “Simulation and analysis
of the mercedes-benz all activity vehicle (aav) production facility,” in
Simulation Conference Proceedings, 1998. Winter, vol. 2, Dec 1998,
pp. 921–926 vol.2.
[37]
J. S. Shang and P. R. Tadikamalla, “Multicriteria design and control of
a cellular manufacturing system through simulation and optimization,”
International Journal of Production Research, vol. 36, no. 6, 1998, pp.
1515–1528.
[38]
J. F. Persson, “The impact of different levels of detail in manufac-
turing systems simulation models,” ROBOTICS AND COMPUTER-
INTEGRATED MANUFACTURING, vol. 18, no. 3-4, 2002, pp. 319–
325.
[39]
R. Suri and R. R. Hildebrant, “Modelling ﬂexible manufacturing sys-
tems using mean-value analysis,” Journal of Manufacturing Systems,
vol. 3, no. 1, 1984, pp. 27–38.
[40]
Y.-H. Lian and H. Van Landeghem, “Analysing the effects of Lean man-
ufacturing using a value stream mapping-based simulation generator,”
International Journal of Production Research, vol. 45, no. 13, 2007, pp.
3037–3058.
[41]
M. Ravesh, “Conﬁrming lean transformation outcomes by using sim-
ulation,” Proceedings of the Asia Paciﬁc Industrial Engineering &
Management Systems Conference, 2012, pp. 1732–1736.
[42]
Y. Monden, Toyota Production System: An Integrated Approach to Just-
In-Time, 4th Edition.
CRC Press, 2012.
[43]
SIEMENS, “Tecnomatix plant simulation: Value stream mapping,”
SIEMENS, Tech. Rep., 2012.
[44]
M. A. Nash and S. R. Poling, Mapping the Total Value Stream: A
Comprehensive Guide for Production and Transactional Processes, 1st
Edition.
CRC Press, 2008.
[45]
T. Rohrlack. A bentley solution paper for automobile manufacturers:
The digital factory from concept to reality. [Online]. Available:
http://ftp2.bentley.com/dist/collateral/whitepaper/DFWhitepaper.pdf [re-
trieved: January, 2016]
[46]
M. Grieves. Digital twin: Manufacturing excellence through virtual
factory replication. LLC. (2014)
[47]
Microsoft Corporation, “Professional Flow Chart and Diagram Software
— Microsoft Visio,” www.visiotoolbox.com, 2016, [Online; retrieved:
January, 2016].
[48]
iGrafx, LLC, “iGrafx Flowcharter,” http://www.igrafx.com/, 2016, [On-
line; retrieved: January, 2016].
[49]
Cards PLM Solutions B.V., “Tecnomatix Plant Simulation,” http://www.
cardsplmsolutions.nl/en/plm-software/tecnomatix/plant-simulation-6,
2016, [Online; retrieved: January, 2016].
[50]
SmartDraw, LLC, “SmartDraw Value Stream Mapping,” http://www.
smartdraw.com/value-stream-map/, 2016, [Online; retrieved: January,
2016].
[51]
Lean Lexicon 5th Edition.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Lean Enterprise
Institute, Inc., 2010.

416
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[52]
R. J. Wilson, Introduction to Graph Theory.
New York, NY, USA:
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1986.
[53]
J. P. Womack and D. T. Jones, Lean thinking: banish waste and create
wealth in your corporation.
Simon and Schuster, 2010.
[54]
R. Barker, “The Design of Lean Manufacturing Systems Using Time-
based Analysis,” International Journal of Operations & Production
Management, vol. 14, no. 11, 1994, pp. 86–96.
[55]
W. G. Sullivan, T. N. McDonald, and E. M. Van Aken, “Equip-
ment replacement decisions and lean manufacturing,” in Robotics and
Computer-Integrated Manufacturing, vol. 18, no. 3-4, 2002, pp. 255–
265.
[56]
M. Rother and J. Shook, “Learning to See: Value Stream Mapping to
Create Value and Eliminate Muda,” Lean Enterprise Institute Brookline,
2003, p. 102.
[57]
P. Childerhouse and D. R. Towill, “Analysis of the factors affecting real-
world value stream performance,” International Journal of Production
Research, vol. 40, no. 15, 2002, pp. 3499–3518.
[58]
S. J. Pavnaskary, J. K. Gershensony, and A. B. Jambekarz, “Classiﬁ-
cation scheme for lean manufacturing tools,” Int. J. Prod. Res, vol. 41,
no. 13, 2003, pp. 3075–3090.
[59]
T. Mcdonald, E. M. V. Aken, and A. F. Rentes, “Utilising Simulation to
Enhance Value Stream Mapping : A Manufacturing Case Application
Utilising Simulation to Enhance Value Stream Mapping : A Manufac-
turing Case Application,” International Journal of Logistics Research
and Applications, vol. 5, no. 2, 2002, pp. 213–232.
[60]
P. Hines and N. Rich, “The seven value stream mapping tools,”
International
Journal
of
Operations
&
Production
Management,
vol.
17,
no.
1,
1997,
pp.
46–64.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//www.emeraldinsight.com/doi/abs/10.1108/01443579710157989
[61]
R. Detty and J. Yingling, “Quantifying beneﬁts of conversion to lean
manufacturing with discrete event simulation: A case study,” Interna-
tional Journal of Production Research, vol. 38, no. 2, 2000, pp. 429–445.
[62]
N. L. Coppini, L. C. Bekesas, E. A. Baptista, M. Vieira, and W. C.
Lucato, “Value stream mapping simulation using ProModel software,”
in IEEE International Conference on Industrial Engineering and Engi-
neering Management, 2011, pp. 575–579.

