1
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A Smart Waste Management with Self-Describing
Complex Objects
Yann Glouche, Arnab Sinha, and Paul Couderc
INRIA, Unit´e de Recherche Rennes-Bretagne-Atlantique
Campus de Beaulieu, Rennes, France
email: {yann.glouche,arnab.sinha,paul.couderc}@inria.fr
Abstract—Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID) is a perva-
sive computing technology that can be used to improve waste
management by providing early automatic identiﬁcation of waste
at bin level. In this paper, we have presented a smart bin
application based on information self-contained in tags associated
to each waste item. The wastes are tracked by smart bins using a
RFID-based system without requiring the support of an external
information system. Two crucial features of the selective sorting
process can be improved by using this approach. First, the user
is helped in the application of selective sorting. Second, the smart
bin knows its content up to the precision of composed materials
by types and percentage. It can report back with its status or
abnormalities to the rest of the recycling chain. Complex objects
like e-waste, hazardous ones, etc. can also be sorted and detected
for hazards with the self-describing approach.
Keywords-green IT; waste management; recycling chain; RFID;
NFC; QR code.
I. INTRODUCTION
Waste management is an important requirement for eco-
logically sustainable development of many countries. Efﬁcient
sorting of waste is a major issue in today’s society. In [1], the
concept of self-describing objects is introduced for using the
technologies of information and communication to improve
the recycling process. In Europe, the consumer society has
led to an ever increasing production of waste [2]. This is
a consequence of the consumer’s behavior, and is worsened
by packaging. In [3], it is shown, that the production of
waste reaches almost 1.2 kg/day/inhabitant in western Europe.
Paradoxically, the same consumers who are concerned with
environmental protection are often reluctant when it comes
to have more land-ﬁling or more incinerators. Therefore,
waste should be disposed and treated properly to reduce
environmental impact.
Waste management services are becoming an important
market, for which the waste collection process is a critical
aspect for the service providers [4], [5]. The main goals are
the following :
1) Reducing waste production
2) Ensuring that wastes are properly disposed
3) Recycling and re-using disposed products
To achieve these goals, regulations and taxes are being im-
plemented to favor virtuous behaviors. In particular, to reduce
the production of waste, there is an increasing trend towards
individual billing, where people are charged depending on
waste quantity disposed.
Selective sorting is another approach, which is often im-
plemented to improve recycling and reduce the environment
impact. The importance of resources and energy saving is
another argument to manufacture recyclable materials.
The sorting of wastes must be implemented as early as pos-
sible in the chain to increase the quantity of valuable recyclable
materials. The use of pervasive computing technology such as
Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID) and sensor networks
offer a new way to optimize the waste management systems.
In recent years, we have seen increasing adoption of the
RFID technology in many application domains, such as logis-
tic, inventory, public transportation and security. Essentially,
RFID makes it possible to read digital information from one
or several objects using a reader within proximity of the
objects, enabling automatic identiﬁcation, tracking, checking
of properties, etc. Apart from this, RFID has added advan-
tages over barcodes. While barcodes compulsorily acts as
an enabler that links to retailer’s/manufacturer’s centralized
data (mostly exclusive), RFID can mimic the same with an
additional advantage of having a memory for storing some
information locally. This locally attached related information
could be easily accessed by end-users; an evolution of QR
code. Hence, it could be predicted that RFID could replace
existing barcodes, QR codes, and attached to most products
by the entities for better handling. In this perspective, it is
the perfect time to use RFID for waste domain and leverage
from their properties to improve current waste management
processes.
This paper demonstrates a method to improve the quality of
selective sorting. The approach is based on local interactions
to track the waste ﬂow of a city. Each waste is detected by
information properties stored in a RFID tag associated to it. At
each step where wastes are to be processed the RFID tags are
read in order to provide the relevant information. This process
improves the reuse of recyclable products. We assume that
organic waste products are not recycled and hence RFID tags
are not attached to them.
One of the advantages of the approach is that it improves the
sorting quality without using an external information system.
Rather the information is distributed locally in the physical
space within the tag memory associated to each waste; thereby
increasing the availability of information for various purposes.
For example, to help the user in the sorting process and to
analyze the content of a bin etc.

2
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
This article is organized as follows. The next section out-
lines the architecture used to process the waste ﬂow in our
waste management system. Then, we present a tagged (or
“self-describing”) waste approach and its use in waste sorting
system. The fourth section illustrates a certiﬁcation process of
the content giving reward to the users participating in the waste
selective sorting. The ﬁfth section discusses other solutions to
sort more complex waste (objects). The sixth section presents
the communication system between bins and the recycling
service provider with the prototype demonstration illustrated
next. Section VIII presents the related work along with a
contrast, highlighting the novelty of our work. Finally, Section
IX concludes the paper.
II. WASTE FLOW AND GLOBAL ARCHITECTURE OF THE
WASTE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
Demonstrating efﬁcient waste management solutions is the
primary goal of this article. These solutions are speciﬁc to the
different phases that pieces of waste undergoes in the system,
discussed later in this section. However, all these solutions
exploit our principal approach of self-describing objects. Most
of these everyday used objects also undergo through different
other phases in their life cycle; from manufacturing until
disposal. As mentioned earlier, manufacturers and retailers
already use RFID tagging of their products extensively for
inventory. We have assumed their use would be extended with
self-description to make them smarter. This would enable them
to participate in smart interactions during their product phase
as well after their disposal; when they become waste. Hence,
the tangible data for these items would be available pervasively
for autonomous processing throughout the waste management
chain. Having said this, it should be noted that with the ﬂow
of waste across its management chain, their self-describing
information (or tangible data) also gets aggregated. However,
it might be necessary to have some exclusive information for
products that would be useful for their proper disposal as
waste.
The waste management architecture we have considered is
built around several elements: waste items, domestic bin, trash
bags, collective containers and collecting vehicles. The waste
ﬂow starts from the waste items and the domestic bin to end
in the collecting vehicles. We now describe each of step in the
waste ﬂow and how these elements interact.
A. Wastes description
The presented management system is based on a self-
describing approach of each waste. We have associated digital
information to each waste to ensure an appropriate treatment
of each item locally. This is the key point of this approach.
In the selective sorting process, the type of a waste item
is identiﬁed by its main component. For example, a plastic
bottle is identiﬁed as a plastic waste, and a cardboard box
is identiﬁed as a cardboard waste. In the presented approach,
each self-describing waste carried digital information about
its type. Other properties of the waste are interesting for the
collection process of the wastes. For example, the weight of
each wastes can be used to estimate if a bin is full, or empty.
Without using measurement sensors, the weight data of a waste
item can be stored in digital information attached to it, making
itself describing.
B. Wastes identiﬁcation
The user is the primary actor in the selective sorting process.
Based on this observation, our waste management system
offers some pervasive assistance for the selective sorting
process. Then, the waste ﬂow presented in Figure 1, begins
at the user level where the trash is generated. As it is shown
on the top of Figure 1, we approach favors a behavior of the
users: by indicating the appropriate bin for a piece of waste,
or more directly, by opening the lid of the bin corresponding
to the type of the waste.
C. Trash bag
To ensure an appropiate treatment, the knowledge of the
type of wastes contained in a trash bag is crucial. As for the
wastes, it is also possible to associate several properties of
each trash bag: for example, the owner of the trash bag, and
the number of items in the trash bag can also be considered.
In the prototype presented in the next sections, some digital
information about the total weight of the trash bag, its content
and the number of items contained in the trash bag are
physically associated to each trash bag. In this prototype, some
digital information is also associated to identify the owner of
a trash bag: the interest is to identify the waste production of
each consumer. This information deﬁnes an analytical report
associated to each trash bag.
The analysis report stores some important information for
the selective sorting process. The information stored in the
analysis report is to determine whether the trash bag could be
accepted. In Figure 1, this analysis report is transmitted to the
collective container, when a user brings a new trash bag.
D. Collective container
In our waste management system, each collective container
is associated to an embedded computing system, which pro-
cesses the data of the analysis report of each trash bag, making
it a smart bin. When a new trash bag is added in a collective
container, the analysis report is read.
Considering the type of wastes contained in a trash bag,
a collective container determines whether it could accept a
trash bag or not. For example, a collective container collecting
only plastic wastes can stay closed when a user brings a
trash bag containing the cardboard objects: it would only
be opened for a bag of plastic wastes. If the trash bag is
accepted, the smart bin stores some information about the
content and owner of these trash bags. Then, the content of a
collective container is iteratively updated as a new trash bag
is added. The information stored by the collective container is
transmitted to the truck during the collection by using a local
connection, as it is presented on the bottom of Figure 1. At
this step, the errors of the selective process can get transmitted.
Among the collection of wastes, the highly polluting wastes,

3
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 1.
Waste ﬂow and global architecture of the system.
which are not placed in the appropriate container, are detected:
for example, it becomes possible to detect a battery placed in
the container dedicated to plastic waste.
The focus in this step of the waste management chain
is on the trash bags disposed by the users. On the one
hand, it ensures on the individual waste items inside the bag
without any tampering (contamination or removal); while on
the other hand, it tries to channelize the bags in the proper
recycling direction based on its dominant contents. This step
can incorporate ﬂexibilities; in the sense that compliance
policies laid down by the waste management operator or the
city could be enforced through these collective containers. A
glass container could be made to accept trash bags containing
glasses strictly without any contamination at all; or it could
be also programmed to accept bags with leniency, i.e., having
contamination upto a certain percentage and exceptions. In
real life implementation there is need for tolerance as most
of the waste is composed of various materials. Our solution
to incorporate such ﬂexibilities is described later in Section
V. However, there would always be exceptional cases where a
trash bag might not comply to any of the collective container.
For such situations the waste management policy may provide
a “catchall” bin that users can open with their personal
identiﬁcation card. In this way users could be tracked for
either imparting recycling education (in case they are facing
issues) or frequent defaulters not participating in the recycling
program.
Considering this waste ﬂow, we now present a system based
on RFID technology to implement this waste sorting process.
III. TECHNOLOGICAL SUPPORT FOR SMART WASTE
INTERACTION
Our smart waste approach consists of associating a physical
waste with digital information. In our approach, information
associated to a waste item can be stored in a QR code or in
a RFID tag memory. Using QR codes does not introduce an
additional cost. However, QR code requires the object to be
in line of sight. Unlike this technology, the RFID tags can
be read without requiring a precise position relative to the
reader during the reading operation. The UHF tags are used
increasingly in the supply chain management and can be easily
read at a distance of ﬁve meters from the reader antenna. In
this context, it is easy to envisage a widespread deployment
of the RFID tags on each manufactured product. This is an
important advantage for using RFID technology in the waste
management domain.
The tagged waste concept uses the data banks memory of
a tag to store information about each waste associated to the
tag. The tag memory is not used to store an identiﬁer of the
waste in an external database, but the information describing
the associated waste is directly stored in the associated tag.
Moreover, the tag(s) is(are) most likely to be placed on the
“signiﬁcant” part(s) of the waste to aid the user for better
sorting. A connection to an external database is not required
to have some information about the smart waste. Only a RFID
reader is required to read the information of a smart waste.
Figure 2 presents a smart waste composed of a plastic bottle
associated to a RFID tag, which stores the data describing the
bottle as a plastic object.
Figure 2.
An example of a smart waste.

4
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A RFID tag contains data banks for the users applications.
The memory size of data banks is limited. For example, an
UHF tag ALIEN ALN-9640 Squiggle shown in Figure 3 can
store 512 bits of information.
Figure 3.
The ALN-9640 Squiggle Alien tag.
In [6], the type of wastes classiﬁcation is shown. In this
classiﬁcation, each type of waste is associated to an identiﬁ-
cation number. Taking examples from everyday life:
• the cardboard is associated to the reference 200101,
• the glass is associated to the reference 200102,
• the plastic is associated to the reference 200139.
The smart waste concept reuses the classiﬁcation [6], to store
the reference number representing the type of the waste in
memory blocks of each tag associated to a piece of waste. As
it is shown in Figure 4, our prototype also saves the weight
(represented by a measure in grams, encoded in hexadecimal)
of the waste associated to the tag, in the tag memory of each
smart waste. The weight encoding presented in Figure 4 is
a way to store the description of each waste directly in the
associated tag.
Figure 4.
Representation of the information in the tag memory.
Until this point of the section we have seen how the digital
information is associated to the physical waste objects. During
their disposal at different stages of the waste management sys-
tem, these information are read and transferred for processing
and aggregation. The rest of this section describes the various
modes of the domestic waste collection and the transfer of
its digital information to the smart trash bags. Finally, the
collective smart bin is demonstrated, which is suitable for
community waste collection area. The smart trash bags are
disposed here.
A. Individual smart bins
At the ﬁrst step of our waste sorting system, the information
contained in the RFID tag associated to each smart waste is
used to help the people disposing an object in the appropriate
container. Here, the main goal is to reduce the sorting errors
when someone does not know, which is the right container, or
mistakenly discards the object in the wrong one. It also helps
people to learn the selective sorting rules applied locally. The
smart bin system uses the self-describing approach of smart
wastes to improve the selective sorting quality.
The description of smart wastes is stored in a RFID tag
physically associated to each smart waste. Using a RFID
reader, the smart bin reads the RFID tag attached to each smart
waste to determine the appropriate treatment. Let us consider
the example of someone who wants to discard a plastic bottle
in a bin. He puts the bottle near a smart bin as it is shown in
Figure 5. When the plastic bottle is in the antenna area, the
tag associated to the bottle is detected. The data stored in the
tag is read to determine the appropriate procedure to discard
the bottle. If the bin accepts plastic objects, then the system
opens its lid. Otherwise, the system keeps the lid closed.
Note that it is also possible to control the opening of several
containers using a single RFID reader. Figure 5 presents a
prototype of a selective bin. In this approach, a management
system connected to a RFID reader uses the data stored on
waste tags to open the correct containers. In this example,
when someone wants to discard a plastic bottle, the container
for the plastic wastes is opened by the management system.
In Figure 5, only the lid of plastic container will be opened
and all other lids will remain closed.
Figure 5.
A RFID based selective bin.
This approach assumes that the management system tracks
the information of the waste items that are discarded in each
container of a selective bin. When a piece of waste is discarded
in the container, the management system updates the memory
inventory for this type of waste. In this way, undesirable wastes
for a given container are either rejected or tracked, depending
on the chosen policy for handling undesirable wastes. Products
are scanned item-wise to ensure a complete reliable reading
process. Figure 6 presents a prototype of a smart bin based
on UHF RFID tags and a UHF RFID reader that implements
this approach.
UHF RFID technology is already used in the supply chain

5
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 6.
A collective bin using the RFID technology.
management systems. In this context, a UHF tag is placed on
the packaging of each product at the begining of its life cycle.
Since the UHF tag is already attached on the packaging of
each product for the supply chain management process, we
are interested to reuse the tag and its technology in our smart
bin approach.
B. Use of QR codes technology for a cheaper approach
The passive UHF RFID tags are quite cheap, ranging from
$0.10 to $0.15 per tag. However, the relative overhead cost
and utility is important for businesses to adopt the technology.
They would readily agree to tag an expensive item than the
very cheap ones. To take care of this practical aspect, we
introduce a cheaper solution using QR codes technology. It
would allow an early adoption of few concepts and applica-
tions presented previously. Using QR code is not necessarily
an alternative but could also be considered as a complement
to RFID for cheap items. This approach takes advantage of
the embedded NFC capability in users smartphone.
This alternative approach assumes that every waste is asso-
ciated to a QR code describing its type. The mobile application
maintains in its memory the current inventory for each type
of collected wastes (for example, 3 inventories if there are 3
types of collected waste). Waste disposal would require users
to scan each item, allowing the mobile application to update
the current inventory for this type of waste in phone’s memory.
Some other waste properties, such as weight, could also be
collected at this step.
A smartphone is a small, low-cost, mobile computer. More-
over, most smartphones now embed a camera, enabling them
to read bar codes or 2-dimensional QR codes (also known as
“ﬂash codes”). A ﬁrst step in the solution would consist to
scan a QR code (or bar code) associated to a product, and
to use this information for giving a sorting instruction to the
smartphone of the user. As in the approach of the individual
RFID bin presented in Section III-A, it is also important to
report the actions of the user to the waste collecting chain.
In Figure 7, a user wants to drop a plastic bottle. He scans
the QR code associated to the bottle. The properties associated
to the bottle are added to the inventory of the plastic container
that is stored in the smartphone’s memory.
Figure 7.
Reading of a QR code associated to a waste item.
Obviously, reading QR code is less convenient than RFID
reading. Additionally, in this approach, the opening of the lid
is also not controlled by an automated system. However, this
approach allows the deployment of the rest of the chain with-
out requiring the smart bins inside each home, as presented
in Section III-A. Beside being cheaper, the mobile application
also provides helpful support to the user regarding the selective
sorting rules in application.
Like the individual bin presented in Section III-A, the man-
agement system of the collective bin tracks waste properties
as they are disposed. When a smart trash bag associated
to a RFID tag is dropped in the collective container, the
management system updates the collective inventory according
to the new bag’s content. Prevention of sorting errors is also
possible, provided that the user actually ﬁlls his trash bags
according to what he scans.
We do not rely on a network connection of the bin. Instead,
it is the waste bag itself that will store the waste inventory, as
we will see in next section.

6
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
C. Smart trash bag
In the individual selective sorting point like a user’s smart
kitchen bin, the wastes are not directly deposited in the
container of the bin. Every user utilizes trash bags, which will
be dropped to a collective container in the residence, or put
at the entrance of every household for being collected by the
service provider.
The smart trash bag concept is smart in the sense that the
waste management infrastructure (bin, truck) will be able to
check its contents. A smart trash bag is a trash bag associated
to a RFID tag, as it shown in Figure 8. The tag associated
to a smart trash bag offers a memory space to store some
information about the contents of the trash bag like: type of
wastes, number of items, etc. The RFID tag may also store
some information about its owner: name, address, etc.
Figure 8.
A smart trash bag.
Writing data in the tag associated to the smart trash bag
about its content is straightforward: for each new smart waste
added, its tag is read; then, the trash bag content is updated
by writing in its tag with the updated information about the
newly added waste. This approach enables the tracking of trash
bag content. Various information can be reported; i.e., the type
and quantity of wastes contained in the bag, total weight of
the content, and the interactions between the wastes. In this
approach, it is assumed that the management system ensures
that all the waste of a container belong to the same type. Then,
it is just necessary to store the expected type of wastes in the
analysis report. The weight of the smart bag is estimated by
considering the weight of each smart waste contained in it.
When a smart waste is added, its weight is read from the tag
memory. The smart trash bag’s weight is refreshed by adding
the weight of this smart waste to its current weight. The weight
is computed each time a smart waste is added. This iterative
process uses the information stored in the tag associated to
each smart waste. This approach is totally autonomous and
based on the information stored in the tags associated to each
smart waste. A connection to an external information system
is not required to obtain the information associated to each
waste.
As it is illustrated in Figure 9, the information stored in
the tag associated to the smart trash bag, are encoded by a
sequence of bytes. Storing the owner’s identiﬁer uses three
bytes. Using the classiﬁcation of wastes [6], the type of wastes
is stored as six hexadecimal digits amounting to three bytes.
The number of waste items is stored as one byte. The weight
(in gram) of the content is stored as two bytes. Without
requiring an external database, the description of trash bag’s
content is direcly carried by its associated tag.
Figure 9.
Data memory structuring of a smart trash bag.
The individual smart bin approach presented in Sec-
tion III-A assumes that the management system tracks the
information of the waste that are discarded in each container
of a selective bin. To this end, the management system updates
the analysis report of a container when a smart waste is added
to the container. The whole report is stored locally in the
memory of a tag associated to the smart trash bags. In the
prototype presented in Figure 6, the analysis report stores the
information about the owner of the smart trash bag, the type
of the content, the number of wastes, and the weight of the
content, using the data representation shown in Figure 9.
We have also developed an application to store the analysis
report of the content of a trash bag for the cheaper solution
using QR codes technology presented in Section III-B. In our
prototype, the NFC technology provides this second step of
the solution: NFC-enabled smartphones can interact in close
proximity: in particular, they can read some RFID tags and
also emulate the response of some tags. It is in the former
functionality that we are interested, as it allows a user to write
the required information in a trash bag’s tag using only an NFC
smartphone.
Figure 10.
Writing analysis report operation with a smartphone.

7
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
When the bag for a given type is full, the mobile application
is used to write the inventory in the RFID tag attached to
the trash bag (Figure 10). The smartphone uses its NFC
reader/writer for this operation. Then the user closes his
trash bag of plastic wastes. Now, he uses his smartphones
application to write the inventory of the trash bag, in an NFC
tag associated to the bag.
D. Collective smart bins
The collective smart bin collects the smart trash bags
produced by the users. Here, we consider a scenario for the
collective smart bins, which can be placed in a common
space of several apartments or in a street. Using the self-
describing approach of the smart trash bag, the collective
smart bin monitors the ﬂow of wastes, and it detects the alerts
like ﬁre, sorting errors, detection of undesirable objects. The
information about its content is transmitted by an ambient
network or local Bluetooth connection during the collection,
according to the type of information. As for the individual bin
approach for helping the sorting process, it is possible to open
a container only when objects of the correct type is brought
by a user. The RFID inventories cannot ensure that all the tags
have been detected in antenna area of a reader, meaning that
missing tags are unnoticed. Considering this limitation, we
have followed an “incremental” approach, where the global
content of the collective container is updated each time a bag
is disposed.
The analysis report of the content of a trash bag presented
in Section III-A is used to update content of the collective
bin. This approach is based on the self-describing concept of
the content of a container; in the same way as the individual
container stores knowledge about the wastes. The collective
container stores knowledge about the smart trash bags. It is a
new way to measure the state of a container without requiring
the use of various sensors. For example, the weight of content,
the size, or the type can be measured by using the information
stored in the tag of each waste of a container, without using
any sensors for each speciﬁc property. For example, the total
weight of the wastes of a collective container can be estimated
by incrementally adding the weight of each smart trash bag
brought to the collective container. The information stored in
the tag of the smart trash bag is only needed. This autonomous
approach facilitates a large scale deployment of the smart bins.
Figure 11 shows a user in a garbage room. He presents his
trash in reading area, where the trash bag’s tag is read. The
analysis report of the content of the trash bag is transmitted
by the reader to the container’s controller. The controller can
then determine the appropriate action, depending on the bag’s
content and the local policy. For example, it could reject the
bag if it contains an inappropriate item (container remains
closed), explaining the cause of rejection to the user (such as
“glass is not accepted in this container”). Implementing this
policy is a way to avoid that a sorted container is contaminated
by undesirable material. For example, it becomes impossible
to pollute a container for plastic waste with metal cap of a
plastic bottle.
Figure 11.
An individual bin using the RFID technology.
IV. AN INTEGRITY CERTIFICATION PROCESS OF THE
CONTENT OF A TRASH BAG FOR REWARDING THE
SELECTIVE SORTING
Based on the smart waste and smart trash bag concepts,
the applications presented in Section III, help users in the
selective sorting process. Considering this selective sorting
approach, it becomes easy to reward the behavior towards the
environment. The smart bins use all the hardware required to
implement a payback mechanism based on a micro-payment
approach. Based ubiquitous computing principle, this can be
implemented by a payback mechanism where the amount
is credited into the user’s smartphone. This non centralized
approach makes deployment easier and offers better privacy
for the user; therefore, not requiring a centralized server
for storing data about the waste production details of each
household. Irrespective of the implementation for payback
mechanism, the reward process should be based on properties
like the number of item(s), their weight, or the value associated
to each waste. Thus, in our scenario, wastes and trash bags
would have a value and they become critical objects for
checking their integrity, mandatorily.
Our approach considers two steps of the selective sorting
process. Firstly, the individual smart bin facilitates the selective
sorting of the trash bag for the user. Secondly, the collective
smart bin ensures selective sorting of smart trash bags, using
their tag information. The collective smart bin uses the waste
inventory stored in the tag of the trash bag, to ensure a real
time waste management of its content.
In the waste management chain, some event might take
place between the individual container and the collective con-
tainer and disturb the selective sorting process. In particular,
an undesirable object can be added; like for example, a battery
can be added in a plastic waste trash bag. A mistake or
a malicious behavior can corrupt the chain of the selective
sorting between the individual smart bin and the collective
smart bin.
Here, we suggest a method to implement a certiﬁcation
process of the content of a smart trash bag. Using a certi-
ﬁcation inventory mechanism presented in [7], the inventory
of the set of all the waste contained in a trash bag can be

8
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
used and certiﬁed. This approach purposes to add a integrity
information in a group of tags. Then, a RFID inventory of
this certiﬁed group can be checked for consistency of the
information distributed over the set of tags.
A. Certiﬁed content creation phase
In the selective sorting application presented in Section III,
the certiﬁed content creation phase is made by a user with
his personal individual bin. In the smart bin application, the
integrity information is a hash value computed with the set
tag identiﬁers at the level of the individual smart bin.
Considering a set of tags with unique identiﬁers t1, t2, ..., tn.
Each tag is associated to a piece of waste contained in a
trash bag. The identiﬁers are ordered in a determined se-
quence (using a chosen order relation). Then, a hash func-
tion is applied to this information to compute the digest:
d = hash(t1, t2, ..., tn). As shown in Figure 12, this hash
value is used as a group identiﬁer gid, stored in the tag of
trash bag, which contains the set of wastes. This hash value is
used as an integrity information, which enables the integrity
checking phase.
Figure 12.
Building of a certiﬁed object set.
When a waste item is added in the smart individual bin, the
management system stores the identiﬁer in its memory. The
management system of the individual bin incrementally stores
the identiﬁers ti of each waste added by the user. When the
user closes his trash bag, the group identiﬁer gid is computed
with the identiﬁers t1, t2, ..., tn of each waste stored in the tag
of the smart trash bag.
Because the memory size of the tag is limited and the
integrity check should be fast, the group will be represented by
a digest, computed by a hash code function. A good discussion
of hash functions in the context of RFID is [8]. This approach
enables full autonomous operation of both the association
points and the checkpoints.
B. Checking integrity of content phase
The integrity checking phase is done at the level of the
collective smart bin. The integrity checking phase considers
the inventory of all the wastes contained in a trash bag. The
integrity checking phase consists to verify if the hash value
computed with all the tag identiﬁers read by the RFID reader,
is equal to the integrity information stored in tag of the smart
trash bag, at the individual bin level.
The principle is to read all the tags identiﬁers ti of the
wastes of a given trash bag (sharing the same group id
gid), and verifying that the hash(t1, t2, ..., tn) = gid. If the
computed hash does not match the gid stored in the tags, the
group of waste in a trash bag is considered as invalid. If wastes
are removed from the trash bag, or if undesirables are put in
it, the collective container will not open, because the integrity
of the group of wastes inventory is violated.
RFID inventory would not require a line of sight with RFID
tag for reading its contents: it is an important feature of the
RFID inventory. This can be used to facilitate a checking
process for the integrity of trash bag content, at the level of
collective smart bin. It becomes possible to read all the tags
associated to many smart wastes contained in a smart trash
bag.
This behavior of the collective container may seem to be
very restrictive. At the application level, some adjustments of
behavior can be considered. For example, in the case where
the integrity information of the smart trash bag is not valid,
considering the set of all waste types, detected during the
RFID inventory of the reader: if all the types of set are
conformed to the type of wastes accepted by a container, the
container can also be open. Using the RFID technology, this
evolution of the system adds an automatic checking of the
content of each trash bag.
C. Certiﬁcation mechanism for the NFC and QR code ap-
proach
The certiﬁcation mechanism can also be applied to the
approach presented in Section III-B based NFC and QR
code technologies. To do this, it is necessary to duplicate
the information stored in the QR code of each waste to an
RFID tag also associated to the same waste. The integrity
information is computed using the identiﬁers stored in each
QR code associated to a piece of waste, and it is written
in the NFC tag associated to the smart trash bag using the
smartphone application of the user. The informations contained
in the tag will be used by the collective container presented in
Section III-D. The collective container will check the integrity
of the content of the trash bag, without rescanning the QR code
of each waste.
The checking operation is to compare the group signature
stored in the NFC tag of the trash bag, to the hash value
compute with all the identiﬁers detected during the RFID

9
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
inventory. If they are equal, the content of the trash bag is
valid, else the content of the trash bag is corrupted.
This certiﬁcation mechanism using the NFC and QR code
approach of the selective sorting remains cheaper, because the
RFID reader are not deployed by the households, but only on
the collective container.
V. SOME MORE COMPLEX SCENARIOS
Waste is an increasingly environmental issue for the so-
ciety. If it is not disposed and treated properly, it can be
detrimental to the living beings and the environment [2].
Managing the waste is a huge task, given its ever-increasing
volume generated. They could even be complicated at times
depending on the nature of waste. They come in many different
forms like biodegradable, biomedical, chemical, clinical, com-
mercial, electronic (e-waste), hazardous, industrial, nuclear,
sharp, toxic etc. Each of the categories has to be processed
differently. We refer to them as complex objects in this
article. Hence, sorting must be performed at the earliest
for performing appropriate treatment. However, as discussed
earlier, some waste contains potentially useful materials for
reuse, which are recycled. These need early separation through
sorting, to prevent their contamination by other waste types
and maximizing the amount of valuable recyclable materials
contained in them. Hence, sorting is a very important process
for waste management. In Sections V-A and V-B, we describe
two other scenarios for efﬁcient sorting.
A. Selective sorting
As described above, one of the aims for sorting is to
maximize the amount of recyclable materials like paper,
glass, plastic etc. We present another approach, which would
enable this aspect of maximization. Smart waste containing
the information about the amount of recyclables that could
be recovered from them. Their tags are encrypted with the
recyclable material classiﬁcation type identiﬁer and percentage
information; instead of weight proposed, similarly, in Section
III.
Consider the examples smart waste in Figure 13. The
cardboard box, glass bottle and plastic bottle are made of
recyclable materials. Each of their tags contain the information
that they are made of cardboard, glass and plastic with 48%,
97% and 83% respectively. This kind of information would
beneﬁt in taking preferential decisions when sorting. Suppose
a sorting process wants to gather glass (type identiﬁer 200102)
waste with atleast 85% purity. Among the three items in
ﬁgure, the glass bottle in the center satisﬁes the conditions in
respect of both, material and its quality. Hence, it would not be
possible to contaminate a sorting process with inferior or other
materials. As a matter of fact, contamination could also be the
other way; like, adding the bottle from above example for a
sorting process collecting low quality glass, between 40% and
75%. So, it is upto the sorting process to choose the purity
range (in %) of recyclable materials while collecting waste.
Practically, there are various waste composed of multiple
materials. A typical example of such form would be e-waste
Figure 13.
Representation of recyclable material percentage in the tag
memory.
or electronic waste. Computers, telephones, televisions, etc.;
all such electronic items contain recyclables and hazardous
materials. Plastic, glass, metal are some that can be extracted
for reuse. Hence, for such forms of waste, the above sorting
process requires some modiﬁcations to its conditions. The sort-
ing conditions must have ﬂexibility to accept items containing
multiple recyclable materials; unlike the process explained
in the preceding paragraph. Consider for example a sorting
process that accepts waste items containing glass (identiﬁer
200102) < 35% and plastic (identiﬁer 2001039) >50%. The
two conditions are represented by the two coloured circles in
Figure 14 with their combined at the intersection. The monitor
in the ﬁgure is tagged containing composition information of
type and quantity of materials used, i.e., 25% and 55% of
glass and plastic, respectively. The composition satisﬁes the
conditions set for the sorting conditions and hence would be
accepted.
Figure 14.
Representation of recyclable material percentage in the tag
memory.

10
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
B. Detecting hazardous interactions
Until Section V-A, we explained how RFIDs attached to
items store information regarding its quantative measures
(weight and percentage) of recyclable materials enabling ef-
ﬁcient sorting. The smart bin is a collective container that
has an embedded computing system to read and process the
tag data. However, there are other ways to perform sorting
for better waste management. The sorting objective is to
maximize on the concentration of recyclable materials for
value. An accumulation could be contaminated due to the
presence of other particular materials. This could render the
entire collection unﬁt for recycling. Consider for example a
glass bottle put into a paper or plastic bin. This would reduce
the recycled value of the collected paper or plastic items
[9]. Apart from mixing of materials, there could be physical
hazards reducing the value of collected items. A ﬂame caused
by an explosion from aerosol can in high temperatures can
ruin the collected paper or plastic materials. Disposal of such
unsafe items in the same waste bin could result in a snowball
effect of physical hazards. The remaining part of this section
describes a sorting process that would enable avoiding such
linked incompatibilities.
1) Principle: Self description of smart waste items contain
information about their properties using RFID tags. Based
on these properties, incompatibilities are computed among
a collection of items present locally. In this section, we
discuss its underlying principle. For the purpose, we begin
with organizing the waste domain in a speciﬁc manner for
making such inferences.
a) Describing waste items: The waste domain can be
categorized based on their various hazardous properties. There
are standards that specify the properties of waste materials and
categorizes them [10]. Although, discussion on such standards
is outside the scope of this paper, however, we utilize its idea
for categorization and use few examples of hazards related to
some of these categories.
Some examples of hazardous properties for this domain are
spark, explosion, toxic fumes, etc. and can be categorized
based on them. As discussed in the previous section, we are
interested to infer incompatibilities. So, it is essential to pick
the properties only that are relevant for interactions with other
items.
Figure 15.
Conditions to describe a category.
Figure 15 represents pictorially the data structure used for
describing waste categories. Its individual ﬁelds are described
as follows:
• under effect of: the condition(s) that holds the properties
that can inﬂuence the category
• can cause: this condition enlists the hazardous properties
that the category is capable of causing
• in presence of: this holds the external conditions, under
which the can cause properties occur; they are the phys-
ical environmental conditions that need to be captured
using sensors.
In the subsequent sections, we will use the same pictorial
representation to describe the waste categories or items in our
examples.
Let us take some scenarios of interactions between cate-
gories. First, let us take an example of simple incompatibility
between a pair of them. Suppose a category A can cause an
incidence (for instance say hazardous property X) that affects
a second category B. Hence, an incompatibility exists between
the categories A and B. Our second example is a slightly
more complex and realistic than the previous example. If the
category A causes the incidence (i.e., X) only in presence of
an external condition (let us name as C), makes it an important
augmentation to the scenario. Hence, the categories does not
pose to be incompatible if the condition C is unfavorable.
Both of these scenarios consider the incompatibility between
different categories where the hazardous property affects each
other. However, there are properties like explosion for exam-
ple, which have hazardous effect by itself. The situation can
be represented as a category that causes a hazardous property
that affects itself and may depend on the external condition.
b) Inferring incompatibilities: As described above, we
can self describe waste items accordingly. When a collection
of these items is present locally we can infer incompatibilities
based on the discussed scenarios. Sometimes objects are
located remotely and communicate within themselves and
other knowledge base using network infrastructure like the
Internet to make decisions. Such an idea is called Internet
of things (IoT) in the ﬁeld of pervasive computing. Our
approach in this paper, makes the required information that
describes waste domain available locally for inferences. Such
collective inferences could be made without using a network
for communication. We prefer to use the name for such a
situation as Intranet of Things (InoT) as it does not involve any
devices located remotely and differentiate to avoid confusion.
In Section V-B1a, we discussed the interaction scenarios
between pairs of categories based on hazardous properties.
Multiple such categories can constitute an InoT. The graph in
Figure 16 represents an example of InoT formed. The shaded
nodes represent some categories. They are connected by an
edge if they interact. The dotted edges represent interactions
that are unfavorable due to external conditions. One of the
external conditions was high temperature at the instance this
snapshot was drawn. Hence, the dotted edge encircled in
the ﬁgure representing an interaction under low temperature
becomes unfavorable. The ﬁrm edges represents favorable
interactions, which could be either the ﬁrst or second scenario
described in Section V-B1a. The shaded node with a self-loop,
which represents the last scenario of V-B1a, is favorable in this

11
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
case as the external condition is satisﬁed.
Figure 16.
InoT formed.
Finally, if a waste item belongs to one or more categories, it
would possess all their conditions. Hence, they could be used
for collective inferences also.
2) System Design: In this section, we describe design-
ing the system for making inferences locally. It essentially
means that all the information required are available from
self-describing waste without referring to remote database
or knowledge base. An alternative could be to distribute
the information partially among the waste items and a local
knowledge base, containing the common domain knowledge.
The waste items are identiﬁed by the system before inferring
on incompatibilities. We have chosen a commonly used archi-
tecture for our system, as shown in Figure 17 below.
Figure 17.
Commonly used Architecture for Systems.
We describe the components brieﬂy.
• Input: It is that point in the system where the waste items
are identiﬁed and added.
• Knowledge Base (KB): This contains all the required in-
formation to identify the items along with their properties.
It also updates its knowledge regarding the presence of
items that are being added to the system incrementally.
• Inference/Rules: This component of the model uses the
KB to reason out about the possible incompatibilities and
hazards. The inferences are added back to the KB.
• Output: It sends out notiﬁcations to communicate about
alerts and warnings to the users of the system.
Next, we elaborate on how the system works based on the
architecture and uses the principle discussed earlier in Section
V-B1.
a) Input: New waste items are added to the system.
They are afﬁxed with RFID tags only for the purpose of
identiﬁcation by the system, which contains a RFID reader
for scanning. The tags do not contain any such data that has
privacy concerns. They contain mostly the category informa-
tion.
b) Knowledge Base (KB): Machines can be made to
perform reasoning effectively provided it has the necessary
knowledge, which is machine readable. In cases of large do-
main knowledge with lots of factors inﬂuencing the reasoning,
using machines should have extra beneﬁts. Using ontologies
are a very good way to serve the purpose [11]. An ontology
consists of common set of vocabulary as shared information of
a domain. It includes machine-interpretable deﬁnitions of basic
concepts in the domain and relations among them [12]. Lately,
the development of ontologies has begun to ﬁnd many uses
outside the Artiﬁcial-Intelligence laboratories. They are being
commonly used on the World-Wide Web and ﬁnds applications
for sharing information widely in the ﬁeld of medicine.
The Web Ontology Language (OWL) is a World Wide
Web Consortium (W3C) Recommendation for representing
ontologies on the Semantic Web [13]. Presently, there are a lot
of ontology editors for OWL. Among them Prot´eg´e is a Java
based Open Source ontology editor. We used Prot´eg´e since we
found it to be an efﬁcient and user-friendly tool to prototype
our ontology rapidly. During the ontology development phase
we visualized the graphical representation of our OWL ontol-
ogy on the editor. The comprehensive Java API provided by
Prot´eg´e [14] was also an added advantage while developing
our stand-alone application in the later phase.
We have used an ontology based approach for the KB for
the reasons stated above. The properties causing incompati-
bilities must be described in the ontology. Apart from these,
other information like conditions in which the categories are
incompatible, possible hazards of incompatibility etc are also
stored in the ontology.
Due to the advantage for describing a domain easily, we
have used ontology based approach for describing the waste
domain. The ontology contains description of various cat-
egories with the conditions for hazardous properties. This
constitutes as the initial knowledge base of the system, which
is maintained locally. It updates itself as new items are added.
Additionally, the external conditions are also updated from
the environmental parameters from sensor data. The modelling
and design of the ontology is detailed in the paper [15].
c) Reasoning/Rules: Reasoners are a key component
of OWL ontologies. They are used for deducing implicit
knowledge by querying the ontology. In the recent years, rule

12
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
languages have been added on as a layer combined with ontol-
ogy, in order to enhance the reasoning capabilities. Semantic
web Rule Language (SWRL) is used to write rules expressed
in terms of OWL concepts and for reasoning about OWL
individuals. It provides a deductive reasoning speciﬁcation that
can be used for inferring new knowledge from the Knowledge
base.
The ontology, which acts as a KB in our architecture, con-
tain all the necessary information for reasoning. The principles
described in Section V-B1 for detecting incompatibilities be-
tween categories of waste items are implemented as ontology
rules. Our objective of inferring incompatibility or hazards
based on these rules are performed using OWL reasoners. The
reasoner springs into action each time the RFID reader detects
a tagged item. It infers if the incoming item has incompatibility
with the already present contents using the ontology KB. The
reasoner also provides the analysis, if found unsuitable.
3) Applications: In this subsection, we describe the system
using ontology as its local knowledge base to infer incompat-
ibilities on the principle of InoT. We think that it can be used
to infer incompatibilities among objects in various domains.
“Bin That Thinks” is a project, that is designed to have an
intelligent waste management solution based on item level
identiﬁcation. The goals are to improve recycling efﬁciency,
reducing waste processing cost and avoiding hazardous situa-
tions [16]. Though we have not assessed the ﬁnancial beneﬁts
ﬁguratively for using our system, the approach hints at the
beneﬁts qualitatively. Sorting waste items at the earliest retains
the purity of the recyclables. This reduces the cost of sorting
at a later stage in processing plants by waste management
companies like Veolia, which is usually passed on to the
consumers as penalties of the cities.
Figure 18.
Final Smart bin Prototype.
We have developed an application for the domain of waste
management using the system described in this paper. It can
be used to make inferences for incompatibilities and hazards
among the waste items present collectively at a place. They
may be situated inside a bin or a waste collecting vehicle
or at the processing plant. For very complex domains like
waste management, they are sometimes veriﬁed at every step
in the processing chain. Alternatively, when the processing is
performed at a single point, we consider the acceptance of
error up to some limit. Figure 18 shows a prototype of the
ﬁnal Smart bin that would identify the RFID tagged wastes and
make inferences from its contents. It contains an RFID reader,
an on-board processor, environment sensors for temperature,
pressure etc., an OWL ontology based knowledge base and
a display. The reader senses and reads the category when
an item is brought near the bin. Then the reasoner makes
required inferences using the KB before the bin actuates.
The appropriate lid opens for the user to dispose the item,
if it is found suitable with a green signal on the display.
Else, the display ﬂashes red along with the reasoning for
incompatibility. Figure 19 below shows a screenshot of our
application. It shows the instance when an incompatibility is
detected with two items present locally in the bin and the last
item that was scanned. It also displays the inferred reasoning.
Figure 19.
Hazard Detection Application for Waste.
VI. COMMUNICATION ARCHITECTURE OVERVIEW
The self-describing information collected at the level of
the collective containers are useful for the recycling service
provider. These information can used to enhance two aspects
of the recycling process:
• to optimize the waste collection scheduling by the truck
(it is not necessary to collect an empty container) and
monitor their waste inventory
• to adapt the treatment of the content of the bins (if a
container is polluted by an undesirable product, which
requires to have a speciﬁc treatment). For example, when
a bin collecting recyclable plastic has been polluted by
glass; requires careful handling during collection.
Obviously, it is necessary to communicate this information
before the waste collection. The self-describing information of
each collective container has to be transmitted to the recycling
service provider’s terminal, or to the truck driver collecting
waste from the bins.

13
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The communication process between smart collective con-
tainers is based on multi-hop wireless networks, as it is shown
on the top of Figure 20. In this communication architecture,
each collective container is a starting point of the multi-
hop network. The data of a given smart collective container
are routed from the smart container to the recycling service
provider’s terminal (or to the truck that collects waste from
the bins). So, the data hops through several communication
nodes before being received by the terminal. This architecture
(similar to Wireless Sensor Networks) is possible due to the
urban topology where each bin is very close to the others.
This non-centralized approach is less costly (ﬁnancially) than
using a GPRS connection between each collective container
and the service provider’s terminal. Also, each container’s
energy lifetime is very crucial and a balance among them
spread across the city is maintained [17].
The motive behind incorporating this feature enables ef-
ﬁcient waste management. The different types of waste col-
lected by the operators have associated monetary value. Hence,
they require sorting based on their types before being sold to
third parties who recycle and reuse them. While the sorting is
taken care at the bin level, the communication infrastructure
of bins help in efﬁcient collection and marketing. The operator
can have a global view of the current stocks of the by-product
materials (plastic, glass, etc.) in the bins for a given city, or
even country-wide. Finally, it can receive alerts in case of
incompatibilities or physical hazards in the waste containers,
as described in the previous section.
Figure 20.
Communication architecture.
Partners of the “BinThatThinks” project [16] have imple-
mented this ambient network with nodes offering an effective
radio-frequency communication. In a city, it is difﬁcult to
deploy a totally reliable ambient network of bins, due to envi-
ronment constraints. In fact, the communication graph (where
each vertex is a communication node, and each edge is a
communication link between two nodes) can not be connected.
Then, this architecture requires some communicating nodes
to have a GPRS connection for sending data from parts of
the ambient communication network, which are not directly
accessible to go through the ambient network. These nodes are
more costly, and use more energy. An energy efﬁcient protocol
for long life operation such as waste containers is presented
in [17]. This protocol maximizes the combined battery life of
the global infrastructure. Using this protocol, all the batteries
have to be replaced at the same time. To achieve that, it uses
an energy balancing system. This aspect is important for the
support of the network. To reduce the maintenance cost, it is
particularly interesting to ﬁx a replacement date of the set of
batteries of all nodes of the ambient network.
VII. PROTOTYPE DEMONSTRATION
Figure 21 shows the prototype demonstration developed
out of the collaborative project “Bin That Thinks” [16]. It
consists of prototypes developed for the various solutions of
the waste management chain discussed in this article and are
marked numerically. The ﬁrst shows two kitchen bins that
collecting different types of waste. The QR codes are scanned
using the smartphone placed in-between, which is also used
to write the inventory onto a NFC tag when a trash bag is
sealed. The second is the collective container that can scan the
inventory tag and verify with the bag contents for compliance.
Its optional screen displays the status and statistics. The later
two shows the required applications deployed for monitoring
in the truck and operator’s station, respectively. While the
former visualizes information about bins to be collected, the
later displays the waste management infrastructure over the
city map. Appropriate operations could also be done through
these applications. Finally, the entire demonstration can be
viewed in [18].
Figure 21.
Prototype demonstration: (1) Kitchen bin (2) Collective bin
showing status (3) Truck’s Application Screen (4) Operator’s status application
at city level.
VIII. RELATED WORK
Some other approaches using the RFID technology for
waste management systems does already exist. In [19], the
author discusses about several applications of the RFID in
the process of collecting wastes. The identiﬁcation of each
bin associated to a RFID tag is mainly mentioned. The tag
memory associated to each product has information about its
end-of-life management process; it is also illustrated in the
paper.
These approaches describe methods to identify each bin
using an identiﬁer stored in a RFID tag associated to the

14
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
container. In [20], [21], using this identiﬁer, the author as-
sociates each container to an external database, along with the
address of the household owning the container. The volume
of wastes estimate the quantity of waste produced by each
household. It is not an information based approach but a
physical measurement approach using sensor. The estimation
of the volume of waste is computed using an image analysis
from a picture of the content of the bin (when the lid of the
container is opened). The data are transferred using a GPRS
connection to an external database.
The idea developed in [22] is also very close to this
approach. In [22], a sensor measures the weight of the bin
placed on the truck, which collects the bins. It differs to our
approach, which uses a self-describing approach of wastes
to compute the weight of a container. At each collection
operation, the truck saves the weight of each bin. The RFID
tags are used to store an identiﬁer in a external database of
the owner of each container. This approach is not autonomous,
but using a Wiﬁ connection, the external database of waste
production is updated for each household. It becomes easy
to track the waste production of each household. In [23],
the author presents a real deployment of a system using an
approach similar to the approach described in [22].
The concept developed in [24] rewards consumers for
recycling empty packaging. The consumers are identiﬁed
by a RFID tag associated to their bin. Based on a weight
measurement of their recycling packaging, the consumer can
also log into his personal account to view how much they have
recycled, as well as statistics such as the number of trees saved
by their effort. Every month, the consumers are also rewarded
ﬁnancially.
Actually, selective sorting is not the priority of these appli-
cations. RFID is used by the container to identify its owner.
To ensure the selective sorting, it is required to track waste at
the item level. This is why item level RFID tagging can have
an important role to play in the selective sorting, provided
that the tag contain information about the components of the
waste.
In [25], the presented approach also considers that each
product is associated to an RFID tags from the begining of
its life cycle. The information stored in the RFID tags is
not used to help the user in the selective sorting process.
The authors use the RFID technology at another level of
the selective sorting process. The RFID tags associated to
each product is used to help the recycling service provider to
decide about the appropriate treatment of the product. In this
approach, the data stored in the RFID tags are used to access
the products’ information in several databases from its single
identiﬁer. This approach of using the RFID technology in the
recycling process is not autonomous. A major difﬁculty is
then to share conformable information about a product across
several databases, and during all the life cycle of the product.
We had presented a complex scenario where interactions be-
tween various waste categories are inferred. A similar ontology
based model is presented in [26]. Its application domain is in
delimited environments where objects are located and is used
to statically prevent/detect their dangerous spatial/temporal
conﬁgurations. Although it could be an alternative for our case,
the preciseness and complexity is on the higher side to be used
when considering our real-time scenarios; like a user waiting
with a smart trash bag for the bin to infer and open the lid for
disposal.
The main goal developed in [27] is to bring out the
environmental impact of RFID used in everyday life. The
author discusses RFID for the waste management: a system of
discounts and fees to stimulate responsible behavior of users
in the selective sorting process, is also discussed. The idea
of a bin, which collects some information about the wastes is
mentioned, although its implementation is not discussed.
Although RFID tags has started to ﬁnd widespread usage, it
is yet restricted to certain applications due to limitations from
the technology aspect. The reading reliability of tags vary due
to certain conditions; like for example a lot of tags placed
close to each other for reading. There are ongoing research
at many places. [28] is one of them that aims to identify the
challenges and propose solutions for better RFID usage in
pervasive computing.
More generally, in [29], the author predicts an important
development of RFID applications in the product recycling
chains.
The approach that we presented in this article, is innovative
in its information processing architecture: the properties are
directly attached to physical objects (waste, bags) and data
are ”moved” and processed along with the physical ﬂow of
wastes. Several systems for encoding the waste description are
discussed. The most simple way is to encode the component
of each waste in plain text.
Value addition
We presented an architecture that is novel compared to the
existing literature in the best of our knowledge. We have
demonstrated it through various use cases (smart waste and
trash bag, collective bin) in the context of waste management
domain. [30], [31] elaborates the same with other use cases.
Ours has the capability to perform operations autonomously,
unlike the current approaches that requires centralization for
either information or its processing. Its beneﬁts are in terms
of the following:
• cost cutting - Deployment and usage of industrial net-
work, required for such purposes is expensive. The cost
also reduces with having minimal number of centralized
servers. Also, we have proposed the reuse of the existing
RFIDs attached onto objects by manufacturers, retailers
etc. Self-describing the waste does away with the instal-
lation of sensors [22], [32].
• scalability and availability - Our approach has high scal-
ability and availability due to local processing and self-
description. Consider for example a scenario, where mes-
sages are transmitted over the network for information
and processing everytime a waste item is disposed; thus
dropping the scalability drastically. The working of such
a system would breakdown due to the unavailability of

15
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the servers and/or network.
• privacy - The information is aggregated naturally in
our architecture. This limits the users’ minute personal
information to reach the operator’s centralized servers, in
the waste ﬂow chain. It would be more acceptable for
a user that the operator knowing the total glass/plastic
waste he produces than the number of coke/juice bottles
disposed.
Hence, from the research perspective, our architecture clearly
demonstrates beneﬁts as well as novelty.
IX. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we demonstrated a new solution to enhance
waste collection efﬁciency using the RFID technology. Fully
relying on digital information attached to waste items, this
approach does not require any sensor, nor external information
system support, enabling high scalability, availability and
privacy. The presented system helps the user in correctly
sorting and disposing wastes.
Regarding the user-support provided during waste disposal,
he is directed towards the proper container for better sorting,
and is helped in case of errors. We presented two approaches
in this article; ﬁrst for simple waste composed of one principal
material, and the second for more complex waste composed
of several materials. Another contribution of this system is
to be able to report the contents of a bin. This information is
useful for waste processing operators, for example to optimize
waste collection scheduling, or to set up a special handling
when an undesirable product is detected somewhere. This
information is communicated to the operators using an ambient
communication network of smart bins.
The reported information about the content of each bin is
also a way to compute statistics of each type of waste in the
recycling process. The smart bins can precisely determine the
quantity of each type of waste produced by a household. It
should help people to contribute to a more efﬁcient sorting of
waste, and reuse valuable materials. By considering the value
of wastes produced by each household, it becomes possible to
make a retributive incentive system to encourage each user to
make the selective sorting of its wastes. This approach can also
help to plan waste collection in better ways and with provision
for operator interventions, in case of abnormal conditions.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Glouche and P. Couderc, “A smart waste management with self-
describing objects,” in SMART 2013, The Second International Confer-
ence on Smart Systems, Devices and Technologies, 2013, pp. 63–70.
[2] “The EUs approach to waste management,” April 2012 (accessed 17
May 2015, 21h13). [Online]. Available: http://ec.europa.eu/environment/
waste/index.htm
[3] H. Boileau and H. Bj¨ork, “Comparing household waste treatment
policies
between
two
medium
size
cities:
Bor˚as
(sweden)
and
chamb´ery (france),” in Proceedings of the 7th World Congress on
Recovery, Recycling and Re-integration, June 2006. [Online]. Available:
http://csp.eworlding.com/3r/congress/manu pdf/420.pdf
[4] “Veolia: Research and Development,” (accessed 17 May 2015, 21h129).
[Online].
Available:
http://environmentalpassion.com/Research and
development
[5] “Better Sorting for Better Recycling,” (accessed 17 May 2015, 21h39).
[Online]. Available: http://environmentalpassion.com/resource.php?id=
2239
[6] Assembl´ee des Chambres Franc¸aises de Commerce et d’Industrie,
“Classiﬁcation des d´echets,” November 2011 (accessed 17 May
2015, 21h10). [Online]. Available: http://www.enviroveille.com/public/
documents/nomenclaturedechets.pdf
[7] Y. Glouche and P. Couderc, “A robust RFID inventory,” in Proceedings
of the European Conference on Smart Objects, Systems and Technologies
(Smart SysTech 2012), Munich, Germany, june 2012.
[8] M. Feldhofer and C. Rechberger, “A case against currently used hash
functions in rﬁd protocols,” in Proceeding of RFID Security, RFID-
Sec’06, 2006, pp. 372–381.
[9] “A
way
forward
for
glass
recycling,”
(accessed
17
May
2015,
21h30).
[Online].
Available:
http://www.waste-management-world.com/articles/print/volume-10/
issue-1/features/a-way-forward-for-glass-recycling.html
[10] “European waste catalogue and hazardous waste list,” (accessed 17
May 2015, 21h31). [Online]. Available: www.environ.ie/en/Publications/
Environment/Waste/WEEE/
[11] M. Cambillau, E. El-Shanta, S. Purushotham, and G. Simeu, “Owl
ontology for solar uv exposure and human health,” Advances in Semantic
Computing, Eds. Joshi, Boley & Akerkar, vol. 2, pp. 32–51, 2010.
[12] T. Gruber et al., “A translation approach to portable ontology speciﬁca-
tions,” Knowledge acquisition, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 199–220, 1993.
[13] “World wide web consortium (w3c), “owl web ontology language
overview”,” (accessed 17 May 2015, 21h32). [Online]. Available:
http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-features/
[14] H. Knublauch, M. Horridge, M. Musen, A. Rector, R. Stevens, N. Drum-
mond, P. W. Lord, N. Noy, J. Seidenberg, and H. Wang, “The protege
owl experience,” in OWLED, 2005.
[15] A. Sinha and P. Couderc, “Smart bin for incompatible waste items,”
in ICAS 2013, The Ninth International Conference on Autonomic and
Autonomous Systems, 2013, pp. 40–45.
[16] “Bin That Thinks,” (accessed 17 May 2015, 21h33). [Online]. Available:
http://binthatthink.inria.fr
[17] D. Tony, N. Mitton, and M. Hauspie, “Energy-based Clustering for
Wireless Sensor Network Lifetime Optimization,” in WCNC 2013, The
Wireless Communications and Networking Conference, 2013.
[18] “Bin That Thinks prototype demonstration video,” (accessed 17 May
2015, 21h34). [Online]. Available: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=
daac0tFig34
[19] S. Abdoli, “Rﬁd application in municipal solid waste management
system,” in IJER International Journal of Envionment Research, vol. 3,
no. 3, July 2009, pp. 447–454.
[20] M. Arebey, M. Hannan, H. Basri, R. Begum, and H. Abdullah, “Inte-
grated technologies for solid waste bin monitoring system,” in Environ-
mental Monitoring and Assessment, vol. 177.
Springer Netherlands,
2011, pp. 399–408.
[21] M. Hannan, M. Arebey, H. Basri, and R. Begum, “Rﬁd application in
municipal solid waste management system,” Australian Journal of Basic
and Applied Sciences, vol. 4, no. 10, pp. 5314–5319, October 2010.
[22] B. Chowdhury and M. Chowdhury, “Rﬁd-based real-time smart waste
management system,” in Proceedings of the Australasian Telecommuni-
cation Networks and Applications (ATNAC 2007), December 2007, pp.
175–180.
[23] J. Wyatt, “Maximizing waste efﬁciency through the use of rﬁd,”
April 2008, Texas Instruments Incorporated. [Online]. Available:
http://www.ti.com/rﬁd/docs/manuals/whtPapers/wp lf hdx.pdf
[24] C. Swedberg, “Rﬁd Helps Reward Consumers for Recycling,” in RFID
Journal, February 2008. [Online]. Available: http://www.rﬁdjournal.
com/article/view/3936
[25] A. Parlikad and D. McFarlane, “Rﬁd-based product information
in end-of-life decision making,” in Control Engineering Practice,
vol. 15, no. 11, 2007, pp. 1348–1363. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0967066106001535
[26] D. Cacciagrano, F. Corradini, and R. Culmone, “Resourcehome: An rﬁd-
based architecture and a ﬂexible model for ambient intelligence,” in
Systems (ICONS), 2010 Fifth International Conference on, April 2010,
pp. 6–11.
[27] V. Thomas, “Environmental implications of rﬁd,” in Proceedings of the
2008 IEEE International Symposium on Electronics and the Environ-
ment, ser. ISEE ’08.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society,
2008, pp. 1–5.

16
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 1 & 2, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[28] “Pervasive rﬁd,” (accessed 17 May 2015, 21h40). [Online]. Available:
http://www.pervasive.cominlabs.ueb.eu
[29] D. C. Wyld, “Taking out the trash (and the recyclables): Rﬁd and the
handling of municipal solid waste,” in International Journal Of software
Engineering & Applications (IJSEA), vol. 1, no. 1, January 2010, pp.
1–13.
[30] A. Sinha, “Self-describing objects with tangible data structures,” Ph.D.
dissertation, Universit´e Rennes 1, 2014.
[31] “Self-describing objects with tangible data structures,” (accessed 17
May 2015, 21h42). [Online]. Available: http://videos.rennes.inria.fr/
soutenanceArnabSinha/indexSoutenanceArnabSinha.html
[32] A. F. Silva, G. L. Sandri, L. Weigang, R. L. de Queiroz, and M. C.
de Farias, “Irsom: Automated sorting of the waste from selective
collection using content based image retrieval and self-organizing maps.”

