279
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Developing a Computer-Based Vocational Training Environment that Complements 
the Weak Skills and Career Development of Trainees 
Norikatsu Fujita  
Ability Development Dept  
Polytecnic University of Japan 
Tokyo, Japan 
fujita@uitec.ac.jp 
Sho Aoki  
Ability Development Dept 
Polytecnic University of Japan 
Tokyo, Japan  
s.aoki0225@gmail.com 
Mahoro Ishihara  
Ability Development Dept 
Polytecnic University of Japan  
Tokyo, Japan 
m-ishihara@uitec.ac.jp 
 
Hiroshi Takeshita 
The Faculty of Health Science 
Tsukuba University of Technology  
Ibaraki, Japan 
takeshita@k.tsukuba-tech.ac.jp  
Hirotada Fukae  
Ability Development Dept  
Polytecnic University of Japan 
Tokyo, Japan  
fukae@uitec.ac.jp  
Ribun Onodera 
Ability Development Dept 
Polytecnic University of Japan 
Tokyo, Japan  
onodera@uitec.ac.jp
Abstract— The objective of this research is to construct a 
vocational training environment where “trainees” who need 
special consideration such as “developmental disorder” and 
“normal trainees” learn in the same classroom. In this study, 
we describe a method for developing and evaluating the 
assessment tool using 33 fundamental skills without any 
distinction between disabled and normal trainees. The 33 
fundamental skills was developed by decomposing 192 problem 
behaviors which were observed during vocational training by 
reductionism. In this verification, we developed an assessment 
tool that set 33 fundamental skills for the representative 
problem behavior and applied it to 15 trainees. Based on the 
trial results, we can confirm that (1) skills are frequently 
detected in the best trainees and that (2) the unevenness of the 
skills can be detected in the considered trainees. The academic 
achievement of this study is that it clarifies "the validity of the 
33 fundamental skills" and “the relation between the 33 
fundamental skills and behaviors.” Further, the vocational 
training 
instructors 
can 
find 
support 
and 
guidance 
corresponding to the skill characteristics of each trainee by 
learning the relation between the 33 fundamental skills and 
behaviors. 
Keywords-Vocational 
training; 
Theory 
of 
multiple 
intelligences; 
Assesment 
tool; 
Developmental 
disabilities; 
Polytechnic science. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
This study is an extension of our previous work [1], 
which was presented at the ACHI 2017 conference.  
Nowadays, 
vocational 
training 
(VT) 
instructors 
(hereinafter referred to simply as instructors) are increasingly 
encountering 
trainees 
needing 
special 
consideration 
(hereinafter referred to as consideration trainees (CTs)) such 
as people with developmental disabilities (PWDD). The 
proportion of the CTs in VT has increased remarkably 
making it essential to have instructors who understand their 
particular needs. Developmental disorder can be observed 
because of the “development of unbalanced innate brain 
functions” and “mismatch of involvement with the 
environment.” Thus, developmental disorders are considered 
to be distinct from personality. Developmental disorders 
include 
various 
types 
and 
symptoms 
such 
as 
ADHD(Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder), autism, 
Asperger syndrome, and learning disability. People with 
developmental disabilities are assumed to constitute 
approximately 6% of the population. In addition, one third of 
the people with developmental disability are considered to be 
2E (twice-exceptional) and possess some special talents. The 
instructors individually guide the trainees by considering the 
developmental disorders that are observed while verifying 
the operations in a small step. Further, the CTs can operate 
without any assistance from the instructors. Instructors need 
to use the good skills of CTs and supplement the weak points 
using the auxiliary equipment. Furthermore, it becomes 
possible to learn at an individual pace by constructing a 
computer-based individual training environment. The 
objective of this research is to develop a vocational training 
environment that learns through try and error using smart 
skills. 
In previous works [1][2], we reported on (i) the 
development of an assessment tool (hereinafter referred to 
simply as the tool) for assessing VT, (ii) the use of that tool 
for a simulation based on theoretical values (typical  

280
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TRANSFORMATION PROCESS (PTP) （REPEATED FROM REF. [2] ) 
 
 
 
 
TABLE I.  
CONCEPTUAL DETAILS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Psychological balance with users 
Reward by continuous interaction
Employment 
  support as 
   own job 
Participation
     in place
Awar eness of gaps 
Coping behaviors
Inte r est in dyad r elationship 
Motivation
Psychological balance in 
          organization
Skill development
Learning
        cycle
     From
 handicap to
individuality
   From
listening to
   asking
 Showing
posture to
  support 
  Instructing
Employment
      skills
T elling how
 others may
       feel
Negotiation
 with firms
Proposing
  support 
 strategies 
Consultation with
        seniors
Mental switching by
      questioning
       One
consideration
for one person 
       From
dissatisfaction
    to analysis
  Guilt for
deteriorated
  condition
Consciousness
   that I did 
  something
Mental switching by 
      questioning
Confidence by 
  user change
Strength by
experiences
Self-realization 
   by expertise 
Accomplishment
       by deeper
   understanding
Problem-coping 
          cycle 
transition
influence
cycle 
Helping
 others 
Anxiety &
preparation 
  Gaining 
knowledge
in training
Relief by no 
 di f ferences
Responsibility 
of influencing
          life 
Di fferent 
traits by
 person
Embarrassment
   to behavior
Complaints 
 from users
Irritating not
   going as 
   expected 
  Shock 
    and 
avoidance
  Directive
instructions
  Excessive
interventions
Unshown 
   anger
Interest in ways of intervention 
 
Figure 1.  
Psychological transformation process (PTP) for rehabilitation counselors (RCs)（Repeated from Ref. [2]） 
1 From diss atisfaction to analysis
A staff considers the causes of communication failure, withou t accusing the user.
2 Guilt for deteriorated cond ition
A staff feels respon sibility because his/her intervention led user cond ition deterioration .
3 Anxiety & preparation
A staff thinks facing with users’ disability traits as a part of own job.
4 Self-realization through expertise
A staff utilizes their experiences on their welfare and bu siness practice through suppo rting users.
5 Helping others
A staff finds value in suppo rting other’s life.
6 Shock and avoidance
A staff is shocked by user’s background and trying to leave the user to his colleagues.
7 From handicap to individuality
A staff acce pts the user’s disability traits as individuality.
8 From listening to asking
A staff receives the user’s reaction and asks the cause and background .
  9 Unsho wn ang er
A staff does not take attitude even if feels ang er in the user’s behavior, and diss atisfaction is accumulated.
10 Consciousness that I did something
A staff feels sad by thinking that he/she did something for the user but the user did not respond ed.
11 Accomplishment by deeper und erstand ing A staff feels accomplishment by und erstanding the background of a user’s behavior.
12 Awareness of gaps
A staff notices the gap between the go als and the reality.
13 Consultation with seniors
A staff can ask a senior whenever he / she can not und erstand the user’s behavior.
14 Relief by no differences
A staff pleasantly surprises because the users’ behaviors do not differ from his / hers.
15 One consideration for one person
A staff notices that each user needs one consideration.
16 Embarrass ment to behavior
A staff is surprised by the sudd en behavior of user and feel un comfortable.
17 Irritating not going as expected
A staff is irritated and exhausted, as having no sign of improvement of user’s cond ition.
18 Telling how others may feel
A staff tell a user ho w the user’s behavior is seen from the third party.
19 Mental switching by questioning
By being asked by seniors abou t the cause of user’s behavior, frustration willswitch to qu estion ing.
20 Gaining knowledge in training
A business -experienced staff learns basic knowledge of suppo rting persons with disabilities in training.
21 Propo sing suppo rt strategies
A mid-level staff creates and propo ses suppo rt plans each other in various viewpo ints.
22 Confidence by user change
A staff gains self-confidence by the prog ress of users.
23 Respon sibility of influencing life
A staff feels respon sible because his / her intervention influences the employment (life) of users.
24 Showing posture to suppo rt
A staff lets the user disclose though ts and circumstances by showing posture to suppo rt.
25 Instructing Employ ment skills
A business -experienced staff trains necess ary skills for employment to users.
26 Strength by experiences
By having experienced, a staff willnot be up set by the disastrou s background of individu al users.
27 Different traits by person
Since the situation of users is different for each person , basic knowledge is not app licable.
28 Negotiation with firms
A staff can negotiate with the company abou t employment of users.
29 Directive instructions
A staff instructs and requ ests at the ordinary workplace level to a user.
Concept
No
Definition (This phenomenon is that ...)

281
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
characteristics of disabilities) and (iii) an empirical 
evaluation of the tool. However, for ethical reasons, the field 
validation of the tool was targeted at the best trainees with an 
electrician’s license. In addition, we checked smart skills 
detection. For the present work, we obtained the consent of 
the ethics committee of the Polytechnic University of Japan 
(No. 607) to investigate the detection of weak skills and 
difference between the instructor-based and tool-based 
evaluation of the skills. In this study, the development 
procedure of the 33 fundamental skills and the verification 
result that has been applied to 15 trainees are described. 
Instructors can understand the support and guidance required 
for each trainee by learning the “relation between the 33 
fundamental skills and behaviors.” 
The study can be structured as follows: the contextual 
background, including relevant research and the problem 
corresponding to various CTs in VT is provided in Section II. 
Section III describes the development procedure of the 
assessment tool whereas Section IV describes the result of 
the assessment tool verification. The conclusion and the 
future work are mentioned in Sections V and VI.  
 
II. 
CONSIDERATION OF THE VOCATIONAL 
TRAINING ISSUES FOR GUIDANCE TO 
CONSIDERATION TRAINEES  
VT for PWDD is based on individual support, whereas 
general VT is based on collective education. In case of the 
inclusive education provided in elementary and middle 
schools 
response 
to 
intervention 
(RTI) 
has 
been 
recommended worldwide. RTI provides a three-layer 
guidance including (1) high-quality overall guidance that can 
be understood by 80% of the students, (2) group guidance for 
15% of the students, and (3) individual guidance for the 
remaining 5% of the students. However, in case of inclusive 
education, it is not possible to provide flexible support and 
guidance because there is no scale of rating skills that can be 
used by both disabled and normal students. In this Section, 
we describe the problem associated with offering practical 
guidance to CTs in VT from the perspective of special 
education. In previous work, we described the RC 
psychological transformation process (PTP) in detail [2]. 
Here, we summarize that work. 
Figure 1 shows the RC PTP schematically while Table 
Ⅰ lists the associated concepts (repeated from Ref. [2]). This 
PTP begins with RCs being interested in investigating the 
causes of problems dealing with PWDD. Then, RCs will 
“skill formation” against “user” and “organization.” An RC 
can become experienced through this learning cycle. 
However, if a problem-coping cycle (PCC) occurs, an RC 
can become frustrated that the trainees are failing to meet 
her/his expectations and that an RC may be unable to get out 
of PCC. The plight of PWDD worsens and an RC who is 
interested in methods of intervention falls into a PCC as 
she/he adopts coping behavior. To escape from such a PCC, 
it is necessary to make a psychological balance in 
organization by consulting with seniors and mental switching 
by questioning. In other words, the theoretical model shows 
the need to improve the environment of “psychological 
balance in organization” and smooth circulation of the 
learning cycle. According to a skilled RC, it is important to 
focus on the smart skills as well as the weak skills of trainees 
while supporting PWDD. For example, the following steps 
support the skills for RCs: (i) (as preparations to promote 
self-recognition) praise the trainee and give her/him a 
challenge that requires smart skills; (ii) give the trainee a 
weak-skill task and make her/him aware of the weak skills; 
and (iii) provide advice on using smart skills and 
technologies to supplement weak skills. 
This PTP allows us to understand the following three 
problems in VT. 
1) There is no fundamental scale on which to assess the 
characteristics of the trainees. For example, in architecture 
training, if there are trainees who often taunt the hands on the 
side that supports the nails by mistake when nailing, "there is 
no concentration", "clumsiness", "Amblyopia." It will speak 
on various measures such as scale. In VT, there is no 
fundamental measure of the disability characteristics 
supported by clinical data (characteristics of disabilities).   
2) There is a lack of information on teaching methods in 
inclusive education. Also, in collective education, there is a 
problem, because the individual support is difficult to 
provide, unless it is open to having disabilities. It is 
necessary to clarify the way of guidance in the collective 
learning based on a fundamental scale for understanding the 
characteristics of the trainees. 
3) In VT, there is a shortage of instructors who 
understand how to give guidance to CTs. Consultation with 
the expert instructor is indispensable for escaping from a 
PCC. Also, if it is difficult for one faculty member to 
respond to CTs, the team must be able to deal with them. 
A. Research Background 
In most VT establishments, it is rare to encounter CTs 
who hold a disability certificate, and most instructors are not 
used to cooperating with rehabilitation counselors (RCs). In 
addition, the material that RCs provide tends to be in the 
form of support recommendations based on disability 
characteristics which are often difficult for instructors in the 
field to convert into practical guidance. 
First, we describe why the existing assessment tools are 
problematic. Table Ⅱ lists three intelligence tests and a 
social skills test; K-ABC [3] is an intelligence test that is 
intended for use in education. However, because its target 
age is 2-12 years, K-ABC cannot be used in VT. WISC-III 
[4] and WAIS-IV [5] are used in VT establishments for 
people with disabilities and in vocational rehabilitation 
centers mainly for medical purposes, such as diagnosing 
developmental disorders. However, from an ethical 
perspective, it would not be appropriate to use WISC-III or 
WAIS-IV in VT establishments that cater for many trainees 
who do not have a diagnosed disability. Social Skill is a skill 
test to measure conformity to society, but it can only 
measure some skills that are necessary for VT. Therefore, as 
just described, none of the existing assessment tools are 
suitable for VT. To establish a transfer from support to 
guidance, we require an assessment tool helping to (i)  

282
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE II.  
THREE INTELLIGENCE TESTS AND A SOCIAL 
SKILLS TEST 
Field
Target
Age
K-ABC
Education
Age 2 to 12
WISC-4
Medical
Age 5 to 16
WAIS-3
Mediacal
Age 16 to 89
Social Skills Education /
Company
Skill
Free Age
Intelligence
Intelligence
Intelligence
 
TABLE III.  
MAIN MEASUREMENT METHODS OF ASSESSMENT 
Method
Description
Behavior Checklist
Measurement by checklist with your subjectivity.
Psychological measure
Measurement by questionnaire using psychological
Measurement by observing for subject's activities.
CBT
(Computer Based Testing)
Measurement by computer using display a task.
(Self-assessment)
(actual behavior)
(Self-assessment)
(actual behavior)  
 
investigate problem behavior scene, (ii) clarify smart skills 
and weak skills from that scene, and (iii) evaluate the 
presence or absence of those skills. To link from "support" to 
"guidance", it is necessary to investigate problem behavior 
scenes, to clarify the lack of skills from that scene. 
Table Ⅲ  lists the main measurement methods of 
assessment. There are two types of measurement methods, 
namely evaluation by self-assessment and evaluation by 
actual behavior. For the evaluation by self-assessment, we 
have action checklists and psychological measures. However, 
that type of evaluation is problematic, because it is difficult 
to account for respondents who make false or socially 
desirable answers. Meanwhile, the evaluation by actual 
behavior involves real-time behavior observation and 
computer-based testing (CBT). The behavior observation is 
reliable, but evaluation takes time, and it can be difficult to 
make a rating scale. Meanwhile, most assessments based on 
psychological measures do not measure actual behavior or 
reactions. Hence, it is difficult to ensure that such self-
assessed evaluation is both reliable and valid. Also, Behavior 
observation is based on obstacle characteristics. The 
objective of this research is to construct a vocational training 
environment 
where 
“trainees” 
who 
need 
special 
consideration such as “developmental disorder” and “normal 
trainees” learn in the same classroom. Herein, the ideal 
assessment tool for VT is one that uses CBT to measure 
skills from actual behavior. However, from an ethical 
perspective, it will be difficult to use such CBT in actual VT. 
Instructors could use the assessment tool as a self-learning 
tool helping them to learn the skills of CTs. 
B. Development procedure 
The tool under consideration evaluates the skills of 
trainees by CBT from behaviors in restaurant- part-time jobs. 
The trainee’s skill evaluation scale extracted 192 cases [6] 
that occurred in VT to extract the 33 fundamental skills 
causing problem behaviors. If all the fundamental skills are 
smart ones, it is a trainee with sense. However, if a trainee 
shows unbalanced fundamental skills, she or he is likely to 
be a CT. If all skills are weak, all actions are problem 
behavior. 
Figure 2 shows the hierarchical structure of the 
fundamental skills based on reductionism. A skill established 
in the upper hierarchy can be rewritten as a skill group in the 
lower hierarchy. In this way, the tool-design philosophy 
leads to an experimental design method of assembling the 
whole with fewer samples than covering all the elements in 
the hierarchy. The top layer of the tool comprises six of the 
eight intelligence categories in the theory of multiple 
intelligences (MI) [7][8]. We excluded the naturalist and 
musical/rhythmic categories, because they are not related to 
VT. By classifying the fundamental skills according to MI 
theory, we can take advantage of practical best practices 
using MI [9][10]. 
Table Ⅳ displays examples of MI practices [11]. The 
intelligence includes genetic limits as nuances. For this 
reason, we reconsider the invisible intelligence as skill. This 
table shows the direction of guidance in the framework of 
MI. When designing VT, we must pay attention to the smart 
skills of CTs. However, it is difficult to shift from that 
information to guidance. Therefore, we must bring together 
the best practices in MI and show them to the instructors. As 
an example of best practice in the bodily/kinesthetic category, 
we have the Total Physical Response that learns the language 
with the body, as advocated by Asher [12]. For instance, 
when studying English with Total Physical Response, one 
says the sentence “open the door” while physically opening a 
door. By collecting such a best practice, we can provide 
instructors with many examples of guidance. We explain this 
further in Section IV.  
According to the Benesse survey [13], the favorite 
subject of the students in junior high school is physical 
education (over 60%), unchanged from 1990 to the present 
(2017). From this survey, it is efficient to target the bodily-
kinesthetic component of MI. For example, the group index 
(five-point evaluation) by MI of Trainee A in descending 
order is bodily-kinesthetic (4.8), visual-spatial (4.5), logical-
mathematical (4.0), verbal-linguistic (2.7), interpersonal 
(2.5), and intrapersonal (2.3). The instructors refer to the 
bodily-kinesthetic, visual-spatial, and logical-mathematical 
components of MI practice (Figure 3). Next, the instructors 
consider a more-detailed teaching method from the 
fundamental skills. 
C. Guarantee of reliability and validity 
Table Ⅴ summarizes all the scenes of this assessment 
tool. We measure multiple skills in one scene of the 
assessment while the tool has 37 scenes in total. The problem 
types are “work on computers” (nos. 6 - 17), “questions 
asking for behavior” (nos. 1, 2, 5, 18 - 37), and “free 
description” (nos. 3, 4). Numbers 13 and 15 cover the 
difficult subject of recognizing numbers and objects. This 
was added based on the advice from instructors specialized 
in teaching developmental disabilities at a school for people 
with disabilities. “Questions asking for behavior” has 
become a choice of five questions, but the “free description” 

283
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 2.  
Hierarchical structure of fundamental skills. 
PRACTICES BY ARMSTRONG 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE IV.  
EXAMPLES OF MULTIPLE INTELLIGENCES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Skill 
Linguistic
Logical-Mathematical
Visual-Spatial
Bodily-Kinesthetic
Interpersonal
Intrapersonal 
Teaching 
Activities
(example)
Teaching
Materials
(example)
Instructional
Strategies
lectures, discussions, 
word games, 
storytelling,choral reading, 
journal writing 
brainteasers, problem solving, 
science experiments, 
mental calculation, 
number games, critical thinking 
visual presentations, 
art activities,
imagination games, 
mind-mapping, 
metaphor, visualization
hands-on learning, drama,
dance, sports that teach, 
tactile activities,
relaxation exercises 
cooperative learning,
peer tutoring,
community involvement, 
social gatherings, simulations
individualized instruction,
independent study, 
options in course of study, 
self-esteem building 
books, recorders, 
typewriters, stamp sets, 
book on cd 
calculators,
math manipulatives, 
science equipment, 
math games
graphs, maps, pictures 
video,Lego sets, 
art materials, 
optical illusions, cameras
building tools, clay, 
sports equipment,
manipulatives, 
tactile learning resources
board games, party supplies, 
props for role-plays
self-checking materials,
journals,
materials for projects
read about it, write about it,
talk about it, listen to it
quantify it, 
think critically about it, 
put it in a logical framework, 
experiment with it
see it, draw it, visualize it, 
color it, mind-map it 
build it, act it out, touch it, 
get a “gut feeling” of it, dance it 
teach it, collaborate on it, 
interact with respect to it
connect it to your personal life, 
make choices with regard to it,
reflect on it 
 

284
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE V.  
ALL SCENES OF THIS SYSTEM 
Scenes
Money calculation (easy)(normal)
Responding to customers who do not need receipts
Response to complaints(1)
Preparation of children's chair
Correspondence when cash register is congested
Confirmation of correct customer service(1)(2)
Identification of single-byte and double-byte characters
Select 10 match bars and make "TEN" letters
Distinguish line width
Nervous breakdown game
No
Greeting according to reality scene
Answering about driving a bicycle
Answer hobby (free description)
Sense of value of life and feeling fun (free description)
Confirmation of fear of contact with others
Complementing hidden parts of numbers (easy)(normal)
Find mistakes in objects (easy)(normal)(difficult)
1
2
3
4
5
6-7
8
9
10
11-13
14
15-17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24-25
26-27
28
29
30
31
32
33-34
35
36
37
Memorize number(easy)(normal)(difficult)
Memorize of conversation
Selection of suitable clothes
Confirm priorty of work(1)(2)
Confirm priorty of work
Explanation of reason(1)
Flexible response(customer service)
Customer service
Response to complaints(2)
Correspondence when praised by customers
Responding to customers when a other card is presented
Explanation of reason(2)
 
 
is 
not 
subject 
to 
tool 
evaluation. 
The 
standard 
implementation time is 20 min. The tool was developed 
using the e-learning authoring tool Articulate Storyline [14]. 
Skills are subjective. The guarantee reliability and 
validity of the system by formative evaluation. The 
procedure for developing the tool consists of (i) defining the 
theoretical composition concept based on Card’s cognitive 
information processing (CIP) model [15]. All the 192 cases 
that occurred in the field of VT can be explained by this 
diagram. Card’s CIP model is renowned in the field of 
cognitive science and can be used to understand the 
intellectual system as well as the nature of intelligence from 
the viewpoint of information processing; further, the 
procedure comprises (ii) setting the scenes and creating the 
options, and (iii) repeated trials with 15 subjects to ensure 
tool reliability and validity (formative evaluation). 
Fig. 3 shows an example of formative evaluation of 
"questions asking for behavior." We set option "I think that it 
is better for someone to help." Because, in actual training, 
one subject always helped the troubled trainee. However, the 
subject chose "I think that it is better to hurry." From 
interview with the subject answered “I am under training, so, 
I can not do selfish." In the formative evaluation of this 
scene, instead of changing the options, we changed the point 
of assignment to the options. From such formation 
evaluation, we increased the reliability of the system. 
Formative evaluation was conducted twice on average for 15 
subjects, and a total of 67 improvements. 
III. 
VERIFICATION EXPERIMENT 
A. Detection of Trainees Needing Special Consideration 
The tool evaluates the existence of the fundamental skills 
that are necessary for VT. This tool does not detect 
insufficient academic ability related to knowledge learned in 
middle school or high school. 
Table Ⅵ displays the results of evaluating the skills of 15 
trainees with a score in the range 1 - 5, where a score of less 
than 3 corresponds to a weak skill. The assessment was 
carried out in a computer room. In Table Ⅵ, the CT is 
trainee G, who had the lowest total score in the verification 
experiment. Also, the trainee G had three group indexes less 
than 3. In descending order, the group index by MI of trainee 
G (five-point evaluation, bodily-kinesthetic is scored as only 
1 or 5) is bodily-kinesthetic (5.0), visual-spatial (3.7), 
interpersonal (3.2), intra-personal (2.9), verbal-linguistic 
(2.7), and logical-mathematical (2.5). In descending order, 
the trainee G’s smart-skill group was bodily-kinesthetic, 
visual-spatial, 
and 
interpersonal. 
Trainee 
G’s 
smart 
fundamental skills (excluding bodily-kinesthetic) were 
“compensating for missing or lacking data,” “recognition of 
parallel lines,” “recognizing gist of visual information,” “link 
with experience,” and “toggle feelings.” Interestingly, the 
trainee G was correct while performing the difficult task of 
recognizing the numbers and objects (nos. 13 and 15).   
Figure 4 shows an object-recognition task (no. 13), 
whereas Figure 5 displays a task involving short-term 
numerical memory (no. 15). Only four trainees answered 
these two difficult problems correctly. 
By contrast, the weak fundamental skills of trainee G 
were “understanding risky behavior,” “understanding 
demonstrative 
words, ”  
“ understanding 
abstract 
expressions,” and so on. The trainee should be aware of 
these weak fundamental skills and repeat the exercises while 
using complementary means and auxiliary tools, if necessary.     
As described above, the ability to detect a CT from MI 
group and fundamental skills can be confirmed. 
B. Differences Between the Instructor-based Evaluation 
and Tool-based Evaluation 
Guiding a trainee begins with understanding her/his 
smart skills. Table Ⅶ shows the evaluation of trainee G by 
the instructors and tool. The instructors created the 
fundamental skills evaluation sheet. The fundamental skills 
evaluation sheet can be found in the appendix. The 
instructors were asked to indicate a smart skill of trainee G 
with the symbol “○” and a weak skill with the symbol 
“×”. There were no fundamental skills that completely 
corresponded between the instructor- and tool-based 
evaluations; in this case, the instructors reported no smart  

285
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 3.  
An example of formative evaluation of "questions asking for behavior." 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE VI.   EVALUATION RESULTS OF 15  TRAINEES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Even though the customer is waiting, the cashier is working
slowly. What do you think?
(1) I think that it is better to be kind to customers.
(2) I think that it is better to hurry.
(3) I think that it is good to be at my pace.
(4) I think that it is better for someone to help.
(5) I do not know.
Fundamental Skills
Scoring list of each option
Vl1-1
Lm3-1
Vs2+1
Vs5+1
Ie5-1
Ir4-1
Ir5-1
Ir6-1
Option (2)
Option (3)
Option (4)
Vl1+1
Vl3+1
Vl5+1
Lm2+1
Lm3+1
Lm5+1
Vs2+1
Vs5+1
Ie3+1
Ie4+1
Ie5+1
Ir4+1
Ir5+1
Ir6+1
Option (5)
Vl1-1
Vl3-1
Vl5-1
Lm3-1
Lm5-1
Vs2+1
Vs5-1
Ie3-2
Ie4-1
Ie5-2
Ir4-2
Ir5-1
Ir6-2
Vl1+1
Vl5+1
Lm2+1
Lm3+1
Lm5+1
Vs2+1
Vs5+1
Ie1+1
Ie2+1
Ie3+1
Ie4+1
Ie5+2
Ir4+1
Ir5+1
Option (1)
 
*Vl  (Ave)
Vl1
Vl2
Vl3
Vl4
Vl5
*Lm (Ave)
Lm1
Lm2
Lm3
Lm4
Lm5
Lm6
Lm7
*Vs (Ave)
Vs1
Vs2
Vs3
Vs4
Vs5
*Bk (Ave)
Bk1
Bk2
Bk3
Bk4
*Ie (Ave)
Ie1
Ie2
Ie3
Ie4
Ie5
*Ir (Ave)
Ir1
Ir2
Ir3
Ir4
Ir5
Ir6
Ir7
Total
139
136
125
141
138
138
10 6
140
140
137
129
138
138
122
142

286
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 4.  
An object recognizing numbers and objects 
Figure 5.  
A task involving short term numerical 
Please compare the left and right pictures and look for mistakes.
Please click on a different part. There are three places in all.
Within 30 seconds　
 
 
 
Please choose the same number as above.
Within 10 seconds
 
 
 
skills for trainee G. However, the system can be used to find 
the five smart skills of the consideration trainee G. 
On the basis of interviewing the instructors, we 
considered which factors caused the differences in the skills 
evaluation of trainee G among the instructors and why no 
smart skills were reported. We found that the differences in 
evaluation were due to the training content. For example, 
even though explaining trainee G’s weak skills in a causal 
relationship, other instructors just said that they did not 
experience such a scene. In particular, the instructor E was 
responsible for training and employment, and therefore he 
(she) had the most-frequent contact with trainee G, whereas 
the instructor E’s evaluation of skills was similar to that of 
the tool. Instructor E observed that Vs4 was ×. However, 
the system evaluated Vs4 as ○ . Based on this point, 
instructor E evaluated that trainee G sketched a figure using 
left and right reverse letters and straight lines that overlapped 
in the report.  
 
 
 
TABLE VII.  
EVALUATION OF TRAINEE G BY INSTRUCTORS 
AND SYSTEM 
 
 
Furthermore, we found that the reason why no smart 
skills were recorded for trainee G was a matter of prejudice. 
On the basis of interviewing the instructors, we heard many 
opinions about trainee G, such as “Could not understand 
even after explaining many times” and “Only have to 
respond with individual guidance.” Also, all the instructors 
were surprised when we told them that trainee G was the top 
of the class for the skill of finding the different parts of the 
two pictures (no.13) and short-term numerical memory 
(no.15).  
Statistically, 6% of all people have a developmental 
disability. Moreover, it is said that one-third of that 6% is 2E 
with special talent. Therefore, if there are 20 trainees in a 
class, there should be at least one CT, and the instructors 
need to identify that person’s smart skills as soon as possible. 
IV. 
FUTURE WORK 
Instructors are struggling to establish the transfer from 
support to guidance. The present research aims to allow CTs 
to work on tasks without the assistance of instructors. 
Therefore, the instructors must deal with the diversity of  

287
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
MI BEST PRACTICES 
TABLE VIII.  AN EXAMPLE OF CONTRADICTION MATRIX FOR  
 
 
trainees adequately. In future work, we intend to structure 
the best practice in MI in the form of a contradiction matrix, 
as shown in Table Ⅷ. A contradiction matrix is considered 
to be a notational method for solving two contradictory 
matters, and the TRIZ [16] contradiction matrix is 
considered to be the best-known example. MI practice has 
been focused only on intelligence which is smart. As 
discussed herein, we consider intelligence replaced with skill. 
Then, by understanding what an effective teaching means, 
considering both smart and weak skills, we think that the 
instructors will be able to respond flexibly to trainee 
diversity by using such a confrontation matrix.  
We also intend to fill the matrix by adopting 
approximately 40 cases (because the TRIZ contradiction 
matrix selects 40 elements) from previous research into 
educational practice.  
In recent years, the trend has been to evaluate the 
effectiveness of learning using t-tests and effect size [17]. 
Many academies are obliged to show the effect size, and here 
we examine the effect size and t-tests. To calculate the effect 
size, a spreadsheet is available for calculating the effect size  
(http://www.mizumot.com/stats/effectsize.xls), and it is used 
in many fields. The effect size is a standardized version of 
the average difference between groups, the strength of the 
relationship between variables, etc., so as not to be 
influenced by the data unit. An effect size of 1.0 means that 
it is 1 SD(standard deviation) apart. That indicates that an 
effect size of 1.0 means that the SD has increased by 10. 
Using deliberate practice [18] to improve knowledge about 
physics was reported to have an effect size of 2.5 [19]. The 
educational methods that use deliberate practice attract 
attention. Other science and engineering classroom studies 
have reported [20] effect sizes of less than 1.0. An effect size 
of 2, obtained with trained personal tutors, is claimed to be 
the largest observed for any educational intervention [21]. In 
creating our confrontation matrix, it will be important to 
survey practical cases involving high effect size. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The objective of this research is to construct a vocational 
training environment where “trainees” who need special 
consideration, such as “developmental disorder,” and  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“normal trainees” learn in the same classroom. In this study, 
we described the development and verification of the 33 
fundamental skills scale without distinguishing between 
disabled trainees and normal trainees. The 33 fundamental 
skill scale was divided by decomposing 192 problem 
behaviors, which could be observed in vocational training by 
reductionism. In the verification, an assessment tool that set 
33 fundamental skills to represent the problem behavior was 
developed and applied to 15 trainees. Based on the trial 
results, we can confirm that (1) the skills are frequently 
detected in the best trainees and that (2) the unevenness of 
skills can be detected in the consideration trainees. The 
academic achievement of this research is that it clarified “the 
validity of the 33 fundamental skills” and “the relation 
between the 33 fundamental skills and behaviors.” Further, 
the vocational training instructors can find support and 
guidance corresponding to the skill characteristics of each 
trainee by learning the relation between the fundamental skill 
scale and behaviors. 
The remaining tasks ensure further improvement of the 
accuracy by verifying the tool on a large scale and by 
collecting the examples of best practices in MI. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant 
Number JP26350303. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Fujita, H. Takeshita, H. Fukae, S. Aoki, K. Matsumoto, T. 
Murakami, and M. Hoshino, "A System to Depict the 
Cognitive Process of Trainees based on Multiple Skill 
Parameters-System validation involving normal individuals with an 
electrician’s license," Proceedings of The Tenth International 
Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions，
pp. 114-121, 2017. 
[2] N. Fujita, H. Takeshita, H. Fukae, S. Aoki, K. Matsumoto, T. 
Murakami, and M. Hoshino, "A System to Depict the 
Cognitive Process of Trainees based on Multiple Skill 
Parameters," Journal of Communication and Computer, 
vol.14(2), pp. 73-83, 2017. 
[3] S. A. Alan, O. L. Kaufman, F. J. Elizabeth,  and L. K. Nadeen, 
"Essentials of KABC-II Assessment," John Wiley & Sons, 
2005. 
weak 
smart 
Linguistic 
Logical-
Mathematical
Visual-Spatial
Bodily-
Kinesthetic 
Interpersonal
Intrapersonal 
Linguistic
Logical-
Mathematical 
Visual-Spatial
Bodily-
Kinesthetic 
Interpersonal
Intrapersonal 
2,5,19 
12,15,19,22 
7,8,11,15 
:
:
: 
: 
:
:
: 
2,18,19,35 
: 
: 
: 
:
:
: 
:
:
: 
: 
: 
:
:
: 
: 
:
: 
:
:

288
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[4] D. L. Speece, L. P. Case, and D. E. Molloy, "first gate to 
learning disabilities identification," Disabilities Research & 
Practice,vol.18, pp. 147-156, 2003. 
[5] P.D.Flanagan, and A.S.Kaufman, "Essentials of WISC-IV 
Assessment," Hoboken, 2009. 
[6] Japan Organization for Employment of the Elderly，Persons 
with Disabilities and Job Seekers,"Effective vocational 
training examples for people with developmental disabilities， 
" Research ReportNo.119..Japanese, 2007. 
[7] H.Gardner, "Multiple Intelligences: The Theory in Practice," 
Basic Books; Reprint Edition edition, 1993. 
[8] J. M. Sanchez, G. J. Alvarez, M. A. Davila, and V. Mellado, 
"Teaching Technology: From Knowing To Feeling Enhancing 
Emotional and Content Acquisition Performance Through 
Gardner’s Multiple Intelligences Theory in Technology and 
Design lessons," Journal of Technology and Science 
Education pp. 58-79, 2017. 
[9] L. Bendt, and J. Nunan, "Enhancing Academic Achievement 
through Direct Instruction of Social Skills," Saint Xavier 
University & SkyLight Professional Development Field-
Based Master's Program, pp. 39-62,1999. 
[10] D. K. Ellis, K. A. Ellis, and L. J. Huemann, "Improving 
Mathematics Skills Using Differentiated Instruction with 
Primary and High School Students," Saint Xavier University 
& Pearson Achievement Solutions, Inc. Field-Based Master's 
Program, pp. 1-118, 2007. 
[11] T. Armstrong, "MULTIPLE INTELLIGENCES in the 
Classroom," Alexandria,Virginia USA, 2009. 
[12] J.Asher, "Children’s first language as a model for second 
language learning," Modern Language Journal, vol.56, pp. 
133-139, 1972. 
[13] Benesse Corpration, Favorite subject / activity ranking(in 
Japanese only): 
http://berd.benesse.jp/up_images/research/5kihonchousa_date
book2015_p27.pdf. Accessed on Movenber 6th, 2018. 
[14] Articlute Storyline: 
http://www.articulate.com. Accessed on Movenber 6th, 2018. 
[15] S. Card, and T.Moran, "The Psychology of Human Computer 
Interaction," Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,1983. 
[16] Z. Hua, J. Yang, S. Coulibaly, and B. Zhang. "Integration 
TRIZ with problem-solving tools: a literature review from 
1995 to 2006," International Journal of Business Innovation 
and Research. Vol.1, No.1, pp. 111-128, 2006. 
[17] C. Woolston, "Psychology journal bans P values," Nature, 
Vol.519, pp. 9. , 2015. 
[18] K. A. Ericsson, R. T. Krampe,  and C. T. Romer, "The Role 
of Deliberate Practice in the Acquisition of Expert 
Performance," Psychological Review, vol. 100. No. 3, pp. 
363-406, 1993. 
[19] L. Deslauriers, E. Schelew, and C. Wieman, "Improved 
Learning in a Large-Enrollment Physics Class," Science, Vol 
332, pp. 862-864. , 2011. 
[20] J. Price,  M. Boodhwani, P. Hendry, and B.K Lam, "A 
randomized evaluation of simulation training on performance 
of vascular anastomosis on a high-fidelity in vivo model: The 
role of deliberate practice," The Journal of Thoracic and 
Cardiovascular Surgery, Vol. 142, No. 3, pp. 496-501, 2011. 
[21] J. Mervis ,"Transformation Is Possible If a University Really 
Cares," Science, Vol 340, pp. 292-296, 2013. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

289
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
APPENDIX 
 
The Fundamental skills evaluation Sheet
Step1： Write
 on a weak unit(perceptual,cognitive,motion,emotion).
Step2： Write□on smart skill
 on weak skill.
Step3： Write each unit (free description).
Step4： Write guidance and support (free description).　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　
Date：　　　　　　Name:
■Weak detection of perceptual system
■Smart skills of a cognitive unit
□
□
□
□
   frequency
（free description）
　　　　　　
Examples of guidance and support
When? · Where? · What?
When? · Where? · What?
When? · Where? · What?
（free description）
Outside world information
Cognitive unit
Motion unit
Emotional unit
Behavior / speech
□Motivation
□Confidence
□Likes and dislikes
○Bodily-kinesthetic
○Verbal-linguistic
○Logical-mathematical
Ability
○Visual-spatial
○Interpersonal
Tacit understanding
○Intrapersonal
Toggle feelings
ffect relationships
fferent perspectives
Perceptual unit
■Smart skills of a motion unit
■Smart emotion
■Guidance and Support
Examples of guidance and support
　　　　　　
　Training for reducing the operation time
    Training for accuracy improvement
    Training of combination action
（free description）　
   Wher,What,Why,How)
For example:camera, voice recorder, clock,
calculator
（free description）
 

