412
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Games as Actors 
Interaction, Play, Design, and Actor Network Theory 
 
Jari Due Jessen 
Center for Playware 
Technical University of Denmark 
2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark 
jdje@elektro.dtu.dk 
Carsten Jessen 
Centre for Teaching Development and Digital Media 
Aarhus University 
2400 Copenhagen, Denmark 
cj@dpu.dk
 
 
Abstract—When interacting with computer games, users are 
forced to follow the rules of the game in return for the 
excitement, joy, fun, or other pursued experiences. In this 
paper, we investigate how games achieve these experiences in 
the perspective of Actor Network Theory (ANT). Based on a 
qualitative data from a study of board games, computer games, 
and exergames, we conclude that games are actors that 
produce experiences by exercising power over the user’s 
abilities, for example their cognitive functions. Games are 
designed to take advantage of the characteristics of the human 
players, and by doing so they create in humans what in 
modern play theory is known as a “state of play”. 
Keywords: computer games; board games; Actor Network 
Theory; interaction; game research; game design; play theory 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Using computer software usually implies that the user is 
the active part who controls the interaction by input and 
direct manipulation [1] [2]. Interaction with computer games 
is a different experience because the user acts in a game 
world where the contents of the game has extensive 
influence on the gamer’s behavior. Game figures and other 
game items are not just passive objects that can be 
manipulated by the gamer. For a game to come live, gamers 
have to follow rules and act as the game requires. Playing a 
computer game like Counter Strike [3] or World of Warcraft 
[4] is not just a question of manipulating an avatar. The game 
is forcing the gamer to react to events in the game by acting 
in a certain way if he wants to survive and prosper in the 
game, i.e., the gamer is placed in a role he has to fulfill. In 
other words: games do something to and with people who 
play them and, in a certain way, games are just like actors 
who have an agency. What this agency consists of and how it 
is engineered is of interest to designers. 
In this article, we will demonstrate how games can be 
seen as actors and as organizers of actors and actions on the 
basis of Actor Network Theory (abbreviated to “ANT”) [5]. 
ANT is well suited for the analysis of interaction with games 
by users since ANT offers an approach to agency that does 
not assign power only to human actors but allows the 
possibility for objects and rules to be examined as actors. 
Also, ANT opens the door to viewing design as a social 
enterprise. As Yaneva stresses: “…design has a social goal 
and mobilizes social means to achieve it” [6]. 
ANT has received some attention in game studies during 
the last decade. Several scholars have studied games on the 
basis of ANT [7], focusing primarily on the interchange 
between humans and technology [8] or on the development 
of social networks in online games [10]. We take a different 
approach and show how the ANT perspective can explain 
which forces are at work when games are actually played. 
Our focus is thus on defining the immediate effects of using 
games. Our approach is in line with Seth Giddings [9], who 
have analysed games from the perspective of ANT. Giddings 
stresses that “the analysis of video games […] demands the 
description of a special category of nonhumans, software 
entities ([…] agents] that act more or less autonomously or 
effect emergent behaviour” [9]. 
The article is the result of a research project where we 
studied gamers of different ages playing computer games, 
board games, and digital play equipment. Contrary to 
Giddings and other scholars studying computer games, our 
point of departure was the theory that computer games and 
other games based on digital technology are games before 
they are anything else [10]. They are not first and foremost 
technology. Therefore, the study is focused on studying 
games as a genre rather than just digital games, and our main 
example here is a board game. 
In the next section, we will introduce ANT focusing 
mainly on the concept of “translation” which is employed as 
our main analytical foundation. After this, the paper will 
present the research methodology applied for collecting data. 
In the following sections, the selected case of game playing 
will be presented followed by a presentation and a discussion 
of the results of our investigation. In this section, we will 
also draw on modern play theory to further explain how and 
why games function and also why computer games belong to 
the general genre of games. We conclude this article with 
reflections on how our viewpoint influences design. 
II. 
ACTOR NETWORK THEORY 
ANT was first developed by science and technology 
study scholars Michael Callon and Bruno Latour [11] as a 
new approach to social theory. ANT is of interest to any 
analysis of technology which goes beyond the assumption 
that technology is a mere instrument that we, as humans, 
utilize. ANT claims that any element of the material and 
social world (nature, technology, and social rules) can be an 

413
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
actor in the same way humans are. Agency is never only 
human or social but always a combination of human, social, 
and technology elements [12]-[14]. 
ANT is not a theory in the usual sense of the word 
according to Latour himself, since ANT does not explain 
“why” a network takes a certain form or “how” this happens 
[5]. ANT is more a method of how to explore and describe 
relations in a pragmatic manner, a "how-tobook" as Latour 
defines it [5], and, as such, it offers a way to describe ties 
and forces within a network.  
The main idea of ANT is that actions always take place 
in interaction between actors in networks when actors 
influence each other and struggle for power. We usually see 
social interaction between humans this way, however, ANT 
differs from traditional social theory by stating that the actors 
are not only humans but can be other elements as well. 
A. The traffic example 
ANT can be difficult to grasp and even counter-intuitive 
[12] because it reverses our common understanding of actors 
and agency, e.g., when it cuts across the subject-object 
division underlying our thinking about the world we live in. 
In an attempt to clarify ANT, Hanseth and Monteiro [15] use 
traffic as an example to explain the implications of seeing 
something in the perspective of ANT. We find their example 
very useful in obtaining a better understanding of ANT and, 
hopefully, what we later have to say about what games do. 
The following is a short presentation of their attempt and 
afterwards we will use it to explain the process of translation: 
When you are driving in your car from one place to another, 
you are acting, however, your acts are heavily influenced by 
technology, the material world (maneuvering abilities of the 
car, layout of roads, traffic signs, traffic regulation, etc.), and 
the immaterial (traffic rules, traffic culture, etc.) and habits 
(your own behaviour as a driver) [15]. 
According to ANT, these factors (including you) all 
function as actors and should be understood as forces of 
agency in a linked network. If you want to play the game, 
human and non-human, technical and non-technical elements 
are part of the network, and none of the elements are per 
definition granted special power over the others [12], [15]. 
Expanding the thoughts of Hanseth and Monteiro, we can 
add that, in the traffic example, you want to move from place 
to place, but you are dependent upon technology and forced 
to act in accordance with both social rules and physical 
conditions. Even though you are the driver, you will clearly 
feel the forces of other actors when acting out the driving. 
For instance, the road forces you to follow a certain route, 
the traffic light forces you to stop and start. One can say that 
in order to reach your goal safely and quickly, you have to 
“give in” to the network and in a way “hand over” your 
acting power and control over the car, so that the vehicle will 
move in accordance with the demands of traffic network. 
You have to “delegate” [12] power to the traffic network, 
and, in return, you will reach your goal as fast and safely as 
possible. Of course, you are not handing over the control of 
yourself to the network. To delegate is more to act as 
prescribed by other actors. According to ANT, this is what 
happens in an actor-network relation. 
B. Translation 
The way delegation is done is through the process of 
translation. This process requires the actors in a network to 
accept roles, a worldview, rules of acting, a path to follow 
etc. Michel Callon [16] describes the process of translation 
as a process of “persuading” with four distinct phases, he 
calls 
“moments”: 
problematization, 
interessement, 
enrolment, and mobilization. These moments are inter-
related overlapping steps that describe how stable actor-
networks come to be established [17]. We will introduce 
them briefly in the following, and later use them in our game 
analysis. 
The first moment, problematization, is where some of the 
actors in the network in question bring forth a definition of 
the problem and present a viable solution to it for the other 
actors. This is also the process during which the actors’ roles 
are defined (both human and non-human actors). To use the , 
example above, this is where the car and the traffic network 
are presented as a solution to the transport problem. 
As part of the problematization process, a so-called 
obligatory passage point (OPP) is defined, i.e., a practicable 
solution, which the actors have to accept to achieve their 
goal. An OPP “is viewed as the solution to a problem in 
terms of the resources available to the actant [actor] that 
proposes it as the OPP (…) It controls the resources needed 
to achieve the actant’s outcome.” [18] By defining an OPP, 
other possibilities are closed [16].  In the traffic example, the 
OPP is literally a passage, since it’s the roads and the current 
traffic rules, etc., which have been established as a solid, 
reliable network. 
The second moment, interessement, is where the main 
objective is to convince all the involved actors that the 
proposed problem and solution is the correct one so that they 
will accept to use this solution and not another one. In the 
traffic network, this is done by the use of sanctions from 
traffic rules, signs, and, not least, by the learning processes 
human actors go through to get a driver’s license. 
When the interessement of the actors is successful, the 
third moment, enrollment, is happening. This moment is 
important since it is here that support and allies are created, 
and the process by which actors become part of a network. 
The process can happen in many ways: “To describe 
enrollment is […] to describe the multilateral negotiations, 
trials 
of 
strength 
and 
tricks 
that 
accompany 
the 
interessements and enable them to succeed.” [16]. In relation 
to the traffic network, one can think of all the things that 
support cars and their moving along the roads. 
Finally, the last moment, mobilization, is where the 
actors are mobilized in such a way that they act in 
accordance with their prescribed roles and thereby maintain 
the established network. This happens when the drivers drive 
their cars following the rules and pathways of the traffic 
network. 
C. Design as inscription 
The effect of translation is delegation of power and 
agency. In relation to design of objects, e.g., computer 
games, translation is about how to construct an object in such 
a way that users are convinced to delegate agency. This is 

414
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Photo of the game Quackle! with animals, cards, and barns on the 
left. 
 
described as inscription and description by Madeleine 
Akrich [19]. 
Inscription is the process where a designer embeds a 
special way the user has to interact with the designed object. 
The designer is envisaging a user and a use case for the 
object and develops an intended use, which is inscribed into 
the object by use of, for instance, physical shape, GUI, 
behavior of objects, and affordances in general. 
Akrich compares inscription with a movie script and calls 
the result a script for how the user should use the object. We 
see thisin the design of e.g. the user interface of an iPad, 
where users are compelled to use finger movements to 
interact which are a more intuitive way of interacting and 
quite different from using a computer mouse.  
While inscription is the designer’s idea and framing of 
the interaction, Akrich uses the term description to describe 
the actual usage of the objects. This is where the script, built 
into and drawn upon in the design process, meets the user in 
an actual user setting. Coming alive is the central part of 
description. It is central to ANT that a non-human actor can 
have agency and perform actions and this is what we see 
when scripts, embedded in designed objects, come to life and 
objects engage in a network with other actors. 
In the perspective of ANT, a game can be studied as a 
designed object with inscriptions that has agency and does 
something with the user, because the user invokes a network 
of actors and agency when he starts playing a game, i.e., 
following the rules of the “game world”. A game designer 
has to be aware of the network of actors that the specific 
game design can invoke if he wants to be able to use it in the 
process of inscription. Networks of actors represent the unit 
of analysis in our study presented below. 
III. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
Our research method relied on qualitative data collected 
through observation, based on non-participatory observation 
as well as active participation and interviews [20], [21].We 
collected data from 12 game sessions during which we 
observed 
informants, 
recorded 
their 
behavior 
and 
interviewed them before, during, and after playing. To 
ensure recordable data, we used games in which players had 
to be social and communicate with one another and board 
games was particularly well suited for this since people tend 
to talk more when playing such games. We observed 
children as well as grown-ups and mixed age groups playing 
games in natural settings at home in a family situation or 
with friends.We recorded spoken language as well as body 
language and managed the many data using thematic and 
theoretical coding as described by Uwe Flick [22], who is 
inspired by Grounded Theory [23]. The analysis of the 
collected data was of course done using ANT. Researchers 
from social science have demonstrated that ANT is well 
suited for exploratory research in areas that have not been 
investigated much, not least because ANT-driven research is 
often able to draw up new conclusions [17], [24], [25]. The 
purpose of our study was to investigate and describe agency 
and actors at work when gamers play games. As our 
framework of analysis, we employed the concept of actors 
and agency and the four described moments of translation, 
being careful not to differentiate between non-human and 
human actors. We analyzed agency by following what 
people did with games, extracting actors and ties, and 
described the translation process in the actual game 
situations, as we will demonstrate in the next two sections. 
These sections are also reports of ”findings” from our study. 
As Kraal [17] writes with reference to one of the founding 
fathers of ANT alongside Latour, John Law: ”It is the nature 
of ANT that it is easier to describe through a demonstration 
of its use”.   
It is important to mention that the object of our study is 
not the games themselves, but the event that unfolds when 
games are played [9]. In accordance with ANT, we analyse 
games in action when the forces of the network are at work, 
so to speak. 
IV. 
CASE:  THE GAME “QUACKLE” 
The case of playing the board game “Quackle” in a 
mixed age group is used as an example for our observations 
in general and in the following, we will use our analysis of 
this case to present our interpretation of what the game 
actually does. 
D. Quackle! The game 
The game, which was awarded “Game of the Year” in 
Denmark in 2006, is a typical funny board game for humans 
aged 5 and above. In short, the game consists of 12 different 
animal figures, 8 barns, and 97 playing cards with pictures of 
the animals and one arrow card (see Figure 1). The game 
starts with each player pulling an animal figure from a cloth 
bag showing it to the others and then hiding it in his barn so 
the others can no longer see it. The cards are dealt and placed 
in a pile in front of each player face down. 
The objective of the game is to get rid of all the cards you 
have in your pile. Each round of the game consists of the 
players in turn turning a card and placing it for all to see. If 
two players have the same animal on their card they enter a 
battle during which the players compete on being the first to 
loudly say the sound of the other player’s animal hidden in 
the barn. The player who looses the battle must pick his own 
and the pile of upwards facing cards of his opponent. The 
game continues until once again there are two identical 
animals in the cards or one of the players gets rid of all his 
cards [25]. 
The game seems pretty simple, but requires that the 

415
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
players can remember and quickly mobilize the correct 
sounds when two identical cards are turned, which is more 
difficult than one might think, even for adults. 
E. Game inscription 
As we see in the above description of the game, there is a 
special way players are expected to interact with the game 
(the inscription) and, as we will argue in the following, in 
this way the game uses the learned scripts that the player 
brings along as well as physical and psychological abilities 
of the player. Among other things, the game takes advantage 
of the knowledge of the players (i.e., scripts) about animals 
and animal sounds, and the game utilizes the fact that most 
humans have a tendency to react automatically in pressurized 
situations. It is precisely this automatic reaction that makes 
the game funny, because the players make  lots of mistakes 
trying to be the fastest which often result in weird sounds 
that is a mix between different animal sounds. 
The game designer has created an inscription that can be 
indicated as follows: We must say a particular animal sound 
while we see and try to remember a lot of other animals. 
These many inputs are combined with the stress factor that 
the game introduces by stating we must respond faster than 
our opponents! Thus, the inscription creates a special way 
the player has to act, i.e., a specific way the players have to 
use their abilities.  
In the perspective of agency, it is noteworthy that the 
game forces the player to make mistakes and thereby 
produce a mishmash of sounds which he would not normally 
produce. When asking our informants about the experience, 
most of them said their tongue was “out of control”. In this 
sense, it is evident that the game has agency and does 
something to the player. 
F. Translation 
The inscription plays an important role when considering 
the whole situation as a translation. As previously described, 
the translation consists of four moments which we will now 
outline in relation to the game scenario. 
The first moment is the problematization, which is where 
we are presented with a problem. In our case, the game is 
played in natural situations on a Friday evening in a family 
of four (parents and two children, son aged 12 and daughter 
21). For the family, the problem is the need for entertainment 
understood as a peaceful and enjoyable social time together. 
In this case, the game of Quackle is set up as a solution. Like 
any family game and most entertainment products, it 
promises that playing the game will lead to the experience of 
fun. Thus, the game is put forward as an actor who can do a 
piece of work (give us fun) through the way other actors treat 
it. This happens when one of the family members says, "Let's 
play Quackle, its fun. We always laugh so much when we 
play it" (quote from the daughter in this case). 
The game is put forward as a solution and as the 
obligatory passage point (OPP) to social entertainment. The 
solution simultaneously suggests roles and organizes 
relations, i.e., a specific network where the family members 
will become game players and the living room table and 
chairs to facilitate the family sitting together. No less 
important is it that the game will establish equality between 
the players regardless of age and family position. 
In the next moment, the interessement, which actually 
takes place in parallel with the problematization, the family 
members are convinced the proposed solution is the right one 
and barriers for alternative solutions to the problem are 
added. One of the things that are cut off is television; a 
frequently used source of entertainment in the family, when 
one of the adults says: "We shouldn’t watch television, we 
always do. We should do something together instead." (quote 
from the episode). 
Enrollment is the third moment where the players are 
enrolled and this entails that they must accept the roles of 
participants as players of Quackle and accept the terms of the 
game. 
In the last moment of translation, mobilization, the 
solution is executed when the family members sit down with 
the game and start playing. If the mobilization works and the 
translation process is thus successful, it enables the family to 
experience fun and laugh together. This is exactly what 
happened to the test family via the interaction with the game, 
which created a lot of laughing especially when the parents 
made weird sounds. 
In our observations, we also encountered an event of a 
failed translation. In this episode, which involved four adults 
and two children, the setup was similar to the above but the 
one of the players did not accept the role of a player who 
could end up saying a wrong sound, and thus she ended up 
destroying the game. She did not hand over agency to the 
game and did not act as prescribed by the game. 
This episode was special, but its points to the fact that the 
translation can fail and the players have a choice, though this 
choice comes with certain consequences (they never got in to 
play). 
Going back to the situation with the successful 
translation, the game re-organizes the social connections 
within the family and in so doing builds a new network of 
actors and agency. The game is what Latour has named a 
“mediator” that “transforms, translates, distorts, and 
modifies” relations [12]. But the game does more than alter 
the social relations. It mediates the body and mind of the 
individual players. In the following, we will address how 
Quackle accomplishes the mobilization of the physical and 
cognitive abilities of the players. 
V. 
WHAT THE GAME DOES 
A game cannot do much by itself but is dependent on 
other actors, and this is, of course, particularly true for board 
games. Nevertheless, games have agency that makes game 
players act in a manner they would not have acted without 
the game. In that sense, the game “does” something in line 
with Latour’s concise statement on what defines an actor: 
“anything that does modify a state of affairs by making a 
difference is an actor [...]” [5]. 
Latour stresses that when we are studying a network in 
ANT, we are focusing on the circulation between the 
connections that make up the network [17]. When we look 
into the Quackle game, we are looking at how agency is 
floating between the involved actors, the details of which we 

416
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
will try to demonstrate through an analysis of a play 
scenario. 
First, the scenario of a family playing the game: 
1) The game is placed on the table and the players sit 
down around it. 
2) The game is opened, and the game elements are 
displayed. There are animals, barns, and cards and a cloth 
bag. 
3) The animals are hidden in a cloth bag and all players 
get a barn. 
4) Each player pulls an animal from the cloth bag: 
Player 1 gets a snake, player 2 a dog, player 3 a donkey and 
player 4 a frog. 
5) After all animals and sounds have been introduced, 
they are stored out of view in the barns. 
6) The cards are shuffled and dealt. 
7) Everyone is ready and turn their first card. 
8) A horse, a cow, a duck and a pig is turned, so there is 
no match. 
9) Next cards are turned: a snake, a pig, a frog and an 
owl appears, still no match. 
10) The third cards are turned: A mouse, a donkey, a 
rooster and an owl appear. 
11) The game gathers speed and the cards are turned a bit 
faster. 
12) The fourth card is turned: a cat, a dog, a cat and a 
frog. 
13) Player 1 shouts "Qu..iau" [sounds a combination of a 
frog sound and a cat sound] and player 3 "Vu..sh"[a 
combination of dog sound and snake sound] followed by a 
grinning "Oh no, uh" and finally player 1 says "Miau" just 
before player 3 says "Sssshh". 
14) Player 3 must gather player 1's card and the game 
continues. 
This is the basic structure of the game which continues in 
a similar manner for a long time (about 30 minutes) before a 
player wins. 
Points 1 and 2 are of practical character, but they help to 
create the framework for what is going to happen. Thus, the 
following activities are framed and the game's inscription 
starts to become clear, especially in the form of the rules. 
The agency is still with the players. This is also the case in 
point 3, but here the game starts to gain agency. It starts to 
have an effect on the players, as it prescribes their actions in 
the next steps. 
Our observations show that, at the same time the players 
build up anticipation about what is going to happen which is 
seen by the body movements and heard by the tone and pitch 
of voices, this anticipation started when the players accepted 
the game as an OPP. It was especially noticeable in points 4 
and 5, where the joy of hiding the animals in the cloth bag 
and pulling one provides a form of excitement that is 
particularly evident in the youngest child. Thus, we see here 
that the agency is distributed to the game as a kind of pre-
disposition of body and mind [6]. 
In point 5, the players need to remember all the animals 
the other players have. The individual player has to establish 
links between the different animals and the players around 
the table. In point 7, the number of links is expanded by the 
creation of connection to the cards and in point 9, the game 
is made even more complex as more animals are introduced 
and it makes it harder to remember the animals hidden in the 
barns, which is of course part of the game designer's 
inscription. 
We continue to point 13, where we see the first match of 
cards. When this match appears, a special script appears 
which is part of the inscription of the game. The script forces 
the player to act as prescribed by the game rules and it 
thereby functions as a type of mechanism that governs the 
actions of the players. The mechanism re-organizes the 
connection between the player's body and cognition in a 
special way by means of rules and materials (cards, animal 
figures, barns) and, in this manner, the game utilizes the 
functions of the player. As mentioned earlier, the player is 
driven to make mistakes when pronouncing words, and it is 
this “drive” that demonstrates an agency from the game. 
What the game does can be described as follows: First, it 
mobilizes 
the 
individual 
player’s 
memory 
but 
overemphasizes the need to remember. There is a wide range 
of images, sounds, figures, and places in play, and the player 
will have to revive all of these objects and connections when 
the match of cards happen. There are different animal figures 
and their sounds to choose from, and several sounds usually 
become actualized before the players are able to produce the 
correct sound. 
Secondly, the game cuts across the usual connection 
between the player's mind and body. In point 13, it is clear 
that the game disrupts the usually 
well-controlled 
connections between the player’s cognitive ability and their 
ability to control their voice. The inscription provides a 
procedure for a specific requested response to certain signals 
where the player has to use specific cognitive functions, i.e., 
perceive, remember, associate images and sounds as well as 
mobilize the organs of speech; and it all has to happen as 
quickly as possible. It is a simple task that players do not 
usually have problems with but, by adding a wide range of 
signals in the form of different images and sounds, and, by 
forcing the players to compete with others, the result is that 
cognitive and bodily functions respond in an incorrect 
manner and the players end up making wrong sounds. The 
game has, in a way, taken over body and mind.  
The case of playing Quackle is an example of a 
translation process in action, where agency is delegated to a 
network. The case is also an example of how such a network 
is comprised of human, material, and social actors. The 
translation is only happening because the players have 
allowed themselves to be enrolled as players and fulfill their 
roles by using the material and following the rules and 
thereby delegating agency. In return, they are entertained. 
A. Playing a computer game 
Earlier in this article, we stated that we consider 
computer games to be games before anything else. Thus, our 
thesis is that computer games do something to the players 
when played, just as in the case of Quackle What we have 

417
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
attempted until now is to establish a framework for analyzing 
what games do, and, in the following, we will briefly show 
how the framework could be applied to computer games. 
The setting, which we observed, are three boys 12, 12, 
and 14 years old playing Grand Theft Auto V (GTA) on a 
Playstation 3. GTA has become very popular with its 
mixture of racing and adventure, where the players can 
follow a story already inscribed in the game or they can just 
go racing around in the game city. 
The boys take turns at controlling the game while the two 
others comment and talk about what is happening. In one 
scenario, the 14 year old is controlling the game. He gets an 
assignment from the game where a tough looking guy on the 
screen tells him that he needs to win a race with a computer-
controlled opponent to progress. Then the game begins. 
The setting, we are analyzing, is a network that consists 
of the interior (couch, table, etc.), the Playstation (consisting 
of screen, game console, controller and DVD), the three 
boys, and the game. The game itself consists of multiple 
actors of which some are activated in combination with the 
other actors of the network.  
We will not analyze all actors and possible networks the 
game can initiate but will only take a short look at how the 
game impacts the players’ bodies. 
When playing, the boys have to follow the rules of the 
game. They are complicated, but for our example here we 
can just point to the traffic rules in the game and how the car 
is driven via the controller. In the same manner as in a real 
traffic system, the player has to delegate agency to the 
system. Just as in the real traffic, there is police; here in the 
form of multiple cars and helicopters, and there are roads, 
houses, pedestrians, and the normal traffic on the road, all i 
of which have to be avoided during the race. All of these 
actors become active as the boy starts the race which lasts for 
a few minutes. 
It is apparent how the game influences the player’s body. 
To initiate the game, the boy presses hard on the controller 
and swings it forward, and the next second he and the 
controller are leaning heavily to the left side, almost leaning 
into one of the other boys. The next second, all of the boys 
shout “Wow, that was close!”, while they all jump a little in 
the couch. At the end, they are all standing up and leaning 
forward and to the side as they follow the movements of the 
car on the road it tries to follow. 
If we look at this scenario as a translation, we can see the 
problematization is set forward as the boys need to win the 
race and this is also the OPP. In the interessement, the game 
builds on the fact that the boys are already enrolled in the 
game (emerged in it) and thus they need to progress to keep 
playing. The enrollment is made more stable by the use of a 
character in the game and adding a storyline to the race (why 
they have to win), thus agency is transferred to the game. 
This also builds up the tension for the next moment, where 
the boys are mobilized to play. The term “boys” indicates 
that all three boys participated even though two of them did 
not control the game. 
When the race begins, the boy controlling the game is 
leaning forward and swinging to the side with his body. This 
is where the game uses some of its agency and the bodily 
action of the player shows that the game is mobilizing the 
player’s ability. In our observations, we saw this again and 
again, the players could not help it but move their body to 
the side as they turned a corner, even though in this game it 
was not needed, as the controller does not react to it. 
The game further uses its agency when it makes the boys 
shout and jump. This happens as the car almost hits a wall 
that would have crushed the car and made them lose the 
game. This kind of danger is present all the time in the race. 
Here, the game is exercising its agency by using the player’s 
body and mind, including his imagination that allows him 
and the other boys to experience danger, which in the real 
world would have produced fear but, in the framework of the 
game, produces excitement.  
VI. 
THEORY OF PLAY AND GAMES 
Obviously, excitement or pleasure is the reason why 
game players obey to the demands of games in the way we 
have described above, i.e., accept to act as a node in a 
network, following rules they often do not understand, using 
hour after hour trying to learn to manage game challenges. 
What games do is to produce play and playful experiences 
for users. In the following, we will lean on modern play 
theory and modern game studies to clarify the importance of 
play and the connection between games and play. 
One need not search for long in game studies literature 
before it becomes evident that play, according to most 
researchers, is an important factor for the success of 
computer games as well as other kind of games. Prominent 
play scholars like Johan Huizinga, Roger Callois, Gadamer, 
and Brian Sutton-Smith appear as references in numerous 
articles and books on the topic. In Salen and Zimmerman’s 
well know book on games, Rules of Play [27], the authors 
define the goal of successful game design as “...the creation 
of meaningful play...” [27] and later on state that “...rules are 
merely the means for creating play...” [27]. And to make the 
central point absolutely clear, they argue in a subsequent 
anthology on games that “...games create play: of that there 
is no doubt.” [28]. In other words, games fulfill a function in 
relation to play. 
In line with our view presented here is also [29], [30], 
and [31]. Games can be seen as “tools” that generate play, 
and, more importantly, games must be designed with the aim 
of generating play. 
But what is play? In developmental psychology, play is 
primarily seen as a means for learning (Piaget [32], 
Vygotsky [33], Singer, Golinkoff, & Hirsh-Pasek [34]) and, 
in that frame of reference, it follows logically from the 
statement that games generate play that they also generate 
learning. Modern play theory sees play differently. Based on 
the work of the above-mentioned play scholars, play is 
regarded, in and by itself, as a meaningful human activity 
that we practise for the simple joy of it. Game players accept 
the translation of agency to games simply because they can 
get into play by doing so, or more accurate get into the 
condition in play theory called “the state of play”, derived 
from Johan Huizinga [35] who is probably the most quoted 
play theoretician today. He writes in “Homo Ludens” (which 
translates to “man, the player”) about play this way: 

418
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
Figure 2. Modular Interactive Tiles. 
“…what actually is the fun of playing? Why does the 
baby crow with pleasure? Why does the gambler lose 
himself in his passion? Why is a huge crowd roused to 
frenzy by a football match? This intensity of, and absorption 
in, play finds no explanation in biological analysis. And yet 
in this intensity, this absorption, this power of maddening, 
lies the very essence, the primordial quality of play. […] … 
it is precisely the fun-element that characterizes the essence 
of play. Here we have to do with an absolutely primary 
category of life, familiar to everybody. […] the fun of 
playing resists all analysis, all logical interpretation…“ [35]. 
The last sentence is perhaps the most important for the 
understanding of play and, thus, for the understanding of 
what games should be designed for. Play is a difficult 
concept to define in a scientific context because of its nature 
as an activity, which represents other values than the ones we 
traditionally use and base our thoughts on. Both in science 
and in our daily lives, we usually try to rationalize human 
activities and give them a purpose. When it comes to play, it 
is not possible to apply rational reasoning according to 
Huizinga, and play does not submit itself to the usual rational 
notions. We are forced to remove our accustomed patterns of 
thoughts and recognize that the human being is something 
else and more than a rational being. In short: Human beings 
want to play for the fun of it, and we use games primarily 
because they can get us “absorbed” in play.  
Games, whether board games, computer games or other 
kind of games (of which we will present an example shortly), 
should be designed to facilitate this absorption. Traditional 
games like street games that have been around for long, 
some for hundreds of years, are clearly designed to produce 
the joy of play [31]. Games are some of the first things we 
meet as infants when we learn to communicate. Play 
researcher Brian Sutton-Smith have given a most precise 
definitions of play, which is useful to game design, even if it 
is about infants: 
“[…] we postulate as the aboriginal paradigm for play, 
mother 
and 
infant 
conjoined 
in 
an 
expressive 
communicational frame within which they contrastively 
participate in the modulation of excitement. We call this a 
paradigm for all ludic action, because we suggest that other 
play itself is a metaphoric statement of this literal state of 
affairs. Ludic action, wherever it is, always involves the 
analogous establishment of the secure communicational 
frame and the manipulation of excitement arousal through 
contrastive actions within that frame.” [36]. 
“Modulation of excitement” is a very precise description 
of what games do. There are numerous variations of such 
modulation. For instance, play can be physical, making the 
body move forward and backwards, as in sports, dancing, or 
on a swing; it might be psychological, creating and using a 
mental tension, for which jokes or horror stories are good 
examples. It is remarkable in this context that play if often 
generated by directly using the natural reactions of the body 
and mind, e.g., dizziness or fear, as we have tried to show in 
our game analysis.  
We employ countless forms of materials, techniques, or 
genres of physical as well as immaterial types to help initiate 
activities that make us play. Thus, games are just one out of 
numerous tools [27], [29], [30] and [31]. From the simplest 
tools, for instance the games of dizziness, where young 
children turn around and around to get the excitement of 
dizziness, to the computer games the goal contains a 
familiarity. In the next section, we will present games ased 
on high tech, where we have utilized knowledge of games as 
tools for play.  
VII. 
EXERGAMES 
Exergames is one of the many names for a fairly new 
type of games. These games try to combine physical exercise 
with digital games through an interface that requires physical 
exertion to play the games [38], [39]. 
Exergames are interesting here because they combine the 
physical abilities of the players with the opportunities of the 
digital games. At the same time, many of these games are 
less complicated than computer games like GTA, because 
they rely on the physical aspects and movements of human 
players and less on the virtual world’s narratives. This allows 
us to further investigate how the human players are being 
used within the network of a game. 
In the following, we will look into one type of 
exergaming called modular interactive tiles (“tiles” for 
short). 
The tiles (displayed in figure 2) are a distributed system 
consisting of electronic tiles, which can be assembled like 
puzzle pieces. The tiles combine robotics, modern artificial 
intelligence, and play in a product that can be used for 
games, sports, health promotion, rehabilitation, dance, art, 
and learning[39].  
Every tile is 30 x 30 cm and works independently but is 
able to communicate with all the surrounding tiles. In this 
way all the tiles can communicate with each other and create 
a playfield for the players to play on. The tiles have a force-
sensitive resistor and eight RGB light-emitting diodes able to 
shine in a rainbow of colors.  
The many colors allow for a variety of different types of 
patterns and games to be played. To play a game on the tile 
platform, a player must move around and step on the tiles 
according to the rules of each game (see later). The various 
applications can either be played by a single person or can be 
set up so that multiple people can collaborate or compete 
against each other. 

419
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Because the tiles are designed to work in any 
combination and because of the puzzle piece design, the tiles 
give the user the ability to create any playing field they wish, 
and to change it again anytime - e.g., change the size or 
shape of the field of tiles. When the user changes the 
configuration of the tiles, the interaction and difficulty is also 
changed, e.g., faster/slower movements, longer/shorter steps 
and so on. Thus, the user has the ability to change the 
movement and difficulty merely by physically building a 
different kind or size of the platform. 
The tiles have been used as balance training for elderly 
people (65+ years old) and motor skills training for children 
(5-6 years old). We observed both elderly and children (total 
of 20 sessions for each group), but here we will focus on the 
sessions for children. Each participant participated in 10 or 
more sessions and a total of 19 children participated. 
The data were analyzed using the methods described 
earlier and the following account is a prototypical example 
of the use of the tiles for children even though similarities 
exist in the use for the elderly. This example illustrates the 
main findings and forms a good basis for the ANT analysis. 
For the sake of the analysis, we are focusing on one game 
called “Color Race”, (see [39] for more info on the tiles). 
The game “Color Race” is a type of “Catch the Color” 
game. On the playing field, three tiles is randomly displaying 
different colors – red, green, and blue.  Each player chose a 
color and has to step on the tile with the chosen color as fast 
possible. When they step on the tile, its color shifts randomly 
to another tile on the playing field that the player now has to 
step on.  
The player has to step on tiles with their chosen color as 
many times as possible within a given timeframe (typically 
30 sec). When the time is up, all tiles light up in the color 
that got most points. Hopefully, the reader can imagine three 
players running around on the relatively small playing field 
at the same time trying to step on tiles as fast as possible. 
The stage is set for rough-and-tumble play (in our experience 
regardless of age).  
In the scenario that we believe is a prototypical example 
of the use of the tiles, we are in a kindergarten with 10 
children 5-6 years old and an adult. The room is full of other 
toys, but there is room in the middle of the floor for the tiles. 
They also have chairs that some of the children are sitting on 
while they are waiting to play. Others are standing around 
and cheering or observing the children playing. The children 
are playing with the tiles two times a week, so they know 
them at this point. The adult helps to set up the tiles and they 
are placed in a typical setup of 9 tiles in a 3x3 square, and 
the game Color Race with three colors is started. Three of the 
children pick a color each, and they place themselves in front 
of that color and count down to start. 
As soon as they start the game, they jump from tile to tile 
trying to get around the other players, but they keep bumping 
into each other again and again as the playing field is approx 
1x1 meter so they do not have much space to move on. The 
game lasts for 30 seconds where the players jump around 
and get around 20 points each. At the end of the 30 seconds, 
the tiles light up in green showing that the green player got 
the most points. 
As described above, the game requires the player to step 
on the tiles for the game to proceed. Here the inscription is 
the tiles in general and the game of “Color Race” in 
particular is calling for the player to step on the tiles. In our 
observations, we have seen this time after time. New players 
or observers can not resist trying to press the tiles to see what 
happens. The physical design of the tiles on the floor, the 
size of a foot, and the colorful light invite the player to step 
on them. They function as trigger points. 
If we look at the inscription, it can be described as 
follows:  The player must press a tile and catch as many 
lights as possible within a limited time frame. The game is 
created so the color jumps to another tile almost instantly and 
this creates the feeling of running after the colors, thus the 
name “Color Race”. The movement of the light to another 
tile “forces” the player to act as prescribed be the game rules 
but also the surrounding network of competing with other 
children, and the observers cheering on is contributing to this 
“force”. This is another example of what we saw earlier with 
Quackle!, where the players are driven to act in a certain 
way. 
If we look at the inscription, it can be described as 
follows:  The player must press a tile and catch as many 
lights as possible within a limited time frame, which 
organize both body and mind of each player and the 
interaction between them. The game also creates the 
necessity of speed by organizing the game as a competition. 
All the sessions we observed with children involved multiple 
players on the platform, and with more players at the same 
time, there is also an element of competition and a lot of 
communication between players. Notably, the kind of 
friendly communication connected to play and games. It is 
noteworthy that all of the players, we have observed, talk, 
shout and laugh. The game evokes a kind of friendly play 
fight.  
It is of special interest from our viewpoint that the game 
sets up the players not only as players, but at the same time 
as material obstacles in the game. In the scenario with the 
tiles, the players are all playing at the same time and the 
colors jump around the platform. Here the game is using its 
agency. As pointed out above, the game is forcing the 
players to move from one tile to another, but in the process it 
creates a “double” role for them as players also become 
obstacles for other players. This “double” use of the human 
player is important for how the game functions. Each player 
becomes a game element, as they again and again are 
standing in the way of others who are trying to reach a tile 
with their color.  
In the observations, we could see that exactly this point 
was critical for how much fun the participants seemed to get 
out of the game. If they surrendered to the game and 
accepted and maybe even used the fact that they bumped into 
each other, they seemed to enjoy the game more. Often 
players tried to push, pull or bump the other players away so 
they could easier reach a tile.  
The game is also pushing the players to speed up and 
jump around by shifting the position of the light almost 
instantly as the tile with a color is pressed. It creates the 
effect of the game progressing fast, and players indicated that 

420
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
they felt the need to hurry to the next tile even though the 
color will stay there until pressed. Technically, there was no 
need to hurry but mentally it appeared so. 
If we consider the case as a translation we can then 
observe the problematization as the case of the children 
wanting to get into play (the state of play or play mode), and 
the tiles are put up as the OPP. In the interessement, the 
children are convinced that the tiles are the solution to the 
problem and the roles are divided with the children as 
players and obstacles for each other, the tiles as the 
playground and the place the game will take place. 
The children and tiles are enrolled and they accept the 
roles in the enrollment and they accept the rules of the game, 
they accept that they will become both active players and 
obstacles in the game. 
In the final moment the actual game is played. The 
children run around on the playing field and the tiles make 
them shift from one tile to another, shifting their balance, 
running into each other, and fighting to get the most points 
and by doing that clearly producing the state of play. 
In this case, we tried to make it clear that the players can 
take multiple roles in the game, and that the actors of the 
network can be used both with their mental abilities (e.g., 
competitive revivals) as well as their physical or virtual 
manifestation (e.g., obstacles or trigger points). 
In the following, we will go deeper into what the 
implications of these analyses of games in the view of ANT 
have for designers of games. 
VIII. 
DESIGN IMPLICATIONS 
In the introduction, we stated that games, in our point of 
view, could be regarded as actors because they function as 
organizers of other actors. Following Latour, quoted above, 
games are actors because they make a difference; not 
because they are human or non-human, social or material. 
We have tried to show how such “difference” is created 
when games do something with players. This view represents 
an understanding of interaction where the subject-object 
dichotomy is dissolved and agency is distributed in a process 
of reorganization, recreation and modification of actions in 
networks that even stretch into the mind and body of the 
individual player and take advantage of abilities and 
faculties.  
If one accepts this way of viewing, it will have 
implications for game design, because design is not just a 
question of creating game worlds and interfaces but also a 
question of how to design social actors that can take agency 
and thereby initiate and guide the building of social 
networks, which can bring human and non-human actors to 
act together in such a way that the players can achieve an 
experience they find pleasant, joyful, funny or equivalent. As 
we have tried to point out, this does not only involve 
organizing social relations, actions and material, but also 
requires utilization of the player’s abilities, for instance of 
both physical and cognitive nature. 
We believe game design should be done on the basis of 
knowledge about how human abilities can be organized and 
influenced including knowledge of the abilities of different 
user groups. In the analysis, we showed how games 
orchestrate actions by humans and non-humans and resulted 
in experiences the players find engaging, joyful, and 
entertaining. From our point of view that is prototypical 
examples of what games do. They organize the acting of 
actors in order to achieve certain kinds of experiences, 
which, as we have argued, primarily are states of play 
Through the inscription, the designer assigns agency in 
such a way that the game can take advantage of the 
characteristics of the human players. The games are 
examples of how the designer renders agency to a non-
human object, and how these objects perform a job by 
getting the players to do a job.  
This view gives us a possibility to further investigate how 
the designer can utilize this understanding when creating 
games.  
Understanding games as active participants in the 
network created by or around the game, puts emphasis on 
attributing agency to the game and the elements in it. To 
understand how this is done, the concept of framing is useful. 
Framing is a concept developed by Gregory Bateson 
[40], who points to the fact that certain situations are 
perceived differently than we normally would in his essay 
with the title “This is play” [41] which is now famous both in 
the context of communication and play research. 
The classical example from Bateson is two monkeys 
playing; where in this framing a bite (an act of attacking)) 
does not denote what it normally would (fighting against 
each other) but is framed in such a way that it is percieved 
differently. Bateson states that a bite in the frame of play has 
to be followed by a metacommunicative signal “this is play”, 
so that the opponent understands it as an act in play and not 
seriously meant [40], [41]. This is, for instance, the case with 
computer games such as GTA that we have described earlier. 
“This is play” puts a frame around every act which signals 
“not serious”. But that does not mean that the acts are 
without influence on the players. For our viewpoint, this is a 
tricky point which we have to elaborate on. 
The best example is perhaps the feeling of fear. 
Psychologist and play researcher Michael Apter [42] have 
put forward the example of meeting a tiger. There is a 
significant difference between meeting a tiger face to face in 
the backyard and meeting tiger in a cage, he writes in an 
attempt to explain that the way we experience our 
surroundings changes their significance due to the frame we 
put them into. This is especially true in play. That which 
outside of play would produce fear, anger and the like, does 
not produce the same reactions in the framework of play. 
Still, as the Apter example shows, what we experience in 
play has to evoke some of the same feelings as reality. If 
not, we would be bored. A kitten in a cage is not exciting 
but pittyful. We believe this is a key point in designing 
games. The “modulation of excitement” of course requires 
something to modulate. Fear is only one example. Apter 
writes: “One of the most interesting things about play is the 
tremendous variety of devices, stratagems and techniques, 
which people can use to obtain the pleasure of, especially to 
achieve high arousal […]. Putting aside the use of direct 
physiological interventions to increase arousal – drugs 

421
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
smoking and drinking – there are a number of general 
psychological strategies which can be used for this purpose” 
[42]. A designer must know which emotions, feelings, etc. 
that produce arousal or other kinds of excitement and joy in 
the specific target group, and must know how to evoke them 
in a game. Good designers know that by intuition; however, 
explicit knowledge may help to make games better or to 
better avoid failures.  
In terms of a game taking agency, the key point is to set 
the scene for the game; creating a framing where the players 
are willing to invest time and energy into the game and in the 
process distributing agency to the game. The players also 
have to accept the roles and rules of the game. Often this 
framing is done in the terms of narratives where the designer 
includes a story that frames the game and divides the roles. 
Dividing the roles and hereby building the social network 
is an important part of the work done by games. This is also 
the first part of the translation. 
 We described this in the case of Quackle and how it 
divided special roles. This is especially clear in GTA and the 
case of the tiles. In GTA, the social network is built to 
include the actors of the race but also draw on the bigger 
picture of why players have to advance through the race. In 
the case of the tiles, the social network is constructed to 
create a social awareness of the actors and how they compete 
and play around with each other.  
B. A word on scripts 
The social networks and relations, actions, and materials 
are not the only elements to take into considerations. The 
most vital part that the ANT analysis points to, is to take the 
abilities, feelings and emotions of the players (physical as 
well as psychological) into account. As described earlier in 
the inscription, the designer can take advantage of the scripts 
that the players already have “downloaded”, e.g., the fear of 
tigers, to mention a simple script. 
In the example of Quackle, it was the ability to make the 
sounds of the animals combined with a common script that 
made us laugh when we and other people made mistakes 
inside the frame of play. In the case of the tiles, it was the 
game structure of “Color Race” where the players had to 
“catch the color” combined with the script of playful fight. 
Players know this kind of game; they know how it is played 
and the designer can use this knowledge. 
All these examples are scripts in different types. As 
described earlier, scripts are a form of manuscripts that we 
know and which we use to interact and cope with different 
situations. In a sense, scripts can be seen as a form of 
recipes. 
In that sense, games are dependent on the players. 
Players have many different scripts and understandings of 
how to play and what a game is. All these can be seen as part 
of their play culture. When players play a game or observe 
others playing, they learn new ways of playing and 
interacting: new scripts are passed to them.  
It is sometimes easy to see, as when a child looks at elder 
children playing and starts to mimic their behavior. In this 
situation the child is starting to “download” the script for 
their actions and can later reuse these.  
In all these small scripts, we have learned that the 
designers of game are using them in different ways while 
they are at the same time supplying new ones to the players. 
IX. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The main theme of this paper has been to establish an 
understanding of what games do in the perspective of ANT. 
We have seen how games do an active job and work as what 
Latour calls a mediator that can “transform, translate, distort, 
and modify” relations [12]. We believe that ANT is 
beneficial when we look into computer game design. While 
it can seem trivial that games do something to users, it is 
highly important for game designers to understand how 
games do this and why people are willing to invest time and 
effort in games. 
We have demonstrated that, using ANT as a tool for 
analysis, can give us a new understanding of the interaction 
between games and users. We believe that game designers 
can advance interaction design by “following the actors” and 
by understanding how agency in games works, and by 
gaining insight into how certain bodily, psychological, and 
social acts can create play. We are fully aware that our 
analysis has shortcomings since it only covers three games 
although several instances of them and, thus, only a few 
examples of the kind of actor network which creates play. 
There are numerous other examples of this kind of network 
operating in many different ways in games. 
Future work should focus on identifying, characterising, 
and possibly systemizing actor networks in different games. 
It should also focus on identifying different kinds of key 
scripts that the designer can utilize and take advantage of. 
Similarly, it’s interesting to further investigate how the 
understanding of games as translation can help create a better 
awareness of what is going on in the process of game 
description. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank our colleagues at Center for 
Playware, the participating children, families and elderly that 
allowed us to observe their play.  
REFERENCES 
[1] J. D. Jessen and C. Jessen, “What games do,” in Proceedings 
of ACHI 2014, vol. 978-1-61208-325-4, pp. 222-224, 2014. 
[2] P. Dourish, “Where the Action is – The foundation of 
Embodied Interaction. Cambrige: The MIT Press, 2004. 
[3] Valve Corporation, Counter Strike. Washington: Valve 
Corporation, 2011. 
[4] Blizzard Entertainment, World of Warcraft. Irvine: Blizzard 
Entertainment 
[5] B. Latour, Reassembling the social: an introduction to Actor–
network theory. Oxford: University Press, 2005. 
[6] A. Yaneva, "Making the Social Hold: Towards an Actor-
Network Theory of Design," in Design and Culture, no. 3, pp. 
273-288, 2009. 
[7] M. Cypher and I. Richardson, “An actor-network approach to 
games and virtual environments,” in CyberGames '06: 
“Proceedings of the 2006 international conference on Game 
research and development,“ pp. 254-259, 2006. 
[8] K. Kallio, F. Mäyrä, and K. Kaipainen, “At Least Nine Ways 

422
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
to Play: Approaching Gamer Mentalities,” Games and 
Culture, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 327-353, 2011 
[9] S. Giddings, “Events and Collusions A Glossary for the 
Microethnography of Video Game Play,” Games and Culture, 
4(2), pp 144-157, 2009 
[10] U. Plesner, “Researching Virtual Worlds: Methodologies for 
Studying Emergent Practices,” Routledge Studies in New 
Media and Cyberculture, vol. 14, 2013. 
[11] M. Callon and B. Latour, “Unscrewing the Big Leviathan: 
how actors macrostructure reality and how sociologists help 
them to do so,” in K. D. Knorr-Cetina and A. V. Cicourel 
(eds.), Advances in Social Theory and Methodology: Toward 
an Integration of Micro- and Macro-Sociologies. Boston: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1981. 
[12] B. Latour, “The Trouble with Actor-Network Theory,” in F. 
Olsen, Om aktor-netværksteori. Nogle få afklaringer og mere 
end nogle få forviklinger.” Philosophia, vol. 25 N. 3 et 4, pp. 
47-64, 1996. 
[13] B. Latour, “Where are the Missing Masses? The Sociology of 
a Few Mundane Artifacts,” W. E. Bijker and J. Law (eds.), 
Shaping Technology/Building Society. Cambridge: The MIT 
Presse, 1992. 
[14] B. Latour, “A Door Must be Either Open or Shut: A Little 
Philosophy of Techniques,” in A. Feenberg and A. Hannay 
(eds.), The Politics of Knowledge. Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1995 
[15] O Hanseth and E. Monteiro, Understanding Information 
Infrastructure, University of Oslo [online].   Available from: 
http://heim.ifi.uio.no/oleha/Publications/bok.html 2014.01.16 
[16] M. Callon, “Some Elements of a Sociology of Translation: 
Domestication of the Scallops and the Fishermen of St Brieuc 
Bay,” in J. Law (eds.), Power, Action and Belief: A New 
Sociology of Knowledge. London:Routledge & Kegan Paul, 
1986 
[17] B. J. Kraal, “Actor-network inspired design research: 
Methodology and reflections,” in Proceedings Internationl 
Association of Societies for Design Research, Hong Kong,, 
pp. 1-12,  2007. 
[18] J. Rhodes, “Using Actor-Network Theory to Trace an ICT 
(Telecenter) Implementation Trajectory,” in Information 
Technologies & International Development, vol 5, issue 3, pp. 
1-20, 2009. 
[19] M. Akrich, “The De-scription of Technical Objects,” in W. 
Bijker and J. Law (eds.), Shaping Technology/Building 
Society: Studies in Sociotechnical Change. Cambridge: The 
MIT Presse, 1992. 
[20] J. P. Spradley, Participant Observation.” Orlando, Florida: 
Harcourt College Publishers, pp. 58-62, 1980. 
[21] P. Atkinson and M. Hammersley, "Ethnography and 
Participant Observation," in N.K. Denzin and Y.S. Lincoln 
(Eds.), Handbook of Qualitative Research, pp. 248-261. 
Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications, 1994. 
[22] U. Flick, An Introduction to Qualitative Research, 3rd edition,  
London,: Thousand Oaks, 2006. 
[23] Juliet Corbin and Anselm L. Strauss, Basics of Qualitative 
Research: Grounded Theory Procedures and Techniques, 3rd 
edition. Sage, 2008 
[24] R. Dankert, “Using Actor-Network Theory (ANT) doing 
research,” in Publicaties vanaf, 2010 [online]. Available at 
http://ritskedankert.nl/publicaties/2010/-item/using-actor-
network-theory-ant-doing-research 2014.01.12 
[25] R. Nimmo, “Actor-network theory and methodology: social 
research in a more-than-humanworld,” in Methodological 
Innovations Online 6(3), pp 108-119, 2011. 
[26] Algaspel,  “Quacklemanual,” Algaspel, Stockholm, 2011. 
[27] K. Salen and E. Zimmerman, Rules of play: game design 
fundamentals. Cambridge, The MIT Presse, 2004. 
[28] K. Salen and E. Zimmerman, The Game Design Reader: A 
Rules of Play Anthology. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2005 
[29] C. Jessen, Interpretive communities. The reception of 
computer games by children and the young, Odense 
University, 1999 [online]. Available at: http://www.carsten-
jessen.dk/intercom.html 2014.01.12 
[30] H. S. Karoff and C. Jessen, New Play Culture and Playware, 
in Proceedings for BIN2008, Copenhagen, 2008 [online]. 
Available 
at: 
http://vbn.aau.dk/files/73392625/-
3BINjessenkaroff.pdf 2014.01.15 
[31] H. H. Lund and C. Jessen, Playware - intelligent technology 
for children's play. Technical report, Mærsk Insttitute, 
University of Southern Denmark, 2005 [online]. Available at 
http://www.carsten-jessen.dk/playware-article1.pdf 
2014.01.14 
[32] J. Piaget, The psychology of the child. New York: Basic 
Books, 1972 
[33] L. S. Vygotsky, “Play and Its Role in the Mental 
Development of the Child,” in Soviet Psychology 5, pp. 6–18, 
1967 
[34] D. Singer, R. M. Golinkoff and K. Hirsh-Pasek (Eds.), 
Play=Learning: How play motivates and enhances children’s 
cognitive and social-emotional growth. New York, NY: 
Oxford University Press, 2006. 
[35] J. Huizinga, Homo Ludens: A Study of the Play Element in 
Culture. Beacon Press, Boston, 1955. 
[36] B. Sutton-Smith, The Ambiguity of Play. Cambridge, Ma: 
Harvard University Press, 1997. 
[37] H. 
Rodriguez, 
“The 
Playful 
and 
the 
Serious: 
An 
approximation to Huizinga's Homo Ludens,” in Game 
Studies, vol. 6 iss 1, December 2006. 
[38] L. H. Larsen, L. Schou, H. H. Lund and H. Langberg, “The 
Physical Effect of Exergames in Healthy Elderly—A 
Systematic Review”in Games for Health, 2(4), 2013. 
[39] H. H. Lund and J. D. Jessen, “Effects of Short-Term Training 
of Community-Dwelling Elderly with Modular Interactive 
Tiles,” in Games for Health, 3(5), 2014. 
[40] G. Bateson, “A Theory of Play and Fantasy,” in Salen, Katie 
og Zimmermand, Eric (eds.), The Game Design Reader: A 
Rules of Play Anthology. Cambridge: The MIT Presse, 2006. 
[41] G. Bateson, “The message 'this is play,” in B. Schaffner (Ed.), 
Group processes: Transactions of the second conference, pp. 
145–242. New York: Josiah Macy, Jr. Foundation, 1956. 
[42] M. J. Apter and J. H. Kerr, ”A Structural Phenomenology of 
Play,” in John H. Kerr and Michael J. Apter (ed.), Adult Play. 
Amsterdam: 
Swets 
and 
Zeitlinger, 
1991.
 
 
 
 
 

