Integration of Up-to-Date Technologies for Emergency Response 
Fire Response Community in Smart Space 
 
Alexander Smirnov, Tatiana Levashova, Nikolay Shilov, Alexey Kashevnik 
Laboratory of Computer Aided Integrated Systems 
St. Petersburg Institute for Informatics and Automation of the Russian Academy of Sciences 
SPIIRAS, 39, 14th line, St. Petersburg, 199178, Russia 
{smir, tatiana.levashova, nick, alexey}@iias.spb.su 
 
 
Abstract—The paper addresses the problem of organizing a 
resource community in a smart space. The resources making 
up the community aim at joint emergency response actions. A 
smart framework for integrating emerging technologies of 
smart space, Web-services and Web-based communities was 
developed. In this framework, Web-services represent smart 
space’s resources and Web-based community members. A 
service-oriented architecture was designed to coordinate Web-
service interactions. The smart framework applicability was 
tested via a scenario-based organization of an emergency 
response community aiming at fire response actions. The main 
research challenge is to show how facilities provided by the 
emerging technologies of Web-based communities and smart 
spaces can be used for emergency management. 
Keywords—smart space; service-oriented architecture; 
Web-services; Web-based community; emergency response 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Emerging technologies of Web-based communities, 
smart spaces, and Web-services, have the potential to impact 
emergency management dramatically. The research on the 
investigation of the possibilities of these technologies for 
emergency response was initially introduced in [1]. 
Web-based communities offer advantages of instant 
information exchange that is not possible in real-life 
communities. Availability of operational information [2][3] 
as well as potentialities to instant information exchange 
[4][5][6] are of great importance to success in emergency 
response operations. Usually, in such operations joint efforts 
of independent parties are required. To involve the parties in 
the emergency response actions and to coordinate them, 
operational information about the parties’ facilities, 
availabilities, locations, etc. is needed. In this connection, 
organization of a community of emergency response actors 
as a Web-based community, whose members can share and 
exchange operational information, seems to be a promising 
idea. 
Unfortunately, in real life it is occurred quite often that 
people would not like sharing information – “At the agency 
level, and even within agencies, there has been the culture 
that you don’t share information for a variety of reasons, 
whether it’s because of classification or “need-to-know,” you 
just don’t share information. There are also sometimes some 
bureaucratic or personal reasons [7]”. Smart spaces provide 
good facilities to overcome this problem since a smart space 
is a sharable system by definition. Smart space is any virtual 
or real location equipped with passive and active artifacts. 
These artifacts have the processing and communication 
capabilities to interact with each other in a (mutually) 
beneficial way [8]. The smart spaces gather information from 
the environment and provide embedded services according to 
this information. This means first, that people do not have to 
provide any information if they do not have intentions of 
doing that; instead, the smart space will do this, and second, 
that smart spaces act in a context-aware manner. 
The information sharing facilities provided by Web-
based communities and smart spaces have suggested an idea 
to combine these facilities for organization of emergency 
response communities. These facilities are supplemented 
with smart spaces’ capabilities to context aware service 
provision. 
Any smart space is comprised of a large number of 
informational, computational, and acting resources. Web-
services offer advantages of seamless information exchange 
between autonomous resources of smart spaces [9]. This fact 
was a reason to use Web-services as mediators between 
resources of the smart space and members of the emergency 
response community. 
Research presented in this paper addresses the 
organization of a resource community in a smart space. The 
purpose of the community organization is participation of its 
members in emergency response actions. The main research 
challenge is to show how facilities provided by the emerging 
technologies of Web-based communities and smart spaces 
can be used for emergency management. 
A smart framework that serves to integrate concepts of 
smart space, Web-services and Web-based communities is 
proposed to achieve the research purpose. This framework is 
based on the earlier developed hybrid technology supporting 
context aware operational decision support in pervasive 
environments [10]. Although some research has been done 
since the hybrid technology was published, this paper 
presents first extension of this technology with Web-based 
communities. 
In the framework, resources of the smart space are 
represented by sets of Web-services. As a result of this 
representation, 
the 
emergency 
response 
community 
comprises Web-services representing units taking these 
actions. Service-oriented architecture is used to coordinate 
101
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Web-service interactions. The Web-services constituting this 
architecture implement resources’ functionalities, produce 
model of the emergency situation, provide emergency 
response services, and represent participants of the 
emergency response actions and other people somehow 
involved in the emergency situation. An applicability of the 
proposed framework is demonstrated via a scenario-based 
organization of a Web-based community aiming at fire 
response.  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II 
provides a comparative analysis of the present research with 
related ones. In Section III the scenario of fire response 
actions is described. The smart framework is discussed in 
Section IV. Results of scenario execution are given in 
Section V. Main research findings and approach limitations 
are discussed in the Conclusion. 
II. 
RELATED RESEARCH 
This Section focuses on approaches dealing with 
integration of different emerging technologies to multi-
parties cooperation, particularly to emergency response. The 
main focus of the discussion is Web-based communities and 
smart spaces since the combination of facilities provided by 
these technologies is the main research challenge. Other 
problems that the present research concerns as e.g., 
ontology management, service composition, constraint 
satisfaction problem solving, etc. are out of consideration in 
this Section. 
The role of social media and online communities in 
emergency situations is being thoroughly investigated 
within the research area of crisis informatics [11]. Online 
forums [12], Web portals [13], Tweeter [14][15], micro-
blogging [16], social networks [17][18], and other forms of 
social media are believed to be powerful tools enabling 
collaboration of different parties to respond more effectively 
to emergencies. 
There is no extensive literature on the subject of 
emergency management in smart spaces. One of the 
possible examples is DrillSim environment [19]. The 
purpose of this environment is to play out a crisis response 
activity where agents might be either computer agents or 
real people playing diverse roles. An activity in DrillSim 
occurs in a hybrid world that is composed of (a) the 
simulated world generated by a multi-agent simulator and 
(b) a real world captured by a smart space. In order to 
capture real actors in the virtual space, DrillSim utilizes a 
sensing infrastructure that monitors and extracts information 
from real actors that is needed by simulator (such as agent 
location, agent state, etc.). 
To some extent potentialities of smart spaces in 
emergency have been exploited in an architecture that 
intends to improve the collaboration of rescue operators in 
emergency management via their assistance by a Process 
Management System [20]. This system is installed on the 
smart phones and PDAs of the rescue operators. It manages 
the execution of emergency-management processes by 
orchestrating the human operators with their software 
applications and some automatic services to access the 
external data sources and sensors. 
In part of integration of emerging technology-driven 
paradigms for different purposes, ideas of an integration of 
paradigms of Web services, Web 2.0, pervasive, grids, 
cloud computing, situated computing, and crowd sourcing 
that are considered to be the candidates that can support 
collective resource utilization and multi-parties cooperation 
with mutual interests [21] can be pointed out. Integration of 
paradigms of virtual organizations and Semantic Web is 
offered to be used for organization of resources and services 
into a collaborative association to handle different kinds of 
emergency events [22]. 
The above approaches address different aspects of 
emergency management. All they integrate various emerging 
technologies to achieve their goals. The novelty of the 
present research lies in combination of information from the 
smart space and from Web-based communities for 
coordination of emergency response activities. 
Like the approaches considering the problem of 
searching for efficient transportation routes within the 
emergency response problem (e.g., [23][24]), this research 
searches for such routes and uses them as the basis for 
joining independent units from diverse locations in a 
collaborative community. The community members are 
coordinated via Web-based interface. They are provided with 
the ability to exchange operational information and interact 
on-line using different Internet accessible devices. 
III. 
SCENARIO 
Suddenly, in some area inside a smart space the 
emergency event of a fire has started. Resources of the smart 
space as, e.g., fire sensors recognize it and send the 
appropriate signal to a smart space’s service taking the role 
of the dispatcher. In the surroundings of this area available 
mobile fire brigades and emergency teams as well as 
hospitals with free capacities are found. Based on some 
criteria (see Section V) several of the brigades, teams, and 
hospitals are selected for the joint fire response actions. A 
plan for these actions is proposed to the selected emergency 
responders. The plan is a set of emergency responders with 
transportation routes for the mobile responders, required 
helping services, and schedules for the responders’ activities. 
The plan is displayed on Internet accessible devices of the 
hospital administrators and the leaders of the fire brigades 
and emergency teams. These persons are organized in a 
Web-based community to exchange information about their 
abilities, availabilities, surrounding conditions, etc. with the 
purpose of the joint actions coordination. 
Potential victims are evacuated from the fire place using 
the ridesharing technology. Potential victims here are people 
who have been out of danger so far or have got themselves 
out of the dangerous area. In the scenario it is proposed that 
persons who need to be evacuated set the location where 
they would like to be conveyed into an application installed 
in their mobile devices. The application finds drivers able to 
transport these persons. The found drivers receive an 
102
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

appropriate signal. In the mobile devices of the drivers and 
persons the ridesharing routes are displayed. 
Generally speaking, the destinations for the evacuated 
people do not matter. In actual usage evacuee can just run 
the appropriate application and it will search for bypassing 
cars. 
It is supposed that the scenario takes place in a smart 
space. The main requirement to fulfill the scenario is Internet 
accessibility for the persons involved in it. A smart 
framework has been developed for this scenario.  
IV. 
SMART FRAMEWORK 
Smart Framework is defined here as a framework that is 
intended to coordinate operations of various autonomous 
resources of a smart space in context aware way to assist 
people in attaining their objectives. Sensors, databases, 
applications and other kinds of components of the smart 
space including humans and organizations are regarded as 
resources. The framework is planned to conceptually show 
how smart spaces and Web-based communities can facilitate 
the coordination and effectiveness of emergency response 
operations. 
Technical 
problems 
like 
failed 
Internet 
connections, discharged devices, power off, etc. are not 
addressed in the framework. As well, reliability and security 
problems 
(unregistered 
services, 
information 
incompleteness, unauthorized access, etc.) are out of the 
research scope. 
The framework (Figure 1) is supported by an application 
ontology that represents non-instantiated domain & problem 
solving knowledge of the emergency management domain 
[25]. This ontology is formalized by means of the formalism 
of object-oriented constraint networks. Problems represented 
in such a way can be processed as constraint satisfaction 
problem.  
The application ontology specifies knowledge that can be 
needed in various emergency situations. Generally, in 
different 
situations 
different 
problems 
can 
arise 
independently on the situation type. In particular situation 
only a piece of knowledge relevant to this situation is 
needed. In this connection, whenever an emergency event 
occurs, knowledge and information relevant to the current 
emergency situation are extracted from the application 
ontology and integrated into an abstract context. This 
context 
reduces 
the 
volume 
of 
knowledge 
and, 
correspondingly, the complexity of the problem to be solved. 
The task of relevant knowledge determination is treated 
as ontology slicing operation. The abstract context is an 
ontology-based model of the current emergency situation. As 
the two components make up the application ontology, the 
context specifies domain knowledge describing the current 
emergency situation and problems to be solved in this 
particular situation. 
The domain constituent of the abstract context is 
instantiated by resources of the smart space. An operational 
context is then produced. The operational context embeds the 
specifications of the problems to be solved. The input 
parameters of these problems, which correspond to 
properties of the classes of the domain constituent, are 
instantiated. The operational context reflects any changes in 
information, so it is a near real-time picture of the current 
emergency situation. The operational context is the base for 
organization of a community that unites members whose aim 
is taking joint actions on emergency response. 
In the framework, the resources of the smart space as 
well as people involved in the emergency in any way are 
represented by Web-services. Service profiles capture 
capabilities of the resources, organizations, and people and 
delivery constraints, i.e., the profiles describe the functional 
Emergency 
situation 
Services
Web-service 
interface 
Constraint 
satisfaction 
problem solving 
Smart space 
Victims and 
resources
Decision making 
Emergency response 
plan 
Application ontology 
Abstract context 
Operational context
Web-based 
community 
Profile 
Ontology-based 
resource 
representation 
Emergency response 
community 
Relationship 
Correspondence 
Reference 
Information flow
Figure 1. Generic scheme of smart framework 
103
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

and non-functional service semantics [26]. The functional 
service semantics is described in terms of the input and 
output parameters of the service by means of WSDL. The 
WSDL service descriptions are complemented with SA-
WSDL [27] annotations. The annotations enable to describe 
the non-functional service semantics, which is expressed 
with 
respect 
to 
service’s 
cost 
model, 
availability, 
competence, and weight. The problem of compliance of 
service data models with the internal data model are resolved 
by wrappers. Due to the representation used the community 
purposed to emergency response actions comprises Web-
services representing entities taking these actions.  
The community is organized by specially developed 
emergency response services embedded in the smart space. 
Input data for the community organization are information 
characterizing the current emergency situation, particularly 
the situation type, and types of services relevant to the 
response actions. The types of services are represented in the 
abstract context. The current situation is represented by the 
operational context. 
The emergency response services select possible 
community members and generate a set of feasible plans for 
actions. The set of plans is generated using the constraint 
satisfaction 
technology. 
A 
heuristic-based 
algorithm 
implements the plan generation [28]. Then, an efficient plan 
is selected from the set and submitted to the possible 
community members to their approval. This is the case of 
Web-based communications on the plan implementation. 
The members participating in such communications organize 
a Web-based community. If the plan is approved by all the 
members the emergency response community is considered 
to have been organized. Otherwise, another plan is taken up. 
The option of rejection is provided for due to the rapidly 
changing emergency situations – something may happen 
between the moment when a plan is selected and time when 
the possible community members receive this plan. The 
process of re-planning is an iterative process repeated till a 
plan suited all the members is found. The approved plan is 
thought to be the guide to joint actions for the members of 
the emergency response community. 
As practice has shown, emergency response actions, 
besides actions on emergency control and first aid, have to 
foresee opportunities to evacuate potential victims from the 
dangerous areas. In the smart framework this purpose is 
achieved by applying functions that the ridesharing 
technology provides. 
A. Service-Oriented Architecture 
To coordinate interactions of the Web-services within the 
smart framework a service-oriented architecture is proposed. 
It comprises three groups of services (Figure 2). 
The first group is made up of core services responsible 
for the registration of the Web-services in the service register 
and producing the real-world model of the emergency 
situation, i.e., creation of the abstract and operational 
contexts. Services belonging to this group are as follows: 
• 
registration service registers the Web-services in the 
service register; 
• 
application ontology service provides access to the 
application ontology; 
• 
abstract context service creates, stores, maintains, 
and reuses the abstract contexts; 
• 
operational context service produces operational 
contexts. 
Web-services 
comprising 
the 
second 
group 
are 
responsible for the generation of alternative plans for actions 
and the selection of an efficient plan. This group contains: 
• 
emergency response service integrates information 
provided by different resources about the number of 
injured people, and the location, intensity and 
severity of an emergency event; 
• 
routing service generates a set of feasible plans for 
emergency response actions; 
• 
smart logistics service implements the ridesharing 
technology;  
• 
decision making service selects an efficient plan for 
actions and coordinates the (re)planning procedure. 
The third group comprises sets of services responsible for 
the representation of the resources, organizations, and people 
and implementation of their functions. This group includes: 
• 
resource services provide data stored in the 
resources’ profiles and implement functions of the 
resources (smart ones as well); 
• 
acting services provide data stored in the profiles of 
the emergency responders and victims; represent 
roles 
played 
by 
people 
or 
organizations; 
communicate on the plan implementation. 
B. Organization of Web-based Community 
We describe a Web-based community aimed at fire 
response actions. 
Smart space services 
Fulfill resources’ functions 
and represent members of Web-based community 
 
  
Acting services 
Core services 
Create model of the current situation 
Application 
ontology service
Abstract context 
service 
Operational 
context service 
Emergency response services 
Organize Web-based community 
Emergency 
response 
service 
Routing 
service 
Decision 
making 
service 
Smart 
logistics 
service 
 
Resource services
Registration service 
Registers Web-services in the service register
Communication bus 
Figure 2. Service-oriented architecture 
104
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The starting point for community organization is 
receiving by emergency response service of the signal that a 
fire event is taking place. Fire-prevention smart sensors had 
recognized some fire and sent this signal. Other kinds of 
smart information resources inform emergency response 
service of the number of injured people, and the location, 
intensity and severity of the fire. 
Based on the information about the fire location, 
emergency response service requests the GeoInformation 
System (GIS) for a map of the fire area and the adjacent 
territory. The map contains some predetermined information 
as locations of the airports, buildings, roads, railway lines, 
water bodies, etc. 
Using knowledge represented in the application ontology 
abstract context service determines what kinds of mobile 
teams and organizations providing response services are 
needed for the fire response actions and kinds of roles of the 
individuals involved in the fire situation. This service 
extracts knowledge related to the listed kinds of concepts 
from the application ontology and integrates it into an 
abstract context. In the case of fire, such kinds of teams are 
fire brigades and emergency teams; kinds of organizations 
are hospitals; kinds of roles are leader of a team, car driver, 
victim, etc. The referred kinds of concepts represent objects 
to be instantiated in the operational context. 
Operational context service instantiates the abstract 
context and produces in that way an operational context. For 
the instantiation operational context service uses information 
provided by the following resources of the smart space: 
• 
GPS-based devices installed on the vehicles of 
mobile emergency teams and fire brigades to fix the 
positions of these teams and brigades and to 
determine what types of vehicles they use; 
• 
databases to find addresses and contact information 
of the fire departments, emergency services 
organizations, and hospitals; 
• 
smart sensors to receive information which routes 
are available (e.g., where traffic jumps are, or some 
roads can be closed for traffic for some reasons); 
• 
hospital administration systems to find out free 
capacities of the hospitals. 
Operational context service passes the operational 
context to routing service. Routing service analyses types of 
routes (roads, airlines) that the emergency teams and fire 
brigades can follow depending on the vehicles they use. 
Based on the information about the number of injured 
people, the intensity and severity of the fire routing service 
calculates number of emergency teams and fire brigades 
needed to succeed in the response actions. The information 
about the number of injured people, the intensity and 
severity of the fire is received from emergency response 
service. 
Then, routing service selects possible fire brigades, 
emergency teams, and hospitals that can be involved in the 
response operation and generates a set of feasible plans for 
actions. The actions are scheduled taking into account the 
availabilities of fire brigades, emergency teams, and 
hospitals; the types of vehicles that teams and brigades use; 
the routes available for these types; and the hospitals’ free 
capacities. The problem of transportation routes planning 
incorporates the shortest-path problem. 
Decision making service using a set of criteria selects an 
efficient plan from the set of feasible plans. The selected 
plan and the operational context are submitted to the leaders 
of the emergency teams, fire brigades that have been 
included in the plan, and to the hospitals’ administrators. 
They have access to the operational context through any 
Internet-accessible devices (notebooks, PDAs, mobile 
phones, etc.). These persons organize a Web-based 
community to communicate on the plan implementation.  
Persons who need to be evacuated invoke smart logistics 
service that is responsible for the evacuation. Clients of this 
service are supposed to be installed on the Internet-accessible 
devices of car drivers and other people involved in the fire 
situation. The persons enter the locations they would like to 
be conveyed. Smart logistics service determines the persons’ 
locations and searches for cars going to or by the same or 
close destinations that the persons would like to be. It 
searches the cars among the vehicles passing the persons’ 
locations. This service reads information about the 
destinations that the car drivers are going to from the 
navigators that the drivers use or from the drivers’ profiles. 
The profiles store periodic routes of the drivers. 
Based 
on 
the 
information 
about 
locations 
and 
destinations of the person and the found cars, routing service 
generates a set of feasible routes for person transportations. 
Decision making service determines efficient ridesharing 
routes. The criteria of the efficiency are minimum evacuation 
time and maximum evacuation capacity. 
Smart logistics service sends appropriate signals to the 
drivers included in the ridesharing routes and displays on the 
drivers’ devices the routes each driver is selected for. The 
points where the driver is expected to pick up the 
passenger(s) is indicated in the routes. The ways the 
passengers have to walk to these points are routed for them 
as well. Besides the routes, the passengers are informed of 
the model, color, and license plate number of the car 
intended for their transportation. 
The view of the routes displayed on the devices of the 
individuals involved in the fire situation depends on the roles 
of these individuals. 
C. Communications on Plan Implementation 
The used model of decision making oversteps the limits 
of the three-phase model [29] towards communications of 
emergency responders on the implementation of the decision 
proposed by decision making service. The emergency 
responders communicate online using Internet-accessible 
devices and Web-based interface. Procedures of making 
decisions on plan implementation by professional emergency 
responders (emergency teams, fire brigades, hospitals) and 
by car drivers and evacuees are different. 
The procedure of making decisions by the professional 
emergency responders is as follows (Figure 3). If the plan is 
approved by all the responders, this plan is supposed to be 
the plan for actions. Otherwise, either this plan is adjusted 
(so that the potential participant who refused to act 
105
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

according to the plan does not appear in the adjusted plan) 
or another set of plans is produced. 
The plan adjustment is a redistribution of the actions 
among emergency responders that are contained in the set of 
feasible plans. If such a distribution does not lead to a 
considerable loss of time (particularly, the estimated time of 
the transportation of the injured people to hospitals does not 
exceed “The Golden Hour” [30]) then the adjusted plan is 
submitted to the renewed set of emergency responders for 
approval. If a distribution is not possible or leads to loss of 
response time a new set of plans is produced, from which a 
new efficient plan is selected and submitted to approval. 
As soon as representatives of all the emergency teams, 
fire brigades, and hospitals have approved the plan they are 
in, decision making service sends them an appropriate signal 
that the joint actions can be started. 
Figure 4 shows service interactions when all the 
emergency responders agree to participate in the joint 
actions according to the plan selected by decision making 
service (in the figure the emergency responders are 
represented by vehicles that they use – ambulance, fire 
truck, and rescue helicopter). We could see that decision 
making service sends simultaneous messages to all the 
emergency responders with the plan for each responder, 
waits their replays on plan acceptance (Ready), and sends 
them simultaneous messages to take the response actions 
(Start). 
Figure 5 demonstrates service interactions in case when 
all the ambulances selected for the response actions are not 
ready to participate in them and routing service does not 
manage to adjust the selected plan. Two ambulances 
(Ambulance 1 and Ambulance 2) replay “Not ready” to the 
messages of decision making service. This replay is 
accompanied with the messages to decision masking service 
and operational service with the reasons of their refusals. 
Examples of such reasons are the road has been destroyed, 
the ambulance has blocked, etc. 
Figure 3. Decision making by professional emergency responders 
Decision making 
service
Ambulance 
Rescue 
helicopter
Fire truck
URL_AmbulServ, Route_Ambulance 
URL_FTServ, Route_FireTruck
URL_RHServ, Destination
Ready
Ready
Ready 
Start
Start
Start 
Figure 4. Emergency responders accept emergency response plan 
Decision making  
service 
Ambulance 1
Fire truck
Rescue 
helicopter
Ambulance 2
Routing 
service
Operational 
service
URL_Ambul1Serv, Route_Ambulance1
URL_FTServ, Route_FireTruck
URL_RHServ, Destination
Not ready, Reason 1 
Ready 
Exclude URL_Ambul1Serv, URL_Ambul2Serv
1: URL11_Route11, URL21_Route12,...; 2: URL21, Route_21, URL_22, Route_22,...
Reason 1
Reason 1
Ready
URL_Ambul2Serv, Route_Ambulance2
Not ready, Reason 2
Reason 2
Reason 2
CurrentSituation_Req
CurrentSituation_Rep
Figure 5. Plan regeneration 
106
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Decision making service duplicates the messages with 
the reasons for operational service. The duplication is a 
guarantee that operational service will receive information 
that it was unaware of up to this moment. As well decision 
making service sends the message on excluding the two 
ambulances from the list of available emergency responders 
to routing service. 
Operational service corrects the operational context 
according to the information contained in the reasons. 
Routing service requests operation service of the 
operational 
context 
that 
represents 
the 
up-to-date 
information of the emergency situation, generates a new set 
of plans, and sends it to decision making service. 
Decision making on an evacuation plan is in making 
agreement between the driver and the evacuee to go 
according to the scheduled ridesharing route (Figure 6). In 
case, when there is no agreement between a driver and an 
evacuee, another car for evacuation of this passenger is 
sought for. At that, the confirmed routes are not revised. 
The emergency responders that are in the approved plan 
intended for professional emergency responders and the 
drivers participating in the evacuation organise the 
emergency response community. 
V. 
SCENARIO USE CASE 
The scenario (Section III) execution is demonstrated via 
organizing an emergency response community aimed at joint 
actions to response on a fire event happened in an urban 
area. The fire event was simulated using an internal platform 
that supports a GIS-based simulation. The platform is able to 
generate random failures and locations of professional 
emergency responders, random route availabilities, random 
flows of cars; it allows ones to input contextual information 
on types of emergency events, number of victims, etc.  
In the scenario it is simulated that the fire has happened 
in a building, its level of severity is low, 9 injured people 
have to be transported to hospitals. 
The application ontology used to create model of the fire 
situation had been created by experts via integration of parts 
of existing ontologies accessible through the Internet. To 
support the integration and necessary ontology modifications 
an ontology management tool – WebDESO [31] – was used. 
The application ontology has 7 taxonomy levels, contains 
more than 600 classes, 160 class attributes, and 120 
relationships.  
Figure 7 presents the abstract context created to model 
the fire situation. This context has 4 taxonomy levels, 
contains 17 bottom-level classes to be instantiated, 38 class 
attributes, and around 30 relationships of different types. 
Problem solving knowledge is hidden in the class 
“emergency response”. This class specifies the following 
problems: 
• 
select feasible hospitals, emergency teams, fire 
brigades, and car drivers; 
• 
determine 
feasible 
transportation 
routes 
for 
ambulances, and fire engines depending on the 
transportation network and traffic situation; 
• 
calculate the shortest routes for transportation of the 
emergency teams by ambulances, fire brigades by 
fire engines, and evacuees by cars; 
• 
produce a set of feasible response plans for 
emergency teams, fire brigades, and hospitals; 
• 
produce a set of feasible ridesharing routes. 
In the simulated scenario 7 available fire brigades, 8 
emergency teams, 5 hospitals having free capacities for 4, 4, 
2, 3, and 3 patients are found in the territory adjacent to the 
fire place; 6 fire trucks and 1 fire helicopter are allocated to 
the fire brigades, 7 ambulances and 1 rescue helicopter are 
allocated to the emergency teams; 1 fire brigade is calculated 
to be required to extinguish the fire. The plan for actions 
designed for the emergency teams supposes that one vehicle 
can house one injured person.  
A set of feasible plans for actions was generated for the 
criteria of minimal time and cost of transportation of all the 
victims to hospitals, and minimal number of mobile teams 
involved in the response actions. The set of feasible plans 
comprised 4 plans. 
Figure 6. Decision making by car drivers and evacuees 
Figure 7. Fire situation: abstract context (a piece)
107
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

An efficient plan (Figure 8) was selected based on the 
key indicator of minimal time of victim transportations. In 
Figure 8 the big dot denotes the fire location; dotted lines 
depict routes to be used for transportations of the emergency 
teams and fire brigades selected for the response actions. The 
plan is approved by all the action participants. As it is seen 
from the figure, Web-based community comprises 1 fire 
brigade going by 1 fire helicopter, 7 emergency teams 
allocated to 1 rescue helicopter and 6 ambulances, and 3 
hospitals having free capacities for 4, 2, and 3 patients. 1 
ambulance (encircled in the figure) and the rescue helicopter 
go from the fire location to hospitals twice. The estimated 
time of the operation of transportations of all the victims to 
hospitals is 1 h. 25 min. Figure 9 shows part of the plan 
displayed on the smart phone of a member of an emergency 
team going by ambulance. 
Results of evacuation of safe people using the ridesharing 
technology are as follows: 26 persons desire to be evacuated 
from the scene of fire; 22 persons have been driven directly 
to the destinations by 16 cars whereas for 4 persons no cars 
have been found. Examples of ways routed for a driver and a 
passenger are given in Figure 10 and Figure 11. The 
encircled car in the figures shows the location where the 
driver is offered to pick up the passenger. The persons that 
cannot be evacuated by passing cars are informed that they 
can be evacuated by taxi. If they agree, smart logistics 
service makes orders for taxi. 
The Web-based community organised comprises 1) the 
professional emergency responders scheduled in the fire 
response plan (Figure 8) in the persons of the leaders of the 
emergency teams and fire brigades as well as the 
administrators of the hospitals, 2) the cars’ drivers 
participated in the confirmation of the ridesharing routes, 
and 3) the evacuees. The emergency teams, fire brigades, 
hospitals, and car drivers constitute the emergency response 
community. 
The Smart-M3 platform [32] has been used for the 
scenario implementation. Tablet PC Nokia N810 (Maemo4 
OS) and smart phone N900 (Maemo5 OS) play role of user 
devices. Personal PCs based on Pentium IV processors and 
running under Ubuntu 10.04 and Windows XP are used for 
hosting other services. 
In the experiments with different datasets the execution 
time from the moment the emergency event was registered to 
the moment of producing the operational context took 
around 0.0007 s. The time taken to generate the sets of action 
plans for different datasets is shown in Table 1 and Figure 
12. The approximating equation is quadratic for the total 
amount of objects involved in the response actions. The 
experimentation showed that the system already takes a 
reasonable time for result generation. Presented results are 
based on the usage of a research prototype running on a 
desktop PC. In a production environment the system is 
aimed to be run on dedicated servers and it is expected to be 
responsive enough to handle a large amount of objects. The 
future development of Smart-M3 up to the production level 
with a higher capacity could also contribute to the system 
performance. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The problem of integration of the emerging technology-
driven paradigms of smart spaces, Web-services, and Web-
based communities for the fire response purposes was 
investigated. Most probably, judging from the literature, this 
is the first investigation on the integration of the mentioned 
technologies for emergency management aims.  
Figure 8. Plan for actions for fire brigades, emergency teams, and hospitals
Figure 9. Plan for actions for an emergency team 
Figure 10. Ridesharing route: driver’s view 
108
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A smart framework that serves to integrate concepts of 
smart space, Web-services and Web-based communities has 
been proposed. This framework is developed to operate with 
Web-services representing the physical resources of a smart 
space and parties and individuals involved in a fire situation. 
The parties and individuals that are fire responders form a 
Web-based community. It is shown that they can 
communicate online independently on the devices they use, 
to exchange the operational information or make decisions 
on their readiness to participate in the joint response actions. 
In this direction, the present research exceeds the bounds of 
the three-phase Simon’s model [29] towards actor 
communications on the decision implementation. 
Due to the smart framework is built around the 
application ontology of the emergency management domain, 
this framework can be applied to organization of emergency 
management communities for response to different types of 
emergencies. 
An original feature of the way the fire response actions 
are planned is in the involvement of ridesharing technology. 
Previously, the authors of this paper considered professional 
emergency responders to act on emergency response. In this 
paper, the community of professionals is extended with 
volunteers. Ridesharing serves as an example of the 
technology based on which volunteers can be involved in the 
emergency response actions. 
To coordinate Web-service interactions within the smart 
framework the service-oriented architecture has been 
designed. The architecture contains a set of Web-services 
that is supposed to be sufficient to organize any fire response 
communities independently on types of operational units to 
be involved in response actions. 
So far, the applicability of the smart framework was 
tested for response to traffic accidents and different kinds of 
fire events (fire in a building, a port, a city area). This paper 
presents the scenario of planning fire response actions in an 
urban area. The scenario execution has shown that the 
paradigm of smart space provides efficient facilities to 
successful emergency response. Moreover, it can be 
concluded that ridesharing technology can be used for 
evacuation of potential victims from dangerous areas. 
Some limitations of the developed framework are worth 
mentioning. The framework does not take into account cases 
when it is not found enough available acting resources or 
when some resources become disabled at time of the 
response actions. As well, the framework does not address 
the problem of lack of passing cars for evacuation of people 
from the fire area and the problem of searching for a route 
with changes if there are not any cars nearby the fire area 
going directly to the person destination. The listed 
limitations will be subjects for future research. Some more 
future research will address the problem of dynamic 
adaptability to following emergency events or to events 
concurrently happening in near-by locations. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The present research was supported partly by projects 
funded by grants 10-07-00368, 11-07-00045, 11-07-00058, 
12-07-00298 of the Russian Foundation for Basic Research, 
the project 213 of the research program “Information, 
control, and intelligent technologies & systems” of the 
Russian Academy of Sciences (RAS), the project 2.2 of the 
Nano- & Information Technologies Branch of RAS, and the 
contracts 14.740.11.0357 and 11.519.11.4025 of the Ministry 
of Education and Science of Russian Federation. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Smirnov, A. Kashevnik, T. Levashova, and N. Shilov, “Web-
Based Community for Fire Response Actions: Scenario and Smart 
Framework,” Proc. first Intl. Conf. on Advanced Collaborative 
Networks, Systems and Applications (COLLA 2011), IARIA, 2011, 
USB-flash drive. 
[2] 
K. Luyten, F. Winters, K. Coninx, D. Naudts, and I. Moerman, “A 
situation-aware mobile system to support fire brigades in emergency 
situations,” in CAMS 2006, the 2nd Intl. Workshop on context-aware 
mobile systems, 2006, pp. 1966–1975. 
[3] 
P. Murphy, A. McGinness, and D. Guinan, Major incident review of 
toodyay fire December 2009, Tech. Rep., Australia, Manuka: Noetic 
Solutions Pty, 2010. 
[4] 
L. Hauenstein, T. Gao, T. W. Sze, D. Crawford, A. Alm, and 
D. White “A cross-functional service-oriented architecture to support 
Figure 11. Ridesharing route: passenger’s view 
TABLE I.  
EXPERIMENT RESULTS 
Number of 
emergency 
responders 
Number of 
victims 
Total number 
of objects 
Time of plan 
generations, s. 
10 
10 
20 
4.85 
10 
20 
30 
9.12 
20 
20 
40 
17.51 
30 
30 
60 
37.93 
40 
40 
80 
66.13 
50 
50 
100 
101.29 
0,00
20,00
40,00
60,00
80,00
100,00
120,00
20
30
40
60
80
100
Time, sec.
Total number of objects
Figure 12. Dependence between number of objects involved in emergency
and times of response plan generations 
109
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

real-time information exchange in emergency medical response,” in 
IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2006, pp. 6478–6481 [EMBS '06, IEEE 
28th Annual Intl. Conf.], doi: 10.1109/IEMBS.2006.260878. 
[5] 
N. Owens, A. Armstrong, P. Sullivan, C. Mitchell, D. Newton, 
R. Brewster,and T. Trego, Traffic incident management handbook, 
U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, 
Office of Transportation Operations, 2010. 
[6] 
M. Turoff, M. Chumer, B. Van de Walle, and X. Yao, “The design of 
a dynamic emergency response management information system,” in 
J. Inf. Tech. Theor. Appl., vol. 5, no. 4, 2004, pp. 1–36. 
[7] 
D. Wyllie, “Technology isn’t the (biggest) problem for information 
sharing in law enforcement,” in PoliceOne, April 30, 2009 [online] 
available 
at: 
<http://www.policeone.com/police-products/-
communications/articles/1816539-Technology-isn-t-the-biggest-
problem-for-information-sharing-in-law-enforcement/> 
[accessed 
25.06.2012]. 
[8] 
B. Moltchanov, C. Mannweiler, and J. Simoes, “Context awareness 
enabling 
new 
business 
models 
in 
smart 
spaces,” 
in 
ruSMART/NEW2AN 2010, LNCS, vol. 6294, Springer, 2010, 
pp. 13–25. 
[9] 
C. Schroth, “The Internet of services: global industrialization of 
information intensive services,” in ICDIM'07 [2nd Intl. Conf. on 
Digital Information Management, Lyon, France, 2007], vol. 2, 
pp. 635–642. 
[10] A. Smirnov, T. Levashova, N. Shilov, and A. Kashevnik, “Hybrid 
technology 
for 
self-organization 
of 
resources 
of 
pervasive 
environment for operational decision support,” in Int. J. Artif. Intel. 
T., vol. 19, no. 2, World Sci. Publ. Co., 2010, pp. 211–229, 
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1142/S0218213010000121. 
[11] C. Hagar, “Introduction to special section on crisis informatics,” in 
Bulletin of the American Society for Information Science and 
Technology, vol. 36, no. 5, 2010, pp. 10–12. 
[12] L. Palen, R. H. Starr, and S. Liu, “Online forums supporting 
grassroots participation in emergency preparedness and response,” in 
Commun. ACM, vol. 50, no. 3, 2007, pp. 54–58. 
[13] L. H. Mandel, C. R. McClure, J. Brobst, and E. C. Lanz, “Helping 
libraries prepare for the storm with Web portal technology,” in 
Bulletin of the American Society for Information Science and 
Technology, 2010, vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 22–26. 
[14] K. Starbird and L. Palen, “Voluntweeters:” self-organizing by digital 
volunteers in times of crisis,” Proc. ACM CHI 2011 Conf. on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, 2011, pp. 1071-1080. 
[15] K. Starbird and L. Palen, “(How) will the revolution be retweeted?: 
Information propagation in the 2011 Egyptian uprising,” Proc. 2012 
ACM Conf. on Computer Supported Cooperative Work, 2012, to 
appear. 
[16] S. Vieweg, A. Hughes, K. Starbird, and L. Palen, “Microblogging 
during two natural hazards events: What twitter may contribute to 
situational awareness,” Proc. ACM 2010 Conf. on Computer Human 
Interaction, 2010, pp. 1079–1088. 
[17] G. Armour, “Communities communicating with formal and informal 
systems: being more resilient in times of need,” in Bulletin of the 
American Society for Information Science and Technology, 2010, 
vol. 36, no. 5, 2010, pp. 34–38. 
[18] A. Krakovsky, “The role of social networks in crisis situations: public 
participation and information exchange,” Proc. 7th Intl. ISCRAM 
Conf., 2010, pp. 52–57. 
[19] V. Balasubramanian, 
D. Massaguer, 
S. Mehrotra, 
and 
N. Venkatasubramanian, “DrillSim: a simulation framework for 
emergency response drills,” in AAMAS’06 [5th Intl. Conf. 
Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, Japan, 2006], LNCS, 
vol. 3975, Springer, pp. 237–248. 
[20] T. Catarci, M. Leoni, A. Marrella, and M. Mecella, “The WORKPAD 
project experience: improving the disaster response through process 
management and Geo collaboration,” Proc. 7th Intl. ISCRAM Conf., 
[online] 
available 
at: 
<http://www.iscram.org/ISCRAM2010/-
Papers/136-Catarci_etal.pdf> [accessed 11.02.2012].  
[21] N. Bessis, E. Asimakopoulou, T. French, P. Norrington, and F. Xhafa. 
“The big picture, from grids and clouds to crowds: a data collective 
computational intelligence case proposal for managing disasters,” in 
3PGCIC 2010, [Intl. Conf. P2P, Parallel, Grid, Cloud and Internet 
Computing, Japan, 2010], IEEE Comput. Soc., 2010, pp. 351–356, 
doi: 10.1109/3PGCIC.2010.58. 
[22] Z. Kang-kang, Y. Feng, Z. Wen-yu, and L. Pei-guang, “EDVO: a 
“one-station” emergency response service model based on ontology 
and virtual organization,” Proc. 2008 IEEE Intl. Conf. Computer 
Science and Software Engineering, IEEE Comput. Soc., 2008, 
pp. 223–226, doi: 10.1109/CSSE.2008.1519. 
[23] C.W.W. Ng and D.K.W. Chiu, “e-government integration with Web 
services and alerts: a case study on an emergency route advisory 
system in Hong Kong,” Proc. 39th Hawaii Intl. Conf. System 
Sciences (HICSS'06), vol. 4, IEEE Comput. Soc., 2006, pp. 70.2–
70.2, doi: 10.1109/HICSS.2006.135. 
[24] A. Ling, X. Li, W. Fan, N. An, J. Zhan, L. Li, and Y. Sha, “Blue 
arrow: a Web-based spatially-enabled decision support system for 
emergency evacuation planning,” Proc. 2009 IEEE Intl. Conf. 
Business Intelligence and Financial Engineering, IEEE Comput. Soc., 
2009, pp. 575–578, doi: 10.1109/BIFE.2009.135. 
[25] A. Smirnov, 
T. Levashova, 
A. Krizhanovsky, 
N. Shilov, 
and 
A. Kashevnik, “Self-organizing resource network for traffic accident 
response,” in ISCRAM 2009, [6th Intl. Conf. Information Systems for 
Crisis Response and Management, Gothenburg, Sweden, 2009], 
J. Landgren and S Jul, Eds., 2009, URL: http://www.iscram.org/-
ISCRAM2009/papers/Contributions/ 
177_Self-Organizing%20-
Resource%20Network%20for%20Traffic_Smirnov2009.pdf (access 
date: 26.06.2012). 
[26] M. Klusch, “Semantic Web Service Description,” in Intelligent 
Service Coordination in the Semantic Web, H. Helin and H. Schuldt, 
Eds., Birkhaeuser Verlag, Springer, 2008, pp. 41–67. 
[27] “Semantic annotations for WSDL and XML schema”, in W3C 
Recommendation, 
2007, 
URL: http://www.w3.org/TR/sawsdl/ 
(access date: 26.06.2012). 
[28] A. Smirnov and N. Shilov, “AI-based approaches to solving a 
dynamic logistics problem,” in Künstliche Intelligenz, vol. 24, no. 2, 
Springer, 2010, pp. 143–147.  
[29] H.A. Simon, “Making Management Decisions: The Role of Intuition 
and Emotion,” in Academy of Management Executive, 1987, no. 1, 
pp. 57–64. 
[30] E. B. Lerner and R. M. Moscati, “The Golden Hour: scientific fact or 
medical "Urban Legend?”, in Acad. Emerg. Med., vol. 8, no. 7, 2001, 
pp. 758–760. 
[31] A. Smirnov, M. Pashkin, N. Chilov, and T. Levashova, “KSNet-
approach to knowledge fusion from distributed sources,” in Comput. 
Inform., 2003, vol. 22, pp. 105–142. 
[32] J. Honkola, 
H. Laine, 
R. Brown, 
and 
O. Tyrkko, 
"Smart-M3 
information sharing platform," Proc. IEEE Symp. Computers and 
Communications, IEEE Comput. Soc., 2010, pp. 1041–1046, 
doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1109/ISCC.2010.5546642. 
110
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

