554
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The KOOLO app 
A case study of self-tracking, visualization, and organizing personal moods 
 
Maja van der Velden 
Dept. of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
majava@ifi.uio.no 
Margaret Machniak Sommervold 
Dept. of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
margarma@ifi.uio.no
 
 
Abstract — Self-tracking refers to the regular collection of data 
about oneself. Smartphones and wearables have made self-
tracking a pervasive activity. This paper describes the design 
process of a self-tracking mood functionality, which is part of 
the KOOLO mobile application. The purpose of the KOOLO 
application is to support young patients, teenagers and young 
adults with long-term health challenges, in the transition from 
child-oriented to adult-oriented healthcare. We implemented a 
design approach, based on a participatory design process 
combined with a focus on the wellbeing of the whole person, 
not just the diagnosis. The result was a mood tracking 
functionality that collects qualitative mood data in the form of 
color-tagged photos. The visualization of the data resulted in 
both a quantification of the data as well as in an interactive 
mood map. The organization of the color-tagged photos, in the 
form of a timeline and map, enables  the user access to the 
mood data in different ways.  
Keywords — lived body, lifeworld; m-health; participatory 
design; qualitative self; transition; visualization, young patients. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper presents our design research on a mood 
tracking functionality for a mobile phone application for 
young patients, who are preparing themselves for the 
transition to adult health care [1]. It addresses the self-
tracking of the expression of moods and emotional 
experiences, through visualization, in a mobile phone 
application called KOOLO. The main aim of KOOLO is to 
support young patients in the transition from child-oriented 
healthcare to adult-oriented healthcare. This research is part 
of the KULU research and design project, which focuses on 
the design and use of interactive technologies with and for 
young people (15-25 years old) with chronic health 
challenges. KULU is a Norwegian acronym for Cool 
Technologies for Youth with Long-term Health Challenges 
(http://www.kulu.no) 
Self-tracking or self-monitoring refers to the practice of 
collecting data about oneself on a regular basis. It “seeks to 
make known something that is typically not a subject of 
reflection, with the aim of converting previously undetected 
bodily reactions and behavioral clues into traceable and 
perceptible information” [2, p. 69].  
Through the use of mobile phones and wearables, digital 
self-tracking has become a popular way to gather data about 
a wide variety of features of one’s life, e.g., food, activity, 
sleep, health, productivity, and mood. These “everyday 
processes are translated into information” [2, p. 80], which 
can be used in generating abstract graphs and figures left to 
the receiver’s interpretation. Self-tracking can result in 
qualitative as well as in quantitative data. The latter is 
associated with the “quantified self”, a term first coined in 
2007 by Gary Wolf and Kevin Kelly, which they also 
described as “self-knowledge through numbers” [3].  
In our research and design activities, the experiences of 
the young patients take up a central place. This is also 
expressed in one of the central concept in our research, the 
lived body [4]. This notion refers to a more holistic 
understanding of the body. One of our design participants 
expressed this as follows: “the doctor should be interested in 
me, all of me, not just my diagnosis” [5]. 
Self-tracking focuses on making the features of one’s life 
and body visible. Can we self-track the lived body? This 
paper will present some preliminary findings resulting from a 
design process with young people with chronic health 
challenges.  
The contribution of this paper is as follows. It locates the 
design of a mobile application for young patients in the 
larger discussion of self-tracking. It adds to the literature in 
designing interactive technologies from the perspective of 
young people with health challenges. We present our 
particular design approach, which enables patients to be met 
as co-designers and experts of their own life and facilitates 
patient contributions to the design of health IT. Secondly, it 
contributes to understanding the life of young patients. It 
shows how they value moods in their life and the importance 
of taking a holistic perspective when tracking moods. In 
addition, the paper contributes to the sparse literature on the 
visualization of qualitative self-tracking data, by presenting a 
design concept that visualizes the quantification of 
qualitative data. Lastly, it contributes to understanding the 
role of technology in the life of young people in general. 
Teenagers and young adults’ technology preferences and use 
are often very different from those of the researchers. 
Designing with the future users of a technology increases the 
chance that the technology reflects the values and needs of 
that particular user group. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In 
Section II, we will discuss self-tracking and the use of 

555
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
visualization. We found in the literature that the self-tracking 
of mood is considered beneficial for both mental and 
physical health, but quantitative self-tracking and its 
visualizations can lead to a undesirable objectification of the 
body. We found no examples of the visualization of 
qualitative self-tracking. We will therefore, in Section III, 
explore some concepts that support a holistic patient body 
perspective in our design process. We also will present 
SHARM 
(Situation-based 
learning; 
Having 
a 
say; 
Adaptability; Respect; Mutual learning), our methodological 
framework, based on Participatory Design, which we used in 
our design activities with the young patients. In Section IV, 
we present the design process, the methods used, the 
different stages in the development of the mood tracking 
functionality, and the final results. In Section V, we discuss 
the design process and its results and in the final section, we 
present our concluding remarks and outline future research. 
II. 
SELF-TRACKING 
Tracking or monitoring data of different aspects of one’s 
life is an established and persuasive activity [6]. Digital 
technologies, in particular mobile ones, made it possible to 
automate large amounts of data collection through the use of 
build-in sensors, such as accelerometers, gyroscopes, 
magnetometers, and humidity, pressure, light, and proximity 
sensors. Wearables, which often extend the tracking 
functionality of smartphones, can have other sensors, such 
those that measure heart rate, blood pressure, blood sugar, 
etc. In addition to the automated sensor-based input, data can 
be collected through manual user input, for example food 
intake, period and ovulation, and changes in skin growths, 
etc.  
Working in an environment with young adults, who all 
have a smartphone, we implemented a scoping survey among 
our students to understand the occurrence of self-tracking 
apps. We approached 50 students and received 45 responses 
(23 male and 22 female students). Twenty-five students used 
one or more apps (13 male and 12 female students). The 
most popular functionalities were tracking of activity, such 
as steps (19 respondents), pulse (10 respondents), sleep (7 
respondents); food intake or calories (6 respondents) and 
menstruation (4 respondents). Non-users often had particular 
ideas about self-tracking apps: “Apps do not measure in an 
appropriate way, for example blood pressure” (f/22) or “I do 
not trust health apps. They can measure wrongly” (f/19). 
Two respondents pointed to possible negative side-effects of 
such apps. One used a fitness app, but not other health apps 
because “It is easy to get too much involved; this can result 
in a negative self-image (f/20). Another student mentioned 
“self-tracking apps can make you too self-centered (f/19). 
A.  Typology of self-tracking 
Lupton has developed a typology of self-tracking: 
private, pushed, communal, imposed, and exploited self-
tracking [7]. According to Lupton, the aim of private self-
tracking is self-awareness and improvements in particular 
aspects of one’s life, such as better sleep and better health or 
control over mood swings. Data collection is self-motivated 
and for personal reasons; they are not shared or shared with 
selected others. In contrast, pushed self-tracking is motivated 
by others. External encouragement for self-tracking, such as 
in the workplace or as part of a health care program, results 
in data that may benefit both the promotor of self-tracking 
and the individual doing the tracking. The collected data is 
often shared with particular others (health care professionals, 
employers, insurance companies, etc.). 
A third category in Lupton’s typology is communal self-
tracking, in which the individualistic behavior of self-
tracking is perceived as part of a larger community of 
trackers. Data are shared, via especially designed social 
media platforms, “to further one’s own interests and goals”. 
In contrast, imposed self-tracking is solely for the benefit of 
others, such as forced productivity self-tacking in the 
workplace and monitoring of location, alcohol, and drug use 
by authorities. 
Exploited self-tracking is private, pushed, communal or 
imposed self-tracking, in which the data collection is used 
for the mainly commercial interests of a third party. The self-
tracker may not always be aware of this exploitation. 
One line of investigation in the self-tracking literature 
focuses on the body that is being tracked. In the context of 
the phenomenological distinction between the objective body 
and the subjective, lived body, Pritz mentions that self-
tracking focuses on the objective body and thus replaces 
experiences of the subjective body, which cannot be trusted 
[8]. Wiederman [9], on the other hand, found no conflicts 
between the objective and subjective body, but argues that 
the body can never be reduced to calculations that produce 
data. 
Ruckenstein [2] explores the concept of data double, first 
described as the result of surveillance data [10]; the process 
in which a person is first divided up in different data streams, 
as a result of monitoring,  and then these data streams are put 
together in the form of a data profile that is stored on 
computers in different places. Ruckenstein describes the 
process of assembling self-tracking data as a re-assembly of 
the body; a new way of having access to the body, “giving a 
new kind of value to their personal realities and everyday 
doings” [p. 81-82]  
B. Quantified and qualified self-tracking 
The majority of self-tracking apps and technologies 
collect quantitative data. Aspects of one’s life are measured 
in the form of time, speed, weight, location, inputs, states 
(e.g., mood or blood sugar level), number of events, etc. The 
“quantified self” is becoming a global phenomenon, with 
self-trackers meeting each other in cities around the world to 
compare data and discuss tracking technologies [11]. 
Qualitative self-tracking can be defined as “using mobile 
technology to recurrently record qualities of experience or 
environment, as well as reflections upon them, with the 
intention of archiving aspects of personal life that would 
otherwise be lost, in a way susceptible to future review and 
revision of concerns, commitments and practices in light of 
such a review [12]. 
Several researchers argue against maintaining a strict 
division between qualified and quantified self-tracking 
[7][13][14]. For example, Davis argues that the quantified 

556
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
self has a qualitative component, which is “key in mediating 
between raw numbers and identity meanings. If self-
quantifiers are seeking self-knowledge through numbers, 
then narratives and subjective interpretations are the 
mechanisms by which data morphs into selves. Self-
quantifiers do not just use data to learn about themselves, but 
rather, use data to construct the stories that they tell 
themselves about themselves.” 
C. Visualization of self-tracking data 
The collection of data is often invisible, especially when 
sensors are used. Data visualization tools are then used to 
organize and present the data in a meaningful manner, often 
in the form of graphs, colors, and quantities (e.g., Figures 1 
and 2). 
 
 
Figure 1. Visualizing self-tracking data I (https://zapier.com/blog/best-
fitness-tracking-apps/) 
Figure 2. Visualizing self-tracking data II 
(http://www.healthviewx.com/solutions/patient-tracking/) 
Personal analytics, personal visualization, and personal 
visual analytics [15][16], are some of the terms that are used 
to refer to this particular type of data visualization. 
According to Few, good data visualization “encodes 
information in a manner that our eyes can discern and our 
brains can understand” [17]. A good visualization: 
• 
Clearly indicates how the values relate to one 
another, e.g., a part-to-whole relationship. 
• 
Represents the quantities accurately. 
• 
Makes it easy to compare the quantities. 
• 
Makes it easy to see the ranked order of values. 
• 
Makes obvious how people should use the 
information - what they should use it to accomplish - 
and encourages them to do this. 
We did not find literature that discusses the visualization 
of qualitative self-tracking data.  
In the context of self-tracking for people with health 
challenges, it is important to stress the reliability and 
accuracy of the self-tracking technologies collecting data for 
the visualizations. Among others, [18] and [19] report some 
inaccuracy in commercial wearables and smartphone 
applications measuring activity levels. While the authors 
argue that this is acceptable in cases of healthy users wanting 
to improve their physical health and lifestyle, these 
inaccuracies contribute to the limited use of mass-marketed 
self-tracking technologies in clinical studies and healthcare 
practices [20]. 
D. Tracking moods and emotions 
Moods are often differentiated from acute emotional 
states, such as being angry, sad or happy. They last longer 
and are often not related to an immediate trigger: “mood 
state appears to be an integrative function of the organism’s 
acute emotional experiences over time” [21]. In the field of 
IT health, e-health, and m-health (health IT), this 
differentiation disappears when describing or designing 
mood technology. This becomes for example clear in [22], 
which categorizes mood technologies into Technology that 
measures mood; Technology that expresses user mood; 
Technology that adapts to user mood; and Technology that 
influences user mood. Another categorization of mood 
technology is diagnosis-based versus general mood. For 
example, mood apps can address specific mood disorders, 
such as bipolar disorder [23], anxiety disorders [24], and 
depression [25], or have a more general approach, such as 
happy apps [26]. According to Matthews et al. [27], mood 
tracking, in the form of mood monitoring or mood charting, 
is widely used in mental health.  
In a scoping study, Seko et al. [28] found that mobile 
phones are an appropriate way to engage youth in therapeutic 
activities and that “the ability of mobile phones to offer 
personal space is also considered to increase levels of 
perceived autonomy, control, and self-esteem in young 
users” which can strengthen their mental health. The 
participation and adherence rate to treatment was higher for 
mobile phone apps than on paper [27], [29], rating mood was 
seen as most useful [30]. Young people with chronic 
physical health challenges are more likely to have mood-
related issues, ranging from emotional problems to mood 
disorders [31], [32]. Nevertheless, mobile phone applications 
still depend on additional therapy in order to be effective, 
they play a supportive role rather than being able to replace 
professional treatment.  

557
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Self-tracking of moods is also relevant in the context of 
physical health. Moods and emotions are central components 
of the subjective well-being (SWB) concept. In an extensive 
review of evidence indicating a positive relation between 
SWB and health and longevity, Diener and Chan [33] argue 
that moods and emotions are not only a result of people’s life 
and health situation. The authors present research indicating 
that “positive moods such as joy, happiness, and energy […] 
were associated with reduced risk of mortality in healthy 
populations, and predicted longevity, controlling for negative 
states” [p.3]. Despite the controversy surrounding causality 
explanations between positive SWB and better life 
expectancy among cancer patients, the authors argue 
“patients in the low range for SWB would experience better 
health if their SWB could be raised” [p.33]. Diener and Chan 
[33] also suggest adding SWB to public health goals and 
place the responsibility for increasing SWB at a societal 
level. 
In Making Emotions Count: The Self-Tracking of 
Feelings, Pritz [8, p. 184] argues that the self-tracking of 
moods and emotions can be understood within two opposing 
views on the social regulation of feelings in modern Western 
societies: the view that supports the hypothesis of the 
domestication, disciplining, and instrumental objectification 
of emotion, and the view that supports the hypothesis of 
informalization of emotion. Self-tracking brings the two 
together, as “emotions are treated as phenomena that can be 
ordered, regulated and normalized” and at the same time 
“treated as “personal resources for self-knowledge and self-
fulfillment”. 
III. 
CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK 
A conceptual framework consisting of three main 
components guided our research and design activities with 
teenagers and young adults with chronic health challenges : 
a) The lived body 
Our research participants made clear that they want to be 
met as young people, not as patients. Their wish to push their 
‘patientness’, the quality of being a patient, to the 
background is also confirmed in the literature [34]–[36]. 
Young patients use the terms normal and regular to express 
how they want to be perceived and treated by the world 
around them [35], [36]. They acknowledge their illness, but 
want to have lives like their peers and they do not want their 
caregivers to see only their diagnosed bodies [5]. 
This particular positioning by the young patients can be 
explained with the notion of the lived body, the body as 
experienced by the self and as being-in-the-world, as 
described in phenomenology [37], [38]. The concept that 
encompasses both the lived body and its experiences in the 
world is the notion of lifeworld. Lifeworld can be described 
as “the world of lived experience or the beginning pace-flow 
from which we divide up our experiences into more abstract 
categories and names” [39]. Lifeworld theory describes five 
intertwined dimensions in which these experiences become 
meaningful: 
temporality, 
spatiality, 
intersubjectivity, 
embodiment, and mood [39]. Mood, in this context, is 
described as a “messenger of the meaning of our situation” 
or our being-in-the-world, “mood is complex and often more 
than words can say” [39]. 
b) Lifeworld-led care 
Lifeworld-led care is a particular perspective on 
healthcare, which focuses on the wellbeing of the whole 
person, not just the illness or diagnosis [40], [41]. This 
perspective is both a deepening of the understanding of 
patient-centered care and a critique on the dehumanisation 
and depersonalization of care, not the least through the use of 
technology [41]. The aim of a lifeworld-led design approach 
is to let the young patients’ lived experiences of everyday 
life, diagnosis, and technology use, guide the design of new 
technology that supports them in living their everyday life 
with their health challenges [41]. 
c) SHARM approach 
In order to provide an enabling environment in which 
young patients can build forth on their lived experiences, 
KULU implements its design activities within a participatory 
methodology 
called 
SHARM, 
which 
is 
based 
on 
Participatory Design [42][43]. The participation of young 
people as co-designers of their own healthcare technologies 
enables a design space in which the young participants can 
position themselves in the way they perceive themselves and 
how they want to be perceived by others. The SHARM 
approach is based on five principles [44]: 1) Situation-based 
action locates the design activities in the lifeworld and 
relationships of the participants; 2) Having a say is about 
creating real opportunities for participants to share the 
decision-making power; 3) Adaptability is about applying 
tools and methods in the design activities that can easily 
adapt to the participants’ changing physical or emotional 
state; 4) Respect is about treating the young participants as 
experts on their own life and body; and 5) Mutual learning 
refers to choosing methods and tools that enable the 
participants to lean as much from the researcher/designers  as 
the researcher/designers   do from the participants. 
This framework was applied in a research and design 
project with the Youth Council of the Akershus University 
Hospital (AHUS), in Norway.  The Youth Council had made 
a wish list of issues and technologies they wanted to use in 
the design project with KULU. The transition to adult 
healthcare was one of the main concerns of the Council and 
they wanted to explore how a mobile phone application (app) 
could support them in the transition process. 
This paper reports in particular on the design of the mood 
tracker functionality for a multifunctional transition app. The 
design process consisted of four workshops and an online 
prototype evaluation. The workshops took place in two large 
meeting rooms and were attended on average by seven 
Youth Council members. In total, ten young patients 
participated, five male and five female participants, who 
were between 14 and 21 years old. They had a variety of 
chronic diagnoses. The project was evaluated and approved 
by the data authority for universities in Norway and the 
privacy officer of AHUS. All participants had given their 
consent to participate. Additional consent was sought from 
the legal guardians of the participants that were younger than 
16 years old. Further details of the design process can be 

558
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
found in [44], which we describe the larger design context, 
with multiple design projects, in which the design research 
described in this paper took place. 
IV. 
RESULTS  FROM THE DESIGN PROCESS 
A. Identifying functionality 
During the first workshop, the functionality of the 
KOOLO transition app was explored with a brainstorming 
technique [45], resulting in two lists: Cool-to-have and Must-
have [46]. The Must-have list consisted of functionalities that 
the app needs in order to be used, such as calendar for doctor 
appointments, alarm for taking medicines, checklists, and 
recording of the general state of the user (e.g., mood, energy 
level), but also attributes, such as colors and privacy. Color 
preferences were perceived as very personal and one of the 
participants proposed that colors could be used to personalize 
the app [47]. A password or pass code was suggested to keep 
the content of the app separate from other apps [46]. The 
Cool-to-have list mentioned aspects and functionalities that 
made the app extra attractive for young people, such as an 
‘Instagram’-like environment, music play-list (similar to 
‘Spotify’), and film and television program tips [46]. An 
analysis of the group discussion of all proposals resulted in 
the identification of three categories: to have an overview 
(medicines, appointments, routines); strengthen autonomy 
(recording the general state, checklists); and entertainment 
(music, tips). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Design proposals for registering the general state: 1) using a 
humor-energy ax, 2) rating feeling healthy, energy, and control, and 3) 
using images. 
B. General State 
During the second workshop, the recording of the 
general state was one of several functionalities further 
explored. In a collaborative prototyping session, three design 
proposals (Figure 3) were presented in the form of both 
paper-based 
and 
digital 
prototypes. 
Collaborative 
prototyping enables the translation of values and needs into 
design requirements [48][49]. The three proposals reflected 
different ways of mapping the patients’ energy levels and 
mood. The recording of the general state through images was 
perceived as more creative and personal. In the discussion 
that followed, the difference between taking your own 
photos and finding images on the net was explored, with one 
participant expressing the concern that finding and uploading 
images from the net needed focus and energy, which was not 
always available. Another participant mentioned: 
 
When you are really down, we all have our ups and 
downs, when you are in a bad period, you can go back 
and see, ‘OK, I had a bad January but see how good my 
February was’. And to see different photos and that there 
is one, for example, that makes you happy. For example, 
when you are admitted to the hospital, you can go back 
and look for what gives you energy, and look at the 
photos [46].  
C.  
C.  
C.  
C.  
C. Mood 
The discussions of the three prototypes evolved around 
the use of photos, colors, and mood. The next iteration of the 
function for mapping the user’s general state focused on 
these three aspects and consisted of three low-fidelity digital 
prototypes, which were also produced as plasticized paper 
printouts. In the ensuing discussions, a new iteration 
emerged, consisting of a photo tagged with a colored frame, 
which would be an expression of the mood associated with 
the photo. Inspired by Snapchat, the popular image 
messaging and multimedia mobile application, the snapshots 
take within the KOOL app were named MoodSnaps. In order 
to enable the user to “go back” in time, we used the concept 
of the timeline as an organizing principle for the photos: each 
photo would be tagged with a date, creating a MoodLine (see 
Figures 4 and 5). During the third workshop the different 
prototypes were explored and discussed (Figure 4). The 
participants preferred the option to scroll up and down 
through the list of photos. Secondly, they preferred photos of 
the same size to the option to have different sizes, because 
this gave a better overview of the photos in the timeline. The 
timeline itself should depend on the date, not on photos, so it 
would be clear to them on which days they were too tired or 
sick to add a photo to the timeline. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Prototypes of the MoodLine explored in the 3rd workshop. 
 
 

559
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The timeline of the MoodSnaps, photos with different color-
tags, inspired a discussion of what they could do with the 
colors. One participant proposed to add a new option to the 
mood tracker, namely the possibility to see only photos 
tagged with one color, similar to Instagram. For example, on 
a difficult day, the user could scroll through photos tagged 
with the color-tag happy (e.g., yellow), in order to get 
through the day and inspire or motivate oneself with photos 
that presented better times or moods. We also explored 
different options for personalization through colors [47]. The 
option to allow the user to configure the colors’ associated 
mood meanings was chosen over option to use colors with a 
default set of moods (See Figure 6). The combination of 
images and colors enabled a focus on tracking their mood, 
not on taking pretty pictures. This option also expresses the 
wide variety of color associations found among the 
participants, which were the result of age, gender, and 
personal preferences [47]. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. The MoodLine (KOOLO app) 
D. Final iteration 
The final iteration of the mood function was produced in 
InVision, an online prototyping software for clickable, high-
resolution prototypes. During the last workshop, our co-
designers were invited to access what was now named the 
KOOLO app in Invision, in order to click through the 
different options, such tagging colors with a mood, adding a 
photo, color-tagging the photo, scrolling through photos, and 
accessing the mood map to select a collection of photos 
tagged with the same color. All the participants received 
information on how to access the online prototype and an 
invitation to use and evaluate the prototype. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Changing the tags associated with the colors (left) and tagging a 
MoodSnap with a color (KOOLO app). 
 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
“Lived experience is coloured by mood” [39] 
 
A systematic review of apps supporting adolescents’ 
personal management of chronic and long-term physical 
conditions [50] shows that the lack of large-scale studies 
makes it difficult to find empirical evidence of their benefit, 
but that engaging the adolescents contributes to changes in 
the mobile intervention’s design. The use of the KOOLO app 
hasn’t been studied yet, but we did find that the engagement 
of young patients as co-designers did have a tremendous 
effect on the design of the KOOLO app in terms of it 
functionality and the particular design aspects within each 
functionality. 
The KOOLO app now has three main functionalities: i) 
mood tracking, ii) a calendar to keep track of health-related 
appointments and events the users wish to keep separated 
from the native calendar app of the phone, and iii) interactive 
transition checklists, which are based on the paper-based 
checklists developed and implemented by the Royal 
Children's Hospital Melbourne 3 , the MYHealth Three 
Sentences Summary of Sick Kids Toronto4, and Akershus 
University Hospital5. In particular in the mood tracker, the 
co-designers’ preferences and needs form the core of the 
design (see summary in Table I).  
 
                                                             
3 http://www.rch.org.au/transition/factsheets_and_tools/ 
transition_checklists/ 
4 http://www.sickkids.ca/Good2Go/For-Youth-and-Families/ 
Transition-Tools/MyHealth-3-Sentence-Summary/Index.html 
5 http://www.ungdomsmedisin.no/resources/ 

560
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE I.  
IMPLEMENTATION OF DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS FOR THE 
MOOD TRACKER 
Requirement 
Implementation 
1. Recording 
the general state 
Photos in an ‘Instagram’-like environment, framed 
by a mood color 
2. Time as 
organizing 
principle 
AMoodLine organized by dates, including dates 
without photos 
3. Color as 
organising 
principle 
No default settings for tags 
Can be used for personalization of the whole app 
The photos can be organized by color via the 
MoodMap option 
4. Privacy 
Photos are stored in the app, which is 
password/code protected 
 
A. Recording of the general state 
In the discussions on recording the general state, the co-
designers included their existing experiences with apps, such 
as that it was easier to take a photo in an app than to find a 
photo on the web and to import it into the app. They also 
knew they were often experiencing a lack of energy and had 
to find the most energy-efficient way to record the state they 
were in. 
Instagram, the popular online photo- and video sharing 
app, was used by all participants. Their knowledge of how to 
collect and share data in Instagram, played a central role in 
how they envisioned the recording of their general state in 
the app. 
The combination of image and color, in the form of a 
photo framed by a color representing a mood, enables the 
users to register or track their mood in meaningful way. It 
enables a bi-directly meaning-making process. The mood 
color provides context to the image and the image provides 
context to the color. The fact that the color-framed images 
are organized by time, enables a third layer of meaning-
making, as the date of the color-framed image can be linked 
to the calendar, another functionality in the transition app 
(See Figure 7). 
B. Time as organizing principle 
The concept of the timeline evolved very early in the 
design process into an image-based mood functionality. The 
MoodLine could use the existing functionality of the mobile 
phone (the native photo app) as input and the participants 
perceived this as an intuitive, easy, and personal way to track 
one’s mood. Also, the shape of the images reflected the 
participants’ existing app use: square shape of the images 
was preferred over round-shaped ones, because of its 
similarity with square-shaped images of the popular 
Instagram app (see Figures 4 and 5).  
Our co-designers also made clear that they wanted to 
track both positive and negative moods and did not want to 
favor one type of mood over the other by presenting them in 
different formats or styles. As an example they mentioned 
that a day with a negative mood could be a very important 
day, but that this could get lost in a design that would present 
positive mood images larger than negative mood images.  
 
 
 
 
 
  
Figure 7. Tagging the date in the calendar with a color (left) and dates 
tagged with a color in the calendar view (KOOLO app). 
 
This example makes clear that the co-designers were able 
to find and explore connections between their lifeworlds and 
the specifications of the mood functionality. That they 
wanted to track their mood in relation to their lived 
experiences became also clear in the design of the timeline 
and the application of mood colors to other functionalities in 
the app. They preferred the MoodLine to track all days, not 
only the days in which a user added a photo. This way, a day 
without a photo has meaning as well, by evoking reflection 
on the reason for not adding a MoodSnap to the MoodLine, 
such as being too tired or too sick.  
Inspired by the color tags of the MoodLine, they 
proposed to use color tags in other functionalities of the app, 
such as the dates in the calendar functionality of the app. A 
date tagged with a color thus became a meaningful way to 
highlight days with doctor appointments or test results 
(Figure 7). 
C. Color as organizing principle 
The idea for the MoodMap (Figure 8) came up in a 
discussion about keeping an overview of things. The larger 
the MoodLine would become over time, the more difficult it 
would be to find patterns that were meaningful in the user’s 
life. The proposal for a MoodMap was inspired by the 
Instagram photomap, which geographically maps where a 
user has taken a photo and shows all photos taken on that 
same location. Once proposed by one of the members of the 
AHUS Youth Council, all participants perceived this as a fun 
and intuitive way of organizing their mood images. The 
MoodMap gives an indication of how many photos are 
tagged by a particular color. Selecting one color in the 
MoodMap results in a MoodLine with only images tagged 
with the selected color (see Figure 9). 
 

561
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 8. The MoodMap (KOOLO app). 
 
The MoodMap visualizes the data tracked in the 
MoodLine in the form of an overview of how many times a 
particular mood has been tracked in the MoodLine. This 
quantification of mood should not be understood as fixing 
emotions with a symbol systems [51], but rather it provides 
i) a new level of meaning to the experienced moods, ii) a 
new way of accessing moods, and iii) a possibility to 
influence a mood.  
The young patients can use the mood functionality to 
keep an overview of their moods over time as well as per 
mood. In addition, they can use mood colors in other 
functionalities of the app, such as calendar and date 
functionality. This can give them an understanding of the 
context in which their moods appear. Keeping an overview 
and looking for meaning are related to mastery, the 
experience of emerging stronger from a very stressful health 
condition [52]. The experience of mastery increases when 
young patients can participate in a meaningful way in 
decisions that affect their life. The MoodMap allows the user 
to focus on one particular emotional state, which may affect 
motivation, inspiration, learning, and change. 
D. Privacy 
Lastly, the privacy specification: the co-designers 
proposed a strict division on their mobile phone between 
general apps and an app focusing on their diagnosis or health 
challenges. The design of the mood functionality, and the 
KOOLO transition app as a whole, are designed according to 
Privacy by Design principles [53]. Privacy is default, as well 
as 
integrated 
to 
the 
system, 
without 
diminishing 
functionality. There is very limited communication between 
this app and the other apps stored on the mobile phone - data 
produced in the app, calendar events, photos, and checklist 
entries are stored within the app – and there is no 
communication with a website or with third parties. The 
source code is open and available for investigation. 
 
 
 
Figure 9. The view of the MoodLine when selecting only one color in 
the MoodMap (KOOLO app) 
 
E. Visualization 
Ruckenstein [2], reporting from an empirical self-
monitoring study of heart-rate variations, discussed how 
visualizations enable, promote or intensify emotional 
attachments between people and their data. It became clear 
that visualizations represent data that are only a partial 
presentation of the empirical world [p.76-77]. Ruckenstein 
concludes that self-tracking technologies have the “ability to 
reimagining the present” [p.81]. It is this reimagining that is 
enabled in the KOOLO mood-tracking functionality. For 
example, in the MoodLine, dates without data (a date without 
a color-framed photo), can be made visible. They can be 
meaningful, in terms of days, or a whole period, in which the 
user was too tired or ill to take a picture. 
This stands in contrast with many other self-tracking 
apps, which depend on a daily and structured data input to 
produce meaningful visualizations. In empirical research on 
the use of one of those apps [54], we found that the push 
notifications to the users’ phones, prompting them to log the 
status of their health, were experienced as clashing with their 
lived bodies. The participants in our study did not continue 

562
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
to use the app because it became too intrusive in their 
symptom-free periods, when they did not identify themselves 
as patients. This indicated that they only wanted to track their 
health when they felt like ‘patients’ (i.e., had symptoms or 
were involved in activities that brought out their patientness). 
This provides an important implication for the design of self-
tracking devices for young patients.  
The MoodMap, which visualizes the data of the 
MoodLine, adds another level of meaning. It quantifies the 
qualitative self-tracking data of the MoodLine, but at the 
same time offers an esthetical visualization of moods that 
can be used to zoom in into one mood, creating a MoodLine 
of only one mood. The MoodMap enables user-initiated 
ordering and re-ordering of all self-tracked data: mood data 
as well as non-data, in the form of date tags without mood 
data (see Figure 5).  
F. The SHARM approach 
The five principles of the SHARM approach played a 
central role in creating a lifeworld-led design process with 
the co-designers, the young people with long-term health 
challenges. The design workshops took place in the hospital, 
enabling a safe place for reflecting on their experiences and 
needs as young patients (situation-based action). The 
iterative approach, in which the design preferences, ideas, 
and results from the previous workshop were presented in a 
more developed manner in the following workshop, provided 
the co-designers the opportunity to see the results of their 
participation. 
The methods we used in the workshops enabled a mutual 
learning process that was at the one hand explorative and 
inspiring, and on the other hand based on research and 
experience. The participants brought in their existing 
experiences with using apps to discuss options for mood 
tracking. They were all Instagram users and could bring this 
experience, in particular the ease of adding a photo and ways 
of organizing photos, into discussions on the design of the 
mood tracker.  
The SHARM approach extended beyond the design 
process itself, as the Adaptability principle which concerned 
itself with adapting to the participants’ changing physical or 
emotional 
state 
was 
translated 
into 
the 
MoodLine 
functionality and availability of visualizing the non-data. 
Further, the Adaptability principle resulted in increased focus 
on facilitating user appropriation of the features in the 
KOOLO app. The option to assign moods to colors used in 
MoodSnaps and Calendar allows users to track other values 
than moods if they choose to do it. In addition, while the 
design assumes that the main value and information comes 
from the color tag on the images in the MoodLine, we have 
included a zoom-in functionality in case the users want the 
images to be the primary source of information.  
The KOOLO app has now been fully developed for both 
the Android and iOS platform. It was launched in a public 
event with the Youth Council of AHUS, representatives of 
healthcare organizations, and the design and development 
team. The Youth Council members expressed their 
appreciation for being able to participate in a complete 
design process and to see their ideas and contributions 
materialized in the application. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Our study confirms that the participation of young people 
with health challenges in the design of their own interactive 
technologies 
can 
result 
in 
creative 
and 
important 
contributions to the design process. A participatory and 
lifeworld-led design process, based on collaborative methods 
and an iterative approach, allows young patients to explore 
mood-related needs and values in a more holistic and 
relational manner. This resulted in very specific design 
requirements that were closely related to the young persons’ 
everyday experiences with technology. The popular 
Instagram app was an important inspiration in the design 
process. Secondly, it resulted in a more meaningful mood 
tracking and mapping practice, such as personalizing the use 
of 
self-selected 
colors 
and 
self-produced 
images 
(MoodSnaps); the equal importance of positive and negative 
moods and days with and without images (MoodLine); and 
the organization of photos by mood (MoodMap).  
The young patients were met as co-designers and experts 
of their own life, which enabled them to be heard as well as 
to have a say in the design process. This allowed them to 
make important contributions to the design of health IT. In 
turn, this enabled the researchers to learn more about the 
young patients’ lived bodies, their lifeworlds, and the role of 
technology in their life. SHARM, our design approach, 
enabled a lifeworld-led design process. As a result, 
methodology, 
methods, 
and 
design 
specifications 
transformed into a holistic process. This became especially 
clear in the methodological principle of Adaptability, which 
was translated into the design of the mood tracking 
functionality. 
The design of the mood tracking functionality resulted in 
two new design concepts for organizing mood data, the 
MoodLine and the MoodMap. The use of photos, framed 
with colors representing self-assigned emotional states, 
enabled a meaningful recording of the young persons’ mood 
in a visually pleasant manner (MoodLine) and in a 
meaningfully organized way (MoodMap). The visualization 
of qualitative self-tracking data is an unexplored topic. In 
this context, the MoodMap provides a simple example of 
how visualization enables meaning-making as well as 
providing opportunities for support and change. 
The literature mainly discusses self-tracking in the 
context of quantitative data gathering and the objectification 
of the human body. We found that it is possible to self-track 
the lived body, when the self-tracking technology focuses on 
data that is meaningful to the user and that enables the user 
to create visualizations.  
Future work consists of making the transition app, 
including the mood functionality, available to a group of test 
users, with and without a diagnosis, followed by qualitative 
interviews with the users as well as health personnel. We 
will also explore what other means of qualitative self-
tracking can be added to the mood-tracking functionality of 
the KOOLO app.  

563
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank the Youth Council of the Akershus University 
Hospital for sharing their expertise and time. We are grateful 
to the Hospital’s staff for supporting our research. We also 
acknowledge the contribution of former master student Nora 
Svarverud Aasen. A special thank you to the reviewers for 
their insightful and detailed comments.    
REFERENCES 
[1] M. van der Velden and M. M. Sommervold, “MoodLine and 
MoodMap: Designing a mood function for a mobile 
application with and for young patients” The Eighth 
International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and 
Social Medicine (eTELEMED 2016), IARIA, April 2016, pp. 
214–219. 
[2] M. Ruckenstein, “Visualized and interacted life: Personal 
analytics and engagements with data doubles,” Societies, vol. 
4, no. 1, pp. 68–84, Feb. 2014. 
[3] G. Wolf. Know thyself: Tracking every facet of life, from 
sleep to mood to pain, 24/7/365. WIRED, 2009. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.wired.com/2009/06/lbnp-
knowthyself/ 2016.12.01 
[4] M. Merleau-Ponty, Phenomenology of Perception. Motilal 
Banarsidass Publishers, 1996. 
[5] Akershus 
universitetssykehus. 
Ungdomsrådet 
på 
internasjonal 
HPH-konferanse, 
juni 
2015. 
[Online] 
Available: 
from: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=izWTk5lqzbM 
2015.11.02 
[6] K. Crawford, J. Lingel, and T. Karppi, “Our metrics, 
ourselves: A hundred years of self-tracking from the weight 
scale to the wrist wearable device,” Eur. J. Cult. Stud., vol. 
18, no. 4–5, pp. 479–496, Aug. 2015. 
[7] D. Lupton, “Self-tracking modes: Reflexive self-monitoring 
and data practices,” Social Science Research Network, 
Rochester, NY, SSRN Scholarly Paper ID 2483549, Aug. 
2014. 
[8] S. M. Pritz, “Making emotions count: The self-tracking of 
feelings (extended abstract),” in Lifelogging, S. Selke, Ed. 
Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden, pp. 179–187, 2016. 
[9] L. Wiedemann, “Self-Monitoring,” in Lifelogging, S. Selke, 
Ed. Wiesbaden: Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden, pp. 207–
212, 2016. 
[10] K. D. Haggerty and R. V. Ericson, “The surveillant 
assemblage,” Br. J. Sociol., vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 605–622, Dec. 
2000. 
[11] Quantified Self. Quantified self - Knowledge through 
numbers. [Online]. Available from: http://quantifiedself.com/ 
2016.08.31  
[12] M. Carrigan. Qualitative self-tracking and the qualified self. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from 
https://markcarrigan.net/2014/07/23/qualitative-self-tracking-
and-the-qualified-self/ 2016.12.01 
[13] J. Davis, “The qualified self” Cyborgology, 2013. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://thesocietypages.org/cyborgology/2013/03/13/the-
qualified-self/ 2016.12.01 
[14] E. Boam and J. Webb, “The qualified self: Going beyond 
quantification,” Designmind, 2014. [Online]. Available from: 
https://designmind.frogdesign.com/2014/05/qualified-self-
going-beyond-quantification/ 2016.12.01  
[15] D. Huang et al., “Personal visualization and personal visual 
analytics,” IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph., vol. 21, no. 3, 
pp. 420–433, Mar. 2015. 
[16] M. Ruckenstein, “Visualized and interacted life: Personal 
analytics and engagements with data doubles,” Societies, vol. 
4, no. 1, pp. 68–84, Feb. 2014. 
[17] S. Few, “Data visualization for human perception: The 
Encyclopedia of Human-Computer Interaction, 2nd Ed.,” The 
Interaction Design Foundation. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.interaction-design.org/literature/book/the-
encyclopedia-of-human-computer-interaction-2nd-ed/data-
visualization-for-human-perception 2016.12.01 
[18] M. A. Case, H. A. Burwick, K.G. Volpp, and M.S. Patel, 
“Accuracy of smartphone applications and wearable devices 
for tracking physical activity data,” JAMA, vol. 313, no. 6, 
pp. 625–626, Feb. 2015. 
[19] J.-M. Lee, Y. Kim, and G. J. Welk, “Validity of consumer-
based physical activity monitors,” Med. Sci. Sports Exerc., 
vol. 46, no. 9, pp. 1840–1848, Sep. 2014. 
[20] L. Piwek, D. A. Ellis, S. Andrews, and A. Joinson, “The rise 
of consumer health wearables: Promises and barriers,” PLOS 
Med, vol. 13, no. 2, p. e1001953, Feb. 2016. 
[21] D. Nettle and M. Bateson, “The evolutionary origins of mood 
and its disorders,” Curr. Biol., vol. 22, no. 17, pp. R712–
R721, Sep. 2012. 
[22] P. M. A. Desmet, “Design for mood: Twenty activity-based 
opportunities to design for mood regulation,” Int. J. Des., vol. 
9, no. 2, 2015. 
[23] J. Alvarez-Lozano et al., “Tell me your apps and I will tell 
you your mood: Correlation of apps usage with bipolar 
disorder state” Proceedings of the 7th International 
Conference on Pervasive Technologies Related to Assistive 
Environments, New York, NY, USA, 2014, p. 19:1–19:7. 
[24] A. Miloff, A. Marklund, and P. Carlbring, “The challenger 
app for social anxiety disorder: New advances in mobile 
psychological treatment,” Internet Interv., vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 
382–391, Nov. 2015. 
[25] N. Shen et al., “Finding a depression app: A review and 
content analysis of the depression app marketplace,” JMIR 
MHealth UHealth, vol. 3, no. 1, Feb. 2015. 
[26] J. McNamara. Get Happy iPhone app gets you happy one tip 
at 
a 
time. 
[Online]. 
http://www.theappreviewzone.com/education-apps/get-
happy-iphone-app/ 2016.12.01 
[27] M. Matthews, G. Doherty, J. Sharry, and C. Fitzpatrick, 
“Mobile phone mood charting for adolescents,” Br. J. Guid. 
Couns., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 113–129, May 2008. 
[28] Y. Seko, S. Kidd, D. Wiljer, and K. McKenzie, “Youth 
Mental Health Interventions via Mobile Phones: A Scoping 
Review,” Cyberpsychology Behav. Soc. Netw., vol. 17, no. 9, 
pp. 591–602, Jul. 2014. 
[29] Y. Seko, S. Kidd, and D. Wiljer, “Apps for those who help 
themselves: Mobile self-guided interventions for adolescent 
mental health,” Sel. Pap. Internet Res., vol. 3, 2013. 
[30] R. Kenny, B. Dooley, and A. Fitzgerald, “Feasibility of 
“CopeSmart”: A telemental health app for adolescents,” 
JMIR Ment. Health, vol. 2, no. 3, Aug. 2015. 
[31] M. S. Klein-Gitelman and M. L. Curran, “The challenges of 
adolescence, mood disorders, and chronic illness,” J. Pediatr., 
vol. 167, no. 6, pp. 1192–1194, Dec. 2015. 

564
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[32] S. Turkel and M. Pao, “Late consequences of pediatric 
chronic illness,” Psychiatr. Clin. North Am., vol. 30, no. 4, 
pp. 819–835, Dec. 2007. 
[33] E. Diener and M. Y. Chan, “Happy people live longer: 
Subjective well-being contributes to health and longevity,” 
Appl. Psychol. Health Well-Being, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–43, 
Mar. 2011. 
[34] A. M. Kanstrup, P. Bertelsen, and C. Nøhr, “Patient 
innovation: An analysis of patients’ designs of digital 
technology support for everyday living with diabetes,” Health 
Inf. Manag. J., pp. 1–9, 2014. 
[35] L. S. Liu, K. M. Inkpen, and W. Pratt, “’I’m not like my 
friends’: Understanding how children with a chronic illness 
use technology to maintain normalcy” Proceedings of the 18th 
ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
& Social Computing (CSCW’15) March 2015, pp. 1527–
1539. 
[36] M. van der Velden and K. E. Emam, “’Not all my friends 
need to know’: A qualitative study of teenage patients, 
privacy, and social media,” J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc., vol. 
20, no. 1, pp. 16–24, Jan. 2013. 
[37] M. Larsson, A. J. Sundler, and M. Ekebergh, “Beyond self-
rated health the adolescent girl’s lived experience of health in 
Sweden,” J. Sch. Nurs., vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 71–79, Feb. 2013. 
[38] J. A. Aho and K. Aho, Body Matters: A Phenomenology of 
Sickness, Disease, and Illness. Lexington Books, 2008. 
[39] L. Todres, K. Galvin, and K. Dahlberg, “Lifeworld-led 
healthcare: 
Revisiting 
a 
humanising 
philosophy 
that 
integrates emerging trends,” Med. Health Care Philos., vol. 
10, no. 1, pp. 53–63, Jul. 2006. 
[40] K. Dahlberg, L. Todres, and K. Galvin, “Lifeworld-led 
healthcare is more than patient-led care: an existential view of 
well-being,” Med. Health Care Philos., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 
265–271, Aug. 2009. 
[41] A. Pulman et al., “Empathy and dignity through technology: 
Using lifeworld-led multimedia to enhance learning about the 
head, heart and hand,” Electron. J. E-Learn., vol. 10, no. 3, 
pp. 349–359, 2012. 
[42] J. Simonsen and T. Robertson, Routledge International 
Handbook of Participatory Design. New York: Routledge, 
2012. 
[43] M. van der Velden and C. Mörtberg, “Participatory design 
and design for values,” in Handbook of Ethics, Values, and 
Technological Design, J. van den Hoven, P. E. Vermaas, and 
I. van de Poel, Eds. Netherlands: Springer, pp. 1–22, 2014. 
[44] M. van der Velden, M. M. Sommervold, A. Culén, and B. 
Nakstad, “Designing interactive technologies with teenagers 
in a hospital setting,” in Perspectives on HCI Research with 
Teenagers, L. Little, D. Fitton, B. T. Bell, and N. Toth, Eds. 
Springer International Publishing, pp. 103–131, 2016. 
[45] V. P. Seidel and S. K. Fixson, “The application and limits of 
design methods and reflexive practices: Adopting design 
thinking in novice teams,” J. Prod. Innov. Manag., vol. 30, 
pp. 19–33, Dec. 2013. 
[46] N. Aasen, “Transisjonsapp - Ansvar for egen helse”, Master 
Thesis, University of Oslo, Oslo, 2014. 
[47] S. Bødker and K. Grønbæk, “Cooperative prototyping: users 
and designers in mutual activity,” Int. J. Man-Mach. Stud., 
vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 453–478, Mar. 1991. 
[48] Y.-K. Lim, E. Stolterman, and J. Tenenberg, “The anatomy of 
prototypes: Prototypes as filters, prototypes as manifestations 
of design ideas,” ACM Trans Comput-Hum Interact, vol. 15, 
no. 2, p. 7:1–7:27, Jul. 2008. 
[49] M. van der Velden, M. M. Sommervold, and A. L. Culén, 
“Patient-initiated personalisation: Privacy, moods, and 
colours,” presented at the 7th International Conference e-
Health, Las Palmas de Gran Canaria, Spain, 2015. 
[50] R. Majeed-Ariss et al., “Apps and adolescents: A systematic 
review of adolescents’ use of mobile phone and tablet apps 
that support personal management of their chronic or long-
term physical conditions,” J. Med. Internet Res., vol. 17, no. 
12, Dec. 2015. 
[51] S. Selke, Ed., Lifelogging. Wiesbaden: Springer Fachmedien, 
2016. 
[52] J. B. Younger, “A theory of mastery,” ANS Adv. Nurs. Sci., 
vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 76–89, Sep. 1991. 
[53] A. Cavoukian and M. Prosch, “The roadmap for privacy by 
design in mobile communications: A practical tool for 
developers, service providers, and users,” Information 
Privacy Commissioner of Ontario, Ottawa, 2010. 
[54] M. M. Sommervold and M. van der Velden, “Transition 
cards: Designing a method with and for young patients,” 
IADIS Int. J. Comput. Sci. Inf. Syst., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 79-
94, 2015. 
 

