257
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
Optimizing the Usability of Mobile Job Advertisements: 
A Multi-Method Approach 
 
Stephan Böhm, Wolfgang Jäger, Sebastian Meurer, and Susanne J. Niklas  
RheinMain University of Applied Sciences 
Department of Media Management 
Wiesbaden, Germany  
e-mail: {stephan.boehm, wolfgang.jaeger}@hs-rm.de, meurer.sebastian@googlemail.com, susanne.niklas@gmx.de 
 
 
 
Abstract— Accessing the Web from mobile devices has become 
increasingly common even when searching for job information. 
Nowadays, most job board offerings are mobile-optimized. 
However, the search results often refer to job advertisements 
(ads) and external career pages that are not completely opti-
mized for mobile access. For this reason, mobile users may be 
confronted with inadequate usability or a dissatisfactory user 
experience. In this context, the purpose of this study is to assess 
the usability of job ads posted on job portals to identify deficits 
and best practices. The analysis is based on an exemplary 
sample of job ads posted on a German job board. As a result, 
recommendations for a mobile-optimized design of job ads are 
presented. 
Keywords-Usability; User Experience; User Interfaces; 
Heuristic Evaluation; Mobile Recruiting. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Mobile optimization of job advertisements is a require-
ment that follows from the increasing proliferation of 
smartphones and mobile media technologies today [1]. Re-
cent studies point out that about 69 percent of all Internet 
users access the web using mobile devices. Within the target 
audience of 14- to 29-year-olds, as many as 80 percent are 
using the mobile web, underlining the general importance of 
this communication channel [2]. All in all, these develop-
ments will also noticeably affect recruiting processes, con-
fronting the companies’ personnel management with new 
challenges concerning the utilization of mobile technologies 
for personnel marketing and recruiting [3]. In this context, it 
is becoming more and more common to use these devices in 
order to retrieve job information as well. In Germany, 58 
percent of all online job seekers are already accessing job 
information via mobile devices; in high-tech industries or the 
media sector, as many as 63 percent browse the mobile In-
ternet for a new professional challenge [4]. Thus, mobile 
optimization is becoming essential in order to maintain reach 
among target groups and to keep up with the changing usage 
of media channels. 
However, a mobile-optimized user experience in the area 
of mobile recruiting cannot be achieved by optimizing a 
single touch point within the recruiting funnel as shown in 
Figure 1. A potential candidate might be attracted by a 
search result in a job portal that is linked to a job ad. The job 
ad, in turn, can provide links to the company’s career 
webpage or the applicant management system. All elements 
in this media chain supporting the recruiting funnel have to 
be adapted to the requirements of mobile devices to achieve 
a consistent mobile-optimized candidate experience. 
 
Awareness
of Employer 
Brand
Positioned 
in Relevant 
Set
Status as 
Employer-
of-Choice
Candidate 
Contact/
Application
Mobile Recruiting in a Broader Sense
Mobile Recruiting
in a Narrow Sense  
Figure 1. Mobile Recruiting in the “Recruiting Funnel” [5] 
Nowadays, however, such a holistic mobile recruiting 
strategy is still rather rare. Companies often focus their activ-
ities on individual mobile recruiting elements. A prominent 
example is the incorrect usage of QR (Quick Response) 
codes in print media. QR codes can be used to facilitate 
mobile access to related online information. The QR code 
must, however, be linked to a mobile-friendly website, oth-
erwise the user experience may be compromised. This can 
not only cause the user to abort the intended information 
retrieval, but also have a negative impact on the employer 
image [6]. Especially mobile recruiting in a narrow sense, 
i.e., the intended candidate application, cannot be achieved if 
an employer provides isolated mobile-optimized touch 
points. This discrepancy between the candidates’ demand 
and the existing mobile recruiting offerings strongly supports 
the hypothesis that mobile optimization of the e-recruiting 
instruments along the recruiting funnel is still incomplete and 
requires improvement. 
In this context, the paper at hand uses a multi-method ap-
proach to identify best practices and derive recommendations 
for the mobile optimization of job ads. Following this intro-
duction, the research background and related work on mobile 
recruiting and mobile usability are the subject of Section II. 
The research methodology of this study is described in Sec-

258
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
tion III before the key findings of this study are presented in 
Section IV. Based on the findings of the study, some man-
agement implications and recommendations for mobile-
optimized job ads are derived in Section V. This paper is 
concluded by a discussion of the study’s limitations and an 
outlook on future work in Section VI. 
II. 
RESEARCH BACKGROUND 
Internet job search and job ads have been subject to re-
search for more than a decade. While early research focused 
on the impact of Internet-based job search on labor markets 
in general [e.g., 7, 8], more recent work has analyzed online 
job seeker behavior and job ads in more detail [9, 10]. How-
ever, this research was conducted with regard to traditional, 
desktop-based access to the Internet by mainly focusing on 
economic and managerial aspects. Only a few research pa-
pers have been published on mobile job seeker behavior and 
the requirements for job ads in the context of mobile recruit-
ing [3, 5]. For this reason, the research background and relat-
ed work on mobile recruiting and mobile-optimization of job 
ads as well as the research gap to be closed by this paper are 
described below.  
A. Mobile Recruiting and Job Search 
According to a multi-year study on mobile recruiting in 
Germany [3], HR (Human Resources) managers attribute a 
growing relevance to mobile devices in personnel recruiting. 
In the latest study, conducted in 2013, 97 percent of the 
participating HR managers stated that addressing potential 
candidates via mobile devices is becoming increasingly 
important and almost as many expressed particular interest in 
the mobile recruiting topic. In addition, most participating 
HR managers (more than 90 percent) were quoted as being 
familiar with the main mobile recruiting tools and would be 
generally willing to provide major mobile recruiting content 
such as career-relevant information as well as job ads. The 
proportion of companies and organizations actively using 
mobile recruiting technologies and applications rose from 8 
percent in 2009 to 25 percent in 2011, and 45 percent in 
2013. A mobile optimized career website is offered by 26 
percent of the companies. Altogether, the application of 
various mobile recruiting tools increased significantly from 
2009 to 2013 [3, 11]. This observation is supported by a 
study of the German industry association BITKOM that was 
conducted at the end of 2012. According to this study, 24 
percent of all German companies already offered a mobile 
optimized career website, followed by 17 percent with com-
pany-owned iPhone apps [4]. A study focusing on large 
enterprises in Germany revealed that as many as 80 percent 
of the companies provide a mobile career website and about 
30 percent have a mobile career app [12]. 
A 2012 study analyzed German job seeker behavior and 
intentions in this area. At that time, only 6.4 percent of the 
respondents stated that they had already applied for a job 
using a smartphone or tablet. This is not a result of a lack of 
interest. In the same study, 30.2 percent of the respondents 
stated that they expect an attractive employer to support such 
a mobile job application [5]. As shown in Figure 2, the 
aforementioned mobile recruiting study from 2013 [11] also 
revealed substantial differences in the utilization of mobile 
recruiting technologies.  
 
45%
26%
20%
9%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
General Usage
of Mobile
Technologies
Mobile Career
Website
Mobile Job
Board
Mobile App
 
Figure 2. Usage of Mobile Recruiting in Germany 2013 [11] 
Whereas nearly half of the participating HR managers in 
the study stated that they use mobile technologies in the 
context of their recruiting activities, not more than 26 percent 
operate a mobile career website. Only 20 percent offer a 
mobile job board and less than ten percent allow potential 
job seekers to apply directly via the mobile device. Against 
this background, it can be assumed that the industry is still 
far from achieving complete mobile-optimization of the 
recruiting process. As a result, candidates using smartphones 
might be confronted with a non-consistent mobile user expe-
rience and drawbacks because of media disruptions. 
From the candidates’ perspective, job portals are the pre-
ferred entry point and the most popular source of information 
for a mobile job search. The aforementioned study [5] on 
German job seeker behavior has revealed that the most fre-
quently used sources of job ads on mobile devices are job 
portal websites, social media/business networks, search en-
gines like Google, job portal apps, and employer career web-
sites as shown in Figure 3. 
7.5%
7.8%
23.2%
31.2%
34.0%
54.9%
77.8%
0% 20% 40% 60% 80%100%
Others
Employer Career Apps
Employer Career Websites
Job Portal Apps
Search Engines (e.g. Google)
Social Media/Business Networks
Job Portals (Website)
 
Figure 3. Sources of Job Ads Used on Mobile Devices 2012 [5] 
For this reason, job portals and job ads are important en-
try points for mobile recruiting. Job portals complement the 
mobile recruiting activities of individual companies. Their 
providers aggregate job ads and career information across 

259
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
companies and sectors. In 2011, an analysis carried out for 
[13] the Apple App Store already identified ten mobile job 
board applications for the German market [14]. Employers 
who place job ads on job boards usually get a package for the 
online channels supported by the portal. When doing this, 
job board providers mobile-optimize access to their own 
portal functions, but may not alter the design of the job ads 
provided by a company. In that case, the search results of the 
job board can refer to a career website or a job ad that is not 
mobile-optimized. Thus, the mobile users may be confronted 
with inadequate usability or a dissatisfactory user experience. 
As a result, all three interest groups are confronted with 
setbacks concerning their individual goals: The job seeker 
does not get the information he/she was looking for or has a 
poor user experience. Consequently, he/she probably decides 
to discontinue the app usage. The employer placing the job 
ad may experience a negative impact on the recruiting pro-
cess, its employer branding, or may even lose a potential 
applicant. The job board provider, in turn, loses an app user, 
i.e., reach, which constitutes the basis of the job board busi-
ness model. But even if a user does not directly discontinue 
the app usage, the design of the mobile ad and its content 
does play a major role concerning job ads’ efficacy in terms 
of recall and retention [15]. 
However, regular usability guidelines for mobile web-
sites cannot be applied directly to mobile job ads. Job ads 
provide very specific information within a focused area of 
application and thus require adapted criteria for usability 
analysis. But, despite the importance of these aspects and 
their high practical relevance, neither specially focused de-
veloper guidelines nor scientific research studies on mobile 
job advertising exist to date. To fill this research gap, the 
study at hand aims to identify deficits and best practices on a 
mobile-optimized job ad design, proposing a multi-method 
approach.  
B. Mobile Optimization of Job Ads 
Requirements for the design of mobile-optimized job ads 
can be found in guidelines for the user-interface design of 
mobile applications or mobile websites, e.g., the well-known 
Best Practice Guidelines of the World Wide Web Consorti-
um (W3C) [16]. Here, recommendations are given regarding 
image format support, style sheet support, page weight, or 
color usage. However, two problems exist concerning the 
usage of such guidelines: firstly, the development as well as 
the improvement of modern smartphones are progressing at a 
furious rate. As a result, guidelines on principles for mobile 
development rapidly become outdated [17]. Secondly, those 
guidelines merely refer to technical capabilities and do not 
address the importance of different design aspects from the 
user perspective or usage context [18]. Some existing ap-
proaches, such as Nielsen’s usability heuristic [19] or the 
adapted metric of the Microsoft Usability Guidelines (MUG, 
[20]), present a more holistic view on aspects influencing 
system usability. The MUG guidelines are based on the ISO 
9241 usability definition, defining usability as the “Extent to 
which a product can be used by specific users to achieve 
specified goals with effectiveness, efficiency, and satisfac-
tion in a specified context of use” [13]. Besides structural 
evaluation in the form of heuristic analysis, user-oriented 
usability tests constitute an important evaluation method in 
order to measure efficiency, effectiveness as well as user 
satisfaction [13, 21]. User satisfaction can be measured by 
experience-based rating scales, product liking, or level of 
acceptance of the task solving effort [13]. 
As this study aims at giving practical recommendations 
for the design and development of mobile job ads, a multi-
method approach with regard to both −structural evaluation 
as well as user based testing of usability aspects− will be 
adopted. In order to not just ensure success in terms of usa-
bility, but also in terms of a company’s communication suc-
cess, research on design aspects influencing the reception of 
job ads’ content will be conducted additionally. The intended 
research approach will be described in the next section.  
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
Usability analysis can be classified in empirical and ana-
lytical methods. Empirical testing can comprise user and task 
observations of prototypes and final products by field or 
laboratory studies, including walk through and thinking-
aloud analysis [19, 22, 23]. Heuristic evaluations, in turn, 
refer to assessment by a small group of evaluators according 
to a predefined set of usability guidelines or criteria [19]. As 
described above, mobile development often draws on tech-
nical guidelines and best practice standards, leading to the 
problems of being quickly outdated as well as not seeing the 
goal of overall usability concerning user satisfaction and 
usage acceptance [17, 18]. Heuristic usability evaluations 
however, by implementing a systematic inspection of user 
interface design aspects, enable the identification of usability 
problems to which special attention should be paid [19]. 
Here, two main methodologies are available for evaluation. 
Firstly, validator tools offer a standardized evaluation and in-
depth analysis of websites, determining how well the site 
performs on mobile devices. Secondly, a heuristic evaluation 
can be carried out by looking at interface design in accord-
ance with certain rules as listed in the guidelines. Here, a 
small number of evaluators (at least three) assess the compli-
ance of a user-interface with usability principles, the so-
called heuristics [19]. As presented in Figure 4, phase 1 of 
the study at hand implements two methods of usability eval-
uation for an exemplary set of mobile job ads: (1) A tool 
based usability evaluation by the W3C mobileOK Checker 
[24] and the mobiReady testing tool [25] validator. Both 
tools provide an overall value of “mobile fitness” as well as a 
detailed report on specific technical checks. (2) A heuristic 
analysis by evaluators, i.e., usability experts. The evaluation 
heuristic was defined by considering usability criteria of 
common standards, e.g., the W3C guidelines [16], the BBC 
Mobile Style Guide [26], the mobile applications of the 
MUG [20] or the Microsoft Mobile Design Guidelines [27].  
In phase 2, empirical user testing is carried out to consid-
er how users perceive mobile job ads and to identify usability 
issues and misconceptions from the user perspective [19]. 
Here, test subjects are asked to search for a job on the job 
board and to utilize presented job ads for this purpose (user 
walkthrough) by applying a thinking aloud approach for the 
analysis. This enables us to identify the job ads’ major aber-

260
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
rations and drawbacks with which the user is confronted 
when attempting to achieve his or her goal and to evaluate 
design aspects within an actual usage context. Following this 
procedure, the test users will be asked to rate the likability of 
the observed job ads as well as to rank them in order of their 
preference to get a measure of the users’ final satisfaction 
with the ads [13]. 
 
Tool-based
Validation
Heuristic
Evaluation
Usability (User Perspective)
(User Walkthrough, Thinking Aloud)
User Satisfaction
(User Questionnaire, Ranking of Job Ads)
Usability (Design/System Perspective)
3rd
Phase
2nd
Phase
1st
Phase
Sample of Job Ads
Eye-Tracking
Recall Test
Visual Perception and Effectiveness
 
Figure 4. Study’s Multi-method Approach 
As mentioned above, the aim of the study is not only to 
evaluate pure usability aspects but also to assess the commu-
nication efficiency of the job ads. With this in mind, a third 
phase focusing on the visual perception and effectiveness of 
the job ads was conducted. For this purpose, one of the most 
advanced usability testing methods is the eye-tracking tech-
nique, which can be conducted directly on a mobile device 
(using head-mounted systems) or based on a simulation/re-
presentation of the design artefact on a desktop-based con-
figuration. Thus, researchers are able to gain information on 
unconscious perception and information processing, which 
can be used to optimize user interfaces [28, 29]. As it has 
been shown that content related design aspects such as struc-
ture or visual design have a major influence on user percep-
tion and comprehension [30], these aspects were included in 
the study. To allow for aggregated group analysis and be-
cause the focus of this part of the study was on visual percep-
tion and not on user interaction, the study incorporates a 
desktop-based test configuration. The eye-tracking analysis 
was followed by recall tests on the user perception of the job 
ads’ content. The users were asked to name companies, job 
titles or to recall employer brands in order to measure ad 
efficacy [15]. The combination of the results from the eye-
tracking and recall testing is intended to gain recommenda-
tions for improving both, usability as well as communication 
effectiveness of the job ads. Aspects of the information 
quality [31] provided in the mobile-optimized job ad and its 
implications for the ease of finding appropriate job infor-
mation in job portals are not analyzed but might be subject to 
future research. 
IV. 
FINDINGS OF THE STUDY 
The implementation of the multi-stage research approach 
to assess the usability of job ads was applied to a sample of 
13 exemplary job ads from a German job board (partly mo-
bile-optimized and non-mobile-optimized). 
A. Tool-based Validation and Heuristic Evaluation 
As a first step, the heuristic evaluation was applied to the 
sample. The evaluation was based on a heuristic that was 
developed by analyzing, consolidating, and adapting existing 
design guidelines to the specific requirements of this study as 
mentioned above. By doing this, e.g., the formerly advised 
maximum page size of maximum 20 kilobyte [16] was iden-
tified as no longer being up to date, since processing power 
and data transmission have improved tremendously [17]. 
Therefore, some more recent studies suggest that mobile 
pages should ideally not exceed 50 or maximum 100 kilo-
byte [32]. Other criteria refer to more detailed aspects like 
touch screen optimization, automatic redirects to mobile sites 
when accessed by mobile, the integration of inbuilt mobile 
functions like click-to-mail/-call, design aspects like font, 
contrast and images, as well as content related aspects con-
cerning the appropriateness and relevance of information, 
e.g., job description, company, qualification or application. 
As shown in Table I, a catalog with criteria subdivided 
into the categories access/navigation (ACN), design (DES), 
content (CON), and interactivity (INT) was derived. The 
catalog contained more than 30 criteria for the evaluation of 
the job ads and was intended to complement the tool-based 
assessment of “mobile fitness” mentioned in the preceding 
section. The tools calculate the mobile fitness as a percentage 
of mobile optimization. Likewise, each category of the heu-
ristic evaluation was measured by assigning a percentage 
representing the extent to which the job ads comply with the 
criteria in the category as well as from an overall perspec-
tive. 
TABLE I.  
AREAS OF HEURISTIC EVALUATION  
Category 
 
No. of. 
Criteria 
Areas of Analysis 
(No. of Criteria) 
ACN 
Access/ 
Navigation 
9 
Mobile accessibility (3), use 
of mobile technologies (2), 
mobile optimized navigation 
(2), ease of access to addition-
al sources (2) 
DES 
Design 
12 
Layout and structure (3), text 
and readability (3), mobile 
optimized embedding of 
media (6) 
CON 
Content 
10 
Corporate identity, appropri-
ateness and relevance of em-
ployer and job information 
(8), contact channels 
INT 
Interactivity 
5 
Click-to-mail/-call, social 
media integration, locate job 
on map, option to apply via 
mobile device 
 
The sample of job ads was assessed by eight evaluators 
using these heuristic criteria. An overall result was calculated 
based on the ratings of the two validation tools (VAL) and 
the consolidated heuristic evaluation (HEU). At this stage of 
the study, no weighting of the criteria, categories or types of 
tests was applied. This means the overall result was calculat-

261
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
ed as the arithmetic average of the partial results. Table II 
shows the average calculated across the job ads of the sample 
for the tool-based and the heuristic evaluation. The table also 
shows the lowest (Min.) and highest (Max.) rating as well as 
the difference (Diff.) between the highest and lowest ranking 
job ad within each category and for the overall result. 
TABLE II.  
OVERALL RESULTS OF PHASE 1  
 
VAL HEU 
Heuristic (HEU) 
by Category 
Over-
all 
 
ACN 
DES 
CON INT 
Avg. 
27% 
50% 
43% 
56% 
77% 
24% 
38% 
Min. 
12% 
38% 
22% 
37% 
45% 
3% 
26% 
Max. 
54% 
69% 
74% 
83% 
98% 
48% 
48% 
Diff. 
42% 
32% 
51% 
46% 
53% 
45% 
22% 
 
The key finding is that each of the examined job ads 
needs to be improved in order to provide an acceptable mo-
bile user experience. None of the thirteen tested job ads 
achieves an overall rating of 50 percent. This is mainly 
caused by the dissatisfactory results for most of the job ads 
in terms of technical validation. However, the results provid-
ed by the validators and the heuristic rating as well as the 
resulting ranking (descending order from highest to lowest 
score representing the measured mobile usability) differ 
greatly in the majority of the cases as presented in Table III. 
TABLE III.  
DETAILED RESULTS OF PHASE 1 
Job ID 
VAL 
 
HEU 
Score 
Rank 
 
Score 
Rank 
1 
22% 
7 
 
45% 
8 
2 
54% 
1 
 
38% 
13 
3 
32% 
5 
 
50% 
6 
4 
34% 
4 
 
41% 
11 
5 
53% 
2 
 
43% 
9 
6 
25% 
6 
 
42% 
10 
7 
49% 
3 
 
47% 
7 
8 
12% 
11 
 
61% 
3 
9 
14% 
10 
 
54% 
4 
10 
12% 
11 
 
39% 
12 
11 
14% 
9 
 
63% 
2 
12 
12% 
13 
 
54% 
5 
13 
14% 
8 
 
69% 
1 
 
Many of the job ads achieve results between 10 and 20 
percent in validation; only two of the job ads rated 50 per-
cent or more. For the heuristic evaluation, all job ads reached 
38 percent or more; six of them even achieved 50 percent or 
more. However, the results of both approaches did not corre-
late at all as shown in Figure 5. Moreover, as shown in Table 
III, the job ad with the highest score in the tool-based valida-
tion achieved the lowest score in the heuristic evaluation. 
This is due to the fact that the validators are somewhat out-
dated (feature phone focus) and do not consider the context 
(mobile recruiting) of use as the heuristic evaluation does. As 
a first result, a validation with the aforementioned validator 
tools cannot be recommended for mobile-optimization of 
mobile job ads. 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
Rating based on
Heuristic Evaluation
Mobile Fitness (Tool-based Validation)
 
Figure 5. Usability Validation vs. Heuristic Evaluation 
Focusing on the study results for the heuristic criteria in 
more detail, the weakest category of the heuristic criteria is 
“interactivity” as shown in Table II: not one of the examined 
job ads fulfilled half of the criteria. In contrast, the majority 
of the job ads achieve quite good results in the area of “con-
tent”, but this was also the category with the biggest differ-
ence between the lowest and highest ranking job ad. The job 
ads with above-average heuristic results lose their top posi-
tions in the overall rating because of their low score in vali-
dation. The top positions in the overall rating have only 
average scoring in heuristics, which is bolstered by a good 
validator score, possibly indicating a kind of trade-off be-
tween technical optimization and adoption of the technical 
capabilities of up-to-date smartphones. Overall, each of the 
analyzed job ads has plenty of room for improvement. In 
most cases, the technical “mobile fit” in terms of validation 
turns out to be poor. The performance of the mobile job ads 
in the areas of “content”, “design” and “navigation” is better, 
but far from good. Most notably, all of the tested job ads fail 
in the area of “interactivity”, where a good concept could 
really set a mobile job ad apart from the competitors.  
B. User Walkthrough and User Satisfaction 
The user walkthrough and the analysis of the user satis-
faction with the job ads were conducted within a group of 
twelve test users. Each participant had to test between four 
and five job ads only, in order to prevent mental overstrain. 
As a result, most of the job ads were tested by four or five 
participants. This is a small number, due to the study’s limi-
tations with regards to time and budget. In this context, it has 
to be considered that group sizes of five participants are 
often sufficient to find (on average) more than 80 percent of 
the usability problems [33] and that the purpose of this study 
is not to find all usability problems in the job ads but to 
compare their level of mobile-friendliness. 
The walkthrough was based on some simple predefined 
tasks to standardize the usability testing. The participants had 
to find answers for questions like: By which date is the va-
cancy to be filled? What education is required? Who can be 
contacted for questions? Each test lasted an average of 15 
minutes. At the beginning, each participant was given a brief 

262
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
introduction to the task. Once the participants were ready, 
the first job ad was presented on a smartphone and the partic-
ipants were asked to complete the given tasks while thinking 
aloud. This procedure was performed for each job ad within 
the test users’ subsample. All statements of usability prob-
lems were documented and consolidated after testing. 
Most of the usability problems were caused by the fact 
that the information in the job ad was not adapted to the 
limitations of mobile devices ("Interaction elements are 
hidden, too small and so barely usable.", "Too much zoom-
ing and scrolling required to access the content") or the mo-
bile usage context (e.g., "Registration process to apply via 
mobile is inconvenient.", "It is distracting to be forced to 
switch to the desktop site to apply for the job.")  
The testing of job ads differs from the evaluation of other 
user interfaces. The design of the job ads varied widely from 
simple textual web pages with some text links to microsites 
with comprehensive information and a sophisticated naviga-
tion structure. Due to the aforementioned variation in com-
plexity (text page vs. microsite), the number of usability 
problems did not seem to be an adequate indicator of the 
mobile fitness of the different job ads. This is why the num-
ber of interactions (e.g., touch gestures to click or scroll the 
screen) were measured instead. A lower average number of 
interactions to complete the tasks is interpreted as a higher 
level of mobile-optimization. Additionally, the participants 
were asked to make positive statements on the mobile-
friendliness of the job ad when thinking aloud. The total 
number of positive user comments and the average number 
of interactions to solve the tasks for each job ad are present-
ed in Table IV. 
After completing the walkthrough, each of the study par-
ticipants was asked to express his/her level of satisfaction 
with the provided usage experience by ranking the job ads 
within the tested subset (1 indicates the best ranking and the 
highest level of user satisfaction). Based on the rankings 
assigned to the job ads, an average ranking was calculated. If 
the participants had fewer than five job ads in their test sam-
ple the ranking was normalized. This was to ensure that the 
average ranking always varies between 1 and 5. The results 
of this ranking are also shown in Table IV and complete the 
findings of the second phase of the study. 
The results presented in Table IV differ in detail. There is 
no direct relationship between the number of interactions, 
positive comments and the average user ranking. Some of 
the job ads received a high number of positive comments but 
also a relatively high average regarding the required number 
of interactions to complete the given tasks (e.g., job ad #12). 
The reason for this is that some of those job ads have a mo-
bile-optimized design but also some usability problems hin-
dering the users from efficiently completing the given task 
with a low number of interactions (e.g., buttons optimized 
for touch screens with unclear labeling). This supports the 
observation from the first phase that mobile-optimization 
cannot be achieved by technical transformation only but 
requires some additional adaptation of the content with re-
gard to the mobile usage context. The results presented in 
Table IV also indicate that there is a strong correlation be-
tween the average number of interactions to complete a task 
and the user satisfaction as indicated by the average user 
ranking of the job ad. 
TABLE IV.  
DETAILED RESULTS OF PHASE 2 
Job ID 
Number of 
Interactions 
(Average) 
 
Positive 
Comments 
(Total) 
 
User 
Ranking 
(1 to 5) 
1 
2.33 
 
6 
 
3.00 
2 
2.47 
 
5 
 
3.50 
3 
2.00 
 
8 
 
1.25 
4 
2.20 
 
0 
 
2.67 
5 
1.43 
 
2 
 
2.67 
6 
1.30 
 
6 
 
2.50 
7 
2.37 
 
5 
 
3.00 
8 
2.70 
 
5 
 
2.25 
9 
1.60 
 
4 
 
1.25 
10 
2.33 
 
5 
 
3.25 
11 
2.70 
 
1 
 
3.25 
12 
3.57 
 
7 
 
4.50 
13 
1.93 
 
18 
 
1.60 
 
Figure 6 shows a scatter plot of these two variables. The 
Pearson correlation is 0.679 and significant at the 0.05 level 
(p=0.011) whereas there is no significant correlation between 
the number of positive comments and user satisfaction ex-
pressed by the user ranking (Pearson r= -0.312, p=0.299). 
 
0,00
1,00
2,00
3,00
4,00
5,00
0,00
1,00
2,00
3,00
4,00
5,00
User Satisfaction
(Average User Ranking)
Number of Interactions (Average)
 
Figure 6. User Satisfaction vs. Number of Interactions 
The findings of this phase suggest that when mobile-
optimizing job ads, the minimization of the required number 
of interactions should be focused on. This requirement is 
consistent with the statement of [34] that “ease of use is 
paramount”, i.e., that mobile design has to cope with distrac-
tions, background noise and interruptions as well as device 
constraints that require a minimization of user input. 
C. Eye-Tracking and Recall Testing 
The third phase of the study started with an eye-tracking 
analysis. All 13 jobs were tested by 15 participants. As a 
prerequisite, slides with screenshots of the job ads were 
produced and merged into a slideshow project. The slides 

263
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
contained the area of the smartphone screen, which can be 
seen on a smartphone (iPhone 4S) without any scrolling. No 
interaction with the screen was considered in this testing. 
The participants received a short briefing and were asked to 
identify the employer, job title and elements that distinguish 
the job ads from others. All the slides were presented to the 
participants with a duration of 15 seconds for each. The 
presentation of the ads was carried out on a desktop-based 
eye-tracking system to allow for group consolidation. Thus, 
the smartphone screens were not presented in the original 
size on the desktop screen. The size was adjusted for the 
viewing distance of approximately 60 cm between desktop 
screen and participant to simulate the smartphone user expe-
rience. 
Based on the eye-tracking analysis of the slideshows, 
heatmaps were generated as shown in Figure 7. The 
heatmaps represent the consolidated group data by visualiz-
ing the aggregated eye fixations of all participants for the job 
ad. Hotspots within those maps are interpreted as areas of 
high attention and interest.  
Employer Logo
Job Title
Areas of Interest
Heatmap
Hotspots
(Areas with
High Attention)
 
Figure 7. Eye-Tracking Analysis Example 
The aggregated heatmaps were used in our study to de-
rive qualitative findings on how to improve the visual design 
of the job ads and how to optimize the positioning of the 
different job ad elements on the smartphone screen.  
To gain some additional quantitative data from the tests, 
the generation of heatmaps was complemented by an area of 
interest (AOI) analysis [35]. Here, the eye-tracking software 
was used to define areas within the screen where the em-
ployer logo and the job description were located for each job 
ad as shown in Figure 7. The eye-tracking data collects data 
such as the time to first fixation, the number of fixations, or 
the fixation duration for each of those defined areas. 
The results of the third phase of the study are shown in 
Table V. Each job ad is listed with the total time to first 
fixation for the employer logo and the job title that were 
defined as areas of interest and analyzed with the eye-
tracking software. In some of the screenshot slides, a logo 
was not available (marked as n.a.)  – either because the com-
panies had decided not to use a logo or the logo was not 
visible without scrolling. Subsequent to eye-tracking, a cued 
recall test was conducted with all the participants. The partic-
ipants were asked if they remembered the employers and the 
job titles of the presented job ads. The percentages of the 
participants who were able to recall the employers and the 
job titles are shown in Table V. The recall rate for the em-
ployer was very low for job ads without the integration of a 
logo. Therefore, the findings indicate that an employer logo 
needs to be integrated in the job ads and has to be visible 
without scrolling. 
TABLE V.  
DETAILED RESULTS OF PHASE 3 
Job ID 
Employer (Logo) 
 
Job Title 
TtFF [s] 
Recall 
 
TtFF [s] 
Recall 
1 
4.074 
47% 
 
3.009 
7% 
2 
2.239 
53% 
 
3.194 
20% 
3 
2.837 
33% 
 
4.147 
7% 
4 
1.005 
27% 
 
3.160 
0% 
5 
n.a. 
7% 
 
2.825 
0% 
6 
n.a. 
7% 
 
0.485 
0% 
7 
0.597 
67% 
 
3.884 
0% 
8 
2.135 
60% 
 
1.123 
7% 
9 
3.654 
67% 
 
2.704 
7% 
10 
n.a. 
7% 
 
2.363 
0% 
11 
2.768 
80% 
 
3.558 
20% 
12 
0.919 
27% 
 
2.338 
33% 
13 
3.565 
20% 
 
0.557 
7% 
Note: TtFF = Time to First Fixation 
 
However, there was no significant correlation between 
the time to first fixation and the recall rates. A possible ex-
planation might be that the job ad design was not systemati-
cally modified but based on a random sample and other de-
sign or content factors influenced the recall results. Another 
source of bias might be the attitudes and preferences of the 

264
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
study participants. In retrospect, it was found to be inappro-
priate for the recall tests to use a random sample of real job 
ads. This is because the selected employers differ significant-
ly in their brand awareness, which means that the recall 
results depended more on the brand awareness than the mo-
bile-optimized positioning of the employer logo on the 
screen. Additionally, the popularity and understandability as 
well as the extent to which the personal interests of the study 
participants matched the job titles varied too much within the 
random sample (e.g., bus driver vs. public relations trainee 
for healthcare communication). 
V. CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS 
The objective of this research was to use a multi-method 
approach to gain some best practice guidelines for the mo-
bile-optimized design of a job ad. As a first step, a random 
sample of real job ads from a job board were analyzed. The 
study at hand has some limitations (e.g., small sample size 
and small number of test users). However, the study revealed 
some methodological problems and areas for further research 
with regards to mobile usability of job ads and mobile usabil-
ity in general: 
a) First of all there is a lack of applicable and com-
monly accepted mobile usability criteria/metrics. 
Some of the existing metrics focus too much on fea-
ture phone characteristics and do not incorporate the 
capabilities of modern smartphones. 
b) As a result the popular validators for mobile fitness 
are outdated as well and not appropriate for the 
content presented on modern smartphones. In addi-
tion, based on the results of the study, it may be 
doubted that a rating of mobile-optimization gained 
by the usage of those validator tools is meaningful 
at all. Mobile-optimization requires a high level of 
adaptation of the user interface design and the pre-
sented content towards the intended mobile usage 
context. This aim cannot be achieved by just adapt-
ing the code to comply with the constraints of mo-
bile devices. Thus, the scope of the validator tools is 
rather limited as far as the identification of techni-
cally related usability problems is concerned. 
c) The job ad rankings varied very much between the 
different methods used for the analysis. This is be-
cause mobile-friendliness is a multi-dimensional 
construct with some trade-offs between the individ-
ual dimensions that need to be optimized for mobile 
usage. Thus, it is not sufficient to rely on one single 
method when aiming for mobile-optimization. Usa-
bility aspects have to be analyzed in line with the 
functional requirements and other limitations such 
as user habits and expectations as well as corporate 
design restrictions. 
d) The study has shown that quantitative analysis is of 
limited use in finding a generalizable mobile-
optimized design pattern. This underlines the neces-
sity of obtaining qualitative user feedback and of 
involving users from the target group in the devel-
opment process of the user interface design. 
Besides the conclusions discussed above, the study re-
vealed some first learnings on the design requirements of 
mobile-optimized job ads. These findings are still far from 
providing a consistent and scientifically proven design guide. 
However, the following recommendation can be a starting 
point to optimize the job ad design and the resulting candi-
date experience within the mobile recruiting process. 
A first recommendation is based on the observation that 
the feature phone-based optimization approach is not suffi-
cient to optimize user experience on modern mobile devices: 
 Cross-platform compatibility is a design prerequi-
site due to the high fragmentation of mobile devices 
that accompanies continuous technical progress. 
There are different types of devices (e.g., feature 
phones, smartphones, tablets) and even the devices 
of the same type can differ significantly with regard 
to their technical capabilities and constraints (e.g., 
screen size). Thus, job ads should be realized by us-
ing common web technologies to provide cross-
platform compatibility. Responsive web design 
technologies and frameworks can help to optimize 
the user experience across platforms and devices. 
The following recommendations are based on the quanti-
tative findings as well as the qualitative feedback gained in 
the multi-method study presented above: 
 Company name and logo are key visuals and thus 
need to be placed at the top of the page to be visible 
without any scrolling. Especially companies with 
strong employer brands can use these elements to 
directly draw attention to the job offering. 
 Job title, start date, requirements and location are 
other important elements that need to be positioned 
in the upper screen area. These elements should be 
accessible without the need to scroll, browse 
through the content, or navigate to linked pages. 
 Sparse use of pictures and graphical elements to 
enable the users to focus on the key elements of the 
job ads even when the job ad is viewed in a mobile 
usage context with a high level of distractions, 
background noise and interruptions. 
 Single column formatting is required to prevent us-
ers from having to scroll vertically and horizontally 
to browse through the content. 
 Supplementary information on job details, company 
and the location can be provided by linking to ex-
ternal but mobile-optimized content. Content such 
as mobile video should be preferred to excessively 
long texts that will not be read in mobile usage con-
texts characterized by short attention spans. 
 Touch-optimized buttons should be used all over the 
job ad instead of text- and image-based links. 
 Contact details should be presented on the first page 
of the job ad and provide direct access to the appro-
priate features of the mobile devices without the 
need to re-enter the contact details.  

265
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
Figure 8 shows an example design of a job ad that is 
based on the recommendations above. As mentioned earlier, 
this generic design has to be adapted to the company’s needs 
(e.g., corporate design). 
 
LOGO
located in Frankfurt/Main.
Marketing Manager (m/f)
Company Ltd. is hiring:
(Deadline for applications:
March 7, 2014 / Code: XYZ)
Requirements: Master Degree in 
Business Administration, …
Company Ltd.
Apply (mobile) now
Company
Job Details
Location

 
Figure 8. Mobile-optimized Job Ad Example 
Usage of the more advanced features to apply for a job 
via mobile device as shown in Figure 8 (“Apply now”) will 
depend on the appropriate preparation and transformation of 
the underling recruiting processes and backend systems as 
already discussed in Section I. 
VI. LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Further research is required to gain more insights on the 
impact of the suggested design recommendations on user 
experience and user acceptance. As mentioned before, the 
usage of a random sample of job ads may have biased the 
study results and also have limited the applicability of quali-
tative methods. 
For this reason, subsequent studies should focus on a 
more systematical variation and combination of design ele-
ments. For this purpose, A/B testing could be applied. With-
in the so-called A/B testing, various user interface design 
alternatives are analyzed to obtain design recommendations, 
i.e., design best practices. To gain insights, single design 
attributes (like typeface or button design) are varied and the 
resulting design variants are evaluated against each other. 
Analysis of the different versions can either be done in a live 
setting by, e.g., tracking conversion rates of design alterna-
tives or within an experimental laboratory environment [36]. 
An experimental setup with a combination of A/B testing 
with other types of analysis, e.g., eye-tracking or recall test-
ing, could then be used to gain a better understanding of user 
interaction and visual perception of the presented job ad [28]. 
Another important research question is the analysis of the 
reasons why the job ad providers have not adapted their ads 
to mobile environments yet. Reasons could be manifold, e.g., 
technical, lack of budget, or insufficient knowledge of user 
needs and usage shift to mobile devices. As the focus of the 
study at hand was to derive recommendations on mobile-
optimization, this topic could not be investigated here but 
may be the subject of further research. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. Böhm, S. Niklas, and W. Jäger, "A Multi-Method Ap-
proach to Assessing the Usability of Mobile Job Advertise-
ments (Working Paper)," Proceedings of CENTRIC 2013 
the 6th International Conference on Advances in Human ori-
ented and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Ser-
vices (CENTRIC), 2013, pp. 108–111. 
[2] 
Accenture, Mobile Web Watch 2012. Special edition: Ger-
many, Austria, Switzerland, 2012. 
[3] 
S. Böhm and S. J. Niklas, "Mobile Recruiting: Insights from 
a survey among German HR managers," Proceedings of the 
50th ACM SIGMIS annual conference on Computer and 
People Research (ACM SIGMIS CPR'12), Milwaukee, Wis-
consin, 2012, pp. 117–122. 
[4] 
BITKOM, 
2012, 
Mitarbeitersuche 
per 
Smartphone. 
http://www.bitkom.org/de/presse/74532_74308.aspx. 
Ac-
cessed 18 February 2013. 
[5] 
S. Böhm, "Behavior and expectations of mobile job seek-
ers," Proceedings of the 51st SIGMIS annual conference on 
Computers and people research (ACM SIGMIS CPR'13), 
Cincinnati, Ohio, 2013, pp. 105–110. 
[6] 
S. Böhm and S. J. Niklas, "Mobile Tagging in the German 
Market: A Comparative Study on User and Non-User Char-
acteristics," International Journal of Business and Manage-
ment Studies 4, 2, 2012, pp. 161–170. 
[7] 
D. H. Autor, "Wiring the Labor Market," Journal of Eco-
nomic Perspectives 15, 1, 2001, pp. 25–40. 
[8] 
P. Kuhn and M. Skuterud, "Job search methods: Internet 
versus traditional," Monthly Labor Review 123, 10, 2000, 
pp. 3–11. 
[9] 
B. Stevenson, 2008, The Internet and Job Search. 
http://www.nber.org/papers/w13886. 
[10] V. Brenčič and J. B. Norris, "Do employers change job 
offers in their online job ads to facilitate search?" Economics 
Letters 108, 1, 2010, pp. 46–48. 
[11] S. Meurer, W. Jäger, and S. Böhm, 2014, Mobile Recruiting 
2013. Eine empirische Untersuchung zur Bewerberanspra-
che 
über 
mobile 
Endgeräte. 
http://www.djm.de/mr2013/mobile-recruiting-
2013_bericht.pdf. Accessed 5 March 2014. 
[12] JobStairs, Bewerber und Unternehmen setzen schon heute 
auf mobile Jobangebote, Bad Nauheim, 2012. 
[13] ISO – International Organization for Standardization, 1998, 
Ergonomic requirements for office work with visual display 
terminals (VDTs) - Part 11: Guidance on usability, 9241-11. 
[14] S. Böhm, W. Jäger, and S. J. Niklas, "Mobile Applikationen 
im Recruiting und Personalmarketing," Wirtschaftsinforma-
tik und Management 3, 4, 2011, pp. 14–22. 
[15] M. de Sa, V. Navalpakkam, and E. F. Churchill, "Mobile 
Advertising: Evaluating the effects of animation, user and 
content relevance," Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference 
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2013, pp. 2487–
2496. 

266
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
[16] W3C, 2008, Mobile Web Best Practices 1.0. W3C (World 
Wide Web Consortium). http://www.w3.org/TR/mobile-bp/. 
Accessed 12 September 2011. 
[17] E. English, 2012, W3C Mobile OK Checker and Mobile 
Web 
Best 
Practices 
– 
a 
bit 
outdated? 
http://www.pijnz.com/blog/w3c-mobile-ok-checker-and-
mobile-web-best-practices-a-bit-outdated/. Accessed 28 May 
2013. 
[18] A. P. Massey, V. Khatri, and V. Ramesh, "From the Web to 
the Wireless Web: Technology Readiness and Usability," 
Proceedings of the 38th Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences, 2005, pp. 1–10. 
[19] J. Nielsen, Usability Engineering. Academic Press, Boston, 
1993. 
[20] V. Venkatesh and V. Ramesh, "Web and wireless site usabil-
ity. Understanding differences and modeling use," MISQ 30, 
1, 2006, pp. 181–206. 
[21] A. R. Hevner, S. T. March, and J. Park, "Design Science in 
Information Systems Research," MISQ 28, 1, 2004, pp. 75–
105. 
[22] R. Agarwal and V. Venkatesh, "Assessing a firm's Web 
presence: A heuristic evaluation procedure for the measure-
ment of usability," Information Systems Research 13, 2, 
2002, pp. 168–186. 
[23] C. Coursaris and D. J. Kim, "A meta-analytical review of 
empirical mobile usability study," Journal of Usability Stud-
ies 6, 3, 2011, pp. 117–171. 
[24] W3C, 
2013, 
W3C 
mobileOK 
Checker. 
http://validator.w3.org/mobile. Accessed 21 August 2013. 
[25] mobiReady, 
2013, 
mobiReady 
testing 
tool. 
http://ready.mobi/launch.jsp?locale=en_EN. Accessed 21 
August 2013. 
[26] B. Guyer, R. Puustinen, and C. D. D. Urschabch, BBC Mo-
bile Style Guide I.I – Global visual language for the mobile 
Web, 2009. 
[27] Microsoft, 
2010, 
Design 
Guidelines. 
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/bb158602.aspx. Ac-
cessed 29 May 2013. 
[28] P. Chynał, J. M. Szymański, and J. Sobecki, "Using eye-
tracking in a mobile applications usability testing," Proceed-
ings of the 4th Asian conference on Intelligent Information 
and Database Systems (ACIIDS'12), 2012, pp. 178–186. 
[29] C. C. Seix, M. S. Veloso, and J. J. R. Soler, "Towards the 
validation of a method for quantitative mobile usability test-
ing based on desktop eyetracking," Proceedings of the 13th 
International Conference on Interacción Persona-Ordenador 
(INTERACCION '12), 2012. 
[30] E. Cuddihy and J. H. Spyridakis, "The effect of visual design 
and placement of intra-article navigation schemes on reading 
comprehension and website user perceptions," Computers in 
Human Behavior 28, 4, 2012, pp. 1399–1409. 
[31] Shirlee-ann Knight and Janice Burn, "Developing a frame-
work for assessing information quality on the World Wide 
Web," Informing Science Journal 8, 2005, pp. 159–172. 
[32] Virginia Commonwealth University, 2011, VCU Web 
Standards 
& 
Guidelines. 
Mobile 
Sites. 
http://www.webstandards.vcu.edu/mobile/. Accessed 2 June 
2013. 
[33] L. Faulkner, "Beyond the five-user assumption: benefits of 
increased sample sizes in usability testing," Behav Res 
Methods Instrum Comput 35, 3, 2003, pp. 379–383. 
[34] S. Nadav and J. Braiterman, "Design Sketch: The Context of 
Mobile Interaction.," MobileHCI '07 Proceedings of the 9th 
international conference on Human computer interaction 
with mobile devices and services. 
[35] M. Manhartsberger and N. Zellhofer, "Eye tracking in usa-
bility research. What users really see," Proceedings of the 
1st Usability Symposium, HCI&UE Workgroup, pp. 141–
152. 
[36] M. 
Hampson, 
2010, 
A/B 
testing. 
http://www.bbc.co.uk/blogs/webdeveloper/2010/01/ab-
testing.shtml. Accessed 29 May 2013. 
 

