245
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Reframing Smart City in Sub-Saharan Africa  
Inclusive engagement approach and co-design tools for a developing economy 
 
Virpi Oksman  
Business Ecosystems, Foresight, Innovation 
VTT Technology Centre of Finland 
Tampere, Finland 
e-mail: virpi.oksman@vtt.fi 
Mika Raunio 
Knowledge, Science, Technology and Innovation Studies 
University of Tampere, Finland  
e-mail: mika.m.raunio@uta.fi 
 
Disney Andreas 
Geography and Environmental Studies 
University of Namibia, Windhoek  
e-mail: disney.andreas@unam.na 
 
 
Abstract—Sub-Saharan African communities face an urgent 
need for affordable housing, new working and learning 
environments, and new technologies to support sustainable 
development. This paper reframes the Smart City concept in 
the Sub-Saharan African context and provides insights to the 
main research questions: 1. How can inclusive engagement 
process for Smart Community enhanced in an African 
context? 2. What kinds of information and communication 
technology (ICT) tools can support such processes? We 
conducted a focus group study in Keetmanshoop, the Karas 
region in Southern Namibia. In addition, we interviewed 
eleven urban planning stakeholders about the urban 
development situation and participatory urban planning in 
Namibia. The study confirmed the view according to which 
participatory model and engagement of people is beneficial 
approach for the urban development. In terms of transparency 
and people having a voice in the process, the quality of urban 
development may be seen improved in terms of “building 
communities” with feeling of ownership from the community 
rather just than building houses for those in need. 
Keywords-Citizen-centric; Smart City; co-creation; virtual 
reality, Africa, developing economies.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In Sub-Saharan Africa, there is an urgent need for 
affordable housing, new working and learning environment 
and new digital services to support societal and economic 
development with co-creation [1]. The African population 
will continue its radical shift from rural to urban areas; in 
2010 urban dwellers made up nearly 40 percent of the total 
population, and the estimation for 2030 is 50% and for 2060 
65% [1]. The urban population of Namibia has been 
increasing from 28% in 1991 to 33% in 2001 and to 42% in 
2011. The evolution of the society requires public 
administrations to tackle many challenges, including civic 
rights, gender equality, employment, mobility, digitalization, 
security, environment and many others. One of the main 
challenges in African governments is to develop more 
democratic and transparent societies without corruption. The 
widespread use of new technologies, such as social media 
and mobile services, has increased the demands for openness 
and 
transparency 
for 
public 
decision-making 
and 
administrations. 
There 
is 
a 
need 
to 
enhance 
the 
communication between citizens and government, and to 
increase public engagement and to help citizens stay 
informed about decisions.  
Urbanization in Africa tends to differ from the 
experiences acquired from other parts of the world. In 
Africa, urbanization is “decoupled from overall structural 
transformation of the economies”. According to a theory, 
urbanization is a process of transformation where economies 
evolve from rural agricultural economies towards industry- 
and service-based economies, and they simultaneously 
move from low-income to high-income societies [2]. 
However, in Africa urbanization seems miss this link to 
development towards industrialization and higher income. 
Instead, urbanization in Africa frequently refers to 
“resettlement from the rural hinterlands, to rural market 
towns”. In fact, over 70% of African populations live in 
towns with less than 100 000 inhabitants, in sparsely 
populated small towns and along the road networks. There 
are only a few mega cities in Africa [3].  
Our aim in this study is to examine the possibilities of 
participatory approach in the context of building new 
affordable housing area in Keetmaanshop, the Karas region 
in Southern Namibia. Moreover, user needs for local service 
infrastructure, public and private service development are 
also studied. In Smart City planning, the open innovation 
approach and new technologies are increasingly used to 
support stakeholder communication in urban planning. 
Advanced virtual reality (VR) models and tools, such as 
augmented reality (AR) and mixed reality (MR) can be used 
to visualize future neighborhoods and urban plans. These 
kinds of tools can significantly improve the understanding of 
what is being proposed and the potential impacts of different 
alternatives on landscape and living environment as it is 
shown earlier in quantitative studies with citizens as well [4]. 
Moreover, we were interested in to find out how this kinds of 
tools would support the co-creation process in Africa. To 
understand the challenges of current housing situation, and 
dwellers’ needs for Smart Community development, we 

246
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
conducted five focus groups in Keetmanshoop. In addition, 
after conducting focus groups, we interviewed eleven urban 
planning stakeholders about the urban development situation 
and participatory urban planning in Namibia. The Namibian 
stakeholders represented different organizations and policy 
actors: governmental, municipality and companies.  
This paper focuses on community-based development 
possibilities, to enhance socially inclusive bottom-up 
approach to smart community development. The paper is 
structured as follows: Section II reframes the concept of 
Smart City. Section III introduces the participatory approach 
in African context, Section IV discusses the overall urban 
planning and housing situation in Namibia. Section V 
presents the VR and MR tools to support participatory 
action research. Section VI explicates the case study 
methods. In Section VII, we present our research findings. 
In Section VII we draw conclusions and define next steps of 
the research.  
The paper an extended version of our article "Citizen -
centric Smart City Planning for Africa: A Qualitative Case 
Study of Early Stage Co-creation of a Namibian Smart 
Community" [1]. 
II. 
SMART CITY OR SMART COMMUNITY? 
In European and in other industrialized countries 
contexts, there has been an intensive development work, 
projects and research on the concept of Smart City. The 
Smart City concept is often approached from a technology-
oriented, 
systemic 
perspective 
that 
provides 
new 
technological solutions, big data and innovations to make 
the living environments smarter through the application of 
digital technologies [5]. Less attention, however, is given to 
societal aspects of the Smart City for instance smart 
governance, smart people, sense of community and social 
learning [6]. In addition, what seems to be largely missing is 
empirical insight into how and, which smart city aspects can 
be applied in different geographical or in decisively 
different cultural contexts [7]. In addition, less is discussed 
how to involve citizens and other stakeholders for the 
development processes with new digital tools for increasing 
transparency and sustainable, long-term results.  
Smart Cities are frequently linked to big cities and 
advanced technologies that improve the living conditions 
and foster economic growth in these highly populated and 
well-connected 
urban 
agglomerations. 
Slavova 
and 
Okwechime 
[3] 
emphasize 
the 
fact, 
that 
African 
urbanization provides some preconditions, which should be 
considered when the Smart City approach is used to foster 
the urban and economic development in Africa. They make 
a distinction between “hard” and “soft” qualities, or best-
practices, as domains that Smart City approach provides for 
city planners and stakeholders, who may then select a 
combination that best fits for their city’s needs. Hard 
domain includes, for example, physical infrastructure like 
water resources, which can be used more efficiently with 
more innovative management solutions. Soft domain 
includes social issues that may be ameliorated, for instance, 
by provision of housing and social services with integrating 
such services with ICT. Also fostering of economic 
development through innovation and entrepreneurship may 
be considered as a soft approach. Slavova and Okwechime 
[3] also point out that different strategies are needed for 
different agglomerations; mega-cities (over 5 million), 
medium cities (from 5 to 0,5 million) and small cities (less 
than 0,5 million) and other urban areas (less than 0,3 
million). To simplify, soft qualities – social and human 
oriented development – are likely to be emphasized in small 
towns and rural environments rather than technology and 
data driven solutions. Rather than “hard domains”, that are 
typical to big cities (e.g., physical infrastructure, urban 
density and congestion) more generic challenges of poor 
regions (e.g., slums and informal settlements) and especially 
qualities of “soft domain” (e.g., low quality and segregated 
social services, unemployment) are key elements to focus on 
in case of small towns [3]. It should be noticed, that in 
Namibia small towns, rather than cities are typical urban 
agglomerations. Even the biggest city, Windhoek, has less 
than million inhabitants. In our case town Keetmanshoop, 
there is only 30 000 inhabitants approximately, although it 
is major urban agglomeration in southern Namibia, and 
locates close to South Africa, which is Namibia’s main 
trading partner. Therefore, “soft and human” solutions of 
Smart City approach are especially important in this case. 
Keetmanshoop also hosts different social and ethnic groups 
that have had conflicts in the recent history, which may 
influence the socio-economic development in the context of 
urban development also in the future. Having these 
guidelines in mind, it is safe to conclude, that especially 
social and human aspects of Smart City approach are 
relevant for the development of communities in the case 
area.  
Moreover, Ziemba [8] states that the quality and 
management 
of 
information 
and 
communication 
technologies in enterprises as well as information culture 
have significant impact on development of sustainable 
information society (SIS), and provides a model to better 
understand the relation of various dimensions of ICT 
adoption to impact on sustainability in the SIS context. 
Therefore, quality, management or culture related to ICT 
should be considered as context that either hinder or support 
the anticipated development. In addition, Cocchia [9] 
explored the concept of Smart City and related concepts in 
extensive literature study including discussions from 1993 
to 2012. It should be noticed, that meaning of the “smart” 
varies a lot (i.e., intelligent, knowledge, ubiquitous, 
sustainable, digital, etc.) and universally acknowledged 
definition was not found in the review. Smart and Digital 
City are the most common concepts and concept evolves 
constantly as it spreads geographically and thematically. 
From the analysis, the weak presences of Sub Saharan 
African cities and evolving nature of the concept itself 
suggest that in our specific case the “people” and 
engagement along with technological dimension, and loose 
Smart City interpretation may be applied in our case study, 
Keetmanshoop. These both findings suggest that fairly open 
concept of Smart Community may be seen as a feasible 
application in the context and for the study at hand. 

247
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Why is the concept of smart communities relevant in the 
African societal contexts? Smart Cities go hand in hand with 
smart communities and one is dependent on the other. Smart 
Cities need also smart citizens – the citizens who live and 
work in these cities need to participate in adoption and 
usage of new solutions, at least. Smart Community concept 
allows 
socially, 
economically, 
technically 
and 
environmentally sustainable solution for urban living and 
advanced digital service-ecosystem for health, wellbeing, 
and equity of citizens (see Figure 1). 
 
 
Figure 1. Elements of smart community as modified from [6][7]. 
 
In other words, Smart Community resembles Smart City 
approach 
that 
foster 
broad 
social, 
economic 
and 
environmental 
sustainability 
in 
urban 
development. 
However, Smart Community is application for smaller scale 
solutions and especially targeted for the less advanced 
regions, with more emphasis on social and economic 
sustainability (“smartness in people”) than on technology 
and digital solutions (“smartness in technology”), as is the 
case in the most Smart City concepts [5][6][7][11]. The 
Smart Community approach aims to introduce an organized 
and systematic approach to community development that 
provides better living conditions for local people. The 
specific qualities that may be considered as benefits of 
Smart Community concept include emphasizing local value 
addition in the construction process, environmental 
sustainability and cultural and social advantages and long-
term sustainability. 
Smart management and communication technologies give 
citizens the opportunity to shape both the culture and the 
structure of cities. 
A successful governance of the 
accelerating urbanization in Africa is a key process in terms 
of a positive economic and social development of the 
continent. One of the major systemic challenges based on 
the observation is that the growth of cities will foster the 
economic development and growth in the continent, but the 
low quality of infrastructure and urban planning hinders the 
positive socioeconomic impacts of the processes. For 
example, Namibian cities act as nodes through, which 
development 
occurs 
and 
the 
rapid 
urbanization 
simultaneously 
poses 
risks 
that 
affect 
sustainable 
livelihoods of people [12].  
III. 
PARTICIPATORY APPROACH FOR SMART 
COMMUNITIES IN AFRICA 
Already 1990’s Blackie and Tarr [13] recognized the 
potential of participatory models in Namibian policymaking. 
Since 1990, key government policies on sustainable 
development in Namibia have aimed on issues relevant to 
the Namibian public and policy-makers. It should be 
noticed, that the most successful of these have been built on 
strong community-level institutions (e.g., conservancies) or 
on solid scientific base (e.g., management of fisheries, 
environmental assessments). The role of strong stakeholder 
participation in the policy and legislation formulation has 
been present including co-operation between various 
ministries. The role of public participation, cooperation 
among the various sectors within government, and 
cooperation with other stakeholders, is recognized to be 
beneficial for the policy outcomes. Democratization (of 
natural resources) and development of institutions for 
sustainability have benefitted from this approach. However, 
the participation and engagement of citizens are still a major 
challenges in policymaking. Incentives that are more 
efficient and policy measures to encourage public and inter-
sectoral debate, as well as indicators of sustainable 
development should be sought. More recently, Jere, 
Kauhonina and Gamundani [14] suggest that Living Lab as 
advanced mode of stakeholder engagement could ne applied 
as the Namibian Government aims to improve service 
delivery to citizens, including the ICT development. The 
current state of ICTs in the country has still challenges. 
Living Lab concept has been introduced and Namibian 
community educated “on how Living Lab methodologies 
could be leveraged within the ICT sector to improve service 
delivery in Namibia” in accordance of challenges identified 
in the National vision 2030. The Living Lab concept should 
be aligned with the policies and strategic plans.  
Hence, citizen participation and social capital are 
considered as essential elements of Smart Community. 
Furthermore, in Social scientific research, the term 
‘community’ may refer to both to communities that are 
location-based, 
whose 
social 
ties 
rely 
mainly 
on 
geographical proximity (such as neighborhoods) or modern 
communities that are rather formed around interests and 
skills (such as professional communities) than around 
locality [15]. Social scientific research has also recognized 
the concept of ‘imagined communities’, understood as 
socially constructed community, imagined by the people 
who perceive themselves as a part of that group [16]. In 
addition, online and virtual communities have gained 
recently more and more attention. They have been defined 
as a combination of people, who have a shared purpose, and 
computer systems, to support and mediate social interaction 
and facilitate a sense of togetherness [17]. In this context, 
we are researching mostly local communities – although all 
kinds of modern communities, including imagined, online 
and virtual communities have impact on and intersect 
people’s sense of community.  

248
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Citizen participation and social capital are essential 
elements of Smart Community. In Europe, governments 
have been launching ICT platforms to facilitate citizen 
participation for Smart City development. They allow 
different types of citizen participation, such as voting, rising 
public awareness and monitoring political processes.  
Moreover, co-creation and co-design of urban public 
services support resilience building and acceptance of public 
urban services that support sustainability [18]. Co-creation 
has impact on experienced quality of living environment. 
Co-design activities affect the experienced quality of a 
living environment, and diverse fields have recognized the 
relationship between the citizens’ sense of the place, social 
cohesion and public health outcomes [19][20][21]. With 
relative few studies looking at smart city and urban planning 
development in Sub-Saharan Africa from co-creation 
perspective, we want to develop the participatory approach 
especially in the context of rural to urban migration in 
Africa.  
IV. 
OVERALL URBAN PLANNING AND HOUSING 
DEVELOPMENT IN NAMIBIA 
 
According to Angel et al. [22], cities across the world are 
faced with numerous challenges, which puts a lot of 
pressure on city resources. Hence, there is a need for cities 
to address challenges they are facing in a smart, efficient 
and effective manner. The Smart City concept is 
increasingly becoming a global phenomenon, with more 
cities rapidly harnessing the power of information and 
communications technology (ICT) and other forms of 
technologies to improve quality of life, service delivery and 
develop sustainable solutions to help cities overcome 
challenges they are facing. It is estimated that by 2030 about 
60% of the world’s population will live in urban areas. The 
developing world in particular, has seen a huge increase in 
rural to urban migration.  
This is especially evident in many African countries, 
Namibia being no exception. Based on data from the 2011 
Namibia Population and Housing census, the percentage of 
people living in urban areas increased from 27% in 1991 to 
33% in 2001 and to 43% in 2011. This is an indication that 
Namibia will transit from being a mostly rural society to a 
mostly urban one within the next two decades, with a third 
of the country’s population projected to be living in the 
Erongo and Khomas regions. The huge increase in people 
living in informal settlements in and around towns is the 
main symptom of this trend. By managing cities 
intelligently, it is anticipated that cities will efficiently 
manage scarce city resources. Today’s rapid urbanization is 
clear evidence that urban areas are the focal points of 
economies, playing a significant role not only in Namibia 
but world-over.  
Furthermore, majority of the people want to live in 
urban areas because of the opportunities and the quality of 
life they present. However, urban areas are faced with huge 
challenges; admittedly, they need to become more creative 
and innovative in order to remain competitive and to 
improve the lives of their citizens. To help cities overcome 
challenges such as global warming, scarce resources, and 
urbanization [23]. 
According to Amugong [24] the capital city of Namibia, 
the population is posed to increase tremendously in the 
coming years, and posed to reach 1 million inhabitants by 
2040. This growing population requires a much deeper 
understanding of the notion of smart city. Therefore, the city 
of Windhoek needs to find better ways to manage city 
resources and although, Windhoek is not at present a smart 
city, it has the right conditions and well positioned to leap 
frog to transform into a smart city because of its good 
network coverage and ICT infrastructure. 
Housing is an extremely important goal for sustainable 
smart city development, but the way in, which houses are 
constructed influences the achievement of other smart city 
development goals as well. Despite various public and 
private sector initiatives, the situation still needs serious 
attention to reach Vision 2030 goals of providing affordable 
housing to all, and to do so in a carefully planned and 
sustainable manner [12].  
In our case study town, Keetmanshoop, which is 
acknowledged as the administrative capital of southern 
Namibia, there is significant interest from private and public 
investors. Investment opportunities range from real estate, 
retail, solar energy, to logistics and hospitality. Some of the 
most significant projects on the horizon include the 
University of Namibia Campus, with 420 upmarket 
residential plots and a 10 000 square meter retail center.  
One essential element that frames all the building projects 
in Namibia is the growing price level and challenges in 
access to credit. One method to analyze the demand is the 
evaluation of purchasing power of potential house buyers 
and prices of the houses available. Recently Namibian 
national mass-housing program that aims to provide low-
cost housing for the most needy (without access to credit), 
has encountered many challenges. The cost of houses has 
remained too high due to insufficient precisely pricing 
mechanisms and estimations, as well as many challenges in 
construction processes. Also, housing prices have soared in 
Namibia during the last decade, making it increasingly 
challenging for many to buy a house [25]. Recently housing 
prices have grown less aggressively, due to strict credit 
conditions and partly a growing number of consumers, 
which are cautious. The most recent median price (in 2016) 
in major towns was 850 000 N$. Nonetheless, high median 
prices do not indicate that most transactions take place at 
that level. However, median price is more likely to describe 
the typical house price than the average (of all transactions), 
when the price distribution is biased, as is the case in 
Namibian housing market.  
Median 
price 
in 
Southern 
Namibian 
town 
Keetmanshoop was close to 700 000 N$ in 2016, but most 
transactions were likely to happen with clearly lower than 
median prices. In general, the South and Karas region have 
lower amount of transactions compared to North and much 
less movement in property prices [26]. However, within 
Karas region in Keetmashoop, median house prices have 
grown even more than in Namibia during the last years, 
although the price level remains lower (Table I).  

249
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
TABLE I. ANNUAL MEDIAN HOUSE PRICES (N$) IN NAMIBIA.  
Location 
Year and House Price 
2009 
2011 
2013 
2015 
Windhoek 
381, 000 
480, 000 
640,000 
868,000 
Keetmanshoop 
271, 500 
407, 000 
421,000 
698,750 
 
One the one hand, rising interest rates, credit conditions 
and consumer caution are likely reasons to lower the growth 
of property prices. On the other hand, structural reasons 
hindering the housing provision, investors and speculative 
actions in housing market area likely to keep demand and 
price level high. According to IMF [25] in June 2016 the 
house price overvaluation at national level was on average 
around 16 %. This was slightly less than in the 2015, 
possibly due to both to the recent slowdown in price growth 
and to revisions to the historical values of the housing index 
[25]. Some estimations even suggest that overvaluation is 
causing a “bubble” and return to “real price level” will take 
place soon.  
Access to credit is essential in financing the purchase of a 
house. To receive a full house loan, a rough estimation is, 
that household’s annual gross earnings should be more than 
one third of the house price. For example national median 
price of 850 000 N$ requires monthly gross earnings of 
25 000 NAD from the household to afford a bond to buy a 
house. This equals with monthly income level of 12 500 
NAD per person in two-earner households. However, the 
median monthly income level among the employed in 
Namibia was 6 800 NAD in 2014. Moreover, it should be 
noticed that many households in Namibia have only one 
earner. According to 2011 report of First National Bank [26] 
only 5,7 % of population has income level higher than 
10 500 N$/month. Estimated housing backlog, instead, is 
mostly concentrated on population with less than 4600 NAD 
monthly income. Therefore, the demand in higher income 
groups is more limited because there are less consumers, 
whereas in lower income group the demand is hindered 
especially by access to credit. According to Statistic Namibia 
(2015), less than 15% (about 4500 people) of employed 
people in Karas region work for industries, where median 
wages are more than 10 000 N$ a month, most of them in 
mining and quarrying (6,8 %) or education (3,7 %). In sum, 
challenges in housing provision are structural part of the 
society and economy in Namibia. In the next sections, we 
will discuss the possibilities of Smart City and Smart 
Community development in African societies to bring about 
changes and more transparency into urban planning and 
housing projects. 
 
V. 
VIRTUAL AND MIXED REALITY TOOLS TO SUPPORT 
PARTICIPATORY ACTION RESEARCH 
As a basic methodological approach, we deployed 
participatory action research (PAR). PAR contrasts with 
many research methods, which indicate disinterested 
researchers, reproducibility of findings and observation of 
human behavior in the hope of eventually emerging 
meaningful change without researchers’ intervention. 
Instead, PAR emphasizes participation and action and 
intends to make sense of the world through collective efforts 
to change it. Research is conducted with people instead of 
“on” or “for” people, in a collaborative manner that suits 
especially when the object of the study is how to promote 
co-creation process [26]. 
According to Greenwood and Levin: “Action research is 
social research carried out by a team that encompasses a 
professional action researcher and the members of an 
organization, community, or network (“stakeholders”) who 
are seeking to improve participants´ situation. Action 
research promotes broad participation in the research 
process and supports action leading to a more just, 
sustainable, or satisfying situation for the stakeholders” 
[27]. The problem is defined and examined together by the 
researcher and other stakeholders involved. Importantly, 
action research democratises the relationship between the 
researcher and the rest of the members involved in the 
research process. According to approach all people 
accumulate, organize, and use complex knowledge 
continuously in everyday life. Characteristic to action 
research is that it has usually been a more practical way of 
doing research: the research is conducted in the field than in 
laboratory settings and it is often practiced more due to 
practical rather than theoretical reasons [28]. PAR approach 
may be enhanced by using VR or MR methods. 
Recently VR and MR tools have been created to visualize 
urban plans. In principle, these tools can be used to increase 
transparency and inclusive engagement in city planning [4]. 
Traditionally, urban planning processes are regulated by the 
public legal service sector. However, legal requirements 
typically base on a top-down distribution of information, 
even if the perception among different stakeholders of, for 
example, the characteristics of urban attractiveness and 
livability may vary significantly. To make cities more 
inclusive, planning processes should be developed towards 
exchanging of ideas, in which dwellers can participate. Such 
processes could use computer-aided design, including VR 
and MR modelling to visualize the plans and different 
options. Moreover, inclusive engagement supports resilience 
building and acceptability of plans in the long run [18].  
Currently, in Africa, urban planning proposals are 
communicated to stakeholders and the public to a varying 
extent and by different means. Often only, a limited amount 
of stakeholders is well informed and new technologies, such 
as virtual models, are not widely used. However, statistic 
images and technical reports may be inadequate if a 
meaningful participation, and convincing common vision is 
desired [27].  

250
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
MR models and applications have been increasingly 
piloted in various urban planning and renewal projects [28]. 
VR and MR technologies can provide users ubiquitous 
experience: need for information any time anywhere with 
their smart mobile devices. In addition to visualizing future 
city environments with VR and MR models, mobile 
applications for instance, have been recently piloted for 
developing 
two-way 
communication 
between 
city 
governance and citizens. The piloted applications allow 
citizens and city officials to discuss local urban planning 
development issues [29]. 
A prototype of a MR application supporting a range of 
devices for a collaborative multimodal interaction was 
developed by Wagner et al. [28] to enable a group of 
participants to create a vision of urban projects. The 
stakeholders and users involved in the urban planning project 
had various backgrounds ranging from local urban planning 
specialists to other stakeholders such as members of local 
commerce. According to the study, MR visualizations 
proved useful in enriching the available representations and 
enhancing stakeholders’ understanding of urban situations. 
3D visualizations, videos and sounds helped to express and 
co-construct their ideas. 
Smartphones with augmented reality system for urban 
planning have been piloted with citizens in many countries. 
The (AR) prototype system was experienced as a useful tool 
for visualising proposed architectural designs [30]. These 
above described MR and AR technology tools have been 
applied in various parts of the world like in Europe and in 
New Zealand [4] [28] [30]. Consequently, we were 
interested in to finding out how these kinds of tools would 
support the inclusive engagement and co-design process in 
Africa.  
One possible way to communicate smart community 
planning in the future is by using a virtual reality solution 
that was developed in order to visualize the planned 
residential area in Keetmanshoop in Southern Namibia. The 
system was developed by engineering firm A-insinöörit 
using virtual models of houses and the whole housing area 
by architecture firm Aihio Architects (Figure 2 and Figure 
3). 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Virtual reality models from the future housing area 
planned in Keetmanshoop, Namibia. 
 
 
Figure 3. A Virtual reality system with devices for 
demonstrating virtual reality solutions. 
 
The aim of the virtual reality model is to visualize the 
future residential area and to enhance the co-creation 
process with different stakeholders. The end-users of this 
kind of virtual reality model can be professionals such as 
architect firms and interior designers who want to 
communicate their plans for their clients or decision makers. 
In the long run, the virtual models can be also used by cities 
and communities to engage citizens in the planning 
processes and getting feedback for the plans. The virtual 
model (Fig. 2 and Fig. 3) were used in discussions with 
decisions makers in the town council and with other 
stakeholders such as local city planners. The virtual model 
was also presented as part of some of the focus groups, as it 
helped these groups to figure out the residential area and 
aimed to facilitate feedback and ideas related to the different 
solutions such as house technology and building materials. 
It also aids in visualizing and choosing different material for 
houses and overall planning of the area.  
In practice, the system uses devices for demonstrating 
VR solutions such as AR and MR head mounted glasses 
(HMD) and their peripherals to produce a fully immersive 
simulation of the area. Furthermore, to create virtual worlds 
from a real world environment, special capturing devices are 
needed, for instance drones equipped with camera. Fully 
immersive simulations are able to provide very realistic user 
experiences by delivering a wide field of view and high 
resolutions. However, one of main challenge of adopting 
technologies in the African context, which are quite mature 
tested and capable in the EU, is the slowness of the internet 
connection. The average download speeds in Finland, 
Denmark and the Netherlands are among the highest in the 
world (over 25 Mbps). In Namibia it is 7,5 -10 Mbps, which 
is higher than the average in African and Sub-Saharan 
African countries in general, but still low compared to the 
more digitalized areas of the world. 
VI. 
CASE STUDY METHODS 
The face-to-face focus groups and interviews were 
selected as a method for data collection as a conversational 
style is likely to produce rich information on concepts such 
as Smart Community, which may need clarification. 
Accordingly focus groups are used to gather in-depth 
information about social processes and they give researchers 

251
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
opportunity to participate and observe group interaction and 
discussion [31]. Moreover, the standard response rate for 
surveys tend to be rather low in Sub-Saharan Africa, around 
36% [31]. We conducted a focus group study in 
Keetmanshoop in February, 2017. The potential participants 
of the focus groups were located through cooperating 
organizations, i.e., the Municipality of Keetmanshoop and 
the University of Namibia, Keetmanshoop Campus. The 
focus groups were specified from different social groups 
including: young people, families, mobile professionals, 
social and health workers and traditional community 
leaders.  
The aim of the focus groups was to discuss and share 
ideas about living, planning of the housing area and 
environment in Namibia and Keetmanshoop with potential 
future dwellers and different stakeholders involved in the 
process. The groups were selected to provide insights for the 
new area under development from the point of view of 
various social and professional groups. 
After conducting the focus groups, from August to 
October 
2017, 
we 
interviewed 
eleven 
Namibian 
stakeholders. Only one out of eleven stakeholders chose to 
e-mail their response. 
 
A. Dwellers’ focus groups  
Five focus groups were conducted with the following 
group configuration in Keetmanshoop: 
 
 Potential 
dwellers 
who 
are 
listed 
by 
the 
Keetmanshoop 
municipality 
and 
First 
Capital 
Housing Fund (8 persons) 
 UNAM final year students (8 persons) 
 UNAM faculty/Staff members (3 persons) 
 Social and community development workers (4 
persons) 
 Community leaders representing different parishes (4 
persons) 
The selection of the focus groups was based on the 
intention to start the first construction project in a given 
location.  
To secure the engagement of real potential dwellers to the 
process, one group was formed of people who met the both 
of criteria: firstly, they had availability of funding due to 
clientele of national agency (The First Capital) that offers 
affordable house loans for public sector workers. Secondly, 
they had their name on the municipal waiting list based on 
the plots available for the construction. These criteria made 
people potential buyers of the planned houses, instead of 
random sample. The persons were sent a letter to invite 
them to the focus group and they were also called with the 
help of a Keetmanshoop community leader.  
Usually focus groups involve around five to eight 
participants, as suggested in literature [32]. We conducted 
five separate focus groups with people with similar type of 
life stages, styles and occupations so that the chosen topics 
cuts 
clearly 
across 
these 
stages 
and  
so that we could get a deeper overview of the subject from 
chosen perspective.  
The group consisted of officers, accountants and human 
resource practitioners from different government sectors. To 
allow various insights of the needs of the future dwellers, 
both 
genders 
and 
parents 
with 
different 
family 
characteristics, from age group from 27 to 52, were 
recruited for the potential dwellers’ focus groups. To find 
out about young people’s insights about future living in 
Keetmanshoop, UNAM final year business students were 
chosen for the focus group. The selections were made with 
the help of a local professor so that suitable students were 
recruited within the time frame. Most of the students were 
from different locations in Namibia and were soon to make 
decisions about their future plans after graduation from the 
university: where to live and how to pick a career.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Five focus groups were conducted in Keetmanshop in 
Namibia. 
To study how mobile, educated professionals see their 
future living needs UNAM faculty members were chosen 
also with the help of University of Namibia professor. This 
three persons were males in their early thirties and were 
working at the University of Namibia while still 
permanently living somewhere else. In addition, two special 
focus groups were conducted to find out about the social 
situations, living conditions and challenges in the living 
communities. These focus groups consisted of social and 
community development workers and community leaders 
representing different parishes. The social and community 
workers had the best knowledge about the current social 
challenges in the area. On top of that, the community 
leaders are known to have a lot of influence act as opinion 
leaders in their communities. The participants for these 
focus groups were recruited with the support of 
Keetmanshoop municipality.  
The focus groups were conducted in the locations that 
were familiar to attendees and were easy to reach. The 
future dwellers focus group was conducted in a guesthouse 
in the commercial centre of Keetmanshoop. The university 
students and faculty participated in the focus groups in the 
university’s lecture rooms. The social and health workers’ 
and community leaders’ focus groups were organized in the 
Keetmanshoop town hall. However, due to early phase of 
the 
project 
(planning 
rather 
than 
building), 
these 
engagement activities are related to concept of the 

252
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
SmartCom especially (e.g., idea, services) rather than actual 
housing solutions (e.g., size, style) only.  The focus group 
study was discussing the following topics:  
 
 Living and finance- how the dwellers perceive 
housing prices in Keetmanshoop and Namibia, 
and how does it impact on participant’s future 
location?  
 Housing styles and alternatives  -   new solutions 
and materials in housing 
 Social and cultural sustainability of the 
neighborhood – safety, diversity and community 
building issues  
Tree persons were conducting the focus groups, i.e. two 
researchers from Finnish research organizations VTT 
Technology Centre of Finland and University of Tampere, 
and a research assistant from University of Namibia in 
Windhoek. Two of the facilitators; a Finnish and a 
Namibian, were guiding the conversation and asking 
questions, while one was making observations and notes. 
This made possible also to localize and explain the 
questions more in detail, if needed. All the focus groups 
were recorded. Qualitative content analysis was conducted 
to the focus group material. 
B. Stakeholders’ interviews  
 
The interviewed eleven stakeholders represented different 
organizations and policy actors: governmental, municipality 
and companies. The interviewees were selected to represent 
different organizations, both private sector and government. 
They were all experienced professionals in their field, 
except one recent graduate. They did not participate to the 
focus groups described earlier in this article. The 
interviewees were selected with the support of co-operating 
organizations; University of Namibia, City of Windhoek 
and Keetmanshoop Municipality. The Smart Community 
project aims and focus groups results were presented briefly 
for the interviewees, especially considering participatory 
approach to urban planning. The interviews lasted about one 
to one and half hours. The interviews provided additional 
information regarding various questions that had risen 
during the focus groups and explored the current practices 
and challenges of urban planning and housing situation in 
Namibia. In addition, it was discussed how they see the role 
of new virtual mixed reality tools and inclusive engagement 
in the urban planning and smart city development. All the 
interviews were recorded and transcript. A qualitative 
content analysis was done to the interview data. The 
transcripts were then coded and categorized according to 
themes, and the themes were picked up as major insights 
and findings from the material.  
 
VII. RESEARCH FINDINGS 
A. Dwellers’ focus groups  
In the dwellers’ focus groups, especially young people 
highlighted the need for development of wiFi network, as 
well as the need for affordable housing and feasible 
services. Young people wished more flexibility to the 
housing and living concepts; house may be smaller and 
cheaper at first, and as prosperity and family grows, it may 
be extended by building new rooms to the house. At the 
moment housing markets are not very dynamic, and houses 
are seldom sold by the individuals, but mostly by investors 
or contractors who have new housing projects.  
In the families focus group, it was interpreted as a 
positive way to create areas mixed with more various 
income levels to make housing markets more dynamic. 
People are ready to accept also less typical solutions, also 
partly because for the many the situation or circumstances is 
that “you have to take what you got”, due to growing price 
level and low availability of houses. One suggestion was 
that the government and relevant authorities should offer 
more affordable options and venture cheaper building 
materials as most Namibians cannot afford the housing 
prices at the moment. However, some people also expect 
more expensive and unique solutions than standard houses; 
more spacious, two-storey houses and using quality 
materials for walls, doors etc. 
The families also expected more transparency about the 
housing situation. At the moment families do not know, and 
cannot check, what is their position in the municipality’s 
waiting list for a new apartment or a house. It may also be 
unclear, how one proceeds on the list, and why someone 
receives an invitation to see the house and some others do 
not. Support for local companies and constructors is seen as 
a good thing, but not at the expense of the quality: quality of 
houses is not always good and cracks to walls may come 
fast. Regarding sustainable energy solutions, for example 
solar panels are already now widely used for energy, so 
sustainable (solar) energy sources are not distinctive factor 
as such, but rather usual solution.   
The mobile professionals’ focus groups emphasized the 
wide availability of different affordable services and quality 
housing. The mobile professionals, even though they had a 
job at the city, they were not planning to stay permanently at 
this stage. They stressed the need for livable service 
structure, including a wide range of public and private 
services. For instance, libraries, schools, commercial 
services, movie theatres, day care with qualified people and 
good quality premises were seen as important. Many basic 
services, like car maintenance, are still missing or too 
expensive in the rural areas, which is keeping professionals 
living in two locations simultaneously. 
The social workers and community leaders also pointed 
out the need for healthier and safe recreational area choices 
like playgrounds, parks, gymn, library, and sports clubs for 
kids and young people to keep youngsters out of bars.  
 

253
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
B. Stakeholders’ interviews  
In the stakeholders’ interviews, many commented on the 
critical need for the process of development to be fast, 
efficient, and perceived public involvement efforts to date as 
impartial. It is important to engage the community because 
ultimately, they would have to use the spaces created. The 
stakeholder interviewees identified that the major social as 
well as urban and rural development trends during the last 
five years in Namibia is rural-to-urban migration and low 
and high urban sprawl. This is where you find suburb areas 
and individuals moving out into the outskirts of the city. 
The challenge they face as town and regional planners is 
that urban sprawl is very difficult to manage whether it is in 
informal or in formal settlements. 
Ten out of eleven stakeholders were positive for co-
creation with dwellers and stated that engaging the public 
instead of imposing development plans allows the public to 
feel a sense of ownership. “Engaging the public in urban 
development process is a very important step that one 
should not dare to overlook”, one stakeholder reasoned.  
Only one stakeholder was against citizen engagement and 
suspected that listening citizens only delay developmental 
processes and cause chaos at this stage because of the slow 
and bureaucratic urban planning process. Six out of eleven 
stakeholders have had some experience of stakeholder 
engagement in some form. A feedback channel that allows 
the government officials and the laypersons to have a 
conversations and discussion in a neutral and unbiased 
space should be created. Such discussions to find a common 
ground can be difficult between educated government 
officials and beneficiaries with less education. Accordingly, 
conversation could be led and mediated by a third party who 
is educated and can communicate with the government 
officials but who also has a relationship with the community 
and understands their needs. Academic institutions are 
generally well placed to play these roles.   
According to the stakeholders, housing culture is 
underdeveloped in Namibia. In terms of housing, the 
citizens are not given much of a choice. Likewise, the idea 
of what housing means should also be challenged because a 
house should not just be a place where one sleeps in but 
should also be able to improve one’s quality of life, both 
socially and economically. At the urban development plan 
challenges are related to that, people cannot afford to buy 
houses, so they tend to squat in informal settlements. This 
puts stress on development plans because the area occupied 
by these high influx of people is not serviced or properly 
managed: people are not provided even basic services (i.e., 
land, water and electricity) in such areas. However, there are 
some improvements that are obvious and evident: the 
central government has introduced an initiative to provide 
housing to these people. In fact, clinics have been mobilized 
to reach the informal settlements. Moreover, expansion of 
facilities have been created to accommodate the influx of 
people.  
According to the stakeholders, the benefit of the co-
design is the fact, that the inhabitants gain a space that they 
can take ownership of and feel comfortable in. Lack of 
engagement with the communities involved, poses the risk 
of creating a project that is not relevant and sufficient to the 
inhabitants, which would ultimately be a waste of resources. 
The challenges is that there are many people in the 
community 
with 
different 
needs 
and 
desires 
and 
compromises will have to be made to find a solution that is 
acceptable to everyone.  
The new co-design tools should support engagement with 
dwellers throughout the process to ensure that they are on 
board with the project and understand what the end goal or 
product is. VR and MR tools could help to give a good 
visual representation of the project. They should be used if 
and when they add value to the project - not in places where 
only a limited number of people understand their purpose.  
There are various ways to engage the public, but by 
creating platforms that the public feels most comfortable in 
is a best way to activate and motivate people to participate 
in urban development plans. This kind of feedback channels 
will only exist if the people understand what is being said to 
them. It is important how to communicate with the people 
so that they understand that the message is to engage them. 
In African contexts, all the local languages need to be used 
when disseminating information to the people and the 
information also must be presented in a way that even the 
illiterate understand what is being communicated. The usage 
of indigenous languages allows to reach people that are deep 
in areas that are usually overseen. Understanding their needs 
is also another way to activate and motivate the community 
to participate in urban development plans. 
According to the stakeholders, in many community 
development programs like in Harambe Prosperity Plan, the 
timeline is unrealistic and ineffective. Social and welfare 
related projects generally take a long time to see results 
because of their trial and error nature; because they have not 
been done and proven to work already, they will have to be 
observed, revised and adjusted over time to improve 
processes and outcomes. However, collaborations are not 
properly managed and there is not enough collaboration 
amongst expertise, officials and the public to help solve 
some the major issues identified. Moreover, there is a lack 
of proper and transparent communication amongst the main 
actors in trying to solve these issues and problems 
identified. 
Overall, the housing culture is very much dependent on 
finances and affordability and the options generally fall in 
one of the following categories: a detached house on a 
single erf, a house in a gated community on the outskirt of 
the city, an apartment or flat in a housing “complex”, a 
rented backyard flat or a room and a corrugated tin 
structure. Buying property is seen as the best and safest 
option. There is no culture of long term property rental as it 
is seen to have less security than that of buying property. 
The majority of people are merely looking for a place they 
can afford and end up compromising on preferences such as 
location and facilities if they are able to find a place they 
can afford to buy. Generally speaking, according to the 
stakeholders, the current instrument for funding housing in 
the country is functional. There are many options people can 
use to purchase their homes. Government employees or civil 
servants have housing subsidies. A new plan has been 

254
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
introduced to use civil servants pension fund to purchase a 
house, home loans from financial institutions have lower 
housing rates and so on. The problem is that people cannot 
afford what is available in the market. To sum it up, funding 
is available, but there are no affordable houses.  
Among other things, shortage of land is affecting the 
availability of housing. According to the stakeholder 
interviews, the capacity of professionals in the government 
or line ministry to provide or make the land readily 
available for the people is a slow process, which leads to 
shortage of land. The current procedure is lengthily. It 
brings frustration to the people in need of the service and 
delays development in the country. To sum it up, the 
development and building projects may face many 
challenges starting from the decision-making about the land, 
to transparency of the communication processes, getting 
quality raw materials and qualified professionals to work for 
the building sites.  
 
VIII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
To conclude, the major social trend in terms of rural and 
urban in Africa is the expansion of towns. The population is 
moving to areas where they can get better infrastructure, 
better sanitation, better education and job opportunities. The 
towns that experience such influx of people cannot meet the 
demands of these people.  
The participatory urban planning processes and Smart 
City development are sensitive for different cultural and 
global contexts. The advanced virtual reality technologies 
may work well in the countries and areas with high WiFi 
speed, but these kind of technology-driven solutions may be 
less usable in rural regions with occasionally very slow 
internet access. Consequently, there is also a need for 
lightweight mobile solutions, which could function more 
securely in rural areas to involve more citizens in the co-
creation process. In addition, to outreach more citizens in 
urban planning processes, the usage of indigenous 
languages is needed to cover people that are deep in areas 
that are usually overseen. 
In this particular project, to enhance citizen-driven 
planning processes, more transparency and information 
sharing is need. Citizens in general were expecting more 
transparency to the urban planning and housing projects. In 
particular, simple online tools that would inform citizens 
about their position on the municipality’s waiting list for 
new apartment or house and would notify about the progress 
of the building project, would improve the communication 
between government and citizens clearly.  
Different citizen groups such as young people, families 
and mobile professionals have diverse needs for Smart 
Community development. Typical standard house solution 
is not serving all groups; also unique solutions are requested 
and especially mobile professionals were emphasizing 
availability of a wide variety of both public and private 
services. However, the most highlighted issue in the all 
groups was the need for affordable houses. At the moment 
housing markets are not very dynamic and cannot provide 
apartments for all.  
It was obvious that various groups, especially young and 
educated, had different views about urban living and quality 
of life, compared to e.g. older age cohorts. Although it is not 
possible to make far reaching conclusions about the 
appropriate housing solutions for Namibia based on this 
data 
only, 
we 
may 
draw 
some 
methodological 
interpretations based on these findings. As still pictures and 
other traditional means to visualize the different solutions 
have rather limited capacity to make new and possibly 
unfamiliar solutions understandable for the stakeholders, 
more advanced tools might serve this purpose. Therefore, 
VR and AR tools, when appropriately applied, could 
potentially provide value-added to the processes, where 
stakeholders and local people may provide fairly distinct 
interpretations and views concerning the desirable housing 
solutions. This, obviously, could then provide an more 
advanced platform to create common understanding and 
shared views at the early phase of the planning process in 
order to nurture more purposeful discussion about solutions 
and alternatives for both, individual housing and wider 
neighbourhoods as well. As it seems that desired housing 
solutions may acquire increasingly diverse forms among the 
local people, new methods to communicate and visualize 
these alternatives among the communities, not only between 
planners and communities, may add value to the local 
planning and development process.  
The study confirmed the view according, which 
participatory model and engagement of people is beneficial 
approach for the urban development. In terms of 
transparency and people having a voice in the process the 
quality of urban development may be seen improved in 
terms of “building communities” with feeling of ownership 
rather just than building houses for those in need. It should 
be noticed that “soft” qualities related to trust and mutual 
respect are the basis for the application of more concrete 
institutions and policies. Therefore, it might be relevant to 
further seek the possibilities to develop engagement in the 
given context, although it evidently requires more systemic 
approaches, as failure in housing provision may emerge 
from various societal and economic reasons, regardless of 
quality of specific development project and even more so of 
specific process of engagement. While discussion of 
systemic approach to Smart City may be left outside of this 
paper, it may be highlighted that carefully designed 
engagement process with new tools should be planned to 
play part in that wider design. One element that could 
support this systemic development, would obviously be a 
more functional ICT infrastructure and related skills, as 
discussed in the paper. However, as the wide systemic 
changes may take a very long time, the lesson learnt from 
the study at hand is that micro-level interaction and 
engagement practices may foster the “people dimension” of 
the Smart Community at very local level and therefore, 
improve the quality of life from this part. It is then rather a 
“part of the solution than part of the problem”, although 
many questions and challenges remain. In addition to new 
methods to modernize urban planning and increase 
collaboration, a lot of political will is needed to solve the 

255
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
identified challenges related to urban planning and 
availability of affordable housing.  
Our qualitative study is limited to one rural, but 
developing community in Namibia and as such, the results 
cannot be generalized to all African or Sub-Saharan 
countries and communities, as the socio-economic and 
political situations might be very different. In the next 
stages of the research, we are going to focus on developing 
frugal innovations, i.e., locally designed and co-created 
digital solutions for engaging citizens in planning or 
developing in their living environments and service-
ecosystem in Namibia. Moreover, other important questions 
to research further are, how local people can be engaged to 
participate in planning most effectively, what kind of 
feedback channels do people need and how should be the 
communication and the interaction in between the 
governance and citizens in urban planning be developed.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The paper is part of SmartCom –project, which was 
funded by Business Finland, A-Insinöörit Ltd., Aihio 
Architects 
Ltd., 
Earth 
House 
Systems 
Ltd. 
and 
Sopimusvuori Ltd. We would like to thank SmartCom –
project partners for their co-operation. In addition, we 
would like 
to thank 
University 
of 
Namibia 
and 
Keetmanshoop community for providing their support and 
facilities in recruiting participants for focus groups and 
interviews.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Oksman and M. Raunio, “Citizen -centric Smart City 
Planning for Africa: A Qualitative Case Study of Early Stage 
Co-creation of a Namibian Smart Community”, The Twelfth 
International 
Conference 
on 
Digital 
Society 
and 
eGovernments (ICDS), IARIA, March 2018, pp. 30-35. ISSN: 
2308-3956, 978-1-61208-615-6. 
[2] African 
Development 
Bank. 
“Annual 
report 
2011”, 
https://www.afdb.org/en/knowledge/publications/annual-
report/annual-report-2011 (Accessed 30.11. 2018). 
[3] P. C. Annez and R. M. Buckley, “Urbanization and growth: 
Setting the context“, In M. Spence, P. C. Annez & R. M. 
Buckley (Eds.), Urbanization and growth. Commission on 
growth and development (pp. 1-45). Washington, DC: The 
World Bank, 2009.  
[4] M. Slavova and E. Okwechime, ”African smart cities 
strategies for agenda 2063”, Africa Journal of Management, 
vol. 
2, 
no. 
2, 
pp. 
210-229, 
June 
2016, 
doi: 
10.1080/23322373.2016.1175266. 
[5] V. Oksman and M. Kulju, “Developing on-line illustrative 
and participatory tools for urban planning: towards open 
innovation and co-production through citizen engagement”,  
International Journal of Service Technology Management, vol 
23,pp. 445-464, Dec. 2017, doi:10.1504/IJSTM.2017.088943. 
[6] P. Neirotti, A. De Marco, A. C. Cagliano, G. Mangano, G., 
and F. Scorrano, “Current trends in Smart City initiatives: 
Some stylised facts”, Cities, Vol. 38, pp. 25-36, June 2014, 
doi:10.1016/j.cities.2013.12.010.  
[7] L. de Wijs, P. Witte, and D. de Klerk, “Smart City Trends and 
Ambitions”, AGILE 2017, Wageningen, May, 2017. 
ISBN 978-9081696074. 
Available from 
https://agileonline.org/index.php/conference/proceedings/proc
eedings-2017 (Accessed on 30.11. 2018) 
[8] R. Giffinger, C. Fertner, H. Kramar, R. Kalasek, N. Pichler-
Milanović, E. Meijers. “Smart cities. Ranking of European 
medium-sized cities”, University of Technology, Vienna, 
2007. 
[9] T. Nam and T. A. Pardo, “Conceptualizing Smart City with 
Dimensions of Technology, People, and Institutions“, 
Proceedings of the 12th Annual International Digital 
Government Research Conference: Digital Government 
Innovation in Challenging Times. dg.o '11, pp. 282-291, 
2011.  
[10] E. Ziemba, “The contribution of ICT adoption to the 
sustainable information society”, Journal of Computer 
Information Systems, vol. 2, pp. 1-12, May 2017, doi: 
10.1080/08874417.2017.1312635. 
[11] A. Cocchia, “Smart and Digital City: A Systematic Literature 
Review”, In Dameri, R.P. and Rosenthal-Sabroux. C. (Eds.) 
Smart City. How to create public and economic value with 
high technology in urban space. Springer; Switzerland, 2014. 
[12] R. G. Hollands, “Will the real smart city please stand up?”, 
City, 
vol 
12, 
no. 
3, 
pp. 
303-320, 
2008, 
doi: 
10.1080/13604810802479126. 
[13] N. Indongo, S. Angombe, and N. Nickanor, “Urbanisation in 
Namibia: Views from semi-formal and informal settlements”, 
University of Namibia, 2013.  
[14] R. Blackie and P. Tarr, “Government policies on sustainable 
development in Namibia”, RESEARCH DISCUSSION 
PAPER, No. 28 Directorate of Environmental Affairs, 
Ministry of Environment and Tourism, Namibia, 1999. 
[15] N. Jere, E. Kauhonina, and A. Gamundani. “A Proposed 
Living Lab Methodological Framework for Namibia”, In P. 
Cunningham and M. Cunningham (Eds.) IST-Africa 2014 
Conference Proceedings. IIMC International Information 
Management Corporation, pp. 1-11, May 2014. 
[16] D. W. McMillan and D. M. Chavis, “Sense of community: A 
definition and theory”, Journal of Community Psychology, 
vol. 14, pp. 6–23, January 1986, doi:10.1002/1520-
6629(198601). 
[17] B. Anderson, “Imagined Communities. Reflection of the 
Origin and Spread of Nationalism”, Verso: London & New 
York, 2006.  
[18] J. Preece and D. Maloney-Krichman, “Online Communities: 
Design, Theory, and Practice”, Journal of Computer-Mediated 
Communication, 
vol. 
10, 
pp. 
0, 
July 
2005, 
doi: 
10.1111/j.1083-6101.2005.tb00264.x. 
[19] M. Steen, M. Manschot, and N. De Koning, “Benefits of co-
design in service design projects”, International Journal of 
Design, vol.5. pp. 53-60, August 2011. [Online] available 
from 
http://www.ijdesign.org/index.php/IJDesign/article/view/890/
346.  
[20] D.F. Shanahan et al., ”Toward improved public health 
outcomes from urban nature”, American Journal of Public 
Health, 
vol. 
105, 
pp. 
470-7, 
Jan. 
2015, 
doi: 
10.2105/AJPH.2014.302324. 
[21] H. Frumkin, “Healthy Places: Exploring the Evidence”, 
American Journal of Public Health, vol 93, pp. 1451-1456, 
Sept. 
2003. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1447992/ 
[22] A. Grahn and P. Stigsdotter, “The relation between perceived 
sensory dimensions of urban green space and stress 
restoration”, Landscape and Urban Planning, vol. 94, pp. 264-
275, November 2009.  

256
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[23] S. Angel, J. Parent, D. L. Civco, and A.M. Blei, “Atlas of 
Urban Expansion”, Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, 
Cambridge, MA, 2012. 
[24] W. Pendelton, J. Crush, and N. Nikanor, “Migrant Windhoek: 
Rural-Urban Migration and Food Security in Namibia”, 
Urban Forum 25, pp. 191-205, January 2014, doi: 
10.1007/s12132-014-9220-x. 
[25] l. M. Amugongo,”Smart cities: Namibia shouldn’t be left 
out”, Retrieved from 
https://thepatriot.com.na/index.php/2016/04/08/smart-cities-
namibia-shouldnt-be-left-out/.(Accessed on 10.12. 2018) 
[26] IMF, “International Monetary Fund 2016. Namibia. Selected 
Issues”, IMF Country Report No. 16/374. 
[27] A. McIntyre “Participatory Action Research”, Qualitative 
research methods series 52. Sage Publications. London 2008  
[28] D. J. Greenwood, and M. Levin, “Introduction to action 
research. 
Social 
research 
for 
social 
change”, 
Sage 
Publications, London, 2007. 
[29] J. W. Willis and C. Edwards, “Action research: models, 
methods, and examples”. IAP, NC & Eurospan, London.2014.  
[30] FNB, First National Bank 2015. Housing Index. Third 
Quarter.  
[31] J. D. Salter, C. Campbell, M. Journey, and S. R. J. Sheppard, 
“The Digital Workshop: Exploring the Use of Interactive and 
Immersive Visualisation Tools in Participatory Planning”,  
Journal of Environmental Management, vol 90, pp. 2090–
2101, May 2009, doi:10.1016/j.jenvman.2007.08.023.  
[32] I. Wagner et al., “MR Tent: a place for constructing mixed 
realities in urban planning”, Proceedings of the fourth 
international conference on Communities and technologies, 
(C&T '09) pp. 185-194, May 2009.  
[33] T. P. Ertiö, “Participatory Apps for Urban Planning—Space 
for Improvement”, Planning Practice and Research, vol. 30, 
no 3, pp. 303-321, May 2015.  
[34] M. Allen, “Smart-phone augmented reality for public 
participation in urban planning”, Proceedings of the 23rd 
Australian Computer-Human Interaction Conference, (OzCHI 
'11) pp. 11-20, Nov. 2011. 
[35] H. Russell Bernard, “Research Methods in Anthropology. 
Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches,” AltaMira Press. 
Lanham, 2006.  
[36] R. A. Krueger and M. A Casey, “Focus Groups. A Practical 
Guide 
for 
Applied 
Research”, 
Fifth 
Edition. 
Sage 
Publications, 2015.  
 
 
 
 

