402
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Proxemic Interactions with Multi-artifact Systems 
Henrik Sørensen and Jesper Kjeldskov 
Research Centre for Socio-Interactive Design 
Department of Computer Science 
Aalborg University, Denmark 
{hesor, jesper}@cs.aau.dk 
 
 
Abstract— The artifact ecologies emerging from an increasing 
number 
of 
interactive 
digital 
artifacts, 
capable 
of 
communicating with each other wirelessly, have created an 
interaction space where software applications are no longer 
limited by the physical boundaries of a single device. With the 
new opportunities follows an added complexity that interaction 
designers need to address. Previous work have shown the 
potential of proxemic interactions as one way of dealing with 
design challenges of ubicomp systems. However, the work 
focused on interactions involving multiple digital artifacts is 
limited. In this paper, we analyze two multi-artifact systems 
from our prior work within the domain of music consumption 
and identify four concepts of multi-artifact interactions: 
Plasticity, migration, complementarity, and multi-user. These 
concepts forms the basis for a discussion on the potential use of 
proxemic interactions in the design of multi-artifact systems. 
Keywords- artifact ecology, multi-artifact systems, proxemic 
interactions, music systems. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The establishment of a wireless network infrastructure 
surrounding us introduces an easier connectivity between 
different digital devices. In addition, to enable data sharing 
and synchronization it provides great potential for 
interactions transcending the physical boundaries of 
individual devices [1]. Jung et al. [2] describe this network 
of devices as a personal ecology of interactive artifacts and 
defines it as “a set of all physical artifacts with some level 
of interactivity enabled by digital technology that a person 
owns, has access to, and uses”. Taking advantage of the 
potential offered by artifact ecologies without introducing 
additional complexity to the user is however a challenge.  
Interaction designers have become quite good at 
designing desktop applications and are in a post-desktop era 
progressively getting better at designing mobile applications 
as well. However, it is our belief that good interaction 
design for artifact ecologies consists of more than the 
aggregation of good designs for each individual artifact. 
Previous work has already moved towards an understanding 
of the composition [2] and dynamics [3] of the ecologies as 
a whole. What we find is that there is a gap between the 
work on understanding interactions with single artifacts and 
understanding personal artifact ecologies on a high 
abstraction level. There seems to be a challenge in 
understanding the interaction with multi-artifact systems 
that combine artifacts from personal artifact ecologies. This 
creates an additional layer of complexity that requires us to 
think of these sub-systems in a holistic way on an 
abstraction layer above the single artifact but below the 
entire artifact ecology.  
The idea of proxemic interactions is to take advantage of 
the significance of spatial organization to the way we 
interact with people and digital artifacts. This has shown a 
great potential in helping us understand the artifact 
associations that constitutes multi-artifact systems and help 
us facilitate the interaction with them. The concept of 
proxemic interactions caters very well to the flexible, 
mobile, and wireless nature of the systems and removes 
some of the responsibility of handling the added complexity 
of multiple artifacts being in play simultaneously.   
The overall goal is to move towards multi-artifact 
interaction designs that deliberately exploit the synergetic 
effects that emerge from artifact compositions and take 
advantage of the new opportunities this gives us without 
compromising user experience. The contribution of this 
paper is to identify concepts of multi-artifact systems that 
we find to be of particular significance to an artifact ecology 
context and explore proxemic interactions [4] as a possible 
framework to reveal opportunities and address design 
challenges for each of the identified concepts. The analysis 
is based around multi-artifact systems from our previous 
work in the music consumption domain. 
Our focus lies in the interaction between humans and 
artifacts on a conceptual level, although it is clear that 
interaction designs spanning multiple artifacts is highly 
dependent on a comprehensive and flexible technical 
infrastructure for artifact discovery, connection, and 
communication. Therefore, we work under the assumption 
that this is or will be available to some extent, but 
acknowledge that some of the challenges are in the 
interaction itself.    
First, we present related work on artifact ecologies, 
proxemic interactions, and music consumption in Human-
Computer Interaction (HCI). We then clarify 
our 
understanding and delimitation of the multi-artifact system 
concept followed by a description of the two music systems 
from our prior work. Finally, we analyze the systems to 
identify characteristic concepts of multi-artifact systems and 
discuss the application of proxemic interaction before we 
conclude the paper with implications for future work. 

403
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
This section relates our work to previous research in 
artifact ecologies, proxemic interactions and music 
consumption. 
A. Artifact Ecologies 
In a study of the social role of products, Forlizzi [5] 
introduces a product ecology framework used to describe 
the dynamic aspects of use. The framework puts the product 
in the middle, meaning that each individual product has its 
own ecology in which components are interconnected. A 
product for example often has certain relations to other 
products that together act as a system. The components 
included in the framework, besides other products, are 
people, activities, place, and the routines and cultural 
context. Forlizzi’s product ecology framework provides 
means to reason about the single product and its social 
impact across users. 
Artifact ecologies represent a different approach of 
putting an ecological thinking into play in relation to the 
products surrounding us. Jung et al. [2], places the user in 
the center and define a personal ecology of interactive 
artifacts that a person owns, has access to, and uses. This 
means that an ecology is defined from the perspective of a 
person instead of a product/artifact. In their work, they 
conducted two types of exploratory studies with the 
common goal of understanding the relationships within 
artifact ecologies. Their study works under the assumption 
that the experience with an artifact can only be fully 
understood when it is considered in relation to an artifact 
ecology. We find the personal perspective very useful in 
understanding interactions that involve several artifacts. The 
limitation of the framework is that it does not take into 
account what happens when different personal ecologies 
intersect in multi-user interactions. 
Jung et al. [2] argues that artifact ecologies are 
dynamically evolving. Bødker and Klokmose [3] follow up 
on that idea and emphasize the importance of not only 
understanding a current composition of artifacts in our 
surroundings but also how relationships among them change 
over time. Using Activity Theory as their theoretical 
framing and the Human-Artifact Model [6] as an analytical 
tool, they identify three states of an artifact ecology: The 
unsatisfactory, the excited, and the stable state. The artifact 
ecology of a person will change state over time and at some 
point reach the unsatisfactory state once again. Changes to 
the ecology can then put it into an excited state and the 
cycle repeats itself. One challenge they encountered in their 
analysis was to describe what the artifacts of artifact 
ecologies is. While Jung et al. [2] describes artifacts as 
physical objects, Bødker and Klokmose [3] found from their 
study that this does not always tell the whole story and that 
something more may be needed to systematically address 
the software as well. 
B. Proxemic Interactions 
According to Hall [7], interactions between individuals 
are highly influenced by interpersonal distance. There is for 
example a significant difference in how we interact with a 
person standing right in front of us compared to a person we 
see from across the street. A noteworthy contribution of 
Hall’s work is the definition of discrete proxemic zones 
surrounding us, called the intimate, personal, social, and 
public zone. Each characterizes the interaction with people 
in our surroundings based on the immediate distance.  
Vogel and Balakrishnan [8] adopts this notion in their 
framework for shareable interactive ambient displays and 
uses it to define what they refer to as interaction phases. 
This is a very direct interpretation of Hall’s proxemic zones 
[7], which allow a large display to adapt to the user, based 
on distance in much the same way as people adapt to other 
people approaching. Greenberg et al. [4] have later 
expanded on the idea of proxemics as a means to describe 
relations in small space ubicomp environments that include 
multiple users, devices, and non-digital features. In their 
framework, they operationalize proxemics through five 
dimensions of proxemic interactions: Distance, orientation, 
movement, identity, and location. In addition to the 
theoretical framework on proxemic interactions, Marquardt 
et al. [9] have presented a proximity toolkit, which gives 
developers and interaction designers easy access to a 
prototype environment for proxemic interactions. The 
toolkit has been used in the development of prototypes such 
as the Proxemic Peddler [10]. 
Although previous work have established a deeper 
understanding of proxemic interactions and the potential of 
the framework over the last few years, Marquardt and 
Greenberg [11] notice that little work is applying the theory 
to interaction designs in ubicomp research. In their work, 
they elaborate on how proxemic interactions can address 
particular challenges of ubicomp interaction design. The six 
core challenges they identify in relation to proxemics are 
revealing 
interaction 
possibilities, 
directing 
actions, 
establishing connections, providing feedback, avoiding and 
correcting mistakes, and managing privacy and security.  
Proxemic interaction shows great potential, but also 
comes with a risk. Because proxemic interaction relies on 
close tracking of people and devices, it comes with the risk 
of being exploited. Greenberg et al. [12] identifies so called 
dark patterns of proxemic interactions and discuss the 
framework from a critical perspective. A particular 
challenge of systems that base decisions on implicit 
interactions is for example to design ways for the user to opt 
out of the interaction. The point of context awareness in 
general is that the system becomes able to infer how a user 
wants to interact with devices based on context. The 
problem is when the interaction designer is not using that 
information in the best interest of the user but for instance in 
the interest of a company that wants to sell a product.  

404
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
C. Music Consumption 
Music has always been an important domain across 
disciplines due to its universal appeal. Holmquist talks 
about the field of ubiquitous music and how it formed 
through a digitization of music, portable music players and 
heightened bandwidth [13]. Although the article is from 
2005, ubiquitous music has only become more relevant after 
the emergence of Internet streaming services and affordable 
multi-room music systems. However, Liikkanen et al. [14] 
point out that music consumption as a defined area in HCI 
research is extinct. They argue that research on music 
consumption through interactive devices continues but is 
marginal and needs a revival.  
An aspect of music consumption with a particular 
relevance to our context is the role of music in a social 
setting. Leong and Wright [15] found that the increasing 
connectivity of technologies we use to consume music have 
prompted users to create their own configurations that 
allows them to obtain more meaningful social interactions 
through music. They comment on the future designs of 
music discovery beyond virtual social networks that utilizes 
the physical environment. Capital Music [16] is an example 
that 
allows 
co-located 
strangers 
to 
share 
music 
recommendations. Their study shows how music can 
influence social interactions in public spaces without people 
listening to music together. Another study explores this 
premise in tuna [17], which allows co-located users to 
“tune” in to other people’s mobile music player. 
O’Hara and Brown’s [18] book contains a large 
collection of contributions to the social aspect of music 
consumption. Their work provides valuable insights into the 
sociality of music but is also a testament to how the 
technologies involved in music consumption has changed 
drastically in few years. Ongoing work is similarly 
exploring shared music experiences supported through 
technology and novel interaction designs. An example is 
Mo by Lenz et al. [19], which is a music player with an 
integrated speaker focusing on a shared music experience. 
Mo can be brought into a social setting and creates a 
connected music system by placing it next to other players.  
III. 
MULTI-ARTIFACT SYSTEMS 
Before we start conceptualizing multi-artifact systems in 
artifact ecologies, it is important for us to clarify what we 
mean by the term in the first place and how we delimit it to 
reflect our scope. By multi-artifact systems, we refer to 
interactive systems, which are part of an artifact ecology, 
and involves more than a single physical artifact. Different 
terms have previously been used to describe similar 
concepts. Rekimoto has for instance described it as 
multiple-computer user interfaces with a focus on graphical 
user interfaces [20]. Furthermore, Terrenghi et al. [21] 
created a taxonomy for what they refer to as multi-person-
display ecosystems, and Anzengruber et al. [22] similarly 
talk about display ecosystems as the platform for social 
feedback. As much as we appreciate the desirable features 
of the visual aspect, we also want to acknowledge other 
modalities of input and output, especially since our point of 
departure is in the music domain. Because we want to 
continue the ongoing work on artifact ecologies, it makes 
sense to refer to the sub-sets of artifacts as multi-artifact 
systems. According to the systems’ view, the essential 
properties of an organism, or a system, is the properties of 
the whole that none of the parts has alone [23]. This view 
fits perfectly well with our intention of addressing 
interaction design for systems, which provides more than 
cross-platform interfaces. 
A. Delimitation 
In our definition and delimitation of multi-artifact 
systems, we acknowledge Bødker and Klokmose’s [3] 
comment on the artifact term encompassing more than the 
physical interactive artifact. Our interest lies in the 
interaction designs, which transcends the boundaries of a 
physical artifact, thus we use multi-artifact systems as a 
term to describe sub-systems of artifact ecologies consisting 
of a specific composition of hardware and software artifacts 
used throughout a particular activity. This could technically 
involve the interaction with a desktop-PC communicating 
with a web server through a browser, but our work 
specifically aims at systems where either the user provides 
direct input to the artifacts or the artifacts provide direct 
output to the user. The server part of the example fulfils 
neither role. Video conferencing is another example that 
involves several artifacts, but traditionally only one from 
each user’s personal ecology. It is thus not a multi-artifact 
system either. A system that merges persons’ smartphones 
into a common interface is an example of a multi-artifact 
system from our perspective, as it would become a multi-
artifact system in each user’s ecology. The example shows 
the inclusion of systems that exist in the intersection 
between personal artifact ecologies, where multiple persons 
interact with some or all of the same artifacts.  
B. Time and Space 
Although the browser and video conferencing examples 
provide some limitation to our scope it should not be 
interpreted as if the artifacts in the multi-artifact systems are 
required to be co-located or that the interaction with each 
artifact has to happen simultaneously. We still consider 
systems that distribute interaction across time and space as 
long as the interaction is part of the same activity from the 
personal point-of-view. The important point is that the 
system provides more than a cross-platform interface. An 
example is the Google Chrome browser. Having a version 
for Windows, Android and iOS makes it a collection of 
single-artifact interactions, but when it starts remembering 
tabs, bookmarks, search preferences, etc. across artifacts it 
becomes interaction with a multi-artifact system.  
The following sections provide descriptions of the two 
multi-artifact music systems from prior work, on which we 
base our conceptualization. 

405
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
IV. 
AIRPLAYER 
AirPlayer is a multi-room music system that adapts to 
the location of the user with the purpose of creating an 
implicit control of the music. It consists of a .NET C# server 
application and an Android client that builds on top of 
Apple’s AirPlay protocol stack, hence the name, making it 
capable of streaming music from a central digital music 
library to speakers placed in different locations around the 
home. Each speaker connects wirelessly to a central music 
player application through an Airport Express that doubles 
as a Wi-Fi access point. The use of a Wi-Fi network 
additionally makes it possible for the user to control music 
independently in specific locations from a smartphone 
application. AirPlayer handles separate locations through 
the notion of zones. A zone is per default a representation of 
the room in which a particular Airport Express is placed. 
However, the user can combine zones to play and control 
music in several locations simultaneously. The zone name is 
visible in the bottom of the main screen (see Figure 1) and 
by sliding horizontally, the user can manually cycle through 
the different zones to see the current song playing change 
the volume etc. 
Similar features are already present in Apple’s existing 
product family, through iTunes, as well as in other multi-
room music systems. The significance of AirPlayer is its 
addition of proxemic interaction features that allow the 
system to adapt to spatial relations between the user and 
particular speakers placed in different rooms. The proxemic 
interaction manifests itself in AirPlayer as two features 
called location and movement, which the user enables 
through 
the 
smartphone 
application. 
A 
simple 
implementation of an indoor positioning system provides 
the necessary logic to estimate user location and distance to 
individual 
speakers. 
The 
smartphone 
application 
continuously measures Received Signal Strength Indicator 
(RSSI) values from the Airport Express Wi-Fi access points 
and uses them to determine in which zone the user is 
located. Chen and Kobayashi [24] argues that indoor 
location is feasible through radio signal based indoor 
location, given an implementation of a sound method for 
signal propagation. Although the proxemic sensing in this 
prototype is not based on a sophisticated algorithm for 
signal propagation, in practice it performs to a degree that 
enables the user to experience proxemic interaction.  
A. Location 
When the location feature is enabled, the smartphone 
application continuously adapts to represent the music 
currently playing in the zone where the user is located. As 
illustrated in Figure 1, this means that the user interface 
presents information about the song playing and ensures that 
the user automatically controls the music in this particular 
location. The change happens in a seamless and subtle way, 
when the user changes location, without the need for 
explicit user interaction. Whenever the system detects a 
change in location, it simply adapts the smartphone 
application to represent the current zone. From the user 
point-of-view the interaction is similar to having a universal 
remote control that can be used to control independent 
music players in each room. 
B. Movement 
When the movement feature is enabled, music follows 
the user around the home as illustrated in Figure 2. By 
tracking the smartphone, the system is able to anticipate 
which zone the user is entering, continue the music in the 
new zone, and stop the music in the old one. What actually 
happens is that AirPlayer streams the music to all zones 
simultaneously and adjusts the volume in accordance to the 
movement of the user. The movement and location feature 
can be enabled independently but are not strictly 
independent of each other. When the movement feature is 
enabled, so is the location feature as the same music is 
always playing where the user is located. The location 
feature enables a state where the smartphone user interface 
adapts to the location of the user and the music content 
stays. Inversely, the movement feature enables a state where 
the user interface stays the same and the music content 
adapts to the location of the user. 
 
Figure 1. The location feature adapts the user interface and control to 
the location of the user. 
 
 
Figure 2. The movement feature makes music follow the user across 
locations.  

406
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
V. 
MEET 
The 
second 
system, 
called 
Music 
Experienced 
Everywhere Together (MEET), is a multi-user, multi-
artifact music system that addresses the problem domain of 
playing music in a social setting where there is no DJ or 
other dedicated control of the music. The concept of MEET 
is to allow several co-located users to share their music to a 
music player at social events, thereby creating a common 
music library. What is being played from the library is then 
controlled in a collaborative manner where anyone can 
nominate and vote for songs using their own smartphones or 
a dedicated tablet. To nominate a song simply means that 
the system puts a song up for display as a possible song to 
be played next. When it will be played, or whether it will be 
played at all, is up to the crowd and how participants choose 
to place their votes. The smartphone and tablet application 
is implemented in Android and the library and music player 
is implemented in Java/JavaFX. The Real-time Transport 
Protocol (RTP) and Real Time Streaming Protocol (RTSP) 
is used for streaming between library and music player. 
The intention of a system like this, compared to for 
example a traditional jukebox, is to make it a social 
experience that tries to be fair to the users and that allows 
people to engage in the music control in a different way. 
The advantages of the approach are: 
 
 
No one can interrupt what is currently being played 
in order to put on another song. 
 
There is no playlist queue, but rather a system that 
dynamically changes to reflect what people wants to 
hear in the moment. 
 
The music in the library is not a large generic 
collection but a personalized collection of people’s 
own music.   
 
A quality of music is its ability to be experienced as a 
background activity. Consequently, it is important for 
MEET to allow participation on different levels and not 
become the event itself. To accommodate this requirement, 
MEET has a built in feature that automatically nominates 
songs from the music library if there are less than three 
current nominations. 
A. Smartphone Application 
The smartphone application is the primary input artifact 
for the music player. Besides being the interface to share 
music to the music player, it features a nominate 
functionality, where users can browse the collection of 
music shared by users and nominate songs they would like 
to hear. Furthermore, the interface presents the list of 
nominations, giving the option to give a positive or negative 
vote for nominations. Each vote will simply add or subtract 
one point from the total score. An important quality is to 
utilize the users’ own smartphones, thereby making it a 
personal artifact representing the specific owner’s choices. 
B. Tablet Application 
The tablet application is a simplified version of the 
smartphone application that only works for nominating and 
voting. It primarily serves as a public input artifact used by 
people without a compatible smartphone and secondly as a 
physical interaction point for the music system in general. 
Because the tablet is an artifact shared among several users, 
the vote feature is modified to allow an infinite number of 
votes for a single nomination and instead introduce a 10-
second countdown after a vote, where the application locks 
itself. The lock mechanism is added in an attempt to prevent 
a person from exploiting the tablet by voting repeatedly for 
the same song. 
C. Situated Display 
The situated display shows the primary visual output of 
the music player to the users. The interface is suitable for a 
large flat screen TV or projector and should be placed with 
visibility in mind as it represents the current state of the 
music player to the users. An album cover represents a 
nomination on the situated display (see Figure 3). Size of 
nominations indicate score, meaning that the largest are 
more likely to play next. This score does not map to the 
smartphone application, thus the situated display is the only 
place where the status is visible. Figure 3 shows the voting 
interface of the different artifacts.The music system is 
running in one place and distributes interaction to other 
artifacts. Specific artifacts consist of a device with a part of 
the distributed interface each with their own output screen 
and each serving a specific purpose. 
 
Figure 3. The different artifacts of MEET and their respective GUIs for 
the voting functionality. 
 

407
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
VI. 
CONCEPTS OF MULTI-ARTIFACT SYSTEMS 
In this section, we use the two presented systems to 
identify concepts that we find meaningful in the context of 
multi-artifact systems. The concepts are not novel in 
themselves, but the contribution lies in the use of them as 
tools to describe interaction across artifacts, which can 
inform a focused and structured effort in the design of 
proxemic interactions. 
A. Plasticity 
The term plasticity is inspired by neuroscience and the 
way our brain is able to change as a reaction to external 
influences such as changes in the environment. The term has 
been adapted to HCI to describe a similar behavior for non-
static user interfaces. Balme et al. [25] define plasticity 
applied to HCI as “…the capacity of an interactive system 
to adapt to changes of the interactive space while 
preserving usability”. Changes of the interactive space can 
both be in terms of the physical environment, the resources 
available or virtual changes. Plasticity is meaningful for 
different types of artifacts. A smartphone application can for 
instance adapt to the location of the user (Figure 4), or a 
public display can adapt to the time of day or number of 
people in front of it. 
In AirPlayer, the location feature enables the smartphone 
application to adapt to the location of the user, providing 
information about the music currently playing, as well as 
control of the music in this particular location. In AirPlayer, 
it is the spatial relations between the smartphone and 
speakers placed around the home that determines what is 
presented to the user, which is why we argue that plasticity 
also has its place as a concept of multi-artifact systems.  
MEET does not have any plasticity integrated in the 
interaction design. Each artifact has a form that plays a 
specific role in the system. An idea of introducing it into the 
smartphone application could be to provide more feedback 
on the status nominations, if the user is not able to see the 
situated display.  
Another interesting challenge of artifact ecologies is the 
increase in general-purpose artifacts capable of executing 
different sort of applications. Our phone is no longer just for 
making phone calls, our TV is no longer just for watching 
TV, and the newest addition to our ecologies is smart 
watches that does much more than showing the time. As our 
collection of general-purpose artifacts expand, arguably so 
does the number of multi-artifact systems and thereby the 
complexity of them. In AirPlayer, the smartphone 
application adapts to contextual information within the 
user’s current activity. Artifacts able to adapt to fit a certain 
activity and composition of artifacts could be an interesting 
utilization of plasticity.  
B. Migration 
Migration refers to the capability of moving the 
interaction from one device to another while preserving the 
state (see Figure 5). Berti et al. describes migratory user 
interfaces as “…interfaces that can transfer among different 
devices, and thus allow the users to continue their tasks…” 
[26]. The essential concept here is the continuity in the 
interaction and it is where it differs from cross-platform 
applications, which merely presents the user to an 
alternative version of the same application on different 
physical artifacts. In the taxonomy of migratory interfaces 
Berti et al. [26] distinguish between different degrees of 
migration: Total migration, is where the entire interface 
migrates from one artifact to another. In partial migration, 
only a part migrates to the target artifact. Distributing 
migration is where the interface migrates to multiple target 
artifacts. Finally, aggregating migration, is where the 
interface migrates from multiple artifacts into one. 
The movement feature of AirPlayer makes music follow 
the user around by moving music output from one artifact to 
another. The interesting thing about the movement feature 
of AirPlayer is not that it plays the same music from a 
central source. It is the ability to do so continuously across 
locations as the user moves around. In the AirPlayer 
example, it is the content (music) migrating between exactly 
two artifacts. The way it works in AirPlayer is an example 
of interface migration not necessarily being a matter of 
transferring an application state.   
Migration and plasticity are somehow related concepts 
that both encourage more flexible and adaptable relations in 
artifact ecologies. There is no implementation of interface 
migration in MEET but is in a similar way as plasticity a 
concept that could be integrated. A possible use is to 
transfer the state of the situated display to a view on the 
smartphone application as soon as the situated display is no 
longer visible to the user. 
 
 
Figure 4. Plasticity allows user interactive systems to adapt to the 
interaction space. 
 
 
Figure 5. Migration allows interaction to move between devices. 
 

408
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
C. Complementarity 
Complementarity, as illustrated in Figure 6, is the 
concept of distributing a user interface across artifacts 
allowing simultaneously use in a collaborative fashion. A 
typical example is a remote control where the user input is 
clearly separated from the output, and one artifact is 
controlling another. Another type of complementary 
interactions have started to emerge in the form of so-called 
companion apps or second-screen apps, which is a mobile 
application that complements the interaction of another 
artifact. An example is an application that shows 
information for a TV show. 
In MEET, interaction is distributed across different 
artifacts. The different artifacts can be described as being 
complementary to each other, as each of them provides 
features that improve the overall system. The music player 
is useless if no one has connected a smartphone, shared 
some music and nominated at least one song. The 
smartphone application similarly does nothing on its own. 
Distributing functionality is of course a conscious design 
choice that is not strictly necessary to play music at a party. 
However, the distribution takes advantage of available 
interaction resources to create a different kind of experience. 
What field studies of MEET have shown is also that such 
systems can provide an opportunity for a different social 
interaction and utilization of the environment, than a 
traditional music system. Unfortunately, the benefits come 
with the cost of an additional level of complexity, both 
technically and in the interaction design.  
The complementarity between the smartphone/tablet and 
situated display in MEET is similar to the notion of coupled 
displays [21] where lessons can be learned from previous 
work. In addition, it is important to consider other 
modalities of input and output of multi-artifact systems than 
the visual, as artifacts may be able to utilize these to 
complement each other in different ways. 
AirPlayer similarly has an element of complementarity 
in its interaction design although more subtle than in MEET. 
The smartphone application provides the input and output to 
a music system distributed throughout the home that 
provides the music output. Although the smartphone 
application is able to control various music outputs 
independently, the complementarity in AirPlayer is basically 
a remote control metaphor. In a way this is also the case in 
MEET 
although 
both 
examples 
illustrate 
that 
complementary artifacts can be more powerful than a direct 
mapping of a traditional remote control.  
It is reasonable to talk about dependency of the 
relationships between complementary artifacts. In MEET 
there is a very strong dependency between the smartphone 
application, the music player, and the situated display as 
none of them can work independent of the other. An 
exception is the tablet, which can be removed without losing 
crucial functionality but does nothing on its own. In 
AirPlayer, there is similarly a strong dependency between 
artifacts as no control of the music is implemented outside 
the smartphone application. The point is that it can be useful 
to consider the dependencies of complementary artifacts. 
Not only in the scope of the multi-artifact system but also in 
relation to the artifact ecologies involved. In AirPlayer all 
the artifacts belongs to the ecology of a single person as 
only one smartphone application is allowed at any time. 
MEET on the other hand is by design dependent on artifacts 
from several personal artifact ecologies. 
D. Multi-user 
Multi-user interaction is quite self-explanatory and is 
simply the concept of interactions that involve more than 
one user. However, it is worth making the distinction 
between two cases. One is where multiple users interact 
with a system simultaneously (Figure 7). The other is where 
multiple users interact with a system one at a time. 
The multi-user concept is different from the others, as it 
addresses the users instead of the artifacts. Whether a 
system is designed for single or multi-user interaction is not 
surprisingly an important factor. What it means to include 
multiple users in terms of artifact ecologies is that the multi-
artifact system spans more than one personal artifact 
ecology and that all involved users’ ecologies intersect.  
MEET is for instance designed specifically for a social 
context with several simultaneous users. Each user’s 
smartphone is a part of their individual artifact ecology and 
can serve various purposes in different contexts. When they 
arrive and connect their smartphone to the player the 
situated display and music player becomes part of each 
user’s artifact ecology as well. Even though smartphone at 
this point is part of the same multi-artifact system, they are 
not part of any other user’s artifact ecology.  
 
 
Figure 7. Multi-user interactions are either interactions involving more 
than one user simultaneously or one at a time. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Complementarity allows interactions to be distributed across 
devices. 
 

409
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
The 
new 
possibilities 
for 
designing 
multi-user 
interactions is one strength of multi-artifact systems. MEET 
for example, has no inherent upper limit on the number of 
simultaneous users by design. The possibilities do however 
come with a price. Just as multi-artifact systems adds an 
extra layer of complexity to single-artifact interaction, so 
does multi-user interaction. It is interesting to see how some 
multi-artifact systems are inherently designed for a single 
user but where it is trivial to support more simultaneous 
users. AirPlayer, on the other hand, is a case where it easily 
gets complicated if it needs to support more user even 
though it would make sense in an everyday situation. MEET 
is specifically designed to support simultaneous users and 
would simply be a different system if it were to support a 
single-user mode. 
E. Comparing AirPlayer and MEET 
We have analyzed the two multi-artifact music systems, 
MEET and AirPlayer and have identified four concepts of 
multi-artifact 
interactions: 
Plasticity, 
migration, 
complementarity, and multi-user. In AirPlayer we identified 
the concepts of plasticity, migration, and complementarity 
and in MEET we identified complementarity and multi-user 
(Figure 8). Complementarity was the only overlapping 
concept and served a similar purpose in both systems, 
namely to distribute part of the user interface onto a 
smartphone. A difference is that in AirPlayer there was no 
other visual interface besides the smartphone application. 
The multi-user concept differs from the others, as it does not 
refer to the artifacts. It is therefore interesting to see how 
important it is to the way a multi-artifact system is designed. 
We do want to stress that the concepts are not individual 
solutions to multi-artifact interaction design. There lies great 
opportunity in combining the concepts as was also evident 
in our analysis. Plasticity, migration and complementarity in 
AirPlayer serves a particular purposes for a part of the 
system and a strength of the combination can be seen in the 
movement feature. Having the music follow you around 
could be achieved by simply playing it from the smartphone 
itself, but the music system installed in the home is of a 
much higher quality and through migration, music can still 
follow the user around. The convenience of controlling 
music 
on 
the 
smartphone, 
offered 
through 
the 
complementary interface, is on the other hand preferable. 
Partial, distributing, and aggregating migration can be used 
to switch between complementary artifact compositions. 
VII. PROXEMIC INTERACTIONS 
In this section, we discuss the use of proxemic 
interactions as a possible interaction framework for multi-
artifact systems in artifact ecologies. We specifically revisit 
the four identified concepts of multi-artifact systems 
described earlier, and discuss possible opportunities and 
challenges in the application of proxemic interactions to 
realize them. The discussion is based on our experiences 
from the studies of the music systems as well as insights 
from previous work on proxemic interactions. 
A. Proxemics and Plasticity 
Plasticity represents the very basic concept proxemic 
interactions was defined for: Adapting the user interface of 
interactive systems to better accommodate the spatial 
organization of people, digital artifacts and non-digital 
objects. This is what Vogel and Balakrishnan [8] 
demonstrates in their work on a public display that adapts to 
the distance of a user in a seamless way through four 
interaction phases very analogous to Hall’s [7] proxemic 
zones. Similar work on proxemic interactions focuses on the 
distance between a user and a large display, and there is a 
great potential in the use of adapting user interfaces of 
artifacts based on the proxemic relations to nearby users. 
In AirPlayer, we saw how plasticity was used to adapt 
the content of the smartphone interface according to the 
location of the user. A noteworthy detail here is that it is the 
content that changes and not the state of the user interface. 
Another aspect of plasticity is to allow the user interface to 
adapt to accommodate the surroundings. In MEET, it could 
for example be interesting to let the interface of the situated 
display adapt to the number of users in front of it. This 
could be used to either improve the experience of current 
users or help attract more. 
A general challenge with proxemic interactions as a way 
of automating plastic user interfaces is the dilemma of how 
much the user needs to understand the decisions made by 
the system. A smartphone typically uses a proximity sensor 
to disable the touchscreen when a call is picked up and the 
phone is being held in a position close to the user’s ear. Not 
everyone knows this happens and as long as it prevents 
accidentally pressing unwanted buttons, the feature serves 
its purpose. In the design of proxemic interactions that adapt 
the user interface, it is however important to take into 
consideration how much the user is kept in the dark.  
B. Proxemics and Migration 
The idea of interface migration is very relevant in an 
artifact ecology context as we already own and interact with 
several artifacts capable of performing the same tasks. 
Without some sort of preserved state across artifacts, we end 
up restarting interactions every time we switch between 
them. Which artifact is appropriate for the task in a given 
point of time depends on various factors and presents a 
challenge that does not seem to be completely solvable by 
proxemic interactions alone. 
 
Figure 6. Utilization of discussed concepts in the two systems. 
 

410
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
In AirPlayer, the music migrates from artifact to artifact, 
depending on the movement of the user, i.e., the content. 
This example already shows how it can make sense to base 
the migration on proxemic relations. The implementation of 
proxemic interactions in AirPlayer is rather coarse-grained 
and only works on a room level. The location dimension in 
proxemic interaction theory differs from distance in that 
other features of the location can be significant. In the 
AirPlayer example, the type of room could for example be 
meaningful to the decision about migrating and if the user 
left the house, it could make sense to perform a total 
migration to the smartphone. 
More generally, proxemic relations seems like a natural 
approach to interface migration. Many of the challenges 
identified by Marquardt and Greenberg [11] apply to 
interface migration such as revealing migration targets, 
directing actions and establishing connections. A general 
challenge that however also would apply to migration is 
how to opt out or how to avoid automatically opting in. It is 
easy to assume that the user would always want to migrate 
the current task to the nearest and/or best artifact. However, 
there could be situations where this is not the case. It would 
for instance not be appropriate to migrate mobile internet 
browsing to every public display a user passes by even 
though it provides a larger screen.  
C. Proxemics and Complementarity 
Unlike plasticity and migration, complementarity as a 
concept does not infer any ability to adapt or change the 
interface of an interactive system. It rather describes how 
artifacts can complement each other to allow for an 
augmented interaction experience. The concept is still 
relevant to discuss in relation to proxemic interactions as the 
procedure of connecting artifacts and making meaning of 
current associations is not a trivial task.   
Results from the field study of the complementary 
interface of MEET shows the importance of the spatial 
organization of users and artifacts in the physical 
environment. In cases where the user had great visibility of 
the situated display, the most important property was the 
coordination of visual feedback between the situated display 
and the smartphone application. However, when either the 
users were at a distance or otherwise unable to see the 
display clearly, they would be highly dependent on the 
limited feedback given from the smartphone application. It 
can be argued that a redesign of the interface or added 
features would solve this problem, but an important aspect 
of the smartphone application is also the simplicity as the 
users were engaged in a social activity as well. 
In an artifact ecology context, there generally seems to be 
an unlocked potential in utilizing proxemic interactions to 
combine plasticity with complementarity. Mobile artifacts 
serve multiple purposes that often overlap. Configuring the 
roles of artifacts in our immediate surroundings is currently 
up to the user and as the number of artifacts grow, it 
becomes a difficult task to get the best out of the artifacts in 
a given situation. Here we see a potential for proxemic 
interactions to adapt the interface of the individual devices 
to complement other artifacts in its proximity. The 
limitation of proxemic interactions in relation to plasticity is 
that spatial relations do not uniquely characterize an 
activity. The couch in front of the TV can be the place 
where a user watches movies while using a smartphone as a 
remote control, but it might as well be where he takes a nap. 
D. Proxemics and Multi-user Interactions 
Supporting multiple co-located users in multi-artifact 
systems is far from a trivial challenge. The identity 
dimension of the proxemic interaction framework do 
acknowledge the importance of distinguishing between 
users. This is similar to how we might feel more 
comfortable having a conversation very close to our spouse 
than to a stranger, and in the interaction design of multi-
artifact systems this makes sense as well. Designing 
proxemic interactions based on the identity of multiple users 
is very useful and can help in managing privacy and security 
through proximity-dependent authentication [11]. A laptop 
should, e.g., react differently if it is aware that the owner is 
sitting in front of it with a smartphone than if it is an 
unauthorized user. However, there are other underlying 
challenges of proxemic interactions in multi-user scenarios. 
Commercial systems heavily rely on a model similar to 
the artifact ecology with a single user in the center.  
Everything is built around user profiles, which inherently 
are meant for one user at a time. The problem is that it is not 
always obvious what it means to support multiple 
simultaneous users. The idea of the movement feature in 
AirPlayer, where music follows you around is an example 
that makes perfectly good sense for one person. It is 
however difficult to design appropriate behavior if more 
people want to use the feature simultaneously. What 
happens if two persons, with different music following 
them, enter the same room? Rules could be defined to cope 
with this specific problem, but what could be more 
interesting is to explore generic approaches. As it may seem 
trivial to take the number of intended users into account for 
a particular context, we find that existing solutions shows it 
is an important area to do more work to understand the 
multi-user dynamics of artifact ecologies.   
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The work in understanding artifact ecologies becomes 
important as the number of relationships among artifacts 
increase in complexity. What we have done is to start an 
articulation of the sub-systems of artifact ecologies on a 
level in between the interaction with single artifacts and the 
understanding of the ecologies in their entirety. The four 
identified concepts of multi-artifact systems, i.e., plasticity, 
migration, complementarity, and multi-user can help obtain 
a more fine-grained understanding of artifact ecologies, 
which informs a discussion of the concepts in relation to 
proxemic interactions.  

411
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
The discussion has revealed specific pointers to proxemic 
interaction’s potential for the design of multi-artifact 
systems and identified limitations of spatial relations as 
context. As the identified concepts are deduced from the 
interaction design of two multi-artifact systems, we make no 
claim of completeness. A next step would therefore be to get 
a broader understanding of interactions with multiple 
artifacts on a conceptual level with the goal of creating 
design guidelines for proxemic interactions in multi-artifact 
systems that do not only work well in isolation, but fits into 
an artifact ecology. 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Sørensen and J. Kjeldskov, ”Concepts of multi-artifact 
systems in artifact ecologies,” Proc. International Conference 
on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions (ACHI 2014), 
IARIA, 2014, pp. 141-146. 
[2] H. Jung, E. Stolterman, W. Ryan, T. Thompson, and M. 
Siegel, “Toward a framework for ecologies of artifacts: how 
are digital artifacts interconnected within a personal life?,” 
Proc. Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: 
Building Bridges (NordiCHI ‘08), ACM Press, 2008, pp. 201-
210, doi: 10.1145/1463160.1463182. 
[3] S. Bødker and C. Klokmose, “Dynamics in artifact 
ecologies,” Proc. Nordic Conference on Human-Computer 
Interaction: Making Sense Through Design (NordiCHI ‘12), 
ACM 
Press, 
2012, 
pp. 
448-457, 
doi:10.1145/2399016.2399085. 
[4] S. Greenberg, N. Marquardt, T. Ballendat, R. Diaz-Marino, 
and M. Wang, “Proxemic interactions: the new ubiComp?,” 
interactions, vol. 18, no. 1, Jan. 2011, pp. 42-50, doi: 
10.1145/1897239.1897250. 
[5] J. Forlizzi, “How robotic products become social products: an 
ethnographic study of cleaning in the home,” Proc. 
ACM/IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Human-robot 
Interaction (HRI ‘07), ACM Press, 2007, pp. 129-136, 
doi:10.1145/1228716.1228734. 
[6] S. Bødker and C. Klokmose, “The human-artifact model: an 
activity theoretical approach to artifact ecologies,” Human-
Computer Interaction, vol. 26, no. 4, 2011, pp. 315-371, doi: 
10.1080/07370024.2011.626709.  
[7] E.T. Hall, “The Hidden Dimension,” Doubleday, 1966. 
[8] D. Vogel and R. Balakrishnan, “Interactive public ambient 
displays: transitioning from implicit to explicit, public to 
personal, interaction with multiple users,” Proc. ACM 
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology 
(UIST ‘04), ACM Press, 2004, pp. 137-146, doi: 
10.1145/1029632.1029656. 
[9] N. Marquardt, R. Diaz-Marino, S. Boring, and S. Greenberg, 
“The proximity toolkit: prototyping proxemic interactions in 
ubiquitous computing ecologies,” Proc. ACM Symposium on 
User Interface Software and Technology (UIST ‘11), ACM 
Press, 2011, pp. 315-326, doi:10.1145/2047196.2047238. 
[10] M. Wang, S. Boring, and S. Greenberg, “Proxemic peddler: a 
public advertising display that captures and preserves the 
attention of passerby,” Proc. International Symposium on 
Pervasive Displays (PerDis ‘12), ACM Press, 2012, Article 3, 
6 pages, doi:10.1145/2307798.2307801. 
[11] N. Marquardt and S. Greenberg, “Informing the design of 
proxemic interactions,” IEEE Pervasive Computing, vol. 11, 
no. 2, Apr. 2012, pp. 14-23, doi: 10.1109/MPRV.2012.15. 
[12] S. Greenberg, S. Boring, J. Vermeulen, and J. Dostal, “Dark 
patterns in proxemic interactions: a critical perspective,” Proc. 
Conference on Designing Interactive Systems (DIS ‘14), 
ACM 
Press, 
2014, 
pp. 
523-532, 
doi: 
10.1145/2598510.2598541. 
[13] L.E. Holmquist, “Ubiquitous music,” Interactions – Ambient 
intelligence: exploring our living environment, vol. 12, no. 4, 
July 
+ 
August 
2005, 
pp. 
71-ff, 
doi: 
10.1145/1070960.1071002. 
[14] L. Liikkanen, C. Amos, S.J. Cunningham, J.S. Downie, and 
D. McDonald, “Music interaction research in HCI: let’s get 
the band back together,” CHI ’12 Extended Abstracts on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI EA ‘12), ACM 
Press, 2012, pp. 1119-1122, doi:10.1145/2212776.2212401. 
[15] T.W. Leong and P.C. Wright, “Revisiting social practices 
surrounding music,” Proc. SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ‘13), ACM Press, 2013, 
pp. 951-960, doi:10.1145/2470654.2466122. 
[16] J. Seeburger, M. Foth, and D. Tjondronegoro, “The sound of 
music: sharing song selections between collocated strangers 
in public urban places,” Proc. International Conference on 
Mobile and Ubiquitous Multimedia (MUM ‘12), ACM Press, 
2012, Article 34, 10 pages, doi:10.1145/2406367.2406409. 
[17] A. Bassoli, J. Moore, and S. Agamanolis, “tunA: socialising 
music sharing on the move, (book chapter)” in K. O’Hara and 
B. Brown (eds.), Consuming Music Together: Social and 
Collaborative Aspects of Music Consumption Technologies, 
Springer, 2006. 
[18] K. O’Hara and B. Brown, “Consuming Music Together: 
Social and Collaborative Aspects of Music Consumption 
Technologies”, Springer, 2006. 
[19] E. Lenz, S. Diefenbach, M. Hassenzahl, and S. Lienhard, 
“Mo. 
shared 
music, shared 
moment,” 
Proc. 
Nordic 
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: Making Sense 
Through Design (NordiCHI ‘12), ACM Press, 2012, pp. 736-
741, doi:10.1145/2399016.2399129. 
[20] J. Rekimoto, “Multiple-computer user interfaces: "beyond the 
desktop" direct manipulation environments,” Proc. CHI ‘00 
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems 
(CHI 
EA 
‘00), 
ACM 
Press, 
2000, 
pp. 
6-7, 
doi: 
10.1145/633292.633297. 
[21] L. Terrenghi, A. Quigley, and A. Dix, “A taxonomy for and 
analysis of multi-person-display ecosystems,” Personal and 
Ubiquitous Computing, vol. 13, no. 8, November 2009, pp. 
583-598, doi: 10.1007/s00779-009-0244-5. 
[22] B. Anzengruber, G. Castelli, A. Rosi, A. Ferscha, and F. 
Zambonelli, “Social feedback in display ecosystems,” IEEE 
International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics 
(SMC 
‘13), 
IEEE, 
2013, 
pp. 
2893-2898, 
doi: 
10.1109/SMC.2013.493.  
[23] F. Capra, “The Web of Life,” Anchor Books, 1996. 
[24] C. Yongguang, and H. Kobayashi, “Signal strength based 
indoor geolocation,” IEEE International Conference on 
Communications (ICC ‘02), IEEE, 2002, vol. 1., pp. 436-439, 
doi: 10.11.1109/ICC.2002.996891. 
[25] L. Balme, A. Demeure, N. Barralon, J. Coutaz, and G. 
Calvary, 
“CAMELEON-RT: 
a 
Software 
architecture 
reference model for distributed, migratable, and plastic user 
interfaces,” 
Proc. 
Second 
European 
Symp. 
Ambient 
Intelligence (EUSAI 2004), Springer, 2004, pp. 291-302, 
doi:10.1007/978-3-540-30473-9_28. 
[26] S. Berti, F. Paternò, and C. Santoro, ”A taxonomy for 
migratory user interfaces,” Proc. 12th Int. Workshop on 
Interactive Systems. Design, Specification, and Verification 
(DSVIS 
2005), 
Springer, 
2005, 
pp. 
149-160, 
doi: 
10.1007/11752707_13. 
 
 

