452
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Smartphone functions in photo-elicitation sessions for teachers´continuing 
professional development 
 
 
 
Antonio Bautista  
Faculty of Educacion 
Complutense University 
Madrid. Spain 
e-mail: bautista@edu.ucm.es  
 
Laura Rayón 
Faculty of Education 
University of Alcala 
Alcala de Henares. Spain 
e-mail: laura.rayon@uah.es 
 
Yolanda Muñoz 
Faculty of Education 
University of Alcala 
Alcala de Henares. Spain 
e-mail: yolanda.munozm@uah.es 
 
Ana María De las Heras 
Pedagogy Department 
UDIMA 
Madrid. Spain 
e-mail: anamaria.delasheras@udima.es  
 
 
Abstract- In this paper, we advance the results of a study on the 
use of smartphone functions supported by photo-elicitation 
processes in the permanent training of primary-school 
teachers. The study began in January 2015 and will end in 
December 2017. Three teachers participated from the primary 
schools Jaime Vera and Concepción Arenal in Madrid and La 
Paloma in Azuqueca de Henares (Guadalajara), Spain. The 
smartphone functions used for photo elicitation by these 
teachers to reflect on the dilemmas and difficulties in their 
practice include: taking photos of classroom situations that are 
judged difficult by teachers then viewing these photos. It 
includes recording an audio track of sessions reflecting on the 
content of the photos; playing back the recorded audio tracks 
to transcribe their content. Identifying the theories and beliefs 
from where participating teachers’ decisions are based is 
another function and, finally, storing and get it back all this 
information in the cloud (Dropbox, Drive, at the rest). The 
main goal of this paper is to show how the different 
applications of smartphones enable teachers´ learning as well 
as their personal and social development through reflection 
processes of their practices. 
  
Keywords - teacher education; photo-elicitation; digital 
hybrids; smartphones. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
This article is an extended version of the paper we 
presented at eLmL 2016 entitled The Role of Smartphones 
in Teacher Training Mediated Through Photo-Elicitation 
[1]. We present the work we are carrying through about 
smartphones in education, related with continuing training 
of primary education teachers. 
Why has our current line of research focussed on this 
digital tool and not others? Because, beginning in 2015, 
smartphones became the most common devices for 
accessing the Internet, compared to other resources such as 
the computer [2]. The implementation of mobile phone 
technology has risen in the last year, meaning it is now 
available in 96.7% of homes and has become the most 
common device for getting online, with a growth of 5.9% in 
its use for the Spanish citizens.   
Furthermore, according to Fundación Telefónica’s report 
“The Information Society in Spain” in 2015, Spanish 
Internet users display the highest adoption rate for mobile 
devices, with smartphones (82.8%) the most popular, 
followed by other devices such as tablets (58.9%) and e-
readers (37.4%). These figures are higher than those in 
surrounding countries. Such is the impact of smartphones 
that, according to the report [3], 90% of users connect every 
or almost every day to the Internet using this device, and 
75% do so several times a day. 
The reasons used to explain this increase on its use 
usually include the features of these digital hybrids. The 
most essential factors proposed are connectivity and 
accessibility any time of day, as well as size reduction of 
these devices. Such features are contributing to the effect 
that, little by little, smartphones are becoming human digital 
prosthetic devices. The principal feature guaranteeing 
success of the smartphone is that they are multi-function 
devices. In only a few years they have evolved from 
telephones that only allowed users to call and send SMSs, to 
devices that can connect us to the Internet so that we can 
communicate with hundreds of people on social networks, 
take photos and record videos that are shared in real time 
with our contacts, offer the possibility of geolocalisation, 
commerce, entertainment and so on. The number of options 
has exploded with mobile applications that are often created 
by communities of people grouped around an interest. So 
“the mobile phone is becoming a tool of global 
communication: via the social networks and with the 

453
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
extension of Internet access we can communicate worldwide 
through text, image, sound or video. Such features offer us 
thousands of applications to make our daily lives easier: 
information 
of 
all 
kinds, 
access 
to 
content 
and 
entertainment, or maps that can find a route to a nearby 
destination. And all this in the palm of your hand” [4]. 
These features give smartphones the ability to have a 
high impact in people’s personal lives. This is true 
especially in the areas of user communication and 
socialization. People have gradually modified the way they 
relate to each other daily by popularising the use of multiple 
languages of representation, such as audiovisual language. 
They have even contributed to decreasing face to face 
interaction in favour of interactions through multiple virtual 
spaces in real time [5], rapidly and fluidly [6].  
 
“The implementation and social penetration of a 
new communication technology that has become 
widely accepted alters and transforms people’s 
communicative habits. Linked to that, changes 
occur in the information uses that individuals can 
make of the new medium. [ … ] The purposes of 
communication 
(communicating, 
informing, 
working or dealing with professional matters, 
entertaining oneself, having fun, training, etc.) 
converge in the new device.” [7]. 
 
For these reasons, in recent years, smartphones have 
played a key role in communication between people through 
distinct web environments and, especially, in different 
applications. Smartphones have encouraged the use of 
multiple languages of representation where the image is 
becoming a normal medium that people use to communicate 
their experiences. Precisely this support for multiple 
languages or systems of representation is what gives 
smartphone the potential to have a positive impact in 
educational processes. In other words, smartphones enable 
the creation of teaching situations that offer both students 
and teachers the chance of participating and having 
experiences; those experiences will guide them towards 
learning as well as personal and social development.  
First, we present the potential of smartphones to create 
new communication spaces through the multiple languages 
that users have at their disposal. Second, we analyze the role 
of smartphones in educational practice, making a review of 
the most significant work in relation to the topic. Further on, 
we explain the photo-elicitation as a process that uses 
photography to communicate life situations and experiences 
of people, followed by the objectives and method of 
research, results obtained so far and to finish the 
conclusions and future work.  
 
II. 
SMARTPHONES AS SUPPORT FOR MULTIPLE 
LANGUAGES OR SYSTEMS OF REPRESENTATION 
Texts, audio, photos and videos play an essential role in 
communication using smartphones. These resources offer 
many options: recording and editing using multiple 
applications for the creation of memes that combine image 
and text, or for producing images in movement, podcasts 
and video podcasts. The applications specialized in 
photography such as Flickr and Instagram that are used on 
these devices are important too. 
Meanwhile, these multi-representational communication 
environments have been increasingly studied in the last 
decade. A number of terms have been coined, such as 
multimedia communication that focusses attention on the 
representation media used in human relationships. Jenkins 
coined the term multichannel to refer to the platforms and 
applications that allow interaction in different forms of 
representation [8]. In this respect, the use of different 
languages has increased. For example, the audiovisual 
messages, due to the combination of several of the 
smartphone features and the virtual space available, they 
allow to a single device to capture an image or video, edit 
it, 
publish 
and 
broadcast 
it 
in 
different 
places 
simultaneously 
(WhatsApp, 
Facebook, 
Instagram, 
YouTube, Flickr, blogs, Wikis and so on). These uses, as 
seen, lead to new forms of communication and socialisation 
and have an impact on our projection in virtual collective 
spaces. More recently we have noticed a big number of 
detailed studies of these communication spaces. There is a 
deluge of literature on the role that virtual space plays in 
interpersonal relationships. In this respect, the term media 
ecology was coined to emphasise the idea that the new 
technological devices and communicative channels create 
spaces that determine how people and society interact and 
act in different areas: medicine and health, administration, 
transport and so on [9]. These authors understand the 
relevance of the technological devices in our lives in the 
way that they interlink our public and private selves. 
Based on these ideas, it is important to highlight the 
studies [10][11] that are centred on the interactions 
mediated by technology; in those studies take on special 
relevance the intentions and emotions emerging from the 
relationships maintained. So the expression polymedia 
spaces was coined, to designate integrated communication 
environments aimed to discover, and to understand the 
possibilities that the simultaneous use of diverse 
environments offer us with the multimodal language to 
relate through technology. Always taking into account 
users’ social and emotional dimension. These studies focus 
on the personal experience of the use of smartphones. They 
identify 
the 
emotional 
implications 
that 
specific 
communication environments have for users. These 
environments can combine old practices such as voice calls 
with the transmission and exchange of productions such as 
images between users. 

454
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
These are emotive components that, as we shall see 
below, are frequent and therefore need to be represented as 
part of the situations experienced in classrooms and 
schools. In this sense, images have gained prominence in 
showing people’s subjective experience. In the same way 
that texts speak to us, images also speak to us of events, 
people and things, but furthermore, and more importantly, 
they are capable of generating meanings, the personal 
interpretations associated to such representations. In short, 
a picture does not show us the world but different ways of 
seeing the world. “Man aims to represent the world, not 
according to the laws of an important truth, but according 
to the laws that emerge from his own observation and daily 
experience” [12]. 
Roland Barthes highlighted the subjective and mainly 
emotional dimension that still images activate. He is a 
reference in the communication sphere because he focussed 
his reflections on the sensations and emotions that a 
photograph produces [13]. In this sense, the interest of 
photography does not reside so much in aesthetic beauty as 
in the composition of the elements that it shows us. Today 
Barthes’ words remain relevant since in our use of 
smartphones, the individual’s gaze becomes increasingly 
important through the productions that the latter shares on 
his or her networks compared to the institutional 
“viewpoint”. 
In this way, the user’s voice gains prominence, 
increasing the visibility of multiple viewpoints and 
situations that were traditionally ignored by the established 
communications media – a question that has been subject to 
criticism [14]. Because a smartphone is such an everyday 
object, it can contribute to the cause of literacy that enables 
people’s emancipation, making us all critical receivers and 
informers. 
To achieve such a premise, we must mention the 
importance in this matter of an education that provides 
individuals with the technological competencies needed to 
intervene freely and critically in these virtual environments. 
Consequently, we point to the importance of a multimodal 
means of communication where, apart from making use of 
different media and digital environments, it is crucial that 
we have the skills needed for these new forms of 
communication that are important in the Information 
Society [15]. Since we work with teachers we would 
especially like to focus on them. Using a smartphone 
should be something more than just another object people 
can use to communicate with those around them. How 
these devices are used requires some reflection, so teaching 
staff can discover new roles for these devices in teaching 
while continually improving their work or, in other words, 
move forward in their professional development. This 
means 
that 
teachers 
must 
acquire 
technological 
competencies that enable more independent use, as 
proposed in “UNESCO’s AMI curriculum for teachers”, 
that opts for audiovisual and digital training that goes 
beyond the mere instrumental use of technological 
resources [16]. In this way teachers will become capable of 
making a critical use of the media in their lives and 
profession, and smartphones will be increasingly present in 
educational settings to make their initial and continuing 
training practice more dynamic.  
 
III. 
SMARTPHONES IN EDUCATIONAL PRACTICE 
Before demanding that the smartphone play a role in 
teachers’ professional development, they have been used by 
teachers in different teaching situations to help students in 
the educational processes aimed at their instruction and 
training in the diverse stages of primary, secondary and 
university education. These uses come under the heading of 
the so-called “M-learning” or electronic learning based on 
mobile devices with wireless connection (smartphone, iPad, 
PDA, etc.) as part of significant learning in formal and non-
formal contexts throughout life [17] [18]. Meanwhile, 
mobile learning is being defended as a fundamental 
strategy to easily break the limitations of time and space 
through the use of free time and ubiquitous learning [19]. 
Regarding teaching material, of note is the use of mobile 
devices in the creation and communication of written texts 
and multimodal narrative stories in the teaching of second 
and third languages [20].  
A milestone in the primary education stage was the 
“personalized intelligent mobile learning system (PIMS)”, 
developed in 2008 to improve reading skills in students 
through news texts in English. The results show that 
reading skills in free time improve while there is a 
reduction in the cognitive overload during the reading 
process [21]. 
On the use of smartphones and other devices for 
improving communication in secondary education, the 
studies highlight the use of mobile phones to access 
content, as well as so students can receive immediate 
feedback on their learning that can provide them with a 
positive motivation for continuing the educational process 
[22]. Furthermore, in this educational stage, smartphones 
have begun to be used for reflexive learning and so that 
students become aware of the opportunities for accessing 
information that is within their reach throughout the day in 
multiple contexts [23]. In these studies, the learning 
activities using mobile devices helped students create 
conceptual maps, videos, photos, comparative tables, 
activities to complete and so on [24].  
Higher education is where we can perhaps find a wider 
use of smartphones aimed at the induction training of future 
teachers, the students in Education faculties. They seek to 
train students so that they can implement the use of mobile 
devices in diverse subjects [25]. The functionality that 
university teachers make of smartphones is primarily 
focussed on using them as a support for virtual platforms or 
to enhance e-learning services in universities [26]. 
Furthermore, we see that the main progress in this field is 
based on teachers creating photographic and video digital 

455
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
narratives using mobile devices so they can include them in 
their future methodological strategies [27]. The conclusion 
of this study group on the use of mobile phones in teaching 
is that they can substantially help to improve the 
performance of students since they encourage information 
search and retrieval processes, without forgetting other 
fundamental aspects such as the fact that these devices are 
giving them a voice and the chance to participate in 
building knowledge in teaching and learning processes. In 
this sense changes are being generated in basic education.  
Yet, in the field of teacher training, smartphones have 
been used mainly in induction training that is aimed at 
preparing future teachers in the use of this device for 
training purposes. The focus here is on teaching the 
different basic subjects, such as mathematics, social 
sciences, physical education and so on while, consequently, 
forgetting about the use of this device for their own 
continuing training or professional development as a 
teacher. In this way, with the work we describe in this 
article, we have begun a fresh line of research using 
smartphones in photo-elicitation situations aimed at 
encouraging teachers’ reflection on their own practice. 
IV. 
THE ROLE OF SMARTPHONES IN TEACHER TRAINING 
MEDIATED THROUGH PHOTO-ELICITATION 
We begin this section by explaining two conceptual 
elements. Both are essential to understand the functionality 
of the phones in teacher training. These are: the reflection 
on own practice, and photo-elicitation as a means of 
signification. 
 
A. Reflecting on teaching practice  
 
Extensive theorising exists on the value of professionals’ 
critical reflection on their own practice in order to improve 
their work [28][29]. Teachers can be helped to improve their 
work once they are aware of their beliefs, theories, attitudes, 
values and so on. To do so, teachers must be “forced” to 
make these explicit. This occurs because they are questioned 
about what they do, and this is achieved by reflecting on his 
practice as a teacher. This reflection is included and is one 
of the three moments of a loop or cycle of Action Research 
[30]. Each is made up of a procedure consisting of the three 
following phases (see Figure 1):  
 
1- Planning the teaching or specifying within a document 
the aims, cultural content, materials and so on that the 
teachers are going to work on or will need over a period of 
time. 
2- Executing the plan and recording certain moments of 
it. The plan must be followed and information must be 
recorded on what occurred during the process. Because it is 
difficult to reflect on the action while it is taking place, 
reflection has to take place afterward. To avoid forgetting 
things or missing relevant details the action must be 
recorded. 
  What technological tools are needed to help teachers 
record their actions and reflect upon them? Those whose 
primary function is producing information; in other words, 
audio recorders and cameras that can be found on one of the 
current digital hybrid devices: smartphones. We propose 
that mainly teachers should follow this procedure, taking 
photos of those moments so that later, outside the 
classroom, they can verbally analyse the content. Therefore, 
we focus on the languages of verbal and photographic 
representation. 
3- Analysing, questioning, discussing and reflecting on 
what happened. After having carried out the plan, one must 
reflect on the value of what took place; we encapsulate it 
using photo elicitation, for that reason it is also necessary to 
use the information reproduction functions that all digital 
hybrid devices contain. The result of this phase leads to new 
knowledge on the decisions taken, on the whys or 
wherefores of the latter and consequently new knowledge of 
the theories, beliefs and so on that underlie them.  
2. 
DEVELOPMENT AND 
RECORDING THE 
PROCCESS.
3. 
QUESTION 
AND 
REFLECT.
1.
PLANNING
 
Figure 1. Action-research in the permanent teacher training adapted 
from Elliot [30]. 
 
This generated knowledge gradually enriches or improves 
the work plan for the following action inquiry loop and 
consequently enhances the teacher-tutor’s training. 
 
B. On photo-elicitation as a means of reflection.  
 
Photo-elicitation consists of using photos to communicate 
people’s 
life 
experiences. 
Eliciting 
means 
drawing 
something out of oneself, arousing an experience, 
establishing a bridge between the past and the present using 
a photo [31][32]. This is a form of narration where images 
are used to elicit the thoughts, interpretations and meanings 
that people place on the actions, objects or events 
represented in the photos. It aims to capture an image of 
reality that can be used to see aspects of the image “through 
the others’ eyes”, along with particular interpretations that 
other people have of that image.  
This procedure has been used in diverse spheres of social 
and cultural intervention. For example: as a reflective 
procedure forming the basis for intervention plans based on 
the narrations of participating young people with HIV [33]; 

456
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
as a critical practice for social regeneration through 
community change [34][35][36]; and to promote health in a 
participative manner [37] . 
In the teacher training sector, diverse experiences 
emphasise the value of photo-elicitation for narrating and 
building the teacher’s experiential knowledge. For example, 
using this procedure, the nature and content of the 
pedagogical beliefs of sixteen adult educators was explored 
and compared to their past school experiences [38]. 
Likewise, it has been used to get teachers to talk about the 
needs generated when teaching students with autism 
spectrum disorders [39], and also in teacher induction 
training to capture classroom situations on camera to 
illustrate changes in their teaching practices [40]. These 
studies highlight the reflective nature of photo-elicitation to 
understand 
how 
teachers 
master 
new 
pedagogical 
approaches and apply them in their teaching practice in the 
classroom.  
In short, the photo-elicitation consists of capturing an 
image so as to describe it later. Several procedures exist in 
the field of education: one is that directed by the teacher and 
the photos she or he takes; another, when students take the 
pictures, and finally, a mixed procedure where everybody 
takes photos. This means the photos are taken by users to be 
screened later so users can describe what they represent and 
explain what they have experienced. 
In this sense, we consider that photo elicitation is a good 
procedure for understanding the tangible and intangible 
aspects of human beings’ lives – in our case, the three 
primary school teachers who aim to improve their teaching 
practice. At the point of reflection within the action inquiry 
loops, photos taken by the participants are shown (in our 
case, only the teachers) on different teaching moments as a 
base document to question, query or wonder about some 
aspect of the content depicted (see Figure 2).  
 
2. 
DEVELOPMENT 
AND 
RECORDING THE 
PROCCESS.
3.
FOTO-
ELICITATION: 
QUESTION 
AND REFLECT.
1.
PLANNING
 
Figure 2. Place of Photo-elicitacion in the process of research-action.  
 
This is how we have used one of the underused action 
inquiry procedures called observational and narrative, 
McKerman said: that an underdeveloped resource in the 
conduct of curriculum action inquiry is the use of the still 
photograph [41]. Likewise, two aspects that were not 
considered in prior studies make our research innovative 
and useful. The first is the incorporation or use of photo-
elicitation into action-research loops, specifically in the 
reflection phase. The second is giving teachers a 
smartphone so that they can record and analyse the 
difficulties and dilemmas arising in the classroom and 
school. 
Below we describe the aims and research method used to 
discover the positive aspects of photo-elicitation situations 
in action research processes and also the functions required 
of smartphones in these processes. 
V. AIMS AND RESEARCH METHOD  
This research has two objectives: 
a) 
Identify the functions required on a smartphone in 
the training of primary teachers based on photo elicitation 
processes. 
b) 
Know whether the photo-elicitation sessions help 
teachers change their teaching practice. 
 
The data needed to achieve the above aims are being 
gathered through a supported discussion group in two 
session types we call photo elicitation and audio reflection.  
Photo elicitation sessions. These are held every two 
weeks. During this time, the teachers take photos of events, 
tasks, dilemmas, conflicts, behaviours and so on that they 
consider most relevant and interesting in the life of their 
classroom and other spaces in the center. After each 
fourteen-day period, the above-mentioned meeting takes 
place. It lasts about 75 minutes with each teacher separately 
and takes place when they have some free time during the 
school day in their respective schools. To do so, the photos 
taken by each teacher are shown and the teacher, the 
research group members and student representatives 
comment on the reasons that led her or him to take each 
photo. Next, the other group members formulate questions 
or doubts on the content of the images and the reasons 
provided by the teacher and students, either on the decision 
taken at a specific classroom moment, or on the tasks 
undertaken by students, etcetera. 
Audio reflection sessions. An audio recording is being 
made of the photo elicitation sessions with a two-fold 
research purpose. Firstly, to analyze each teacher’s 
statements and respond to the questions posed in the first 
aim of the project, regarding the different uses of the 
smartphone. Secondly, to codify and create the information 
provided in the photo elicitation session to be used in the 
second aim.  
The information analysis was conducted with the help of 
the NVivo 10 software application. We are using it 
specifically to incorporate each photograph shown or 
projected in the photo-elicitation sessions and relate it to 
the verbal content it evoked. Furthermore, it is being used 
to establish initial relationships between the text 
transcriptions of the interviews with participating teachers, 

457
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
using the Links function in NVivo 10. Lastly, we are 
applying the Queries and the Nodes functions in that 
software to define the coding. These queries are guided by 
the questions and aims of the study. For example, to 
discover the functions provided by, or required of, 
smartphones in the process of teacher training in general, 
and in the photo-elicitation sessions in particular, we 
conduct text searches for terms such as advantages, 
positive impact, uses, utilisation, application, has the 
function of, helps to, enables or makes possible, save, 
search, retrieve, view and so on.  
To answer the first research objective, this first analysis 
has helped us to identify situations (codes) or moments of 
the photo-elicitation sessions where reference is made to 
the functionality of smartphones. When we talk about 
functions of smarphones we refer to the meaning of a 
Smartphone for teachers in different situations or 
experiences of use. What we intend with our analysis is to 
identify all those meanings or functions provided by these 
experiences of the three teachers. From our point of view, 
to know these functions we must identify and understand 
the experiences with these intelligent mobiles that caused 
them. We understand that the most direct way of knowing 
these human experiences is to narrate them, rather than to 
quantify them. This explains that, for us, each situation of 
photo-elicitation is equivalent to an open interview, that 
situations do not need a questionnaire, because the 
questions are oriented from the spontaneous manifestations 
of the teachers about images of moments in their 
classrooms. 
In the next section we will explain the categories 
discovered to date in relation to the first aim of the study, 
focus of this article. 
As stated in the summary above, the discussion group 
that conducted this reflection consists of the teacher who is 
the center of the training process, the members of the 
research team who were present during the prior photo 
elicitation session, and some students when they appear in 
the photos. The parents gave permission to use the photos 
where their children appeared as long as such use was 
confined to teaching and research purposes. 
VI. 
RESULTS 
In order to respond to the first aim, we are working on 
the content of the photo-elicitation sessions recorded in 
audio. But furthermore, the observations by many of the 
members of the research team are focussing on the use that 
teachers make of smartphones during action-research loops. 
The significance of these uses observed for each teacher is 
being compared and validated in formal and informal 
interviews conducted with them. We then group these 
results according to the meanings given by teachers and the 
representation systems used and commented on by them. 
 
A). Global meanings provided on the hybrid nature of 
these devices, that are a product of the assessments teachers 
made in informal and formal interviews conducted at the 
end of each trimester: 
“School teacher 2: The good thing about having a state-
of-the-art phone is that you have everything together all the 
time. 
Researcher: What do you mean “everything together”? 
School teacher 2: Well, you can take a photo or record 
what they say, or record a video on how they are working 
in class or playing in the playground … Ah! And I can also 
write a note to explain a photo and send it on WhatsApp so 
it doesn’t slip my mind to talk about it later.” (Interview 
fragment, 11/3/2016). 
 
“Researcher: How is taking photos and send them to 
going? 
School teacher 3: Quite well. When I have taken photos 
I’m not worried about sending them because I can do so 
easily on WhatsApp once I’m home and more relaxed ... 
The truth is I forgot to send you the photos after the last 
session because I had a very busy week and I’ll send them 
when things calm down. I have them stored on my phone 
and can send them straight off.” (Interview fragment, 
27/04/2016).  
 
B) Specific functions assigned to and required from 
smartphones that are the result of observation carried out 
by researchers in their field work and the statements of 
participating teachers when asked about their experience 
with these devices: 
 
- On taking the photos: 
“Researcher: What were your decision-making processes 
for taking each of the photos in your classroom? What 
factors played a role?  
School teacher 1: When making the decision to take a 
photo two types of factor came into play: external and 
internal: 
- External: Events occurred in my environment that 
needed to be dealt with and solved because they affected 
classroom organisation. I decided to take a photo when I 
observed something unusual in the group. If I compiled 
enough photos it reduced the risk and uncertainty when 
dealing with these topics. 
- Internal: Something clicks inside me and I know that 
something was happening that required more time and 
analysis than we currently had available in the classroom to 
try to solve it. And having this great opportunity, to take 
photos, I was able to relive these moments later and analyse 
them more carefully. I could break them down into smaller 
parts that would let me make more accurate decisions.” 
(Interview fragment, 14/12/2015). 
 
On the same question the researcher asked above, but 
asked in later trimesters: 
“School teacher 1: I feel calmer when I can save the 
photos I take in class because I know I will later have time 

458
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
to think about them and about what is said in meetings. 
Uploading them to Dropbox so you can see them and help 
me out reassures me”. (Interview fragment, 16/03/2016). 
“School teacher 2: When there is something I am not 
clear about, or I have doubts about something that is 
happening at school or in my class concerning the relation 
with the 6th-year students, I can see it solves the problem 
when I take a photo and tell myself: there it is, saved on my 
phone so I won’t forget it and I can send it by WhatsApp to 
the research group to view it the next time they come.” 
(Interview fragment, 27/05/2016). 
 
“Researcher: Can you comment on “What is it that 
makes you take a photo?” 
School teacher 3: Those things that worry me, that don’t 
go well in class …. Such as, for example, Leire’s 
classmates’ rejection of her, so I take the photo … and as 
time has passed, well, I see it’s working, because they (the 
students) are fine. This leads me to take the photo to 
comment on it later, because they are responding.” 
(Interview fragment, 27/03/2016). 
 
“Researcher: Can you comment on what these photo-
elicitation sessions have most contributed to your work? 
School teacher 1: These images have helped me to value 
my time far more as well as the importance of the photos 
themselves. Being able to view the images taken in class 
over and over again means I can make much more sensible 
and suitable decisions regarding the personal situation of 
each of my students”. (Interview fragment, 14/12/2015). 
School teacher 3: “I have realised that we do many 
things and are not aware of the day to day, and that they 
work … The change in students, for example. I realised 
after the sessions with you that I have accomplished things 
– I have even gotten the families to change… And that 
makes me feel good, it reassures me”. (Interview fragment, 
27/06/2016). 
 
Regarding the use of digital image projectors, only one 
of the three teachers, referred to in the article as teacher 1, 
preferred to observe the photographs through their 
projection on a wall screen. The reasons she stated were 
that in the classroom where the photo-elicitation sessions 
took place they had a digital projector anchored in the 
ceiling. Another reason is that she "had a habit of seeing the 
big picture whenever there was a group meeting, because it 
was easier and more comfortable to see and discuss its 
content". 
 
- On the audio. 
“Researcher: When I arrived during playtime, I saw you 
in the class wearing your earphones. Do you like to listen to 
music when you’re alone? 
School teacher 2: No, it wasn’t music. Since I knew you 
were coming, I was listening to the recording I have on my 
mobile phone of what we talked about last time, about the 
photos of the playground conflict.  
Researcher: Yes, I think that listening to the discussion 
again helps you to reflect on and draw conclusions from it. 
School teacher 2: Yes, but I don’t do it just for that, but 
also to hear myself, to improve my speaking, to avoid 
repeating certain words too often, to avoid using fillers, that 
I sometimes use without realising it.  
Researcher: Do you always keep the audio recordings on 
your phone? 
School teacher 2: Yes, mainly because in my phone I 
have them sorted by date, that helps me to find them 
easily.” (Interview fragment, 27/05/2016). 
 
- On the texts. 
“Researcher: I see you’ve added captions to almost all 
the photos you have taken. 
School teacher 1: I like to write notes on the photos so 
that I don’t forget what they mean. 
Researcher: In fact, the text helps to define an image’s 
polysemy. Above all, it is necessary when you want to 
communicate accurately to others what that photo means to 
you. 
School teacher 1: It even helps me personally, because I 
like to read the transcripts that were made of the 
conversations during the photo-elicitation sessions stored 
on Dropbox. 
Researcher: To see why we act how we do in class? 
School teacher 1: For many reasons. It’s reassuring to 
read and then re-read slowly what we said. To find out how 
others see what I do and, strangely, to understand how I 
think and act without being aware of it. When I read that 
you are surprised or when you ask me questions, I 
understand better how sometimes I don’t do things so 
logically or, rather, coherently, such as not being 
constant…” (Interview fragment, 16/03/2016). 
 
“Researcher: Why do you take a notebook into the 
photo-elicitation sessions? 
School teacher 3: Because when I take written notes, it 
helps me to communicate and express what each photo 
means, the feeling that a specific object, action or situation 
has for me. In the notebook I write down the feelings that 
the photo elicits… I realise that I make notes very fast, so 
fast that I almost can’t stop to analyse what is happening in 
the day to day.” (Interview fragment, 27/06/2016). 
 
The above data confirm the positive assessment by 
teachers of the general functions of accessibility, 
multimodality, connectivity and so on, indicated in the 
review of studies we made in the earlier sections of this 
article. Yet, this reveals a number of specific functions that 
help to develop the photo-elicitation sessions in the action-
research loops. As we will argue in the conclusions, all of 
the functions related to production, storage and retrieval of 
information are present in the representation of images, 

459
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
sound and text. Even so, the three teachers say there is a 
lack of applications that simplifies taking written notes and 
storing them on their mobile phone as easily as they take a 
photo or record an audio file. They compensate this 
handicap with alternative procedures such as writing a 
WhatsApp message.  
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
1) Regarding the first aim, the functions that the three 
teachers required of a smartphone are: 
 
A) It can be seen that the teachers assign a number of 
overall functions to these mobile devices, specifically those 
that refer to accessibility, their hybrid nature, connectivity 
and multi-functionality. Overall, operating as a sort of 
human digital prosthetic device, smartphones are enabling 
these teachers to store and retrieve information at any place 
or time. So from the point of view of the digital divide, any 
material aspect can be reduced by gaining access to digital 
devices and, through them, information. 
 
B) Specific functions assigned to and required of 
smartphones: 
B1. Taking photos of classroom situations that the 
teachers considered complex and conflictive, such as 
dilemmas, difficulties arising from the students and so on. 
This is the most sought-after smartphone function in 
photo-elicitation sessions included in action-research loops. 
B2. Saving photos on the smartphone or storing them in 
the cloud (Dropbox, Drive, etc.). 
We observed that this function is used more or less 
depending 
on 
the 
teachers’ 
“smartphone 
literacy”. 
Specifically, School teacher 2 only knew how to store 
information (images and audio) on her phone and send them 
by WhatsApp to the group, as long as the files were not too 
large. She did not know how to store and retrieve 
information on cloud applications such as Drive or 
Dropbox. So a degree of technological literacy is needed at 
the start of photo-elicitation sessions. 
B3. Viewing those photos in the photo elicitation sessions 
independent of the existence of a digital projector. 
Independently of the existing technological equipment in 
the school (laptops, interactive digital whiteboards, digital 
projectors, etc.), teachers and members of the research team 
were always able to view the photos they had taken on the 
smartphone screen itself to analyse and discuss any difficult 
situation or specific dilemma arising in their classes. 
B4. Making audio recordings of the sessions to reflect on 
the content of the projected photos, as well as the interviews 
conducted with participating teachers.  
This is a function of smartphones that has provided help 
not just to teachers to be able to listen again to their 
statements in photo-elicitation sessions, but also to the 
research team, to conduct the analysis and create the 
experiential information provided by participating teachers. 
B5. Uploading the audio files in the cloud (Dropbox, 
Drive, etc.).  
In contrast to the photos, the audios were recorded by the 
research group. Firstly they were recorded on a Smartphone 
and later stored in each centre’s Dropbox account, that all 
participants, teachers and researchers could access. 
B6. Playing the recorded and stored audio files to 
transcribe their content and identify the theories and beliefs 
from where the decisions of the participating teachers are 
based. 
As with the above function, this function was basically 
used by the research team. However, it is clear from in the 
information provided during the interviews that the teachers 
also used this function to listen to themselves again and, as 
School teacher 2 said, “to improve my speaking, to avoid 
repeating certain words too often, to avoid using fillers, that 
I sometimes use without realising it.” 
B7. Storing the texts transcribed in the cloud (Dropbox, 
Drive, etc.) for later analysis. 
This function was only included by the research team 
because it was responsible for making the text transcripts of 
the audio recording content. 
B8. Reading the transcripts stored in the cloud. 
Similar to function B6 above, this function was used by 
the research team to analyse the theories, beliefs, attitudes 
and so on, from where the teachers’ behaviours and 
decisions were based. Once this was established, teachers 
could be informed and become aware of such habits. At that 
point, teachers could reflect and assess whether they would 
change these practices or not, especially those that are not 
aligned with the ideas and educational principles they 
defend. But this function was also included by teachers, to 
carefully read the content of the transcripts and “understand 
how [they] think and act without being aware of it”. 
This second group of features, the specific ones assigned 
to or required of smartphones, enables us to tackle the 
functional dimension of the digital divide because they 
allow teachers to build knowledge using the stored 
information to reflect and discuss their teaching practices in 
classrooms and schools. So teachers, as well as being users 
of the information, are becoming producers of knowledge 
on their professional teaching practice. 
 
2) Concerning the study’s second aim, based on the 
results as of late June 2016, it can be stated that teachers are 
changing the way they design and approach teaching 
situations. This is because, according to the analysis of the 
transcriptions of the photo elicitation sessions, the teachers 
are becoming aware that they base their actions and 
decisions on five different aspects of their person: 
-Theories: rational ideas or arguments, with a scientific 
basis. 
-Beliefs: ideas or arguments with no scientific basis. 
-Attitudes: forms or kinds of willingness to do or respond 
to something. 
-Habits: routines they use in certain situations. 

460
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
-Emotions: feelings about a situation that guide decisions. 
 
The teachers have shown a disposition to change once 
they become aware that the above five components 
influence their motivations and decisions, both to improve 
the school tasks in the classroom and to address the personal 
difficulties of their students. 
Finally, we should indicate that all of the smartphone 
functions that the teaching staff required in the discussion or 
photo elicitation processes (those that take place when 
viewing the image of a photo taken by the teacher and 
projected on-screen) were used to record moments in the 
classroom, to bring some quietness to the educational 
practice in order to slow down the analytical processes. 
These pauses made it possible to describe and interpret the 
content reported by the participating teachers, allowing 
them to reflect and comment on their theories, beliefs, 
attitudes, habits and emotions so that, once aware of them, 
the teachers uncovered those that are incongruous with their 
idea of education or unsuitable for working with that unique 
and unrepeatable group of students in a specific context. 
In the future, we want to deepen the possibilities 
for smartphones to locate, select and project a part or 
element of a photograph. We think that the analysis of these 
details of an image can help teachers to evoke their 
theories and beliefs. Also, we want to use smartphones to 
store and play music during sessions photoelicitación. We 
think that both, the projection of detail and background 
music, can improve the evocation of the beliefs 
and emotions that have promoted the decisions taken in their 
classrooms. 
We cannot conclude this article without referring to an 
ethical aspect of continuing professional development. The 
teachers come to these professional development sessions 
with very different training or skills in the use and 
application of smartphones in general, and in education in 
particular. This leads us to believe that certain minimum 
digital skills training on smartphones is needed in the future 
to enable teachers to store and access information and 
produce knowledge. It is basic training in a subject we have 
called smartphone literacy.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
A project subsidised by the Ministry of Economy and 
Competitiveness of the Spanish Government, within the 
R&D&i State Plan, reference EDU2014-57103-R. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Bautista, L. Rayón, Y. Muñoz and A. M. de las Heras, 
“The role of smartphones in teacher training mediated through 
photo-elicitation,” The Eighth International Conference on 
Mobile, hybrid, and On-line Learning (eLmL2016) IARIA, 
Apr. 2016, pp. 83-86. ISBN: 978-1161208-471-8. 
[2] Instituto Nacional de Estadística. INE: Encuesta sobre 
Equipamiento y Uso de Tecnologías de Información y 
Comunicación en los Hogares 2015. [Online]. Available 
from: http://www.ine.es/dyngs/INEbase/es/ 2016.12.06 
[3] Distendria: Informe Mobile en España y en el Mundo 2015. 
[Online]. Available from: http://www.ditrendia.es/ 2016.12.06 
[4] N. Arroyo, Información en el móvil. Barcelona: Editorial 
UOC, 2011. 
[5] N. Baym, Personal Connections in the Digital Age. 
Cambridge:  Polity, 2010.  
[6] M. 
Hand, 
“Persistent 
Traces, 
Potential 
Memories: 
Smartphones and the Negotiation of Visual, Locative, and 
Textual 
Data 
in 
Personal 
Life,” 
Convergence: 
The 
International 
Journal 
of 
Research 
into 
New 
Media 
Technologies, vol. 22, nº 3, pp. 269-286, Aug. 2014, doi: 
10.1177/1354856514546094.  
[7] C. Costa Sánchez, “Ciberperiodismo en el Smartphone. 
Estudio de la Multimedialidad, Usabilidad, Hipertextualidad e 
Interactividad de las Aplicaciones de Medios Nativos 
Digitales para Smartphone,” Estudios sobre el Mensaje 
Periodístico, 
vol. 
18, 
pp. 
243-251, 
Oct. 
2012, 
doi:10.5209/rev_ESMP.2012.v18.40978. 
[8] H. Jenkins, Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media 
Collide. New York: NYU Press, 2006.  
[9] M. Ito et al., Hanging Out, Messing Around and Geeking Out: 
Kids Living and Learning with New Media. Cambridge: MIT 
Press, 2010.  
[10] M. Madianou and D. Miller, “Polymedia: Towards a New 
Theory of Digital Media in Interpersonal Communication,” 
International Journal of Cultural Studies, vol. 16 nº 2, Aug. 
2012, pp. 169-187, doi: 10.1177/1367877912452486.  
[11] M. Madianou, “Smartphones as Polymedia,” Journal of 
Computer-Mediated Communication, vol. 19 nº 3, pp. 667-
680, Apr. 2014, doi: 10.1111/jcc4.12069.  
[12] J. J. Fernández Ibáñez, Didáctica de la Imagen: Educación de 
la Sensibilidad Visual. Deusto: ICE, 1986.  
[13] R. Barthes,  La Cámara Lúcida. Notas sobre la Fotografía. 
Barcelona: Paidós, 1990.  
[14] L. Másterman, Teaching the Media. Londón: Routledge, 
1990. 
[15] C. Bazalgette and D. Buckingham, “Literacy, Media and 
Multimodality: a Critical Response,” Literacy, vol. 47, nº 2, 
pp.95-102, Jul. 2013, doi: 10.1111/j.1741-4369.2012.00666.x.  
[16] VV.AA. Alfabetización Mediática e Informacional, AMI. 
Currículum para Profesores. París: UNESCO, 2011 [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
 
http://www.unesco.org/new/es/media-
services/ 2016.12.06 
[17] M. Sharples, “Disruptive Devices: Mobile Technology for 
Conversational Learning,” International Journal of Continuing 
Engineering Education and Lifelong Learning, vol. 12, pp. 
504-520, 2003, doi:10.1504/IJCEELL.2002.002148.  
[18] T. White, A. Booker, C. Carter, and L. Martin, “Integrating 
digital and mathematical practices across contexts: A 
manifesto for mobile learning,” International Journal of 
Learning and Media, vol. 3 nº3, pp. 7-13, Apr. 2011, doi: 
10.1162/ijlm_a_00076  
[19] C. M. Chen and Y. L. Li, “Personalised Context-Aware 
Ubiquitous Learning System for Supporting Effective English 
Vocabulary Learning” Interactive Learning Environments, 
vol. 
18 
nº 
4, 
pp. 
341-364, 
Jan. 
2009, 
doi: 
10.1080/10494820802602329. 
[20] The New London Group, “A Pedagogy of Multiliteracies: 
Designing Social Future,” Harvard Educational Review, vol. 
66, nº 1, pp. 60-92, 1996. 
[21] T. Y. Liu, “A Context-Aware Ubiquitous Learning 
Environment for Language Listening and Speaking,” Journal 
of Computer Assisted Learning, vol. 25, nº 6, pp. 515–527, 
Sep. 2009, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2729.2009.00329.x.  

461
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[22] N. Castro and I. Gómez, “Incorporación de los Códigos QR 
en la Educación Física,” Retos, nº 29, pp: 114-119, 2016, 
[Online]. Available from: http://recyt.fecyt.es/index.php/retos/ 
index/ 2016.12.06 
[23] B. Tabuenca, D. Verpoorten, S. Ternier, W. Westera and M. 
Specht, 
“Fostering 
reflective 
practice 
with 
mobile 
technologies. Workshop on awareness and reflection in 
technology-enhanced learning” ARTEL/EC-TEL, Sep. 2012, 
Saarbrücken 
(Germany) 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://hdl.handle.net/1820/4405/ 2016.12.06  
[24] T. W. Greaves, J.  Hayes, L. Wilson, M. Gielniak, and E. L. 
Peterson, Revolutionizing Education through Technology: the 
Project RED Roadmap for Transformation. Washington DC: 
International Society for Technology in Education, 2012.  
[25] P. Henríquez, J. Organista, and   G. Lavigne, “Nuevos 
Procesos de Interactividad e Interacción Social: Uso de 
Smartphones por Estudiantes y Docentes Universitarios,” 
Revista Actualidades Investigativas en Educación, vol.  13,   
nº 3, pp. 1-21, Mar. 2013, [Online]. Available from:  
http://www.scielo.sa.cr/pdf/aie/v13n3/a12v13n3/ 2016.12.06  
[26] A. Peña et al., “Tools and Strategies for Competences 
Assessment (TASCA),” Revista Internacional de Aprendizaje 
y Cibersociedad, vol. 17, nº 1, pp. 11-34, 2013, [Online] 
Available 
from: 
https://riunet.upv.es/handle/10251/46131/ 
2016.12.06 
[27] J. Herrington, J. Mantei, A. Herrington, I. W. Olney, and B. 
Ferry, 
“New 
technologies, 
new 
pedagogies: 
mobile 
technologies and new ways of teaching and learning,”.Annual 
Conference of the Australasian Society for Computers in 
Learning 
in 
Tertiary 
Education 
(ASCILITE 
2008). 
Melbourne, Australia: Deakin University, Dec. 2008, pp. 419-
427, http://www.ascilite.org/conferences/melbourne08/procs/ 
2016.12.08 
[28] J. Gimeno, El Curriculum: Una Reflexión sobre la Práctica. 
Madrid: Morata, 1988.  
[29] D. Schön, Educating the reflective Practitioner. San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass Publishers, 1987. 
[30] J. Elliott, La Investigación-Acción en Educación. Madrid: 
Morata, 1990.  
[31] M. Clark-Ibañez, “Inter-City Children in Sharper Focus. 
Sociology of Childhood and Photo Elicitation Interviews,” in 
Visual Research Methods, C. Stanczak, Ed. Los Ángeles, CA: 
Sage, pp. 167-196, 2007.  
[32] D. Harper, “Talking about Pictures: A Case for Photo 
Elicitation,” Visual Studies, vol. 17 nº 1, pp. 13-26, 2002, doi: 
10.1080/14725860220137345  
[33] C. Mitchell, N. DeLange, R. Moletsane, J. Stuart, and T. 
Buthelezi, “Giving a Face to HIV and AIDS: On the Uses of 
Photo-Voice by Teachers and Community Health Care 
Workers Working with Youth in Rural South Africa,” 
Qualitative Research in Psychology, vol. 2, nº 3, pp.  257-270, 
Jul. 2008, doi: 10.1191/1478088705qp042oa.  
[34] R. Purcell, “Images for Change: Community Development, 
Community 
Arts 
and 
Photography,” Community 
Development Journal, vol. 44 nº1, pp. 111-122, Jan. 2009, 
doi: 10.1093/cdj/bsm031 
[35] M. C. Desyllas, “Using Photovoice with Sex Workers: The 
Power of Art, Agency and Resistance,” Qualitative Social 
Work, vol. 13 nº 4, pp. 477-501, Jul. 2014, doi: 
10.1177/1473325013496596.  
[36] R. Fortin, S. F. Jackson, J. Maher, and C. Moravac, “I WAS 
HERE: Young Mothers Who have Experienced Homelessness 
use Photovoice and Participatory Qualitative Analysis to 
Demonstrate Strengths and Assets,” Global Health Promotion, 
vol. 
22 
nº1, 
pp. 
8-20, 
Mar. 
2015, 
doi: 
10.1177/1757975914528960.  
[37] C. C. Wang, W. K. Yi, Z. W. Tao, and K. Carovano, 
“Photovoice 
as 
a 
Participatory 
Health 
Promotion 
Strategy,” Health Promotion International, vol. 13 nº1, pp. 75-
86, Mar. 1998, doi: 10.1093/heapro/13.1.75.  
[38] E. Taylor, “The Relationship between the Prior School Lives 
of Adult Educators and their Beliefs about Teaching 
Adults,” International journal of lifelong education, vol. 22 
nº1, pp. 59-77, Jan. 2013, doi: 10.1080/02601370304828.  
[39] C. R. Carnahan, “Photovoice: Engaging Children with Autism 
and their Teachers,” Teaching Exceptional Children, vol. 39 
nº2, pp. 44-50, Nov. 2006. 
[40] F. Wolfenden and A. Buckler, “Teacher Learning in Sudan: 
Building Dialogue around Teachers' Practices through 
Reflective 
Photography,” in Photography 
in 
Educational 
Research: Critical Reflections from Diverse Contexts, S. 
Miles and A. Howes, Eds. Abingdon: Routledge, pp. 79–95, 
2015.  
[41] J. McKernan, Curriculum Action Research. London: Kogan 
Page, 1991.  
 

