224
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A Verb Phrase Tracking System for Formative Feedback in Foreign Language 
Writing 
Shuai Shao, Kazuhiro Ohtsuki, Hidenari Kiyomitsu, Min Kang 
Graduate School of Intercultural Studies 
Kobe University 
Kobe, Japan 
e-mail: samveldf@stu.kobe-u.ac.jp, ohtsuki@kobe-u.ac.jp, 
 kiyomitsu@carp.kobe-u.ac.jp, kang@kobe-u.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—Providing feedback is crucial in the language 
learning process. In time, formative feedback, both manual and 
automated can help both learners and teachers confirm the 
ongoing acquisition of language. However, little research has 
been done on either manual or automated formative feedback 
in actual foreign language classroom. In this paper, we 
elaborate on how to track learners’ acquisition for formative 
feedback by developing a system for foreign language writing. 
The system is implemented based on the results of an analysis of 
data collected from conventional face-to-face classrooms in 
Chinese learning. We have previously reported on a part of the 
system, and in this paper we extend our study, especially 
concerning the pre-processing algorithm. 
Keywords-foreign language writing; automated formative 
feedback; 
pre-processing; 
phrase 
extraction; 
dependency 
relation; change detection. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In this paper, we propose a verb phrase tracking system 
for formative feedback based on our previous work [1].  
Feedback plays an important role in foreign language 
learning [2]. The effectiveness of feedback has been clarified 
by a number of researchers [3]-[5]. It is considered that 
effectiveness depends on how it is best delivered. Feedback 
type, feedback timing etc. are important factors which have 
been shown to influence feedback performance [6, 7]. 
Recently, formative feedback has been seen as an 
indispensable component as well [8, 9]. According to Shute 
[8], formative feedback is defined as information 
communicated to learners which supports the learning 
process and enhances learning. It consists of a variety of 
different types and is managed at various times during the 
learning process. Although there are many advantages, 
providing feedback can be time consuming and costly in 
classroom learning. Gradually, automated feedback has 
drawn much attention [10].  
Previous research has shown the advantages of an 
automated feedback system over the paper-based feedback 
[11]. Educational Testing Service (ETS) has developed 
Criterion, a Web-based writing evaluation service, and 
Vantage Learning has created My Access, both programs 
combine a scoring engine with a separate editing tool, which 
provides grammar, spelling and mechanical feedback [12]. 
Source language has also been taken into consideration to 
generate feedback based on error detection [13]. Warschauer 
and Grimes [12] have evaluated the use of Criterion and My 
Access through a mixed-methods case study in classrooms. 
They pointed out that although the programs saved teachers’ 
grading time and learners tended to edit their writings more, 
the editing was usually superficial and no iterative process 
was observed. These automated systems are just designed to 
improve the writing quality of the current document by 
finding errors, which is different from a teacher’s goal which 
is to improve the learners’ writing ability to produce better 
documents over time [14]. Thus, research on the long-term 
usage of automated systems to improve writing ability 
becomes a necessity.  
Simone and Christian implemented a Web-based 
feedback system in their lectures and then analyzed the 
effects of the system which provided automated formative 
feedback throughout the semester [15]. They found that the 
students who received feedback achieved higher scores and 
became more motivated and confident. Computer-based 
formative feedback not only helps learners but also assists 
teachers in improving their instructional strategies [16]. AI 
techniques have already been used in intelligent tutoring 
systems to understand formative feedback, and a lot of the 
researches focus on how to build general models or 
frameworks of systems [9, 17]. McNamara, Crossley and 
Roscoe proposed an excellent intelligent tutoring system, the 
Writing Pal, based on a natural language processing (NLP) 
algorithm, to support adolescent native writers in English 
[18], but additional research on automated formative 
feedback in foreign language writing is still rare [19].  
The aim of our research is to design an automated 
formative feedback environment which will facilitate the 
writing process. In this paper, we report on our efforts to 
further develop a system for formative feedback in classroom 
learning. We focus on the writing process in Chinese for 
Japanese learners, especially on the Japanese-Chinese 
translation process. Verb-object (V-O) phrases are chosen as 
the targets of feedback because V-O phrases are basic 
sentence structures expressing the meanings of sentences and 
appear frequently in teaching materials for beginners.  
In Section II, we look at the V-O phrases used in several 
translation exercises conducted in face-to-face classrooms. 
We first analyze the translations manually to see how learners 
translate the corresponding Japanese phrases to the Chinese 
phrases in time-series. In Section III, based on the results of 
the manual analysis, we propose an approach to provide 
feedback for learners’ time-series data in the Japanese-
Chinese translation process. In Section IV, we elaborate the 
methodology in details about how to track changes of 

225
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
learners’ translations concerning the phrases. The results will 
be provided to teachers to give them an overview of the 
learners’ acquisition of the material. In Section V, we will 
analyze the output of our system to examine the validity. The 
discussion and conclusion will be given in Section VI and 
Section VII. 
II. 
ANALYZING LEARNING LOG DATA 
In this section, we analyzed the translations collected 
from face-to-face classrooms to observe how the learners 
translate V-O phrases under different circumstances. 
A. Data from Classrooms 
The subjects for this research were 68 sophomore students 
(2 classes of 34 students) taking “Intermediate Chinese” at 
Kobe University, Japan, whose overall Chinese proficiency 
level was empirically considered to be intermediate. All 
students had taken two levels of “Basic Chinese” in the 1st 
academic year. They learned the basic pronunciation and 
basic grammar, such as the sentence structure of simple 
sentences, the use of auxiliary verbs and prepositional phrases 
in simple sentences, etc. They also mastered some basic 
knowledge about compound sentences and complex sentences. 
In “Intermediate Chinese” in the 2nd year, the students are 
required to understand relatively complicated sentences with 
two or more clauses. An important part of the course is the 
ability to use conjunctions and specific sentence structures in 
writing sentences with two or more clauses. Weekly 
composition exercises are given to assess the students’ use of 
conjunctions and specific sentence structures learned.  
With respect to this research, the students were asked to 
translate Japanese sentences into Chinese as a class exercise 
every week. One specific word “花 見 ” (cherry-blossom 
viewing) was chosen as the target to provide feedback. We 
designed three different Japanese sentences containing the 
word “花見” (cherry-blossom viewing) for three exercises to 
be given over eight weeks: the interval between the first two 
exercises was one week, and the interval after the 2nd exercise 
was six weeks. In the 1st week, the Chinese translation of the 
phrase “花見に行く ” (go to see cherry blossoms) was 
presented as a hint along with the exercise for Class 1 but 
wasn’t given for Class 2. In the following week, the students 
from both classes did the 2nd exercise without a hint. Then in 
the interim, during the 3rd week, the teacher thoroughly 
explained about the various translations of “cherry-blossom 
viewing” and told the students of both classes that “看樱花” 
(see cherry blossoms) was the most appropriate answer. Five 
weeks later, the 3rd exercise containing “cherry-blossom 
viewing” was conducted. The three Japanese sentences and 
the reference translations in Chinese are listed below. 
 
S1. 
 
Japanese: “もし明日雨が降らなければ，私たちは花見
に行くつもりです．” 
   Chinese: “如果明天不下雨，我们就去看樱花。” 
(If it doesn’t rain tomorrow, then we are going to see 
cherry blossoms.) 
 
S2. 
Japanese: “もし花見に行くなら，京都が一番いい．” 
Chinese: “如果去看樱花，京都是最好的。” 
(If you go to see cherry blossoms, Kyoto is the best place.) 
S3. 
Japanese: “来年 3 月末に私は神戸に来る予定だが，花
見に来るのではなく，出張に来るのだ．” 
Chinese: “明年 3 月底我打算来神户，但不是为了来看
樱花，而是来出差。” 
(I plan to come to Kobe at the end of March next year for 
business trip not for cherry blossom viewing.) 
In fact, the three Japanese sentences were composition 
exercises mentioned above. S1 and S2 are provided to help 
students understand the use of the conjunction “如果…, 就…” 
(if…, then…), and the target of S3 is the sentence structure 
“不是…而是…” (for… not for…). 
B. Analysis and Results 
TABLE I.  
CORRECT ANSWER RATE OF “花見” (CHERRY-BLOSSOM 
VIEWING) 
 
Week 1 
Week 2 
Week 8  
Class 1 
100% 
94.1% 
94.1% 
Class 2 
73.5% 
88.2% 
100% 
TABLE II.  
PERCENTAGE OF STUDENTS CHANGING ANSWERS 
BETWEEN EXERCISES 
 
Week 1- 2 
Week 2- 8 
Week 2- 8(G2-G1) 
Class 1 
85.3% 
64.7% 
23.5% 
Class 2 
52.9% 
64.7% 
23.5% 
 
Our analysis focuses on the changes of translation of the 
specific word “cherry-blossom viewing” found in all three 
exercises. There were four main variations, “看樱花” (see 
cherry blossoms), “看花” (see flowers), “赏花” (admire 
flowers), and “ 观 赏 樱 花 ” (admire cherry blossoms). 
Although “cherry-blossom viewing” is a word in Japanese, it 
should be translated as a verb phrase in Chinese, with one verb 
and one noun. The Japanese word “花見” (cherry-blossom 
viewing) refers to the tradition of sitting under blooming 
cherry trees to appreciate the beauty of the cherry blossoms. 
Thus, even though the kanji/Chinese character “花” (flower) 
exists in both Japanese and Chinese, in the original Japanese 
word it specifically refers to cherry blossoms. However, in 
translations such as “看花” (see flowers), “赏花” (admire 
flowers), “花 ” (flower) means flowers generally without 
explicitly referring to cherry blossoms. Hence “樱花” (cherry 
blossoms) is considered as a more appropriate translation. In 
addition, 
all 
three 
sentences 
come 
from 
everyday 
conversations, “观赏樱花” (admire cherry blossoms) seems 
too formal in this context. Therefore, we divided the different 
translations into three groups: Group 1 (G1: most 
appropriate): “看樱花” (see cherry blossoms); Group 2 (G2: 
correct but flawed): “看花” (see flowers), “赏花” (admire 
flowers), and “观赏樱花” (admire cherry blossoms), as well 
as Group 3 (G3: mistakes). We then calculated the percentage 
of correct answers for each exercise and also the percentage 

226
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
of students changing answers over time according to 
descriptive statistics methods. 
Table I shows the percentage of correct answers (G1 & 
G2) of the word “花見” (cherry-blossom viewing) in the three 
exercises. As we can see, students in Class 1 achieved 100% 
accuracy because of the hint, in contrast, Class 2 only 
achieved 73.5%. However, it is noteworthy that in the 
following week, the accuracy of Class 1 fell while that of 
Class 2 increased. In week 3, the teacher explained about the 
exercises conducted previously and emphasized the most 
appropriate translation. In week 8, the accuracy of Class 2 
exceeded that of Class 1, which suggested that giving students 
answers without any explanation was not as effective as one 
might think. This kind of input may lead students to just use 
the answer without any active thinking or reflection involved. 
Table II shows the percentage of students who changed 
answers between the exercises. In week 1, all students in Class 
1 used the most appropriate translation owing to the hint. 
However, 85.3% of Class 1 changed their answers in week 2, 
which indicated that the hint had not been properly 
memorized. In week 2, the percentage of G1 was 14.7% in 
Class 1 and 8.8% in Class 2. The percentage of students 
changing answers in both classes between exercise 2 and 3 
were identical, and there were over 20% of students in each 
class who changed their answers from G2 to G1. These 
percentages reveal that students’ self-reflection improves their 
accuracy but explanations by a teacher can further facilitate 
the learning process.  
Based on the above results, it is suggested that by tracking 
the changes of translation, teachers will be able to confirm the 
effects of the hints and explanations provided; students should 
benefit from the formative feedback which enables them to 
assess their weak points in the learning process. 
III. 
SYSTEM DESIGN 
We propose an approach to provide feedback for learners’ 
time-series data in the Japanese-Chinese translation process, 
with a focus on tracking changes in V-O phrases. The key idea 
in the approach is to utilize the dependency relation between 
two words as a phrase for tracking. By using a dependency 
parser, we can obtain the structural information from input 
sentences in which the V-O phrase should be found; based on 
this information we can extract the phrase and then detect 
whether the learner has changed the phrase by comparing the 
extracted phrase with those from previous translation 
exercises. If the phrase cannot be extracted, there are two 
possible reasons. One is that the learner used an incorrect 
phrase, and the other is that the learner used an alternative 
correct phrase with a different dependency relation.  
 
This approach can be divided into two phases, as shown 
below. 
Preparation and extraction of verb phrase: 
A teacher chooses a V-O phrase, we call it the intended 
phrase (IP), which is used to confirm the appropriate 
acquisition. 
Learners’ translations, which should contain the IP 
(based on the source language sentence), will be extracted 
and processed by a Chinese parser and the V-O phrase, called 
learner’s phrase (LP) will be extracted based on the 
dependency parser’s result. 
Formative feedback: 
The LP will be extracted along with the time when it was 
submitted (timestamp). As a result, extracted LPs will be in a 
time series, and later LPs submitted can be compared with 
earlier LPs.  
This extraction and comparison will provide not only 
information about the phrases, but also detect whether the 
learners have changed their translations or not. Subsequently, 
the results of all the exercises will be reviewed by the teacher. 
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
Following the above approach, we implemented a system 
with four stages: 1) pre-processing for extracting simple 
sentences, 2) segmentation and part of speech (POS) 
generation of extracted simple sentences, 3) V-O phrases 
extraction based on dependency parsing and 4) comparison 
between extracted V-O phrases. This system utilizes the 
Stanford Parser [20] through Python NLTK (Natural 
Language Toolkit) interface to analyze the input data, while 
the system interface is based on PHP.  
A. Overview of the System 
Figure 1 shows an overview of the system. Currently, the 
system is mainly designed for teachers. The elements depicted 
by solid lines are completed, while those in dash lines are still 
in development.      
 
Figure 1.  
Overview of the system 
 
In Student’s UI, students can input answers for 
assignments and receive feedback generated by the system. 
The “Complete assignments” is designed to deal with data 
from students and save it as log data. In Teacher’s UI, teachers 
can select the assignments that they want to check and input 
corresponding reference answers. The “GEs” in “GEs 
selection, IP input & processing” means “grammatical 
elements”. In this part, teachers can choose GEs and input IPs. 
LPs will be extracted automatically and saved as log data. The 
details will be described in the next sub section. 
B. Algorithm 
The pre-processing in stage 1) is designed to extract a 
single clause with the target V-O phrase from a sentence with 
several clauses. As we indicated in Section II, students in the 
“Intermediate Chinese” course are required to master how to 
Student 
Teacher 
Authentication  
Student’s UI  
Teacher’s UI  
 
Complete 
assignments  
GEs selection, IP input 
& processing 
Log data 

227
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
use conjunctions or specific sentence structures for 
composing compound sentences, complex sentences and 
compound-complex sentences. To help them consolidate their 
knowledge, all the exercise sentences previously introduced 
consist of two or more clauses and many may contain multiple 
V-O phrases. This makes it difficult for the system following 
the stage 2) to automatically identify the phrase the teacher 
chose to confirm acquisition of. Therefore, it is necessary to 
pre-process the sentences to ensure that the system can parse 
and extract the clause containing the LP. In other words, the 
input data for stage 2) should be a single clause which is 
produced by learners in an exercise and should contain an IP.  
 
1) Pre-processing for extracting simple sentences: 
It is important to be able to automatically analyze sentence 
structures in natural language processing. Parsers developed 
for a variety of languages have made it easy to separate a 
sentence with plural clauses into single clauses. However, 
analyzing a sentence, even a simple sentence with errors 
automatically, continues to be a challenging issue. Although 
many approaches have attempted to solve this problem, most 
of the approaches deal only with English and few addressed 
Chinese sentence structures. In addition, most of the 
approaches are based on learner corpora and few learner 
corpora on Chinese have been reported. Hence, through an 
empirical observation of teachers, we present a method based 
on punctuation and the grammatical elements such as 
conjunctions, adverbs and flag words for specific sentence 
structures to separate the target sentences. For sentences with 
plural clauses composed by students, we first try a punctuation 
position step and then a grammatical element step. 
Empirically, students at the intermediate level tend to 
grasp grammar that they just learned in the classroom very 
well but easily make mistakes on what they have learned after 
several weeks or months. Because the main grammar 
elements that students learn in the “Intermediate Chinese” are 
conjunctions and specific sentence structures, there are few 
errors related to these but the same does not hold true for 
previously learned preposition phrases or VO phrases etc. 
This means that most students can master the use of 
conjunctions when they have translation assignments. 
Therefore, our sentence separation in the empirical 
observation is restricted.  
For sentences by students that contain two clauses, the 
sentences generally consist of two clauses separated by 
punctuation. As a result, it is extremely possible that the 
position for the punctuation in the sentence is correct. In this 
case, it is easy to extract a single clause with the IP according 
to the punctuation position. We call this the punctuation 
position step. Table III shows the percentages with a correct 
punctuation position in the sentences composed by the 
students in the “Intermediate Chinese” course. 
In the punctuation position step, a reference answer is used 
to determine the position of the single clause that contains the 
IP. For example, the reference answer of S1 is “如果明天不
下雨，我们就去看樱花。” (If it doesn’t rain tomorrow, then 
we are going to see cherry blossoms.) Since the IP is “看樱
花” (see cherry blossoms), the desired clause will be the latter 
part of the whole, e.g., “我们就去看樱花” (then we are going 
to see cherry blossoms). Based on this information, we can 
extract the single clause from sentences by students by 
initially finding the comma, and then retrieving the latter part 
of the sentence.  
TABLE III.  
PERCENTAGES OF STUDENTS WITH CORRECT 
PUNCTUATION AND GRAMMATICAL ELEMENTS 
    
For sentences by students that consist of two or more 
clauses without punctuation or with plural punctuation, we 
adopt a grammatical element step. In this step, instead of 
relying entirely on the position of the IP in the reference 
answer, we add conditions based on grammatical elements 
such as conjunctions, adverbs or flag words used in specific 
sentence structures just learned by students as explained 
above. The grammatical elements usually correctly appear in 
each student’s translation. Thus, the grammatical elements 
should be considered as helpful factors when separating the 
sentences. In addition, similar to English, Chinese sentences 
usually contain subjects, which should also be regarded as an 
important factor to help us separate the sentences. Table III 
shows the percentages of the grammatical elements correctly 
used and the percentages of the subjects that appear in the 
sentences composed by the students in the “Intermediate 
Chinese” course. 
In the grammatical element step, the grammatical element 
and the subject included in the clause with an IP in a reference 
answer are first determined according to both the grammar 
and the IP chosen by the teacher. The grammar is that which 
is needed to compose sentences with two or more clauses. The 
element could be a conjunction or an adverb. The Stanford 
Segmentor will segment the reference answer and the teacher 
can choose the grammatical elements concerning the grammar. 
By searching the IP in the reference answer, we can easily 
obtain the clause that contains the IP and its position in the 
reference answer so that we can determine the grammatical 
element included and the subject within. If there is no 
grammatical element or no subject in the clause, the 
grammatical element step will go to the end of the pre-
processing stage. 
Therefore, for sentences by students that consist of two or 
more clauses without punctuation or with plural punctuation, 
the part with the element or the subject is extracted as the 
clause that should contain the IP, otherwise the whole 
sentence will be used in the next stage. Figure 2 shows the 
flow of the step. In Figure 2, “RA” and “PI” refer to “reference 
answer” and “positional information” respectively. The 
sentence “如果明天不下雨，我们就去看樱花” (If it doesn’t 
rain tomorrow, then we are going to see cherry blossoms.) is 
an example of a reference answer where the IP is “看樱花” 
(see cherry blossoms) and the grammatical elements are 
respectively “如果”(if) and “就”(then) that correspond to the 
grammar “如果…, 就…”(if…, then…). 
 
Correct Punctuations 
Correct GEs 
Correct Subject 
 
Class 1 
Class 2 
Class 1 
Class 2 
Class 1 
Class 2 
S1 
100% 
91.2% 
14.7% 
5.9% 
88.2% 
76.4% 
S2 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
91.2% 
88.2% 
S3 
82.4% 
70.1% 
85.3% 
79.4% 
100% 
97.1% 

228
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
GE or subject exists 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  
The flow of the grammatical element step of pre-processing 
for extracting simple sentences 
 
Since “就” (then) should be in the clause with the IP, it 
becomes the key to extract the desired simple sentence in 
students’ translations. In addition, the Stanford Dependency 
Parser is also used to parse the simple sentence from the 
reference answer, and if “nsubj” (nominal subject) exists, then 
the referred word will be extracted as a keyword to help locate 
the desired simple sentence. In this case, the subject “我们” 
(we) is also found and marked. After obtaining the 
information about the grammatical element and the subject, 
and the position of the simple sentence in the reference answer 
(the 2nd part), we can finally extract the desired simple 
sentence that should contain the IP in a student’s translation.  
The extraction algorithm first breaks down the students’ 
translations into parts based on the punctuation. For 
translations which contain plural punctuation, we try to find 
whether the extracted grammatical element or subject exists. 
If one or both exist, e.g., “如果明天，不下雨，就去看樱花。” 
(If tomorrow, it doesn’t rain, then go to see cherry blossoms.), 
then the part which contains the grammatical element “就” 
(then) will be extracted. If no grammatical element or subject 
exists in the translation, e.g., “如果明天，不下雨，观赏樱
花。” (If tomorrow, it doesn’t rain, admire cherry blossoms.), 
then the part based on the positional information (the 2nd part), 
which will be “不下雨” (it doesn’t rain) is extracted. If the 
translation cannot be split but contains the extracted subject, 
e.g., “如果不下雨我们打算去观赏樱花。” (If it doesn’t rain, 
we are going to admire cherry blossoms.), then we search for 
the extracted subject “我们” (we) and since the subject 
usually appears at the beginning of a clause, we extract the 
part led by the subject. Otherwise, we conduct no extraction 
and use the original translation in the following step. 
2) Segmentation and POS generation: 
The extracted simple sentence (e.g., single clause) will be 
segmented and the POS information will also be generated 
by exploiting the segmentor and the POS tagger of the 
Stanford Parser.  
3) Dependency parsing and V-O phrase extraction: 
    The dependency parser of the Stanford Parser will 
provide the structual information of the segmented input and 
the LP within will be extracted if there is a “dobj” (direct 
object) tag. If a “dobj” tag exists, the contents, as well as their 
POS tags will be extracted, otherwise the output will be “*”.  
4) Comparison between extracted V-O phrases: 
    Since the extracted LPs will have timestamps, the 
system will compare the later LP with the earlier to detect 
whether the learner has changed the translation or not .  
C. System Practice 
We first designed the interface to help teachers confirm 
students’ acquisition of V-O phrases. In the pressent situation, 
students’ translations have already been collected, and from 
these, we prepare an SQL database to store the translations. 
In order to evaluate the approach, we use the collected 204 
translations from Class 1 and Class 2. We also choose the V-
O phrase “看樱花” (see cherry blossoms) as the target to 
provide feedback as described in Section II. The translations 
of S1, S2 and S3 are the raw data to input into the system. The 
description of the user interface is shown as follows. 
Step 1: Sentence selection and reference answer input 
Figure 3 shows the first step of our system. As the 
translation assignments and students’ answers have already 
been stored in the database, teachers need to choose a sentence 
or several sentences they want to check the acquisition of and 
then input the corresponding reference answers. In Figure 3, 
all the exercise sentences are selected so the teacher needs to 
input all the reference answers at this point, as shown in the 
lower part of the figure. 
Step 2: Grammatical element selection and IP input 
Figure 4 shows the second step. In this step, the reference 
answers have been segmented by the Stanford Parser, and the 
teacher chooses the grammatical element they taught in class 
when the assignment was given. The IP should be input at this 
step as well.
 
Input by the teacher:  
RA: “如果明天不下雨，我们
就去看樱花。” (If it doesn’t rain 
tomorrow, then we are going to 
see cherry blossoms.),  
IP: “ 看 樱 花 ” (see cherry 
blossoms)  
GEs: “如果”(if) & “就”(then) 
Simple sentence with IP -> “我们就去看樱花”( then we are 
going to see cherry blossoms),  
the contained GE -> “就”(then) and subject -> “我们”(we), and 
store the PI->the 2nd part 
Extract the 
part 
containing 
GE“就”(the
n) or 
subject“我
们”(we) 
 
Start  
 
 
Plural punctuations exist  
 
 
Subject exists 
Extract 
the 
part 
based 
on PI (the 
2nd part) 
 
Extract 
the 
part led by 
the 
subject 
“我们”(we) 
 
Conduct no 
extraction 
 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
No 
No 
No 
For 1 student’s translation 
 
 
Move to the next step 

229
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 3.  
Sentence selection and reference answer input 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  
Grammatical element selection and IP input
Step 3: Simple sentence extraction 
After completing the previous 2 steps, reference 
answers, their segmentation results, as well as the IP will be 
written to the database. With this information, the system 
first extracts the simple sentence containing the IP in the 
reference answer by splitting the sentence according to its 
punctuation into several parts and searching for the part that 
includes the IP. Then, the information and the position of 
the simple sentence are used to extract the simple sentence 
from the students’ translations. Using this method, we 
correctly extracted 203 simple sentences out of 204 
translations. Examples of the pre-processing results are 
listed in Table IV.  
 
Analysis of V-O Phrases Acquisition (For teachers) 
Please select the assignment to analyze: 
1. 
If it doesn’t rain tomorrow, we are going to see 
cherry blossoms. 
2. 
If you go to see cherry blossoms, Kyoto is the best 
place. 
3. 
I plan to come to Kobe at the end of March next 
year for business trip not for cheery blossom 
viewing. 
Next 
Reset 
Please input the corresponding reference answer: 
1. 
If it doesn’t rain tomorrow, we are going to see 
cherry blossoms. 
2. 
If you go to see cherry blossoms, Kyoto is the best 
place. 
3. 
I plan to come to Kobe at the end of March next 
year for business trip not for cheery blossom 
viewing. 
Next 
Reset 
 
Grammatical Element Selection and IP Input 
1. 
If it doesn’t rain tomorrow, we are going to see cherry blossoms. 
 if  tomorrow  doesn’t rain  we  then  go   see   cherry blossoms 
 
Please select the taught grammatical element: 
 
2. 
If you go to see cherry blossoms, Kyoto is the best place. 
 if   go   see  cherry blossoms  Kyoto  is   best   (a character to form a noun phrase or nominal expression) 
 
3. 
I plan to come to Kobe at the end of March next year for business not for cherry blossom viewing. 
 next year  3   end of month  I  plan  come  Kobe   but   not  for  come to see  cherry blossoms 
 but  come  business trip 
 
Please input the intended phrase: 
 

230
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 5.  
Examples of system output
TABLE IV.  
EXAMPLES OF SIMPLE SENTENCE EXTRACTION 
Students’ 
translations 
如果去看樱花，京都是最好。 
(If going to see cherry blossoms, Kyoto is the best.) 
如果我去看樱，京都最好。 
(If I go to see cherry, Kyoto is the best.) 
Pre-
processed 
如果去看樱花 (If going to see cherry blossoms) 
如果我去看樱 (If I go to see cherry) 
 
Step 4: V-O phrase extraction and change detection  
Figure 5 shows some examples of our system’s output. 
All the V-O phrases extracted from the students’ translations, 
and the detection results of whether they changed their 
answers or not across all the three exercises are shown. If the 
extracted phrase is different from that in the reference answer, 
then it will be shown in red. If the student’s answer changed 
between exercises, then the detection result will also be 
displayed in red. In this way, the teacher can easily notice the 
noteworthy parts as well as any changes over time. 
The first column of Figure 5 shows the students’ ID. For 
the protection of privacy, we replaced them with numbers. 
The students’ translations of S1, S2 and S3 are shown in 
column 2, 4 and 7 respectively. In column 3, 5 and 8, the 
extracted LPs are displayed. Here, the symbol “**” means 
that no V-O phrase was extracted in the translation. In 
column 6, the information that whether the students changed 
their usage of the V-O phrase between S1 and S2 is shown 
here. If the system detected a change, then the contents of the 
corresponding cell will in the following format: “the 
extracted V-O phrase in S1=>the extracted V-O phrase in S2”, 
otherwise the contents will be “No”. Similarly, in column 9 
and 10, the change detection results of whether the students 
changed their usage of V-O phrases between S1 and S3 as 
well as between S2 and S3 are shown. 
From the information, the teacher can readily check the 
acquisition of the chosen V-O phrase. The system output not 
only shows whether the students used the intended phrase or 
not, but also provides the information on students’ changes 
in the usage of V-O phrases.  
V. 
OUTPUT ANALYSIS  
Figure 5 shows the final system output stage. In order to 
reach that stage, pre-processing plays a significant role. Our 
pre-processing algorithm for extracting simple sentences 
achieved an overall 99.5% correct extraction rate, with only 1 
out of 204 extractions incorrect. In contrast, before applying 
the algorithm, we had also extracted simple sentences from 
the same 204 translations only based on the punctuation 
position step. The result is shown in Table V. 
TABLE V.  
CORRECT SIMPLE SENTENCE EXTRACTION RATE OF 
DIFFERENT METHODS 
 
Solely by position 
Based on several conditions 
S1 
97.1% 
100% 
S2 
100% 
100% 
S3 
76.5% 
98.5% 
 
The absent comma resulted a null extraction for 2 students’ 
translations of S1, which caused the correct extraction rate to 
be 97.1%. However, the correct extraction rate was only 76.5% 
in S3. S3 was the longest and most complicated sentence 
among the three. There are 2 commas in both the Japanese 
sentence and the reference answer. Due to this comparably 
complicated sentence structure, students often missed or 
added extra commas/periods, which caused the false 
extraction of simple sentences within those translations. The 
reference answer of S3 is “明年三月底我打算来神户，但不
是来看樱花，而是来出差。” (Literal translation here to show 
the structure of the Chinese reference answer clearer: At the 
end of March next year I plan to come to Kobe, not to see 
cherry blossoms, but for a business trip.). Based on the IP “看
樱花” (see cherry blossoms), the second part of the reference 
answer can be extracted. However, because of the mother-
tongue interference, students tended to add a comma after the 
“明年三月底” (at the end of March next year), which resulted 
in an extraction of corresponding part of “我打算来神户” (I 
plan to come to Kobe) in the work of 14 students. And another 
2 students added an extra comma to a different place. 
The grammatical element step made the detected subject 
and grammatical element as key to extract, that perfectly 
solved the null extraction caused by absent punctuation. The 
only false extraction is from the following sentence: “明年 3
月末我将来神户，不过不是来，观赏樱花，来出差。” (I 
will come to Kobe at the end of next March, but not come to, 
see cherry blossoms, come for business trip.). In this sentence, 
the student added an extra comma between “不是来” (not 
come to) and “观赏樱花” (admire cherry blossoms). Since 
our system first searches for the taught grammatical element 
“不是” (not for), and in the reference answer and most 
students’ answers, the V-O phrase follows without any 

231
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
punctuation, the simple sentences were correctly extracted. 
However, in this student’s translation, he made a rare error 
that separate the simple sentence and resulted in the false 
extraction.  
TABLE VI.  
EXAMPLES OF EXTRACTED PHRASES 
No. 
verb 
vPOS 
object 
oPOS 
V&O 
S1 
去
(go) 
VV 
看樱 
(see 
cherry) 
NN 
去看樱 
(go to see 
cherry) 
S1 
看 
(see) 
VV 
樱花 
(cherry 
blossoms) 
NN 
看樱花 
(see cherry 
blossoms) 
S2 
看 
(see) 
VV 
樱花 
(cherry 
blossoms) 
NN 
看樱花 
(see cherry 
blossoms) 
S2 
* 
* 
* 
* 
** 
   
The extracted V-O phrase shown in Figure 5 is provided 
to teachers. But before that, the components that form the 
phrase and their POS information were also generated and 
stored into the database. Table VI shows some examples. If a 
LP was extracted, then the verb and object, as well as the V-
O phrase will be stored. It can be observed from both Figure 
5 and Table VI that not all inputs can be extracted with a V-O 
phrase. Just like the last example in the table, if the system 
couldn’t find a “dobj” tag, then the output would be “**”.  
TABLE VII.  
EXTRACTION RATE OF LP IN CLASS 1 
 
Extraction Rate of All Inputs 
Usage of IP “看樱花” 
Week 1 
100% 
100% 
Week 2 
100% 
14.7% 
Week 8 
76.5% 
26.5% 
 
For examining the validity of the output of the system 
(Figure 5), we calculated the extraction rate that describes 
how many V-O phrases there are in the input sentences. The 
extraction rates of Class 1 are presented in Table VII. 
Meanwhile, we calculated the percentages of the IP “看樱花” 
(see cherry blossoms) used by students in the raw data and 
showed the percentages in the same table. Since the output is 
displayed in different colors, the difference is quite clear and 
the calculation is easily done. From Table VII it is clear that 
in week 1, all students of Class 1 translated “花見” (cherry-
blossom viewing) into the IP “看樱花” (see cherry blossoms) 
because of the hint. Consequently, all inputs were successfully 
extracted. Apart from “看樱花” (see cherry blossoms), other 
variations were also extracted in week 2 and week 8, as long 
as the input contained a V-O phrase. In week 2, although 
every input contains a V-O phrase, the usage of the IP 
decreased to 14.7%. Thus, if students have grasped the basic 
sentence structure, e.g., the V-O structure, all LP would be 
extracted and Figure 5 would provide teachers a visual 
feedback to confirm what different phrases or wrong phrases 
are used by students. On the other hand, the extraction rate in 
week 8 was only 76.5%. In the case, this results from that the 
two-character words in G2: “看花” (see flowers) and “赏花” 
(admire flowers) were treated as nouns instead of V-O phrases 
in the system. However, we also observed that in translations 
from week 2, 14 students used the two-character words in G2: 
“ 看 花 ” (see flowers) or “ 赏 花 ” (admire flowers). 
Nevertheless, in those 14 translations, all the V-O phrases 
were extracted because the students all used another verb “去” 
(go) before the two-character words. While the two-character 
words were regarded as noun by the parser, the noun and the 
verb “去 ” (go) together form another phrase which was 
determined as a V-O phrase and extracted. Other variations 
extracted from week 2 translation include G2 “(观)赏樱花” 
(admire cherry blossoms) and G3 “去看樱” (go to see cherry). 
TABLE VIII.  
EXTRACTION RATE OF LP IN CLASS 2 
 
Extraction Rate of All Inputs 
Usage of IP “看樱花” 
Week 1 
91.2% 
0.03% 
Week 2 
97.1% 
0.09% 
Week 8 
82.4% 
26.5% 
 
Table VIII shows the extraction rate of LP from Class 2 
students’ translation. In week 1, V-O phrases were not 
extracted in 3 translations. The two-character word in G2: “看
花” (see flowers) exists in 2 of the 3 translations, and another 
null extraction is due to the mistake of using “看去花” (see 
go cheery blossoms). In translations from week 2, the only 
translation didn’t have an extracted V-O phrase used the same 
two-character word in G2: “看花” (see flowers). In week 8, 
V-O phrases were not extracted in 6 students’ translations. 
One of them is due to the false extraction of the simple 
sentence we explained before. All of other 5 students used the 
two-character words in G2: “看花” (see flowers) or “赏花” 
(admire flowers) without another verb nearby, which caused 
the null extraction.   
From Figure 5, besides the extracted V-O phrases, the 
change detection results were also provided to teachers. The 
correct detection rate of all the 204 detections achieved 94.6%, 
which proved the high accuracy and the possibility to be 
utilized. To sum up, there are mainly two patterns in the 
eleven incorrect detections. The first one is that the students 
used the two-character words in G2: “看花” (see flowers) and 
“赏花” (admire flowers) in multiple translations. In this case, 
some of them were not extracted because of the lack of verb 
before the word and others will be extracted along with the 
verb. As a result, even the student used the same two-character 
word between two translations, in six students’ translations of 
two exercises, one was extracted and the other was not, then 
the change detection turned out to be wrong. And in four 
students’ translations, both of them were extracted along with 
the verb, however, the verbs were different, in week 2 they 
used “去” (go), but in week 8 they used “来” (come), so the 
system detected the change as a result. The second pattern is 
the null extraction of LP due to the mistakes across exercises. 
In one student’s translation, the mistake caused one null 
extraction in week 1, and usage of two-character words caused 
null extraction in week 2 and week 8, so there is no extracted 
phrase from all the translations. Even he changed the phrases 
across exercises, the system couldn’t detect.    

232
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
As our results show, the extraction rate of LP and the 
change detection over time were both found to have a high 
correct percentage. This means that the system can provide 
teachers with an almost immediate overview of a student’s 
progress in the learning process. The color differentiation 
allows teachers to readily note that there was only one student 
in each class who used the IP in all three exercises in this 
instance. From the system output of Class 1 translations, it can 
be observed that eight students changed their answer in week 
2 but then changed back to the most appropriate “看樱花” 
(see cherry blossoms) in week 8, which demonstrated the 
effectiveness of the teacher’s detailed explanation in week 3. 
However, the other 25 students failed to change back to the 
correct translation they submitted in week 1. From the output 
of Class 2, we found that even without the teacher’s detailed 
explanation, two students changed their answers to the IP in 
week 2, and in week 8, nine students used the IP which was 
the same number of students who used the IP in Class 1 of 
week 8. As showed in Section II, these results clearly illustrate 
that a provided hint cannot improve a student’s long-term 
performance. But with the system, the progress of the students 
can be promptly perceived and are more intuitive. This 
information can help teachers improve their instructional 
strategies, and facilitate individual students to comprehend 
whether the required grammatical element had been mastered 
or not. At the current stage, only the interface for teachers has 
been developed. Our pre-processing algorithm helped us 
extract virtually all of the translations so that it is a practicable 
method to adapt empirical observations of teachers to process 
students’ translations that contain errors.  
On the other hand, the incorrect change detection result 
caused by the parser’s POS determination remains a problem. 
Incorrect outputs may not cause much trouble for teachers to 
distinguish, however, they may confuse the students. The 
interior algorithm of the parser is difficult to alter, so we may 
need to investigate the possibility and effects of adding 
exterior rules or using different segmentors. Segmentors do 
not seem to be able to separate the two-character words 
determined as V-O phrases by humans, so the POS tagger and 
dependency parser are unable to provide the desired 
information. In addition, it is noteworthy that we found that 
the system output changed significantly just by using different 
trained parser models concerning Chinese grammar. There are 
5 different Chinese parser models trained on data from the 
Penn Chinese Treebank provided by the Stanford Parser. 
According to the official document, the PCFG parsers are 
smaller and faster, but the Factored parser is significantly 
better for Chinese. In the practical use, however, the output 
generated by using the xinhuaFactored grammar model was 
much worse than the result based on the xinhuaPCFG 
grammar model. Even when IP exists in translations, the 
extraction cannot achieve 100% by using the xinhuaFactored 
grammar model. Thus, in this specific context, choosing the 
appropriate Chinese grammar model should be considered of 
high importance.  
VII. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we first analyzed learning log data from two 
face-to-face classrooms in Chinese learning. The analysis 
results revealed that tracking the changes of translation on V-
O phrases could help teachers confirm the effects of the 
provided hints or explanations; and students may benefit 
from the formative feedback to find out their weak points in 
the learning process. Thus, we proposed an approach for 
providing formative feedback and developed a system to test 
the approach.  
We designed an interface for teachers to confirm students’ 
acquisition of a specific grammatical element. Since the raw 
data contains a lot of complex sentences, which creates a 
barrier for our system to locate the desired part within the 
translation, we made an effort to improve the pre-processing 
method. The system achieved a high correct percentage in 
both the extraction rate of LP and change detection. 
It is suggested that the system is effective in providing 
automated formative feedback to teachers. The feedback on 
V-O phrases would help teachers grasp the overall situation 
of learners and confirm the effects of the current instructional 
strategies. Although the V-O phrase is limited in the 
description in the methodology and the evaluation of the 
system, the system can certainly be used to track other V-O 
phrases as well. Because the system focuses on the extraction 
and comparison of V-O phrases by using the Stanford Parser, 
it is thus expected that it can be applied to other languages as 
long as similar structures can be identified by the parsers. 
Moreover, unlike Chinese, English sentences are separated 
by space, which makes it much easier to be correctly 
segmented. 
There still remain some problems in the approach. In the 
system, the two-character words cannot be determined as 
phrases as we have explained. Furthermore, it is important to 
deal with the phrases without a “dobj” tag, which suggests 
that the extraction method still needs improvement. Currently 
we have only developed an interface for teachers, developing 
an interface for learners will be the next step. In addition, 
further practical use in classrooms needs to be investigated. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
    This work is supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant 
Number JP17K01081.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
S. Shao, K. Ohtsuki, H. Kiyomitsu, and M. Kang, “Tracking 
Verb Phrases for Formative Feedback in Foreign Language 
Writing,” Proceedings of The Tenth International Conference 
on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning, pp. 58-61, 2018. 
[2] 
H. Kimura, T. Kimura, and O. Shiki, “Theory and Practice in 
Reading and Writing: Nurturing Independent Learning,” 
Tokyo, Japan: Taishukan, 2010. 
[3] 
P. Duppenthaler, “The effect of three types of feedback on the 
journal writing of EFL Japanese students,” JACET Bulletin, 
(38), pp. 1-17, 2004.  
[4] 
K. Oi, T. Kamimura, T. Kumamoto, and K. Matsumoto, “A 
Search for the Feedback That Works for Japanese EFL 
Students: Content-based or Grammar-based,” JACET 
Bulletin, (32), pp. 91-108, 2000. 

233
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[5] 
A. M. F. Yousef, U. Wahid, M. A. Chatti, U. Schroeder, and 
M. Wosnitza, “The Impact of Rubric-Based Peer Assessment 
on Feedback Quality in Blended MOOCs,” Communications 
in Computer and Information Science Computer Supported 
Education, pp. 462-485, 2016. 
[6] 
Y. Attali and F. van der Klei, “Effects of feedback elaboration 
and feedback timing during computer-based practice in 
mathematics problem solving”, Computers & Education, 
(110), pp. 154-169, 2017.  
[7] 
F. M. van der Kleij, T. J. Eggen, C. F. Timmers, and B. P. 
Veldkamp, “Effects of feedback in a computer-based 
assessment for learning”, Computers & Education, (58), pp.  
263-272, 2012. 
[8] 
V. J. Shute, “Focus on Formative Feedback”, Review of 
Educational Research, 78(1), pp. 153-189, 2008. 
[9] 
I. Goldin, S. Narciss, P. Foltz, and M. Bauer, “New Directions 
in Formative Feedback in Interactive Learning Environments,” 
International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 
27(3), pp. 385-392, 2017. 
[10] P. D. Ware and M. Warschauer, “Electronic feedback and 
second language writing,” Feedback in second language 
writing: Contexts and issues, pp. 105-122, 2006.  
[11] S. W. Yeh and J. J. Lo, “Using online annotations to support 
error correction and corrective feedback,” Computers & 
Education, 52(4), pp. 882-892, 2009. 
[12] M. Warschauer and D. Grimes, “Automated writing 
assessment in the classroom,” Pedagogies: An International 
Journal, 3(1), pp. 22-36, 2008. 
[13] K. Kawamura, H. Kashiwagi, and M. Kang, “An Approach 
toward Automatic Error Detection in Learners’ English 
Writing Based on the Source Language,” Proceedings of The 
Tenth International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-
line Learning, pp. 62-65, 2018. 
[14] C. Leacock, M. Chodorow, M. Gamon, and J. Tetreault, 
“Automated grammatical error detection for language 
learners,” Synthesis lectures on human language technologies, 
7(1), pp. 109-112, 2014. 
[15] S. V. Kol and C. Rietz, “Effects of Web-Based Feedback on 
Students' Learning,” International Journal of Teaching and 
Learning in Higher Education, 28(3), pp. 385-394, 2016. 
[16] K. Ludvigsen, R. Krumsvik, and B. Furnes, “Creating 
formative feedback spaces in large lectures,” Computers & 
Education, (88), pp. 48-63, 2015. 
[17] M. W. Easterday, D. R. Lewis, and E. M. Gerber, “Designing 
crowdcritique systems for formative feedback,” International 
Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 27(3), pp. 623-
663, 2017. 
[18] D. S. McNamara, S. A. Crossley, and R. Roscoe, “Natural 
language processing in an intelligent writing strategy tutoring 
system,” Behavior research methods, 45(2), pp. 499-515, 
2013. 
[19] E. M. Golonka, A. R. Bowles, V. M. Frank, D. L. Richardson, 
and S. Freynik, “Technologies for foreign language learning: 
a review of technology types and their effectiveness,” 
Computer assisted language learning, 27(1), pp. 70-105, 2014. 
[20] C. D. Manning, et al, “The stanford corenlp natural language 
processing toolkit,” In ACL (System Demonstrations) pp. 55-
60, 2014. 
 
 

