Component Framework Implementation and Realisation for Development and
Deployment of a Coherent Multi-disciplinary Conceptual Knowledge-based
Holocene-prehistoric Inventory of Volcanological Features Groups and Faceting
Claus-Peter R¨uckemann
Westf¨alische Wilhelms-Universit¨at M¨unster (WWU), Germany;
Unabh¨angiges Deutsches Institut f¨ur Multi-disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF), Germany;
Leibniz Universit¨at Hannover, Germany
Email: ruckema@uni-muenster.de
Abstract—This
paper
presents
extended
insight
in
results
and current status of the procedural component framework
implementation and realisation for creation of a coherent multi-
disciplinary conceptual knowledge-based Holocene-prehistoric
inventory of worldwide volcanological features groups, especially
enabled
by
conceptual
knowledge
facets.
The
goal
is
the
creation
of
a
sustainable
framework
of
components,
which can be employed for multi-disciplinary integration of
knowledge contexts, especially from prehistory and archaeology.
The component framework has to enable further coherent
conceptual
knowledge
contextualisation
and
georeferenced
symbolic representation. This paper provides the results on
experiences of sustainable component integration and practical
procedural implementations and realisations. Future research
will
address
the
creation
of
a
component
framework
for
a Holocene-prehistoric inventory of worldwide volcanological
features, which enables coherent multi-disciplinary conceptual
knowledge integration and contextualisation with prehistorical
and archaeological knowledge resources.
Keywords–Prehistory, Prehistoric Archaeology, and Holocene;
Knowledge-based Contextualisation and Component Integration;
Coherent Multi-disciplinary Conceptual Knowledge Faceting and
Integration; CRI Framework; CKRI.
I.
INTRODUCTION
This paper is an extended and updated presentation of the
research based on the publication and presentation at the
INFOCOMP 2022 conference in Porto, Portugal [1]. Due to
a number of requests for the created inventory, this extended
paper concentrates on the practical inventory and procedural
knowledge complements, showing a wider range of result
groups based on practical facets used for on-demand contex-
tualisation and symbolic representation.
The corresponding coherent complementary results and de-
tails on faceting from the research groups on multi-disciplinary
conceptual knowledge [2] are further developed and have to be
given in a separate publication [3]. That research concentrates
on the conceptual knowledge reference implementation and
realisation, the fundaments for creation of a multi-disciplinary
coherent conceptual knowledge-based Holocene-prehistoric in-
ventory of volcanological features groups along with the over-
all frame [4] and importance of information science methods
and structures [5].
The overall multi-disciplinary contextualisation and faceting
enables to integrate the state of the art scientiﬁc research results
from respective disciplines on equal footing of knowledge and
scientiﬁc level.
It can integrate a wide range of methodological approaches
used in disciplines, e.g., conceptual knowledge based methods,
chorology based methods, e.g., place described by conceptual
knowledge and other factual knowledge like position, height,
depth, chronology based methods, visualisation based methods,
handling of multi-disciplinary contexts.
Coherent conceptual knowledge resources are results of
often complex and long-term multi-disciplinary creation pro-
cesses. Coherent conceptual knowledge resources may have to
achieve an advanced level of implementation before procedural
components can be created for sustainably employing these
resources. The conceptual knowledge implementation for this
inventory is in focus of multi-disciplinary research groups and
matter to be reported in separate publications. Motivation is the
creation of a sustainable and practical component framework
based on coherent multi-disciplinary conceptual knowledge.
This paper presents the results of the procedural compo-
nent framework implementation and realisation for creation
of a coherent multi-disciplinary conceptual knowledge-based
Holocene-prehistoric inventory of worldwide volcanological
features groups, which are employing respective coherent
knowledge resources. The goal of this research is the cre-
ation of a sustainable framework of components, which can
be employed for multi-disciplinary integration of knowledge
contexts, especially from prehistory and archaeology, too. The
component framework further has to enable a coherent concep-
tual knowledge contextualisation and georeferenced symbolic
representation.
The rest of this paper is organised as follows. Section II
presents the major reference implementations. Section III
presents the methodological implementation and realisation,
workﬂow procedure, respective component reference imple-
mentation and integration and coherent conceptual knowledge
implementation for the new inventory. Section IV discusses
the procedural potential regarding integration of components,
parallelisation, and implementation features. Section V sum-
marises lessons learned, conclusions, and future work.
II.
MAJOR REFERENCE IMPLEMENTATIONS
The coherent knowledge resources and the practical realisa-
tion are fully based on the Component Reference Implementa-
tions (CRI) framework [6], which is employing the main im-
plementations of the prehistory-protohistory and archaeology
Conceptual Knowledge Reference Implementation (CKRI) [7].
CRI provides the required component groups and components
for the implementation and realisation of all the procedural
modules. CKRI provides the knowledge framework, including
multi-disciplinary contexts of natural sciences and humanities
[8]. Both provide sustainable fundaments for highest levels of
reproducibility and standardisation and allow continuous and
consistent further development of discipline-centric and multi-
discipline development of knowledge resources. Both reference
103
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

implementations and all components are in continuous further
development by the respective disciplines themselves.
The approach conforms with information science funda-
ments and universal knowledge and enables an integration of
the required components from methodologies to realisations
for knowledge representations of realia and abstract contexts
[9], namely the Conceptual Knowledge Pattern Matching
(CKPM) methodology, considering that many facets of knowl-
edge, including prehistory, need to be continuously acquired
and reviewed [10].
III.
METHODOLOGICAL IMPLEMENTATION AND
REALISATION
Implementation and realisation are based on the CKRI
[7]. Components outside the core scope of this geoscientiﬁc,
prehistoric, and archaeological research are employed and can
be extended via the CRI frame [6].
The employed CKRI corresponds with development stage
editions, prehistory-protohistory and archaeology E.0.4.8, nat-
ural sciences E.0.4.0). The CKRI implementations provide the
fundament for the coherent multi-disciplinary knowledge based
integration and the realisations of the methodological compo-
nent integration. Integration components, reﬂecting standards
and sustainable modules are based on the major groups of the
Component Reference Implementations (CRI) frame [6]. The
employed CRI framework corresponds with development stage
edition E.0.3.9.
The conceptual knowledge implementation is the major
practical knowledge-based result, a tool, which can be em-
ployed for enabling multi-disciplinary coherent knowledge-
based contextualisation and solutions. The component frame-
work provides integrated tools for realising solutions based on
such multi-disciplinary coherent knowledge contextualisation.
The results and presentation are designed for multi-
disciplinary audience willing to expand their methodological
and practical facilities towards creating sustainable multi-
disciplinary solutions deploying components, which can en-
able advanced coherent conceptual knowledge integration for
knowledge-based projects. As employed for demonstration,
the examples do not require expertise in volcanology but
understanding and practical deployment may require the will
to learn new methods, even naturally complex contexts, and
advanced components, enabling fundaments and facilities.
The following implementation and realisation start with a
description of a workﬂow procedure for creation of a coher-
ent multi-disciplinary conceptual knowledge-based Holocene-
prehistoric inventory of worldwide volcanological features
groups, followed by the component implementation and re-
alisation based on the general coherent multi-disciplinary con-
ceptual knowledge implementation.
A. Methodological workﬂow procedure
A workﬂow procedure for the creation closely integrates the
component framework and the coherent knowledge implemen-
tation of the Knowledge Resources (KR):
•
(KR/components selection, continuous development.)
•
Component implementation and realisation.
◦
Scientiﬁc parametrisation of components (includ-
ing algorithms, in each discipline).
◦
Workﬂow decision making.
◦
Country identiﬁcation algorithm.
◦
Country representation algorithm.
◦
Area of Interest (AoI) representation algorithm.
◦
Symbolic representation of country
◦
Symbolic representation of AoI.
◦
Knowledge and discipline depending algorithm
creation.
◦
Knowledge Resources processing.
◦
Chorological assignment and processing, e.g., spa-
tial calculations, e.g., countries and areas.
◦
Chronological assignment and processing, e.g.,
time related calculations, e.g., geological and pre-
historic.
•
Coherent conceptual knowledge implementation.
◦
Coherent conceptual knowledge references, main
tables.
◦
Coherent conceptual knowledge references, auxil-
iary tables.
•
Symbolic representation, generation.
◦
Context area views.
◦
Symbolic representation of features groups, inte-
grated visualisation.
◦
(Further symbolic representation of narratives.)
◦
(Multitude of further contextualisation and narra-
tives.)
◦
. . .
After understanding the selected task-related algorithms and
the fundamentals of knowledge complements many different
realisations can be done straightforward, deploying the CKRI
and CRI framework components.
The symbolic representation of features groups and the
integrated visualisation will provide manifold ways of con-
textualisation. We can only demonstrate a single group of
examples here.
Nevertheless, the realisation of the implemented workﬂow
procedure may depend on the capacities the participating
disciplines want to invest in their education, scientiﬁc research
and contextualisation. It should not be uncommon with today’s
scientiﬁc research to invest increasing resources, 25 to over
50 percent of overall project resources, of each participating
discipline into multi-disciplinary knowledge integration and
contextualisation.
The CKRI and CRI framework can create coherent multi-
disciplinary conceptual knowledge references effectively and
efﬁciently and focus on core tasks within available capacities
of time and other resources available for a workﬂow procedure.
B. Component implementation and realisation
The following passages give a compact overview of the
major component framework integrated with this research.
All the components and references are given, which were
employed for the implementation and realisation and which
are in a continuous further development process towards even
closer integration and standards. More detailed, comprehensive
discussion and examples regarding fundaments are available
with the references on knowledge representations, methodol-
ogy, contextualisation, and conceptual knowledge.
a) Conceptual knowledge frameworks: The created and
further developed reference implementations of conceptual
knowledge frameworks (this research major references in Ta-
bles I and II) are used with the implementation and realisation
104
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

KR [11]. CKRI can be created by any disciplines and for multi-
disciplinary scenarios and coherently integrated, e.g., in con-
textualisation for prehistorical and archaeological narratives.
b) Conceptual knowledge base: Conceptual knowledge
base is The Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation (UDC) [12],
a general plan for knowledge classiﬁcation, providing an
analytico-synthetic and faceted classiﬁcation, designed for
subject description and indexing of content of information
resources irrespective of the carrier, form, format, and lan-
guage. UDC-based references for demonstration are taken
from the multi-lingual UDC summary [12] released by the
UDC Consortium, Creative Commons license [13].
c) Integration of scientiﬁc reference frameworks: Rel-
evant scientiﬁc practices, frameworks, and standards from
disciplines and contexts are integrated with the Knowledge
Resources, e.g., here details regarding volcanological features,
chronologies, spatial information, and Volcanic Explosivity
Index (VEI) [14], [15].
d) Formalisation:
All integration components, for all
disciplines, require an explicit and continuous formalisation
[16] process. The formalisation includes computation model
support, e.g., parallelisation standards, OpenMP [17], [18],
Reg Exp patterns, e.g., Perl Compatible Regular Expressions
(PCRE) [19], and common standard methods, algorithms, and
frameworks.
e) Methodologies and workﬂows integration: Methodolo-
gies for creating and utilising methods include model pro-
cessing, remote sensing, spatial mapping, high information
densities, and visualisation. Respective contextualisation of
(prehistoric) scenarios should each be done under speciﬁc
(prehistoric) conditions, especially supported by state-of-the-
art methods, e.g., spatial operations, triangulation, gradient
computation, and projection. The symbolic representation of
the contextualisation can be done with a wide range of meth-
ods, algorithms, and available components, e.g., via LX Profes-
sional Scientiﬁc Content-Context-Suite (LX PSCC Suite) [20]
deploying the Generic Mapping Tools (GMT) and integrated
modules [21] for visualisation.
f) Prehistory Knowledge Resources: Prehistoric objects
and contexts are taken from The Prehistory and Archaeology
Knowledge Archive (PAKA), in continuous development for
more than three decades [22] and is released by DIMF for
the previous working edition [23] and this work [24]. The
KR support seamless coherent multi-disciplinary conceptual
knowledge integration for workﬂow procedures.
g) Natural Sciences Knowledge Resources: Several co-
herent systems of major natural sciences’ context object groups
from KR realisations have been implemented, especially
Knowledge Resources focussing on volcanological features
[14] deployed with in depth contextualisation [15] and with
a wide range of contexts [11], [12], [25]. The KR support
seamless coherent multi-disciplinary conceptual knowledge
integration for workﬂow procedures.
h) Inherent representation groups: The contextualisation
for the inventory can employ state-of-the-art results from many
disciplines, e.g., context from the natural sciences resources,
integrating their inherent representation and common utili-
sation, e.g., points, polygons, lines, Digital Elevation Model
(DEM), Digital Terrain Model (DTM), and Digital Surface
Model (DSM) representations sources, e.g., from satellites,
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV), z-value representations,
distance representations, area representations, raster, vector,
binary, and non-binary data. Employed resources are High
Resolution (HR) (Space) Shuttle Radar Topography Mission
(SRTM) [26], [27], HR Digital Chart of the World (DCW)
[28], and Global Self-consistent Hierarchical High-resolution
Geography (GSHHG) [29]. SRTM was produced under the Na-
tional Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Making
Earth System Data Records for Use in Research Environments
(MEaSUREs) program. The Land Processed Distributed Active
Archive Center (LPDAAC), USA [30], operates as a partner-
ship between the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) and the Na-
tional Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), USA,
and is a component of NASA’s Earth Observing System Data
and Information System (EOSDIS). Resources are released by
NASA and JPL Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), USA, [31],
[32]. SRTM15 Plus [26], [27] is continuously updated and
improved.
i) Scientiﬁc context parametrisation: Scientiﬁc context
parametrisation of prehistoric targets can use the overall
insight from all disciplines, e.g., parametrising algorithms and
creating palaeolandscapes. Parametrisation is supported for all
contexts and can consider views of participated disciplines.
For the new inventory, parametrisation ranges from contexts,
methods, representation of heights, illumination, symbol de-
sign, symbolic consistency to data locality and parallelisation.
j) Structures and symbolic representation: Structure is
an organisation of interrelated entities in a material or non-
material object or system [25]. Structure is essential in logic
as it carries unique information. Structure means features and
facilities. There are merely higher and lower facility levels of
how structures can be addressed, which result from structure
levels. Structure can, for example, be addressed by logic,
names, references, address labels, pointers, fuzzy methods,
phonetic methods. The deployment of long-term universal
structure and data standards is essential. Relevant examples of
sustainable implementations are NetCDF [33] based standards,
including advanced features, hybrid structure integration, and
parallel computing support (PnetCDF) and generic multi-
dimensional table data, standard xyz ﬁles, universal source and
text based structure and code representations.
C. Resulting coherent conceptual knowledge implementation
The CKRI implementations provide the fundament for the
coherent multi-disciplinary knowledge based integration and
the realisations of the methodological component integration.
Universally consistent conceptual knowledge of CKRI ref-
erences, based on UDC code references, for demonstration,
spanning the main tables [34] shown in Table I. Table II shows
an excerpt of universally consistent conceptual knowledge of
CKRI references, based on UDC code references, spanning
auxiliary tables [35].
The tables contain major UDC code references required
for the implementation and realisation of the methodological
workﬂow procedure, especially for place (countries and AoI),
time (Holocene), and disciplines (volcanology and prehistory).
D. Resulting symbolic representation of features groups facets
The procedural component framework implementation and
realisation enable the creation of numerous contextualisa-
tions and symbolic representations for the coherent multi-
disciplinary conceptual knowledge-based Holocene-prehistoric
inventory of volcanological features groups.
105
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE I. CKRI IMPLEMENTATION OF COHERENT CONCEPTUAL
KNOWLEDGE CONTEXTUALISATION; MAIN TABLES (EXCERPT).
Code / Sign Ref. Verbal Description (EN)
UDC:0
Science and Knowledge. Organization. Computer Science.
Information. Documentation. Librarianship. Institutions.
Publications
UDC:1
Philosophy. Psychology
UDC:2
Religion. Theology
UDC:3
Social Sciences
UDC:5
Mathematics. Natural Sciences
UDC:52
Astronomy. Astrophysics. Space research. Geodesy
UDC:53
Physics
UDC:539
Physical nature of matter
UDC:54
Chemistry. Crystallography. Mineralogy
UDC:55
Earth Sciences. Geological sciences
UDC:550.3
Geophysics
UDC:551
General geology. Meteorology. Climatology.
Historical geology. Stratigraphy. Palaeogeography
UDC:551.21
Vulcanicity. Vulcanism. Volcanoes. Eruptive phenomena.
Eruptions
UDC:551.2. . .
Fumaroles. Solfataras. Geysers. Hot springs. Mofettes.
Carbon dioxide vents. Sofﬁoni
UDC:551.44
Speleology. Caves. Fissures. Underground waters
UDC:551.46
Physical oceanography. Submarine topography. Ocean ﬂoor
UDC:551.7
Historical geology. Stratigraphy
UDC:551.8
Palaeogeography
UDC:56
Palaeontology
UDC:6
Applied Sciences. Medicine, Technology
UDC:7
The Arts. Entertainment. Sport
UDC:8
Linguistics. Literature
UDC:9
Geography. Biography. History
UDC:902
Archaeology
UDC:903
Prehistory. Prehistoric remains, artefacts, antiquities
UDC:904
Cultural remains of historical times
TABLE II. CKRI IMPLEMENTATION OF COHERENT CONCEPTUAL
KNOWLEDGE CONTEXTUALISATION; AUXILIARY TABLES (EXCERPT).
Code / Sign Ref. Verbal Description (EN)
UDC (1/9)
Common auxiliaries of place
UDC:(23)
Above sea level. Surface relief. Above ground generally.
Mountains
UDC:(3/9)
Individual places of the ancient and modern world
UDC:(3)
Places of the ancient and mediaeval world
UDC:(32)
Ancient Egypt
UDC:(35)
Medo-Persia
UDC:(36)
Regions of the so-called barbarians
UDC:(37)
Italia. Ancient Rome and Italy
UDC:(38)
Ancient Greece
UDC:(399)
Other regions. Ancient geographical divisions other than
those of classical antiquity
UDC:(4/9)
Countries and places of the modern world
UDC:(4)
Europe
UDC:(5)
Asia
UDC:(6)
Africa
UDC:(7/8)
America, North and South. The Americas
UDC:(7)
North and Central America
UDC:(8)
South America
UDC:(9)
States and regions of the South Paciﬁc and Australia.
Arctic. Antarctic
UDC:“...”
Common auxiliaries of time.
UDC:“6”
Geological, archaeological and cultural time divisions
UDC:“62”
Cenozoic (Cainozoic). Neozoic (70 MYBP - present)
UDC:“63”
Archaeological, prehistoric, protohistoric periods and ages
For this research, we choose the resulting symbolic represen-
tation of a volcanological features group, maars, based on the
coherent conceptual knowledge integration. Symbolic repre-
sentation of contexts includes position based global projection
of bathymetry / topography, automated country identiﬁcation,
multi-disciplinary context selection and reduction, chorological
symbolic representation, geospherical projection considering
national administrative boundaries. The symbolic representa-
tion of the global country identiﬁcation exactly corresponds
chorologically with that of the respective AoI context. There-
fore all central positions of the representation are targeted to
be precisely those of the volcanological object entities here.
The sequence of procedural steps enables contextualisation
for ﬂexible larger and smaller context scales, e.g., generated
symbolic representation (Figure 1) of country identiﬁcation
contexts (Figure 1(a)) and generated symbolic representation
of AoI contexts for respective object entities (Figure 1(b)).
Generated representations include integrated CKRI references,
projection of topographic and bathymetric results, and further
knowledge for respective areas, based on the coherent concep-
tual knowledge.
The requested volcanological features groups facets created
from the result matrix comprise the following objects with
the status of this publication. The names are given along
with the country code. The results of requested volcanological
features groups facets and country identiﬁcation contexts are
given, along with the generated symbolic representation of
AoI contexts for respective object entities. Context example
references target Prehistoric Volcanic Activity (PVA) [3] for
all volcanological features groups here, for the Holocene-
prehistoric inventory. Due to the multi-disciplinary complexity
and amount of contributions, complementary results and details
from the research groups on multi-disciplinary conceptual
knowledge have to be given in a separate publication [3].
•
Maars features: Cerro Tujle (CL), Suoh (ID), Ukinrek
Maars (US), West Eifel Volcanic Field (DE); (Figure 1:
Country identiﬁcation contexts, Figure 1(a); generated
symbolic representation of AoI contexts for respective
object entities, Figure 1(b)).
•
Strato volcano: Agua de Pau (PT), Alngey (RU), Azuma
(JP), Hekla (IS); (Figure 2: Country identiﬁcation con-
texts, Figure 2(a); generated symbolic representation of
AoI contexts for respective object entities, Figure 2(b)).
•
Shield volcano: Volc´an Darwin (EC), Kilauea (US),
Santorini (GR), Waesche (AQ); (Figure 3: Country iden-
tiﬁcation contexts, Figure 3(a); generated symbolic rep-
resentation of AoI contexts for respective object entities,
Figure 3(b)).
•
Explosion crater: Bunyaruguru Field (UG), Dallol (ET),
Koranga (PG), San Luis Gonzaga, Isla (MX); (Figure 4:
Country identiﬁcation contexts, Figure 4(a); generated
symbolic representation of AoI contexts for respective
object entities, Figure 4(b)).
•
Volcanic ﬁeld: Four Craters Lava Field (US), Gallego
(SB), Volc´an de San Antonio (ES), Volc´an de Flo-
res (GT); (Figure 5: Country identiﬁcation contexts,
Figure 5(a); generated symbolic representation of AoI
contexts for respective object entities, Figure 5(b)).
•
Subglacial volcano: Hoodoo Mountain (CA), Katla (IS),
Loki-F¨ogrufj¨oll (IS), Volcan Viedma (AR); (Figure 6:
Country identiﬁcation contexts, Figure 6(a); generated
symbolic representation of AoI contexts for respective
106
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(a) Generated symbolic representation of country identiﬁcation contexts.
(b) Generated symbolic representation of object AoI contexts.
Figure 1. Resulting symbolic representation of a volcanological features group facet (maars) based on coherent conceptual knowledge integration (excerpt).
Sequence of procedural steps for larger scale and smaller scale contextualisation, including country identiﬁcation contexts (a) and AoI contexts (b). Generated
representations include integrated CKRI references, projection of topographic and bathymetric results, and further knowledge for respective areas.
object entities, Figure 6(b)).
•
Submarine volcano: Campi Flegrei Mar Sicilia (IT),
Curacoa (TO), Shin-Iwo-Jima (JP), Vestmannaeyjar (IS);
(Figure 7: Country identiﬁcation contexts, Figure 7(a);
generated symbolic representation of AoI contexts for
respective object entities, Figure 7(b)).
•
Cones: Bus-Obo (MN), Kabargin Oth Group (GE), Tore
(PG), Tutuila (AS); (Figure 8: Country identiﬁcation
contexts, Figure 8(a); generated symbolic representa-
tion of AoI contexts for respective object entities, Fig-
ure 8(b)).
•
Complex volcano: Marapi (ID), Soretimeat (VU), Unzen
(JP), Vesuvius (IT). (Figure 9: Country identiﬁcation
contexts, Figure 9(a); generated symbolic representa-
tion of AoI contexts for respective object entities, Fig-
ure 9(b)).
In addition to these inventory groups facets, the high-
resolution resources from different disciplines like prehistorical
and classical archaeology, natural sciences, and humanities, all
contributing to the component implementations and realisa-
tions enable to create consistent and coherent contextualisation
for large scale scenarios up to site survey scales, e.g., for
detailed object level diagrams and / or for a few kilometres
of spatial extend.
IV.
DISCUSSION OF PROCEDURAL POTENTIAL
Logic is a general limit to many overblown claims, from
universal parallelisation to ‘Artiﬁcial Instruments’.
Therefore, parallelisation can only deliver feasible ap-
proaches for simple, formalised cases of contextualisation and
small parts of much more complex contexts of knowledge. The
goals and complexity of conceptual knowledge-centric tasks
and procedural tasks require the insight of eminently suitable
structures and resources.
The resources, which provide highest potential for the
realisation based on the inventory model are huge, based
on quantity and resulting from quality of the contextualisa-
tion resources. Models are even continuously growing when
considering ongoing state-of-the-art research. In consequence,
these scenarios require a high level of scalability. A realistic
conceptual-procedural environment for the coherent multi-
disciplinary conceptual knowledge-based Holocene-prehistoric
inventory of volcanological features groups includes:
•
Different object groups, objects and views, e.g., for over
500 volcanological object entities and features.
•
Multi-dimensional views, e.g., focus dependent views
per objects, e.g., via OpenMP [17] / speciﬁcations [18].
•
Embarrassingly parallel procedures (e.g., knowledge di-
mensional computation), e.g., via OpenMP [17] and
speciﬁcations [18].
•
Job parallel procedures (e.g., knowledge objects and
resources localities).
Parallelisation does not solve knowledge related challenges
of discipline inherent complexity but it can help to cope with
implementation challenges of procedural and computational
matters.
Table III shows the inherent representation groups used by
the disciplines for the formalised representation of knowledge
integrated for the implementation and realisation (serial, par-
allel, not applicable, n.a.).
The respective locality-license and parallelisation aspects re-
fer to the realisation resources, primarily depending on the re-
spective knowledge and organisation. Therefore, precondition
107
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(a) Generated symbolic representation of country identiﬁcation contexts.
(b) Generated symbolic representation of object AoI contexts.
Figure 2. Resulting symbolic representation of a volcanological features group facet (stratovolcano) based on coherent conceptual knowledge integration
(excerpt). Sequence of procedural steps for larger scale and smaller scale contextualisation, including country identiﬁcation contexts (a) and AoI contexts (b).
Generated representations include integrated CKRI references, projection of topographic and bathymetric results, and further knowledge for respective areas.
(a) Generated symbolic representation of country identiﬁcation contexts.
(b) Generated symbolic representation of object AoI contexts.
Figure 3. Resulting symbolic representation of a volcanological features group facet (shield volcano) based on coherent conceptual knowledge integration
(excerpt). Sequence of procedural steps for larger scale and smaller scale contextualisation, including country identiﬁcation contexts (a) and AoI contexts (b).
Generated representations include integrated CKRI references, projection of topographic and bathymetric results, and further knowledge for respective areas.
for implementation is a deep understanding of the knowledge
complexity within a discipline, which is represented by the task
as well as the required formalisations for all the components.
OpenMP is a mature and portable industry standard, which
can be efﬁciently implemented directly by scientists of any
discipline in their contextualisation, methodological workﬂow
108
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(a) Generated symbolic representation of country identiﬁcation contexts.
(b) Generated symbolic representation of object AoI contexts.
Figure 4. Resulting symbolic representation of a volcanological features group facet (explosion crater) based on coherent conceptual knowledge integration
(excerpt). Sequence of procedural steps for larger scale and smaller scale contextualisation, including country identiﬁcation contexts (a) and AoI contexts (b).
Generated representations include integrated CKRI references, projection of topographic and bathymetric results, and further knowledge for respective areas.
(a) Generated symbolic representation of country identiﬁcation contexts.
(b) Generated symbolic representation of object AoI contexts.
Figure 5. Resulting symbolic representation of a volcanological features group facet (volcanic ﬁeld) based on coherent conceptual knowledge integration
(excerpt). Sequence of procedural steps for larger scale and smaller scale contextualisation, including country identiﬁcation contexts (a) and AoI contexts (b).
Generated representations include integrated CKRI references, projection of topographic and bathymetric results, and further knowledge for respective areas.
logic, and for their workﬂow procedure implementations and
realisations. Organisation of data structure and formalisation
of knowledge are core tasks of a discipline itself and not at all
a technical task. Nevertheless, the organisation of knowledge
also deﬁnes feasible data locality concepts. Parallelisation of
workﬂows with plain-dimension and multi-dimension targets
109
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(a) Generated symbolic representation of country identiﬁcation contexts.
(b) Generated symbolic representation of object AoI contexts.
Figure 6. Resulting symbolic representation of a volcanological features group facet (subglacial volcano) based on coherent conceptual knowledge integration
(excerpt). Sequence of procedural steps for larger scale and smaller scale contextualisation, including country identiﬁcation contexts (a) and AoI contexts (b).
Generated representations include integrated CKRI references, projection of topographic and bathymetric results, and further knowledge for respective areas.
(a) Generated symbolic representation of country identiﬁcation contexts.
(b) Generated symbolic representation of object AoI contexts.
Figure 7. Resulting symbolic representation of a volcanological features group facet (submarine volcano) based on coherent conceptual knowledge integration
(excerpt). Sequence of procedural steps for larger scale and smaller scale contextualisation, including country identiﬁcation contexts (a) and AoI contexts (b).
Generated representations include integrated CKRI references, projection of topographic and bathymetric results, and further knowledge for respective areas.
can differ regarding their contextualisation results. For exam-
ple, a plain-dimension workﬂow can deliver different contex-
tualisation contexts of an AoI. A multi-dimension workﬂow
can deliver a certain contextualisation context of an AoI,
depending on further dimensions, views or chorologies. There-
fore, plain- and multi-dimension workﬂows can complement in
110
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(a) Generated symbolic representation of country identiﬁcation contexts.
(b) Generated symbolic representation of object AoI contexts.
Figure 8. Resulting symbolic representation of a volcanological features group facet (cone volcano) based on coherent conceptual knowledge integration
(excerpt). Sequence of procedural steps for larger scale and smaller scale contextualisation, including country identiﬁcation contexts (a) and AoI contexts (b).
Generated representations include integrated CKRI references, projection of topographic and bathymetric results, and further knowledge for respective areas.
(a) Generated symbolic representation of country identiﬁcation contexts.
(b) Generated symbolic representation of object AoI contexts.
Figure 9. Resulting symbolic representation of a volcanological features group facet (complex volcano) based on coherent conceptual knowledge integration
(excerpt). Sequence of procedural steps for larger scale and smaller scale contextualisation, including country identiﬁcation contexts (a) and AoI contexts (b).
Generated representations include integrated CKRI references, projection of topographic and bathymetric results, and further knowledge for respective areas.
chorological and chronological contextualisation while sharing
resources, structural and procedural fundaments. Most of the
faceting is dealt with in the conceptual processing steps of
the workﬂow. An example for a model reduction in plain-
dimension is, e.g., generation of multiple context views. An
example for a model reduction in multi-dimension is, e.g.,
111
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE III. INHERENT REPRESENTATION GROUPS WITH INTEGRATED
COMPONENTS INVENTORY OBJECT ENTITY EXAMPLE WORKFLOW.
Inherent Representation Group
Locality-License
Parallelisation
Model
Plain
Multi
KR preprocessing, conceptual
On-premise
Ser. / par.
Ser. / par.
Context preprocessing
Restricted
Ser. / par.
Ser. / par.
KR processing, conceptual
On-premise
OpenMP
OpenMP
Conceptual knowledge processing
On-premise
OpenMP
OpenMP
PoI
On-premise
OpenMP
OpenMP
Point spatial operations
Restricted
OpenMP
OpenMP
Line operations
Restricted
OpenMP
OpenMP
Polygon operations
Restricted
OpenMP
OpenMP
DEM
Restricted
OpenMP
OpenMP
PCRE
Restricted
OpenMP
OpenMP
Editing
Restricted
OpenMP
OpenMP
Projecting
Restricted
OpenMP
OpenMP
Cutting
Restricted
OpenMP
OpenMP
Sampling
Restricted
OpenMP
OpenMP
Filtering
Restricted
OpenMP
OpenMP
Illumination
Restricted
OpenMP
OpenMP
Triangulation
Restricted
OpenMP
OpenMP
Projection
Restricted
OpenMP
OpenMP
Filter operations
On-premise
OpenMP
OpenMP
View/frame computation
Restricted
OpenMP
OpenMP
Model reduction (frames)
n.a.
OpenMP
OpenMP
Model reduction (animation)
n.a.
n.a.
Serial
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
generation of a video of geospherical satellite view frames with
moving observer position. It is obvious that the workﬂow logic
of the examples also differ in their ways of parallelisation. The
use of on-premise (e.g., in-house) and restricted (distributed)
resources is attributable to the licenses of the core assets,
the knowledge resources. Inherent representation groups are
major matter of scalable processing and conversion (two-
dimensional/three-dimensional) and higher multi-dimensional
workﬂow procedures.
Table IV shows the scalability of the example workﬂow pro-
cedure for parallelised parts of the coherent multi-disciplinary
conceptual knowledge-based Holocene-prehistoric inventory of
volcanological features groups, based on mean requirements
for an object entity, with numbers of objects entities, no,
numbers of frames, nf, and numbers of views, nv, for nf = 1
and nv = 2 as in the above symbolic representation example
of volcanological features groups.
TABLE IV. PARALLELISED PROCESSING OF INVENTORY WORKFLOW
(PARALLELISED KNOWLEDGE RESOURCES AND CONTEXT RESOURCES).
Number of
Wall Time
Number of Object Entities
CPU Cores
Workﬂow (Plain)
no = 100
no = 500
1
no · (nv · nf · 1, 680/1) s
336,000 s
1,680,000 s
36
no · (nv · nf · 1, 680/36) s
9,333 s
46,667 s
The architecture choosen for this realisation is an efﬁcient
36-core-based Central Processing Unit (CPU) (Intel Xeon),
which is taking into account that we commonly use 36 cores
for many basic global approaches, e.g., considering the 360
degrees of a global model. Results on other architectures with
same numbers of respective cores will be highly comparable.
Precondition for parallelisation is sufﬁcient memory for
parallel use of integrated resources. Considering the employed
resources, e.g., SRTM, 128 GB for 36 parallel processes is
comfortable when data limits are cut to the limits required for
the algorithms with the range of a few hundred kilometres area
per object entity.
Wall and compute times, especially of multi-dimensional
workﬂow results, can greatly be reduced from the integrated
parallelisation, which makes the procedural solution highly
scalable. The wall times for numbers of objects entities, no,
illustrate the high scalability when the same workﬂow is
using higher numbers of CPU cores. Probably, most practical
workﬂows may contain parts which cannot be reasonably
parallelised. This is especially true for scientiﬁc tasks with
a certain complexity. The percentage of non parallelised parts
is very low here. For multi-dimension targets, e.g., animations
with nf = 1000 and nv = 1, it may be considered to employ
hundreds to thousands of CPU cores so parallelised wall times
per object can be reduced from days to hours.
That means, for the scenario and inventory subset displayed
in this publication all the symbolical representation, contextu-
alisation, and visualisation can be continuously assembled and
updated based on highest resolution satellite data and continu-
ously updated Knowledge Resources on one processor in less
than an hour now with the given compute resources. Anyhow,
workﬂow time consumption may be non-linear, depending on
the reﬂected scenario and present status of integrated resources.
Serial and parallel compute times, e.g., for groups of object
entities, are non-linear. For example, mean times for the
same workﬂow realisation may greatly differ for different
object entities. To signiﬁcant extent, this is consequence of
the inherent complexity of the knowledge complements, which
have to be integrated and analysed. In practice, compute times
for object entities may commonly vary to over several hundred
percent. Component and knowledge contributions of different
disciplines may have different weight in their contributions
to the non-linearities. The resulting compute times may even
deliver continuously new and non-linear compute times in a
dynamical workﬂow realisation with knowledge resources and
components, which are in continuous development.
In principle two basic constellation categories exist here with
multi-dimensional results, temporal static and positional static.
Including faceting, both categories can be fully parallelised
regarding view/frame computation, e.g., via OpenMP.
The compute requirements are about the same for both
categories, mostly depending on the parametrisation of used
resources and components, including faceting. Nevertheless,
due to the characteristics and diversity of real scenarios and
environments the compute requirements differ to some extend
with the targeted chorology and chronology. Levels of effec-
tive parallelisation may differ due to amounts of data to be
processed, e.g., satellite and model data. Compute intensities
depend on the target object entity, too, not only on an object
group facet.
In addition, processing, analysis, and conversion require-
ments may also largely depend on the number and complexity
of vector objects in the respective object entity contexts. At
least if preprocessing, e.g., resizing, scaling, and resampling,
is not common to more than one target, e.g., a frame in one
of either categories, that part of the processing should be done
once in a sub-loop only and not in parallelisation.
For organisational reasons with discipline related knowledge
development processes, every loop might require an individual
preprocessing, which might not be possible to be parallelised
or requires a decoupled parallelisation. These aspects, disci-
pline related knowledge development and faceting, are ad-
112
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

dressing methodological principles and should be dealt with by
members of the responsible discipline, e.g., from archaeology.
Anyhow, commonly this preprocessing is a minor compu-
tational effort of less then a few percent overall but essential
for the contextualisation.
V.
CONCLUSION
The new approaches for the creation of a sustainable proce-
dural component framework for implementation and realisation
of a coherent multi-disciplinary conceptual knowledge-based
inventory and faceting proved efﬁcient and sustainable. Based
on the methodology of coherent conceptual knowledge clas-
siﬁcation, the CKRI, and the CRI frameworks, the procedural
and conceptual implementation and realisation of a Holocene-
prehistoric inventory of worldwide volcanological features
groups facets showed very ﬂexible and scalable, supported by
many scenarios over the last years. The developed framework
of components, can be employed for multi-disciplinary integra-
tion of knowledge contexts. Everything has been done to de-
ploy standards and provide maximum ﬂexibility so that context
from prehistory, archaeology, natural sciences, and humanities
can be be coherently integrated. The methodology of coherent
conceptual knowledge contextualisation and its implemented
methods proved to enable coherent context integration in
prehistory and archaeology, sustainable, advanced contextuali-
sation [36] and method integration [37], e.g., for prehistorical
and classical archaeology and their multi-disciplinary contexts.
The component framework showed to enable an effective
and efﬁcient coherent multi-disciplinary conceptual knowledge
contextualisation and georeferenced symbolic representation
and proved most scalable and sustainable during all long-term
development and practical use.
Researchers from all disciplines already practice the proce-
dural component framework development, coherent conceptual
knowledge, and procedure parallelisation in professional long-
term research knowledge and data management.
Together with the corresponding conceptual knowledge ref-
erence implementation, the CRI framework of components
will on long-term be employed in a wide range of disciplines
and different ongoing projects in prehistorical and classical
archaeology and multi-disciplinary contextualisation.
The methodology enables the practical contextualisation and
integration of knowledge, supporting systematical and method-
ological backprojections for disciplines employing their meth-
ods in interaction with future multi-dimensional and multi-
disciplinary knowledge models and symbolic representations.
Future research will address the creation of a component
framework for further developing the Holocene-prehistoric
inventory of worldwide volcanological features, which enables
coherent multi-disciplinary conceptual knowledge facets and
procedural integration and coherent multi-disciplinary con-
ceptual knowledge contextualisation with prehistorical and
archaeological knowledge resources and new advanced multi-
dimensional context integration models.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This ongoing research is supported by scientiﬁc organisa-
tions and individuals. We are grateful to the “Knowledge in
Motion” (KiM) long-term project, Unabh¨angiges Deutsches
Institut f¨ur Multi-disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF), for par-
tially funding this research, implementation, case studies, and
publication under grants D2022F1P05312, D2022F1P05308,
and D2020F1P05228. and to its senior scientiﬁc members
and members of the permanent commission of the sci-
ence council, especially to Dr. Friedrich H¨ulsmann, Got-
tfried Wilhelm Leibniz Bibliothek (GWLB) Hannover, to
Dipl.-Biol. Birgit Gersbeck-Schierholz, Leibniz Universit¨at
Hannover, for fruitful discussion, inspiration, and prac-
tical multi-disciplinary contextualisation and case studies.
We are grateful to Dipl.-Geogr. Burkhard Hentzschel and
Dipl.-Ing. Eckhard Dunkhorst, Minden, Germany, for proliﬁc
discussion and exchange of practical spatial, UAV, and context
scenarios. We are grateful to Dipl.-Ing. Hans-G¨unther M¨uller,
G¨ottingen, Germany, for providing specialised, manufactured
high end computation and storage solutions. We are grateful
to The Science and High Performance Supercomputing Cen-
tre (SHPSC) for long-term support. / DIMF-PIID-DF98 007;
URL: https://scienceparagon.de/cpr .
REFERENCES
[1]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Procedural Component Framework Implementation
and Realisation for Creation of a Multi-disciplinary Coherent Concep-
tual Knowledge-based Holocene-prehistoric Inventory of Volcanolog-
ical Features Groups,” in Proceedings of The Twelfth International
Conference on Advanced Communications and Computation (INFO-
COMP 2022), June 26 – 30, 2022, Porto, Portugal.
XPS Press,
Wilmington, Delaware, USA, 2022, pages 8–14, ISSN: 2308-3484,
ISBN: 978-1-61208-961-4, URL: https://www.thinkmind.org/articles/
infocomp 2022 1 40 60019.pdf [accessed: 2022-12-15].
[2]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Creating a Holocene-prehistoric Inventory of Vol-
canological Features Groups: Towards Sustainable Multi-disciplinary
Context
Integration
in
Prehistory
and
Archaeology
Based
on
the Methodology of Coherent Conceptual Knowledge Contextu-
alisation,” in Proceedings of The Fourteenth International Con-
ference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applica-
tions, and Services (GEOProcessing 2022), June 26 – 30, 2022,
Porto,
Portugal.
XPS
Press,
Wilmington,
Delaware,
USA,
2022, pages 62–67, ISSN: 2308-393X, ISBN-13: 978-1-61208-983-
6, URL: https://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=
geoprocessing 2022 1 150 30091 [accessed: 2022-12-15].
[3]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Faceting the Holocene-prehistoric Inventory of
Volcanological Features Groups Towards Sustainable Multi-disciplinary
Context Integration in Prehistory and Archaeology Based on the
Methodology of Coherent Conceptual Knowledge Contextualisation,”
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol. 15,
no. 3&4, 2022, ISSN: 1942-2679, URL: http://www.iariajournals.org/
intelligent systems [accessed: 2022-12-15], (to appear).
[4]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Keynote Lecture: The Multi-disciplinary Case of
Prehistorical Insight: Information Science at the Edge of Structured Data
Comprehension,” The XI-th International Conference - Mathematics
of Informational Modeling, Institute of Mathematics and Informatics,
Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, July 1–2, 2021, Varna, Bulgaria, URL:
http://math.bas.bg [accessed: 2022-12-15], 2021.
[5]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “The Coherent Multi-disciplinary Knowledge Case
of Prehistorical Insight: Information Science at the Edge of Struc-
tured Data Comprehension,” The International Journal “Information
Theories and Applications” (IJ ITA), vol. 28, no. 1, 2021, pp. 3–30,
Markov, K. (ed.), ISSN: 1310-0513 (print), DOI: 10.54521/ijita28-01-
p01, Submitted accepted article: December 20, 2021, Publication date:
August 22, 2022, URL: http://www.foibg.com/ijita/vol28/ijita28-01-
p01.pdf [accessed: 2022-12-15], DOI: https://doi.org/10.54521/ijita28-
01-p01 [accessed: 2022-12-15].
[6]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Towards a Component Reference Implementa-
tions Frame for Achieving Multi-disciplinary Coherent Conceptual and
Chorological Contextualisation in Prehistory and Prehistoric Archaeol-
ogy,” International Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements,
vol. 14, no. 1&2, 2021, pp. 103–112, ISSN: 1942-261x, LCCN:
2008212470 (Library of Congress), URL: http://www.iariajournals.org/
systems and measurements [accessed: 2022-12-15].
113
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[7]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Towards Conceptual Knowledge Reference Im-
plementations for Context Integration and Contextualisation of Pre-
history’s and Natural Sciences’ Multi-disciplinary Contexts,” Interna-
tional Journal on Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol. 14,
no. 1&2, 2021, pp. 113–124, ISSN: 1942-261x, LCCN: 2008212470
(Library of Congress), URL: http://www.iariajournals.org/systems and
measurements [accessed: 2022-12-15].
[8]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “The Information Science Paragon: Allow Knowl-
edge to Prevail, from Prehistory to Future – Approaches to Universality,
Consistency, and Long-term Sustainability,” The International Journal
“Information Models and Analyses” (IJ IMA), vol. 9, no. 3, 2020,
pp. 203–226, Markov, K. (ed.), ISSN: 1314-6416 (print), Submitted
accepted article: November 18, 2020, Publication date: August 17, 2021,
URL: http://www.foibg.com/ijima/vol09/ijima09-03-p01.pdf [accessed:
2022-12-15].
[9]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “From Knowledge and Meaning Towards Knowl-
edge Pattern Matching: Processing and Developing Knowledge Objects
Targeting Geoscientiﬁc Context and Georeferencing,” in Proc. GEO-
Processing 2020, November 21–25, 2020, Valencia, Spain, 2020, pp.
36–41, ISSN: 2308-393X, ISBN-13: 978-1-61208-762-7.
[10]
R. Gleser, Zu den erkenntnistheoretischen Grundlagen der Pr¨ahis-
torischen Arch¨aologie.
Leiden, 2021, 2021, (title in English: On
the Epistemological Fundaments of Prehistorical Archaeology), in: M.
Renger, S.-M. Rothermund, S. Schreiber, and A. Veling (Eds.), Theorie,
Arch¨aologie, Reﬂexion. Kontroversen und Ans¨atze im deutschsprachi-
gen Diskurs, (in print).
[11]
C.-P.
R¨uckemann,
“Prehistory’s
and
Natural
Sciences’
Multi-
disciplinary Contexts: Contextualisation and Context Integration Based
on Universal Conceptual Knowledge,” in Proc. INFOCOMP 2020, May
30 – June 3, 2021, Valencia, Spain, 2021, pp. 8–14, ISSN: 2308-3484,
ISBN: 978-1-61208-865-5.
[12]
“Multilingual Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation Summary,” 2012, UDC
Consortium, 2012, Web resource, v. 1.1. The Hague: UDC Consortium
(UDCC Publication No. 088), URL: http://www.udcc.org/udcsummary/
php/index.php [accessed: 2022-12-15].
[13]
“Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 3.0 license,” 2012, URL:
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/ [accessed: 2022-12-15],
(ﬁrst release 2009, subsequent update 2012).
[14]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Cognostics and Knowledge Used With Dynamical
Processing,” International Journal on Advances in Software, vol. 8,
no. 3&4, 2015, pp. 361–376, ISSN: 1942-2628, LCCN: 2008212462
(Library of Congress), URL: http://www.iariajournals.org/software/ [ac-
cessed: 2022-12-15].
[15]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Long-term Sustainable Knowledge Classiﬁcation
with Scientiﬁc Computing: The Multi-disciplinary View on Natural Sci-
ences and Humanities,” International Journal on Advances in Software,
vol. 7, no. 1&2, 2014, pp. 302–317, ISSN: 1942-2628.
[16]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, R. Pavani, B. Gersbeck-Schierholz, A. Tsitsipas,
L. Schubert, F. H¨ulsmann, O. Lau, and M. Hofmeister, Best Practice
and Deﬁnitions of Formalisation and Formalism. Post-Summit Results,
Delegates’ Summit: The Ninth Symp. on Adv. Comp. and Inf. in
Natural and Applied Sciences (SACINAS), The 17th Int. Conf. of Num.
Analysis and Appl. Math. (ICNAAM), Sept. 23–28, 2019, Rhodes,
Greece, 2019, pp. 1–16, DOI: 10.15488/5241.
[17]
L. Dagum and R. Menon, “OpenMP: an industry standard API for
shared-memory programming,” Computational Science & Engineering,
(IEEE), vol. 5, no. 1, 1998, pp. 46–55.
[18]
OpenMP Architecture Review Board, “OpenMP API 5.1 Speciﬁca-
tion,” Nov. 2020, URL: https://www.openmp.org/wp-content/uploads/
OpenMP-API-Speciﬁcation-5-1.pdf [accessed: 2022-12-15].
[19]
“Perl Compatible Regular Expressions (PCRE),” 2021, URL: https://
www.pcre.org/ [accessed: 2022-12-15].
[20]
“LX Professional Scientiﬁc Content-Context-Suite (LX PSCC Suite),”
2022, (release 2022), Unabh¨angiges Deutsches Institut f¨ur Multi-
disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF): c⃝ Dr. Claus-Peter R¨uckemann. All
rights reserved.
[21]
P. Wessel, W. H. F. Smith, R. Scharroo, J. Luis, and F. Wobbe,
“The Generic Mapping Tools (GMT),” 2020, URL: http://www.
generic-mapping-tools.org/ [accessed: 2022-12-15], URL: http://gmt.
soest.hawaii.edu/ [accessed: 2022-12-15].
[22]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Information Science and Inter-disciplinary Long-
term Strategies – Key to Insight, Consistency, and Sustainability:
Conceptual Knowledge Reference Methodology Spanning Prehistory,
Archaeology, Natural Sciences, and Humanities,” International Tu-
torial, DataSys Congress 2020, Sept. 27 – Oct. 1, 2020, Lisbon,
Portugal, 2020, pp. 113, URL: http://www.iaria.org/conferences2020/
ProgramINFOCOMP20.html [accessed: 2022-12-15].
[23]
“The Prehistory and Archaeology Knowledge Archive (PAKA) license,”
2021, (release 2021), Unabh¨angiges Deutsches Institut f¨ur Multi-
disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF): All rights reserved. Rights retain to
the contributing creators.
[24]
“The Prehistory and Archaeology Knowledge Archive (PAKA) license,”
2022, (release 2022), Unabh¨angiges Deutsches Institut f¨ur Multi-
disziplin¨are Forschung (DIMF): All rights reserved. Rights retain to
the contributing creators.
[25]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “The Impact of Information Science Accompanied
Structural Information on Computation of Knowledge Pattern Matching
and Processing: A Prehistory, Archaeology, Natural Sciences, and
Humanities Conceptual Integration Perspective,” in Proc. INFOCOMP
2020, Sept. 27 – Oct. 1, 2020, Lisbon, Portugal, 2020, pp. 1–6, ISBN:
978-1-61208-807-5, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=
article&articleid=infocomp 2020 1 10 60015 [accessed: 2022-12-15].
[26]
C. L. Olson, J. J. Becker, and D. T. Sandwell, “SRTM15 PLUS: Data
fusion of Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) land topography
with measured and estimated seaﬂoor topography,” (NCEI Accession
0150537), National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI),
NOAA, 2016.
[27]
B. Tozer, D. T. Sandwell, W. H. F. Smith, C. Olson, J. R. Beale,
and P. Wessel, “Global Bathymetry and Topography at 15 Arc Sec:
SRTM15+,” Earth and Space Science, vol. 6, no. 10, Oct. 2019, pp.
1847–1864, ISSN: 2333-5084, DOI: 10.1029/2019EA000658.
[28]
P. Wessel, “DCW for GMT 6 or later,” 2022, URL: http://www.soest.
hawaii.edu/pwessel/dcw/ [accessed: 2022-12-15].
[29]
P.
Wessel,
“GSHHG,”
2017,
URL:
http://www.soest.hawaii.edu/
pwessel/gshhg/ [accessed: 2022-12-15].
[30]
“Land Processed Distributed Active Archive Center,” 2022, LP DAAC,
URL: https://lpdaac.usgs.gov/ [accessed: 2022-12-15].
[31]
“U.S. Releases Enhanced Shuttle Land Elevation Data,” 2014, JPL,
September 23, 2014, URL: https://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/us-releases-
enhanced-shuttle-land-elevation-data [accessed: 2022-12-15].
[32]
“U.S. Releases Enhanced Shuttle Land Elevation Data, Ofﬁcial NASA
SRTM Site,” 2014, Australia, September 23, 2014, URL: https://www2.
jpl.nasa.gov/srtm/ [accessed: 2022-12-15].
[33]
“Network
Common
Data
Form
(NetCDF),”
2021,
DOI:
10.5065/D6H70CW6,
URL:
http://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/
netcdf/ [accessed: 2022-12-15].
[34]
“UDC Summary Linked Data, Main Tables,” 2022, Universal Decimal
Classiﬁcation (UDC), UDC Consortium, URL: https://udcdata.info/
078887 [accessed: 2022-12-15].
[35]
“UDC Summary Linked Data, Auxiliary Tables,” 2022, Universal Deci-
mal Classiﬁcation (UDC), UDC Consortium, URL: https://udcdata.info/
[accessed: 2022-12-15].
[36]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “Keynote Lecture – Information Science or The
Strenuous Path of Dispensation with Hermetics: All-scientists Sustain-
able Contributions to Contextualisation in Prehistory and Archaeology,”
The Twelfth Symposium on Advanced Computation and Information in
Natural and Applied Sciences (SACINAS), The 20th International Con-
ference of Numerical Analysis and Applied Mathematics (ICNAAM),
September 19–25, 2022, Heraklion, Crete, Greece, September 19, 2022,
URL: http://icnaam.org/ [accessed: 2022-12-15], 2022.
[37]
C.-P. R¨uckemann, “The Abydos Ships Method: New-insight-driven
Numeral Systems Approach for Coherent Multi-disciplinary Analysis
and Contextualisation,” in The Twelfth Symposium on Advanced Com-
putation and Information in Natural and Applied Sciences (SACINAS),
Proceedings of The 20th International Conference of Numerical Anal-
ysis and Applied Mathematics (ICNAAM), September 19–25, 2022,
Heraklion, Crete, Greece.
AIP Press, American Institute of Physics,
Melville, New York, USA, 2023, ISSN: 0094-243X (American Institute
of Physics Conference Proceedings, print), URL: http://icnaam.org/
[accessed: 2022-12-15], (to appear).
114
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 15 no 3 & 4, year 2022, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2022, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

