Digitalization and Evolving IT Sourcing Strategies in the German Automotive 
Industry 
 
Kerstin Felser and Martin Wynn 
School of Computing and Engineering 
University of Gloucestershire 
Cheltenham, UK 
Email: kerstinfelser@connect.glos.ac.uk 
Email: MWynn@glos.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract – Digitalization and major changes in core business 
products and processes are now sweeping through the global 
automotive industry, and many automotive companies are 
confronted with the challenge of formulating and implementing 
a company-wide digital transformation strategy. Digitalization 
is associated with significant and extremely rapid change, and, 
in some cases, even the replacement of established business 
models. This transformation is part of what is often termed 
Industry 4.0 and, in large companies, where the provision of 
information technology (IT) has hitherto been outsourced, the 
introduction of these new technologies may be the catalyst for a 
major re-think of IT sourcing strategy. This may entail bringing 
previously outsourced activities back in-house – a process 
known as backsourcing - to regain ownership and control, in 
order to be more flexible and respond more effectively to rapidly 
changing demands. This study reviews the extant literature on 
the motivation for backsourcing, and then examines the 
potential impact of digitalization on IT sourcing in the German 
automotive industry. A conceptual framework for subsequent 
research is put forward, using a knowledge-based view of the 
firm. In addition, following initial feedback from an online 
survey, an initial model for analyzing change in IT sourcing 
strategy is proposed. The model is being developed through 
more in-depth interviews to provide operational guidance for IT 
management and strategists in the German automotive 
industry. 
Keywords – IT sourcing strategy; backsourcing; digitalization; 
digital transformation; German automotive industry; conceptual 
framework; operational model.   
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The backsourcing process in the German automotive 
industry has been the focus of recent research [1], as 
companies continually assess their IT sourcing strategy in the 
light of the implications of digitalization and other industry 
trends [2]. Over the past two decades, many different forms of 
IT outsourcing have emerged, all associated with expectations 
that the company can better concentrate on its core business, 
focus on innovation, reduce costs and increase the 
effectiveness of IT services [3]. Now, however, this 
assumption is being challenged in the German automotive 
industry, as changes in the external technology environment - 
digitalization and new automation technologies – are 
demanding a reassessment of IT sourcing options. 
When IT outsourcing agreements expire, or the activity is 
reviewed, the decision has to be made as to whether to 
continue the agreement, to switch to another vendor, or to 
bring management and control of the hitherto outsourced 
activity back in-house – thereby backsourcing the IT 
provision [4] [5]. The German automotive industry is the most 
affected of all industries by digitalization in the German 
economy [6], and the aim of this paper is to assess current 
understanding of IT backsourcing and determine what impact 
digitalization may have in the German automotive industry 
regarding current and future IT sourcing strategies.  The study 
explores a relatively unknown field, and will contribute to 
both research and practice, providing new knowledge for 
researchers and operational guidance for practitioners. 
This article has six sections. Following this Introduction, 
Section II looks at the main concepts under study, briefly 
discusses relevant background issues and sets out three main 
research questions. Section III then outlines the research 
methodology, which is based on a systematic literature 
review, but which is now being complemented by an online 
survey and interview analysis with industry experts. Section 
IV analyses the existing literature to address the three research 
questions and makes an initial attempt to establish a 
conceptual framework and provisional operational model. 
Section V then reports on the preliminary findings from the 
online survey. Finally, Section VI provides a summary of the 
ground covered in the paper and makes some concluding 
comments on the significance of evolving IT sourcing 
strategies in an industry sector undergoing unprecedented 
change. 
II. 
BACKGROUND AND RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
The term sourcing is a generic term that combines several 
different sub-concepts, models or strategies besides the two 
fundamental directions of insourcing and outsourcing. 
Theoretical and empirical studies to explain insourcing and 
outsourcing decisions also refer to the terminology of vertical 
integration. Vertical integration is generally defined as the 
degree to which a firm intends to source services externally or 
carry out the activity in-house. This leads to make-or-buy 
decisions which reflect the strategic intent and purposeful 
design of in-house service competencies and depth [7] [8]. A 
large body of research provides an overview of what can be 
212
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the subject of a make-or-buy decision and the criteria that 
should be taken into account (Figure 1). 
 
 
Figure 1. IT sourcing and criteria for make-or-buy 
decisions 
 
Many different forms of IT outsourcing have emerged in 
recent decades, which can be combined in many ways and 
lead to a high degree of complexity, there being many possible 
dimensions to the outsourcing process (Figure 2).  
Whilst backsourcing involves bringing previously 
outsourced activities back in-house, insourcing is sometimes 
used as a general term for performing activities in-house. 
Terms, such as backshoring, reshoring, onshoring or 
relocating, 
are 
sometimes 
used 
synonymously 
with 
backsourcing. However, Nujen et al. [9] underlined that these 
terms imply a change in location, and  backsourcing is the only 
term that indicates a change in ownership. A distinction can 
also be made between total and selective sourcing. Lacity and 
Hirschheim [10] defined total outsourcing as being when 
more than 80% of IT budgets are outsourced to an external 
provider. Similarly, total insourcing occurs when more than 
80% of the IT budget remains within the company. Finally, 
selective sourcing suggests an allocation of between 20% and 
80% of the IT budget to a particular sourcing strategy, and 
selective outsourcing has been the most popular and the most 
successful outsourcing strategy [11]. This study applies the 
same definitions to backsourcing, which may involve just a 
single IT service - such as a datacenter or a bundle of 
applications - or complete backsourcing, where a company 
rebuilds the previously outsourced IT organization. 
There is some overlap in the literature between the terms 
“digitization”, “digitalization” and “digital transformation”.  
Digitization is a more technical interpretation and refers to the 
conversion of information from an analog to a digital storage  
medium [12]. It also equates to the transfer of tasks to the 
computer, which were previously performed by humans. 
Thus, digitization also refers to a special form of automation. 
The focus is on digital technologies, for which the acronym 
“SMACIT” (social, mobile, analytics, cloud, and Internet of 
Things) is sometimes used [13].  This has been widened by 
some authors to encompass Big Data, artificial intelligence, 
digital twin, 3-D-Printing, augmented and virtual reality, and 
 
Figure 2. The potential dimensions of IT sourcing. Based on Krcmar [7] and Von Jouanne-Diedrich, Zarnekow and 
Brenner [8]. 
213
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

robotics. Many of the technologies mentioned are not new or 
revolutionary on their own. Rather, their innovative potential 
stems from their significantly enhanced efficiencies, their 
intensive networking possibilities and their increasingly 
widespread use [14].  
The term digitalization is more broadly defined and is 
intended to express the fact that digitalization now affects all 
economic and social areas [12]. Riedl et al. [15] define 
digitalization as “the process of introducing digital 
technologies, which essentially deal with changes caused by 
information technologies”. Koch, Ahlemann and Urbach [16] 
define four conditions for this. First, the technologies used do 
not have to be new - rather the newness is created in the 
context of business and value creation models. Second, 
digitalization is data-driven, and is based on an increased 
generation, processing and analysis of often new types of data. 
Third, digitalization means that the character of the value 
added or the business model changes significantly as a result. 
Fourth, there needs to be an association with a clear strategic 
dimension, as companies expect competitive advantages from 
it.  
Digital transformation is a result of digitalization and 
refers to how the deployment of digital technologies can lead 
to new, disruptive business and value creation models [17]. 
For Singh and Hess [18], this requires a company-wide digital 
transformation strategy to guide a company through the 
transformation process. However, there is no uniform 
definition of this term to date. Vial [19] reviewed 282 digital 
transformation related academic publications and found 23 
different definitions. Based on the existing definitions, he 
developed a conceptual definition of digital transformation as 
"a process that aims to improve an entity by triggering 
significant changes to its properties through combinations of 
information, computing, communication, and connectivity 
technologies” [19].  
Industry 4.0 can be viewed as part of digitalization, 
encompassing the entry of complex digital technologies and 
architectures into manufacturing processes. A generally 
accepted definition has not yet been established in the 
literature, but the definition of Roth [20] is used in the context 
of this research. “Industry 4.0 comprises the networking of all 
human and machine actors along the entire value chain as well 
as the digitalization and real-time evaluation of all relevant 
information with the aim of making processes and value 
creation more transparent and efficient in order to optimize 
customer benefits with intelligent processes and services.” 
Industry 4.0 is also sometimes called the “fourth industrial 
revolution” or Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), where the 
focus is on the strong integration of Internet-based 
information and communication technology (cyber-physical 
systems) into industrial processes [20].  
      Industry 4.0 has its roots in the concept of the Smart 
Factory and this is viewed as the starting point and main 
purpose of Industry 4.0 [21]. People, machines and products 
to be manufactured are connected in a network. The aim of 
this network is to achieve the overall optimization of quality, 
lead-time and utilization of resources. It is considered a 
decisive innovation that all data are available in real time, 
providing a permanently up-to-date, virtual image of reality, 
which allows complex manufacturing processes to be better 
controlled [21]. The Smart Factory represents an adaptable 
system in which flexible production lines automatically 
adjust their processes to different types of products and 
changing conditions [22].   
In recent years, digitalization has become one of the most 
important topics in social, scientific and economic life [12].  
Digital technologies are regarded as major technical changes 
or breakthroughs and the associated digital transformation is 
seen as a driver for significant and extremely rapid change, in 
some cases even leading to the replacement of established 
business models [23]. The term “transformation” reflects the 
variety and complexity of the measures that may need to be 
taken when companies are confronted with these new and 
disruptive technologies [18]. Some companies may see this as 
requiring a company-wide digital transformation strategy, 
which can encompass all business areas as well as products, 
processes and organizational structures.   
If pre-existing IT strategy is aligned with the business, IT 
can be seen as an enabler for digital transformation [24].  
Companies may review their IT sourcing strategies and 
governance models and consider alternatives for existing 
outsourcing arrangements [25]. This in turn may lead to a 
move towards IT backsourcing. Many companies have 
already established innovation labs, digital factories or 
technology accelerators in recent years, in order to keep up 
with the increased demands of digitalization [26]. 
Volkswagen, for example, strengthened its IT department 
with 1,000 new IT employees from various disciplines [27]. 
At Daimler, too, there are signs of a part move away from the 
IT sourcing strategy that has been pursued for years, aimed at 
increasing its own contribution to IT from 25% to 35% [28].  
The significance of digitalization as a factor in the 
backsourcing of IT provisions has received little attention in 
the scientific literature so far. In contrast to insourcing and 
outsourcing, IT backsourcing generally lacks scientific studies 
[29]. The literature that does exist deals mainly with the 
reasons and decision-making processes for IT backsourcing in 
relation to contract problems that have led to failure [30]. 
Internal or external organizational changes are only explained 
using individual examples of high profile / large-scale events, 
which have received press attention but cannot support 
generalization [31].   
The German automotive industry consists of the Original 
Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) and a three-tier supplier 
network. 
The 
industry 
is 
facing 
serious 
external 
organizational changes, which are leading to four megatrends 
in the automotive industry: Connectivity, Autonomous 
Driving, Shared & Services, Electric [32], for which the 
acronym C.A.S.E. is often used. 
Each of the C.A.S.E. elements has the power to radically 
change the industry and undermine existing business models. 
The challenge is to combine them in a way that delivers a 
comprehensive and seamless package to the customer. 
Digitalization and Industry 4.0, and the associated connection 
of the physical with the digital world, as well as the 
networking of the entire value chain, are the drivers of this 
change [33] (Figure 3). 
214
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Digitalization and digital transformation affect all areas of 
a company. The aim of the study is to analyze to what extent 
digitalization has influenced the German automotive 
industry's move towards IT backsourcing, and provide new 
insights concerning decision-making relating to overall IT 
sourcing strategy.  The current study addresses three Research 
Questions (RQs): 
RQ 1:  
What does the extant literature reveal 
regarding current thinking on the rationale for IT 
backsourcing? 
RQ 2:  
To what extent has digitalization influenced 
the German automotive industry's strategy  regarding 
IT 
backsourcing and what are its potential benefits? 
RQ 3:  
How can an operational model be 
developed to aid practitioners in the German automotive 
industry in the reassessment of their IT sourcing strategy? 
This article presents initial findings from the study that are 
now being pursued through in-depth interviews with industry 
practitioners. 
In 
general, 
current 
evidence 
for 
IT 
backsourcing, as presented in the existing literature, brings 
only partial answers to the research questions of this study.   
III. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
To date, a systematic literature review has been 
undertaken. The search for existing and relevant literature was 
carried out in three stages. As the selection of search terms 
(keywords) has a significant impact on the search results [34],  
 
an initial exploratory search was undertaken in April 2019 in 
order to ascertain key terminologies and concepts used in the 
literature. A combination of keywords was used in the search 
string when identifying relevant literature.  
A second systematic search was carried out in May 2019 
using complex combinations of keywords, and a third search 
was undertaken in July/August 2019, after reformulating the 
research questions. Keyword searches were conducted in the 
Science Direct, IEEExplore, Business Source Complete 
(EBSCO), AIS Electronic Library and Google Scholar 
databases, restricting the publication dates to be within the 
year 2008 and after, because the topic of digitalization was not 
a current issue before 2008. 
A practical screening was performed [35], and after 
deleting duplications and separating all non-relevant ones, 22 
publications were selected. Backward and forward searches 
based on references and authors were performed to uncover 
seminal publications on the subject of IT backsourcing [36].  
The backward search showed no further results. The forward 
search resulted in five more articles from Sage journals, 
SpringerLink, Emerald insight and Researchgate. Of the 27 
articles in total, 13 are peer reviewed. Practice-oriented 
publications such as the frequently published magazines MIT-
Technology report, CIO magazine or reports from the 
Association of German Automobile Manufacturers (VDA) as 
well as from international IT consulting and supplier 
organizations were also reviewed. 
  
Figure 3. External environmental changes in the German automotive industry. Based on Automobil-Produktion [32] and 
Daimler Annual Report [33] 
 
215
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The research project is now being extended to encompass 
an online survey and exploratory interviews with senior 
management in the German automotive industry, and with 
other industry practitioners and consultants as the primary 
source for data collection. This will allow interaction with 
decision-makers in a complex and dynamic situation, taking 
account of many context-relevant factors that support an 
assessment of the “situation as a whole”. Data collection and 
analysis is based on the selection of a single case study, taking 
the German automotive industry as whole as the main unit of 
analysis and the different companies in this industry as 
embedded sub-units of analysis. The case study entails a 
double-phase research design, beginning with an online 
survey to identify important themes, followed by the main 
stage of data collection with in-depth semi-structured 
interviews. The purposive sampling for both the survey and 
the interviews is representative of the German automotive 
industry, including IT executives and practitioners from 6 
German OEM’s and 22 German first-tier suppliers which 
belong to the Top 100 world-wide automotive supplier of the 
year 2019. The first responses from the survey and first 
interviews with industry experts have confirmed the 
practicability of these methods for data generation. The early 
results from the survey are reported in section V below. 
IV.        FINDINGS FROM THE LITERATURE REVIEW 
RQ1: What does the current literature reveal regarding 
current thinking on the rational for IT backsourcing? 
The reasons for individual backsourcing decisions are a 
focus in both the academic and practitioner literature. The 
practitioner literature highlights cost savings, quality 
improvements, and increase in control and flexibility as the 
three most important reasons [37]. The academic literature 
looks at a broader picture and distinguishes between the three 
important 
categories: 
contract 
problems, 
internal 
organizational changes and external environmental changes, 
to which individual reasons are assigned [2]. Contract 
problems emerges as the main reason for backsourcing until 
now (Table I).  
As regards contract problems, one of the main motivators 
for backsourcing is dissatisfaction with the quality of services 
provided by the vendor. Moe et al. [38] state a lack of 
communication between client and vendor, the inability to 
provide the necessary knowledge and skilled resources, a high 
turnover of employees on the vendor side and cultural 
problems such as different understandings of responsiveness 
and punctuality. Gorla and Lau [39] have analyzed how 
negative experiences in outsourcing affect future outsourcing 
decisions. They conclude that competence and coordination 
problems with the vendor have a stronger influence on 
backsourcing and future outsourcing decisions than 
unexpected costs. According to Kotlarsky and Bognar [40] 
low service quality is typically linked to poor responsiveness 
or a lack of professionalism on the vendor's side. The 
relationship between client and vendor, as well as trust, also 
plays a significant role in either changing vendors or taking 
backsourcing into account [41]. The gap between expected 
and actual cost reductions through outsourcing is another 
important driver for backsourcing. As Kotlarsky and Bognar 
[40] point out, cost savings through outsourcing tend to be 
overestimated and hidden costs such as transition costs, rising 
wages in the outsourcing destination country or staff turnover 
are not sufficiently taken into account. Another critical factor 
is losing control over the vendor’s activities or over certain 
functions [8]. This can be risky if security or intellectual 
capital is involved, or if it turns out that outsourced systems 
have a strategic value. 
 Kotlarsky and Bognar [40] stated that a knowledge 
mismatch is one reason for loss of control if the vendor knows 
more about the systems than the client does, or the vendor only 
barely understands the client's business. Another possible 
reason for backsourcing is when the IT outsourcing company 
fails to adopt the latest technologies, thereby not delivering 
best value to the customer [42].  Losing control also leads to 
limited flexibility for the client compared to in-house 
operations [43]. Benaroch et al. [44] contend that in times of 
increased demand uncertainty, there is a tendency among 
clients towards backsourcing or insourcing decisions, as 
opposed to vendors' view that these situations would be 
motivators for outsourcing. They also claim that companies 
would prefer the flexibility of contracts in increased demand 
uncertainty, e.g., the possibility to pay a lump sum as a penalty 
to ease backsourcing. However, without the flexibility built 
into the original outsourcing contract, the probability of 
backsourcing is limited.  
The most recent studies show, however, that contract 
problems and the resulting operational difficulties are no 
longer major drivers of backsourcing. Könning, Westner and 
Strahringer [31] analyzed over 1,000 sourcing deals in 
Austria, Switzerland and Germany between 2006 and 2017 
and show that the companies are able to manage a large 
number of IT vendors. They also mention that companies use 
international sourcing consultancies (e.g., ISG, Accenture, 
BCG, Deloitte, KPMH, PwC) to design tenders and contracts, 
support the transition process, the provision of global delivery 
models and advise on the processes for the constant 
monitoring of the various vendors and services.  A review of 
the German automotive industry shows that, on the one hand, 
the depth of service in the in-house provision of IT services is 
generally between 20% and 30% of the overall IT budget [28], 
while at the same time companies have employed thousands 
of IT employees worldwide [45]. These IT organizations have 
also developed and implemented comprehensive process 
models to minimize contractual and operational risks in 
outsourcing [46]. However, Solli-Saether and Gottschalk [47] 
refer to the Sourcing Circle and the stages-of-growth model to 
determine whether a formerly in-house function has a higher 
degree of maturity when it comes back after years of 
outsourcing. They argue that the outsourcing phase is not a 
waste of time, “it is not a return to the beginning, but 
something that has been altered” [47].  
The literature on internal organizational factors for IT 
backsourcing focuses on the discussion of strategic 
reorientation in the company, the intensive debate about the 
value of IT and internal power-political behaviour, which are 
more subjective and therefore more difficult to assess [48]. In 
this context, the role of IT and the sourcing strategy of IT are 
repeatedly reassessed. According to Butler [48], the proper 
216
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

alignment between business and IT strategies requires the re-
positioning of the IT function from a commodity to a key 
strategic asset, and this may lead to appropriate backsourcing 
decisions. He also points out that not all IT functions are core 
business or non-core business, but the challenge is to 
categorize IT functions as either commodity or strategic in 
order to adjust the IT sourcing strategy. Qu, Oh and 
Pinsonneault [49] also emphasize that companies should make 
more efforts to assess the strategic value of IT, rather than 
considering IT as a non-core activity. Benaroch et al. [50] add 
that strategic considerations play an important role in 
transaction- and information-intensive processes with volatile 
demand and that backsourcing increases the capabilities for 
innovation and competitive advantages. 
Thakur-Wernz [51] combined the two theoretical lenses -
Transaction Cost Economics (TCE) and Resource Based 
View (RBV) - and concluded that companies decide 
backsourcing for two reasons: short-run total costs and 
internal capabilities. She contradicts earlier research, which 
assumes that costs and capabilities play a complementary role 
and are intertwined, especially in the long run. Based on a 
backsourcing topology, however, Thakur Wernz [51] claims 
that costs and capabilities are independent of each other, 
especially in the short-term. The reason for this assumption is 
that companies would not be in a position to change or expand 
their capabilities at short notice. She concludes that companies 
are less likely to undertake backsourcing when the total short-
term costs of backsourcing are higher, and more likely to go 
for backsourcing when internal reintegration capabilities are 
higher. 
Oshri et al. [52] stated that dissatisfaction with an 
outsourcing agreement is an even stronger driver for 
backsourcing decisions than cost considerations. They used 
the behavioral theory as a lens, which is based on realistic 
assumptions about human cognition and relationships. The 
theory suggests that decision making in companies is 
characterized by the limited rationality and organizational 
politics of decision makers. The assumption is that problem-
driven managers tend to make irrational decisions rather than 
based on a systematic assessment of long-term opportunities 
and risks. The transition from outsourcing and especially from 
offshoring to backsourcing means a radical change of strategy 
with significant economic consequences. Those responsible 
would do well to first consider a detailed feasibility study. 
Qu et al. [49] postulate, from the knowledge-based view, 
that IT backsourcing would create value and competitive 
advantage. Best practice processes require the integration of 
IT and business knowledge and this interaction increases the 
alignment between IT and business objectives. Shared 
knowledge and smooth coordination between IT and business 
is not a commodity, which can be bought on the market. This 
in-house knowledge only evolves over many years and is part 
of the corporate culture. 
External environmental changes such as economic cycles 
with volatile demand, financial crises, changes in the structure 
of the industry that redefine the overall business strategy of 
the company are identified by some authors as the catalyst for 
backsourcing [52]-[54]. Regarding mergers and acquisitions, 
several authors cited the example of how JP Morgan Chase 
terminated its large-scale outsourcing contracts after the 
merger with Bank One or Bank of Scotland merged with or 
Halifax Building Society because the mergers gave rise to new 
internal capabilities to provide in-house IT services more 
effectively. In addition, changes on the vendor side are 
triggers for backsourcing, when the vendor redefines its 
business strategies or its organizational structure, which is 
often the result of mergers and acquisitions between vendors.  
German companies have been affected by the wave of 
concentration on the vendor side, which can also be assumed 
as a reason for backsourcing.  
 
 
 
Contract Problems: Outsourcing agreement did not meet 
expectations 
• Higher than expected costs 
• Poor service quality 
• Poor transition planning 
• Loss of control over the core business 
• Loss of flexibility 
• No benefits from outsourcing 
• Disagreement with vendor 
• Loss of know-how 
• Incompetence of the vendor (e.g., missing 
innovations on the vendor side hinders the client’s 
business success)  
Internal Organizational Changes 
 
• New or changed executive management 
• Structural changes in the company (e.g., new 
business line, new corporate entity) 
• New business strategies 
• Recognition of IT as business enabler 
• New/changed importance of outsourced activities 
• Changes in IT strategy due to mergers and 
acquisitions 
• Power and politics 
External Environmental Changes 
 
• Changes in the environment of the company 
• Economic cycles 
• Bandwagon effect 
• Changes in vendor organization 
• Technology changes (“break-through” technologies) 
 
Thakur-Wernz [51] refers to the bandwagon effect 
mentioned by Lacity and Hirschheim [10]. Outsourcing was 
widespread, many companies did it and therefore more 
companies followed suit. There was significant increased risk 
that the outsourcing decision was not adequately researched 
and assessed, and backsourcing is the correction of 
outsourcing failures. Ironically, the bandwagon effect could 
now also happen with backsourcing. Finally, and most 
significantly for this study, Wong [43] and Von Bary [55] 
state that new and disruptive technologies, lead to a 
TABLE I. SUMMARY OF REASONS FOR IT BACKSOURCING BASED ON 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
217
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

repositioning of the value of IT and trigger backsourcing 
decisions. 
RQ2: To what extent has digitalization influenced the 
German automotive industry's strategy regarding IT 
backsourcing and what are its potential benefits?   
 
Germany is the second largest outsourcing market in the 
western world [56] but is under-represented in the academic 
literature, although online sources provide evidence of a 
number of failures in large outsourcing deals in German 
industry. In addition, digital technologies are regarded as 
major technological changes, and the associated digital 
transformation is seen as potentially leading in some cases to 
the replacement of established business models. The German 
automotive industry as a manufacturing industry and the most 
important German industrial sector is particularly affected by 
these changes. New digital business models are becoming the 
starting point for the future competitiveness of the German 
automotive industry on the world market [57]. According to 
Veltri et al. [2] and others, external environmental changes are 
seen as motivators for IT backsourcing because the core 
competencies of a company need to be redefined. These 
dependencies and effects have not yet been specifically 
investigated by researchers using the example of an entire 
industry in Germany. 
Researchers have applied various theories, such as TCE, 
RBV or Knowledge-Based View (KBV), to explain and 
demonstrate the benefits of IT backsourcing. However, there 
is some debate as to whether these theories are useful in 
evaluating IT backsourcing decisions, and in providing 
practical guidance. According to Wernerfelt [58] and Barney 
[59], the RBV considers an organization from the inside and 
the central thesis of the RBV is that companies generate 
sustainable competitive advantage by introducing strategies 
that exploit their internal strengths. However, in the KBV 
concept, it is argued that competitive advantages are achieved 
not only on the basis of physical or financial resources, but 
also through knowledge-based capabilities [60]. Teece, 
Pisano and Shuen [61] published the theory of Dynamic 
Capabilities (DC) in 1997, which extends the internal view to 
the market and defined the DC as "the firm’s ability to 
integrate, build, and reconfigure internal and external 
competences to address rapidly changing environments” (p. 
516). 
According to Teece, Pisano and Shuen [61] markets can 
be divided into moderate and highly dynamic markets. 
Moderate dynamic markets are characterized by continuous 
changes. These are relatively easy to predict. Moderate 
markets are transparent and stable. Resources, organizations 
and processes are generally based on existing skills, 
knowledge and abilities. Highly dynamic markets, on the 
other hand, are characterized by rapid changes, have unstable 
structures and the resources of a company are based less on 
existing skills than on situation-specific knowledge, skills and 
abilities that can be quickly developed and newly created. The 
static approach of the RBV is not suitable for this field of 
operation [62]. The RBV would only apply to firms in 
predictable environments.  
Since the German automotive industry is in a highly 
dynamic market because of the digital transformation, the 
theories applied to answer the question of whether IT 
backsourcing contributes to a sustainable competitive 
advantage or not should be extended to include the DC 
approach. A review of the existing literature shows that there 
is no analysis and evaluation with the DC theory on IT 
backsourcing. 
Previous research on IT backsourcing has concerned IT 
technology and IT systems in general. In the context of the 
strategic alignment between business and IT, there is a need 
to examine which outsourced IT functions, technologies or 
applications are brought back in-house, particularly against 
the background of digital transformation, in order to achieve 
sustainable competitive advantage.  There is clearly a link to 
the core production process as many manufacturing 
companies have outsourced parts of their production, 
especially to offshore locations such as China. It is to be 
expected that digitalization and Industry 4.0 will lead to 
backsourcing of production to some extent [63]. The new 
technologies provide opportunities for production to be more 
flexibly and cost-effectively re-located in the home country 
for two reasons: firstly, because the cost advantages that 
originally resulted in offshoring can be neutralized, and 
secondly, the application of Industry 4.0 technologies can then 
increase flexibility in the production process. This would also 
have 
implications 
on 
outsourced 
IT 
services 
for 
manufacturing processes. Backsourcing does not necessarily 
mean that the affected functions and capacities are locally 
returned to the headquarters of the mother organization. The 
German automotive industry has worldwide access to 
resources and know-how and has the opportunity to network 
resources and knowledge with modern forms of agile 
cooperation [27]. 
RQ3: How can an operational model be developed to aid 
practitioners in the German automotive industry in the 
reassessment of their IT sourcing strategy? 
The existing literature partly shows in individual case 
studies the challenges of knowledge transfer during 
outsourcing, and provides overviews of the requirements for 
knowledge re-integration during backsourcing or switching 
vendors. An overall framework that offers guidance to 
practitioners involved in backsourcing in the German 
automotive industry is missing. 
The proposed conceptual framework (Figure 4) represents 
the theoretical basis for answering the research questions in 
this study. It uses the theory of dynamic capabilities to 
investigate the value of IT backsourcing. The concept of 
dynamic capabilities can be divided into the ability to identify 
and shape opportunities and threats, the ability to seize 
opportunities and the ability to maintain competitiveness by 
improving, combining, protecting and reconfiguring the assets 
of the business [64]. Sensing, seizing, reconfiguring and 
transforming are the main components of dynamic 
capabilities. This theory is combined with the knowledge-
based view of the firm, since it is assumed that digital 
transformation requires significant change in the knowledge-
base of the company to increase its innovative capacity [65]. 
However, in combining these theoretical perspectives, three 
main dimensions of change relating to the new digital 
technologies, the change in processes relating to IT 
218
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

backsourcing, and the necessary enhancement of people skills 
and capabilities, will be used to identify critical success 
factors (CSFs) to achieve competitive advantage from the 
adoption of appropriate IT sourcing strategies. This aligns 
with other studies of change and innovation relating to the 
introduction of new technologies into organizations [66]. IT 
backsourcing may thus be viewed as a strategic decision of a 
company to respond to the rapidly changing external 
environment and provide a source of sustainable competitive 
advantage. This is especially the case when this enables 
important innovation, increases flexibility to respond very 
effectively to new business requirements, introduces 
emerging technologies to achieve new capabilities and 
facilitates the rapid placement of new digital business models, 
products or services in the marketplace. 
The knowledge-based view has received a great deal of 
interest in the literature because it recognizes the fundamental 
economic changes that have resulted from the accumulation 
and availability of knowledge over the last two decades [67]. 
The transition from production to service in most developed 
economies is based on the manipulation of information and 
not on the use of physical products [68]. Knowledge has 
become one of the most important assets for creating a 
sustainable competitive advantage [69], and this trend 
becomes even more pronounced with digitalization.  A central 
element of digitalization and of Industry 4.0 is the generation 
of huge amounts of data with cyber-physical systems and the 
storage and linking with technologies such as Big Data. 
However, data itself are of little value. The data from many 
different sources are only transformed into valuable 
information through comprehensive analysis and correlations. 
What matters is the management and the intelligent 
exploitation of this information to evolve new business 
models and processes.  
The conceptual framework and underlying philosophy of 
the study is therefore based on the authors’ belief that the 
digital transformation of a company is an eminently 
knowledge-based issue. The theory of the knowledge-based 
view of the firm assumes that a company exists because it has 
advantages in the market through the generation of knowledge 
and innovations [70]. In addition to the dynamic capabilities, 
in responding to changes in the external environment, 
knowledge is also a key resource for achieving sustainable 
competitive advantage. 
Based upon the conceptual framework, research findings 
to date indicate that an operational model (Figure 5) may be 
of value in supporting practitioners in German automotive 
companies in adjusting their IT sourcing strategy. Based on 
the preliminary findings from the first expert interviews, this 
model involves a three-way classification of sourcing status: 
insourced, outsourced, or value-added sourced. In this 
context, backsourcing is viewed as a process that changes the 
status of all or part of the IT provision from being outsourced 
to being insourced. Value-added sourcing reflects the fact that  
Figure 4. Theoretical conceptual framework 
 
219
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the classic make-or-buy decision is now becoming a make-or-
buy-or share decision. Joint ventures constitute an alternative 
to external and internal sourcing of the IT provision to provide 
mutual benefit from complementary competencies [71]. 
Significantly, this model encompasses all IT technology 
environments in the automotive industry, including not just 
standard “Corporate IT” (mainstream business systems), but 
also “Car-IT” and digital “Platforms and Ecosystems” [72]. 
These sourcing classifications will be applied and analysed in 
past, present and future scenarios to understand how and why 
IT sourcing strategies are evolving. In addition to developing 
CSFs for the realignment of IT sourcing, the resultant model 
will provide operational guidance for managing this 
transition, and be of value to IT and company strategists in the 
German automotive industry, and in other car manufacturers 
undergoing parallel changes. 
Interview findings will help determine to what extent 
digitization and the C.A.S.E. trends are encouraging 
backsourcing and changes in overall IT sourcing strategy. Any 
such correlations and conclusions will also take account of 
other influencing entrepreneurial factors. In this context, 
“digital entrepreneurship” [73] emerges as a significant new 
competence in making IT sourcing decisions. The impact of 
digitalization and the complexity of the C.A.S.E. change 
agenda will require high investment in new competencies and 
knowledge to develop sustainable competitive advantages in 
the long term. Digitalization leads to extremely rapid change, 
in some cases even the replacement of established business 
models, and the German automotive industry will have to 
demonstrate appropriate capabilities to change and adapt. The 
industry must have the dynamic capabilities to react flexibly 
to the accelerating changes in the external environment the 
internal capabilities, in terms of resources and knowledge, to 
drive and support the necessary innovation. This can provide 
the basis for the development of company-wide digital 
transformation 
strategies, 
encompassing 
possible 
re-
positioning in the marketplace, reworking of sourcing 
agreements, and implementation of necessary change in terms 
of technologies, processes and people competencies. 
V. 
INITIAL REPORT ON SURVEY RESULTS 
Preliminary results come from the online survey, drawing 
on the findings from the extant literature discussed above, 
and incorporating the experience of practitioners from the 
German automotive industry to identify key issues and 
trends. The survey comprises twenty-four statements and a 
five-point Likert scale (ranging from Strongly Agree to 
Strongly Disagree), statements being clustered into three 
main areas of IT sourcing related business activity. The first 
cluster concerns digital transformation strategy, which 
provides the business and management framework for 
decision-making and action in the different technology 
environments. Secondly, there are statements regarding 
digital entrepreneurship, which provide the culture and 
mindset for organizational changes. The third cluster of 
 
 
Figure 5. Provisional operational model 
220
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

statements focuses on the justification of IT backsourcing and 
evolving IT sourcing strategies. The initial report on survey 
results helps develop responses to RQ2 and RQ3. RQ1 is, in 
the main, addressed by the findings from the literature 
review. 
Survey respondents from the German automotive 
industry confirm that the so-called “megatrends” (C.A.S.E.) 
and Industry 4.0 have been triggered by the emergence of 
digital 
technologies. 
These 
technologies 
are 
partly 
considered revolutionary and disruptive and partly only 
evolutionary. The evolutionary perception is more prevalent 
among companies that have had the financial resources to 
constantly invest in state-of-the-art IT technologies. The 
companies 
surveyed 
also 
indicate 
that 
a 
digital 
transformation strategy has been developed, but that its 
execution requires more than the traditionally existing IT 
strengths of the companies. There is a generally agreed view 
that, amongst the digital technologies, artificial intelligence 
combined with self-learning algorithms are gaining industrial 
relevance and constitute an increasingly significant 
competitive factor. The survey also indicates that the shortage 
of skilled experts has been the biggest hurdle for 
digitalization and has led to a “battle for talent”. 
The survey results also emphasize that the deployment of 
digital 
technologies 
must 
be 
supported 
by 
digital 
entrepreneurship. Some companies argue that digitalization 
is not necessarily a new phenomenon, but rather an 
organizational challenge alongside the mainstream economic 
and strategic questions. Digital entrepreneurship requires 
investment in cultural change, enabling the company to be 
more agile, more experimental, risk-taking to an acceptable 
degree, supportive of continuous learning, and adaptive and 
tolerant of new forms of collaboration. This provides a sound 
basis to generate value from technology. Additionally, the 
advent of digital technologies and associated transformation 
strategies is leading to a significant redefinition of core 
competencies in IT that where lost in the past due to the high 
degree of outsourcing. There is consensus that a clear 
strategic goal is to have the key IT capabilities and related 
resources for digital technology deployment in-house in the 
long run. Thus, IT sourcing management must take on new 
roles and competencies as changes in the sourcing strategy 
are driven by the search for highly specialized talent and the 
closing of digital skill gaps. Digital technologies have made 
IT sourcing a much more complex and multi-layered process. 
Significantly, companies claim that IT sourcing strategies are 
a proven source of sustained competitive advantage, but they 
also report a lack of validation to prove success. 
The majority of respondents took the view that the 
introduction of digital technologies leads to a higher degree 
of vertical integration and thus an increased provision of IT 
services in-house. Digitalization encourages bringing IT 
services back in-house in order to strengthen core 
competencies, become more agile and respond more 
effectively to rapidly changing demands. However, these first 
survey results show different perceptions about further 
outsourcing.  There is some agreement that due to the trend 
towards standardization of IT infrastructure components and 
services, an almost complete outsourcing of IT infrastructure 
services is expected in the future. This is in line with the 
agreement that cloud sourcing will become the digital 
backbone for standardized infrastructure.  The responses 
partly underline a trend that further outsourcing of 
commodities (e.g., infrastructure) will create flexibility to 
focus resources on strategically important technology areas, 
such as software engineering. This initial analysis of survey 
responses has highlighted a number of key perspectives, 
which will be developed and tested through the further 
collection and analysis of data within the case study. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK    
Many companies in the automotive sector are currently 
under pressure to review their IT sourcing strategies to reflect 
the anticipated implications of digital transformation, 
industry 4.0 and the megatrends that are sweeping through 
the industry - changes in Connectivity, Autonomous Driving, 
Shared and Electric. This is part cause/part effect of the 
moves towards sustainability in the automotive industry and 
in society in general [74]. In this context, the literature review 
indicated that there are three main motivations for IT 
backsourcing - unsolvable contractual problems, internal 
organizational changes and external environmental changes, 
and digitalization is a significant component of the last-
named category. Digitalization has the potential for new, 
disruptive business and value models, and requires 
companies to shape their digital transformation process, 
within which an evolving IT sourcing strategy will play a 
significant part. 
Future work will use the conceptual framework and 
provisional operational model to identify critical success 
factors and key actions for the successful adoption of new IT 
sourcing strategies. IT backsourcing will undoubtedly play its 
part, arguably creating better conditions for the interaction 
between IT and business, and for sharing and integrating IT 
and business knowledge, which can underpin the adoption of 
best practice [49]. The protection of mission-critical 
knowledge, intellectual property and security issues are 
taking on a new significance in the context of digitalization 
and supplier partnerships involved in value-added sourcing. 
   The contribution of this research to theory has several 
aspects.  First, it will provide an informed view on whether 
digitalization is encouraging IT backsourcing – currently a 
gap in the extant literature. Second, it will explore and 
explain how companies in the German automotive industry 
justify decisions for IT backsourcing within the framework 
of a company-wide digital transformation strategy. This will 
allow key issues regarding IT backsourcing to surface - for 
example, the need to develop dynamic capabilities and 
redefine core competencies in order to achieve sustainable 
competitive advantages in the so-called digital age. Research 
results will also establish the methods used by companies to 
forge a strategic link between digitalization and IT 
backsourcing and to determine the resulting value.  
   In terms of contribution to practice, the project aims to 
provide decision makers in the German automotive industry 
with operational guidance to assess the different options for 
IT sourcing as part of a digital transformation strategy. The 
221
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

study will provide illustrative examples of the practices, 
procedures and organizational change needed for new IT 
sourcing strategies. It will provide an insight into how the 
German 
automotive 
industry 
is 
being 
forced 
to 
fundamentally reinvent itself to survive. The traditional core 
competencies of the industry revolve around car-production, 
and the industry is still heavily invested (including labour) in 
end-of-life business models, technologies and products. 
Value is generated exclusively through physical materiality. 
In the future, software will account for a large share of 
automotive value creation. Car manufacturers will need to 
develop their own operating systems for networking their 
vehicles. Additionally, the world-leading internet platform 
players are currently all pushing into the automotive and 
mobility area for new data-driven business models. As an 
alternative to pure insourcing and outsourcing, the industry 
needs gap-closing sourcing concepts with IT tech players, 
such as alliances, where mission critical resources and 
competencies are shared in a partnership. Thus, especially for 
Car IT and the creation of shared platforms and ecosystems, 
the traditional make-or-buy will become a make-or-buy-or-
share decision for IT sourcing. The operational model 
developed through this research will support automotive 
industry practitioners in developing new strategies to 
navigate this rapidly evolving technology and business 
landscape. 
   
REFERENCES   
 
[1]  
K. Felser and M. Wynn, "Digitalization and IT 
Backsourcing: Towards a Transformational Model for the 
German Automobile Industry," IARIA eKNOW 2020: The 
Twelfth International Conference on Information, Process, 
and Knowledge Management, pp. 53-62, 2020.  
[2]  
N. F. Veltri, C. S. Saunders, and C. B. Kavan, "Information 
systems backsourcing: correcting problems and responding 
to opportunities," California Management Review, vol. 5, 
no. 1, pp. 50-76, 2008, doi: 10.2307/41166468. 
[3]  
J. Barthelemy, “The seven deadly sins of outsourcing,” 
Academy of Management Perspectives, 17(2), vol. 17, no. 
2, pp. 87-98, 2003, doi: 10.5465/ame.2003.10025203. 
[4]  
M. C. Lacity and L. P. Willcocks, Outsourcing: A 
Stakeholder Perspective in Framing the Domains of  IT 
Management Research: Glimpsing the Future through the 
Past, R. Pinnaflex: Cincinnati, OH, 2000.  
[5]  
D. McLaughlin and J. Peppard, “IT backsourcing: from 
make or buy to bringing IT back in-house,” European 
Conference on Information Systems (ECIS 2006), Proc. 
117. 
[6]  
F. Pfeil, "Megatrends und die dritte Revolution der 
Automobilindustrie: Eine Analyse der Transformation der 
automobilen Wertschöpfung auf Basis des Diamantmodells 
[in English: Megatrends and the third revolution in the 
automotive industry: an analysis of the transformation of 
automotive value creation based on the diamond model]", 
2018, ISSN: 978-3-00-059102-0. 
[7]  
H. 
Krcmar, 
"Informationsmanagement 
[in 
English: 
Information Management]", 6th ed., München: Springer 
Verlag, 2015, ISBN: 978-3-662-45862-4. 
[8]  
H. Von Jouanne-Diedrich, R. Zarnekow, and W. Brenner, 
Industrialisierung des IT-Sourcing. HMD-Praxis der 
Wirtschaftsinformatik, 245, 2005, pp.18-27. 
[9]  
B. Nujen, L. Halse, and H. Solli-Saether, "Backsourcing and 
knowledge re-integration: a case study," IFIP International 
Conference on Advances in Production Management 
Systems (APMS), Sep 2015, Tokyo, Japan, pp. 191-198, 
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-22759-7_22  
[10]  M. C. Lacity and R. Hirschheim, "Information Systems 
Outsourcing: Myths, Metaphors and Realities," in 
Chichester: Wiley, 1993, ISBN: 978-0-471-93882-8. 
[11]  D. Whitten, S. Chakrabarty, and R. Wakefield, "The 
strategic choice to continue outsourcing, switch vendors, or 
backsource: Do switching costs matter?," Information & 
Management, vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 167-175, 2010, doi: 
10.1016/j.im.2010.01.006. 
[12]  T. Hess , “Digitalisierung [in English: Digitalization],” 
2016. [Online]. Available: http://www.enzyklopaedie-der-
wirtschaftsinformatik.de/lexikon/technologien-
methoden/Informatik--Grundlagen/digitalisierung. 
[retrieved: January, 2020]. 
[13]  N. Urbach et al., "The Impact of Digitalization on the IT 
Department," 
Business 
& 
Information 
Systems 
Engineering, vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 123-131, 2018, doi: 
10.1007/s12599-018-0570-0. 
[14]  N. Urbach and F. Ahlemann, "Die IT-Organisation im 
Wandel: Implikationen der Digitalisierung für das IT-
Management [in English: The IT Organization in Flux: 
Implications of Digitalization on IT Management]," HMD 
Praxis der Wirtschaftsinformatik, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 300-
312, 2017, doi: 10.1365/s40702-017-0313-6. 
[15]  R. Riedl, A. Benlian, T. Hess, D. Stelzer, and H. Sikora, "On 
the relationship between information management and 
digitalization," 
Business 
& 
Information 
Systems 
Engineering, vol. 59, no. 6, pp. 475-482, 2017, doi: 
10.1007/s12599-017-0498-9. 
[16]  P. Koch, F. Ahlemann, and N. Urbach, “Die innovative IT-
Organisation in der digitalen Transformation [in English: 
The innovative IT organization in digital transformation],” 
in 
Managementorientiertes 
IT-controlling 
und 
IT-
governance, pp. 177-196, Springer Gabler, Wiesbaden, 
2016, doi: 10.1007/978-3-658-07990-1_11.  
[17]  A. Bharadwaj, O. A. El Sawy, P. A. Pavlou, and N. 
Venkatraman, “Digital business strategy: toward a next 
generation of insights,” MIS quarterly, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 
471-482, 2013, ISSN: 0276-7783. 
[18]  A. Singh and T. Hess, “How Chief Digital Officers Promote 
the Digital Transformation of their Companies,” MIS 
Quarterly Executive, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 1-17, 2017, ISSN: 
1540-1960.  
[19]  G. Vial, “Understanding digital transformation: A review 
and a research agenda,” The Journal of Strategic 
Information Systems, vol. 28, pp. 118–144, 2019, doi: 
10.1016/j.jsis.2019.01.003.  
222
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[20]  
 
 
 
 
[21] 
 
 
 
 
 
[22] 
 
  
A. Roth, “Industrie 4.0 - Hype oder Revolution? [in English: 
Industry 4.0 - Hype or Revolution?],” in Einführung und 
Umsetzung von Industrie 4.0, pp. 1-15, Springer Gabler, 
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2016, doi: 10.1007/978-3-662-48505-
7_1. 
H. Kagermann, J. Helbig, A. Hellinger, and W. Wahlster, 
“Recommendations for implementing the strategic initiative 
INDUSTRIE 4.0: Securing the future of German 
manufacturing industry; final report of the Industrie 4.0 
Working Group,” Forschungsunion, 2013. 
 
A. G. Frank, L. S. Dalenogare, and N. F. Ayala, “Industry 
4.0 technologies: Implementation patterns in manufacturing 
companies,” International Journal of Production Economics, 
vol. 210, pp. 15-26, 2019, doi: 10.1016/j.ijpe.2019.01.004. 
[23]  S. Berghaus and A. Back, “Gestaltungsbereiche der 
Digitalen Transformation von Unternehmen: Entwicklung 
eines Reifegradmodells [in English: Design areas of the 
digital transformation of companies: development of a 
maturity model],” Die Unternehmung, vol. 70, no. 2, pp. 98-
123, 2016, doi: 10.5771/0042-059X-2016-2-98. 
[24]  A. Yeow, C. Soh, and R. Hansen, “Aligning with new digital 
strategy: A dynamic capabilities approach,” The Journal of 
Strategic Information Systems, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 43-58, 
2018, doi: 10.1016/j.jsis.2017.09.001. 
[25]  IDG, "Studie Sourcing 2018 [in English: Sourcing Study 
2018]," IDG Business Media GmbH, München, 2018. 
[26]  S. Kahl, N. Urbach, M. Gschwendtner, and A. Zimmer, “IT-
Outsourcing im Zeitalter der Digitalisierung [in English: IT 
outsourcing 
in 
the 
age 
of 
digitalization],” 
Wirtschaftsinformatik & Management, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 48-
55, 2017, doi: 10.1007/s35764-017-0132-0.  
[27]  Automobilwoche, “Digitalisierung: VW stellt 1000 IT-
Experten ein [in English: Digitalization: VW hires 1000 IT 
experts],” 
2016. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.automobilwoche.de 
/article/20161228/ 
Nachrichten/161229894. [retrieved: January, 2020]. 
[28]  J. Hackmann, “Daimler holt ausgelagerte SAP zurück [in 
English: Daimler brings back outsourced SAP],” 2013. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.cio.de/a/daimler-holt-
ausgelagerte-sap-zurueck,2918732. 
[retrieved: 
January, 
2020]. 
[29]  B. Von Bary and M. Westner, “Information systems 
backsourcing: A literature review,” Journal of Information 
Technology Management, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 62-78, 2018, 
ISSN: 1042-1319.  
[30]  A. Nicholas-Donald and K. M. Osei-Bryson, “The 
Economic Value of Back-sourcing: An Event Study," 
International Conference on Information Resources 
Management (CONF-IRM 2017), Proc 31, pp. 1-9, 2017.  
[31]  M. 
Könning, 
M. 
Westner, 
and 
S. 
Strahringer, 
“Multisourcing on the Rise–Results from an Analysis of 
more than 1,000 IT Outsourcing Deals in the ASG Region,” 
Multikonferenz 
Wirtschaftsinformatik, 
March 
2018, 
Lüneburg, Germany, pp. 1813-1824.   
[32]  C. Berlin et al., “Automobil Produktion, IAA Sonderheft [in 
English: Automobil Production, IAA Special Issue],” Media 
Manufactur, Pattensen, 2019. 
[33]  Daimler, “Annual Report 2018,” 2018. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.daimler.com/investors/reports-news/annual-
reports/2018/. [Retrieved: September, 2019]. 
[34]  B. Kitchenham et al., “Systematic literature reviews in 
software engineering–a systematic literature review,” 
Information and Software Technology, vol. 51, no. 1, pp.  7-
15, 2009, doi: 10.1016/j.infsof.2008.09.009. 
[35]  C. Okoli and K. Schabram, "A guide to conducting a 
systematic literature review of information systems 
research," Sprouts: Working Papers on Information 
Systems, vol. 10, no. 26, 2010, ISSN: 1535-6078. 
[36]  Y. Levy and T. J. Ellis, "A systems approach to conduct an 
effective literature review in support of information systems 
research," Informing Science, vol. 9, 2006.  
[37]  B. Von Bary, M. Westner, and S. Strahringer, “Do 
researchers investigate what practitioners deem relevant? 
Gaps between research and practice in the field of 
information systems backsourcing,” IEEE 20th Conference 
on Business Informatics (IEEE 2018), vol. 1, pp.  40-49, doi: 
10.1109/CBI.2018.00014. 
[38]  N. B. Moe, D. Šmite, G. K. Hanssen, and H. Barney, “From 
offshore outsourcing to insourcing and partnerships: four 
failed 
outsourcing 
attempts,” 
Empirical 
Software 
Engineering, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 1225-1258, 2014, doi: 
10.1007/s10664-013-9272-x.  
[39]  N. Gorla and M. B. Lau, “Will negative experiences impact 
future IT outsourcing?,” Journal of Computer Information 
Systems, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 91-101, 2010, ISSN:  0887-4417. 
[40]  J. Kotlarsky and L. Bognar, "Understanding the process of 
backsourcing: 
two 
cases 
of 
process 
and 
product 
backsourcing in Europe," ournal of Information Technology 
Teaching Cases, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 79-86, 2012, doi: 
10.1057/jittc.2012.7. 
[41]  M. Olzmann and M. G. Wynn, “How to switch IT service 
providers: recommendations for a successful transition,” 
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, 
vol. 5, nos. 1&2, pp. 209-219, 2012, ISSN: 1942-2679. 
[42]  B. 
Martens 
and 
F. 
Teuteberg, 
“Bewertung 
von 
Backsourcing-Entscheidungen im Umfeld des Cloud 
Computing [in English: Evaluation of backsourcing 
decisions in the context of Cloud Computing],” MKWI 2010 
– IT Performance Management/ IT-Controlling, pp. 267-
279, 2010.  
[43]  S. F. Wong and P. Jaya, “Drivers of IT backsourcing 
decision,” Communications of the IBIMA, vol. 2, no. 14, pp. 
102-108, 2008.  
[44]  M. Benaroch, Q. Dai, and R. J. Kauffman, “Should we go 
our own way? Backsourcing flexibility in IT services 
contracts,” Journal of Management Information Systems, 
vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 317-35, 2010, doi:  10.2753/MIS0742-
1222260411. 
[45]  IDG "Jahrbuch 2019: Prognosen zur Zukunft der IT [in 
English: Yearbook 2019: Outlook for the future of IT]", 
München: IDG Business Media GmbH, 2018, ISBN: 978-3-
942922-71-5  
[46]  C. Brautsch and M. Wynn, A New Process Model for 
Optimising IT Outsourcing Operations in the German 
Automotive Industry, SERVICE COMPUTATION 2013, 
223
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Service 
Computing, 2013, ISBN: 978-1-61208-270-7. 
[47]  H. Solli-Sæther and P. Gottschalk, “Stages-of-growth in 
outsourcing, offshoring and backsourcing: back to the 
future?,” Journal of Computer Information Systems, vol. 55, 
no. 
2, 
pp. 
88-94, 
2015, 
doi: 
10.1080/08874417.2015.11645760.  
[48]  N. P. Butler, Stay, switch or back: Evaluating the IT 
sourcing cycle, Doctoral dissertation, Sheffield Hallam 
University, UK, 2011.  
[49]  W. G. Qu, W. Oh, and A. Pinsonneault, “The strategic value 
of IT insourcing: an IT-enabled business process 
perspective,” The Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 
vol. 
19, 
no. 
2, 
pp. 
96-108, 
2010, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.jsis.2010.05.002. 
[50]  M. Benaroch, S. Webster, and B. Kazaz, “Impact of 
sourcing flexibility on the outsourcing of services under 
demand uncertainty,” European Journal of Operational 
Research, vol. 219, no. 2, pp. 272-283, 2012, doi: 
10.1016/j.ejor.2011.12.007.   
[51]  P. Thakur-Wernz, “A typology of backsourcing: short-run 
total costs and internal capabilities for re-internalization,” 
Journal of Global Operations and Strategic Sourcing, vol. 
12, no. 1, pp. 42-61, 2019, doi: 10.1108/JGOSS-01-2018-
0004. 
[52]  I. Oshri, J. S. Sidhu, and J. Kotlarsky, “East, west, would 
home really be best? On dissatisfaction with offshore-
outsourcing and firms' inclination to backsource,” Journal of 
Business Research, vol. 103, pp. 644-653, 2019, 
doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2017.11.008. 
[53]  B. Von Bary, "How to bring IT home: Developing a 
common 
terminology 
to 
compare 
cases 
of 
IS 
Backsourcing," in Twenty-fourth Americas Conference on 
Information Systems (AMCIS 2018), New Orleans.  
[54]  C. Leyh, T. Schäffer, and T. D. Nguyen, “Information 
System Backsourcing: A Systematic Literature Analysis,” 
2018 Federated Conference on Computer Science and 
Information Systems (FedCSIS 2018), pp. 779–788, 2018, 
doi:10.15439/2018F333 
[55]  B. Von Bary, What Makes Companies Backsource IT 
Services? Exploring the Influence of Decision Makers’ 
Preferences, Technische Universität Dresden, 2019, ISBN: 
978-0-9966831-8-0. 
[56]  ISG-Index, “Market Trends and Insights 2018 Annual 
Report,” 
2019. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/isg-index-
digital-tailwinds-likely-to-keep-global-sourcing-on-strong-
growth-trajectory-in-2019-300777653.html. 
[retrieved: 
January, 2020]. 
[57]  T. Heeg and J. Jansen, “Wir wollen nicht hirnamputiert 
werden [in English: We don't want to become brain-
damaged],” 
2019. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.faz.net/aktuell/wirtschaft/ diginomics/daimler-
chef-zetsche-wollen-nicht-hirnamputiert-werden-
16066850.html. [retrieved: January, 2020]. 
[58]  B. Wernerfelt, “A resource-based view of the firm,” 
Strategic Management Journal, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 171-180, 
1984, doi:  10.1002/smj.4250050207. 
[59]  J. Barney, "Firm resources and sustained competitive 
advantage," Journal of management, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 99-
120, 1991, doi: 10.1177/014920639101700108. 
[60]  A. Zimmermann, I. Oshri, E. Lioliou, and A. Gerbasi, 
“Sourcing in or out: Implications for social capital and 
knowledge sharing,” The Journal of Strategic Information 
Systems, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 82-100, 2018, doi: 
10.1016/j.jsis.2017.05.001.  
[61]  D. J. Teece, G. Pisano, and A. Shuen, “Dynamic capabilities 
and strategic management,” Strategic Management Journal, 
vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 509-533, 1997, doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-
0266(199708)18:7<509:AID-SMJ882>3.0.CO;2-Z. 
[62]  I. Barreto, “Dynamic capabilities: A review of past research 
and an agenda for the future,” Journal of Management, vol. 
36, 
no. 
1, 
pp. 
256-280, 
2010, 
doi: 
10.1177/0149206309350776. 
[63]  B. Dachs, S. Kinkel, and A. Jäger, “Bringing it all back 
home? Backshoring of manufacturing activities and the 
adoption of Industry 4.0 technologies,” Journal of World 
Business, 
vol. 
54, 
no. 
6, 
2019, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.jwb.2019.101017.  
[64]  M. Augier and D. J. Teece, “Dynamic capabilities and the 
role of managers in business strategy and economic 
performance,” Organization science, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 410-
421, 2009, doi: 10.1287/orsc.1090.0424. 
[65]  R. A. Teubner and D. Ehnes, “The Corporate IT/IS 
Function: Competences and Organization for a (Digital) 
Future,” Multikonferenz Wirtschaftsinformati (MKWI 
2018), Lüneburg, Germany,  pp. 1825-1836. 
[66]  M. Wynn, University-Industry Technology Transfer in the 
UK: Emerging Research and Future Opportunities, 
Advances in Knowledge Acquisition, Transfer, and 
Management (AKATM). IGI-Global, Hershey, USA, 2018; 
ISBN: 9781522574088, ISSN: 2326-7607. 
[67]  C. Curado, “The knowledge based-view of the firm: from 
theoretical origins to future implications,” Department of 
Management Working paper Series, ISEG, Lisboa, 2006, 
ISSN: 0874-8470. 
[68]  J. Fulk and G. DeSanctis, “Electronic communication and 
changing organizational forms,” Organization science, vol. 
6, no. 4, pp. 337-349, 1995, doi: 10.1287/orsc.6.4.337.   
[69]  K. Umemoto, “Managing existing knowledge is not 
enough,” The Strategic Management of Intellectual Capital 
& Organizational Knowledge, Oxford University Press, pp. 
463-476, 2002.  
[70] 
 
 
 
 [71] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[72] 
R. M. Grant, “Toward a knowledge‐based theory of the 
firm,” Strategic management journal, vol. 17, Winter 
Special 
Issue, 
pp. 
109-122, 
1996, 
doi: 
10.1002/smj.4250171110. 
S. Lipsky, "Cloud Computing: Eine Abgrenzung zum 
ITOutsourcing 
und 
Systematisierung 
möglicher 
Sourcingoptionen [in English: A differentiation from IT 
outsourcing and systematization of possible sourcing 
options]," Arbeitspapiere des Instituts für 
Genossenschaftswesen 
der 
Westfälischen 
Wilhelms-
Universität Münster, vol. 119, 2011. 
T. Riasanow,  G. Galic, and M. Böhm, "Digital 
transformation in the automotive industry: Towards a 
224
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
[73] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[74] 
 
generic value network", Proceedings of the 25th European 
Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), Guimarães, 
Portugal, pp. 3191-3201, 2017. 
S. Anim-Yeboah, R. Boateng, E. Kolog, A. Owusu, and I. 
Bedi, "Digital Entrepreneurship in Business Enterprises: A 
Systematic Review". In M. Hattingh, M. Matthee, H. Smuts, 
I. Pappas, Y. K. Dwivedi, & M. Mäntymäki (Eds.), 
Responsible 
Design, 
Implementation 
and 
Use 
of 
Information and Communication Technology, pp. 192-203, 
2020. Cham, Switzerland: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-
030-44999-5. 
M. Wynn, and P. Jones, The Sustainable Development 
Goals: Industry Sector Approaches. Chapter 3 - The 
Automotive Industry. Abingdon: Routledge (Taylor and 
Francis), 2020. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
225
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

