194
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Analysis of Relation between Psychological Stress and Intentional Facial 
Expressions Based on Bayesian Networks 
 
Kazuhito Sato, Hiroaki Otsu, and  Hirokazu Madokoro 
Department of Machine Intelligence and Systems 
Engineering, 
Faculty of Systems Science and Technology, Akita 
Prefectural University 
 Yurihonjo, Japan 
{ksato, m13a006, madokoro}@akita-pu.ac.jp 
Sakura Kadowaki 
 Smart Design Corp. 
 
Akita City, Japan 
sakura@smart-d.jp
 
 
Abstract - This paper presents a gender-specific stress model 
to analyze psychological stress factors affecting intentional 
facial expressions. We extract three facial expressions (i.e., 
happiness, anger, and sadness) from the basic six facial 
expressions. Then we present a graphical model of the relation 
between these three facial expressions and the psychological 
stress factors. From probabilistic reasoning based on the 
observed values of each facial expression, the following trends 
were obtained. The stress models constructed by Bayesian 
networks showed trends of different stress factors between 
men and women in relation to expression levels and 
psychological stress. The stress models appeared on happy 
faces of "lassitude" factor in men. The angry faces of 
"displeasure and anger" were affected by stress factors in 
women. Furthermore, the influence of "displeasure and anger" 
readily appeared in the upper part of the face when expressing 
"anger". In addition, the influence of "lassitude" strongly 
appeared in the lower part of the face with the expression of 
"sadness", in the upper part of the face with the expression of 
"happiness". 
 
Keywords - Bayesian networks; Self-organizing maps; 
Adaptive 
resonance 
theory; 
Expression 
levels; 
SRS-18; 
Intentional facial expressions 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Modern human life has become increasingly convenient 
along with the rapid development of our advanced 
information society. However, we are sometimes confused 
amid the plethora of information spreading around us. 
Products and artificial environments that we do not want to 
use are useless, even if they might be convenient. Using 
unattractive products makes us feel uncomfortable and 
stressed. Anyone might feel stress if forced to use 
unsatisfactory products. 
  Modern society is full of stress. Numerous people live 
their lives with various stressors: factors that cause stress. 
Stress is a biological reaction that develops when one 
confronts a psychological or spiritual stressor. Reactive 
processes of people interacting with the environment signify 
individual cognitive processes that are involved in 
biological reactions and physiological processes [1]. Figure 
1 presents three indices used for human measurements in the 
areas of biology, psychology, and action. All require the 
consideration of individual processes when a person is 
subjected to stress. Moreover, we can posit a psychological 
index that shows stress to be psychological. As Figure 1 
shows, various somatic symptoms appear with gastralgia 
and breathless states when stress accumulates. Stress 
appears from a psychological state when one experiences 
frustration and unease. In addition, stress is manifested in 
actions such as the increased consumption of alcohol and 
cigarettes. Stress affects the brain. Usually, the human brain 
responds effectually to maintain mental and physical 
balance. However, excessive stress can trigger mental 
illness such as depression [2]. Because it can be difficult to 
conceal stress, faces are often described as a window by 
which one can discern information of various types such as 
the state of a person's mind and health condition. Especially, 
facial expressions can reveal aspects of internal psychology, 
reflective emotions such as delight, anger, sorrow, pleasure, 
and the existence of stress. Close friends and family 
members communicate while interpreting stress from 
conditions and changes of facial expressions. 
For this study, we specifically examine intentional facial 
expressions. Moreover, we set the upper part, lower part, 
and whole parts of the face as regions of interest (ROIs) to 
address static and dynamic diversity, as defined by 
Akamatsu [3]. We quantify the relation between facial 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Background. 

195
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
expressions and psychological stress using Bayesian 
networks (BNs), which can describe stochastic relations of 
events as a graphic structure. For our evaluation experiment, 
we create stress models by gender. Then we analyze stress 
factors and stress elements in facial expressions of various 
types: happiness, anger, and sadness.  
This paper is presented as the following. We review 
related work to clarify the position of this study in Section II. 
In Section III, we explain relations of psychological stress 
and facial expressions by FESCs that quantitatively 
represent individual facial expression spaces proposed in a 
previous paper. In Section IV, we explain our originally 
developed facial expression datasets including stress 
measurements and describe the method to capture facial 
expression images, preprocessing, classification of facial 
expression patterns with self-organizing maps, integration of 
facial expression categories with fuzzy adaptive theory. We 
describe how to create a model of stress elements using 
Bayesian Networks in Section V. We show analytical results 
of stress elements models for men and women in Section VI. 
In Section VII, we estimate stress factors using a male and 
female model with emphasis on facial parts effect of facial 
expressions. Finally, we present conclusions and intentions 
for future work in Section VIII. 
II. 
RELATED STUDIES 
Existing methods for measuring stress are divisible into 
two types: contact type and noncontact type. Using  findings 
demonstrating that stress can affect amylase secretion in 
saliva, methods for quantifying stress have been proposed. 
Many products have been marketed based on such findings 
[4] [5]. In association with autonomic nerve activity and 
stress, many analytical studies of heart rate variability have 
been conducted. In fact, many devices have been developed 
and used in research and clinical practice [6] [7]. Numerous 
reports describe the correlation between stress and neural 
activity 
of 
the 
cerebrum. 
Particularly, 
electroencephalography (EEG) is a method that has been 
studied for many years. Studies using EEG have been 
performed in the context of the psychological state, such as 
attention and concentration, stress, and anxiety [8] [9]. As a 
new functional brain analysis method, near-infrared 
spectroscopy (NIRS), used for measuring cerebral blood 
volume changes locally and non-invasively, is also 
attracting attention as a stress measurement method, which 
indicates that the activity of the prefrontal cortex has 
changed significantly [10]. However, the methods for 
objective comparisons that are useful to identify the most 
suitable approach for stress measurements is extremely 
complex 
because 
each 
researcher 
has 
a 
different 
perspective: the type of stressor used in their experiments 
differs for each approach. In addition, methods using 
physical contact generally require a hardware interface. 
Stress measurement checking using a questionnaire form 
is a popular noncontact measurement method. The Profile of 
Mood States (POMS) [11] is an inventory that is recognized 
worldwide, although its results cannot generally be 
compared because the target attributes differ. POMS 
consists of 65 items. The brief version of POMS consists of 
30 items [12]. Actually, POMS becomes extremely 
burdensome if one incorporates images of facial expressions. 
Suzuki et al. developed the Stress Response Scale-18 (SRS-
18) [13], which is useful for widely various subject ages. 
SRS-18 comprises 18 items and measures psychological 
stress encountered over a short time. Moreover, SRS-18 
shows highly discriminative capability in high stress and 
low stress groups. Although most existing stress evaluations 
are aimed at the assessment of clinical conditions, numerous 
questions of the SRS-18 are related to events that normal 
people encounter on a daily basis.  
Facial expressions and their intensities differ according to 
mental state, context, situation, etc. We actively use those 
differences to take facial expression images of each subject 
over a long term. We are aiming at describing and 
quantifying the relations of psychological stress and 
intentional facial expressions from temporal changes of 
long-term facial expression datasets. The degrees of 
expression levels differ among people and their feelings at 
any particular time.  Therefore, the SRS-18 appears to be 
an optimal and helpful inventory for use in assessing facial 
expressions because of the measurement of physical and 
mental reactions and smaller number of question items. 
III. RELATIONS OF PSYCHOLOGICAL STRESS                                
AND FACIAL EXPRESSIONS 
An appropriate amount of stress improves abilities of 
concentration and engenders work efficiency. However, 
excessive stress produces psychosomatic abnormalities 
because of humans' limited adaptive capability. The degree 
to which one feels stress effects reportedly varies subtly in 
similar environments because of individual differences from 
conditions and tolerance of stress [14].  
Therefore, it is necessary to measure the state of stress in 
individuals. Furthermore, it is necessary to take steps to 
improve a bad stress state soon after it occurs [2]. Therefore, 
we must be able to assess a person's emotional state while 
considering the corresponding relations to biology, 
psychology, and actions for stressors of various kinds. The 
relations between the changing expression intensity and 
psychological stress with facial expressions can be verified 
from their psychological and behavioral characteristics. We 
can assess expressions of individual facial expressions using 
Facial Expression Spatial Charts (FESCs) [15], which were 
proposed as a new framework to describe facial expression 
spaces and patterns of expressive intensity constituting each 
facial expression. Facial expression spaces are spatial 
configurations of each facial expression that are used to 
analyze semantic and polar characteristics of various 
emotions portrayed by facial expressions [4]. They represent 
a correspondence relation between the physical parameters 
that present facial changes expressed by facial expressions 
and the psychological parameters that are recognized as 

196
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
emotions. Our experiment results suggest the influence of 
psychological stress on facial expressions. For this study, 
we create a model of stress elements for individuals of both 
genders using BNs. Then, we graphically analyze the 
interdependence between psychological stress and facial 
expressions. For this study, we designate a parameter of 
expression intensity that characterizes facial expressions 
quantitatively. 
IV. 
 DATASETS 
For this study, we constructed a dataset to assess facial 
expression changes. We measured the psychological stress of 
a subject showing facial expression changes using SRS-18. 
Then we compared the results to the facial expressions. 
A. Facial Expression Images 
We set the time period during which we measured facial 
expressions to construct individual models of stress 
elements. We constructed an original and long-term dataset 
for the specific facial expressions of one subject. For the 
experiment, we created original facial expression datasets 
from 10 subjects, with each dataset including images with 
three facial expressions: happiness, anger, and sadness 
obtained at one-week intervals during 7-20 weeks. The 
subjects were five women (Subjects A, B, C, and D were 
19; Subject E was 21) and five men (Subjects F and J were 
19; Subjects G, H, and I were 22), all of whom were 
university students. The order of facial expressions in a 
single measurement is happiness→anger→sadness. When 
taking images of each facial expression, the same expression 
is repeated three times based on neutral facial expressions 
during the image-taking time of 20 s. We previously 
instructed subjects to express an emotion three times during 
the image-taking time. One set of data consisted of 200 
frames with the sampling rate of 10 frames per second. 
We set the region of interest (ROI) to 90 × 80 pixels, 
including the eyebrows, which all contribute to the 
impression of a whole face as facial feature components. 
We set the ROI of the upper part to 40 x 80 pixels including 
the eyebrows, which contribute to the impression of upper 
facial parts as facial feature components. We set the ROI of 
the lower part to 50 × 80 pixels including the mouth, which 
contributes to the impression of lower facial parts as facial 
feature components. 
B. Target Facial Expressions 
We set three facial expressions of object facial 
expressions because the facial expressions are acquired over 
a long term for our study. We strove to reduce the load on 
subjects. We selected happiness, anger, and sadness from 
six basic facial expressions described by Ekman [16]. He 
asserted that Japanese people show disgust by smiling to 
conceal their true emotions. Therefore, we consider that it is 
difficult for subjects participating in this study to express 
disgust. The emotion of fear is a rare feeling in daily life. In 
the opinion of subjects, it was often stated that they are not 
aware of how they appear when feeling fear. Therefore, we 
do not record fear among the facial expressions. Surprise 
can readily occur along with fear, happiness, solace, anger, 
and despair [16]. Therefore, we do not include surprise 
among the recorded facial expressions because it invariably 
translates into complex facial expressions. 
Our target facial expressions are therefore happiness, 
anger, and sadness, which include the geometry of each 
quadrant of Russell's circumplex model [17]. 
C. Stress Measurement 
Psychological stress reactions are anxiety, anger, 
lassitude and difficulty in concentrating, which are 
encountered on a daily basis when one is affected by 
stressors. Our measurements are three robust stress factors: 
"depression and anxiety", "displeasure and anger", and 
"lassitude". Subjects respond on the check sheet using four 
responses for 18 items, answering with responses from 
"Completely different" to "It's correct". Each answer 
receives a score of 0–3. High point totals signify a higher 
degree of stress. Moreover, stress levels are represented by 
consultation value Level 1 (weak), Level 2 (normal), Level 
3 (slightly high), and Level 4 (high). For this paper, we 
define the reported values as stress levels. For this 
experiment, we measured stress values using the SRS-18 
and took facial expressions of 10 subjects. To avoid 
influencing the facial expressions, we did not report any 
score to subjects. Moreover, subjects recorded their 
responses in accordance to the SRS-18 scale before 
recording facial expressions. 
D. Extraction of Facial Expressive Intensity 
Figure 2 portrays a flow chart of our proposed method. 
Features are emphasized using Gabor wavelet filters in the 
preprocessing of input images. For extracting and 
normalizing the topological variation of facial expressions, 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Procedure of the proposed method. 
 

197
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
we reduce noise and constrain the amount of information 
using time-series images decorated with Gabor wavelets and 
processing coarse graining. The period during which images 
were obtained was expanded from several weeks to several 
months. Although we took facial expression images in 
constant conditions, we were unable to constrain external 
factors completely, e.g., through lighting variations. 
Therefore, in the first step, brightness values are 
preprocessed with normalization of the histogram to the 
target images. In the next step, features are extracted using 
Gabor wavelet filtering. The information representation of 
Gabor wavelets that can emphasize an arbitrary feature with 
inner parameters shows the same characteristics of response 
selectivity in a receptive field. Gabor wavelets are functions 
that combine with a plane wave propagating to one direction 
and a Gaussian wave. We used the three directions of 0, 45, 
and 90 deg for selective responses for facial parts. At the 
final step, we applied down-sampling for noise reduction 
and data size compression. For this method, we set the 
initial template position to include facial parts for capturing 
facial images. We use template-matching methods to trace 
the region of interest of a face in real time. However, the 
trace results of the region of interest yield errors caused by 
body motion. These errors can be removed through down-
sampling. The down-sampling window that we set is 10 × 
10 pixels. The target images are compressed from 80 × 90 
pixels to 8 × 9 pixels.  
Facial expression processes differ among individuals. 
Therefore, Akamatsu described the adaptive learning 
mechanisms necessary for modification according to 
individual characteristic features of facial expressions. This 
study targets intentional facial expressions. We use SOMs 
[18] to extract topological changes of facial expressions and 
for normalization with compression in the direction of the 
temporal axis. After classification by SOMs, facial images 
are integrated using Fuzzy ART [19], which is an adaptive 
learning algorithm with stability and plasticity. In fact, 
SOMs perform unsupervised classification input data into a 
mapping space that is defined preliminarily. In contrast, 
Fuzzy ART performs unsupervised classification at a 
constant granularity that is controlled by the vigilance 
parameter. Therefore, using SOMs and Fuzzy ART together, 
time-series datasets showing changes over a long term are 
classified with a certain standard. Here, we used one-
dimensional SOMs with 15 mapping units and set the 
vigilance parameter of Fuzzy ART to 0.90 through a 
preliminary experiment. 
Figure 3 presents details of procedures for acquiring a 
time-series variation of expressive intensity. First, we use 
SOMs to learn the time-series images of facial expressions 
with down-sampling. The face images that show topological 
changes of facial expressions that are similar are classified 
into 15 mapping units of SOMs. Next, similar units among 
15 mapping units of SOMs are integrated into the same 
category by Fuzzy ART. By sorting the facial expression 
categories integrated by Fuzzy ART from neutral facial 
expression to the maximum of facial expression, we obtain 
categories labeled as expressive intensities of facial 
expressions quantitatively. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Expressive intensity.  
 

198
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE I.   INPUT VARIABLES OF BNS 
 
 
 
 
TABLE II.   OUTPUT VARIABLES OF BNS 
 
 
V. 
 MODEL OF STRESS ELEMENTS 
A Bayesian network is a knowledge representation 
scheme dealing with probabilistic knowledge [20]. Its nodes 
and arcs mutually connect, forming a directed acyclic graph. 
Each node can be viewed as a domain variable that can take 
a set of discrete values or continuous value. An arc 
represents a probabilistic dependency between the parent 
node and the child node. We illustrate the graphical 
modeling approach using a real-world case study, such as 
modeling and inferring human psychological stress by 
integrating information from intentional facial expressions 
and four levels of expression intensity, three stress factors, 
and 18 stress attributions of SRS-18. A probabilistic 
psychological stress model based on the BNs is a suitable 
option to address the relation between facial expressions 
and human psychological stress. 
Table 
I 
presents 
parameters 
representing 
the 
psychological state, which is the input of the stress element 
model, i.e., three stress factors and 18 stress elements. Table 
II shows the state values of three facial expressions (i.e., 
"happiness", "sadness", and "anger") and the stress response 
degree as stochastic variables for outputting occurrence 
probabilities. In the BNs, the state value of each variable, 
the conditional probability, and the graph structure are 
constructed by statistical learning using the previously 
obtained dataset. The constructed BNs determined the state 
value of the expression type as an output variable from the 
observed dataset. Then, it performed probabilistic inference 
for the parameters representing the psychological states of 
the 
input 
variables. 
Consequently, 
the 
probability 
distribution of each state value of the input variable is 
obtainable. The BNs might be assessed as stochastic 
parameters representing the mental state at that time from 
the occurrence probability distribution of intentional facial 
expressions. Therefore, using Bayesian networks, we were 
able to estimate the parameters determining the state of 
mind at that time and specific the type of facial expression 
easy to expose at a certain psychological state. 
Using a program package of Bayesian Network 
Construction System (BayoNet) [21], the stress element 
models used for this study were constructed with the 
structure learning employing K2 algorithm [22] as a model 
search algorithm, Akaike Information Criterion (AIC) [23] 
as the model evaluation criterion. The details are explained 
below. 
A. Definition of Variable Nodes 
The stress model used in our experiment comprises 25 
nodes. A stress element model was constructed from 18 
stress elements, three stress factors, three facial expression 
intensities, and one stress response degree. The "depression 
and anxiety", "displeasure and anger", and "lassitude" of 
stress factors accommodate parent nodes for the six stress 
elements. The stress factors are parent nodes to the stress 
response degree node, which are the child nodes. We set 
relations manually between the parent and child of facial 
expression intensities and stress factors. We set stress 
factors and expression intensity respectively as parent and 
child nodes based on preconditions for psychological stress 
influence to facial expressions. Furthermore, we set directed 
links for stress elements as six nodes to each stress factor 
based on a precondition that stress elements trigger stress 
factors. 
The 18 nodes of stress elements are assigned 0–3 points 
with four items: "Strongly no", "Yes a little", "Yes", and 
"Definitely yes". All stress factor nodes have four grades: 
Level 1 (weak), Level 2 (normal), Level 3 (slightly high), 
and Level 4 (high). 

199
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
Figure 4. Stress elements model without constraints.  
 
 
 
Figure 5. Stress elements model with constraints. 
 
VI. 
ANALYSIS OF STRESS ELEMENT MODEL 
For the analysis described in this section, we constructed 
two models given certain constraints on different nodes of 
stress factors to obtain a single simple model for which 
effects of stress are noticeable. Using the selected model, we 
attempt to analyze the types of facial expressions that are 
readily influenced by stress. Subsequently, we shall analyze 

200
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the stress factors and stress elements supporting them. To 
ascertain differences in stress susceptibility by gender, we 
compare the results of analysis of stress elements obtained 
for men with those obtained for women. 
A. Model Construction 
As a preliminary experiment, we constructed models of 
stress elements under two constraints: "with constraints, 
where each factor is independent"; and "without constraints, 
allowing relations among elements". The model of "without 
constraints" in Figure 4 is constructed with an optimal graph 
structure representing the correlation of multiple stages by 
connecting each stress element with an arc. However, the 
model of "with constraints" in Figure 5 shows a simple 
graph structure by which stress elements form directed links 
correspond to stress factors. As might be inferred from the 
contents of the preliminary experiment, no need exists to 
define an exact correlation between stress elements because 
a tendency is apparent by which the probability distributions 
of the stress levels and expressive intensities are similar, 
irrespective of the presence or absence of constraints. 
However, the probability distribution of the model without 
constraints is an important characteristic for the analysis of 
stress elements. In other words, although the stress elements 
that characterize the factor of "depression and anxiety" are 
not found in Figure 6(b), dominant changes appear in the 
probability distribution of "sad mood", "feel like crying" 
and "disheartened" as stress elements characterizing the 
factor of "depression and anxiety" in Figure 6(a). It is 
regarded as more effective when performing probabilistic 
inference. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Stress elements model of male. 
 
 
 
(a) Without constraints  
 
 
 
 
(b) With constraints  
 
Figure 6. Probability distribution of stress elements. 
 

201
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Therefore, for the following experiments, we use the 
stress element model without constraints, allowing their 
relation among elements. 
B. Analytical Procedures 
The stress element models of men and women are 
presented in Figure 7 and Figure 8. Each node in stress 
factors, such as "depression and anxiety", "displeasure and 
anger", and "lassitude", has directed links to six items of 
stress elements as parent nodes. The directed links signify 
that nodes connected with them are optimized for better 
inferential accuracy. Therefore, a strong mutual relation 
exists between nodes that are connected by directed links. 
The analytical procedures of stress factors that affect the 
facial expressions are described in the following based on 
the stress element models. As the flow of the entire analysis, 
by giving evidence to the degree of stress response, and by 
comparing the probability distribution of the expressive 
intensities "happiness", "anger" and "sadness", we strive to 
identify facial expressions that are sensitive to stress. 
Additionally, we verify all stress elements in terms of 
whether they affect the expressive intensities of the facial 
expression. 
First, we calculate the expressive intensities of three 
facial expressions by giving evidence to the stress response 
degree as "weak". Conducting stochastic reasoning based on 
the probability distribution related to each expressive 
intensity, the most sensitive stress that is likely to appear in 
any facial expression was determined. Next, we assessed the 
degree of stress responses of "slightly high" and "normal" 
using the same procedures. We specifically examine the 
probability distribution of expressive intensities in three 
facial expressions. Furthermore, even for stress elements 
corresponding to each stress factor, using the same 
procedures as stochastic reasoning, we identify the stress 
factors and elements that affect expressive intensities in 
facial expressions. 
C. Male Model 
Figure 9 presents a probability distribution of the 
expressive intensities corresponding to each stress response 
degree in the male model. Giving evidence to the stress 
response degree as "weak", the probability value was also 
larger as the expressive intensity increases. For the case in 
which the stress response degree is "normal" compared to 
"weak", the probability value is greater when the expressive 
intensity is small. Moreover, in the case of "slightly high", 
probability values tend to be large in all three facial 
expressions, 
when 
expressive 
intensities 
are 
small. 
Estimating the expressive intensity corresponding to stress 
response 
degree 
is 
particularly 
difficult 
for 
facial 
expressions of "anger" and "sadness" because it is small in 
the state of "normal" stress. 
Therefore, we will strive to conduct analyses particularly 
addressing the "happiness" facial expression, for which the 
probability value of expressive intensity is changing related 
to the stress response degree. To analyze the stress factors 
and stress elements that support them on the "happiness" 
facial expression, by giving evidence sequentially from 
"Level 1" to "Level 4" for total stress levels, we identify the 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Stress elements model of female. 
 

202
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
stress factors affecting facial expressions from their 
probability 
distributions 
of 
expressive 
intensities. 
Furthermore, we examine the link structure of the stress 
elements related to the stress factor that has been identified. 
Figure 10 depicts a probability distribution of the stress 
level in each stress factor. As the stress response degree 
becomes higher, the level of the stress factor "depression 
and anxiety" indicates a higher value. This phenomenon 
appears most significantly on the estimated value of the 
probability distribution. However, for the stress factors of 
"lassitude" and "displeasure and anger", characteristic 
changes are not observed in the estimated value of the 
probability distributions at respective stress levels. 
Therefore, in the male model, we consider that the factor 
of "depression and anxiety" affects the facial expressions of 
"happiness" as a stress factor. Then, targeting the six stress 
elements characterizing the factors of "depression and 
anxiety", we attempt to identify the stress factors for 
supporting the relevant factor. We set evidence for the stress 
response degrees of "normal", "weak", and "slightly high". 
Figure 11 portrays the probability distribution of stress 
elements for each stress level. For "normal" and "weak" as 
stress response degrees, the highest probability value of 
"Strongly no" denying the stress elements was identified. 
Other probability values were less than 0.3. For "slightly 
high" as a stress response degree, stress elements of "sad 
mood", "feel like crying", and "disheartened" showed high 
probability values together for support of the cause of 
"Definitely yes". 
 
 
(a) Stress response degree: weak  
 
 
(b) Stress response degree: normal  
 
 
(c) Stress response degree: slightly high  
 
Figure 9.  Probability distribution of the expressive intensities 
corresponding to each stress response degree in male model. 
 
 
 
(a) Stress response degree: weak  
 
 
(b) Stress response degree: normal  
 
 
(c) Stress response degree: slightly high 
 
Figure 10. Probability distribution of the stress levels with emphasis on 
the facial expression of "happiness". 
 

203
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
D. Female Model 
Using the same procedure as that used for men, we 
analyzed the relations among stress factors, stress elements, 
and expressive intensities of three facial expressions for 
women. In the female model, a marked change was 
recognized in the probability distribution of expressive 
intensity of "sadness", as presented in Figure 12. 
Figure 13 presents a probability distribution of stress 
levels with emphasis on the facial expression of "sadness" in 
each stress factor. As might be understood from the contents 
of Figure 13, particularly addressing the probability 
distribution of the factors of "lassitude" and "depression and 
anxiety", a considerable change is apparent with the 
difference of stress response degree, i.e., "weak", "normal", 
and "slightly high". The probability distributions of the 
stress elements characterizing the factor of "depression and 
anxiety" are presented in Figure 14. As a stress element 
giving influence to the factor of "depression and anxiety", 
the influence of "disheartened" exists to a slight degree. 
However, no distinctive element to support the factor of 
"lassitude" is found anywhere because the probability 
distribution shows a similar tendency to that of the change 
of the degree of stress response. 
Based on the experimentally obtained results presented 
above, we conduct an examination from the perspective of 
stress factors and stress elements giving influence to them, 
specifically examining the relation between psychological 
stress and three facial expressions for men and women. 
Some facial expressions appear easily, but others are 
difficult to assess in terms of psychological stress. In the 
male model, facial expressions of "happiness" show marked 
changes attributable to differences in the stress response 
degree, but characteristics of the probability distribution of 
expressive intensities are similar in facial expressions of 
"sadness" and "anger". Expressive intensities become slight 
with the increase of stress response degree as an overall 
trend. In the female model, a change was observed in the 
 
 
(a) Stress response degree : weak  
 
 
(b) Stress response degree : normal  
 
 
(c) Stress response degree : slightly high  
 
Figure 12. Probability distribution of expressive intensities 
corresponding to each stress response degree in female model. 
 
 
 
(a) Stress response degree]e : weak 
 
 
(b) Stress response degree : normal 
 
 
(c) Stress response degree : slightly high 
 
Figure 11. Probability distributions of the stress elements characterizing 
the factors of "depression and anxiety" in male model. 

204
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
characteristics of the probability distribution of expressive 
intensities, only the facial expression of "sadness", by 
setting evidence to the stress response degree as "slightly 
high". 
Therefore, we inferred that the influence of psychological 
stress appears easily in the expression of "happiness" for 
men and in the expression of "sadness" for women. In 
addition, the factor of "depression and anxiety" as a stress 
factor influences the facial expressions of "happiness". Then, 
as stress elements which support it, three items exist for 
men: "sad mood", "feel like crying", and "disheartened". 
Although significant changes were observed in the 
probability distribution of the factors of "lassitude" and 
"depression and anxiety", the female model did not 
engender specific stress elements to support those stress 
factors. 
VII. STRESS FACTORS AND EFFECT OF FACE REGION 
In this section, we first classify the state (slightly high) of 
levels 3–4 and the state (weak) of level 1 for which each 
stress factor holds the state of "Level 4" from "Level 1". 
Next, by probabilistic reasoning of giving evidence in these 
two states, we strive to identify the face region (upper part 
of the face, lower part of the face) in which psychological 
stress effects readily appear. For this experiment, we use the 
model of stress elements for all subjects: the 10 university 
student subjects comprise 5 men and 5 women. The stress 
element model of all subjects is presented in Figure 15. This 
model is a graph structure consisting of 28 nodes: 18 nodes 
corresponding to the stress elements, 3 nodes corresponding 
to the stress factors, one node corresponding to the stress 
response degree, and 6 nodes corresponding to the 
expressive intensities appearing in the lower part and upper 
part of the face on three facial expressions. 
A. Factor of ‘Depression and Anxiety’ 
Figure 16 presents expressive intensities of parts of the 
face, where we set evidence to the state (slightly high) of 
levels 3–4 and the state (weak) of level 1, assessing the 
factor of "depression and anxiety". Estimation results of 
stress levels and expressive intensities are presented in 
Figure 16(a). The relation between types of facial 
expression and the differences of expressive intensity are 
presented in Figure 16(b). These two figures are summaries 
 
 
(a) Stress response degree : weak  
 
 
(b) Stress response degree : normal  
 
 
(c) Stress response degree : slightly high  
 
Figure 13. Probability distribution of stress levels with emphasis on the 
facial expression of "sadness". 
 
 
(a) Stress response degree : weak  
 
 
 
(b) Stress response degree : normal  
 
 
 
(c) Stress response degree : slightly high  
 
Figure 14. Probability distributions of the stress elements characterizing 
the factors of "depression and anxiety" in female model. 
 

205
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
(a) Estimation of stress levels  
 
 
(b) Difference of expressive intensity each face part 
 
Figure 16.  Expressive intensities of parts of the face. 
for the respective face regions. The vertical axes in the 
figures respectively show the expressive intensity and the 
difference of expressive intensity. It is noteworthy that the 
difference of expressive intensity shows the absolute value 
of the difference between the expressive intensity levels "3-
4" and "level 1" in respective states. 
Specifically, assessing the differences of expressive 
intensity in "happiness", "anger", and "sadness", the 
respective values of the upper part of the face are 0, 3, and 2. 
In contrast, the respective values of the lower part of the 
face are 1, 3, and 0. In the case in which the stress factor of 
"depression and anxiety" acts significantly, large values 
have been identified for the upper and the lower part of the 
face at expressing "anger". Therefore, the influence of 
"depression and anxiety" readily appears at expressing 
‘anger’. Additionally, we infer that the influence affects the 
entire face region. These analytical results are consistent 
with the contents of the previous study described in [18], i.e., 
the emotional states of mind stimulating "anger" and 
"depression" are similar. 
B. Factor of ‘Displeasure and Anger’ 
Figure 17 presents the expressive intensities of each face 
region based on the stress factors of "displeasure and anger", 
as presented in the preceding section. Specifically 
examining the differences in expressive intensity in 
"happiness", "anger", and "sadness", the respective values of 
the upper part of the face were 2, 1, and 4. In contrast, the 
 
 
 
Figure 15. Stress elements model of all subjects. 
 

206
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
respective values of the lower part of the face are 0, 1, and 2. 
Accordingly, we consider that the following analysis is 
reasonable, i.e., the influence of "displeasure and anger" 
readily appears at the upper part of the face of expressing 
"anger". 
In addition, because we are conducting the operation of 
"glaring" to intimidate an opponent expressing "anger", this 
analytical result matches a case study showing changes that 
occur during that process, such as "eyebrows down" or 
"upper eyelid is raised". Consequently, the effect readily 
appears strongly in the upper part of the face of the facial 
expression "anger", for the case in which the stress factor of 
"displeasure and anger" is readily apparent. 
C. Factor of ‘Lassitude’ 
Figure 18 exhibits expressive intensities of respective 
face regions based on the stress factor of "lassitude". 
Specifically examining the differences of expressive 
intensity in "happiness", "anger", and "sadness", the 
respective values of the upper part of the face are 5, 3, and 2. 
In contrast, the respective values of the lower part of the 
face are 1, 3, and 4. Accordingly, we regard the following 
analysis as reasonable: the influence of "lassitude" readily 
appears at the upper part of the face expressing "happiness", 
and the lower part of the face expressing "sadness". 
In general, changes in facial expressions are poor during 
the state of "lassitude". Therefore, a tendency to fall 
"expressionless" appears to be confirmed. However, results 
indicate that the influence appears strongly in the lower part 
of the face for the expression of "sadness" and in the upper 
part of the face of the expression ‘happiness’ in this analysis. 
For this study, we adopted an experimental protocol in which 
all subjects intentionally express three facial expressions of 
"happiness", "sadness", and "anger", even when they are in 
the state of "lassitude". Therefore, these reasoning results 
reflect the characteristics of datasets based on the 
experimental protocol. Although the factor of "lassitude" 
contributes significantly, results show that the effect readily 
appears in the lower part of the face of the expression 
"sadness" and in the upper part of the face of the expression 
"happiness" for intentional facial expressions. 
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This study, which analyzed stress factors and elements of 
psychological stress on intentional facial expressions using 
BNs, was conducted to identify the types of facial 
expressions and facial parts which readily manifest the 
influence of psychological stress. Our evaluation experiment 
used stochastic reasoning to build stress element models for 
male and female subjects, providing evidence for the stress 
response degree and stress factors. 
Results revealed the following points. 
1) 
When building a stress element model, a model of 
"without constraints" that allows relations among 
stress elements is more beneficial for analysis of 
probabilistic reasoning results than a model of "with 
constraints". 
 
 
(a) Estimation of stress levels  
 
 
(b) Difference of expressive intensity each face part  
 
Figure 17. Expressive intensities of each face region based on the stress 
factors of "displeasure and anger". 
 
 
 
(a) Estimation of stress levels  
 
 
(b) Difference of expressive intensity each face part  
 
Figure 18. Expressive intensities of respective face regions based on the 
stress factor of "lassitude". 
 

207
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
2) 
The "depression and anxiety" factor affects the facial 
expression of "happiness" in men. 
3) 
The "depression and anxiety" and "lassitude" factors 
affect the facial expressions of "sadness" in women. 
4) 
The influences of "depression and anxiety" readily 
appear when expressing "anger". They affect the entire 
face. 
5) 
The influence of "displeasure and anger" readily 
appears in the upper part of the face when expressing 
"anger". 
6) 
The influence of "lassitude" strongly appears in the 
lower part of the face of the expression of "sadness", in 
the upper part of the face of the expression of 
"happiness". 
We will estimate models of stress elements by increasing 
the number of subjects and the image capture duration. 
Furthermore, we will improve our method to address both 
intentional facial expressions and natural expressions that 
are exposed unconsciously. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by Japan Society for the 
Promotion of Science (JSPS) KAKENHI Grant Number 
25330325. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Sato, H. Otsu, H. Madokoro, and S. Kadowaki, “Analysis 
of psychological stress factors and facial parts effect on 
intentional facial expressions,” Proceedings of The Third 
International 
Conference 
on 
Ambient 
Computing, 
Applications, Services and Technologies (AMBIENT2013), 
pp. 7-16, Oct. 2013. 
[2] T. Yata, H. Sannohe, M. Nakasako, and M. Tao, “How to 
cope with stress,” Yuhikaku, 1993. 
[3] S. Akamatsu, “Recognition of facial expressions by human 
and computer [I]: facial expressions in communications and 
their automatic analysis by computer,” The Journal of the 
Institute of Electronics, Information, and Communication 
Engineers, vol. 85, no. 9, pp. 680-685, Sep. 2002. 
[4] H. Shimomura, K. Kanamori, J. Nishimaki, and K. Shiba, 
“Usefulness of salivary amylase and cortisol measurement as 
stress markers at educational sites,” ISSN, vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 
247-254, 2010. 
[5]  N. Takai, M. Yamaguchi, T. Aragaki, K. Eto, K. Uchihashi, 
and Y. Nishikawa, “Effect of psychological stress on the 
salivary cortisol and amylase levels in healthy young adults,” 
Arch Oral Biol., vol. 49, no. 12, pp. 963-968, 2004. 
[6] Medicore Co. Ltd., Body Checker (Cardio Monitor), 
http://www.medi-core.com/ [retrieved: June, 2014] 
[7] M. Malik, “Heart rate variability: standards of measurement, 
physiological interpretation, and clinical use,” European Heart 
Journal, vol. 17, pp. 354-381, 1996. 
[8] Brain Function Research Center, Alphatec-IV, http : 
//www.alphacom.co.jp/  [retrieved: June, 2014] 
[9] R. S. Lewis, N. Y. Weekes, and T. H. Wang, “The effect of a 
naturalistic stressor on frontal EEG asymmetry,” Biological 
Psychology, vol. 78, pp. 239-247, 2007. 
[10] I. Akirav and M. Maroun, “The role of the medial prefrontal 
cortex–amygdala circuit in stress effects on the extinction of 
fear,” Neural Plast. 2007; 2007: 30873. Published online 2007 
Jan. doi: 10.1155/2007/30837. 
[11] D.M. McNair, J.W.P. Heuchert, and E. Shillony, Research 
with the Profile of Mood States (POMS), Toronto, Canada: 
Multi-Health Systems, 1964-2001. 
[12] Comprehensive Support Project, ISTRESS Scale Guidebook, 
Jitsumu Kyouiku, 2004. 
[13] S. Suzuki, “Stress Response Scale-18,” Kokoronet, Jul. 2007. 
[14] Mechanical Social Systems Foundation, “Surveillance Study 
to Security Precaution of Stress Instrumentation Technology 
on Possible Application,” 2004. 
[15] H. Madokoro, K. Sato, and S. Kadowaki “Facial expression 
spatial charts for representing time-series changes of facial 
expressions,” Japan Society for Fuzzy Theory, vol. 23, no. 2, 
pp. 157-169, 2011. 
[16] P. Ekman, “Emotions Revealed: Understanding Faces and 
Feelings,” Kawade Shobo Shinsha, 2004. 
[17] J.A. Russell and M. Bullock, “Multidimensional scaling of 
emotional facial expressions: similarity from preschoolers to 
adults,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, vol. 48, 
pp. 1290-1298, 1985. 
[18] T. Kohonen, Self-organizing maps, Springer Series in 
Information Sciences, 1995. 
[19] G.A. Carpenter, S. Grossberg, and D.B. Rosen, “Fuzzy ART: 
fast stable learning and categorization of analog patterns by 
an adaptive resonance system,” Neural Networks, vol. 4, pp. 
759-771, 1991. 
[20] Y. Motomura, “Probabilistic reasoning algorithms and their 
experiments in bayesian network,” IEICE, pp. 157-162, 2004. 
[21] Y. Motomura, “Bayesian network software bayonet,” Journal 
of the Society of Instrument and Control Engineers, vol. 42, 
no. 8, pp. 693-694, 2003. 
[22] G. Cooper and E. Herskovits, “A Bayesian method for the 
induction of probabilistic networks from data,” Machine 
Learning, no. 9, pp. 309-347, 1992. 
[23] H. Akaike, “Information theory and an extension of the 
maximum likelihood principle,” Proceedings of the Second 
International Symposium on Information Theory, pp. 267-281, 
1973. 

