439
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Exploring the Digital Music Instrument Trombosonic with Extreme Users and at a
Participatory Performance
Oliver H¨odl and Geraldine Fitzpatrick
Human Computer Interaction Group
Institute for Design and Assessment of Technology
Vienna University of Technology
oliver@igw.tuwien.ac.at, geraldine.ﬁtzpatrick@tuwien.ac.at
Simon Holland
Music Computing Lab
Open University
Milton Keynes, England
simon.holland@open.ac.uk
Abstract—We introduce the “Trombosonic” as a new digital music
instrument inspired by the slide trombone. An ultrasonic sensor
combined with a red laser allows the performer to play the
instrument using similar movements to playing a trombone to
change the pitch, despite the absence of a physical slider, by
moving one hand back and forth. Additional sensors enhance
the potential for musical expression by movement of the whole
interface and by using the breath. We identify and discuss a
variety of design issues arising from the Trombosonic. Due to
its compact size and the lack of a slider, the Trombosonic can
be played in many different ways. In order to explore varied
potential uses of the Trombosonic, we carried out a series of
informal evaluations. These included experts in new musical
instruments, an older user, a younger user, an interaction design
expert, and the audience at an experimental concert with audience
participation. Future work is also discussed. Further technical
development might include a built-in microphone to use the
human voice and an expansion of the synthesizer’s features.
Keywords-Sound and Music Computing, Interface for Musical
Expression, Digital Music Instrument, Exploratory Evaluation,
Performance Evaluation
I.
INTRODUCTION
In this article we build on a recent study about the new
digital music instrument “Trombosonic” [1]. New musical
instruments, such as ours, are often equipped with sensor-
technologies to allow many different ways of expression and
interaction [2]. Apart from using them for musical purposes
the application of such versatile interfaces can be manifold
(e.g., [3], [4]) but remain as yet largely unexplored.
The main contribution of this paper is the presentation of
the new digital music instrument Trombosonic and to discuss
its potential uses, as derived from analysis of an exploratory
evaluation as well as its use in a participatory performance.
The primary intention was a new digital music instrument
inspired by the slide trombone. Hence, we started to design
the interface under some self-deﬁned constraints. Unlike many
existing approaches, we did not augment a trombone (e.g.,
[5]) or used the instrument as an example for a digital music
interface imitating the trombone’s look and feel to create an
electronic slide trombone (e.g., [6]). For our development we
rather took the technique for playing the trombone as a guiding
principle only, to enable an embodied control of sound with a
preferably simple and compact hand-held interface.
Our initial design considerations led to preconditions that
Figure 1: The ﬁnal Trombosonic prototype
address sensor-technology and construction. To balance func-
tionality and complexity of the interface and keep it as simple
and cheap as possible, we decided to use only standard off-
the-shelf low-cost hardware, such as an ultrasonic sensor,
push buttons and an accelerometer, to mention some of the
important ones. By doing so, we could keep the costs for
hardware and material below 100 Euros in total and were still
able to explore a range of different sensors within one device.
Throughout the design process, the basic intentions regard-
ing appearance, functionality and materials changed signiﬁ-
cantly. We initially started with a paper-made tubular prototype
to simulate a trombone. The ﬁnal interface is shown in Fig.
1 and illustrates the visual difference to a traditional slide
trombone (see Fig. 2). Most notable is the missing typical slide
that characterises a trombone. Despite that, it is played like a
trombone with slide motions by holding it in one hand, either
left or right, and changing the pitch by moving the other hand
back and forth. The name “Trombosonic” is the combination
of the two words “trombone” and “sonic”.
However, during the development phase it turned out that
the device might also be useful for other applications as a hand-
held interface. Apart from its original purpose to serve as a
musical instrument, an exploratory evaluation has shown its
potential applicability in ﬁelds such as education, soniﬁcation,
therapeutic prevention and rehabilitation. We use both, expert

440
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 2: The jazz trombonist Roman Sladek plays a
traditional slide trombone (Photographer OhWeh)
knowledge and the concept of using the experience of extreme
users [7] to identify potential future applicability in music and
non-music domains.
Furthermore, we conducted an evaluation during a live
performance of the ﬁrst author’s band “Oliver Linus”. The
whole performance took place at a music festival in Vienna,
Austria and was planned as a participatory performance for
another study where the audience was included at certain
parts of the show. The actual focus of that, from a musical
perspective, is discussed in another publication [8] and not
directly relevant or of interest here.
In the following, we start with the description of similar
research and existing literature our project is built on. Then
we go on to describe the design and the functionality of the
Trombosonic. Finally, we present the exploratory evaluation
that shows the potential applicability of our prototype.
II.
RELATED WORK
In this paper we consider design issues, an exploratory
evaluation, and potential wider classes of use. Consequently,
the following brief review of related work considers work
related to all three aspects of this paper.
Both researchers and artists have used the trombone for
their work in many ways. Composers appreciate the trombone
as “very adaptable system for capturing, suspending and al-
tering shards of sound” using different electronic extensions
to create new sounds and sample external sources [9]. Farell
augmented a trombone by using a minimal-hardware ultrasonic
sensor for the slide, a modiﬁed mouthpiece and a loudspeaker
in the trombone bell to change the original sound of the
trombone for his electro-acoustic performances [5]. A very
simple prototype using an optical sensor to detect the position
of the slide was created by Lemouton et al. to realise a gestural
interface for a traditional trombone [10].
Instead of augmenting existing instruments, Bromwich
built a completely new instrument, the Metabone, using only
the trombone’s dynamics and characteristics [11]. Su et al.
present an electronic trombone for the entertainment of chil-
dren and a playful introduction in musical instruments [12].
The Double Slide Controller derives from the traditional trom-
bone [6]. It looks different though and appears as a complex
interface.
Unlike the presented examples that use the trombone as
Figure 3: Playing the Trombosonic, the red laser in the palm
indicates the direction of the ultrasonic sensor
a model or augment an existing instrument, we wanted to
combine its most promising features within one simple and
compact interface. Keeping in mind the trombone as original
instrument and its possibility to create sound by a unique hand
gesture, we also wanted to provide new features and embodied
interaction that goes beyond the usual musical purposes.
Apart from designing, building and playing new musical
instruments, their evaluation can shed light on improvement
possibilities and the experience of musicians and audiences
with these new developments. Especially in Human-Computer
Interaction, researchers have tried different approaches to eval-
uate digital music instruments, such as Kiefer et al. [13] and
Stowell et al. [14].
The evaluation of new musical instruments at an actual live
performance, allows researchers to access the original opinion
and experience of an audience. Usually, this consists of a
certain number of people and the performances happen in an
authentic, real-world setting (e.g., [15]).
Approaches to get feedback from the audience are mani-
fold, for instance, by using technology (e.g., [16]) or ethno-
graphic methods such as questionnaires (e.g., [17]). Research
motivations for gathering audience feedback are not limited
to purposes of evaluating new digital instruments. The use of
audience feedback is also a key technique in technologically-
mediated participatory performance.
In both cases, researchers have used new technology to
measure emotional states of the spectators while new digital
instruments were played live in front of them (e.g., [18]).
Others focused on traditional forms of feedback such as
measuring applause (e.g., [19]).
Beyond pure artistic and musical purposes, digital in-
struments have been approached from different angles. For
instance, Robson [4] and Jord`a [20] have shown the suitability
of certain digital music instruments as playful, toy-like devices
for non-specialists. Others investigated their applicability for
therapeutic prevention and rehabilitation (e.g., [21], [22]). In
the context of user-driven innovation, Holmquist [7] explored
the value of extreme users in design evaluation.
All these approaches from pure digital instrument design,
towards evaluation in a musical context such as participatory
performances, and ﬁnally studies with non-expert users in other
domains than music, form the basis of the studies we present

441
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE I: Overview of prototype development and evaluation
phases
Phase
Description
Development
Interface Design (Section IV)
Development
Musical Expression (Section V)
Evaluation
Exploratory Evaluation (Section VI)
Evaluation
Evaluation at a Participatory Performance (Section VII)
in this article.
We proceed with the description of the design process and
considerations that have been engaged with during the proto-
type development. Along with that, technical details about the
Trombosonic are presented from an engineering perspective as
well as from the perspective of sound creation.
III.
RESEARCH APPROACH
This research was driven by the idea to develop an in-
teractive interface for gestural control of sound. In particular,
the interface should be a digital music instrument to explore
different application possibilities in music and non-music
domains.
We already had certain design considerations in mind at the
beginning. Hence, we decided to follow a design-led research
approach to develop the interface (the ﬁrst author is both a
musician and interaction designer). In the ﬁrst step, we focused
on the overall concept and the technical development of the
interface (Section IV). The creation of sound capabilities came
next to turn the interface into an actual instrument (Section V).
To explore the different application possibilities of the ﬁnal
prototype, the “Trombosonic” was evaluated in two consecu-
tive phases. First, we did an exploratory evaluation with ex-
treme users (Section VI); this was followed by improvements
to the synthesizer based on insights from this user study. The
second evaluation was conducted at a live concert to reﬂect
on the audience’s experience (Section VII). Thus, we see this
as a provocative prototype to help us explore a design space
of possibilities for this type of new digital music instrument
enabled by sensor-based technologies.
An overview of all phases including the prototype devel-
opment and the evaluation is presented in Table I. All phases
are described in detail in the following sections.
IV.
INTERFACE DESIGN
A. Design Process
Throughout the design process, the basic intentions regard-
ing appearance, functionality and materials changed signiﬁ-
cantly. We initially started with a paper-made tubular prototype
to simulate a trombone. The original setting is documented in
Fig. 4. To create a trombone-like hand-held interfaces, we used
two interleaved paper tubes with an ultrasonic sensor at one
end. The other end was left open similar to a mouth piece as
known from wind instruments.
Right from the beginning we used an Arduino Duemi-
lanove microprocessor [23] for sensor handling. To connect our
prototype to a MIDI compliant synthesizer for sound testing
purposes, we implemented a simple MIDI interface on the
Arduino. Later, this wired MIDI interface was replaced by
a wireless OSC interface to increase physical and technical
operability.
Figure 4: The initial prototype development setting.
During some prototype test sessions, we ﬁgured out signif-
icant usability problems with the paper tube. In addition, most
of the electronic parts were considered to be attached at the
hand-held interface. However, this would have been a weight
problem for the paper tube and an aesthetic disturbance due
to the anticipated size of the Arduino, the battery pack and
other required components. We thought about improving the
tube prototype by using stronger material such as aluminium
and attaching a small box for the electronics. In the end we
decided to leave off the tube entirely which lead the design
close to ﬁnal prototype.
B. Final Prototype
The Trombosonic’s hand-held interface is purely electronic
without any loose or moveable parts. It is held in one hand,
either left or right, with a pinch grip. For data processing it
uses an Arduino as described earlier in the design process.
An attached RedFly WiFi-Shield [24] sends sensor data as
OSC messages wirelessly to a computer running Max/MSP
for sound synthesis in our particular case or any other OSC-
compliant musical application.
The casing of the interface is cylindrical with rounded ends
and made of polystyrene and wood (see Fig. 1 and Fig. 5).
This keeps it lightweight but stable and handy. All electronic
devices are bolt-on or glued. Additionally, four aluminium rods
provide a good grip and they round out the overall appearance.
Its total weight including batteries is 294 g (10.37 oz).
For powering the Arduino, a battery pack is included at the
bottom of the interface which holds four standard AA batteries.
The longest period of time that the Trombosonic was turned on
for testing purposes was 130 minutes and no energy problems
were observed during this time. An accurate test regarding
energy consumption has not been done yet.
Both the compact design and the wireless network commu-
nication ensure free and easy movement during usage within
the range of the arm and without being wired to the computer.
The whole set of sensors and why they are speciﬁcally used
to enable embodied musical expression, are described in detail
in the following.
V.
MUSICAL EXPRESSION
The Trombosonic’s primary intention is to serve as a
musical instrument. Hence, it has several features that enable

442
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 5: Description of all features of the interface
TABLE II: Overview of features and functionality
Feature
Functionality
Four buttons
Tone on/off, set synthesizer param.
Ultrasonic sensor
Pitch/frequency control
Red laser pointer
Direction of the ultrasonic sensor
Accelerometer
Position/movement of the interface
Thermal resistor
Using the player’s breath
expressive sound control, including (1) four push buttons and
four LEDs, (2) an ultrasonic sensor, (3) a red laser pointer, (4)
a thermal resistor, and (5) an accelerometer. For its use as a
musical instrument the sensors and actuators are conﬁgured to
work for particular musical purposes. All features are shown
in Fig. 5 as they are located on the device and an overview
with a short description is given in Table II.
A. Physical sound generation
Four push buttons, mounted on the top board, enable the
control of the basic functions. They are ordered in a square
and operated with the middle ﬁnger and the ring ﬁnger. This
allows a good grip using the other two ﬁngers while pushing
the four buttons. For additional visual feedback each button is
connected to an LED in a different colour, which ﬂashes when
the button is pushed. All combinations of how the buttons can
be pushed and the corresponding functions are shown in Table
III.
TABLE III: Summary of button functions
Buttons pushed at once
Functionality
1
Tone on/off
2
Set new frequency
3
Switch oscillator wave
4
Switch LFO waveform
1 + 2
Switch ﬁlter type
3 + 4
Laser on/off
1 + 2 + 3 + 4
Set thermal resistor value
other button combinations
not used yet
The Trombosonic uses a subtractive sound synthesis. The
default frequency of the oscillator is 440 Hz. Button 1 turns
on the sound, while button 2 allows the user to save and hold
the actual frequency which changes continuously according
to play. With this function, the player is able to explore
the acoustic frequency spectrum endlessly or at least within
the human acoustic range. Buttons 3 and 4 switch between
waveforms of the oscillator and a Low Frequency Oscillator
(LFO). Pushing buttons 1 and 2 or 3 and 4 together switches
between ﬁlter types and turns on the laser. Pushing all buttons
at once, resets the reference value of the thermal resistor. All
functions are described later in detail.
B. Embodied expression
The design of Trombosonic enables a range of embodied
expressions in play. The ultrasonic sensor [25] at the front
enables the typical pitch control of the generated tone as known
from the slide trombone. Unlike the traditional instrument the
Trombosonic has no slider or handle. Instead, the red laser
pointer (a disassembled off-the-shelf model for presentations)
indicates the direction of the ultrasonic sensor for a better
orientation of the pitch-steering hand as shown in Fig. 3. While
moving it back and forth a red dot is projected on the palm.
This realisation allows the player to play the instrument with
two hands, comparable to a slide trombone which also makes
it familiar to spectators in its embodied movements.
Because the ultrasonic waves can bounce off any object,
the second hand is not mandatory, thus the Trombosonic can
also be played with just one hand and interact with other
objects. These objects may be items within the performer’s
environment, or the body itself. Whatever interface is pointed
on, the distance is transformed into sound. Even spectators who
are moving or waving hands can allow interactive soniﬁcation
of both performer and audience. The laser pointer can also be
turned off and on at any time during a performance to avoid
dazzling the spectators.
Another embodied sound control is realised with an ac-
celerometer [26] that measures the interface’s movement in
three dimensions. The actual synthesizer implementation uses
two of them. The device can be turned around the longest axis
(the one the red laser points to) and up- and downwards to
control frequencies of the LFO and the ﬁlter.
Given that the trombone, the source of our inspiration,
is a wind instrument, we also included a mouth piece in
our interface. Unlike the slide trombone, it is for additional
expression only and not the origin of the tone. For reasons of
simplicity we did not use a complex breath analyser [5], [6] but
a simple thermal resistor [27] to recognise the player’s breath.
During the design process we used this value to intensify
different parameters of the synthesizer, such as the bandwidth
of the frequency ﬁlter. However, with the actual prototype, the
breath control gives the volume a boost as this seems to be
comparable with a traditional wind instrument.
C. Sound synthesis
For our applications, the Trombosonic uses Max/MSP as
control and sound generation unit. The full patch in presen-
tation mode is shown in Fig. 6. Usually, during playing the
instrument, the whole patch is controlled remotely with the
wireless interface and receives nine different sensor-values (see
Table II). These values are received and visualised in the sub-
patch “Trombosonic interface” as shown in the green area of
Fig. 6 on the left.

443
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 6: The interface for the Trombosonic sound synthesis as Max/MSP patches in presentation mode
Another sub-patch, “Ultrasonic Settings”, allows the player
to switch between two modes: (1) no limit or (2) limit to certain
distance. If no limit is set, the ultrasonic sensor is capable of
measuring a distance of about 4 m. This mode is necessary, if
the Trombosonic is played without the second hand. Otherwise
it can be limited to the arm length of about 50 cm.
To generate a sound, the player has two opportunities,
which are located in the blue area: either to use the built in
synthesizer or use the external synthesizer. The internal syn-
thesizer uses subtractive sound synthesis and its sub-patches
are located in the lower right of Fig. 6. The player can choose
among simple waveforms of three oscillators which are atten-
uated by ADSR (Attack Decay Sustain Release) envelopes, an
LFO and ﬁlter effects. Certain parameters can be controlled in
real-time with the Trombosonic’s hand-held interface.
For this prototype we focused mainly on the interface and
minimised the synthesizer’s features. Hence, the sound reminds
one a little of old synthesizers. Furthermore, there is no special
musical training or knowledge needed to play the Trombosonic
and to explore its features.
The second option for sound generation is an external
synthesizer. In our case, the patch is prepared to be used
with Propellerhead’s Reason [28] through internal MIDI which
is realized by the sub-patch in the lower left of Fig. 6. In
our particular setting, the note on/off and four parameters
can be controlled remotely with the Trombosonic’s hand-held
interface.
After the detailed description of the Trombosonic’s func-
tionality and its possibilities for musical expression, we pro-
ceed with the presentation of the exploratory evaluation.
VI.
EXPLORATORY EVALUATION
We did an informal evaluation of the Trombosonic as a
musical instrument and explored the potential applicability of
our prototype in different ﬁelds. For this purpose we asked
experts at a competition for new musical instruments and a
researcher in game and interaction design.
Additionally we build on knowledge from existing litera-
ture about the value of extreme users [7]. The positive impact
of music and the suitability of musical instruments in various
non-music domains have already been shown. For instance
they can be used as playful, toy-like devices for non-specialists
(e.g., [4], [20]) or for therapeutic prevention and rehabilitation
(e.g., [21], [22]). This inspired us not only to use expert
knowledge to evaluate the Trombosonic but also to give it
away to people with different abilities and ages such as a 92-
year-old woman and a 13-year-old boy. We considered them
as untypical users for new musical interfaces and expected
them to help to explore the Trombosonic’s potential beyond
performances.
Everyone participating in the exploratory evaluation was
not involved in the project before and saw the device for the
ﬁrst time. After a short introduction they were allowed to play
the interface freely. Afterwards they were asked to tell us about
their experience. In addition, we took photographs of their
explorations and took notes of their comments. All subjects
started to play the Trombosonic with its general sonic and
gestural features we described in Section V. With each of them
we spent about 30-45 minutes for exploration and talked with

444
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
them about their experience. For some we slightly changed
single features tailored to their anticipated interests and needs,
as will be described below.
A. New interface for musical expression - expert evaluation
To hand out the Trombosonic to a musician is the most
obvious test for a musical instrument. We did so in early spring
2013 for a performance in Vienna where the Trombosonic was
used as special instrument for a certain part of a show. The
artist used it as a solo instrument during one song.
However, to “ﬁt” better with the other unusual users and
to get the most interesting and diverse results, we did some-
thing different. We applied for the annual Margaret Guthman
Musical Instrument Competition [29], which is considered one
of the largest competitions for new musical instruments. The
Trombosonic was chosen out of more than 70 submissions
to take part in a performance as one of 17 semiﬁnalists
which means an acceptance rate of lower than 25%. The
successful submission to this highly competitive and renowned
competition proves that the Trombosonic is already well-
regarded as a new musical instrument. The actual performance
took place in Atlanta, USA, in April 2013. We took advantage
of this event to get the ofﬁcial feedback of the expert jury as
well as the opinion of other participants and audience members
when presenting it as a new musical instrument.
The performance at the competition was successful and two
pieces were presented: One original electro-acoustic composi-
tion and one rather mainstream oriented piece accompanied by
pre-recorded playback. People in the audience as well as the
jury enjoyed the presentation of the many different features
and how the Trombosonic was played in a trombone-like
manner during the ﬁrst piece. The second piece was called
“Trombopolka” and was intended to be a tribute to the original
instrument, the slide trombone. The Polka is a popular genre
of folk music. Some audience members explicitly stated after
the performance how they liked the combination of traditional
music and the new musical instrument.
The experts mainly criticized deﬁciencies in the sound
synthesis and some spectators missed the acoustic traceability
of the breath sensor. One suggestion from another musician
was to integrate a microphone for additional sound creation
using the human voice. Two other performers pointed out
the compact and wireless design, which makes it easy for
embodied performances as they anticipated.
In summary, the performance at the musical instrument
competition conﬁrms the potential of the Trombosonic as a
new interface for musical expression and various comments
from new musical instrument experts suggest the direction of
future revisions and improvements.
B. Physical training for older adults
We then gave the Trombosonic to a 92-year-old woman
who is a relative of one of our project members. She was
willing to help us for the evaluation during a visit at her
own house. She has full mental abilities apart from some
forgetfulness from time to time, as she confessed herself. She
is still able to walk without a cane in her home. She told
us, she uses a walking stick only outside as a precaution and
especially during the winter season. However, according to
her own description her movement abilities are getting worse
and her visibility is already in a bad condition. Asked for her
musical knowledge she said, she had learned to play the piano
a long time ago and loved to play music and to sing. Now she
Figure 7: A 92-year-old woman playing the Trombosonic:
First impression (left), standing to operate it “in another
way” (right)
is unable to play any more since she cannot see the keys and
the score.
We did not present the Trombosonic as a music instrument
to her. According to what literature suggests in relation to
physical activity and elderly people [30] we rather said it
was an acoustic training device. Addressing her own musical
experience, we changed the original electronic sound with a
piano synthesizer to make it sound more familiar to her. After
an explanation of the buttons and some possibilities to make
sound, she started to handle it by herself.
Conversation with her and our own observation have shown
that the originally intended way to play the Trombosonic with
two hands was not very convenient for her. What was notable
though, was her behaviour changing her hands holding the
device alternately in both hands and ﬁnally she even stood up
to operate it “in another way” as she noted (see Fig. 7, right).
She said she tried to ﬁnd a good way to hold it and at the same
time preventing her arms from getting tired when moving the
device by changing hands. Unlike all other participants of the
exploratory evaluation, she was the only one considering tiring
issues during playing the instrument. This might be important
when using the Trombosonic for older adults or rehabilitation.
It appeared to us that she mainly concentrated on the device
itself instead of producing particular sounds. However, at the
end of our session she summarized her experience: “I really
enjoyed making it sound like a piano doing moves I am usually
not used to do. Though I do not know how it works and why
it sounded like a piano” (Translated from German).
Overall, we identiﬁed a certain interest in the Trombosonic
and her different ways to handle it. Following Rolland et
al. who illustrate that “regular physical activity is a key
component of successful aging” [30] and Bruhn and Schr¨oter
who discuss the positive impact of making music in old age,
we propose the Trombosonic as a potential device for elderly
people. It might be a good way to combine physical and
musical activity.
C. Playful interface for children
When talking about musical play and young children,
Tarnowski explains “functional musical play might include
exploring vocal, instrumental, and environmental sounds as

445
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 8: A boy aged thirteen explores the Trombosonic’s
features
well as the way in which these sounds are made” [31]. This
motivated us to give the Trombosonic to a young boy aged
thirteen (Fig. 8), who was visiting our lab for a trial intern-
ship. He has no instrumental training but considers himself a
very interested listener to music, which is also indicated by
the big headphones he wears around his neck all the time.
Additionally, he started to make music with his computer a
little while ago, experimenting with a software-synthesizer.
Similar to the older adult, we explained the basic function-
ality of the Trombosonic to him and how to handle it. When
he started playing we observed, most different to all other
evaluation participants, that he really seemed to focus on the
music. We also noticed that he played the Trombosonic mostly
in its originally intended way using two hands. However, once
he started to roll the interface with one hand on the table
to create a smooth wave-like sound using the accelerometer.
He was the only one who used the movement features of the
interface in this physical way together with other objects such
as the table.
In all, the young boy carefully analysed the different
features and ways to play the Trombosonic throughout his
whole session. Following his own words “it was a lot of
fun” and he would like to control his own sounds with the
interface. We propose the Trombosonic as a suitable instrument
for letting young people playfully explore music without being
able to play a traditional instrument.
D. Soniﬁcation and people with disabilities
Finally, we asked a researcher with expertise in interaction
design within our lab to tell us about his experience with
the Trombosonic. After an initial explanation of the basic
functionality we let him explore the device. It was signiﬁcant
that he started to use it as a one-handed device despite our
initial advice to play it in a trombone-like manner. Following
his own “intuition” (as he deﬁned it by himself) he started to
walk around the room using the Trombosonic as a soniﬁcation
device. He started to explore the environment acoustically
while pointing the device onto different walls and surfaces
(Fig. 9).
Furthermore, he turned the device around pointing the
ultrasonic sensor towards his own body. This way to play
the Trombosonic is illustrated in Fig. 10. Moving it back and
Figure 9: Playing the Trombosonic as a one-handed
instrument to acoustically explore a shelf
Figure 10: Playing the Trombosonic as a one-handed
instrument towards the own body
forth he started explaining: “Look, now it is a one-handed
instrument. I can play a trombone without my second hand”
(Translated from German). During his test he complained
about the lack of clear feedback when using the buttons to
control the synthesizer. Since he was not familiar with the
synthesizer’s options this was really a problem when trying to
intentionally switch between wave forms and ﬁlters as he said.
The trial with the interaction designer suggests some
usability improvements for a more intuitive handling. Fur-
thermore, it might be worth considering the Trombosonic
as a one-handed musical instrument keeping in mind that
“thousands of people with disabilities in the UK, and millions
across the world, are excluded from music making” [32]. The
Trombosonic could be such an instrument to enable those
people and people with restricted mobility in general to gain a
trombone-like musical experience. It could also have potential
for people with visual impairment as a way to playfully explore
their physical environment.

446
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
E. Discussion
The exploratory evaluation was not meant to be compre-
hensive but to complement the main contribution of this paper,
the presentation of a new musical instrument. It gave us a
differentiated impression of how people play the Trombosonic
from the perspectives of both experts (in new musical instru-
ments and in interaction design) and extreme users (very old,
young). Their considered feedback, as well as their unantic-
ipated uses, pointed to potential applicability that might be
worth considering and gave some initial directions for future
development.
Overall, people tried various different ways to handle the
interface, such as using one-hand only or both hands and while
standing, sitting or moving around. The actual usage to pro-
duce sound was ranging from playing music following scores
in a traditional way to acoustically explore the environment.
The approach of using an exploratory evaluation when test-
ing new musical instruments turned out to be qualiﬁed. It was
inspiring to use expert knowledge as well as to see unexpected
behaviour of unusual users. We argue that our assumption
to widen the range for non-obvious applications by doing an
exploratory evaluation was veriﬁed. At least for the initial of
a new musical instrument and a new interaction device this
opened a set of unpredictable possibilities for improvements
and new directions to focus on for future development.
Compared to the initial described approaches which aug-
ment traditional trombones or create new interfaces on the
basis of the original instrument, our strategy to create a
compact device has its advantages as the exploratory evaluation
has shown. Despite its different appearance, people considered
the Trombosonic to be a trombone-like instrument. At least
when it is played as intended which happened during the
instrument competition in our particular case. Analogously,
people tend to play with the interface in unusual ways and
they explore its features as soon as they do not think of it as a
trombone-like instrument such as the interaction designer and
the older adult.
Thus, designing a new musical instrument under cer-
tain constraints and evaluate the prototype in an exploratory
manner brought the anticipated insights in unexpected and
unpredictable user behaviour. The combination of experts and
extreme users helped to go beyond the usual applicability
of this musical interface in ﬁelds such as healthcare and
education.
VII.
EVALUATION AT A PARTICIPATORY PERFORMANCE
Guided by the results of the exploratory evaluation, we
improved the quality of the sound capabilities and conducted a
more focused, music-oriented evaluation to explore the experi-
ence of the audience who attends a Trombosonic performance.
This study did not fully work out as intended as we will
describe later. However, there was still enough data to draw
out directions for future in-depth studies.
We used a public live concert of the ﬁrst author’s band
“Oliver Linus” at the festival “Wiener Musik-Experimente”
(Viennese Music-Experiments) on 6th February 2014 in Vi-
enna, Austria. This was a good opportunity for us from a
conceptual point of view in particular, because the main idea
behind this event was to interlink mainstream and experimental
approaches in live music in various different ways.
Moreover, the band already planned to do a participatory
performance for other research purposes at this concert. The
intention was to let the audience inﬂuence certain sound effects
in real-time during the performance of one piece by using a
big balloon. This was a central element of the whole show. The
results of that particular study are discussed elsewhere [8].
The main motivation for the Trombosonic part of the
performance was to look more deeply at the potential of the
Trombosonic as a music instrument and to get insight into the
audience’s experience and opinion about it. To not interfere
with the other study and overwhelm the audience, we decided
to change two things signiﬁcantly. First, the Trombosonic
performance should be a solo without the band. Second, since
the audience participation of the other study was in real-time
during the show, the Trombosonic performance should contain
asynchronous participation immediately after the concert in the
form of active experience collection among the audience.
The whole performance of the band “Oliver Linus” took
about 30 minutes. From a conceptual point of view and the ﬁrst
author’s performance perspective, the show was in three parts:
(1) Two solo pieces with the Trombosonic, (2) two regular
songs with the band, and (3) two songs including the audience
for real-time participation. A visual impression of the setting
is documented from three perspectives in Fig. 11. The whole
Trombosonic performance including two pieces is available
online as a video [33].
The reason for choosing two songs for the Trombosonic
performance was on purpose. The ﬁrst one was the electro-
acoustic piece “From Peak to Sine” and the second one was
called “The night the stars fell asleep” which can be considered
as popular music. Both songs were instrumental and the second
one had an accompanying playback. This setting should give
us the chance to gather the experience of the audience with the
Trombosonic using the example of two very different songs.
The original idea was to let the audience participate asyn-
chronously and decide right after the show which of the two
Trombosonic songs should be played again as an encore. By
doing so, we wanted to get the preference of the audience
regarding to the two very different Trombosonic songs. We
thought about using applause and cheering as an instant
measurement similar to other studies (e.g., [19]). Finally, this
did not work out at all for organisational reasons mainly. The
whole festival was far behind the time schedule and so there
was simply not enough time for another song and the decision
making process of asking the audience again to applause and
cheer for the two songs. Unfortunately, we were also not
prepared to do the measurement with technical means right
after the songs’ performance.
However, there was still another chance to gather data about
the Trombosonic performance. This data was collected with
the help of a short questionnaire for evaluation right after the
show during the preparation of the stage for the next band.
The questionnaire itself and its results are presented in the
following.
A. The After-Concert Questionnaire
After the concert, 32 out of approximately 80 spectators
were randomly selected and asked 10 questions about their
experience during the show of the band “Oliver Linus”. The
main purpose of this questionnaire was the real-time participa-
tion of the audience for another study [8] as already mentioned.
Hence, most of the questions were aimed towards the expe-
rience during the interaction with the balloon. Nevertheless,

447
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 11: Three perspectives of the performance at the
music festival “Wiener Musik-Experimente”: The performer
playing the Trombosonic “against the wall” (top), the
audience watching the performance (middle), and the view
from the back towards the stage (bottom)
three questions were targeting the whole show1:
1)
Describe your impression with one or two words?
2)
What did you like best?
3)
What did you dislike?
We consider these general questions as partly relevant for
the Trombosonic as some participants mentioned it explicitly
in their answers. For the analysis we coded all contents of the
relevant three questions thematically.
All answers of the ﬁrst question, which are basically only
single words, were categorized as either positive, neutral or
negative. The number of words per participant varied from 0
to 3. This resulted in a total number of 39 words that describe
e.g., a feeling, an opinion, or an experience. The choice
whether a word was rated as positive, neutral or negative
might be ambiguous. No word was coded twice and all words
1All contents related to the questionnaire were translated from German to
English
which were considered as not clearly positive or negative were
counted as neutral. The summary of this analysis is presented
in Table IV.
TABLE IV: Summary of the thematic analysis of question 1
Code
Number of words
Examples
Positive
18
atmospheric, rousing, funny, super, inspiring
Neutral
15
interesting, different, technical, electric
Negative
6
confusing, nervous, unpleasant, tedious
In the second and third relevant question, people had to say
what they like best and dislike. Here, the Trombosonic in par-
ticular was mentioned twice and once the overall performance
experience was commented. Since the only electronic piece
was one played with the Trombosonic, we considered these
statements to be relevant here as well. The selected answers
according to the questions are listed in Table V in the original
language (German) and the English translation.
TABLE V: Summary of the answers to questions 2 and 3
that are relevant for the Trombosonic
English translation
German original
Q: What did you like best?
Trombosonic was cool, singing
Trombosonic war cool, Gesang
Trombosonic, Music (not electronic)
Trombosonic, Musik (nicht elektronisch)
Was funny, interesting overall exp.
War lustig, interessantes Gesamterlebnis
Q: What did you dislike?
ﬁrst Trombosonic song
erste Trombosonic Lied
electronic music
elekronische Musik
B. Discussion
The evaluation of the Trombosonic at a participatory live
performance by doing a short survey right after the concert,
has raised some indications that could be considered for further
investigation in future studies.
When asked for single words to describe the experience
of the performance, the majority of all statements (33 out
of 39) were positive or neutral. Some were more general
such as funny or super but others gave descriptions such
as atmospheric, rousing or even inspiring. Spectators who
had negative experiences found the performance confusing,
nervous or tedious. Even one spectator rated the show as
unpleasant.
However, none of these experiences really addresses aes-
thetic or music issues. Apart from atmospheric and maybe
electric, all statements indicate a certain experience associated
with a feeling.
This was different when the spectators were asked about
what they liked or disliked. Here in four of all ﬁve statements,
where the Trombosonic was mentioned, participants talked
about music-relevant issues. Notable in this case was that two
people talked about the electronic music in a negative context.
One even said “Trombosonic, Music (not electronic)” when
asked about the positive experience. This indicates, that the
instrument itself is perceived separately from the music.
This can be interpreted differently. If anticipated that spec-
tators “accept” or even “like” a new digital music instrument

448
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
in principle, there is still the question of “how it is played”
and “what is played” which makes the overall experience.
In our particular study, we performed two totally different
kinds of music. One pure electro-acoustic piece with a simple
synthesizer and one popular-music oriented piece with a full
arrangement. At this point we can only anticipate that the peo-
ple preferred the second piece for aesthetic reasons while they
found the whole instrument interesting, funny and inspiring.
After presenting the two evaluation studies, one explorative
with extreme users and one at a concert with a participatory
performance, we proceed with the conclusion of these insights.
VIII.
CONCLUSION
The Trombosonic is a new instrument for musical expres-
sion that derives from the slide trombone. However, it does
not imitate the slide trombone either visually or acoustically,
rather the principles of this wind instrument serve as a design
inspiration for the interactive gestures.
Push buttons, an ultrasonic sensor and a red laser allow
an embodied playing of the instrument similar to the slide
trombone changing the pitch with one hand moving back and
forth. Compared to a traditional slide trombone, the whole
instrument’s size is much smaller and the slider is completely
missing. Furthermore, an accelerometer and a thermal resistor
enable an additional embodied expression. Moving the whole
interface enhances the musical possibilities compared to the
traditional instrument, while the use of the player’s breath
retains a typical feature of wind instruments.
Along with presenting the Trombosonic as a new inter-
face for musical expression we did an exploratory evaluation
looking for its potential as a musical instrument as well as in
other ﬁelds. Hence, we successfully submitted a performance
proposal to an international competition for new musical
instruments and gave the instrument to a 92-year-old woman,
a 13-year-old boy and a researcher in game and interaction
design. This let us identify different issues and unexpected
aspects to keep in mind for future improvements. All cases
also indicate the Trombosonic’s suitability for various musical
purposes as well as non-music applications.
In addition to the exploratory evaluation we conducted
a typical music-related evaluation for new instruments at a
live performance. This was conceptualized as a participa-
tory performance including the audience. After the concert
randomly selected spectators were asked with the help of a
short questionnaire about their experience. Their statements
are not enough evidence to draw deﬁnite conclusions but they
indicate a certain connection in relation to the perception and
experience of a new digital music instrument. We assume a
dependency between the overall concept of a new instrument,
the way it is played and for what kind of music it is used.
Furthermore, in a participatory performance, which has cer-
tainly new elements for an audience per se, as it was in our
study, it is even more important that the balance between new
concepts, new technology and new music is considered for the
sake of the audience’s overall experience.
IX.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
For advanced prototypes of the Trombosonic we plan to
integrate a microphone for additional sound creation using the
human voice. Furthermore, the synthesizer needs some revision
regarding the sound and better mapping of sensor values to
single parameters, along with a more intuitive button control.
Beyond technical improvement addressing mainly musical
features, the evaluation suggests to adapt and use the interface
in other domains. It could be used as training device for elderly
people addressing physical and musical health-relevant activity
or it could let children intuitively explore sound generation
without being trained to play a traditional music instrument.
The ﬁeld studies, and in particular the evaluation at the
participatory performance, have shown the potential of such
settings. Future studies might include a more substantial
methodology and a focused approach when asking spectators
about their experience with a new music instrument. The
concept of using very different sorts of music with the same
new instrument and the same audience seems promising and
could be adapted for an in-depth study about new digital music
instruments in relation to experience, opinion, and aesthetics.
REFERENCES
[1]
O. H¨odl and G. Fitzpatrick, “Trombosonic: Designing and Exploring
a New Interface for Musical Expression in Music and Non-Music
Domains,” in The Seventh International Conference on Advances in
Computer-Human Interactions, 2014, pp. 54–59.
[2]
C. Dobrian and D. Koppelman, “The ’E’ in NIME: Musical Expression
with New Computer Interfaces,” in Proceedings of New Interfaces for
Musical Expression, 2006, pp. 277–282.
[3]
C. Pacchetti and F. Mancini, “Active music therapy in Parkinson’s
disease: an integrative method for motor and emotional rehabilitation,”
vol. 393, 2000, pp. 386–393.
[4]
D. Robson, “Play!: Sound toys for non-musicians,” Computer Music
Journal, vol. 26, no. 3, 2002, pp. 50–61.
[5]
N. Farwell, “Adapting the trombone: a suite of electro-acoustic inter-
ventions for the piece Rouse,” in Proceedings of New Interfaces for
Musical Expression, 2006, pp. 358–363.
[6]
T. Henriques, “Double Slide Controller,” in Proceedings of New Inter-
faces for Musical Expression, 2009, pp. 260–261.
[7]
L. Holmquist, “User-driven innovation in the future applications lab,”
Extended abstracts of the 2004 conference on Human factors and
computing systems - CHI ’04, 2004, pp. 1091–1092.
[8]
O. H¨odl, G. Fitzpatrick, and S. Holland, “Experimence: Considerations
for Composing a Rock Song for Interactive Audience Participation,” in
Proceedings of ICMC, 2014.
[9]
N. Collins, “Low Brass: The Evolution of Trombone-Propelled Elec-
tronics,” Leonardo Music Journal, vol. 1, no. 1, 1991, pp. 41–44.
[10]
S. Lemouton, M. Stroppa, and B. Sluchin, “Using the augmented
trombone in I will not kiss your f.ing ﬂag,” in Proceedings of New
Interfaces for Musical Expression, 2006, pp. 304–307.
[11]
M. A. Bromwich, “The Metabone: An interactive sensory control
mechanism for virtuoso trombone,” in Proceedings of International
Computer Music Conference, 1997, pp. 2–4.
[12]
M. Su, W. Lee, and S. Chen, “Electronic trombone: an interactive tool to
promote musical learning and performance creativity,” in Proceedings
of the 10th International Conference on Virtual Reality Continuum and
Its Applications in Industry, 2011, pp. 585–588.
[13]
C. Kiefer, N. Collins, and G. Fitzpatrick, “HCI methodology for
evaluating musical controllers: A case study,” in Proc. of NIME, 2008.
[14]
D. Stowell, A. Robertson, N. Bryan-Kinns, and M. Plumbley, “Evalua-
tion of live humancomputer music-making: Quantitative and qualitative
approaches,” International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, vol. 67,
no. 11, Nov. 2009, pp. 960–975.
[15]
E. W. Pedersen and K. Hornbæ k, “mixiTUI: A Tangible Sequencer for
Electronic Live Performances,” in Proceedings of the 3rd International
Conference on Tangible and Embedded Interaction - TEI ’09.
ACM
Press, 2009.
[16]
G. Kaiser, G. Ekblad, and L. Broling, “Audience Participation in a
Dance-Club Context: Design of a System For Collaborative Creation
of Visuals,” in In Proceedings of Nordes, 2007.
[17]
S. Thompson, “Audience responses to a live orchestral concert,” Musi-
cae Scientiae, vol. 10, no. 2, Sep. 2006, pp. 215–244.

449
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[18]
R. Knapp, J. Jaimovich, and N. Coghlan, “Measurement of motion
and emotion during musical performance,” in Affective Computing
and Intelligent Interaction and Workshops, 2009. ACII 2009. 3rd
International Conference on.
IEEE, 2009, pp. 1–5.
[19]
L. Barkhuus, “Engaging the crowd: studies of audience-performer inter-
action,” CHI ’08 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, 2008, pp. 2925–2930.
[20]
S. Jord`a, “Digital Instruments and Players: Part I Efﬁciency and Ap-
prenticeship,” in Proceedings of New Interfaces for Musical Expression,
2004, pp. 59–63.
[21]
C. Plahl, “Musiktherapie - Praxisfelder und Vorgehensweisen,” in
Musikpsychologie.
Enzyklop¨adie, Rowohlts, 2009, pp. 630–652.
[22]
M. E. Clark, A. W. Lipe, and M. Bilbrey, “Use of music to decrease ag-
gressive behaviors in people with dementia.” Journal of gerontological
nursing, vol. 24, no. 7, Jul. 1998, pp. 10–17.
[23]
Arduino. [Online]. Available: http://www.arduino.cc (last access 2.
Sept. 2014)
[24]
RedFly
WiFi-Shield.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.watterott.com/de/Arduino-RedFly-Shield
(last
access
2. Sept. 2014)
[25]
Ultrasonic
sensor.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.watterott.com/en/Parallax-PING-Ultrasonic-Sensor-28015
(last access 2. Sept. 2014)
[26]
Accelerometer
ADXL335.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.watterott.com/en/Breakout-Board-ADXL335 (last access 2.
Sept. 2014)
[27]
Thermal
resistor.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.sparkfun.com/products/250
(last
access
2.
Sept.
2014)
[28]
Reason.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.propellerheads.se/products/reason/
(last
access
2.
Sept. 2014)
[29]
Margaret
Guthman
Musical
Instrument
Competition.
[Online].
Available: http://www.gtcmt.gatech.edu/guthman2013 (last access 2.
Sept. 2014)
[30]
Y. Rolland, G. Abellan van Kan, and B. Vellas, “Physical activity
and Alzheimer’s disease: from prevention to therapeutic perspectives.”
Journal of the American Medical Directors Association, vol. 9, no. 6,
Jul. 2008, pp. 390–405.
[31]
S. M. Tarnowski, “Musical Play and Young Children,” Music Educators
Journal, vol. 86, no. 1, 1999, pp. 26–29.
[32]
The One-Handed Musical Instrument Trust. [Online]. Available:
http://www.ohmi.org.uk (last access 2. Sept. 2014)
[33]
Trombosonic
Performance
at
the
festival
Wiener
Musik-Experimente.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wm48g4xL8QQ
(last
access
2. Sept. 2014)

