266
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
An Analysis to Improve Voltage Stability in Smart Grids by Regulating Active 
Power in Intelligent Buildings   
 Abid Ahmad Khan, Michael Massoth and Torsten Wiens 
Department of Computer Science 
 Hochschule Darmstadt — University of Applied Sciences 
Darmstadt, Germany 
{abid.a.khan | michael.massoth | torsten.wiens}@h-da.de 
 
Abstract—This paper describes an approach to minimize the 
uneven effect of voltage and power in smart buildings and on 
electrical networks. The idea is to analyze and improve the 
voltage variation in intelligent buildings and in electrical 
networks. In a second step, the actual power consumption and 
power reserves of selected Smart Homes is calculated and 
regulated by a control application using Next Generation 
Network technology. In the last step, stationary storages for 
improving the stability of the smart systems are discussed and 
evaluated. The analysis is performed by considering multiple 
scenarios in smart power grids. We consider intelligent 
buildings (Smart Homes) based on Next Generation Network 
components. 
These 
components 
are 
applied 
as 
a 
communication and integration platform between the smart 
phones of the Smart Home owners and the building control 
system, as well as the energy supplier of the smart power grid. 
The Session Initiation Protocol and the Presence Service are 
used to build a performant and scalable system based on open 
source software. The Smart Home appliances are based on the 
KNX bus, a secure and trustful architecture by which the user 
can remotely monitor and control his house or facility from 
anywhere in the world. 
Keywords-Energy Management; Home Automation; Smart 
Power Grid; Next Generation Network; Presence Service. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The work at hand is an extended version of our paper 
“Stability Improvement Solution of the Smart Power Grid 
by an Analysis of Voltage Variation in Intelligent 
Buildings” [1].  
Intelligent power grids form the core of the future power 
supply. As a part of smart cities, smart buildings, home area 
networks (HAN) are composed of devices that communicate 
with each other, can communicate data to utilities (or other 
energy service providers) and can respond to signals sent by 
these remote entities. An overarching vision of the Smart 
Grid holds that providing consumers with information about 
their energy usage will support an array of electricity pricing 
models and enable customers to better control their use of 
electricity. Smart thermostats, smart meters, real-time 
dynamic pricing and next-day energy information feedback 
to electricity users play an important role in this intelligent 
energy management infrastructure. Every part of our energy 
environment will be connected to each other and may be 
controlled from central points with the given rights, to 
exchange both energy and information. The actual 
intelligence is supplied by the IT-supported structure and 
control tactics, especially to match fluctuating Smart Grids, 
which are supposed to guarantee stable power supplies 
within the European Norms. For the stability of a Smart 
Grid system, there are two main criteria: First, the power 
generation has to match the demand at any time and has to 
hold a reserve (e.g., battery storage) for immediate outages. 
Second, the grid has to provide sufficient capacities for 
voltage stabilization at every point in time. According to our 
particular status, all countries need to simplify the smart 
cities and adjust their parameters in order to fit their own 
features.  
A. 
Purpose and Relevance 
The purpose and contribution of this paper is to 
investigate various issues regarding voltage and power 
instabilities of Next Generation Network (NGN) based 
smart building systems from uncertain energy sources, and 
to suggest solutions based on exemplary calculations.  
Our previous work presented a novel approach for a 
performant, scalable, secure and trustworthy interaction 
between intelligent homes, control managers and energy 
suppliers of the smart grid [1]. Our work also described 
energy management mechanisms by load balancing tactics 
that include manual and automated control of equipment in 
smart homes, using NGN technologies based on the Session 
Initiation Protocol (SIP) and its Presence Service. Based on 
these ideas, a near-real-time push solution has been 
implemented, using the IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) to 
remotely monitor and control Home Automation systems 
via mobile devices with open source software [2][3].  
According to the latest report by GTM Research, the 
U.S. home energy management market is forecasted to be 
worth more than USD 4 billion by 2017 [4]. This forecast 
shows the business opportunities and relevance of our 
proposed ideas for home control and energy management 
services. According to this source, the sectors with the 
largest potential for saving energy are buildings and 
mobility. 
B. Structure of the paper 
Following this introduction, Section II shows related 
work for the suitability of our previous idea to implement a 
control solution based on NGN technology. In Section III, 

267
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the instability problem and two important use cases are 
presented. The overall system design is described in Section 
IV. The calculation for the first solution is discussed and 
evaluated in Sections V and VI. Section VII gives power 
and energy consumption statistics for the second solution. 
The components used to analyze the solution are presented 
in Section VIII. Section IX gives an outlook on future work 
and concludes the paper.  
II. RELATED WORK  
Many companies and institutions are working on 
solutions for energy efficient management of buildings.  But 
only a few of them are working on a complete solution that 
relies exclusively on open standards. Most of the systems 
focus on the inside- or outside-systems of the building. 
Many control and automation system devices are usually 
installed at the low-voltage part of the grid. They have more 
capabilities in controlling electrical energy consumption of 
consumers [5][6][7][8]. In our previous work, we presented 
the idea to connect the technology of NGN to Smart Homes 
The next step is to use SIP with all its benefits as the main 
communication protocol and connect it to a KNX bus 
system. The general architecture is depicted in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Figure 1.  General architecture. 
The NGN infrastructure that has been prototypically set 
up at our project consists of an IP Multimedia Subsystem 
(IMS) in its center. The IMS is a control architecture based 
on SIP, designed by the wireless standards body 3rd 
Generation Partnership Project (3GPP). It aims to 
standardize access to different networks. The core 
functionality of the IMS is to operate and manage 
multimedia 
sessions 
of 
various 
types 
in 
NGN 
infrastructures, ranging from simple telephone calls to 
multi-participant video conferencing and many more 
applications. Therefore, all communication is based on the 
Internet Protocol (IP).  
An important functionality of the IMS is the Presence 
Service. This service was originally specified to manage and 
track the online status of all connected multimedia units. 
The basic idea in our project was to use the Presence 
Service to store the status of sensors and actors of Smart 
Homes instead. Advantageous about this idea is that the 
effort for setup and implementation of our demonstrator 
system is reduced, since most of the major functionality 
maps quite simply from IMS to home automation. Also, 
means to enable secure communication are already included 
or may be added at a relatively limited expense. 
This idea enables to represent different home automation 
appliances as users to the outside world. Each appliance can 
set its own current status, or the status can be monitored by 
the central instance. Thus, it is possible to register a mobile 
device at the SIP network, and in this way at the Presence 
Service. The status information of the different home 
automation appliances can also be viewed on mobile 
devices, such as smart phones.  
The IMS is connected via a gateway to a KNX bus 
system. The gateway translates control messages from SIP 
to KNX, and vice versa. The KNX bus installation is 
connected to different types of actors and sensors. Actors 
are appliances that perform different actions, for example 
switching lights on or off. They provide their activity status 
and are able to receive telegrams from physical switches. 
Sensors are appliances that can detect different conditions, 
e.g., temperature or brightness. They are capable of sending 
KNX messages (so-called KNX telegrams) to specific actors 
or software tools.   
 
            
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Signal flow in system. 
The signaling gateway is the main part of this concept 
and has been prototypically implemented. The signaling 
gateway is used to control the whole infrastructure that is 
connected to it. It also provides various interfaces to the 
outside world, for example, for the connection of mobile 
devices, on which the smart grid management component 
runs that is part of the ideas described in the paper at hand. 
This software service connects the KNX bus to the IMS 
network, as mentioned. Figure 2 shows a typical signal flow 
in the system. The sensors and actors on the right are 
connected through a KNXnet/IP device to the signaling 
gateway. The signaling gateway is connected to the 
presence server. User A (which may be any kind of IP 
enabled device) is connected to the Presence Server. The 
SIP protocol is used to communicate between the 
participants as shown. At first, the participants are set up 
using the REGISTER command. To transfer status 

268
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
messages and to store and manage the status data at the 
Presence Service, SUBSCRIBE, NOTIFY and UPDATE 
messages are used. 
Using a KNXnet/IP connector device, KNX telegrams 
are transferred to an IP network. The telegrams are packed 
into the payload of UDP packets and are sent over the 
network. Thus, one function of the signaling gateway is to 
receive these IP packets sent by the KNXnet/IP device. 
Furthermore, the information contained in the telegram has 
to be extracted. The telegram may consist of sensor values 
or other status messages of different home automation 
appliances. The KNXnet/IP device is also able to receive IP 
packets from the IP network and to send the containing 
telegram to the KNX bus. Thus, in order to control 
appliances that are associated with the bus installation, the 
signaling gateway has to have the ability to generate KNX 
telegrams (see Figure 3). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Basic System Architecture. 
A. System security 
It is necessary to ensure a secure connection to the 
mobile device, a secure authentication for the user and a 
generally secured environment that is up to current 
standards. The original KNX standard, which historically 
dates back to a predecessor from the 1980s, did not offer 
sufficiently secure communication environments. Here, our 
security approach is introduced that secures the end-to-end 
network communication of the system. For all connections, 
SIP Security (SIPS) is used, applying Transport Layer 
Security (TLS) and the Secure Real-Time Transport 
Protocol (SRTP). SRTP is used for securing Voice and 
Video-Data connections. TLS is used for exchanging 
signaling 
messages 
(e.g., 
for 
authentication 
and 
registration). TLS is a hybrid encryption protocol for secure 
data connections over the Internet. In the OSI reference 
model, TLS acts at the transport layer. Within SIPS, TLS 
takes care of the following security tasks: 
  
• 
Bidirectional authentication of communication  
 
endpoints  
• 
Exchanging shared secrets  
• 
Cryptographic encoding of data to be transferred  
• 
Securing the integrity of transferred SIP messages  
 
We measure the security of the selected approach 
according to the four pillars of information security [9]. 
 
• 
Confidentiality  
• 
Integrity  
• 
Availability  
• 
Authenticity  
As described above, SIPS is using the protocols TLS and 
SRTP for secure communication. TLS uses a high security 
encoding and therefore grants high confidentiality. The 
TCP/IP protocol ensures integrity by adding a checksum to 
each message. Authenticity is granted by using an 
authentication with credentials.  
III. 
USE CASES FOR SMART ENERGY MANAGEMENT 
The focus of this paper is to analyze the problem of 
voltage and power variation in NGN based smart homes, 
using our project infrastructure described above. In order to 
meet today’s power system requirements, it is necessary to 
apply regulation in order to keep the voltage in the 
permitted voltage range for the distribution grids on the low 
voltage and middle voltage levels. The consumption of 
electrical power causes the voltage to drop at the junction 
point of the smart buildings, whereas an injection of power 
will make it rise. This overshoot-and-dip-effect increases 
with the power and the distance of the smart buildings to the 
substation. If the voltage drops or rises too much, the 
distribution system operator has to take countermeasures. 
This is because the end users’ appliances and electrical 
devices are designed for a certain voltage range defined by 
European norms (EN50160:2007, [10]). The amplitude of 
the supply voltage is defined in this norm (see Table I). It is 
defined in the norms that the magnitudes of the low voltage 
and high voltage should be in the given range. 
TABLE I.  
AMPLITUDE OF SUPPLY VOLTAGE 
  Voltage Magnitude 
  LV: U =230V 
  MV: "by convention" 
  Voltage Magnitude 
  Variations 
  LV, MV: ±10% for 95%   week 
 
A. Use case UC1: Insufficient or lack of renewable      
energy 
In our previous work, we discussed the following use 
cases. In use case UC1, the power consumption in the city 
and the load on the distribution grid reaches its maximum 
level. During the same time frame, the feed-in of renewable 
energy is diminishing to the minimum, e.g., because of wind 
calm or the lack of sun radiation. Figure 4 illustrates this 
situation. 
After further analysis of this topic, we found that in times 
of high load, the voltage at the terminals might fall below 0.9 
p.u. (red line, equivalent to 207V), which would be a voltage 
magnitude violation according to the European norm. This 
dip effect increases with the power and the distance of the 
smart houses to the substation. The typical instrument to 
counteract this effect is the application of tap-changer 
transformers, because the end users appliances and electrical 
devices are designed for a certain voltage range, as defined 
by the norm. This lack of electric power shall be balanced 
with an optimum approach, at least partly by the intelligent 
buildings of the city.  
 
 

269
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 4.  Maximum load scenario
In order to do that, the lack of energy is signaled
power providers towards the owners of intelligent buildings 
in the city by means of usual communication technologies.
The house owners can then react by turning 
appliances (e.g., white goods), set air conditioning units
heat pumps to eco-mode and deactivate charging stations for 
electric cars and vehicles. Therefore, the energy supply 
within the city could be balanced in a better way by the 
swarm behavior of the intelligent consumers by de
activating power loads. This is one of the c
previous and current work. 
B. 
Use case UC2: Surplus or excess of renewable energy
In our previous work, we also discussed
The power consumption and load in the city reaches its 
lowest level. During the same time frame, the renew
energy is fed into the power grid at maximum 
because of strong winds or strong sun radiation.
illustrates this situation. 
 
Figure 5.  Low load scenario
 
This is likely to occur in time periods
of photo voltaic (PV) is high and the load
typically during the morning hours. The h
shown here is meant to illustrate the idea
power from the grid to the consumer. An i
may make the voltage at the terminals rise up 
line, equivalent to 253V), which is also 
level violation to the European norm. This overshoot effect 
increases with the power and the distance of 
houses to the substation. If the voltage rise gets too high, the 
distribution system operator also has to take counter 
measures, because the end users appliances and electrical 
Maximum load scenario. 
In order to do that, the lack of energy is signaled by the 
power providers towards the owners of intelligent buildings 
in the city by means of usual communication technologies. 
turning off domestic 
, set air conditioning units or 
mode and deactivate charging stations for 
electric cars and vehicles. Therefore, the energy supply 
within the city could be balanced in a better way by the 
swarm behavior of the intelligent consumers by de-
This is one of the core ideas of our 
Use case UC2: Surplus or excess of renewable energy 
discussed use case UC2. 
he power consumption and load in the city reaches its 
lowest level. During the same time frame, the renewable 
energy is fed into the power grid at maximum levels 
sun radiation. Figure 5 
 
Low load scenario. 
n time periods when the injection 
load on the net is low, 
The high PV injection 
the idea of getting more 
An injection of power 
at the terminals rise up to 1.1 p.u. (red 
is also a possible voltage 
This overshoot effect 
increases with the power and the distance of the smart 
e rise gets too high, the 
has to take counter 
measures, because the end users appliances and electrical 
devices are designed for a certain voltage range
mentioned above). Again, this 
power shall be used with optimum approach by the 
intelligent buildings of the city. In order to do that, the 
surplus of energy is again signaled by the energy suppliers 
towards the owners of the intell
The house owners with our 
then react by turning on additional power loads such as 
domestic appliances (e.g., white goods, air conditioning 
units or heat pumps), as well as electric cars and vehicles. 
Also in this case, the energy supply within the
balanced by the swarm behavior of the intelligent 
consumers. 
IV. 
CONCEPT AND OVERALL 
The core concept is to minimize the uneven 
smart buildings on electrical 
power grid by analyzing and 
the intelligent buildings. The use of information technology 
allows an improvement on the electricity’s
the power grid, with power 
consumption integration. The idea is to b
power grids by using KNX-
communication infrastructure 
advantages of NGN are used to build a communication 
platform between mobile devices and an intelligent building 
with a home automation solution. 
 
Figure 6.  Control system with smart loads L9.....L20
 
Figure 6 depicts the smart loads and 
architecture. For simplicity, the 
20. To analyze the facts related to smart homes and power 
networks, we used an integrated 
power system calculations. The following features are 
provided by “Dig SILENT Power Factory
designed as an advanced integrated and interactive software 
package dedicated to electrical power system and control 
analysis in order to achieve the main objectives 
and operation optimization. Some of these functions are 
load flow, stability calculation and modal analysis
design a distribution model of 
network and a power grid, the following steps 
applied that include the external grid, transformers, bus
etc. (see Figure 7).  
At first, an external gri
connected to the bus-bar (B1). The specific bus
devices are designed for a certain voltage range only (as 
Again, this surplus or excess of electric 
power shall be used with optimum approach by the 
intelligent buildings of the city. In order to do that, the 
signaled by the energy suppliers 
intelligent buildings in the city. 
our smart phone application can 
then react by turning on additional power loads such as 
white goods, air conditioning 
units or heat pumps), as well as electric cars and vehicles. 
, the energy supply within the city could be 
balanced by the swarm behavior of the intelligent 
VERALL SYSTEM DESIGN 
The core concept is to minimize the uneven effect of 
electrical networks and on the smart 
analyzing and controlling the load profile of 
The use of information technology 
an improvement on the electricity’s transport from 
 system stability to consumer 
The idea is to balance loads in 
-enabled Smart Homes and a 
communication infrastructure as described above. The 
are used to build a communication 
platform between mobile devices and an intelligent building 
utomation solution.  
 
system with smart loads L9.....L20. 
smart loads and their control system 
the loads are named L 9, 10, 19, 
o analyze the facts related to smart homes and power 
integrated engineering tool for the 
. The following features are 
Dig SILENT Power Factory” [11]: It has been 
designed as an advanced integrated and interactive software 
package dedicated to electrical power system and control 
analysis in order to achieve the main objectives of planning 
operation optimization. Some of these functions are 
calculation and modal analysis. To 
model of a smart home electrical 
the following steps have been 
external grid, transformers, bus-bars 
an external grid (medium voltage) was 
bar (B1). The specific bus-bar was 

270
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
connected to a transformer (step-down), the parameters 
being 120/20 kV. The low-voltage side was 
bus-bar (B2). At the high-voltage end of 
T1...T3 line, one end was connected to B3 and the other end 
to the consumer (load), the line-line voltage 
230V line-ground.  
There is a total of 12 smart houses and 23 
houses, loads being 1.14 kW each, with a 
0.95 to bus-bar B3. The transmission line 
length. The resistance value for each kilometer of B3 is 
0.2215 Ohm, with a reactance of 0.037
standard values. When voltage is applied to 
line of (B3), due to different loads, the
simulation sags from 400V to 343V. The voltage 
does not comply with the norms: According 
may be a ±10% voltage magnitude variation
voltage.  
The distribution grid model consists of 
lines, three transformers 0.4 kV, four 
generators (PV cell) and one motor (battery). E
the consumer end could be “1 to n” number of customers. 
Three transmission lines are connected to one bus
which is connected to one transformer (20/0.4
other two transmission lines are connected to a separate bus
bar, which is connected to another transformer (20/0.4
Now, there are mainly two tasks: Energy balancing and 
operational control. Both tasks are closely linked,
power that is generated at different places and times in the 
grid must be evacuated and transported. According
German Energy Industry Act, the power from internal 
Renewable Energy Sources (RES) generators
evacuated [12]. For a further coverage of 30% RES, 
contracts for RES outside the grid have been made. 
However, forecast and reality do not always match
on the generation nor on the load side [13
down), the parameters 
was connected to the 
voltage end of Transformers 
connected to B3 and the other end 
voltage being 400V and 
a total of 12 smart houses and 23 “normal” 
with a power factor of 
B3. The transmission line of B3 is 5 km in 
length. The resistance value for each kilometer of B3 is 
reactance of 0.037 Ohm, which are 
applied to the transmission 
, the voltage in the 
sags from 400V to 343V. The voltage of 343V 
According to these, there 
variation of the reference 
of five transmission 
, four photo voltaic 
(PV cell) and one motor (battery). Every load at 
number of customers. 
are connected to one bus-bar, 
transformer (20/0.4 kV). The 
transmission lines are connected to a separate bus-
is connected to another transformer (20/0.4 kV).  
here are mainly two tasks: Energy balancing and 
operational control. Both tasks are closely linked, since the 
at different places and times in the 
transported. According to the 
German Energy Industry Act, the power from internal 
Renewable Energy Sources (RES) generators must be 
ther coverage of 30% RES, 
contracts for RES outside the grid have been made. 
forecast and reality do not always match, neither 
[13]. 
V. 
EVALUATION AND A
The scenario being displayed
load connection. It shows a voltage dip after each
load. 
 
Figure 8.    Transmission line with max load smart homes
In Figure 9, the scenario being displayed is high 
On the X-axis the distance in 
axis shows the voltage (unit: p.u
 
Figure 9.   Voltage drop across supply line, high load at terminals
Let us assume that the voltage has dropped from 1 p
to 0.97 p.u., which is equivalent to 207
line. The graph shows that when high 
connected to a transmission line, there will be a voltage drop 
Figure 7.     Transmission from grid to consumer end. 
ANALYSIS OF OUTPUT PLOTS 
being displayed in Figure 8 shows the high 
load connection. It shows a voltage dip after each smart 
 
Transmission line with max load smart homes. 
scenario being displayed is high load. 
istance in kilometers is displayed, the Y-
p.u.). 
 
Voltage drop across supply line, high load at terminals. 
the voltage has dropped from 1 p.u. 
equivalent to 207V at the end of the 
he graph shows that when high smart loads are 
a transmission line, there will be a voltage drop 

271
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
at the consumer end, so that the effect is increasing when 
the distance to substation increases. Line-
phase voltages are drastically reduced. 
variations are also violating the norms, since t
should be within the 10% range. Usually
transformers are used by distribution system operators as the 
typical instrument to counteract this effect. The technique is 
to choose another tap winding so that the voltage in the 
substation increases, which also affects the terminal voltage.  
However, they can only be operated in 
which is a great disadvantage. If the voltage is supplied 
the grid, the feed-in of renewable energy is diminishing to 
the minimum and the consumer is in the high
voltage at the transmission line is decreased
improved to a standard that complies 
Electrical appliances may be damaged if the voltage levels 
are not kept within the specified range
appliances at households cannot bear such 
voltage. More current will be drawn by
causing higher expenses and affecting 
these appliances.  
In the following, a scenario for high
described (Figure 10). Each load is connected to bus
(0.4 kV). Every alternate load is connected via 
to smart houses. 
 
Figure 10.   Transmission line with smart homes delivering excess power
In Figure 11, the scenario being displayed 
integration of in-feed electrical power 
injection. On the X-axis the distance in
displayed, the Y-axis shows the voltage (unit: p.u.). 
 
Figure 11.   High photo voltaic generation violates voltage criteria
Figure 11 shows the results of our simulation when 
voltage goes up from 1.0 p.u. to 1.10 p.u
253V) at the end of the line. Due to the power
the generators (PV panels) on the specific
connected to that generator, the effect will be distributed 
the effect is increasing when 
-to-line and line-to-
. Here, the voltage 
, since the voltage 
Usually, tap-changer 
transformers are used by distribution system operators as the 
effect. The technique is 
nother tap winding so that the voltage in the 
the terminal voltage.  
they can only be operated in a load-free state, 
the voltage is supplied by 
in of renewable energy is diminishing to 
the high load state, the 
voltage at the transmission line is decreased. This has to be 
that complies with the norms. 
be damaged if the voltage levels 
specified range. The electrical 
olds cannot bear such decreases in 
by the appliances, 
 the efficiency of 
igh PV injection is 
connected to bus-bar B3 
). Every alternate load is connected via a generator 
 
delivering excess power. 
he scenario being displayed is a high 
electrical power by a high PV 
the distance in kilometers is 
axis shows the voltage (unit: p.u.).  
generation violates voltage criteria. 
of our simulation when the 
to 1.10 p.u. (equivalent to 
the power injection by 
n the specific loads, which are 
the effect will be distributed 
and the voltage is increased after every kilometer
of this injection of power, the transmission line voltage went
high. The system voltage show
normal range, therefore violating the norms
power is available. In this scenario, balancing 
applied. Here, the PV generators
asynchronous generators just to implement the 
active power of each generator is 4
power is 0 MVAr, and the consumer is considered as 
households. Now the voltage is 
generator injection is applied 
lower load. The voltage at the transmission line increase
(overshoots), and now it has to be lowered to
given by the norms. The electrical appliances at 
households cannot bear such an 
could be caused to the appliances and also 
efficiency of these appliances.
VI. 
CALCULATION AND 
The purpose of the calculation
find the actual power that is needed to minimize the uneven 
effect of our smart houses, in order that 
and balancing technique can be applied
Voltages with U=230V 
Concerning the given voltage magnitude variations, the 
admissible voltage range for the LV consumer 
ULV < 253V. The terminal voltage is subject to the line 
impedance R, X and the apparent power, as shown 
12. 
 
Figure 12.    Equivalent circuit of supply line with line impedance
Figure 12 shows the equivalent circuit of a supply line 
with the voltage U0 at the substation
point of the load. The apparent power S
and flows towards the junction po
across the line impedance ZL
defined as [14]: 
 
       ⋅ 	 ⋅  
 
Figure 13 shows the voltage across a supply line in the 
low voltage grid. The flow of the active power P is directed 
from the MV-grid downwards
transformer, over a stub line, 
following, a calculation of different scen
load, high/low PV injection) is presented.
after every kilometer. Because 
this injection of power, the transmission line voltage went 
he system voltage shows an overshoot from the 
violating the norms, when excess 
In this scenario, balancing should be 
generators are replaced with 
just to implement the idea. The 
power of each generator is 4.5 kW, the reactive 
consumer is considered as normal 
is supplied by the grid, and the 
applied with the consumer having a 
. The voltage at the transmission line increases 
has to be lowered to the standard 
orms. The electrical appliances at the 
an increase of voltage. Damage 
be caused to the appliances and also affect the 
efficiency of these appliances. 
ALCULATION AND EVALUATION 
calculations given in this section is to 
is needed to minimize the uneven 
in order that an optimal control 
can be applied.  
U=230V are used as a reference. 
the given voltage magnitude variations, the 
admissible voltage range for the LV consumer is 207V < 
ULV < 253V. The terminal voltage is subject to the line 
impedance R, X and the apparent power, as shown in Figure 
 
circuit of supply line with line impedance. 
shows the equivalent circuit of a supply line 
with the voltage U0 at the substation, and UL at the junction 
the load. The apparent power S = P + jQ is injected 
towards the junction point. The voltage ∆U drops 
across the line impedance ZL = RL + jXL and can be 

                                             (1) 
shows the voltage across a supply line in the 
low voltage grid. The flow of the active power P is directed 
rid downwards through the MV/LV 
 towards the customers. In the 
of different scenarios (high/low 
is presented. 

272
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 13.    Single line distribution
   Apparent power:      
 ⋅                   
Let Q = 0, then S = P. Number of smart 
P/Customer at any specific time = 1.14 
 13.68                  
Voltage at load:        
Difference voltage =   
 
The voltage at the customer end is in question
Supply Voltage:  = 230V (Line-Earth
P [W] = U [V] ⋅ I [A] 
 
 
Current: I =  

 = 13.68 kW / 230 V  
I = 59.4 A 
 
 
 
The change in voltage is:     ⋅    
   ⋅   
 
 
 
   	   j ⋅Xk 
 
 
Resistance = 0.207 Ω / km,                                        
Reactance   = 0.0804 Ω/km, Distance
    √0.5748     0.758155 ⋅  5   3
    ⋅      59.4 ⋅  3.79   225.
   Calculations of specific power:  
     ⋅      ⋅    
 
        230* –  225.17 * 
 ,-./010/   4.83 ⋅   59.4
  286.9                   
This power is needed to stabilize the transmission line
(Figure 14).  
 
Figure 14.   Unloaded transmission line.
line distribution. 
                  
(2) 
smart loads = 12.  
  ⋅  12 
              (3) 
 
 
is in question:  = ? 
arth),                                   
 
 
 
 
(4) 
 
 
 
(5) 
 
 
 
 
,                                        
Distance = 5 km. 
 
3.79 Ω           6 
.17 *    
(7) 
 
 
  4.83 *  
                     8 
the transmission line       
            
Unloaded transmission line. 
  Now, the excessive and deficit of 
  U3  U   U4  230 V  205
  P  1.485 kW                                                 
  
   U3  U  U4  230 V  253
   P  1.366 kW                                                                   
The important results for the first
 
• 
Equation (9) indicates the power needed 
into the system in order to 
effect of voltage caused due
consumer end. 
• 
Equation (10) indicates the power value needed to 
be taken out of the system 
uneven effect of voltage caused due to low load 
and surplus power at 
• 
Equations (9) and (10) also indicate that if the 
storage battery system of same power 
added to the system, 
in both cases, charging when surplus energy is 
available and discharg
the required limit.  
 
Figure 15 contains loads,
system, which defines the balanced 
and high load scenarios are 
power by integration of battery storage 
 
Figure 15.    Stabilized 
In Figure 16, the scenario being displayed is balanced 
power. Again, on the X-axis the distance in kilometers is 
displayed, the Y-axis shows the voltage (unit: p.u.).
 
Figure 16.      Stabilized 
and deficit of power is calculated:     
205 V  25 V  
                                                                 (9) 
253 V  23 V                       
                                                                  (10)    
first solution are: 
quation (9) indicates the power needed to be fed 
in order to balance the uneven 
caused due to a high load at the 
Equation (10) indicates the power value needed to 
the system in order to balance the 
uneven effect of voltage caused due to low load 
and surplus power at the consumer end. 
(10) also indicate that if the 
storage battery system of same power capacity is 
 it will balance the load profile 
harging when surplus energy is 
ble and discharging when energy is less than 
loads, PV generators and a battery 
balanced load profile. Low load 
are balanced with regulating the 
battery storage systems.  
 
Stabilized voltage scenario. 
, the scenario being displayed is balanced 
axis the distance in kilometers is 
axis shows the voltage (unit: p.u.).  
Stabilized voltage scenario. 

273
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The above graph indicates the balanced voltage values 
with high load and high in-feed from PV generators with an 
integration of battery systems.  
VII. POWER AND ENERGY CONSUMPTION, SECOND 
SOLUTION 
In this section, we will discuss some power consumption 
statistics in detail and find out how our NGN based network 
can minimize the problem. We will discuss two use cases 
here. The power usage data will be collected in dynamic 
power environment, which varies with the utilization. 
A. 
Residential environment 
For instance, we look at a two person living room 
apartment. Before we start with the power and energy 
consumption analysis, we must have a rough idea about the 
consumption of power and energy among the individuals in 
the residential environment. The full system power 
consumption is divided into two components: Static or 
constant power, which is independent of system activity, 
and dynamic power, which varies with the utilization [15]. 
The data that we have collected leads us to come up with a 
synopsis of power and energy used among the two persons 
at peak hours (see Figure 17).  
 
 
  Figure 17.    Power and energy consumption in residential environment. 
The above power consumption statistical graph is for a 
high-load residential environment, where an excessive 
number of appliances is in use by the residents. So, for the 
simplification of our calculation, we will use the ideal case 
as given in Table II. In this table, the values are depending 
on the variable time. 
It can be constant and variable according to the different 
profile of the individuals. It also depends on the type and 
number of appliances that are being used at certain points in 
time. Power consumption per day for pure resistive loads 
(from the above figure and calculation): 
  
• 
Light bulb, heaters, smart devices = 1550 W 
• 
Energy per day for same loads = 5.4 kWh 
• 
Energy per month for same loads=162 kWh 
 
 
 
TABLE II.  
POWER CONSUMPTION OF DIFFERENT APPLIANCES 
Items 
Quantity 
Power con-
sumption 
(W) 
Operational 
time (h) 
Energy 
(kWh) 
Light bulb 
    4 
    40 
   6 
 0.96 
Electric 
Stove 
1 
1500 
    1 
1.5 
Electric 
Heater 
1 
1500 
   2 
3.0 
Fridge 
/Freezer 
1 
100 
   24 
2.4 
TV 
 
1 
80 
    1 
0.08 
Washing 
Machine 
1 
200 
   1 
0.2 
Cloth dryer 
 
1 
2000 
0.5 
1.0 
Smart 
Devices  
6 
10 
24 
1.44 
 
It should be kept in mind that these values are taken in a 
normal two person ideal residential environment. These 
values vary with different profiles and different household 
appliances. This example of normal households is given to 
illustrate the idea of analyzing how load profiling is taking 
part to regulate the power system networks in different 
levels [16].       
Now we discuss the given example in more detail. We 
take a specific time interval between (5pm to 10pm) when 
all of the house appliances are in operating mode, meaning 
that the house residents are using most of the appliances at 
this specific time. So, this will be about load calculation in 
peak hours. At the same time, our Smart Home 
communication infrastructure is providing the information 
to the house owner by a graphical user interface panel, 
installed 
at 
the 
same 
premises. 
Alternatively, 
the 
information is passed through our smart phone android 
application to the user. The house owner will have the 
possibility to minimize or regulate the power consumption 
profile by switching off the high power rating device or 
appliance.   
An example for a random user: If he turns off a specific 
appliance, for instance a heater, at peak hours - how much 
effect will be observed after this specific action? Let us 
assume that he is reducing the load by 20% at peak hours. 
Similarly, if ten users are using the same control technique 
for their smart homes, they are reducing a considerable 
amount of load, which obviously sends a positive effect to 
the energy suppliers. The energy supply within the city 
could be balanced in a better way by the swarm behavior of 
the intelligent consumers by de-activating power loads.  
The active power per customer taken in the above 
calculation is for simulation and to analyze the effect of 
power and voltage variation in electricity networks. Now 
again, we will use the ideal case values as above and 
analyze the effect of our control action on our power and 
energy statistics.  
 

274
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
In the calculations, power reduction and energy 
differences in the defined time is given. 
 
89.: :.;</=08> ?8=@A  -./  5,430  1,550
 3,880  
 
C>.:DE ;011.:.>/. 0> 0.3ℎ  1,550  ⋅ 0.3ℎ
 0.46 ℎ 
 
C>.:DE ;011.:.>/. 18: 5 @--A0@>/.,   2.3 ℎ 
 
C>.:DE ;011.:.>/. -.: ;@E   10.58  2.3 ℎ
 8.28 ℎ 
 
In the same manner, the same control technique of our 
smart KNX architecture affects different environments [17]. 
Now, we will take another use case for power consumption 
statistics. 
B. 
Office in a business environment  
Now follows a power consumption analysis of an office 
in a business environment, taking into account the broad 
spectrum of workflows of the office environment and 
including different appliances in the office. To deal with 
power consumption, the components used in the business 
office system should be known that are responsible for the 
consumption of power. Also, the recourses that are been 
used in the same scenario should be taken into account. All 
these power measurements are taken in real time. To 
overcome the repetition of the measuring part, we came up 
with estimated data and the calculation of power 
consumption. 
Figure 18.    Power and energy consumption in a business environment. 
This provides us with the parameters we want to 
observe. This approach also focuses on benchmarking the 
computer system in order to achieve an overall overview of 
the energy consumed by the computer system in the office. 
So, in the end we have the infrastructure of the power 
consumption used in the business environment in a real-time 
scenario [18]. 
For the simplification of our calculation, we will use the 
ideal case as given in Table III. In this table, the values 
depend on the variable of time. It can be constant and 
variable according to the different profile of individuals. 
TABLE III.  
POWER CONSUMPTION OF DIFFERENT OFFICE APPLIANCES  
Items 
Peak 
rating  
No of 
Items 
Time 
(h) 
Power 
(W) 
Energy 
(KWh) 
PC and monitor 
300 
30 
7 
63000 
63 
Laptop computer 
100 
10 
4 
4000 
4 
Monitors  
200 
5 
8 
8000 
8 
Printer/scanner/ 
copier 
50 
5 
4 
1000 
1 
Fax machines 
130 
10 
0.3 
390 
0.39 
Vending machines 
3000 
2 
8 
48000 
48 
Coffee machines 
1000 
1 
5 
5000 
5 
 
Power consumption per day for specific loads (from the 
above figure and calculation): 
 
• 
Coffee  machine = 1 kW 
• 
Energy per day for same load = 5 kWh 
• 
Energy per month for same load = 150 kWh 
 
It should be kept in mind that these values are taken in a 
normal, “ideal” office environment. These values vary with 
different profiles and different equipment or appliances. The 
given example of normal loads again illustrates the idea to 
analyze how load profiling is taking part to regulate the 
power system networks in different levels.       
Now we discuss the given example in more detail. 
Again, we look at a specific time interval (between 5pm to 
10pm) when all of the office equipment or appliances are in 
operating mode. This means that the office workers use 
most of the devices at this specific time, leading to a load 
calculation for peak hours. At the same time, our KNX-
enabled office [19] communication infrastructure is 
providing the information for the office energy operator by a 
graphical user interface panel, installed at the same 
premises, or the information is passed through our smart 
phone application. The operator will have the possibility to 
minimize or regulate the power consumption profile by 
turning off the high power rating device or appliance. 
Example: A specific appliance, for instance a coffee 
machine, is used for 3 hours instead of 5 hours, at peak load. 
How much effect will be observed after this specific action? 
Let us assume there will be a reduction of the load by 11% 
(see Figure 13) at peak hours. Similarly, if ten users are 
using the same control technique for a “smart” office, they 

275
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
are reducing the load by a considerable amount
obviously sends a positive effect to the energy suppliers
the city. This could be balanced in a better way by the 
swarm behavior of the intelligent consumers by de
activating power loads. The active power per cus
taken in the above calculation is used for 
analyzing the effect of power and voltage variation in the 
electricity networks. Again, we will use 
values as above and analyze the effect of our control action 
on our power and energy statistic [20]. 
 
C>.:DE ;011.:.>/. 0> 2ℎ   1000  ⋅
 
C>.:DE ;011.:.>/. 18: 5 @--A0@>/., 
 
C>.:DE ;011.:.>/. -.: ;@E   129.39
 119.39ℎ 
 
VIII. COMPONENTS 
The following section introduces the components 
are needed for the proposed analysis and calculation. 
following parts of the Power Factory workspace are visible.
 
Figure 19.    Transmission grid, single line diagram
The distribution grid (see Figure 1
external grid element. The transmission grid has a load 
element in the middle that represents the distribution grid, as 
depicted in Figure 20 by the red arrow. In order to connect 
the two grids, we have to remove the external net ob
the distribution grid, and the middle load element in the 
transmission grid.  
 
 
Figure 20.    Transformer connected to the single 
a considerable amount, which 
positive effect to the energy suppliers of 
could be balanced in a better way by the 
swarm behavior of the intelligent consumers by de-
activating power loads. The active power per customer 
used for simulation and 
of power and voltage variation in the 
we will use the ideal case 
and analyze the effect of our control action 
2ℎ  2 ℎ 
  10 ℎ 
39  10 ℎ
 
The following section introduces the components that 
are needed for the proposed analysis and calculation. The 
workspace are visible. 
 
single line diagram. 
Figure 19) is fed by an 
external grid element. The transmission grid has a load 
represents the distribution grid, as 
by the red arrow. In order to connect 
the two grids, we have to remove the external net object in 
the distribution grid, and the middle load element in the 
 
Transformer connected to the single busbar system.     
To create a 110/33 kV transformer and to connect the 
110 kV double busbar system with the 33 kV 
terminals (busbars) of the substations are to be connected 
with two winding transformers
transformer, the upper terminal at the 
by the background pattern. 
connected to the terminal at 
terminal makes the second connection
21).  
Figure 21.     Two winding 
A load flow calculation may be started from the main 
menu of Power Factory. For the intended load flow 
calculation, the following options need to be set: Calculation 
Method = AC Load Flow, balanced, positive sequence. All 
other options on the basic options page need to be disabled.
The load flow calculation is not executed to resolve the 
error. One should first find the element for which the error 
was reported. With the Power Factory output window, the 
error can be corrected and the load flow calculated again. 
Then, the calculation shows that the load flow solving 
algorithm has found one area (separated area) in the whole 
system and chosen the external grid element as a reference 
element. The single line graphic in Figure 21 shows the 
results of the load flow in the result boxes. 
 
Figure 22.     Results of the load flow calculation
 
To create a 110/33 kV transformer and to connect the 
system with the 33 kV busbar, the 
s) of the substations are to be connected 
transformers. To draw the first 
the upper terminal at the position is suggested 
by the background pattern. The transformer is now 
at that position. The middle 
the second connection (see Figures 20 and 
 
inding transformer connection. 
A load flow calculation may be started from the main 
For the intended load flow 
calculation, the following options need to be set: Calculation 
Method = AC Load Flow, balanced, positive sequence. All 
other options on the basic options page need to be disabled. 
The load flow calculation is not executed to resolve the 
irst find the element for which the error 
was reported. With the Power Factory output window, the 
error can be corrected and the load flow calculated again.  
Then, the calculation shows that the load flow solving 
algorithm has found one area (separated area) in the whole 
system and chosen the external grid element as a reference 
element. The single line graphic in Figure 21 shows the 
the result boxes.                                 
 
Results of the load flow calculation. 

276
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
IX. 
FUTURE WORK AND CONCLUSION 
We are concluding this work by stating that our smart 
home KNX control architecture solution is secure and 
trustworthy for the solution of current challenges in the field 
of optimal smart grids. Capable of energy efficient 
management for intelligent buildings, our simulation 
provides the important values, which estimate the values of 
power that can balance the uneven effect of voltage in both 
cases. An interesting alternative is the integration of battery 
backup systems. Already a proven technology for 
uninterrupted power supply (UPS) units, they become 
increasingly interesting for applications in power systems. 
They cannot only be used for energy balancing purposes, 
but can also serve as primary and secondary control 
reserves.  
Actually, this concept is not new: A battery-based 
system was built in Germany for voltage and frequency 
stabilization for the supply of the island network used in 
West Berlin in 1986. The 17 MW plant was to going 
through an entire charge and discharge cycle twice per day 
[21]. Keeping in view that if emerging renewable energy 
sources act as separate generation, they cannot balance the 
existing energy demand. It is necessary that RES will be 
integrated in the existing power grid. 
Our 
results 
evaluate 
the 
following 
important 
conclusions: In case of high loads and a lack of power, and 
in case of excessive power and low loads, we have to 
manage a certain amount of power that can balance the 
effect. This could be done by reducing or raising the load 
with our load management and control solution. 
In the power statistics (Section VII), the collected data 
will help us to create a power model, as the power model 
would be the most efficient and effective way to replicate 
the workload on the different users in the business 
environment dealing with real time data. Advancements are 
required in the existing power management systems. 
The software being used for simulation purposes in this 
work is a limited version, in which only small networks can 
be analyzed. For future work, voltage variations are to be 
looked upon with specific actual loads as presented in 
Section VII at larger scales. This will be done with an 
extended version of the software, allowing to simulate a 
whole city as a grid model [22]. The number of transmission 
lines will be increased as well as the number of parameters 
for the distribution grid. Thus, we will have the knowledge 
to give an intelligent idea within this remarkable field of 
study. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT                          
This work has been performed within the project “Smart 
Home Control” at Hochschule Darmstadt (University of 
Applied Sciences). The authors would like to acknowledge 
the support of the Energy Lab at the University for giving 
access to the Dig Silent software and Albrecht JUNG GmbH 
& Co. KG for their contribution of KNX actors, sensors and 
other KNX home automation devices and kind support.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Khan, T. Wiens, and M. Massoth, “Stability Improvement 
Solution of the Smart Power Grid by an Analysis of Voltage 
Variation in Intelligent Buildings,” (SMART 2014), IARIA, 2014, 
pp. 13-19, ISSN: 2308-3727, ISBN: 978-1-61208-363-6. 
[2] T. Wiens and Michael Massoth, “Trustful interaction between 
intelligent building control and Energy suppliers of the smart power 
Grid," in  Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on smart 
system, devices and technology (SMART 2013), IARIA, 2013, pp. 
46-51, ISSN: 2308-3727, ISBN: 978-1-61208-282-0. 
[3] M. Massoth et al., “Ubiquitous Smart Grid Control Solution based on 
a Next Generation Network as Integration Platform,” in Proceedings 
of the 1st International Conference on Smart Grids, Green 
Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies (ENERGY 
2011), IARIA, 2011, pp. 173-178, ISSN: 2308-412X, ISBN: 978-1-
61208-136-6. 
[4] “Genentech Media. Home Energy Management Systems,” [Online]. 
Available from: http://www.greentechmedia.com, 2013-2017. 
[5] D. Tsiamitros, D. Stimoniaris, N. Poulakis, M. A. Zehir, A. Batman, 
M. Bagriyanik, A. Özdemir and E. Dialynas, “Advanced Energy 
Storage and Demand-Side Management in Smart Grids using 
Buildings Energy Efficiency Technologies,” 5th IEEE PES 
Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Europe (ISGT Europe), Istanbul, 
Oct 2014, pp. 632-637, ISBN: 978-1-4799-7721-5. 
[6] R. Acker and M. Massoth, “Secure Ubiquitous House and Facility 
Control Solution,” Fifth International Conference on Internet and 
Web Applications and Services (ICIW 2010), IARIA, 2010, pp. 262-
267, ISBN 978-0-7695-4022-1. 
[7] M. Liska, M. Ivanic, V. Volcko, P.Janiga, “Research on Smart Home 
Energy Management System,” Institute of Power and Applied 
Electrical Engineering, Slovak University of Technology in 
Bratislava, Slovakia, 2015. 
[8] B. Asare-Bediako, P. F. Ribeiro, and W. L. Kling, “Integrated Energy 
Optimization with Smart Home Energy Management Systems,” 3rd 
IEEE PES Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Europe (ISGT 
Europe), IEEE, 2014, pp. 1-8, ISBN: 978-1-4673-2595-0, ISSN: 
2165-4816. 
[9] A. Menezes, P. van Oorschot, and S. Vanstone, "Handbook of 
Applied Cryptography (Discrete Mathematics and Its Applications), 
CRC Press, 1996. 
[10] Deutsches Institut für Normung, „DIN EN 50160.“ Available from: 
http://www.leonardo-energy.org/good-practice-guide/standard-en-
50160, 2015. 
[11] Dig Silent, “Dig Silent Power Factory, Version 14.23 software”. 
[Online]. Available from: http://www.digsilent.de/ 
[12] Bundesministerium 
des 
Inneren, 
„Energiewirtschaftsgesetz,” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.gesetze-im-internet.de/ 
bundesrecht/ Energy Act _[2005]/gesamt.pdf, 2005. 
[13] AsianPower & EnergyFront, “Smart Grid. [Online],” Available from: 
http://my.reset.jp/~adachihayao/indexE100319.htm, 2012. 
[14] L. Petry, “Renewable energies - Master of Electrical Engineering 
(Power)”. University of Applied Sciences Darmstadt, 2011. 
[15] A. K. Tao Jiang, “LAYERED GREEN PERFORMANCE,” GAMES, 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2039447.2039651, 2010. 
[16] M. Liserre, T. Sauter and J. Y. Hung, “Future Energy Systems: 
Integrating Renewable Energy Sources into the Smart Power Grid 
through Industrial Electronics,” Industrial Electronics Magazine, Vol. 
4, Issue 1, IEEE, 2010, ISSN: 1932-4529. 
[17] KNXAssociation, “KNX Standard. [Online],” Available from: 
http://www.knx.org/knx-standard/standardisation, 2015. 
[18] tED magazine, “Special Report. [Online],” Available from: 
http://www.tedmag.com/news/news-room/special-report/Special- 
Report/Special-Report-[1-22-2009], 2014. 

277
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[19] P. Kundur and J. Paserb, “Definition and Classification of Power 
System Stability,” IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, Vol. 19, 
IEEE, 2004, pp. 1387-1401, ISSN: 0885-8950. 
[20] G. M. Shafiullah, “Potential challenges: Integrating renewable energy 
with the Smart Grid,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Universities Power 
Engineering Conference (AUPEC), 2010, pp. 1-6, ISBN 978-1-4244-
8379-2.  
[21] T. H. Fiedler, “Mobile and Immobile Components in Modern Power 
Grids for Improving Stability,” Faculty of Electrical Engineering, 
IOSUD, 2010. 
[22] IEEE Task Force on Harmonics Modeling and Simulation, “Modeling 
and simulation of the propagation of harmonics in electric power 
networks, Part I. Concepts, models, and simulation techniques,” IEEE 
Transactions  on Power Delivery 11, IEEE, 1996, pp. 452–465.  

