280
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The Modular Structure of Housing Utilities:
Analyzing Architectural Integration Patterns
Peter De Bruyn and Herwig Mannaert
Normalized Systems Institute
Faculty of Applied Economics
University of Antwerp, Belgium
Email:{peter.debruyn,
herwig.mannaert}@uantwerp.be
Jeroen Faes, Tom Vermeire and Jasper Bosmans
Department of Management Information Systems
Faculty of Applied Economics
University of Antwerp, Belgium
Email:{jeroen.faes,tom.vermeire,jasper.bosmans}
@student.uantwerp.be
Abstract—Modularity is considered a powerful concept within
many domains. While modular artifacts are believed to have
the potential to exhibit several beneﬁcial characteristics such
as evolvability, the actual realization of this evolvability or
ﬂexibility remains challenging. This paper considers houses as
modular structures and employs the combinatorics underlying
Normalized Systems Theory, as well as the integration patterns
it proposes, to analyze design alternatives for the incorporation of
electricity, heating, air conditioning and Internet access utilities
within houses. The paper demonstrates that the integration
patterns can be applied at several modular granularity levels.
An analysis is presented regarding the currently most frequently
used integration patterns (as well as their level of application),
and those patterns that should deserve additional exploration. The
adopted approach to analyze the modular design alternatives for
housing utilities is believed to be applicable within other domains
as well.
Keywords–Modularity; Housing; Evolvability; Normalized Sys-
tems; Architectural Patterns.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Modularity is a powerful concept used in many application
domains (including computer science, product engineering,
organizational sciences, and so on) and is generally assumed to
provide beneﬁts including evolvability. Nevertheless, obtaining
such adaptability or evolvability in practice can be challenging.
The different modules in a system might be dependent on one
another, so that a change in one module might lead to (few or
many) changes in other modules. Some of these ripple effects
may be due to so-called cross-cutting concerns in the sense
that they are required across the whole modular structure (e.g.,
security in a software application). As a cross-cutting concern
is, by deﬁnition, present in many modules of a system, it is
clear that changes in that regard can easily impact several
places within a modular structure (e.g., every data entity should
be adapted so that it can securely stored in order to create a
more secure overall software application).
Also houses can be considered as modular structures. They
exhibit several abstraction levels (e.g., houses consisting of
rooms and built by bricks) and could beneﬁt from evolvability
(e.g., connecting an additional room to an existing house). Mo-
reover, houses seem to contain several cross-cutting concerns
(e.g., water and electricity supply) and subject to ripple effects
when undergoing change (e.g., the need to drill into existing
walls or even tear down walls in order to be able to provide an
additional room with water because the connecting old walls
did not provide any connection), hampering their evolvability.
This paper extends a previous paper [1] by investigating and
illustrating the applicability of modularity reasoning (and in
particular the concept of cross-cutting concerns) within the
design of housing utilities. We argue that, in general, the utili-
ties within houses can be considered as cross-cutting concerns.
Whereas our earlier work focused on the electricity and heating
utilities, this paper also analyzes airconditioning and Internet
access utilities in a housing context, thereby further supporting
our claim of the applicability of our reasoning. We propose
design alternatives for housing utilities based on the modular
integration patterns for cross-cutting concerns as suggested
by the combinatorics underlying Normalized Systems Theory
(NST) [2]. The theory is suitable for this purpose as it aims
to provide prescriptive guidance on how to design evolvable
modular systems.
It is important to mention upfront that none of the authors
of this paper are experts within the domain of housing architec-
ture. Therefore, the intention of the paper is not the prescribe
in detail how housing architectures should be improved in
the future. Rather, we intend to show that it makes sense to
apply the modularity reasoning presented within NST (which
originated at the software level) to other domains in which
modularity plays a prominent role. We will structure this
paper as follows. In Section II, we provide a brief overview
of related work regarding modularity, NST and evolvable
housing. Next, in Section III, we present the set of considered
integration patterns for modular structures. We then apply
these patterns for the concerns electricity (Section IV), heating
(Section V), air conditioning (Section VI) and Internet access
(Section VII). Finally, we offer our reﬂections and conclusions
in Sections VIII and IX, respectively.
II.
RELATED WORK
In this section, we discuss some areas of related research.
We brieﬂy discuss, consecutively, modularity, NST and some
earlier work on the evolvable design of houses.
The modularity concept generally refers to the fact that
a system is subdivided into a set of subsystems. Modular
artifacts are deemed interesting due to several potential beneﬁts
that are attributed to it. For instance, designing a system

281
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
in a modular way is expected to lower the complexity as
the design can be decomposed into a set of smaller (less
complex) problems [3]. Also, once a module has been well
designed and tested, it can be reused in other systems without
signiﬁcant additional costs. Another major beneﬁt expected
from modularity is increased ﬂexibility or evolvability. In a
modular artifact, one particular part (module) of the system
can be substituted for another version of it, without the need
to build up the artifact again from scratch. This type of plug-
and-play behavior allows for variation (using the same set of
available module versions, different aggregations or variants
can be realized) and evolvability (over time, an artifact can
evolve from one variant to another) and has been considered
as the “power” of modularity [4].
The realization of a good modular design in practice,
enabling the mentioned advantages like evolvability, is very
challenging. It is generally accepted that the coupling (depen-
dencies and interactions) between the modules in a system
should be studied and minimized [3][5][4]. However, how this
should be attained is unclear and few theoretically underpinned
and generally accepted practical implications are available in
literature. One approach which aims to provide a theoretically
founded framework with practical implications, is NST. The
origins of NST are situated in the formulation of a set of
design theorems for the creation of evolvable software systems.
Here, evolvability is operationalized by demanding Bounded
Input Bound Output (BIBO) stability on ever growing systems.
The theory proves that the isolation of all change drivers
in separate constructs (Separation of Concerns), the stateful
calling of processing functions (Separation of States) and
the ability to update data structures or processing functions
without impacting other data structures or processing functions
(Version Transparency) are necessary conditions in order to
obtain stability [6]. It has been shown that these theorems
can actually be formulated in more general terms for modular
systems [7] and seem to appeal to the basic combinatorics
regarding modularity [2]. More speciﬁcally, the promise of
modularity is that maintaining a particular amount of versions
of modular building blocks will result in an exponential
amount of available system variants. However, in case a
modular system is not well designed (e.g., by not adhering
to the theorems), a change in one particular version of one
particular module may have an impact (ripple effects) on other
(versions of) modules. This number of impacts will typically
grow (in an exponential way) with the size of the system and
its dependencies.
Adhering to the NST design theorems is difﬁcult as they
demand a very strict and ﬁne-grained design of a system, and
every violation will result in a limitation of the evolvability
of the system. Experience with respect to the realization of
such systems has shown that such design becomes much more
realistic in case a set of design patterns (so-called “elements”)
are employed [2]. Each individual element is a generic modular
structure for a basic functionality for the type of system at hand
and can be parametrized (and if necessary, customized) over
and over again when an actual system is built. For instance, in
the case of software systems, a general structure for data, task,
ﬂow, connector and trigger elements was provided [2]. Stated
otherwise, the set of modules constituting an element becomes
a reusable module at a higher abstraction (or granularity) level.
In essence, each element provides a core functionality (e.g.,
representing data) as well as an incorporated integration with
the relevant cross-cutting concerns in the domain (e.g., security
and persistency for data). In order to maximize the envisioned
evolvability, it is important that these cross-cutting concerns
are integrated at the most ﬁne-grained level possible (such as
these elements) and that the parts in the elements connecting or
dealing with the cross-cutting concerns are properly separated
in distinct modules that are version transparent.
As we stated above that houses can be considered as mo-
dular systems and contain cross-cutting concerns, NST seems
to be applicable in this domain. To the best of our knowledge,
little previous work exists on the evolvable modular design
of houses. Some interesting exceptions do however exist. In
terms of academic research for instance, Keymer [8] lists
and discusses a set of design strategies for increasing the
possibilities of buildings to accommodate change, some of
them pointing to relevant cross-cutting concerns in this respect
(i.e., several ways of distributing services such as heating,
ventilation, electrical wiring, plumbing, etcetera). Or, when
considering real-life projects, the Hivehaus “modular living
space” project [9] can be considered as an interesting effort
in dealing with the design of houses in a modular way while
taking care of the proper integration of cross-cutting concerns
(see Section VIII). Therefore, the use of underlying theory
such as NST (and the integration patterns following from this,
as discussed in Section III) to analyze the modular design of
houses in a more systematic way is in our view an interesting
extension of existing work. Whereas our earlier publication
[1] focused on the electricity and heating utilities, we now
also conduct a similar analysis to airconditioning and Internet
access utilities.
III.
PATTERNS FOR CROSS-CUTTING CONCERN
INTEGRATION
Based on NST and the implications of its theorems [2],
we differentiate between the following integration patterns
of cross-cutting concerns. As a ﬁrst category of integration
patterns, we consider cross-cutting concern modules added to
the main modules wherein each of the cross-cutting concern
modules handles the full functionality of that cross-cutting
concern itself. We call this the embedded integration pattern
and refer to it as conﬁguration 1. This embedded module can
be dedicated (in case the module was customly designed for the
system at hand) or standardized (in case a standardized module
is employed to handle the concern). We refer to the ﬁrst variant
as conﬁguration 1A and the second one as conﬁguration 1B.
For modules in the context of a software system, think of
a separate module added to a data entity taking care of the
persistency of that data entity in a custom designed way (1A)
or by using a standard module (1B) for this purpose.
As a second category of integration patterns, we consider
cross-cutting concern modules added to the main modules
wherein the cross-cutting concern modules are merely con-
nections (“relay modules”) to a more elaborate (external)
implementation framework of the cross-cutting concern that
is actually performing the needed functionality. We call this
the relay integration pattern and refer to it as conﬁguration
2. Such relay modules can connect to a dedicated framework
(in case the framework was customly designed for the system
at hand) or standardized framework (in case the framework
is standardized and, for instance, publicly available). We refer

282
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
to the ﬁrst variant as conﬁguration 2A and the second one as
conﬁguration 2B. For modules in the context of a software sy-
stem, think of a separate module added to a data entity serving
as a proxy to a persistency framework, which was speciﬁcally
designed for its own system (2A), or to an available standard
solution such as JPA (2B). Finally, we mention the option to let
the relay modules connect to another module (i.e., a framework
gateway) and in which only this framework gateway directly
connects to the external implementation framework. We refer
to this third variant as conﬁguration 2C. For modules in the
context of a software system, think of a dedicated gateway
module connecting to the JPA framework but allowing all relay
modules to be technologically independent of this framework
by calling the gateway in a JPA agnostic way.
IV.
ELECTRICITY PATTERNS
In this section, we consider the electricity utility within
houses as a cross-cutting concern. We consider the integration
architectures as proposed in Section II at the modular granu-
larity level of a city or community, house, room and device.
Afterwards, we consider some advanced issues and reﬂections.
A. City or community level
Most cities and communities of developed countries need
electricity, so it can be considered as a cross-cutting concern.
Here, we consider how a city or community can power its
electrical grid as a whole (the distribution of electricity to
individual buildings is discussed later on).
A ﬁrst option could be to have all cities/communities have
there own electricity generation (conﬁguration 1). In primitive
communities, custom built solutions might be considered (1A),
but typically the use of standard solutions (1B) would be
more realistic (e.g., the reproduction of a typical power plant
by means of nuclear reactions, coal, etc.). However, this
often lacks economies of scale (it is more efﬁcient to have
large power plants producing energy for more than 1 city or
community) so typically a city’s electricity grid is connected
to a national electricity grid with one or more electricity
plants dividing the electricity over a large set of cities and
communities (conﬁguration 2). Each country might create its
own speciﬁcally designed grid connecting with the multiple
cities and communities (2A) or make use of a standardized
electrical power distribution network between cities (2B).
While this latter solution is most frequently opted for,
it also has some drawbacks in terms of dependencies. For
instance, if the central grid goes down, all connected cities
and communities are lacking electricity. Therefore, in reality,
most electrical grids are divided into several isolated areas
avoiding that a problem in a particular part of the grid to
get escalated into the complete (national) electricity grid.
Moreover, changes in the standardized network still have their
impact on the relay modules (which should nevertheless be
encapsulated within the cross-cutting concern handling relay
module and not be incorporated within the core module itself).
Consider for instance a change in the voltage of the network or
from alternating current (AC) to direct current (DC). In fact,
the limitations (at that time) for distributing DC over long
distances (in order to be able to adopt integration pattern 2B),
was one of the main reasons for the general prevalence of AC
in the so-called “War of the Currents”. One could even imagine
the situation in which all cities plug their individual grids into
a centralized relay module (power supply) tapping into the
global electricity grid (2C) and shielding the individual cities
and communities from changes in the standardized framework
used.
B. House level
Within every city, community or electricity grid area,
electricity typically has to be available within every house.
Therefore, it constitutes a cross-cutting concern at this level
as well. Sometimes, individual houses have the possibility to
generate their own electricity by using, for instance, a fuel
based electricity generator, solar panels, heat pumps, etc. Furt-
hermore, new technological developments have allowed the
creation of home based batteries with large storage capacities,
even allowing to store electrical power for a whole house for
a considerable amount of time. As this provides a signiﬁcant
amount of independence and sometimes offers budget friendly
solutions, this integration pattern can be interesting in certain
situations. Moreover, a certain amount of ﬂexibility is enabled
as each individual house can choose for the most suitable
type of energy in their situation (e.g., those areas with a high
exposure to sun light might opt for solar panels instead of a
wind mill). In that case (except when they want to transmit the
overcapacity to the central electricity distribution network), no
distribution framework (see previous subsection) is required
and the generators and batteries support the modules for the
adoption of integration pattern 1 (typically conﬁguration 1B).
Most people, however, do not opt for the duplication of
power generators and batteries in each and every individual
house and choose for the option of a connection module plug-
ging into the publicly available electrical power distribution
network (typically standardized, so conﬁguration 2B). Similar
as stated above, dependencies regarding the availability of the
distribution network as well as changes in the power distri-
bution network affecting all connection modules of houses,
remain possible disadvantages of this integration pattern.
C. Room level
Within every house or building, most if not all rooms
require electricity in terms of a set of available sockets where
individual devices (cfr. infra) can be plugged in. Therefore,
it constitutes a cross-cutting concern at this level as well.
Based on the integration patterns we summarized in Section III
and similar to our reasoning expressed above, it would be
theoretically possible for each room in a house to generate
the electricity required (conﬁguration 1A if custom designed,
conﬁguration 1B if a standard solution is opted for). Ne-
vertheless, individual heat pumps, electricity generators, etc.
for individual rooms are —to the best of our knowledge—
typically not applied. Therefore, conﬁguration 2 (typically 2B)
is applied by having sockets plugging into the grid network
of the house. In certain situations, conﬁguration 2C might be
relevant as well. For instance, houses employing a combination
of electrical sources (tapping from the publicly available grid,
as well as producing a portion of energy themselves by solar
panels) could beneﬁt from having the possibility of shifting
between them (e.g., using the solar energy when electricity is
being generated or available on the local battery and the public
grid in all other cases). By having the relay modules (sockets)
connecting to a gateway switching module (connecting to the
solar panels and public grid), only one electricity grid for such
house should be created.

283
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
D. Device level
Ultimately, electrical power should be made available to
individual devices for which it is required in order to work
properly. One possibility to obtain this power is by having a
built-in generator or battery in a device. While the generator
variant hardly exists in practice, batteries within devices are
common practice. Such batteries exist in both custom built
variants (integration pattern 1A) or by the use of general pur-
pose variants (integration pattern 1B). A conﬁguration like this
obviously provides the device a certain degree of autonomy
(i.e., the device can operate on its own) and absence of speciﬁc
dependencies in this respect. For instance, such conﬁguration
might be of great importance for devices to be used witin
an Internet of Things (IoT) context. However, incorporating
batteries in every device might be a signiﬁcant engineering
challenge (sometimes even simply impossible) and requires
the duplication of a battery in each device. Therefore, in many
cases a centralized conﬁguration will be adopted in which the
device is connected to a custom developed (conﬁguration 2A)
or, typically, a standardized electrical grid (conﬁguration 2B).
Recall that we noted in Section IV-A that historically, AC
was chosen above DC at the level of cities and communities
due to (among other things) its possibility to transport electrical
current along larger distances. The consequences of this choice
ripple down to the lower modularity granularity levels, such as
the level of the devices, which then have to deal with electricity
delivered at AC. However, most electrical devices need DC
to function properly. As stated above, it is the relay module
that should encapsulate these kind of dependencies regarding
the external framework and ensure conversions for mutual
compatibility if required. Therefore, an adapter (typically with
a device speciﬁc connection) is often included at the level of
the cross-cutting connecting module (i.e., between the device
and the electrical grid) in order to convert AC (coming in from
the plug) to DC at the right voltage (typically also resulting in
a certain degree of loss of electrical power, which is converted
into heat, depending on the efﬁciency of the adapter). This
clearly shows the duplication of the AC to DC conversion
functionality present within all relay modules (here: adapters).
Moreover, in terms of ﬂexibility and adaptability, this situa-
tion nicely illustrates that changes in the external framework
(e.g., a conversion of AC to DC within the public electrical
grid) would impact all relay modules. In case the AC/DC
conversion would not be separated in a distinct module (e.g.,
the conversion would be performed in the devices themselves
instead of via a separately in/unpluggable adapter), the impact
would be even more profound as the devices themselves should
be adapted. Based on our analysis of the different modular
granularity levels, one could argue for the need to investigate
the option to have AC/DC conversion happening at the house
level instead of the device level. This way, the duplication
of adapters for each separate device could be eliminated and
the dependence on DC would be avoided. More speciﬁcally,
such situation would correspond to the cross-cutting concern
integration pattern 2C where the main modules are the devices,
the sockets are the relay modules (no need for adapters
anymore) and the centralized AC/DC converter would fulﬁll
the role of the gateway module. In fact, recent initiatives
regarding new possible electricity (micro)grid conﬁgurations
seem to suggest these type of integration patterns [10].
E. Overview and advanced issues
Table I provides an overview of the granularity-integration
pattern combinations for the electricity provisioning of houses.
We can observe that, at most modularity levels, a standardized
integration pattern (i.e., 1B and 2B) is opted for. This tends to
indicate a certain maturity within the respective domain, which
is in accordance with our expectations. While dependence on
the external framework is an important limitation regarding
integration pattern 2B, we remark that an interesting research
avenue regarding integration pattern 2C at the device level can
be identiﬁed. Further, the table illustrates that, when aiming
for maximum ﬂexibility, the integration of concerns tends to
be solved at more ﬁne-grained levels (going downwards in
Table I) and in a more standardized externally enabled way
(going to the right in Table I) in the long run.
TABLE I. OVERVIEW OF THE DIFFERENT
GRANULARITY-INTEGRATION PATTERN COMBINATIONS
REGARDING ELECTRICITY.
1A
1B
2A
2B
2C
city/community
•
house
•
•
room
•
•
device
•
•
•
◦
•: currently employed, ◦: to be explored
Further, the electricity cross-cutting concern might be
enriched with additional features for which our proposed
granularity levels and integration patterns might prove useful
during the analysis of their realization options. Consider for
instance on/off switching. Many devices (such as light bulbs)
using electricity to function need to be able to switched on (i.e.,
emit light) and off (i.e., dim the light). Typical approaches
consist of a switch attached to the lamp itself (required in
case of conﬁguration 1) or a separate switch integrated into
the electrical grid of the house itself (the integration structure
of the external framework in case of conﬁguration 2). While
this approach has worked well for many years it still requires
manual intervention at the location of the switch and, in the
latter case, requires the reconﬁguration and integration of the
switches when a lamp would be relocated within the house.
During the last decade, attention has grown for more advan-
ced home domotics in which switches can be managed by
software (e.g., allowing to automatically switch devices on at
a predeﬁned time slot) and in a remote way. Again, this could
be done by placing individual sensors/programmable control-
lers with individual remote controllers (conﬁguration 1B, if
standardized equipment is used). Alternatively, a network of
sensors/programmable controllers could be used having one
central management and remote control (conﬁguration 2B, if
standardized equipment is used), which manages all connected
switches. This would also allow the use of aggregated actions,
such as switching on or off all light bulbs at once at a
predeﬁned time slot, and enable parameter reconﬁguration in
a centralized way. Integration conﬁguration 2C could even
be opted for when, for instance, all sensors/programmable
controllers connect to one central connection module allowing
to be manipulated by means of multiple remote controllers and
protocols (e.g., a traditional remote, smartphone, etc.).

284
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
V.
HEATING PATTERNS
In this section, we consider the heating utility within
houses as a cross-cutting concern. We consider the integration
architectures as proposed in Section II at the modular gra-
nularity level of a city or community, house, room and brick.
Afterwards, we consider some advanced issues and reﬂections.
A. City or community level
As all households need heating, a source of heat should be
transported to or be generated within every house. Therefore,
it represents a genuine cross-cutting concern within a housing
context. In contrast with the electricity concern we discussed
in Section IV, it is rather rare and exceptional that heating is
generated and provided at the city or community level, which
implies that heating is provided at more ﬁne-grained modular
levels (cf. infra). Some initiatives at the higher level of the city
or community can however be noted. For instance, an initiative
in Rotterdam was recently reported [11] in which residual heat
from petrochemical companies around its port is recuperated.
While it concerns warmed water being generally too cold
to be useful for industrial purposes, it might still sufﬁce to
provide the heating for (a large amount of) houses. Referring
to the case of Rotterdam, it is claimed that heating can be
provided for up to 500.000 households in its surrounding
area via a so-called heat network by means of pipelines. In
terms of the NST integration patterns, this would correspond
to integration pattern 1 at the level of Rotterdam’s area (and
more speciﬁcally 1A as it is a ﬁrst and, by deﬁnition, non-
standardized implementation of the concern). Clearly, this
initiative was inspired by the fact that this allows for efﬁciency
gains as the considered household do not have to produce their
own heat in one way or the other: as the heat would otherwise
be “lost”, it is now recuperated at a very low cost. Therefore,
the heat at the level of each house can be tapped from an
external network (i.e., integration pattern 2 can be adopted at
this level, cf. infra).
B. House level
As stated before, most houses take care of their own heat
generation: a house typically has a central heating system
meaning that a central heating boiler uses electricity (cfr.
supra) or petroleum to generate heat and convert cold into
warm water. Another option could be to use heat pumps. This
water will then be distributed along the different rooms in the
house later on (cfr. infra). Considering the granularity level of
a house, this therefore means that typically integration pattern
1 is opted for (and more speciﬁcally 1B, as most households
use a standardized heat generator for this purpose). This way
of working clearly implies certain beneﬁts such as indepen-
dence from external heat generation providers. However, one
might wonder whether this is always the most efﬁcient or
environment friendly way of working. As we mentioned in
Section V-A, it is interesting to see that certain initiatives are
being taken into the exploration of other integration patterns,
such as the so-called heat distribution networks. Here, heated
water is produced in a central location for multiple houses and
then distributed among them. Therefore, integration architec-
ture 2A (as the solution is typically not yet highly standardized)
is opted for in this case.
C. Room level
While a garage or cellar might not be in need of explicit
heating, most other rooms within a house (such as the living
room or bathroom) are. As a consequence, it can be considered
as a relevant cross-cutting concern at this level as well. As
mentioned before, most houses today employ a central heating
system in which heated water is produced at one centralized
place in the house and then transported via water pipes to the
required rooms in which a heating element/radiator is present.
The warm water causes the element to warm up and release
its heat into the room, after which the water (which partly
cooled down) returns to the central heating system. As these
systems and their pipe networks are highly standardized and
commonplace, integration architecture 2B is typically applied.
This allows an efﬁcient generation of heat but also clearly
entails a dependency of all rooms on this central heating
system: in case it would fail or be replaced in such way that the
old pipe network no long sufﬁces, all rooms would be heavily
affected. Using a framework gateway that decouples the pipe
network from the boiler might prevent this and would even
allow to switch between different sources of heat (electrically
generated, via a heat pump or via the external heat distribution
network), which would correspond to integration architecture
2C. In case of absence of a central heating system, integration
architecture 1 might still be used. For instance, some houses
(although a minority) still use systems in which radiators are
placed within rooms. These radiations use the plug to tap
electricity and generate heat at their own spot (representing
conﬁguration 1B). The use of a ﬁreplace corresponds to
the same architecture as well (or conﬁguration 1A in case
it concerns a custom designed ﬁreplace). And theoretically
speaking, one might also think of situations in which each
room is equipped with things such as its own heat pump,
although such solutions —at this point in time— are very
expensive and inefﬁcient.
D. Brick level
Finally, in order to have more homogeneous heat dis-
persion in rooms, heating elements incorporated in the ﬂoor
are sometimes adopted. In such design, the heating pipes
are traditionally also connected with a central heating boi-
ler, representing integration architecture 2. Nevertheless, such
design is typically not really scalable or ﬂexible as changes
(for example, extensions of the heating system to other or
larger rooms) might require to break up the ﬂoor as a whole.
In addition, designing standardized solutions might be more
difﬁcult as many rooms take on different shapes and sizes.
As a purely speculative and thought provoking alternative, we
therefore envision the integration of the heating cross-cutting
concern at the level of an individual brick as represented in
Figure 1 [2]. In every such element, standardized transport
pipes would be embedded for the transportation of hot water,
nicely ﬁtting onto the pipes of every similar adjoining brick.
This would provide a remarkable degree of scalability when
compared to traditional ﬂoor heating: as different rooms are
built or expanded throughout time, additional bricks (with
integrated pipes) could be used, enlarging the area that can
be heated. Clearly, just as it was the case for the device level
for the electricity concern, the brick level seems to represent
the most ﬁne-grained modularity level where the heating cross-
cutting concern can be meaningfully integrated.

285
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 1. A construction element integration cross-cutting concerns [2].
E. Overview and advanced issues
Table II provides an overview of the granularity-integration
pattern combinations for the heating of houses. We can observe
that, at most modularity levels, a standardized integration
pattern (i.e., 1B and 2B) is opted for. An exception is the
integration of heat at the city or community level, which
still resides a non-standardized variant (1A), but could easily
evolvable towards conﬁguration 1B as it gains maturity. Again,
this tends to indicate a certain maturity within the respective
domain, which is in accordance with our expectations. As
the dependency on the external framework is an important
limitation regarding the use of integration pattern 2B, we can
identify an interesting research avenue regarding integration
pattern 2C at the room level. Additionally, we propose to
consider the integration of the cross-cutting concern at an even
more ﬁne-grained level (i.e., a brick) in the future. Further, the
table illustrates that, when aiming for maximum ﬂexibility, the
integration of concerns tends to be solved at more ﬁne-grained
levels in a more standardized externally enabled way (stated
otherwise: evolving towards the right lower corner in Table II).
TABLE II. OVERVIEW OF THE DIFFERENT
GRANULARITY-INTEGRATION PATTERN COMBINATIONS
REGARDING HEATING.
1A
1B
2A
2B
2C
city/community
•
house
•
•
room
•
•
◦
brick
◦
•: currently employed, ◦: to be explored
Further, it should be clear that the heating cross-cutting
concern is highly related to the preservation of heat by, for
example, insulation. Also here, the same modular aggregation
levels might be relevant: the house (e.g., an isolating roof),
the room (e.g., a well-closing door or insulation being put
behind a wall) and the brick (e.g., insulation incorporated in
every individual brick). And similar to the on/off switching
of electricity consuming devices, heat distribution throughout
a house might beneﬁt from more speciﬁc, remote and/or
automated management (of its subparts). For instance, in order
to allow certain rooms in the house (e.g., the living rooms) to
be heated and others (e.g., the garage) not for a certain period
of time, an operating panel may be provided for every radiator
turning it on and off or even measuring the current temperature
and matching it with a predeﬁned temperature goal. In more
advanced settings, a central management unit at the level of
the house could be provided in which a goal temperature for
multiple zones could be speciﬁed. Based on this information,
heat can be released by those radiators standing in zones in
which the temperature is lower than speciﬁed.
VI.
AIR CONDITIONING PATTERNS
In this section, we consider the air conditioning utility
within houses as a cross-cutting concern. Whereas heating as
discussed in Section V aims to increase the room temperature
within houses in case the temperature is lower than desired,
air conditionning aims to decrease the room temperature in
case the temperature is higher than desired. We consider the
integration architectures for air conditioning as proposed in
Section II at the modular granularity level of a house, room
and brick. Afterwards, we consider some advanced issues and
reﬂections.
A. House level
In case houses are equipped with an air conditioning
system, some houses have a centralized, electricity driven,
cool air producing unit. This cold air is then distributed
along the different rooms in the house later on (cfr. infra).
Considering the granularity level of a house, this therefore
means that typically integration pattern 1 is opted for (and
more speciﬁcally 1B, as most households use a standardized
cool air generator for this purpose). We are not aware of any
air conditioning generation/distribution at a higher granularity
than a house, such as a city or community as was the case
for electricity and heating, which would allow houses to tap
cooled air from an external network. This would constitute a

286
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
conﬁguration 2A or 2B at the level of a house, and 1A or
1B at the city or community level. As we can imagine several
very challenging issues of such conﬁguration and given the
fact that the market base for air conditioning is currently still
rather limited, we leave this aggregation level out of scope. The
current way of working clearly implies certain beneﬁts such
as independence from external cool air generation providers.
B. Room level
In contrast with the electricity and heating concern, not all
rooms (or even the majority of them) within a house are always
equipped with air conditioning if a house has provisionings
in this regard (e.g., only the bedroom and living room). We
mentioned above that some houses employ a central cooling
system in which cooled air is produced at one centralized
place in the house. This heat is then transported via tubes to
the required rooms in which an air fan is present. Therefore,
such situations correspond to conﬁguration 2 at the level of the
rooms. For the authors, not being experts in air conditioning
as well as the other cross-cutting concerns, there is no full
clarity regarding the fact whether this constitutes a 2A (custom
built) or 2B conﬁguration. However, this issue is not due
to a shortcoming of our modularity or integration pattern
reasoning, but solely due to our lack of expertise in the
speciﬁc area of, in this case, air conditioning. It is obvious
that this conﬁguration allows an efﬁcient generation of cool
air but also clearly entails a dependency of all rooms on this
central cooling system: in case it would fail or be replaced
in such way that the old tube network no long sufﬁces, all
rooms would be heavily affected. Using a framework gateway,
which decouples the pipe network from the cooling system,
might prevent this and would even allow to switch between
different sources of cool air production. This would correspond
to integration architecture 2C. In many houses having air
conditioning, no central cooling mechanism is present. Instead
separate (mobile) air conditioning devices are put into each
room to be cooled (with a hose to be connected to the outside
environment to expel hot air). Therefore, this corresponds
to integration architecture 1 (and more speciﬁcally 1B as
it generally concerns highly standardized devices). As we
know from our discussion above, this conﬁguration implies
the duplication of these air conditioning devices in each room
for which cooling is preferred.
C. Brick level
Just as we discussed for the case of the electricity and
heating cross-cutting concerns, we might envision the inte-
gration of the air conditioning cross-cutting concern at the
level of an individual brick as a purely thought provoking
possibility, as represented in Figure 1 [2]. In every such
element, standardized transport pipes would be embedded
for the transportation of cooled water or air, nicely ﬁtting
onto the pipes of every similar adjoining brick. This would
provide a remarkable degree of scalability when compared
to the traditional integration alternatives: as different rooms
are built or expanded throughout time, additional bricks (with
integrated pipes) could be used, enlarging the area that can be
cooled. Clearly, just as it was the case for the device level for
the electricity and heating concern, the brick level seems to
represent the most ﬁne-grained modularity level at which the
heating cross-cutting concern can be meaningfully integrated.
D. Overview and advanced issues
Table
III
provides
an
overview
of
the
granularity-
integration pattern combinations for the air conditioning within
houses. While at ﬁrst sight, the air conditioning might seem
completely analogous to the heating concern discussed before
(i.e., cooling instead of heating), some important differences
and nuances can be observed. First, airconditioning is not a
mandatory or strictly necessary cross-cutting concern within
houses. Indeed, many houses or buildings exist in which no
airconditioning is present (which may in fact even represent
the majority of the houses). Secondly, somewhat related or
being a consequence of the previous point, is that the way how
the air conditioning concern is integrated within the modular
structure of houses is less mature when compared to heating.
No concern provisioning is, to the best of our knowledge,
present at the level of a city or community. And while the
concern provisioning at the level of the house and room is
standardized in case of conﬁguration 1, this is not the case (or
at least not completely clear) when conﬁguration 2 is opted
for. Therefore, we anticipate that these 2A conﬁgurations will
or can tend towards a conﬁguration 2B (and later on 2C)
in the future, as the domain further gains maturity. Next to
the exploration of possible air conditioning management at
the level of cities and communities, these transitions might
constitute interesting avenues for research. Also here, we might
propose to consider the integration of the cross-cutting concern
at an even more ﬁne-grained level (i.e., a brick) in the future.
Moreover, these ﬁndings correspond with our intuition that
a concern with a somewhat lower adoption rate exhibits a
somewhat lower degree of maturity.
TABLE III. OVERVIEW OF THE DIFFERENT
GRANULARITY-INTEGRATION PATTERN COMBINATIONS
REGARDING AIR CONDITIONING.
1A
1B
2A
2B
2C
city/community
◦
house
•
◦
room
•
•
brick
◦
•: currently employed, ◦: to be explored
Further, it should be clear that also the air conditioning
cross-cutting concern is highly related to the way how insula-
tion is managed and that the same modular aggregation levels
might be relevant: the house (e.g., an isolating roof), the room
(e.g., a well-closing door or insulation being put behind a wall)
and the brick (e.g., insulation incorporated in every individual
brick).
VII.
INTERNET ACCESS PATTERNS
In this section, we consider the need to provide Internet
access within houses as a cross-cutting concern. We consider
the integration architectures as proposed in Section II at
the modular granularity level of a house, room and device.
Afterwards, we consider some advanced issues and reﬂections.
A. House level
Within most cities and communities in developed countries,
access to Internet access is considered as a crucial resource
for all inhabitants. As it is typically required to distribute such

287
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Internet access across all houses within such community, it can
be considered as a genuine cross-cutting concern. The main
connections for Internet, being considered as a network of
networks, are formed by backbones constructed by government
and Internet provider companies (the so-called Tier 1, Tier 2
and Tier 3 networks). When we discuss Internet access as a
cross-cutting concern in this paper, we mean the way how
an artifact connects to an internet connection provided by an
Internet provider in its area.
In order to obtain such connection, most houses have an
individual subscription to an Internet provider (e.g., through a
connection achieved by ﬁbre). This provider will make sure
that the subscriber gets an IP address, can access the Internet
by downloading and uploading information, etc. So while
the Internet itself is clearly to be considered as an external
framework, the access point is provided at the level of an
individual house. Therefore, when studying the way how the
connection to the Internet is made, this can be considered as
the usage of integration pattern 1B (as typically, standardized
routers —sometimes even provided by the Internet providers—
will be used for this purpose). Such integration provides
certain appealing characteristics. This conﬁguration allows
each household to make independent choices (e.g., to subscribe
or not subscribe to an Internet connection) and ﬂexibility in
terms of the Internet provider of their own preference.
B. Room level
Within every house or building, most if not all rooms
require Internet access these days in order to use TVs, radios,
computers and other devices in a meaningful way. Therefore,
it constitutes a cross-cutting concern at this level as well.
In most contemporary designs of houses, rooms connect to
the Internet connection as obtained at the level of the house
(conﬁguration 2), instead of subscribing and making a separate
connection on their own. This can be due to the fact that
separate Internet subscriptions are considered overkill for each
room (given the large download and upload limits for each
single subscription) as well as the fact that the internal network
within the house (connecting the devices within one house) is
typically distributed via the same medium and technology.
The distribution of the Internet connection to rooms can
be done via different media. For instance, UTP cables having
a RJ45 connector can be drawn within the walls or on the
ground to which many digital devices can connect. Another
option is to opt for the wireless distribution of Internet access
via Wiﬁ. While it could be that the router making the initial
connection with the Internet provider (see Section VII-A)
already provides a Wiﬁ signal that can reach one or multiple
rooms, Wiﬁ repeaters (capturing and repeating the Wiﬁ signal
in order to extend the network) are generally required in (some)
rooms. Alternatively, the network and Internet access can be
distributed via so-called powerlines, in which the signals are
distributed over the electricity network (see Section IV) and
captured via plugs in the electricity sockets, which expose the
signals via Wiﬁ or a connection for UTP cables.
Typically, the above mentioned connection points for the
provisioning of Wiﬁ within the rooms of a house are standar-
dized. In some cases, the repeaters or plugs might be speciﬁc
for the Internet provider chosen. This means that, in case
another Internet provider would be chosen later on, different
repeaters or plugs might be required and conﬁguration 2B
is adopted. In some cases, such as with the use of UTP
cables and RJ45 connectors, no Internet provider speciﬁcity
is present within the access point at the level of the room and
therefore conﬁguration 2C is present: one could easily change
the chosen Internet provider without an arising need to change
the connectors.
C. Device level
While Internet access is distributed among the different
households and their rooms, the Internet access should ul-
timately be disclosed to individual devices for which it is
required in order to work properly and provide access to
Internet services. The most straightforward solution would
probably be to use the provisioned UTP or Wiﬁ connection
at the room level (see above) for connecting the devices.
This would correspond to conﬁguration 2. More speciﬁcally,
as most devices use a highly standardized network card as
a relay to the house level Internet connection, this generally
corresponds to a 2C conﬁguration as changing the Internet
provider would not impact these connections. In some cases,
one might argue that conﬁguration 2B is still applicable as
sometimes, a change in Internet provider might require the
adaptation of certiﬁcates, username and/or password.
As another possibility, devices can perform their con-
nection to an Internet provider themselves in a dedicated way.
This means that they do not use the room or house level
provided Internet access but instead will access the Internet
via a separate subscription. One might think of smartpho-
nes having a mobile subscription with a data package and
accessing the Internet via a 3G or 4G connection. Or of all
kinds of other devices connecting to LoRa or Sigfox services
in order to access the Internet. In the context of the ever
increasing popularity of the IoT, it is interesting to see that
our modularity and integration pattern reasoning as set out in
Section III clearly indicates that such conﬁguration is highly
suitable for such purposes due to its associated independence
and ﬂexibility in terms of the choice of a provider. However,
this implies that the conﬁguration and connection capability to
the mentioned IoT services should be duplicated in each of the
devices. Recall that we also made a brief referral to the IoT
context during the discussion of the same integration pattern
of another cross-cutting concern as well (see Section IV-D).
D. Overview and advanced issues
Table
IV
provides
an
overview
of
the
granularity-
integration pattern combinations for the electricity provisioning
of houses. We can observe that, at all modularity levels, a
standardized integration pattern (i.e., 1B and 2B) is opted
for, with in some cases even a 2C conﬁguration (indicating
the presence of a framework gateway). This tends to indicate
a rather high maturity within the respective domain, which
could be argued to be rather congruent with our experiences
in everyday life: indeed, in most cases today it is rather easy
to equip an increasing amount of devices in a household with
Internet access. While the table does not explicitly indicate
integration patterns to be explored and researched for this
cross-cutting concern, the next section (see Section VIII) will
suggest some general possibilities for exploration that are
also applicable for this Internet access cross-cutting concern
(especially in case one is opting for the distribution of Internet
access by the use of UTP cables). Further, the table once

288
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
again illustrates that, when aiming for maximum ﬂexibility,
the integration of concerns tends to be solved at more ﬁne-
grained levels (going downwards in Table IV) and in a more
standardized externally enabled way (going to the right in
Table IV) in the long run.
TABLE IV. OVERVIEW OF THE DIFFERENT
GRANULARITY-INTEGRATION PATTERN COMBINATIONS
REGARDING INTERNET ACCESS.
1A
1B
2A
2B
2C
house
•
room
•
•
device
•
•
•
•: currently employed, ◦: to be explored
VIII.
REFLECTIONS
Sections IV till VII showed that the integration of cross-
cutting concerns such as electricity, heating, air conditioning
and Internet access can and have to be dealt with at several
modular granularity levels and can be solved in multiple ways.
During the drawing of a building plan, an experienced architect
will take into account these cross-cutting concerns in advance:
the wires for the electricity and water pipes for the water
distribution will be provided, space for central heating boiler
will be assured, and so on. And although some heuristics and
best practices exist, this still means that the integration problem
of these concerns has to be dealt with by every architect
again, every time a house is constructed. As mentioned in
Section II, NST was inspired by the need for adaptability and
ﬂexibility. In the context of a house, this would for instance
correspond to the possibility of incorporating an additional
room, or choosing another provider for a particular cross-
cutting concern (e.g., switching from tapping electricity from
the public distribution network to self-generated solar energy).
However, it is generally known that the distribution of housing
cross-cutting concerns —such as the ones we considered in
this paper— may cause signiﬁcant problems during such house
extensions or adaptations. Many times, this leads to unforeseen
ripple effects, including the drilling into walls and ﬂoors,
and even tearing down (parts of) walls. As we explained in
Section II, NST therefore proposes to use a set of predeﬁned
design patterns (called “elements”) that already solve this
integration problem for a particular functionality of a modular
system and can then be used over and over again.
In the context of housing and their cross-cutting concerns,
we would envision an elementary construction element as such
ﬁne-grained element [2] as is represented in Figure 1. We
already suggested such a brick for heating and airconditioning,
but it is clear that a construction element might provide the
integration of more than one cross-cutting concern (e.g., water
supply, electricity, physical support, wired Internet access
provisioning, etc.). Different types of such building blocks
might exist, such as for inner or outer walls, for ﬂoors and
ceilings, with and without certain utilities, etc. The adaptation
problems and their associated ripple-effects would be less
frequent by the use of such building blocks as it is often the
set of cross-cutting concerns that causes these invasive drilling
and tearing down activities and these would then already be
integrated in the most elementary building block of a house.
As they are used, the construction elements would provide
the cross-cutting concerns and integrate ﬂuently with the other
previously installed building blocks. Moreover, an architect
designing a new house would have to spend less effort into
the integration issues regarding the cross-cutting concerns as
the elements already deal with it. As we are no domain experts,
we are not in a position to elaborate in detail how these
building blocks should actually look like in practice. However,
we do think that it would be worthwhile for such building
blocks to be subject to intensive research and development,
which might for instance result in connections and isolations
of ﬂuid conduits and electrical conductors that are superior
with respect to handcrafted plumbing. As these building blocks
would be rather general and used over and over again, the
resources invested would have a signiﬁcant pay off due to the
high-quality re-used solution.
So while in most cases, architects take the house as the
main level of modular granularity, it is interesting to see that
some initiatives have been initiated to adopt the individual
rooms of a house as a modular unit. It even seems that
some kind of elements have been proposed in this context,
such as in the Hivehaus “modular living space” initiative [9].
Here, houses are assembled as aggregations of prefabricated
(e.g., hexagonal) modular parts, wherein the distribution of
auxiliary facilities has been integrated upfront. Clearly, the
design freedom concerning the house is then limited to an
aggregation of these modular building blocks. This is due
to the phenomenon we mentioned in Section II: the cross-
cutting concerns should be integrated at the most ﬁne-grained
modular level as possible, as this determines the ﬂexibility of
the resulting artifacts. It is for this reason that we encourage
the exploration of a construction element, integrating several
cross-cutting concerns as discussed above.
Finally, we wish to remark that very similar conclusions
or analyses can be made for other utility concerns within
houses such as water distribution or media (audio, video) as
well. We anticipate that the bottom line of such analysis will
be highly similar: ﬁrst, the distribution of the cross-cutting
concern should be considered at different modular aggregation
levels. At each level, centralized (integration pattern 1) or
non-centralized (integration pattern 2) integration patterns can
be chosen, each in a non-standarized (A) or standardized
(B) way. Whereas the decentralized version offers beneﬁts in
terms of freedom of choice, the centralized alternative might
typically generate other beneﬁts such as economies of scale.
A centralized version then has to deal with the fact that all
modules plugging in are dependent on the framework unless
a gateway module assuring version transparency (2C) is used.
IX.
CONCLUSIONS
This paper presented an overview of the different possible
integration patterns (with their associated beneﬁts and draw-
backs) for the heat, electricity, air conditioning and Internet
access distribution utilities in a housing context, which we con-
sider as cross-cutting concerns within a modularity perspective.
It is important to stress that none of the authors claim to be
experts in any of the speciﬁc cross-cutting concerns discussed
(e.g., electricity, heating, etc.). Instead, the analysis was based
on general knowledge within this domain. Also, with regard to
general modularity reasoning, no signiﬁcant new principles or
knowledge was presented. Our actual contributions are situated
elsewhere and are twofold. First, our goal was to show that

289
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the cross-cutting integration patterns for modular structures as
proposed in [2] (and illustrated within the domain of software
systems) are, at ﬁrst sight, indeed relevant and applicable in a
domain outside software as well. Given our non-expert status
in the housing industry, we encourage actual domain experts
to scrutinize and validate or reﬁne our initial analyses. Second,
we proposed and illustrated an approach to analyze and report
on the different modular integration patterns for cross-cutting
concerns within a domain. That is, is seems valuable to start
with describing certain speciﬁcities and challenges in the
domain at hand. Next, the different (hierarchical) granularity
levels in the domain as well as the relevant cross-cutting
concerns could be listed. For each cross-cutting concern, all
possible combinations of granularity levels and cross-cutting
concern integration patterns can be considered and analyzed
in terms of their respective beneﬁts and drawbacks. Some of
these conﬁgurations might already exist, others might prove
to be interesting avenues for future developments and still
others might be purely theoretical considerations. We ﬁnd it
encouraging that we recently succeeded in applying the same
thought experiment (i.e., applying modularity reasoning in
terms of the possible integration architectures for cross-cutting
concerns) within another domain (being artifacts and concepts
related to logistics) [12]. Therefore, we hope that this paper
might incite researchers and experts within other domains (e.g.,
all kinds of manufacturing and product designs) to perform
similar analyses within their respective areas of expertise.
REFERENCES
[1]
P. De Bruyn, J. Faes, T. Vermeire, and J. Bosmans, “On the modular
structure and evolvability of architectural patterns for housing utilities,”
in Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Pervasive
Patterns and Applications (PATTERNS), 2017, pp. 40–45.
[2]
H. Mannaert, J. Verelst, and P. De Bruyn, Normalized Systems Theory:
From Foundations for Evolvable Software Toward a General Theory for
Evolvable Design.
Koppa, 2016.
[3]
H. Simon, The Sciences of the Artiﬁcial.
MIT Press, 1996.
[4]
C. Y. Baldwin and K. B. Clark, Design Rules: The Power of Modularity.
Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2000.
[5]
D. Parnas, “On the criteria to be used in decomposing systems into
modules,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 15, no. 12, 1972, pp.
1053–1058.
[6]
H. Mannaert, J. Verelst, and K. Ven, “The transformation of require-
ments into software primitives: Studying evolvability based on systems
theoretic stability,” Science of Computer Programming, vol. 76, no. 12,
2011, pp. 1210–1222, special Issue on Software Evolution, Adaptability
and Variability.
[7]
P. De Bruyn, “Generalizing normalized systems theory : towards a
foundational theory for enterprise engineering,” Ph.D. dissertation,
University of Antwerp, 2014.
[8]
M. Keymer, “Design strategies for new and renovation construction that
increase the capacity of buildings to accommodate change,” Master’s
thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2000.
[9]
Hivehaus, http://hivehaus.co.uk/, Last accessed on February 4th, 2017.
[10]
Emerge Alliance, http://www.emergealliance.org/, Last accessed on
February 4th, 2017.
[11]
M. Duusma, “Restwarmte haven r’dam moet 500.000 huizen verwar-
men,” 2007, https://www.nrc.nl/nieuws/2017/03/23/energie-z-holland-
uit-restwarmte-haven-rdam-a1551649, Last accessed on July 12th,
2017.
[12]
P. De Bruyn, H. Mannaert, and P. Huysmans, “Exploring evolvable
modular patterns for transportation vehicles and logistics architectures,”
in Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference on Pervasive
Patterns and Applications (PATTERNS), 2017, pp. 46–51.

