Cybersecurity and the Evolution of the Customer-Centric Service Desk 
Maryam Rezaeian, University College London, UK 
 and 
 Martin Wynn, School of Business and Technology, 
University of Gloucestershire, UK 
 
Email: M.Rezaeian@ ucl.ac.uk 
Email: MWynn@glos.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract – Cybersecurity is now seen as a central function of the 
modern IT Service Desk. This article examines two case studies 
of Helpdesk or Service Desk operations in different technology 
eras, and highlights the recent emergence of Cybersecurity as a 
critical area of Service Desk responsibilities. The article profiles 
the Helpdesk operations at Glaxo Pharmaceuticals in the late 
1980s and the Service Desk functions at the University of 
Gloucestershire in 2019. Comparative analysis shows that whilst 
the range of technologies requiring support has increased 
markedly, this has been counter-balanced somewhat by the 
emergence of standards and dominant products in many 
technology categories. Cybersecurity, however, has emerged as 
a key concern that permeates all fields of Service Desk support. 
It also finds that the role of the end-user has evolved 
significantly in a rapidly changing technology landscape. 
Keywords – Cybersecurity; Service Desk; Helpdesk; customer-
centricity; office systems; personal productivity tools; business 
systems; end-user computing.   
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The advent of the personal computer in the 1980s and the 
subsequent widespread use of the Internet and mobile 
technologies ushered in a revolution in corporate computing 
that has required a step-change in end-user support and 
Service Desk capabilities [1]. Amongst these new capabilities 
and competences, Cybersecurity has become a key element of 
Service Desk support, and its significance to corporate 
sustainability is only likely to increase in future years. An 
enterprise security review recently concluded, “Cybersecurity 
now lies at the very heart of the corporate and public sector 
agenda” [2] and the complexity and far reaching nature of 
Cybersecurity is well illustrated by the multiple lawsuits being 
pursued against Apple Inc. As reported in the Washington 
Post, FaceTime (Apple’s video chat application) “suffered a 
security glitch that enabled users to ‘eavesdrop’ on 
conversations and see individuals through their iPhones 
without detection” [3]. The bug was fixed only two weeks 
after its discovery, resulting in concerns around both personal 
and business security. Another pertinent example surfaced in 
July 2019, when it was revealed that British Airways faces a 
£183m fine over a security breach that occurred in 2018 - a 
record fine for a data breach and the first to be levied under 
the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) in the UK 
[4]. 
Back in 1988, there was virtually no use of the Internet, 
portable computers were in their infancy, there were no 
mobile phones or tablets, and the issues surrounding 
Cybersecurity were very different. Although the personal 
computer (PC) had broken through to become the main 
desktop 
device 
in 
the 
more 
technology 
advanced 
organisations, local area networks were just being introduced 
and MSDOS was the main PC operating system in the pre-
Windows age. Many of the mainstream corporate systems 
were bespoke (often in 3G languages like COBOL), and the 
main packaged software products like the SAP and Oracle 
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems were just 
starting to be taken up by the bigger corporations.   
Support for such technologies is a key issue in nearly all 
organisations today, and this article examines the origins and 
evolution of end-user computing and support functions over 
the past three decades, and focuses specifically on the 
requirements to ensure effective Cybersecurity.  It features 
two case studies. First, Glaxo Pharmaceuticals, which was an 
advanced technology user and was seen as a leader in its rapid 
uptake of PC applications in the 1980s [5]. The second case 
study concerns the University of Gloucestershire (UoG) in 
2019. 
This introductory section is followed in Section II by a 
brief discussion of the background to this research and the 
case study methodology, and sets two research questions. 
Sections III and IV discuss the two case studies and section V 
then focuses on Cybersecurity and suggests an outline 
checklist for Service Desk monitoring of Cybersecurity 
issues. Section VI addresses the two research questions. 
Finally, Section VII summarises the research findings 
featured in this article. 
II. 
BACKGROUND & RESEARCH METHOD 
IT services are key in ensuring the efficiency and agility 
of business processes, and the importance of a successful 
Helpdesk or Service Desk in supporting corporate 
performance is generally accepted. As early as 1992, Bridge 
and Dearden [6] noted “the quality of Helpdesk operations can 
be improved by the provision of knowledge to front line 
Helpdesk operators” and that “this could only be done 
effectively if AI technology is used”. This early study of 
Helpdesk operations proved prophetic, as Helpdesks have 
evolved to meet the changing demands of end-users and have 
used increasingly sophisticated support systems. Existing 
literature also highlights the increase in the range of 
technologies that Helpdesks are required to support.  
Gonzalez, Giachetti and Ramirez [7], for example, note that 
147
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the average number of information technologies supported by 
central support functions has increased from 25 to 2000 in the 
current millennium. Sood [8] recently noted, “The cross-
functional nature of its operation means the help desk directly 
impacts productivity and is an essential part of what enables 
an agency to meet its stakeholder needs”. 
One of these needs is to ensure protection against hackers 
and outside interference or unauthorized access to an 
organization’s systems and the data they contain. This is 
normally termed “Cybersecurity” which is defined by the 
National Institute of Standards and Technology [9] as “the 
ability to protect or defend the use of Cyberspace from Cyber-
attacks”. More specifically, the Economic Times [10] see 
Cybersecurity as “the techniques of protecting computers, 
networks, programs and data from unauthorized access or 
attacks that are aimed for exploitation.” The main areas 
covered in Cybersecurity are: 
 
Application Security, 
which 
“encompasses 
measures or counter-measures that are taken 
during the development life-cycle to protect 
applications from threats that can come through 
flaws in the application design, development, 
deployment, upgrade or maintenance.” 
 
Information 
Security, 
which 
“protects 
information from unauthorized access to avoid 
identity theft and to protect privacy.”  
 
Disaster recovery planning, which is seen as a 
process 
that 
“includes 
performing 
risk 
assessment, establishing priorities, developing 
recovery strategies in case of a disaster. Any 
business should have a concrete plan for disaster 
recovery to resume normal business operations 
as quickly as possible after a disaster.” 
 
Network security, which encompasses “activities 
to protect the usability, reliability, integrity and 
safety of the network. Effective network security 
targets a variety of threats and stops them from 
entering or spreading on the network” [10]. 
Effective and robust Cybersecurity requires measures 
based around “three pillars: people, processes and 
technology” [11]. This approach can help organisations 
“defend themselves from both highly organised attacks and 
common internal threats, such as accidental breaches and 
human error” [11]. As a Chief Information Security Officer 
(CISO) recently noted, “by aligning security with the 
technology function, it is considered a technology problem to 
fix, but what we know now about security is that it transcends 
many different frontiers of business, that it’s a people, process 
and technology problem to fix” [2].  
People: All members of staff and (in the context of a 
university) students need to be aware of their role in 
preventing and reducing Cyber threats, and specialist 
Cybersecurity technicians must remain abreast of new 
developments, with new skills and competencies to mitigate 
and respond to Cyber-attacks. 
Processes: Processes are crucial in defining how the 
organisation’s activities, roles and documentation are used to 
mitigate the risks to the organisation’s information. Cyber 
threats change quickly, so processes need to be continually 
reviewed to be able to adapt with them.  
Technology: By identifying the Cyber risks that an 
organisation faces, the necessary controls can be put in place. 
Appropriate technology can be deployed to prevent or reduce 
the impact of Cyber risks, depending on risk assessment and 
what is considered an acceptable level of risk [11].      
This article looks at two case studies of relevance, 
spanning a thirty-year time gap. The case study is a widely 
used methodology within business research and Bryman and 
Bell [12], for example, argue that the case study is particularly 
appropriate to be used in combination with a qualitative 
research method. A case study facilitates detailed and 
intensive research activity, usually in combination with an 
inductive approach as regards the relationship between theory 
and research.  Saunders, Lewis and Thornhill [13] argue that 
case studies are of particular value for explanatory or 
exploratory investigation. 
  Data collection 
was pursued through participant 
observation and action research. One of the authors worked 
at the first case study company (Glaxo Pharmaceuticals) as 
IT Trainer and then End-User Computing manager in the 
1984-88 period. Some of the observations included here were 
discussed in research publications at the time [5] [14], and 
these have been used as secondary sources of material. The 
other author has worked on the IT Service Desk at the second 
organization (UoG) and thus has first-hand experience of the 
technologies deployed and the Service Desk operations. 
There are thus multiple sources of evidence, which as Yin 
[15] suggests, is one way of increasing the construct validity 
of case studies. At UoG, this includes participant observation 
and a number of internal reports and policy documents, 
particularly those concerning Cybersecurity. 
Within this context, this article addresses two research 
questions (RQs): 
RQ1. How have the support requirements of Helpdesks and 
Service Desks evolved over the past thirty years?    
RQ2. How has the Service Desk developed in response to 
the need for Cybersecurity? 
III. 
CASE STUDY 1: GLAXO PHARMACEUTICALS 1988 
Overview: In 1985, the European shipment of PC 
workstations overtook shipments of simple terminals (i.e., 
video display units and keyboards, with very little processing 
power), with computer users taking advantage of new word 
processor, spreadsheet, graphics, email and database 
applications running on their PCs. Within this change 
environment, Glaxo Pharmaceuticals saw a rapid increase in 
the use of PCs, which transformed the nature of computing 
within the company. In excess of 1300 PCs were installed in 
the company's four sites at Greenford (London), Barnard 
Castle (County Durham), Ware (Hertfordshire) and Speke 
(near Liverpool). This expansion reflected the dramatic 
growth and improvement in PC-based office systems during 
this period. However, in 1984, office systems were clearly a 
function of the HP3000 mini-computers, there being over a 
thousand users of these office systems in Glaxo, over 600 of 
which were electronic mail users. There were just a few PC-
148
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

based users of spreadsheets in the sales, marketing and market 
research areas.  By 1988, one in four staff had a PC, and of 
these, six out of ten had a spreadsheet, four out of ten had a 
graphics package and a word processor, and three out of ten 
had a database package. The use of mini-computer graphics 
modelling and word-processing had virtually disappeared, but 
electronic mail remained a function of the Hewlett Packard 
mini-computers, there being over 2,500 users, a fourfold 
expansion since 1984. 
Word processing and desktop publishing: In the period 
1984-88, word-processing experienced several phases of 
growth. In the two years after 1984, the company standardized 
on one main word processing system (HPWord), based on an 
HP mini-computer for all secretarial/office staff.  Then, in 
1987-88, as the PC became the standard desktop machine 
rather than the terminal, users were transferred to a PC-based 
version (PCWord) of the software, thus minimizing the need 
for retraining. Then in 1988, the company embarked on a 
further change that would see the introduction of a more 
sophisticated word processor as the standard for secretarial 
use. This was in part driven by the well-publicised benefits of 
using the so called “desktop publishing” (DTP) packages, 
which required a skill level normally beyond that of the 
average secretary, and which also required specialist 
workstations (an 80386 chip, and a PostScript-compatible 
printer) if acceptable performance was to be achieved.  
 
 
 
End-user system name 
Software 
Electronic faces folder 
DB3+/Tencore 
Medical  records 
DataEase 
Unpublished journals 
DataEase 
Label reconciliation 
DataEase 
Materials requisition 
RBase 5000 
Medical terms dictionary 
Custom-built in PASCAL 
Accident records 
 
DataEase 
Project engineer management 
DataEase 
Media scheduling 
DataEase 
Planning & budgeting 
DataEase 
Action reporting 
DataEase 
 
This resulted in the introduction of only two desktop 
publishing workstations (running PageMaker and/or Ventura 
software packages). However, it was expected at the time that 
the standard document processing software available to 
secretaries would come to include some DTP functions such 
as graphics and scanned image importation, and this is indeed 
what happened. It was thought that a move to the type of mid-
range product in the word processing to DTP spectrum (such 
as the Lotus Manuscript or Advancewrite Plus software 
packages) would be beneficial. The coming of Windows as 
the standard operating system and the gradual dominance of 
the Microsoft Office products was not envisaged at that time. 
Databases and spreadsheets Databases are possibly the 
most powerful end-user tools of all the functional “off- the-
shelf” packages, while spreadsheets are the most commonly 
used. A PC survey carried out at Glaxo in May 1988 found 
that for every PC database system written by the company’s 
Information Management Division (IMD), end-users had 
developed three systems for themselves. The PC systems 
developed by IMD at the request of end-users is shown in 
Table I.  Authorisation for these systems was done on an ad 
hoc basis, and approval for resource allocation from higher 
management levels was not required. A number of different 
spreadsheet packages had been tried by end-users, but Lotus 
1-2-3 was the most commonly used. 
Graphics packages: Graphics packages were not as 
common as word processors, but the two were increasingly 
used in unison as standard secretarial software. They were 
used mainly for departmental reports and presentations. The 
data was still input manually for the most part, but electronic 
transfer into graphics packages was on the increase as 
integration with mainframe databases and other office systems 
improved. This was to be a forerunner of the wider integration 
and consolidation of office productivity tools that occurred in 
the Microsoft era. By 1988, the main graphics package used 
was Freelance or Freelance Plus, which was then from the 
provider of the Lotus 1-2-3 spreadsheet, ensuring ease of data 
transfer between the two packages.  
Electronic presentations systems and presentation design 
software: This was a significant end-user computing activity. 
There was a range of software packages available for 
electronic systems, including PictureIt and Freelance Plus, 
running on the so-called “IBM compatible” PCs. PictureIt 
enabled the user to design bar, pie, line, organization and word 
charts in a range of pre-determined formats. It was extremely 
easy to use and yet contained sufficient variety to facilitate the 
design of a reasonable presentation. This was particularly 
useful for senior management and the sales and marketing 
functions. 
For more specialised needs, Freelance Plus was used. This 
was a freeform drawing package, with a range of icon libraries 
that could be combined with PictureIt images. Graphs could 
also be imported from other software packages (including 
Lotus 1-2-3 and Lotus Symphony).  Standard 80 column/25 
line text screens could also be converted to VideoShow format 
and edited using VIP. 
The VideoShow presentation system was made available 
to be taken out on loan from the IMD, and each of the four 
sites had at least one of these machines. Having prepared the 
presentation with software running on the PC, this was then 
saved to “floppy disc” and run on the VideoShow presentation 
system. These presentations could be given to a large audience 
via a projector (e.g., Barco Data 3 or Electrohome ECP 2000) 
or a colour monitor for smaller audiences. The wide range of 
colours available (1,000) as well as the range of formats 
available made this a convenient way to present material 
TABLE I. END-USER COMPUTINGE SYSTEMS AT GLAXO 
PHARMACEUTICALS 1988 
 
149
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

suitable for a 35mm slide presentation. The obvious 
advantages included the portability of the presentation (one 
floppy disc could hold as many as 200 images) and the fact 
that the presentation was always in the correct order, the right 
way round and there were no focusing problems.  
Computer based training (CBT) packages: From 1985 
onwards, approximately 30 CBT packages were developed by 
IMD using the Tencore authoring language [16]. Most of 
these were for sales and marketing training, and their support 
and on-going enhancement and update constituted an element 
of PC systems support at the time.   
 
Figure 1. The Rupert Helpdesk system: interaction with end-users and 
support groups.  
The Helpdesk function: The Helpdesk was centralized at 
the company’s Greenford site, but had links to support staff in 
the company’s three main manufacturing plants at Ware, 
Barnard Castle and Speke (Figure 1). By 1988, IMD had 
developed its own in-house fault logging diagnostic system, 
built using an expert system shell (CASSANDRA). This 
system was known as “Rupert” (Resolves Users' Problems 
Expertly). 
The Helpdesk had hitherto been manned by a senior 
network analyst who used his expertise to help solve users' 
problems. Rupert encapsulated some of the experts' 
knowledge and was able to apply it to users' problems. By 
asking a series of questions, Rupert could home in on a 
problem. In some situations, it could take action such as 
aborting a users' session, disconnecting a terminal or asking 
the user to perform some action such as pressing a key etc.  In 
other cases, where Rupert was unable to provide a full 
solution, the call was passed on to the support group, which, 
in Rupert’s judgement, would be best placed to deal with the 
problem.  
The support groups were still in the main geared to helping 
users of the company’s wide range of bespoke transaction 
processing and reporting systems for their manufacturing and 
financial functions. These were mainly written in COBOL or 
PASCAL, and the analyst-programmers of the day doubled up 
as support staff to help end-users. Indeed, for the main 
manufacturing system (known as “MENTOR”), there was a 
programme of courses run on the four sites on test machines 
on which the main manufacturing systems could be simulated. 
There were three main support groups for the main corporate 
business systems and a fourth for office systems and end-user 
computing. The main business systems were run on Hewlett 
Packard mini-computers at the four sites linked by a wide area 
network, and there were a number of test and development 
machines. 
It was in these support groups that security issues of the 
day were managed and problems resolved. The main concerns 
were less about Cyber threats from third parties, but rather 
about human error corrupting data. There were particular 
requirements in the pharmaceuticals industry in relation to 
Good Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Practice (GPMP), 
notably stock traceability in the event of damaged or defective 
products, and process validation, which required high levels 
of access control and back-up procedures, above all in the 
MENTOR suite of programs. The concepts of application and 
information security, and disaster recovery planning, were in 
evidence in what was an advanced blue-chip company; and 
network security was of paramount importance in ensuring the 
transfer of data and information via the WAN that linked the 
company’s four sites.  
More generally, the Rupert Helpdesk system produced 
fault statistics, which helped IMD to identify problem areas 
and thus continue to improve the service given to users. The 
major benefits of Rupert to the company were: 
• 
its role as a training aid for new Helpdesk staff; 
• 
the ease with which new knowledge could be added 
to the system; 
• 
the time taken to resolve user problems was halved; 
• 
the improved image of IMD in the rest of the 
company; 
• 
the better statistics it provided about user problems. 
The last two benefits could probably have been obtained 
from any Helpdesk function and fault reporting software. 
However, Rupert's excellent user interface made this a very 
successful application of expert system techniques. It was 
envisaged that the system would eventually be the focal point 
of a comprehensive network management system. 
IV. 
CASE STUDY 2: UNIVERSITY OF GLOUCESTERSHIRE 
2019 
Overview: UoG is located across six sites within 
Cheltenham and Gloucester with 20 professional departments. 
The Library, Technology and Information Service (LTI) 
department provides supports for both staff and students, 
particularly for teaching and learning, along with the provision 
of appropriate training and skills development. The University 
has over 1,500 staff, most of which are computer users, and 
approximately 10,000 students, who use a range of 
applications on University equipment in labs and classroom 
environments. The IT Service Desk is located within LTI and 
provides full support for staff in University hardware, 
communications and software solutions. Support for students 
encompasses Office 365, assignment submission, the Moodle 
150
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

learning management system, and a range of IT guides 
accessible via MyGlos Help (a web portal guidance page 
which helps student to search for guidance and information). 
 
TABLE II: MAIN BUSINESS SYSTEMS SUPPORTED  BY UOG LTI 
System 
Description 
Sunrise 
IT application to manage 
enquiries from students and staff 
SITS Student 
Records 
SITS is a student records 
management system used to 
store, administer and manage all 
aspects of student information 
from initial enquiry and 
application through to degree 
congregation. A configurable 
package from software provider 
Tribal. 
ResourceLink 
ResourceLink is an integrated HR 
and Payroll software package. 
Agresso 
Finance  
A global accounting system from 
software provider Unit4. 
Moodle 
Moodle is a free and open-source 
learning management system 
written in PHP and distributed 
under the GNU General Public 
License. 
 
Office productivity tools and end-user computing: 
Microsoft Office 2016, Adobe, SSRS, SPSS, and NVivo are 
the main packages that are increasingly used as standard on a 
daily basis. SSRS (SQL reporting) is mainly used for 
departmental reports, whilst SPSS and NVivo are only used 
for teaching and research purposes, and PowerPoint (part of 
Office 2016) is the main package used for presentations. 
There are many different packages on different machines, 
depending on department needs. For example, there are 150 
graphics package users in the Departments of Art and Design 
and Landscape Architecture.  The operating system for the PCs 
is currently Windows 7, although a University-wide upgrade 
to Windows 10 is currently being rolled out. The University 
email system is based on Microsoft Office 365 and hosted 
externally. The University supports Office apps such as Skype 
for business, Outlook, OneDrive, and uses the international 
roaming 
service called Eduroam to provide Wi-Fi 
connectivity. Eduroam allows UoG users to login at any 
participating institution using their UoG login name and 
password. Eduroam also allows users from any participating 
institution to login to UoG using their local login name and 
password. LTI use Gmetrix to provide Microsoft Office 
training to both staff and students.  UoG supports staff and 
student research projects with SPSS and NVivo. 
As regards telephony, the internal telephone system (an 
Avaya IP phone system providing telephony for all the 
University campuses and the majority of the student halls of 
residence) is complemented by a number of exchange lines 
direct from the BT exchange. These are used for alarm lines, 
swipe machines for debit and credit cards, and payphones 
around the University and in halls of residence. LTI are 
responsible for managing mobile phone services, which are 
coordinated through a centralised agreement with Vodafone. 
The University will provide support for equipment and 
software, which is procured by the University, but does not 
support mobile phones, tablets or other equipment purchased 
by staff or students themselves. Nevertheless, the frontline 
support teams will endeavour to help students with their own 
devices if they can (e.g., to reinstall software or attempt data 
recovery), but they will not attempt to fix any major hardware 
or mechanical problems.  
 
Figure 2.  Main operational functions of the UoG IT Service Desk 2019. 
 
     UoG Main Business Systems: There are about 60 
business systems running across the University, including 
Sunrise, SITS Student Records, ResourceLink, Agresso 
Finance and Moodle (Table II). All of these are now 
supported by LTI, although some started as departmental 
end-user systems prior to the centralisation of IT support 
within the University and the imposition of certain policies 
and standards. Many of these systems are administered by 
end-users who undertake data maintenance and general 
support tasks. The SITS student records management 
package is one of the University’s core systems, and the 
system is upgraded regularly with modifications and new 
releases from the software supplier (Tribal). These are tested 
and implemented in the test environment by the SITS users. 
When the software has been tested thoroughly and 
approved, a change control is raised which then goes to a 
change control board, who will approve or reject the change. 
New developments are driven by the University’s business 
and legal requirements. 
UoG IT 
Service 
Desk
Software 
Support
Incident 
Management
Problem 
Management
Procurment 
(PCs, Mobiles, 
Ipad)
Hardware & 
Comms 
Support
151
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The general policy for the procurement of new software 
applications is that they should be based on web-enabled 
technologies that will assist in the development of a  
University-wide Managed Learning Environment (MLE). 
This principle guides procurement when the University has 
the opportunity to replace business systems through the 
annual IT capital programme. 
UoG IT Service Desk functions: Sunrise is the main system 
used by the LTI staff to manage enquiries from students and 
staff. In addition, any enquiries received via the MyGlos Help  
Portal are redirected to the appropriate team. Different 
versions of Sunrise have been used by the University since the 
year 2000, but all with the same backend. With the latest 
version of this system, keywords can be used to select the 
problem categories and the problem is automatically assigned 
to appropriate support personnel.   
The IT Service Desk performs a number of functions 
(Figure 2). It has the responsibility for all user account 
management as well as giving access to all University 
business systems such as Agresso and SITS. LTI is 
responsible for providing the basic “image” (i.e., software 
footprint) for all staff and student devices. A minimum of 
between 4-6 weeks is allowed to enable a thorough evaluation 
and testing of any new software application. 
Figure 3 shows the escalation of a call through different 
levels 
of 
service 
expertise 
depending 
on 
the 
complexity/specialism of the problem reported. This 
systematic approach to tackling problems, combined with the  
 
 
 
 
application of dedicated human resources to solving Service 
Desk enquiries, has contributed to a significant improvement 
in response times and a more efficient IT service for the 
University’s staff and students.  
     Support teams across the university’s four main sites use 
IT Service Desk tools and the Sunrise support system. The IT 
Service Desk tools are an integral part of the Sunrise system, 
and were developed as a bespoke, standalone system for 
UoG. Some of its main functions are:  
 
 
Password reset 
 
Unlock accounts 
 
Create guest login for externals 
 
Provide access to shared drives 
 
Deploy software 
 
Change voicemail passwords 
LTI uses the Sunrise system to log calls, update the call, 
and transfer the call to the appropriate support team. Service 
Desk officers have access to all communications across the 
University by searching for the Incident number (ID), call 
details, surname, forename, category, hub area, open date, 
network logon, global summary, priority, escalation level, 
assigned group, and first time fix. The call needs to be logged 
under the name of the person that reported the enquiry, which 
can be logged by network logon (staff number) or forename 
and surname. The category is selected based on the enquiry;  
Figure 3.  Incident Tracking by UoG IT Sevice Desk 2019 
 
152
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
 
for example, if someone reports an issue with email, Service 
Desk officers can search for emails and pick the correct 
category. The use of keywords and categories ensures that an 
enquiry is managed by the most appropriate team. Once the 
category has been selected, the system will automatically pick 
the first line team and referral team appropriate to the job. 
All the operations of the Service Desk are now impacted 
by Cybersecurity issues, as has been highlighted by Whitman 
and Mattord. They note that technology has permeated every 
facet of the business environment in the last 20 years and that 
“the business is no longer static; it moves whenever 
employees travel for office to office”; and therefore “the 
security of the organisation also depends on the 
implementation of a multi-layered system” [17]. 
 
 
 
V. 
 TOWARDS A CYBERSECURITY CHECKLIST  FOR 
SERVICE DESK MONITORING  
The Service Desk thus has a key role to play in the 
monitoring and reporting of Cybersecurity and this section 
draws together the different operational areas supported by the 
Service Desk at UoG to set out a rudimentary checklist for 
Cybersecurity (Table III). Cybersecurity is being marketed as 
a new software category, including Security Information 
Event and Management (SIEM) systems and Security 
Orchestration Automation and Response (SOAR) systems. 
These are in essence sophisticated reporting tools, sometimes 
involving machine learning, advanced statistical analysis and 
analytics software. Rapid7 [18], for example claim “security 
orchestration and automation helps teams improve their 
security posture and create efficiency—without sacrificing 
control of important security and IT processes”. However, to 
TABLE III.CYBERSECURITY CHECKLIST FOR SERVICE DESK MONITORING 
 
  
 
People Skills & Competencies 
Process Requirements 
Technology Deployment 
Application 
security 
 
Respect for user privacy 
and confidentiality (access 
to sensitive data)  
 
User systems knowledge 
 
System administration 
skills and responsibilities 
 
IT staff communication 
skills 
 
Systems documentation, 
user guide policy and 
procedures 
 
Knowledge management 
(consistent terminology 
and definitions, amending 
and updating data) 
 
Systems maintenance and 
update controls and 
procedures 
 
Authentication and access 
control  in main business 
systems 
 
 
 
 
Information 
security 
 
User awareness of 
criticality of data and 
information  
 
Cybersecurity awareness 
programmes and briefings 
 
Data integrity policies and 
procedures  
 
Information security 
recognized and managed 
as a continuous process 
 
 
Physical security 
mechanisms to protect 
assets and workplaces 
from unauthorized access  
 
Data accuracy validation 
controls 
Disaster 
recovery 
planning 
 
Clear management 
responsibilities for 
different Cyber threats  
 
Prevention and detection 
procedures 
 
Threat and risk 
management  processes to 
support vulnerability 
assessment 
 
Incident tracking system 
and response plan  
 
Database recovery and  
back-up systems  
 
On-site/off-site storage 
options 
Network 
security 
 
User and IT professionals’ 
awareness of Cyber threat 
via the networks. 
 
Network administrator role 
with Cybersecurity 
responsibilities 
 
Network security controls 
and procedures, including 
password security 
 
Control of network 
administration rights and 
privileges 
 
Firewall, antivirus and 
encryption programs for all 
physical and virtual 
servers, workstations, 
laptops, tablets, phones 
and mobile devices. 
 
Appropriate Virtual Private 
Network utilization 
 
Email server configuration 
and intrusion detection 
software 
 
Resilient network 
architecture 
 
153
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

be of value, they still require the critical underlying data, and 
the “nuts and bolts” skills and competencies, processes and 
technologies that the Service Desk can monitor and help 
ensure are in operation to support the organisation’s 
Cybersecurity. Once these building blocks are in place, then 
SIEM and SOAR systems can be introduced to provide overall 
automation and control.    
 
 
In terms of Application Security, as defined in Section II, 
UoG has set up clear access control policies for its users in 
order to establish the rules, which govern the use of the 
University’s accounts. These policies apply to all students and 
staff and to all of the University’s IT systems, irrespective of 
how they are accessed. Staff receive privileged access, based 
on their role and the need for systems access.  These People 
related issues (Table IV) are complemented by policies setting 
out related Processes, notably for software documentation, 
user guides and associated procedures. Technology measures 
include password authentication and systems audits and 
logging capabilities. 
As regards Information Security, Meyers [19] has 
observed that most security breaches occur at user level, and 
result from human actions. This has helped shape UoG policy, 
providing basic security awareness to all users and educating 
staff and students on, for example, Pishing emails, spam 
collection etc. A recent survey of Cyber awareness training 
[20] found that only 11% of organizations continuously train 
employees on how to spot Cyber-attacks, 24% admit to 
monthly training, and 52% perform training only quarterly or 
once a year. The report concludes, “Humans can be either a 
first line of defense, or the first line that Cybercriminals seek 
to exploit when they attack an organization. Their behavior 
and the culture you influence greatly impact the effectiveness 
of your overall Cyber resilience strategy” [20]. 
The ability to communicate technical issues to non-
technical people in a clear and effective manner has become 
an important competence for support staff. Confidentiality of 
data access is another important issue that is supported by 
UoG policy on data breaches, which allows recourse to 
relevant law enforcement agencies when appropriate. 
Technology related elements include Anti-Malware policy 
and associated software to protect the servers and 
workstations. UoG currently uses Sophos Anti-Malware.  
 
 
If the anti-malware software finds a problem it automatically 
sends an email to designated members of the First Line 
Support Team as well as specific second line support staff 
(e.g. the Information Security and Cyber Developer). With 
portable devices, there is a greater risk of loss, or infection 
from the malware, and UoG register all such devices to an 
accountable owner who is made responsible for security 
issues. All relevant UoG security policies are applied to these 
devices to provide protection against unauthorised use.  
For Disaster Recovery planning, UoG has set out the rules 
to govern the ways in which the university makes copies of 
the data held within its various IT systems. In the event of data 
loss, caused by an ‘incident’ (major or minor), data can be 
restored from the back up and normal service can be resumed. 
Such ‘incidents’ include systems crash, ransomware attacks, 
natural disasters (fire, flood) and catastrophic failure. 
Processes are in place to identify and recognise the problem, 
make an initial assessment and communicate the issue to all 
users. Identified managers are responsible for identifying the 
nature of the incident, point of origin, determine the intent and 
identify systems compromised. LTI managers must evaluate 
the solution and monitor it to determine the outcome. Backups 
for compromised systems may be used and managers need to 
review and report on the incident with recommendations for 
future reference. The technology used for back-up operations 
does not provide archiving or permanent storage.  The storage 
of data according to specified retention schedules is achieved 
through management of storage within the online systems. All 
TABLE IV. CYBERSECURITY CHECKLIST: DRILLDOWN DETAIL 
 
Application Security: People Skills and Competencies 
 User privacy and confidentiality (access to sensitive data)  
The concept of privacy is something all users must recognize and respect. In particular, sensitive data contained in 
business systems should not be divulged to other users or organisations unless authorized.  
 User systems knowledge  
System users need to have appropriate levels of knowledge to be able to control and manage the data in a secure 
way. All users should be clear about their responsibilities, and how systems operations should be completed. 
 System administrators and super-users 
Main business applications need systems administration and maintenance and this is increasingly located in end-
user departments, requiring appropriate skills, knowledge and responsibilities. Super-users with expert knowledge 
of how an application works is another role often located in the user department, which may be vital in a disaster 
recovery or Cyber-attack context. 
 IT staff communication skills 
Service Desk staff and other members of the IT team need the communication and vocabulary skills to explain 
technical issues in non-technical terms. This is important in explaining Cyber issues and may be critical in taking 
appropriate action in the event of a Cyber-attack.  
 
154
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

data held within the Storage Area Network, the virtualised 
guests and the network file stores is backed-up daily. Initially 
these back-ups are stored on disc and then transferred to tape. 
At regular intervals, the tapes are removed to secure storage 
areas. Both the discs and the tape library are housed separately 
from the ‘live’ data, and back-up tapes are encrypted to 
safeguard data.  
Network Security overlaps several of the policy and 
technology elements discussed above. IT Administrators have 
specific access rights to the networks and are responsible for 
ensuring appropriate business continuity measures are in place 
to protect against events, which might otherwise result in loss 
of service. Default passwords must be changed the act of 
changing password is recorded. The effective management 
and integrity of the networks is supported by firewalls and 
anti-malware software.  
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
   This section draws on the case study material discussed 
above to address the research questions set out in section II. 
   RQ1. How have the support requirements of Helpdesks 
and Service Desks evolved over the past thirty years?    
   Thirty years ago, the need for IT support in major 
organisations were somewhat different from those of today. 
There was no significant use of the internet and very few 
mobile phones or laptops. There was no Windows - MSDOS 
was the main operating system for PCs. There was no SKYPE, 
no viruses and no Wi-Fi, but Intel chip-based PCs had 
established themselves in most organisations and hard-wired 
LANS linked them to server PCs and mini-computers. Most 
business systems were bespoked in-house – the age of 
integrated packaged software was just around the corner. 
However, despite the expansion in the range of 
technologies that Service Desks are now called upon to 
support, there was arguably more variety in the range of 
products that needed supporting in each technology category. 
For example, the Glaxo Helpdesk supported five different 
word processors and several spreadsheets and graphics 
packages. The market was still evolving with many competing 
products and no obvious standards. Presentation graphics 
systems and videoconferencing also needed support, along 
with bespoked computer-based training packages in the era 
before on-line help functions for many software products. 
There is now a greater range of technologies to support, 
but there are clearer standards and more obvious choices 
within each category. It is thus critical that the central support 
function has clear policies and makes product choices in each 
technology area. At Glaxo, despite the lack of standards in 
end-user software, the IMD Director was adamant that only 
Intel chip based PCs would be permitted in the company, and 
this has parallels with UoG’s non-support of devices not 
obtained through the University procurement system. In 
recent years, there has been a clear imposition of standards 
and product choices at the University as central IT strategy 
and policies have taken precedence over departmental 
initiatives. 
Over the time duration between the two case studies, the 
Helpdesk function has evolved and adapted to changing 
requirements and developments in technology. The concept of 
support has also evolved, with Helpdesks or Service Desks 
increasingly seeing computer users as “customers”, but at the 
same time end-users taking some responsibility for systems 
ownership, data maintenance and training. The super-user and 
data maintenance specialists have emerged as key link 
personnel between the computer user-community and central 
IT support.   
   RQ2. How has the Service Desk developed in response to 
the need for Cybersecurity? 
   Hila Meller, BT’s vice president for Security, Europe, 
noted recently “security needs to be a concern across the 
whole organisation, not just the remit of the IT department. 
Everyone needs to play their part, to stop shadow IT and 
ensure data breaches don’t happen” [21]. Nevertheless, the 
Service Desk has a key role to play in this endeavor, and 
Cybersecurity is now a major issue for Service Desk 
operations. Cybersecurity itself consists of “technologies, 
processes and measures that are designed to reduce the risk 
of a Cyber-attack (which is conducted through the deliberate 
exploitation of systems, networks and technologies)” [11]. 
This underlines the vast scope of Cybersecurity and points up 
the new capabilities, knowledge and skills required of the 
Service Desk personnel, who must play a key role in 
prevention, tracking and resolution of Cyber-attacks. 
   Digitalisation and the “disruptive technologies” pose new 
challenges. David Carvalho, Global CISO at OCS Group, has 
remarked that the Internet of Things (IoT) represents another 
area of emerging vulnerability. “IoT is everywhere, smart 
cameras, dumb cameras, all sorts of sensors, SCADA 
devices, and companies that use PLCs (programmable logic 
controllers). The whole world is producing IoT devices with 
few or no regulations at all” [22]. 
   This is producing new demands on the training and 
reskilling of Service Desk staff. Mannie Romero, the 
executive director in the office of the CISO at Optiv, recently 
observed that “people who were network people in the past 
and are used to running discovery scans and doing things on 
the network and the system, now have to move up the stack 
to the applications and start learning APIs in AWS, Azure, 
and other cloud infrastructures. The situation is only going to 
get more challenging, as artificial intelligence, robotics, 
machine learning, and IoT become more prominent and 
widely deployed” [22]. 
   In practice, this has seen Cybersecurity develop as a 
discipline or specialism in its own right in the business and 
consultancy fields, and as a major component of an 
organisation’s operations, sometimes with a CISO reporting 
at Board level. For the Service Desk, as noted above, this has 
produced new and rapidly evolving demands on people skills 
and competencies. A recent report on Cybersecurity 
concludes, “Having the necessary technical personnel in 
place is one of the most important — and most difficult — 
elements 
of 
any 
organization’s 
security 
posture. 
Organizations of all sizes and maturity levels struggle to 
155
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

attract and retain the right mix of people to help manage and 
secure their computing environments” [23]. 
   In terms of technology deployment, Cybersecurity 
technology is becoming increasingly sophisticated. Threat 
prevention, for example, is a critically important component 
of a Cybersecurity strategy, and most organizations invest 
significantly in security controls and processes in this area. 
Oltsik notes, “Tools like endpoint security software, web 
threat gateways, and IPSs are designed to identify and block 
an assortment of activities deemed to be malicious”. He adds, 
“Beyond blocking known malicious behavior, organizations 
must collect, process, and analyze internal and external data, 
identify and investigate suspicious activities, and remediate 
problems quickly before minor issues become major data 
breaches. The processes, tools, and personnel used for these 
tasks are generally referred to as security analytics and 
operations” [24]. Although there are some similarities in the 
business systems and desktop tools used by the two 
organisations in the two case studies spanning a thirty-year 
time gap, the technology requirements for addressing 
Cybersecurity issues are now on a different level. In the 
1980s, the advent of the PC and the growth of end-user 
computing was the catalyst for the development of the 
Helpdesk with new skills requirements and supporting 
technology. In this decade, it has been the emergence of 
Cybersecurity issues that have driven a similar step change in 
Service Desk operations and staffing. 
 
VII. 
CONCLUSION 
The old Helpdesk is now increasingly seen as part of a 
broader Service Desk function, with service being defined as 
“an approach to IT service management that emphasizes the 
importance of coordination and control across the various 
functions, processes and systems necessary to manage the full 
lifecycle of IT services” [25]. This definition is often applied 
in the context of a third party service provider, but is also 
relevant to in-house IT service provision. At UoG, the Service 
Desk is the customer facing front end of all IT services, which 
are measured against stipulated service level targets defined 
in service level agreements. This aligns with the IT 
Infrastructure Library (ITIL) concept and definition of the IT 
Service Desk as the single point of contact between the IT 
function and users, which manages incidents and service 
requests, and handles communication with users. There is also 
a more subtle change in that the service is seen as supporting 
business processes and people capabilities along with the pure 
technology elements. The Service Desk now focuses on 
delivering high quality customer service to end-users, whereas 
the Helpdesk was more concerned with incident management 
and resolving problems related to IT in the organization.  
The range of different technologies supported by the 
Service Desk has seen developments in its own support 
technology. In addition, the requirements set out in service 
level agreements have meant that Service Desks need to 
increase end-user satisfaction levels by responding to the 
incidents and problems within stipulated response times. To 
support this increase in customer service levels, support 
technology has become more sophisticated, involving 
elements 
of 
knowledge 
management 
and 
artificial 
intelligence.  
Over and above this, however, as Peppard [26] has noted, 
the role of people skills and capabilities in delivering a 
successful Service Desk operation remains critical. In the 
context of Cybersecurity, this is true in its widest sense. As 
Bechkoum notes, “having an effective Cybersecurity culture 
within your organisation is vital” [27]. The key is to bring 
together relevant IT and security teams united through the 
actions of an empowered Service Desk. If the organisation is 
able to do this effectively, detecting the early warning signs of 
a potentially serious threat becomes easier. Such a 
preventative approach is likely to prove the most effective 
security model for most organisations. Despite advances in 
technology support systems, a fully automated Service Desk 
function remains some years away. Computing Research [2] 
have concluded “as the Internet of Things gathers pace, those 
data volumes will explode into something which we are all 
collectively struggling to even imagine. The role of AI and 
machine learning in security solutions in this sense is not a 
matter for debate. They simply have to play a role – and as 
data volumes grow, the role for AI will grow with it. However, 
for now and the foreseeable future, the role of AI in Cyber 
security is likely to remain as a partnership with humans. 
Neither can quite manage the task alone.”  
 
REFERENCES   
[1] M. Rezaeian and M. Wynn, “The Evolution of the Customer-
Centric Helpdesk: Two Case Studies” The Eleventh 
International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented 
and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services 
(CENTRIC 2018) IARIA, Nice, France, 2018, pp. 7-13. 
 
[2] Computing Research. (2016, Nov. 16). Enterprise security 
review [Online]. Available: 
https://www.computing.co.uk/ctg/news/2478143/computing
-enterprise-security-review-2016 
 
[3] IGI-Global Newsroom. (2019, Feb. 18). How to prevent your 
phone from spying on you through the latest cybersecurity 
advancements 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.igi-
global.com/newsroom/archive/prevent-your-phone-spying-
you/4066/ 
 
[4] Computing (2019, Jul. 8). British airways faces £183m 
GDPR fine over last year's security breach [Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.computing.co.uk/ctg/news/3078541/british-
airways-gdpr-183m-fine-payments-
security?utm_source=Adestra&utm_medium=email&utm_c
ontent=&utm_campaign=CTG.Daily_RL.EU.A.U&im_edp
=1415226d3d7959ccd15603%26campaignname%3DCTG.
Daily_RL.EU.A.U&utm_term=Higher%2FTertiary%20Edu
cation&im_company=UNIVERSITY%20OF%20GLOUCE
STERSHIRE&utm_term=1000%20to%201999 
 
[5] M. Wynn, “The business benefits of pc office systems and 
end-user computing at Glaxo Pharmaceuticals, 1984 – 1988”, 
Journal of Information Technology, vol. 4, issue 1, pp 17-29, 
Mar 1989. 
156
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[6] D. Bridge and A. Dearden, “Knowledge based systems 
support for help desk operations : A Reference Model”, 
Dept of Computer Science University of York [Online], 
April 1992. Available: 
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.4
7.5118&rep=rep1&type=pdf /2018.07.22 
 
[7]    L.Gonzalez, R. Giachetti, and G. Ramirez, “Knowledge 
management- 
centric 
help 
desk: 
specification 
and 
performance evaluation”, Decision Support Systems, vol. 40, 
pp. 389-405, 2005. 
 
[8]     U. Sood, “ 7 Essentials for a top-performing IT help desk”, 
GCN Executive Roundtable Cloud [Online], March 30, 
2017. Available: https://gcn.com/articles/2017/03/30/help-
desk-essentials.aspx/ 
 
[9] National Institute of Standards and Technology, Glossary of 
Key Information Security Terms. NISTIR 7298 Revision 2, 
U.S. 
Department 
of 
Commerce, 
2013. 
Available: 
https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2013/NIST.IR.7298r2.p
df 
 
[10] Economic Times, “Definition of Cyber Security”. Available: 
https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/definition/Cyber-
security 
 
[11] ITGovernance. (2019, Nov. 15) What is cyber 
security[Online]. Available: 
https://www.itgovernance.co.uk/what-is-Cybersecurity 
 
[12] A. Bryman and E. Bell, Business Research Methods, 3rd 
edition, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011. 
 
[13] M. Saunders, P. Lewis, and A. Thornhill, Research methods 
for business students, 5th ed.England: Pearson Education 
Limited, 2012 
 
[14] M. Wynn and L. O’Callaghan, “Quality graphics at Glaxo  
pharmaceuticals”, Training Technology, vol. 1, issue 4, pp. 
18-20, Apr 1988. 
 
[15] R. K. Yin,  Applications of Case Study Research. 3rd ed. 
London: SAGE Publications, Inc, 2012 
 
[16] M. Wynn, “Computerised training solutions at Glaxo”, 
Interactive Learning International, vol. 4, issue3/4, pp. 73-
80, Sep1987. 
 
[17] M.Whitman and H.Mattord, Managing information security, 
4th ed, Stamford, CT, USA: Cengage Learning, 2014. 
 
[18] Rapid7. (2019, Nov. 15). Security orchestration and 
automation playbook - Your practical guide to implementing 
a 
SOAR 
solution 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.rapid7.com/info/security-orchestration-automation-
playbook/ 
 
[19] M. Meyers, “Don’t be hacked: 5 cyber security skills your IT 
team needs to master”, Udemy for Business IT instructor and 
President of Total Seminars, Feb 27 2019. Available: 
https://business.udemy.com/blog/Cyber-security-skills-it-
teams/ 
[20] Mimecast. (2018, Nov. 14). Employees behaving badly? Why 
awareness 
training 
matters 
[Online] 
Available: 
www.mimecast.com 
 
[21] H. Meller, “Don’t let security cloud your views on digital 
transformation”, British Telecommunications plc, November 
2018. Available: www.bt.com/risk-reward-cloud 
 
[22] Tenable. (2018, Jan. 12). Reducing Cyber Exposure from 
Cloud 
to 
Containers 
[Online]. 
Available: 
www.mightyguides.com 
 
[23] CrowdStrike Services. (2019) Guidance for Maturing Cyber 
Defenses [Online]. Available: www.crowdstrike.com/ 
 
[24] J. Oltsik, “Cybersecurity Analytics and Operations in 
Transition”,  Enterprise Strategy Group, July, 2017. 
 
[25] The Stationary Office (TSO), ITIL Foundation Handbook, IT 
Service Management Forum, 2012. 
 
[26]  J. Peppard,"Managing IT as a portfolio of services" 
European Management Journal, vol. 21, issue 4, pp. 467–
483, 2003. 
 
[27] K.Bechkoum, “Building a Cybersecurity culture for your 
business”, University of Gloucestershire [Online] , Feb 25, 
2019. Available: 
https://medium.com/@bechkoumkamal/building-a-
Cybersecurity-culture-for-your-business-60bb183a7493 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
157
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

