600
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The implementation of ERP systems in Iranian manufacturing SMEs 
Maryam Rezaeian 
The Business School 
University of Gloucestershire 
Cheltenham, UK 
MaryamRezaeian@connect.glos.ac.uk 
 
Martin Wynn  
The Business School 
University of Gloucestershire 
Cheltenham, UK 
MWynn@glos.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract – The quest to implement Enterprise Resource 
Planning (ERP) software to support all main business 
functions has been actively pursued by in-house IT 
departments, software vendors and third party consultancies 
for over three decades. It remains a key element of many 
companies’ information systems strategy in the developed 
world, and increasingly, in the developing world.  In the 
specific context of Iranian SMEs, there has been relatively little 
research on information systems in general, and very little 
specifically on ERP systems projects. This paper attempts to 
help address this dearth in the existing literature by examining 
three case studies of ERP systems deployment in Iranian 
manufacturing 
SMEs. 
It 
investigates 
the 
underlying 
information systems strategies and examines how this has been 
implemented in the core process areas of these companies. The 
analysis is based on a conceptual model that combines defined 
implementation phases with change dimensions and elements, 
which provide the basis for the development of an 
implementation framework for subsequent ERP projects in 
this business and technology environment.  
Keywords – Enterprise Resource Planning; Total Systems; 
Iranian SMEs; information systems; ERP; process change; IS 
strategy; implementation framework.   
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) software packages 
first appeared on the market in the late 1970s and early 
1980s, since when they have been widely deployed in the 
developed world, particularly by large corporations. Since 
the turn of the century, there has been an increase in the use 
of these integrated software systems by small to medium 
sized enterprises (SMEs) in the developed world. This has 
been paralleled – part cause, part effect – by an increase in 
the number of ERP vendors specifically geared to the 
requirements and budgets of SMEs. In the developing world, 
the uptake of these new systems has been slower, for a 
number of reasons, including the lack of the human and 
financial resources needed for such projects, and the non-
availability of sales and support offices for many of the main 
ERP 
vendors 
operating 
in 
the 
developed 
world. 
Nevertheless, the use of ERP packages in developing world 
countries has accelerated in recent years, as evidenced by 
recent case study research [1], but the current literature 
suggests that there have been both significant failures [2] as 
well as some qualified successes [3][4].  
One interesting development in Iran has been the 
emergence of integrated software solutions developed in the 
country, by and large for the home business market (Table 
I). These are sometimes called “Total Systems,” being 
produced and sold by Iranian software companies. The term 
“ERP” is also used, but these products are usually more 
customizable than western based ERP products to specific 
user requirements, and are also available in both the Parsi  
 
TABLE I. HOME GROWN ERP SYSTEMS PACKAGES IN IRAN 
(INDICATING VENDOR WEB ADDRESSES) 
 
BEHKO 
http://www.behko.com/?page_id=96 
GREEN/ 
GALAX 
http://www.greendataware.com/about/history/ 
PARS ROYAL 
http://parsroyal.net/products 
MEDAR 
GOSTARESH 
http://www.itorbit.net/ 
HAMKARAN 
SYSTEM 
http://www.systemgroup.net/products/%D8%B1
%D8%A7%D9%87%DA%A9%D8%A7%D8%
B1-%D8%AF%D9%88%D9%84%D8%AA 
RAYDANA 
SYSTEM 
http://www.danabarcode.com/ 
EADEGOSTAR 
http://ideagostarco.net/Page/About 
EADEPARDA 
ZAN 
http://www.eadepardazan.com/pages/ltr/LTRDef
ault.aspx?pid=2&lang=2 
RAYVARZ 
https://rayvarz.com/about-us 
FARAGOSTAR 
http://www.faragostar.net/automation/ 
PARNIAN 
PARDAZESH 
PARS 
http://www.parnianportal.com/OA/Pages/Home.a
spx 
BARID 
SAMANEYE 
NOVIN 
http://www.baridsoft.ir/products/integrated-
approach/office-automation 
 
language, as well as English. Although the sanctions on trade 
with the West have now been eased, Iranian companies 
tended to look within Iran for software solutions when these 
restrictions on trade were in place. This article examines the 
implementation of such packages in three Iranian SMEs and 
identifies the key factors involved in determining project 
 
 

601
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
outcomes. This analysis provides the basis for the 
development of a framework for successful ERP project 
implementation 
in 
similar 
business 
contexts. 
This 
introductory section is followed in Section II by a discussion 
of the relevant background literature. In Section III, a 
description of the case study methodology used in this 
research is given. Sections IV then reports in some detail on 
the case study findings, and Section V focuses on 
implementation issues and what can be learned from the case 
examples. Finally, Section VI makes some concluding 
remarks that pull together a number of themes discussed in 
the paper.   
II. LITERATURE REVIEW 
ERP is a modular but integrated software system which 
automates business processes, shares common data, and 
produces and accesses information in a real time 
environment. ERP software can be implemented in stages, 
module by module, and therefore be used to integrate 
previously isolated IT systems and functional departments 
within a company. ERP is also viewed by some researchers  
[5] [6] as a fundamental method for achieving best practice 
within business operations – the implementation of an ERP 
package requiring the application of certain disciplines 
within main business processes. As Koch has noted; “ERP 
attempts to integrate all departments and functions across a 
company on to a single computer system that can serve all 
those departments’ particular needs” [5]. According to 
Turban et al. [7], ERP not only provides business discipline, 
it also allows the alignment of IT deployment with overall 
business strategy and business goals. Implementing ERP 
thus may also require change in core processes, often termed 
business process reengineering or “BPR” [8].    
There remain divergences of opinion regarding the 
suitability of systems developed in the Western world in a 
developing world context. When discussing IS in the 
developing world, Gomez and Pather [9] observe that there 
is a lack of literature and evaluation studies, and the World 
Bank view that “analysts and decision makers are still 
struggling to make sense of the mixed experience of 
information technologies in developing countries” is 
highlighted by other authors [10]. In spite of some evidence 
of failure in the adoption of information systems (IS), the 
overall deployment of ERP and IS in general is increasing in 
the developing world.   
Increasing professional skills and training is viewed as a 
key element for successful IS project delivery by 
Noudoosbeni et al. [11], who argue that lack of planning and 
management as well as inadequate training led to IS project 
failure in Malaysian companies. Research of companies in 
Iran [12] [13] [14]  highlight a range of issues that have 
hampered IS deployment in general in the country - lack of 
managerial skills, low IT maturity, poor training, poor 
internet access, governmental policies, and poor business 
planning; but there is very little literature on the more 
specific issues faced  by  SMEs  attempting  to  implement  
ERP  software.  Other researchers [15] [16] suggest that the 
lack of human capability and economic conditions in 
developing countries lead to IS failure and prevent overall 
economic growth. There nevertheless appears to be a 
significant market for ERP software in SMEs in the 
developing world. The studies of Dezar and Ainin [17] and 
Arabi et al. [18] indicate that 90% of businesses in 
developing countries are SMEs; but adoption of ERP 
systems by SMEs in developing countries is a relatively 
recent undertaking, in part due to the high expense and 
technical complexity of such systems. 
Iran is an interesting example of the potential of ERP 
systems in a developing world country. Talebi [19] reports 
that the great majority of businesses in Iran are micro, small 
and medium-sized enterprises. According to Molanezhad 
[20], the majority of SMEs in Iran are in the manufacturing 
sector. He also suggests that due to the location of Iran in the 
Middle East, its access to Russia, Europe and Asia, and its 
considerable market size, ERP systems have significant 
potential in supporting Iranian SMEs grow their business and 
increase their employment. This potential has been 
reinforced by the recent international agreement on nuclear 
development in Iran, and the subsequent opening up of 
trading with the West. Hakim and Hakim [21] assert that 
“IT, as a new industry in Iran, has not found its rightful place 
within organizations, as the managers are still adamant and 
adhere to the traditional management systems, and show 
resistance to the required organizational and infrastructural 
changes”.  
Research by Heeks [22] suggests there are several main 
elements of change that are important in implementing new 
IS in developing world environments. He identified people, 
process, structure and technology as key dimensions of what 
he termed the “design-actuality gap”. Heeks’ model can be 
used in various business change contexts, and in this paper it 
is used to support the analysis of the implementation of the 
integrated software systems in the case study companies. 
Other authors [6] have adopted a similar approach in looking 
at structures that are embedded in both packages and 
organisations 
in 
trying 
to 
assess 
the 
reasons 
for 
misalignments between IS strategy and the overarching 
business strategy of the organisation.   
The process mapping technique can help assess systems 
deployment at process level. It generates a sequence of maps 
that are used in identifying the information systems that are 
used in defined business areas. While process mapping is 
used as a framework to identify the business processes and 
sub-processes, it can also be used as a point of reference for 
assessing the functionality of the information systems 
themselves. This “systems profiling” encompasses a review 
and assessment of functionality, reporting capabilities, user 
interface and soundness of the underlying technology [23].    
There are a number of ERP and IS implementation 
models in the literature such as Saunders and Jones [24] 
Bancroft et al. [25], Ross [26], Markus and Tanis [27], Parr 
and Shanks [28] and Esteves and Pastor [29]. Most of these 
models identify and define a series of stages in the overall 
implementation process. For example, the model put forward 
by Markus and Tanis [27] has four stages: charter, project, 
shakedown and onward and outward. The Process Phase 
Model (PPM) developed by Parr and Shanks [28] consists of 
three phases planning, project and enhancement, each with 
 
 

602
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
its own critical success factors. The planning phase refers to 
activities such as package selection, appointment of a 
steering committee and project team members, defining 
project scope, determining the implementation approach and 
allocating resources. The project phase encompasses a range 
of activities from module selection to package deployment 
and ‘go live’. The model identifies five sub-phases including 
set-up, re-engineering, design, configuration, and testing and 
installation.  The enhancement phase covers system repair 
and 
maintenance, 
and 
business 
improvement 
and 
transformation. Ross’s [26] five-phase implementation 
model is similar, including design, implementation, 
stabilization, continuous improvement, and transformation 
phases.  The ERP life cycle model of Esteves and Pastor [29] 
has six phases and four dimensions. The dimensions are the 
different elements of change by which the phases can be 
analysed.  The ERP life cycle model phases are: adoption 
decision, acquisition, implementation, use and maintenance, 
evolution, and retirement. The dimensions in the model refer 
to process, people, product and change management.   
Within this context, the study addresses the following 
research questions (RQs): 
RQ1. What has been the nature of ERP systems projects 
in SMEs Iran, and what has been the underlying information 
systems strategy?  
RQ2. 
What 
lessons 
can 
be 
learnt 
from 
the 
implementation process to help guide future projects to 
achieve successful outcomes?    
III. RESEARCH METHOD 
The case study is a widely used research method within 
business research. Bryman and Bell [30] argue that the case 
study is particularly appropriate to be used in combination 
with a qualitative research method, allowing detailed and 
intensive research activity, usually in combination with an 
inductive approach as regards the relationship between 
theory and research. The case study is also appropriate for a 
combination of qualitative methods, which is of particular 
relevance to this study of information systems in three 
SMEs, where mapping and profiling techniques are 
combined with questionnaire and interview material.  
Saunders, Lewis and Thornhill [31] argue that case studies 
are of particular value for explanatory or exploratory 
investigation, such as that pursued in this research. 
The case studies under investigation are manufacturing 
SMEs in Iran. This article reports on the findings from three 
case studies, for which aliases are used because of 
confidentiality issues. The first case study is the Isfahan Bus 
Company, which was founded in 1985 as a family business 
in Najafabad in Isfahan province. The company designs, 
manufactures and sells a range of buses, vans and spare parts 
and currently employs 350 staff. The second case study is 
Electronic Transmission Systems, a company employing 160 
staff which was founded in 1978, and is another family 
business in the Isfahan province. The company designs, 
manufactures and distributes electronic vehicles, E-bikes, 
differential transmission systems (for Pride, Nissan Jounior 
and Tiba engines), and pinion and gear differential systems 
and parts. The third case study is the Spare Parts Company, 
which was founded in 1998 as a family business in Tehran 
province. The company designs, manufactures and sells 
spare parts for commercial vehicles (trucks, buses, minibuses 
and vans) and currently employs 250 staff.  
Data collection was undertaken through questionnaires, 
interviews, and documentary evidence. Yin [32] suggests 
that the utilisation of multiple sources of evidence is one 
way of increasing the construct validity of case studies. A 
detailed structured questionnaire was filled in by three 
respondents in the first case study, two in the second and 
five in the third company and follow-up interviews were 
conducted with the questionnaire respondents. The job roles 
of these respondents were: 
Isfahan Bus Company 
     Head of IT: he was heavily involved in supporting the 
company’s 
main 
departments 
in 
specifying 
their 
requirements and in the package selection process. In the 
implementation phase, he had regular meetings with 
department heads to monitor progress and make sure they 
understood the implementation process. 
     Head of quality control and engineering: he was on the 
project steering group (PSG) that was responsible for 
selecting and implementing the ERP solution. As main user 
and responsible for overall project quality, he represented 
individual departmental needs, and met with the head of IT 
regularly.  
     Head of commercial department: he worked closely with 
the head of IT in the selection and implementation 
processes, identifying and planning training for most of the 
staff.  
Electronic Transmission Systems 
     Head of IT: he was involved in selecting the ERP 
package, but the final decision was made by the company 
director, based on the recommendation of the head of IT.  
     Head of human resources: he was not involved in the 
software selection process but played an important role in 
post implementation, in reviewing and proposing training 
needs for new systems users. 
Spare Parts Company 
Head of IT: he was heavily involved in supporting the 
main departments in specifying their requirements and was 
in overall charge of the project team. He was involved in 
package selection and all implementation phases. 
Head of finance: he was on the PSG and was responsible 
for overall financial management of the project, and more 
specifically for implementing the financial module of the 
selected ERP solution.  
Head of quality control: he was on the PSG that was 
responsible for selecting and implementing the ERP 
package.  
Head of sales and marketing: he worked closely with the 
Head of IT in the selection and implementation processes, 
identifying and planning training for most of the staff. 
Head of production: he was not involved in the software 
selection process but played an important role in post 
 
 

603
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
implementation, in reviewing and proposing training needs 
for new systems users. 
     The questionnaire responses and follow-up interviews 
clarified the processes and sub-processes that are central to 
the companies’ business operations, and allowed a mapping 
of current technology deployment in each process area. 
More specifically, the topics included in the questionnaire 
can be categorised as follows: 
a) Company information: basic company data, company 
profile, 
size, 
operations 
and 
other 
general 
information.  
b) Company processes: the company’s main business 
processes and also the secondary processes (sub-
processes within each main process area).  
c) Information systems: the deployment of systems 
modules and any remaining legacy systems, and the 
underpinning technical architecture.   
d) Current systems status: the functionality of the main 
information systems and general satisfaction levels in 
different departments that use them.   
e) Problems and challenges: key problems or issues, 
both from a technical perspective and from the point 
of view of the end user; integration and interfacing of 
systems, report quality, systems performance.   
Questionnaires and interviews were conducted in Parsi 
and have been translated into English.  
IV. ERP DEPLOYMENT AND IS STRATEGY 
This section will apply process mapping and systems 
profiling to the three manufacturing SMEs in Iran, with the 
objective of establishing the current use and functionality of 
ERP modules and other systems, and assessing the 
underpinning IS strategy. 
 
Case Study 1: The Isfahan Bus Company (IBC)  
IBC has six major top level business processes and a 
number of sub-processes. These are briefly outlined below, 
along with the information systems which currently support 
them (Figure 1).  
The manufacturing process comprises three sub-
processes: production planning and production, quality 
control, and engineering. Production planning is automated 
via the materials requirements planning (MRP) module of 
the BEHKO system. This systems module assesses the 
requirements for production against current company stock 
and suggests replenishment works orders for the appropriate 
dates and quantities to meet production requirements. The 
system takes account of current stock levels, outstanding 
orders, and minimum purchase order quantities. It will 
suggest a schedule of what should be made and when, what 
should be purchased and when, and current and future 
loading of production lines, by resource by week.  This sub-
process includes the bill of materials (BOM) function. When 
the MRP module receives an order, it will also create a list of 
required components to make that order. The MRP module 
also has additional forward planning functionality. It has the 
capability to plan requirements for meeting new orders and 
rescheduling existing orders. 
In contrast, the quality control and engineering sub-
processes are only partly automated. These sub-processes are 
supported by Microsoft Excel spreadsheets and an Access 
database to monitor, store and report upon key events and 
stock transactions. These include inspection and testing 
records, and inventory transactions for engineering parts.  
The sales and marketing process is also supported by the 
BEHKO system. There are two sub-processes – sales 
management and marketing management, supported, 
respectively, by the BEHKO sales management module 
(that encompasses customer records, sales orders, price lists 
and quotation functions) and the BEHKO customer 
relationship management (CRM) module. A customer 
record includes customer details, customer status, and 
customer discounts, and is linked to the sales ledger which 
shows outstanding invoices and displays these along with 
other real time data from BEHKO so that sales and 
purchasing staff have a total up-to-date view of pertinent 
financial data for each customer. The sales order function 
allows the entry and editing of sales order information and 
the generation of sales reports. The quotation function 
allows the processing of requested quotes for business and 
the generation of quotation reports to send to customers. 
The BEHKO CRM 
module provides the systems 
functionality to manage and report upon sales contacts, 
prospects, existing customers and suppliers, in support of 
improved 
customer 
service 
and 
better 
information 
availability across the internal customer facing processes. 
The purchasing and procurement process centres on 
purchasing management and related operations. Purchasing 
management is supported by the BEHKO purchasing 
module, which provides a full range of purchasing functions. 
After the MRP module calculates requirements to fulfil a 
works 
order, 
a 
purchase 
requisition 
is 
generated 
electronically to be accessed by the purchasing department 
and processed as a purchase order on the system; copies are 
also made available electronically to the finance department 
and processed as a purchase order on the system; copies are 
also made available electronically to the finance department. 
The BEHKO purchasing module generates unique supplier 
reference codes and provides purchase reports for each 
supplier. It also has the capability to assess suppliers’ credit 
worthiness and overall supply performance, and also attach 
picture, voice or any other document to supplier files.  
The BEHKO finance and accounting module supports 
the financial management process, recording and reporting 
the current sales order book (accounts receivable), purchase 
order book (accounts payable), outstanding purchase 
invoices and staff payments, alongside the company general 
ledger and cash management transactions. This system 
assesses current outstanding sales orders to raise sales 
invoice to customers, and matches goods received notes 
against purchase orders and purchase invoices. The module 
defines the financial period start and end dates and can 
accommodate a variety of foreign currencies and exchange 
rates. 
 
 

604
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The logistics and distribution process has three sub- 
processes - inventory management, primary distribution and 
aftersales services, and agency distribution. Inventory 
management is automated via the BEHKO stock control 
module. The primary distribution and aftersales services sub-
process manages customers’ orders to ensure customer 
delivery and post sales service. It is supported by an off-the-
shelf after sales information systems package called SEVEN. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Main Business Processes and IS profiling at IBC 
 
 
Manufacturing  
I. Production planning and production (G: 
BEHKO MRP and production module)  
II. Quality control (A: Access/ Excel) 
III. Engineering (A: Access/ Excel) 
 
 
Sales and Marketing 
I. Sales Management (G: BEHKO 
Commercial module)  
II. Marketing Management (G: 
BEHKO CRM module)  
 
Purchasing and Procurement 
I.  Purchase Management (G: 
BEHKO purchase module)  
 
Financial Management 
I. Finance management (G: 
BEHKO Finance & accounting 
module)  
 
Logistics and distribution 
I. Inventory management (G: BEHKO 
Inventory module)  
II. Primary distribution and after sales 
service (A: SEVEN off the shelf 
package) 
III. Agency distribution (R: 
Manual/spreadsheets) 
Human Resource management 
I. Personnel management 
(G: BEHKO HR module)  
II. Training (R: Manual) 
III. Health and safety 
 
 
  
Key  
 
G (Green) indicates a system that is effective 
A (Amber) indicates a system that may need replacement 
R (Red) indicates a system that is defective and need replacing  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

605
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 2.  Systems Interfaces at IBC 
 
 The agency distribution sub-process involves the sale of 
spare parts for buses and other vehicles via company 
agencies located in different cities in Iran. This process is 
partly manual and partly automated by use of spreadsheets.  
The human resource (HR) management process can be 
subdivided into three main sub-processes: personnel   
management handles employee records (including payment, 
staff absence and leave, and timesheet recording) and this is 
centrally managed and automated using the BEHKO HR 
systems module. There are also the staff training and health 
and safety sub- processes, which are mainly manual. 
The information system strategy adopted at IBC has been 
to implement modules of the BEHKO total system in the 
core process areas of the business, some of which have been 
customized to meet the specific requirements of the 
company. BEHKO is an Iranian software company, and its 
selection was based on functionality, language – it uses both 
Parsi and English – and easy access for systems support and 
upgrade. IBC pursued a phased implementation to enable a 
careful phasing out of previous systems and a managed 
exchange of data between old and new systems. In addition, 
it allowed staff to adapt to the changes in systems and 
procedures in an orderly and controlled manner. 
Many modules were customised based on requested 
requirements specified by senior management in each 
process area. In all, it took three years to implement the 
system, but even now some sub-processes are still manual or 
are supported by using spreadsheets and semi-automated file 
exchanges (Figure 2). Although the BEHKO system modules 
are well integrated, there is no effective integration with the 
stand alone SEVEN system, nor with the MS Excel and MS 
Access applications. The BEHKO system is developed in 
C++ and uses the SQL database and is administered by 
senior managers who have access to all system generated 
reports and invoices. These reports include key business 
performance information, providing an overview of all sales, 
purchases, stock levels, and financial data and staff reports.  
IBC has five servers comprising a database server, 
software server, backup server, webserver (mainly for 
email), and antivirus server. Windows 2012 R2 is installed 
on all the servers as the operating system. Microsoft SQL 
2008 was installed on the database server, whilst the 
BEHKO modules run on the software server. Database 
backup and vital files archiving are done on the backup 
server every day. In addition, IBC has installed the McAfee 
antivirus software on all desktop computers and all software 
External distributor 
system  
 
Training 
Health & Safety  
Quality control  
Primary distribution 
& after sales services 
                                                        
                 BEHKO systems modules  
 
                Off the shelf IS and in- house system developed in Excel/ Access 
 
                 Manual operations 
                                         
                 Electronic or manual file exchange 
 
Sales management 
Marketing management  
Finance and accounting 
management 
Personnel management  
Production planning & 
production 
Inventory management  
Purchase management  
Engineering 
 
 

606
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
updates are managed by the antivirus server.  The Internet 
connection installed in IBC is both wired and wireless. All 
departments are connected via an intranet that is controlled 
by privilege policy that manages the workflow.  They follow 
a single sign-on technique; therefore, they have 100 desktops 
that are available to 100 or more users.  IBC have also 
provided twenty portable devices (laptops) if needed by staff 
members for off-site working, or presentations and meetings. 
All PCs run under the Windows 10 operating system and 
have MS Office available. IBC uses a private VLAN and 
cisco switch to separate each server for higher security and 
privacy. The company uses firewall network security, 
located in three different physical areas, to prevent 
unauthorised access from other networks.  
The current IS strategy at IBC was adopted in 2008 in 
support of the company’s business strategy to expand 
production and drive up bottom-line company profit. The 
strategy was a formal decision made by a committee 
comprising selected managers from across all departments - 
commercial, finance, production, engineering, quality 
control, and the IT manager. Previous systems were a mix of 
off the shelf packages and end-user applications. The initial 
focus was in the logistics and distribution process area, to 
establish consistent inventory product codes and simplify 
and standardise product information for both internal 
processes and also for customer facing sales and marketing 
departments. After a successful six month parallel run of old 
and new systems in this area in 2008, the BEHKO systems 
modules were introduced in stages, completing in 2012. The 
software vendor continues to provide support and upgrades, 
and IBC is now planning a major upgrade to the BEHKO 
ERP product in 2017. This package includes improved 
functionality which should allow the replacement of the 
SEVEN package and other standalone applications. 
 
Case Study 2: Electronic Transmission Systems (ETS) 
Initial process mapping suggests there are six top level 
business processes, and each process has several sub-
processes. The processes are depicted in Figure 3, along with 
the information systems which currently support these 
business processes.   
The manufacturing process comprises three sub- 
processes: quality control, production planning, and 
production and assembly. The quality control sub-process 
encompasses the inspection of both purchased and 
manufactured parts and products, and the recording and 
monitoring of test results. The GREEN/GALAX quality 
control module records and manages all data associated with 
product sampling, testing and results recording and 
reporting. Security aspects are supported by systems controls 
on access, allowing only staff with the required skills and 
competence levels to undertake inspection testing.  
The production planning sub-process is automated with 
the GREEN/GALAX materials requirements planning 
(MRP) module, which determines the quantity and timing of 
component purchases. MRP stores the bills of materials and 
explodes these into requirements, based on received orders, 
and will then compare the demands to available company 
stock to generate necessary procurement requirements. The 
production 
and 
assembly 
sub-process 
encompasses 
production control and final inspection operations. The 
GREEN/GALAX production module also provides time 
estimates for parts delivery at production line and for final 
inspection of finished products. The production team can 
attach 
drawings 
of 
product 
designs 
and 
technical 
specifications to job sheet records.   
The inventory management process covers stock control 
and is partly automated with MS Excel spreadsheets 
monitoring manufactured and component products in and out 
of the stockrooms. The product design process is automated 
with a range of off-the-shelf design and planning software 
packages, including Catia V5R18, MSC Super Forge, Master 
CAM 9.0, Autodesk Mechanical desktop 2007, Power Mill 
6.0, Primavera Project planner, MS Project 2007, and 
Minitab 13.0.  This process encompasses the design and 
drawing of company products based on received orders and 
customer specifications.  
The commercial management process has two sub- 
processes - customer management and supplier management 
– and both are supported by the GREEN/GALAX 
commercial management module. This module supports the 
categorization and management of both customers and 
suppliers, and recording of relevant details. The financial 
management 
process 
is 
similarly 
supported 
by 
a 
GREEN/GALAX module. There are two sub-processes: 
accounts management, and general ledger/asset management. 
The system manages financial activities, financial figures 
and reports and invoices; it contains the ledgers for sales and 
purchase 
transactions, 
and 
records 
company 
assets, 
liabilities, owners' equity, revenue, and expenses.  
The human resource management process covers 
personnel management, including employee records, staff 
absence and leave, and timesheets. The process is mainly 
manual. Employees have their own identity and attendance 
card, which are checked and monitored by security guards at 
the company entrance.  Annual leave is also authorised and 
recorded by a manual, paper-based system.  
The information system strategy adopted at ETS is based 
on the GREEN/GALAX ERP package, combined with point 
solutions developed in MS Excel. The choice of the main 
software system again was influenced by the fact that it was 
available in the Parsi language and there was easy access to 
software support and technical advisors.  
The current IS strategy was adopted in 2014 and was a 
formal decision made by the IT manager in conjunction with 
the company director. Modules of the GREEN/GALAX ERP 
were implemented simultaneously in core business functions 
in the period October to December 2014. The company has 
two servers - a database server and a webserver, the 
Windows 2012 R2 operating system having been installed on 
both of these. Microsoft SQL 2008 was installed on the 
database server, on which database back up is scheduled 
daily, in addition to offsite back up. GREEN/GALAX 
modules, website and email run on the webserver. Wired and 
wireless Internet access is installed. They have 25 desktop 
computers that are available to 27 or more users. ETS 
provides three portable devices (laptops) if needed by staff 
for off-site working, presentations or meetings. All PCs run 
 
 

607
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
under the Windows 10 operating system and MS Office is 
used for personal productivity tools and email. The 
GREEN/GALAX system was developed in C++ and uses the 
Microsoft SQL 2008 database.  The GREEN/GALAX 
system has a drop list that enables the user to choose which 
subsystem they wish to access based on their department and 
login. All users log onto the system with personalised user 
IDs and passwords allowing different accesses and 
privileges. This is controlled by thee head of each 
department who can grant users with additional or restricted 
access and permissions. 
Unfortunately, training was poor and insufficient and 
there have been significant user issues with some 
departments reverting to previous semi-manual processes. 
There also remain a number of file exchange operations 
whereby data is extracted from the GREEN/GALAX system 
and input into standalone applications for inventory 
management and product design (see Figure 4). In 2015, 
external consultants were engaged to review the status of the 
ERP project and specifically to provide training and user 
support. Despite this initiative, there remain significant 
issues to address. The implementation of new modules has 
not been adequately coordinated with changes in people 
capability. The HR system needs to be automated and 
integrated with finance and the accounting department to 
prevent duplication and data inconsistencies in payroll. 
Similarly, the inventory management module of the 
GREEN/GALAX system needs to be ushered in to provide 
consistent product codes and enhance the capability and 
functionality of company business activities. The company 
needs to address the training issue to encourage and support 
staff in using all of the available functions in the new system. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Main Business Processes and IS profiling at ETS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Manufacturing  
I. Quality control (G: GREEN/ GALAX QC 
module) 
 
II. Production planning and production (G: 
GREEN/ GALAX manufacturing module) 
  
 
Commercial Management  
I. Customer management (G: GREEN/ 
GALAX commercial module) 
II. Supplier management (G: GREEN/ 
GALAX commercial module) 
 
Financial Management 
I. Accounting management (G: 
GREEN/ GALAX Financial module 
 
II. General ledger and assets G: 
GREEN/ GALAX Financial module 
 
HR Management 
I. Personnel management (R: 
Manual) 
 
Key 
 
G (Green) indicates a system that is effective and strategically sound 
A (Amber) indicates a system that may need replacement 
R (Red) indicates a system that is defective and needs replacing  
Product Design (A: 
off the shelf 
software)   
 
Inventory Management 
 (A: EXCEL spreadsheet) 
 
 

608
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
                                                                               
 
Figure 4.  Systems Interfaces at ETS
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Case Study 3: Spare Parts Company (SPC) 
     Initial process mapping suggests there are five top level 
business processes, and each process has several sub-
processes. The processes are depicted in Figure 5, along with 
the information systems which currently support these 
business processes.     
     The manufacturing process in this company comprises 
two sub-processes: production/production planning, and 
maintenance/engineering. 
Production 
and 
production 
planning are supported by HAMKARAN manufacturing 
and operations module. The production/production planning 
sub- process reacts to forecast demand to generate works 
orders and procurement requirements to meet those orders. 
Users are also able to specify cumulative lead times they 
want to allow for order fulfilment, and also record human 
resource availability patterns for production. Users also 
record quality inspection details and outcomes across the 
internal supply chain from component parts to finished 
products. The maintenance and engineering sub-process, 
however, is only partly automated with Microsoft Excel 
spreadsheets. 
The sales and marketing process is automated and 
supported by the HAMKARAN sales and marketing 
modules. This allows data entry and recording of relevant 
details for prospects and customers, price lists, and 
quotations, and reporting and tracking of sales orders, 
despatches and outstanding invoices, and the monitoring of 
credit control status of customers and sales performance. 
The sales team can change product prices and apply 
discount for specific customers or products.  
The financial management process is automated using 
the HAMKARAN finance and accounting module, which is 
closely integrated with the other HAMKARAN modules. 
The finance and accounting module is used to prepare 
financial reports in compliance with Iranian accounting 
standards and international financial regulations. Standard 
reports are available from the general ledger, accounts 
payable, and accounts receivable, including evaluation of 
payment 
and 
cash 
discount 
histories.
Production planning and production 
 
Accounting management 
General ledger and assets 
  
Supply Management Module 
Customer Management Module  
Quality Control management  
Product design  
           GREEN/GALAX system modules 
                                        
           Other off the shelf packaged software/MS Excel applications  
 
           Manual operations 
 
            Electronic or manual file exchange 
Inventory  
HR 
  
 
 

609
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 5.  Main Business Processes and IS profiling at SPC  
Manufacturing 
I. Production and production planning (G: 
Hamkaran manufacturing and operations 
module) 
 
 II. Maintenance and engineering (Microsoft 
Excel) 
 
 
 
 
 
Sales and marketing  
I. Sales and marketing management (G: 
Hamkaran sales and marketing Module)  
 
Financial management 
I. Finance and accounting 
management (G: Hamkaran finance 
and accounting Module)  
 
 
   
  
HR  
I. Employee administration (G: Hamkaran 
HR module 
II. Training and personnel development (R: 
Manual) 
Key  
G (Green) indicates a system that is effective 
A (Amber) indicates a system that may need replacement 
R (Red) indicates a system that is defective and need replacing  
Procurement and logistics  
I. (G: Hamkaran 
procurement and logistics 
module)  
 
 
 

610
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 6.  Systems Interfaces at SPC 
 
The human resources process has two sub-processes - 
employee administration, which is automated with the 
HAMKARAN HR module, and training and personal 
development, which remains a manually recorded operation. 
The HR module includes full employee records, payment 
details, holiday and absence recording and payslip 
generation. It also has a full payroll function that integrates 
with production time records.  
The procurement and logistics process encompasses 
inventory, purchasing and distribution management which 
are integrated and automated via the HAMKARAN 
procurement and logistics module. Once a works order is 
raised and MRP has calculated requirements based on 
available stock, a procurement request is processed through 
the HAMKARAN procurement and logistics module to 
produce purchase requisitions and purchase orders. This 
module also has functionality to support both inward and 
outward distribution, generating reports of expected 
deliveries against customer orders, and also reporting on 
finished product distribution.   
The information system strategy adopted at SPC has 
been based around the phased introduction of the 
HAMKARAN ERP system. HAMKARAN is an Iranian 
product and the selection was again influenced by language 
(it uses Parsi), and availability of the Parsi calendar within 
the system. It also uses mainstream technologies, having 
been developed in C++ and Asp.Net (3.5/4.0) and runs on 
the Microsoft SQL server data base. SPC has four servers 
consisting of a database server running Microsoft SQL, a 
software server (on which are installed modules of 
HAMKARAN system), a web and email server, and a 
backup server. The Windows 2012 R2 operating system is 
installed on all servers, and the IT manager backs up the 
data from various servers on a weekly basis. Network 
connections installed in SPC are both wireless and cable, 
and all departments are connected via a local area network 
(LAN). All users have their own specific privileges which 
are determined by heads of department, and the privileges 
and accesses of heads of department are authorised by the 
company director. There are 50 desktop computers for 50 
users, besides three portable devices (two laptops and an 
IPad) for off-site undertakings. All desktop computers run 
under the windows 10 operating system and have MS Office 
installed.  
Production and production 
planning 
 
Finance and accounting  
 
 
Sales and marketing  
 
 
Maintenance and 
engineering  
            HAMKARAN system modules 
                                    
           Excel spreadsheets 
                                        
            Manual operation 
 
            Electronic or manual file exchange                                   
                                         
Procurement and logistics  
 
Human resource 
management 
 
Training and 
Personal 
Development 
 
 

611
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Another factor that influenced software selection was 
ease of access to the software company for software 
maintenance or upgrades. SPC elected to pursue a phased 
implementation to allow employees to adapt gradually to 
changes in their systems and ways of working. All modules 
were installed simultaneously in 2011 on a few desktop 
computers and the database server, and some key users were 
trained up in the use of the system. Systems modules were 
then installed on other desktops and users trained 
accordingly. Only then were some users put live, but this 
was done in phases and followed the order of the training 
programme. The financial systems users were first to use the 
new system, followed by manufacturing process users, sales 
and marketing, procurement and logistics and finally human 
resources users. Overall this roll-out and move to ‘go live’ 
took 4 months in the period November 2011 to February 
2012. The project as a whole – encompassing the three 
phases as depicted Figures 5 and 6 – took an elapsed time of 
about 18 months spanning 2011-12. The HAMKARAN 
systems modules are integrated, but links with the Excel 
spreadsheet in the maintenance and engineering process is 
still done by file exchange. Nevertheless, the new ERP is 
now bedding in reasonably well, with the efficiency benefits 
of automating former manual processes now being delivered.  
Figure 7.  ERP Implementation at IBC 
 
 
 

612
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
V. IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES 
     The current information system strategies at all three 
companies have some similarities. They all elected to adopt 
an ERP package from Iranian based software suppliers, to 
provide the benefits of integrated systems and consistent 
management information to support company growth 
aspirations. In all three companies, however, some of the 
old legacy systems remain in some core process areas, and 
these are likely to be replaced in the near future with 
appropriate ERP systems modules.  
There were significant differences between the three 
companies’ strategy implementation approaches. At IBC, 
the strategy development and its implementation was agreed 
to, and guided by, a cross-departmental steering group that 
carefully managed a phased implementation of the BEHKO 
ERP product, providing the necessary training and support 
for end-users. At ETS, the GREEN/GALAX ERP package 
was selected as a result of discussions between the IT 
manager and the company director, and lacked cross-
company involvement and support. Implementation was 
simultaneous in most process areas, increasing the risk of 
systems problems and data issues. This was compounded by 
the absence of adequate training and support for end-users, 
which left the project in a parlous state. Only recently has 
the engagement of third party support helped to provide 
much needed training and bed in the new systems modules. 
At SPC, a phased implementation of the HAMKARAN 
ERP was successfully undertaken, the project spanning 
2011-12  
 This analysis reinforces the findings of Heeks [22] and 
other recent studies [33][34][35] that suggest large scale 
technology implementation, even in SMEs, must be 
accompanied by appropriate process improvement and an 
upgrade in people skills to accommodate the new ways of 
working that are often introduced with new systems 
modules. There are a some elements of people change that 
affect ERP implementation throughout the project duration - 
employee skills (IT and computer literacy), awareness of 
goals and objectives, appropriate selection of project team 
and project board, identification of main users (including 
system champions) and clarity on their responsibilities and 
roles, planning and training, and having an effective project 
manager. The people change dimension had a very 
significant impact on the other dimensions of change 
(process and technology) in all three cases. Project team and 
project board decisions at IBC and SPC regarding package 
and 
module 
selection, 
customisation 
(at 
IBC), 
implementation strategy, and the organisation of the training 
programme impacted the project positively. The influence 
of competent project manager(s) is equally important. At 
IBC and SPC, project managers worked closely with the 
companies’ IT managers - a combination of internal 
managers who knew the business and external managers 
who were expert in ERP positively affected project 
outcomes in a number of ways (such as technology 
decisions regarding IT infrastructure, implementation 
strategy, package selection).   
 Awareness of goals and objectives of the project and a 
willingness to broadcast them to users to involve them in all 
stages of the ERP project influenced the implementation 
process at IBC and SPC. By involving users throughout the 
project, they were motivated to work as a team. Involving 
users and sharing the goals and objectives developed a 
shared perspective with management and fully engaged 
them in the ERP project. By contrast, at ETS, the gap 
between top managers and the main users was detrimental to 
the whole project. The management style was in many ways 
typical of the Iranian private organisation culture, and put 
the project at risk. The majority of SMEs in Iran are private 
family businesses, managed by the owners, who make most 
of the decisions regarding such projects. This can act against 
the likelihood of overall project success which requires that 
all employees buy into the chosen solution and the 
implementation process.  
Manufacturing SMEs in Iran need to be prepared for the 
process change challenges that are inevitable during a 
successful ERP project. Businesses should be prepared to 
modify their processes to fit the ERP system if necessary. 
The potential misalignment of current business processes 
with the business model underpinning the ERP system can 
increase the need for customisation, which negatively 
affects other project factors, resulting in potential budget 
cost overruns and exceeding the project timeline. It is 
important for SMEs in Iran to define their business 
processes clearly before selecting their package. The case 
studies also highlight the importance of communication 
across various stages of implementation. Communicating 
and sharing goals, objectives and process change plans 
encourages users to accept these changes and reduces 
resistance.  
This is best illustrated at IBC (Figure 7), where a 
carefully managed implementation was done department by 
department, in parallel with a phased training programme 
for managers and key users. The role of the cross-
departmental steering group was critical in guiding the 
project through a number of key activities, from the request 
for proposal from ERP suppliers, to the selection process 
itself, through the phased implementation, the conduct of 
the training programme and to the final agreement of a 
support and maintenance plan. It is the project at IBC that 
perhaps best illustrates a model for future ERP projects in 
similar companies in Iran.  
VI. 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
The case studies of the implementation of three home 
grown ERP products in Iranian SMEs revealed some 
interesting results. These ERP products are structured in a 
similar manner to their western counterparts, albeit they 
appear to allow greater flexibility in customisation to 
specific users’ needs. The projects were generally 
successful, being the product of a fairly straightforward IS 

613
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
strategy of replacing old manual and legacy systems with 
new ERP modules. At ETS, however, there is still a need for 
more training to ensure the system is used effectively and 
owned by the users themselves. The implementation process 
was a little different in the three cases, and the successful 
outcome at IBC suggests a phased approach is likely to be 
most successful in which people change elements (steering 
group, project leadership, training and skills upgrade) are 
put in place in parallel with technology implementation.  
     The case studies also provide some interesting insights 
into the ERP market in Iran, where, with international 
sanctions now lifted, the opportunities for western based 
ERP vendors are likely to be enhanced. However, the home-
grown ERP (Total Systems) packages have an established 
user base which is likely to grow, in the short-term at least, 
given the benefits of customisation and operation in the 
Parsi language that most of these packages offer. 
  
REFERENCES 
[1]    M. Rezaeian and M. Wynn, “Implementing Integrated 
Software Solutions in Iranian SMEs,” eKNOW 2016 : The 
Eighth International Conference on Information, Process, 
and Knowledge Management, Venice, ThinkMind, pp. 76-
84, ISBN: 978-1-61208-472-5 
[2] A. Hawari and R. Heeks, “Explaining ERP failure in a 
developing country: a Jordanian case study,” Journal of 
Enterprise Information Management, Vol. 23 (2), pp. 135-
160, 2010.   
[3] H. Akeel and M. Wynn, “ERP Implementation in a 
Developing World Context: a Case Study of the Waha Oil 
Company, 
Libya,” 
eKNOW 
2015, 
The 
Seventh 
International Conference on Information, Process and 
Knowledge Management, Lisbon., Feb 22nd – Feb 27th. 
ThinkMind, ISBN: 978-1-61208-386-5; ISSN: 2308-4375 
[4]    M. Moohebat, M. Jazi and A. Aseni, “Evaluation of ERP 
implementation 
at 
the 
Esfahan 
Steele 
Company,” 
International Journal of Business and Management, Vol. 6 
(5), pp.  236-250, 2011. 
[5] C.  Koch, “The ABCs of ERP,” CIO Magazine, Dec 1999. 
[6] C. Soh and S. Sia, “An institutional perspective on sources 
of ERP package organization misalignments,” Journal of 
Strategic Information Systems, Vol.13 (4), pp. 375-397, 
2004. 
[7] E. Turban, E. McLean, J. Wetherbe, N. Bolloju and R. 
Davison, Information Technology for Management – 
Transforming Business in the Digital Economy, 3rd ed., 
John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2002. 
[8] M. Hammer and J. Champny, Re-engineering the 
Corporation: A Manifesto for Business Revolution, Harper 
Business, New York, 1993. 
[9] R. Gomez and  S. Pather, “ICT evaluation: are we asking 
the right questions?” Electronic Journal of Information 
Systems in Developing Countries (EJISDC), Vol. 50 (5), 
pp. 1-14, 2012.  
[10] S. Batchelor, S. Evangelista, S. Hearn, M. Pierce, S. Sugden 
and M. Webb, ICT for Development: Contributing to the 
Millenium Development Goals – Lessons Learnt from 
Seventeen infoDev projects, Wasington DC: World Bank, 
2003.  
[11] A. Noudoosbeni, N. Ismail and H. Jenatabadi, “An  
effective end-user knowledge concern training method in 
enterprise resource planning (ERP) based on critical factors 
(CFS) in Malaysian SMEs,” International Journal of 
Production Economics, Vol. 115 (2), pp. 72-85, 2010. 
[12] A. Shahin, S. Sadri and R. Gazor, “Evaluating the 
Application of Learning Requirements Planning Model in 
the ERP project of Esfahan Steel  Company,” International 
Journal of Business Management, Vol. 5 (2), pp. 33-43, 
2010.  
[13] P. Hanifzade and M. Nikabadi, “Framework  for  Selection  
of an Appropriate e- Business Model in Managerial Holding 
Companies: case study: Iran Khodro,”  Journal of Enterprise 
Information Management, Vol. 24 (3), pp. 237-267, 2010. 
[14] A. Amid, M. Moalagh and A. Ravasan, “Identification and 
classification of ERP critical factors in Iranian industries,”  
Journal of Information Systems, Vol. 37, pp. 227-237, 
2011. 
[15] M. Warschauer, “Dissecting the Digital Devide: A case 
study in Egypt,” The Information Society, Vol.19 (4), pp. 7-
24, 2003. 
[16] R. Wade, “Bridging the Digital Divide: New Route to 
Development or New Form of Dependency?,” Journal of 
Global Governance, Vol. 8 (4), pp. 443- 466, 2002.  
[17] S. Dezar and S. Ainin, “ERP implementation success in 
Iran: examining the role of systems environment factors,” 
World Academy of Science, Engineering and Technology, 
Vol. 42, pp. 449-455, 2010.  
[18] M. Arabi, M. Zameri, K. Wong, H. Beheshti and N. 
Zakuan, “Critical Success Factors of Enterprise Resource 
Planning Implementation in Small and Medium Enterprises 
in Developing Countries: A Review and Research 
Direction,” Proceedings of Industrial Engineering and 
Service Science, 2011,http://www.academia.edu/1083186/ 
Critical_Success_Factors_of_Enterprise_ResourcePlanning
_Implementation_in 
small 
and_medium 
enterprises_in_developing_countries:_a 
Review_and_Research_Direction/ [Retrieved: March, 2016] 
[19] K. Talebi, “How should the entrepreneurs of SMEs in Iran 
change their style in a business life cycle?” Iranian Journal 
of Management Studies (IJMS), Vol. 1 (1), pp. 10-17, 2007. 
[20] M. Molanezhad, “A Brief Review of Science and 
Technology and SMEs Development in Iran,” The inter-
sessional panel of the United Nations commission on 
science and technology for development, 2010. 
[21] A. Hakim and H. Hakim, “A practical model on  controlling 
ERP implementation risks,”  Journal of Information 
Systems, Vol. 35, pp. 204-214, 2012. 
[22] R. Heeks, “Information Systems and Developing Countries: 
Failure, Success, and Local Improvisations,” Journal of 
Information Society, Vol.18 (2), pp. 101-112, 2002. 
[23] M. Wynn and O. Olubanjo, “Demand-supply chain 
management: systems implications in an SME packaging 
business in the UK,” International Journal of Manufacturing 
Research, Vol 7 (2), pp. 198-212, 2012. 
[24] C.S. Saunders and J.W. Jones, “Measuring performance of 
the information systems function,” Journal of Management 
Information Systems, Vol.8(4), 63-82. 1992.  
[25] N. Bancroft, H. Seip and A Sprengel, Implementing SAP 
R/3. 2nd ed., 1998 Greenwich:  Manning Publications 
[26] J.W. Ross “Surprising facts about implementing ERP,” IT 
professional, Vol. 1(4), pp.65-68, 1999.  
[27] M. L. Markus and C. Tanis, “The enterprise systems 
experience-from adoption to success,” Framing the domains 
of IT research: Glimpsing the future through the past, pp. 
173-207, 2000.   
[28] A. Parr and G. Shanks, “A model of ERP project 
implementation,” Journal of Information Technology, 
15(4), pp. 289–304, 2000.  

614
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[29] J. Esteves and J. Pastor, “An ERP life-cycle-bnased 
research agenda,” 1st International Workshop in Enterprise 
Management and Resource Planning: Methods, Tools and 
Architectures, Venice, 1999. 
[30] A. Bryman and E. Bell, Business Research Methods, 3rd 
edition, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011. 
[31] M. Saunders, P. Lewis and A. Thornhill, Research methods 
for business students, 5th ed., 2009, England: Pearson 
Education Limited. 
[32] R. K. Yin,  Applications of Case Study Research. 3rd ed., 
2012, London: SAGE Publications, Inc 
[33] M. Wynn, P. Turner, A. Banik, and A. G. Duckworth, “The 
impact of customer relationship management systems in 
small businesses,” Strategic Change, Vol 25 Issue 6, pp. 
655–670, 2016. Published online in Wiley Online Library 
(wileyonlinelibrary.com) DOI: 10.1002/jsc.2100.  
[34] M. Wynn and M. Rezaeian, “ERP implementation in 
manufacturing SMEs: Lessons from the Knowledge 
Transfer Partnership scheme,” InImpact: The Journal of 
Innovation Impact, Vol. 8 No. 1, 2015: Innovation through 
Knowledge Transfer 2015, pp. 75-92. Online Edition - 
ISSN: 2051-6002. Print Edition - ISBN: 978-1-911108-03-0 
[35] P. Mangin, V. Hovelaque, and L. Bironneau, “Enterprise 
Resource Planning contribution to firm performance: A 
literature review over the last 15 years,” 11th Congrés 
International de Genie Industrial - CIGI2015, Québec, 
Canada, 26-28 October 2015. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

