94
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Becoming a Smart City: A Textual Analysis of the
US Smart City Finalists
Jasmine DeHart
School of Computer Science
University of Oklahoma
Norman, Oklahoma, USA
dehart.jasmine@ou.edu
Oluwasijibomi Ajisegiri
School of Computer Science
University of Oklahoma
Norman, Oklahoma, USA
oluwasijibomi.ajisegiri@ou.edu
Greg Erhardt
Department of of Civil Engineering
University of Kentucky
Lexington, KY, USA
greg.erhardt@uky.edu
Jamie Cleveland
Duke Energy One
Charlotte, NC, USA
jamie.cleveland@duke-energy.com
Corey E. Baker
Department of Computer Science
University of Kentucky
Lexington, KY, USA
baker@cs.uky.edu
Christan Grant
School of Computer Science
University of Oklahoma
Norman, Oklahoma, USA
cgrant@ou.edu
Abstract—The term “smart city” is widely used, but there is no
consensus on the deﬁnition. Many citizens and stakeholders are
unsure about what a smart city means in their community and
how it affects cost and privacy. This paper describes how city
planners and companies envision a smart city using data from
the 2015 Smart City Challenge. We use text analysis techniques
to investigate the technology and themes necessary for creating
a smart city using surveys, document similarity, cluster analysis,
and topic modeling from the seven ﬁnalists from the 2015 Smart
City Challenge Applicants. With this investigation, we ﬁnd that
smart city requests include various technologies, and the goal
of smart cities is to enhance and connect the communities to
improve the lives of its’ citizens. On average, aspiring smart cities
requested 12 new or improved technologies. We also ﬁnd that two
of the seven studied smart city applications center privacy in their
proposals. The analysis within gives governments and citizens a
common interpretation of a smart city.
Index Terms—smart city; privacy; networks; text analysis.
I. INTRODUCTION
The concept of a “smart city” has recently led people,
cities, and governments to pursue idyllic improvements to
municipal infrastructure. Each stakeholder may have different
expectations for how their city should invest in improvements.
Currently, no standard deﬁnition for a smart city exists causing
variable expectations of residents, city governments, and other
community stakeholders.
Citizens have an expectation of privacy, affordability [1],
and timely and interactive information from a smart city [2].
While innovations in technology continue, citizens are critical
about how unvetted smart cities can violate intrinsic rights [3].
People are inventing methods to disguise themselves from
surveillance systems using fashionable masks [4]. Citizens also
depend on other products to curtain themselves from other
This material is based upon work supported by the National Science
Foundation under Grant No. 1952181.
devices, such as smart speakers [5][6]. Recent studies have
shown that some popular smart technologies, such as smart
thermostats, may not provide stated beneﬁts [7]. However,
laws are being proposed and passed to ensure the respon-
sibility of the city or company protects the privacy of the
citizens [8][9]. Signiﬁcant costs are incurred when deploying
sensors equipped with 5G or WiFi connectivity due to data
subscription fees [10][11]. The transformation into a smart
city is expensive (e.g., between $30 Million and $40 Billion),
and only a few cities are able to obtain the resources required
for upgrades [1].
In this paper, we study the ﬁnalist applications from the
2015 Smart City Challenge [12] to understand what types
of technologies cities requested along with the funding re-
quirements needed to bring smart cities to fruition. Figure 1
describes the main concerns of the citizens and city govern-
ments when envisioning smart cities according to the Smart
City Challenge applications.
In Section II, we describe a survey to understand the
perceptions of smart cities in relation to privacy and cost.
In Section III, we perform a detailed textual analysis of the
submitted smart city applications. We then propose solutions to
the cost and privacy issues in Section IV-A and Section IV-B,
respectively. Furthermore, we describe a case study of a
privacy-enabled low-cost smart city technology implemented
in a U.S. city in Section IV-C. Finally, we summarize our
ﬁndings in Section V.
II. SURVEYING PERSPECTIVES OF SMART CITIES
We deployed a survey (IRB #13565) to learn about the
current understanding of people tangentially involved with
smart city implementation or governance. The survey was
compromised of eighty-eight questions and had a respondent
size of six participants. The average time to complete the

95
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Information
Privacy
Quality of 
Life
Cost
Safety
Data
Participation
Citizen City
Expense
Fig. 1. Citizen and City concerns with Smart City Technology and Services.
Citizens concerns centers around information, privacy, costs, and quality of
life. City concerns in regards to Smart Cities focus on expenses, safety,
data, and participation of the community.
survey was twenty-seven minutes. The participants were able
to complete the survey online and it did not require the
participants to answer every question. The survey focused
on participant’s knowledge of privacy, their respective gov-
ernment/companies’ involvement with developing smart cities,
and the current cost of data collection. Participants were asked
about projected costs spent on technologies, knowledge of
smart city efforts, and understanding of privacy expectations
(see Table I).
Respondents had insightful answers when asked to deﬁne
smart cities. One participant highlighted “pressing issues for
its residents and businesses” and deﬁned a smart city as:
“One that employs technologies to improve ser-
vices to the community and/or make government
operations more efﬁcient and effective. A truly smart
city/community should also be targeting the most
important and pressing issues for its residents and
businesses not just applying technology for technol-
ogy’s sake.” – Survey Respondent
Another respondent stated that a smart city is:
“A city whose residents are connected by tech-
nology, high-speed broadband, providing services
online and interactively, tele-health services, using
IOT and AI in trafﬁc management, air quality man-
agement, parking, waste management, public safety,
utilities, autonomous vehicles, etc.” – Survey Re-
spondent
Beyond understanding what people deﬁned as a smart city,
we wanted to gain insight into the privacy concerns in potential
and deployed smart cities. When asked to deﬁne privacy,
participants highlighted the need to be able to revoke access
to their data.
“. . . I would include the ability to control or
at least delete personal data as well that has been
collected especially if the data has become obsolete
or inaccurate.” — Survey Respondent
When asked about what data privacy protection methods
would help improve their willingness to take part in city data
sharing, several participants stated they would like the “ability
to review” any data collected by the city concerning them. If
data is collected anonymously, there is an inherent difﬁculty
when designing systems to review personalized data requests.
To solve this, respondents suggest block chain or smart con-
tract techniques to provide anonymous keys to support audit
requests. Analyzing the current results, we found common
concerns around the concept of privacy. The words personal,
private, uninvited surveillance and protect are the noticeably
frequent words used to describe and articulate how privacy
is visualized for both pedestrians and companies. The survey
further asks about data sharing. Participants were asked if they
were comfortable sharing their data for the development and
enhancement of smart cities. However, the results show partic-
ipants are skeptical about sharing their data with smart cities.
The reasons provided by the participants included possible
increased policing in under-served communities, vulnerability
to data leakage, and not being aware of the purpose of data
collection.
TABLE I. THE SURVEY IRB #13565 WAS COMPROMISED OF
MULTIPLE-CHOICE QUESTIONS AND SHORT ANSWERS. WE ADD
SELECTED QUESTIONS FROM SURVEY RELATED TO DEFINING A
SMART CITY, PERSPECTIVES OF PRIVACY, TECHNOLOGY, AND
SPENDING.
Number
Question
1
How would you deﬁne a smart city/community?
2
How would you deﬁne privacy?
3
What data privacy protection methods would increase your
willingness to share data with the city?
4
Would you be comfortable sharing personal data within these
smart communities?
5
What makes you feel uncomfortable with sharing your per-
sonal data within smart communities?
6
How do you use the pedestrian counting data – for what
purpose(s)?
7
How much do you spend annually on pedestrian counting
data?
8
Where are the locations you need to have pedestrian counting
data?
When asked about pedestrian counting for marketing and
economic development, some of the pain points concerning
pedestrian counting include cost and frequency of pedestrian
counting, while privacy is the most valued feature with sim-
plicity as the second most valued. According to the preliminary
survey responses, companies spend between $11,000 - $20,000
annually on counting pedestrians. The average amount com-
panies spend on data collection for trafﬁc counts is approxi-
mately $25,000 annually; while the maximum allotted amount
for trafﬁc counting is $150,000. We also found that, although
companies use pedestrian counting for marketing, economic
development, safety, and infrastructure development; some of
the pain points or challenges concerning pedestrian counting
are cost and frequency of pedestrian counting. The most
common places for pedestrian counting include intersections,
downtown, or shopping areas.

96
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
III. ANALYZING SMART CITY FINALIST APPLICATIONS
In 2015, the United States Department of Transportation
announced the Smart City Challenge, which asked cities in the
US to create an integrated, smart, and efﬁcient transportation
system built on data, applications, and technology in an effort
to improve the lives of their citizens [12]. The Smart City
Challenge received 78 applicants describing what a smart city
looked like for their community. From this challenge, the seven
cities chosen as ﬁnalist include: Columbus (Ohio), Austin
(Texas), Denver (Colorado), Kansas City (Missouri), Pitts-
burgh (Pennsylvania), Portland (Oregon), and San Francisco
(California). Figure 2 displays U.S. cities that are applicants
2015 Smart City Challenge Applicants, of these, the red
circles denote the seven ﬁnalists (the circle area denotes the
population size).
✦
Portland
✦
San Francisco
✦
Kansas City
✦
Denver
✦
Austin
✦
Pittsburgh
Columbus  ✦
Fig. 2. Smart City Challenge Applicant locations in the United States; red
circles denoted the seven ﬁnalists.
In an effort to understand the needs and wants of smart
cities, we evaluate the ﬁnalist from the Smart City Challenge.
We perform text analysis methods from each submitted ap-
plication. We ﬁrst describe the document preprocessing to
transform the PDFs into a usable format (Section III-A). We
then perform document similarity, where documents refer to
the ﬁnalist applications, and we analyze overlap in the ap-
plication requests (Section III-B). Next, we performed cluster
analysis to group the ﬁnalist applications by themes according
to word usage in each document (Section III-C). Additionally,
we performed topic modeling to derive the dominant themes
present across the documents and provide insights on what a
“smart” city is compromised of (Section III-D). Furthermore,
we provide details on the requested technology (Section III-E)
and privacy mechanisms (Section III-F) for the Smart City
Challenge ﬁnalists considered for implementation.
A. Document Preprocessing
Each ﬁnalist document was downloaded from the Smart City
Challenge website where their vision statements were made
publicly accessible as a PDF ﬁle [13]. We extracted the textual
content from the ﬁles with Python code using the PyPDF2 PDF
manipulation library [14].
Figure 3 shows the distribution of word tokens across all
documents with a truncated tail. The documents are cleaned by
Fig. 3. Token Frequency Distribution across the Smart City Finalist Corpus.
The higher frequency tokens are conjunctions and overly common words.
removing stopwords and alphanumeric text, then those words
are stemmed. The words are further processed and embedded
using natural language processing tools. Stopwords are derived
from a list of typically infrequent words or misspellings
(e.g. “asd”, “buisness”) or overly common words (e.g. “the”,
“a”, “is”) and overly speciﬁc city names. We calculate tf-idf
scores [15] with
tft,d =
ft,d
P
t′∈d ft′,d
,
(1)
where t, d are the term and document, respectively, and the
ratio ft,d is the frequency of a term t in document d. We
multiply the tf score for each term by an idf term to account
for words that appear in each document. The inverse document
frequency is given by
idft = log (1 + n)
(1 + dft) + 1,
(2)
for each term t, where n is the total number of documents,
and dft is the number of documents where t appears. We the
value tft,d ∗ idft to remove additional terms that add little
to no meaning to the content of the topics and themes. The
repetition and frequency of unimportant words can inﬂuence
the text analysis results.
The process of removing alphanumeric terms can alleviate
typos as well as unsupportive words. Another pre-processing
method we used was stemming. We used the Porter Stemmer
to remove the endings of words to set them to the root [16].
When using this Stemmer, you will notice endings such as
“ing”, “ed”, and “es” being removed. With this collection of
processed documents, we create a corpus which is used in
the analysis steps. With the use of Text Analysis, we can
extract the text from these documents to create machine-
readable information to perform machine learning tasks to
better understand the content.
B. Document Similarity
With a cleaned corpus, we can gain insights of the docu-
ments by comparing them with similarity metrics. The doc-
ument similarity can be calculated by comparing vectorized

97
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
documents with the Euclidean distance measure. When two
documents are compared, the Euclidean distance score be-
tween them acts as a proxy for the similarity of the documents.
These distances are visualized in Figure 4.
Columbus, OH
Denver, CO
Kansas City, MO
Pittsburgh, PA
Portland, OR
San Francisco, CA
Austin, TX
Columbus, OH
Denver, CO
Kansas City, MO
Pittsburgh, PA
Portland, OR
San Francisco, CA
Austin, TX
Fig. 4. Similarity Matrix for Finalist Documents; darker shades describe the
similarity strength of the Smart City Finalist Applications.
Figure 4 shows relations by varying the intensity of the
colors between the range of 0 to 1. The stronger correlations
are noted in the darker shades with the values being closer to
zero. Weak correlations are shown in the lighter shades with
the values being closer to one. From Figure 4, we observe
that the documents with the strongest similarity are San
Francisco, Columbus, and Austin. The applications
for the cities of San Francisco and Austin show the
closest similarity among all documents. The moderate color
variation across the corpus insists that the documents have
similar content, but also distinctive features as shown in the
additional analyses below.
C. Cluster Analysis
Cluster Analysis was performed to group similar documents
together. The documents that are found in the same cluster are
more similar than those in the other clusters. The cluster anal-
ysis was completed using K-Means clustering [17]. K-Means
is an iterative centroid based clustering method that creates
groups based on closeness or similarity. It uses expectation
maximization to place the centroids at an optimal location in
the data space such that similar documents are in a cluster
and dissimilar documents are not clustered. For the K-Means
algorithm, we must deﬁne a k value, which is the number of
clusters the K-Means Model should produce. To obtain the
k value, we evaluated the elbow of the corpus by ﬁtting the
model to various values of k between two and six. This elbow
analysis of a corpus helped us determine the optimal number
of clusters for the respective corpus [18]. The optimal k value
was found when the cluster number is set at 4. The corpus was
then passed into the K-Means Model to cluster the documents.
To create this visualization, we used Principal Component
Analysis (PCA). PCA is traditionally used as a dimension re-
ductionality method. We employ PCA to create a visualization
that helps us understand the clusters – we choose the ﬁrst
two principal components as the axes of a two-dimensional
plane. This cluster visualization is shown in Figure 5. From
this visualization, we notice four distinctive clusters.
Denver
Kansas City
Portland
Pittsburgh
San Francisco 
Columbus
Austin
Principal Component 1
Principal Component 2
Fig. 5. Two Component PCA for visualizing K-Means Clustering for Smart
City Challenge Finalists.
The cities of Denver, Portland, and Kansas City
are individual clusters which imply that they differ from one
another as well as the large cluster. The larger cluster is com-
prised of Pittsburgh, San Francisco, Columbus,
and Austin. The content in these documents are closer
in similarity. The centroid of this cluster is positioned on
Columbus. We also see that there is heavy overlap in San
Francisco’s and Austin’s applications, which are also
present in the similarity matrix described in Section III-B.
D. Topic Modeling
To start the Topic Modeling process, we begin to deﬁne
phrases and vocabulary from the corpus. When building the
word dictionary for this model, we choose the words that
appear in more than two documents but less than 90% of
all documents. After this process is complete, we create a
Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) Topic Model [19]. LDA can
produce weighted topics based on the analysis of the corpus.
Our corpus consists of seven documents and a vocabulary
size of 2,282. With this generative probabilistic model, we are
able to derive themes and topics that are representative of the
corpus. Topics are represented as a list of weighted terms of
which we take the top-k. Our LDA model creates 3 topics that
are used to discover themes for our documents. In Table II,
the three topics are displayed with their respective words and
themes.
The terms denoted in gray have little to no contribution
to the theme of the cluster. These terms are used based on
their assigned weight from the output values of the LDA
model and the assigned topics. From Table II, we see that
Topic #1 includes four cities (Columbus, Kansas City,
San Francisco, Austin), Topic #2 includes two cities
(Denver and Pittsburgh), and Topic #3 includes one
city (Portland). These applications focus on several topics,
but the overall similarity of the document content allowed
the model to group and create topics. The documents were

98
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE II. TOPICS AND THEMES DERIVED FROM THE LDA
MODEL. THE GROUPS ARE LISTED WITH ASSOCIATED CITIES,
TOPICS, AND THEMES. THE TOPICS LISTED CONTAIN THE TOP
TEN WORDS.
#
Cities
Topics
Theme
1
Columbus,
Kansas
City,
San
Francisco,
Austin
grant, proposal, event, digital,
automated, university, demon-
stration,
automated
vehicle,
deploy, tool
Autonomous
Technology
and Tools
2
Denver,
Pittsburgh
component, grant, department
transportation,
university,
beneﬁt, consortium, efﬁciency,
foundation, percent, avenue
Building
Partnerships
and
Infrastructure
3
Portland
device, efﬁciency, equity, per-
cent, market place, university,
cloud, engineering, payment,
beneﬁt
Connecting the
Collegiate Ex-
perience to the
City
assigned to these groups by their dominant topic. The themes
derived from these groups encompass the various focuses a
smart city can have. From these themes, it is implied that cities
can become “smarter” with the use of autonomous technology,
building partnerships and infrastructure, and connecting to the
local universities in the city.
E. Technology Enhancements
To deﬁne the essence of a Smart City, we establish the
universal technologies requested by smart cities. We introduce
deﬁnitions needed to build a basis for understanding the
foundation of the technologies requested by these Smart City
ﬁnalists. These deﬁnitions provide a foundation to understand
the types of connectivity and technology smart cities need to
be operational and effective. There are additional technologies,
networks, and sensors not mentioned that smart cities can
implement in their community.
Many cities are interested in Dedicated Short-Range Com-
munications (DSRC), which allows vehicles to communicate
with each other and other road users directly. It is a wireless
communication technology that can function properly without
involving cellular or other infrastructures. It can save lives
by cautioning drivers of a looming, threatening situation or
occurrence in time to take necessary actions to help evade the
situation.
Cities are also interested in technologies that improve
efﬁciency for travelers. Trafﬁc Signal Priority (TSP) can be
deﬁned as technological set of operational improvements to
shorten the wait time at trafﬁc signals for vehicles and prolong
the time for green light signals. This can be done by using the
existence of vehicular locations and wireless communication
to extend the time of the green light at a trafﬁc signal.
TSP can be implemented at street intersections. Additionally,
pedestrian counters can be implemented in these intersections
as well. Pedestrian counters can be deﬁned as an electronic
device that is used to classify, count, and measure pedestrian
trafﬁc amongst along a particular road. These counters can
be used to measure the direction of the trafﬁc by time and
location. With this technology, corporations can ﬁnd peak
trafﬁc times, identify entry and exit points of travelers, and
set travel management protocols. Smart kiosks can serve as a
gateway for pedestrian counting as well. A smart kiosk is an
information kiosk that detects and tracks prospective clients
and sends/stores information about these prospects as data for
usage [20]. These kiosks can serve as a medium among the
citizens, the city, and additional technologies. Smart parking
technologies can be deﬁned as a strategy that infuses the use of
technology to inform citizens about free and occupied parking
spaces over the Web or mobile apps. Simultaneously, it can use
minimal resources there by reducing time and consumption of
fuel.
Electric transportation is any vehicle whose propulsion
and accessory systems are powered exclusively by a zero-
emissions electricity source. Electric transportation vehicles
have rechargeable batteries. The E-bikes use rechargeable
batteries battery mounted on the bike frame, and electric bus’
battery is under the hood or protective barrier. Cities are inter-
ested in planning charging stations to support electric vehicles.
Expanding from electronic transportation, smart cities are also
interested in implementing autonomous vehicles.
Similarly, cities are interested in promoting autonomous
transportation, or vehicle that drive with minimal human
intervention. Also called driver-less or self-driving vehicles;
autonomous transportation requires detailed real-time environ-
mental sensing for detection and classiﬁcation of surrounding
objects along navigation pathways. Cities should also un-
derstand the evolving regulations of transportation governing
automated vehicles. These electric and autonomous vehicles
can include cars, scooters, bikes, and buses [21][22].
TABLE III. REQUESTED TECHNOLOGIES FROM SMART CITY
CHALLENGE FINALIST. THE TECHNOLOGIES ARE LISTED IN
DESCENDING ORDER. TECHNOLOGIES CAN BE REQUESTED BY
ALL CITIES.
Technology request
Number
of
Cities
Smart Trafﬁc Signals
7
Web Applications
7
Electric Vehicle Charging Station
7
Use of Sensors
7
Use of WiFi/Communications
7
Use of Cameras
7
Autonomous Vehicles
6
Connected Vehicles: DSRC technology
5
Smart grid
3
Use of GPS
3
Kiosks
3
Use of Cellphone signals
3
Autonomous home delivery
3
Smart Parking
3
Bike and/or pedestrian Counters
2
Electric Bus
2
Information screens for bus stops
2
Road condition monitors
2
SMART roadside lights
2
Trafﬁc Management Centers
1
Universal smart access card
1
Bike sharing
1
Transportation Hubs
1
Interactive Voice Response
1
Smart Pedestrian Guides
1

99
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
In Table III, we display the requested technology for the
cities. Among the seven ﬁnalists, 25 technologies were re-
quested. The average city requested 12 technologies to be used
in their smart city. The amount of technology requested by
the city could vary depending on the population as seen in
Figure 6.
Fig. 6. Comparing the city’s population size with the amount of technology
requested. A linear regression line shows the projected ﬁt for the cities.
The winning city, Columbus (Ohio), requested a total
of 16 technologies to implement their smart city. Following
close behind is the city of Austin, TX with a total of
15 technology requests. The remaining cities had 13 requests
(Denver, CO), 12 requests (San Francisco, CA), 11
requests (Kansas City, MO and Pittsburgh, PA),
and 9 requests (Portland, OR). To integrate these tech-
nologies, the cities use sensors, video, Global Positioning
Systems (GPS), and radio signals from pedestrians, vehicles,
and equipment. These cities also use these video and GPS
feeds for license plate recognition and to track crime-related
incidents. The goal of becoming a smarter city revolves around
connecting communities to opportunities, decreasing health
disparities, reducing air pollution, and increasing the mobility
of citizens by relieving congestion of roadways. Assisting low
socioeconomic and disabled citizens has risen to the forefront
of smart city development strategies. In an effort to make these
advancements more inclusive of those communities, smart
cities have proposed the use of:
• Smart kiosks enable advanced payment options by in-
corporating additional features, such as braille and voice
feedback
• Electronic signs can provide visual and audio cues to
pedestrians crossing intersections
• Autonomous car sharing allows commuters ﬁrst and last
mile transportation with a reduction in costs
• Information screens provide real-time transportation up-
dates through audio and video
With the incorporation of these additional technologies, we
see these cities becoming more inclusive and smarter for
all. On top of an already costly smart city, these specialized
technologies introduce additional expenses tied to continuous
maintenance for supporting the aforementioned technologies.
F. Privacy Considerations in Smart Cities
A major concern for citizens in literature is understanding
how increased technologies in cities will affect their privacy [3]
[4][8][9]. Furthermore, cities will become a 24-hour hub
for collecting information about the mobility and efﬁciency
of transportation, but also personally identifying information
of its’ travellers [20]. In the Smart City Challenge [12],
we examine how applicants describe risks and mitigation
strategies for the deployment of technologies to their cities.
From these concerns, we focus on the risks associated with
residents and visitors of the city. The main concerns listed
by the cities include data sharing, individual privacy, system
security, data privacy, and data management.
In Table IV, we reviewed these Smart City Finalist proposals
and assessed a score based on a Likert Scale (Excellent,
Average, Poor) from the ﬁve central themes found in the
documents: Data Sharing, Individual Privacy, System Security,
Data Privacy, & Data Management. From the proposal and
discussion, a city will receive a rating for all ﬁve privacy
categories:
• Excellent: The proposal has thorough discussion about
the risks and mitigation strategies related to topic and a
solid plan of action.
• Average: The proposal has moderate to little discussion
about the risks and mitigation strategies related to topic
and a general plan of action.
• Poor: The proposal has little to no discussion about the
risks and mitigation strategies related to topic and no plan
of action.
We give each of the ﬁve categories a deﬁnition to describe
their clarity of the topic in the documents. Data manage-
ment outlines access control procedures, storage schema,
and storage policies for smart city data and databases. Data
privacy entails the encryption of items in the data, and what
information is stored from the citizens and anonymization
schemes. Data sharing includes the procedures and policies
of which the smart city data will be shared with organizations,
entities, or the public. Individual privacy focuses on the
protection of citizens in the city. This protection could include,
but not limited to, encryption schemes, consent documents,
and privacy mitigation techniques. System security details the
overall protection mechanisms for the smart city infrastructure.
Data sharing and data privacy concerns are addressed by
the majority (4 of 7) of the cities. Strategies for addressing
data sharing included access management, encryption, and
anonymization. Individual privacy, system security, and data
management categories are each addressed by three of the
cities. Columbus is the only city without a risk analysis
in their proposal. This city will develop their plan during
the implementation of their city, but would this be enough?
Immediately after winning, Columbus created the Smart City
Program Ofﬁce to assess possible risks and mitigate them. Of
the ﬁnalists, none of these cities provide a detailed description

100
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
of the protection they will provide their citizens in their
proposals. To mitigate the proposed risks these cities seek to:
(1) implement standards from government and industry, (2)
anonymize or mask sensitive personal data, and (3) partner
with cyber-security experts and government.
TABLE IV. RATING OF PRIVACY DISCUSSION BY CITY. EACH CITY
RECEIVES A RATING (POOR, AVERAGE, OR EXCELLENT) BASED
ON FIVE CATEGORIES.
City
Data
Shar-
ing
Individual
Privacy
System
Security
Data
Privacy
Data
Manage-
ment
Columbus,
OH
Poor
Poor
Poor
Poor
Poor
Austin,
TX
Poor
Poor
Excellent
Excellent
Excellent
Denver,
CO
Poor
Poor
Poor
Average
Poor
Kansas
City, MO
Poor
Average
Excellent
Poor
Poor
Pittsburgh,
PA
Poor
Poor
Poor
Average
Poor
Portland,
OR
Average
Poor
Poor
Average
Average
San Fran-
cisco, CA
Poor
Poor
Poor
Poor
Poor
Beyond security breaches and attacks, what protection will
these cities use to ensure the privacy of those who want
to remain anonymous in an “always on” city? Researchers
have investigated the concerns of privacy leaks and the types
of privacy leaks on social media [23]. These privacy leak
concerns can be expected in a smart city where citizens are
continually being monitored. To help cities protect their citi-
zens, we propose the use of a visual mitigation library used for
videos and images based on existing literature [24]. This work
provides a foundation for several mitigation techniques used
for social media networks; however these same technologies
can be implemented to protect the citizens from surveillance
concerns and privacy issues. Beyond the citizen’s concern for
anonymity or protection of minors, there is a concern for the
type of information that is revealed in a public setting.
IV. DISCUSSION
We provide essential interpretations and considerations for
smart city infrastructure. Based on the Finalist’s Applications,
we propose the use of a low-cost and privacy-enabled smart
city. Furthermore, we explore an existing smart city technol-
ogy and provide discussion its’ privacy-enabled and low-cost
features.
A. Proposed Solution: Low-Cost Smart Cities
Smart City projects can be expensive to deploy and manage.
Cities around the world such as San Diego, New Orleans,
London, and Songdo have either proposed or invested in Smart
City projects that cost between $30 Million and $40 Billion.
In addition to the cost of deploying and maintaining the IoT
devices themselves, a signiﬁcant portion of the expense is
a result of providing Internet connectivity via 5G or WiFi
to those devices. These costs are a major barrier to the
widespread deployment of Smart City technology and the
social beneﬁts that may ensue from that technology [25].
To alleviate the costs, opportunistic communication, such as
Delay Tolerant Networks (DTNs) can be used as a backbone
for Smart City communication to facilitate data that does not
have real-time Quality of Service (QoS) constraints. DTNs
traditionally provide opportunistic networking connections in
areas with little to no infrastructure. Messages are delivered
with some delay which is directly correlated with the layout,
density, and mobility of nodes in the network [26][27]. Recog-
nizing that some data are needed in real-time, edge-computing
can be utilized as long as the placement of internet-connected
nodes are optimized in the network. For data that can tolerate
delays, the natural movement of people and vehicles through
a city to transfer data between nodes. In this way, the citizens
become an integral part of the smart city network itself.
In order for low-cost Smart Cities to ﬂourish and DTNs
as backbone to be practical, both the technology questions
related to the devices and the network itself, as well the social
aspects of how people and vehicles move through a city must
be addressed. For almost 20 years there has been a substantial
amount of research in opportunistic communications and de-
lay tolerant networks; unfortunately real-world deployments
traditionally fall short of their simulated counterparts [28].
Related efforts, [29][30][31][32][33][27][34][35][36], have
proven the ability to deliver messages when connections are
intermittent, but generally are limited to performing within
simulation environments [37].
B. Proposed Solution: Privacy Mitigation Library
Cameras can be integrated into several requested technolo-
gies which makes it popular commodity. We consider how
the privacy risks of cameras and video surveillance can be
mitigated in smart city infrastructure. In a city where facial
recognition systems are used can lead to privacy leaks due
to individual privacy rights. Pedestrians carry identiﬁcation,
purchase items with their credit or debit cards, use physical
keys to enter restricted areas, and virtual passcodes to access
sensitive information. These types of sensitive content will be
captured in those videos and image feeds [38][39], with the use
of obfuscation we can ensure that content will not be leaked to
others. Studies have shown that the use of obfuscation methods
[40][41][42] can protect individual privacy. These obfuscation
methods can include blurring, blocking, adversarial noise, or
replacing items in visual content. Methods such as blurring and
blocking alters the pixelation of the visual content to provide
distortion to the human eye. These methods can be added on
to objects, faces, and text in visual content. The technique of
adversarial noise [43] adds a few pixels that can (1) impede
a computer’s ability to learn anything from the visual content
even if it is in their possession, and (2) still allow the images to
be visible to humans. To protect individuals identities, studies
have suggested face swapping [44][45][46] which can switch
detected faces of citizens with a pre-existing library of faces
at their disposal.

101
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
To address this concern, we suggest the deployment of the
ViperLib. This mitigation library will allow the Smart Cities
to select from a library of mitigation techniques that can be
integrated into their systems. As proposed by [24], mitigation
techniques can be integrated into mobile applications, servers,
IoT devices, and comprehensive systems. Techniques such
as obfuscation (e.g., adversarial noise, blurring, blocking),
interception, and blind vision can be integrated into this
library easily ready for use. The library can also facilitate
active engagement strategies for alerting authorized personnel
about pertinent privacy concerns and suggesting the possible
mitigation strategies for that visual content. These types of
alerting strategies are similar to Chaperone Bot or Privacy
Patrol from previous works [24]. These alerting systems can
alert ofﬁcials of private information that is displayed in public
settings before the data is stored without additional protection.
We hope that this can provide security to the data privacy and
storage methods smart cities will implement. These alerting
strategies are important to provide a human-in-the–the-loop
system at various phases of the deployment and collection
processes that these cities will have.
The ViperLib open-source library can be integrated into
existing “off-the-shelf” packages. Citizens can select the pri-
vacy protection features that must be integrated into deployed
systems. Such libraries can provide safety, security, and peace
of mind to the citizens that reside in those areas.
C. Case Study: Deployed Technology in a Smart City
Smart city technology must be reliable, low-cost, and con-
sider privacy to attract citizens to engage with those platforms.
The Smart City Applications Platform (SCAP) is an example
of a privacy-aware system coupled with reliable and effective
management. It serves as a strong example for organizations to
model pedestrian counting and computer vision technologies
in smart cities. In this study, SCAP is deployed in city C.
SCAP was created by a major utility company. This platform
consists of a complete hardware and software solution which
identiﬁes various types of moving objects common to an
outdoor urban environment such as bicycles, pedestrians, and
scooters. At its core, SCAP is a Field Node with computer
vision software that analyzes data from a high-deﬁnition
camera on an edge compute device and transforms it into
object count data (Figure 7A). The Field Node is available
in a stand-alone enclosure or as an integrated subsystem of a
digital information kiosk as seen in Figure 8. The Field Node
kiosk is integrated in city C’s downtown infrastructure. This
data can be uploaded to the Cloud (Figure 7B) as anonymized
statistics after data analysis is complete (Figure 7C). The data
can then be viewed in a portal or accessed via an Application
Programming Interface (Figure 7D).
In order to provide data in as real-time of a manner as
possible, the video analytics data is sent from the local device
to the Cloud. Should the network connection be lost, data is
queued in the Field Node compute device and transmitted once
the network returns. This connection uses Message Queuing
Telemetry Transport (MQTT) between the edge and cloud for
B
A
C
D
Fig. 7. High-level overview of the deployed Smart City Applications
Platform (SCAP).
communication. MQTT is a standard publish and subscribe
technology that uses machine-to-machine communication with
low bandwidth requirements. The cloud database is set up in
a cluster for backup and redundancy purposes. SCAP utilizes
a cloud based user management system to control access to
the Portal and to the Cloud API. In order to access any
system information or data, a username and password must be
created. The Platform is designed to utility-grade cybersecurity
and network security standards. It is important to note that
the SCAP software does not collect or record personally
identiﬁable information, such as facial images, phone numbers
or mobile phone MAC addresses. Rather anonymized target
object count data is collected and provided to the user.
Furthermore, all video is processed on a local computer and
no images are recorded or stored ensuring piece of mind for
citizens and visitors.
In consideration of robust physical security, the SCAP Field
Node or digital kiosk features an enclosure with a specially
keyed locking system. Both the incoming and outgoing data
to the Field Node is encrypted. Through the monitoring and
control software, licenses for the Field Nodes can be remote
enabled or disabled. Each Field Node utilizes a compute device
with storage capability. As a result, should the Field Node
become compromised, the larger system is unaffected.
While the SCAP Field Nodes have the capability to work
with a variety of wired and wireless data back-haul networks,
the most common type is anticipated to be cellular. One of the
major advantages of the SCAP is that it has low bandwidth
requirements. This allows the use of the lower bandwidth CAT-
M1 network when cellular communications are required. As
the Smart City Applications Platform is still in its infancy
and undergoing ﬁeld trials, there will be ample opportunity to
reduce the cost of both system deployment and operations.
For example, the complexity of mounting the Field Node
equipment to appropriate street furniture or buildings will be
simpliﬁed and as system requirements are better understood,
optimization of the Field Node components will allow for
a reduction in the Bill of Material costs as well as annual
operating costs.

102
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 8. Field Node Designs provided by Smart City Applications Platform. (a) Field Node Integrated in a Kiosk, (b) Opened Field Node Kiosk deployed in
the city, (c) Rendering of Field Node Integrated with a Light Pole (refer to Pole-Mountable Camera Support Structure, US Design Patent D902,985 S) [47]
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The ﬁnalist of the Smart City Challenge showcased what
their city would look like throughout their application. We
analyzed the applications to reveal the intricacies in the ex-
pectations of smart cities. When becoming a smart city, the city
government and citizens could create multiple goals or mile-
stones. From our analysis, an innovative smart city proposal
would include creative approaches to deploying autonomous
technology and tools such as drone delivery, building part-
nerships and infrastructure, and bridging the local collegiate
experience in the smart city. This analysis also alluded that
the typical smart city will require 12 new technologies on
average to become a smart city, which is more than a city
with smart technology. With creativity and development of
smart city infrastructure, it is important to take cost and privacy
in consideration. Using our survey and analysis, we ﬁnd that
privacy and cost can continue to be concerns for citizens
and corporations in these environments. In the analysis of
the Finalist’s proposals, we ﬁnd that the discussion of privacy
and cost is not at the forefront of developer concerns; rather
technological innovation. The winning city from the Smart
City Challenge proposed innovative ways to develop their
city, but showed less interest in privacy and cost than other
applicants.
The analysis and evaluation of smart cities using the 2015
Smart City Challenge and deployed surveys are important
to understand the needs and wants of smart cities, but also
understand perspectives of individuals in those cities. These
insights show the disconnect between citizens and organization
who develop these smart cities. With the input of citizens for
smart cities, the organizations will be able to create inclusive,
adaptable and trusted relationships to aid in the acceptance
and assimilation to the futuristic growth of the city.
In summary, this paper argued that smart cities have the
capability to be both private and inexpensive in deployment
and long-term sustainability. During planning and implementa-
tion of these cities, ofﬁcials along with citizens should further
consider the high cost and privacy concerns associated with
their development choices. The need for privacy mitigation in
smart cities extends from the protection of personally identi-
fying information to the choice of anonymity and protect of
minors. Beyond the deployment of the ViperLib, we proposed
the use of DTNs to lower the cost of smart cities and allow
citizens to assist in the transmission of data across the city.
Deploying traditional IoT infrastructure is prohibitively ex-
pensive for most cities and expanded development introduces
privacy risks. However, low-cost smart cities and privacy-
enabled technologies can achieve the goals of smart cities
while allowing citizens to feel secure and protected.
Future research considers the potential effects of security for
cyber-physical systems in real IoT deployments. To do this,
we will collaborate with Louisville, Kentucky, a Smart City
Applicant, to discuss future strategies and deployment plans
for ViperLib as part of NSF Grant (#1952181).
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This material is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation under Grant No. 1952181. Thank you
Jason Clermont and our partners at the Louisville Downtown
Partnership and Duke Energy One.
REFERENCES
[1] Jasmine DeHart, Corey E Baker, and Christan Grant. Considerations
for designing private and inexpensive smart cities.
The Sixteenth
International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Communications,
2020.
[2] C´esar R Cortez and Victor M Larios. Digital interactive kiosks interfaces
for the gdl smart city pilot project. 2015.
[3] Joshuas Emerson Smith.
As San Diego increases use of streetlamp
cameras, ACLU raises surveillance concerns, August 2019. last accessed
on 09/01/2020.
[4] Adam Harvey. Cv dazzle: Camouﬂage from computer vision. Technical
report, 2012.
[5] Jack Morse. There’s a privacy bracelet that jams smart speakers and,
hell yeah, bring it. last accessed on 09/01/2020.

103
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[6] Yuxin Chen, Huiying Li, Shan-Yuan Teng, and Steven Nagels Zhijing
Li.
Wearable microphone jamming.
In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pages 1–12, 2020.
[7] Alec Brandon, Christopher M Clapp, John A List, Robert Metcalfe,
and Michael Price. Smart tech, dumb humans: The perils of scaling
household technologies. Work, 2021.
[8] Cory Doctorow. The case for ... cities that aren’t dystopian surveillance
states. The Guardian, January 2020. last accessed on 09/01/2020.
[9] Hannah Devlin. AI systems claiming to ’read’ emotions pose discrimi-
nation risks. The Guardian, February 2020. last accessed on 09/01/2020.
[10] Josep Paradells, Carles G´omez, Ilker Demirkol, Joaquim Oller, and
Marisa Catalan. Infrastructureless smart cities. Use cases and perfor-
mance.
2014 International Conference on Smart Communications in
Network Technologies, SaCoNeT 2014, pages 1–6, 2014.
[11] Esther Max-Onakpoya, Oluwashina Madamori, Faren Grant, Robin
Vanderpool, Ming-Yuan Chih, David K Ahern, Eliah Aronoll-Spencer,
and Corey E Baker. Augmenting cloud connectivity with opportunistic
networks for rural remote patient monitoring.
In 2020 International
Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications (ICNC),
pages 920–926. IEEE, 2020.
[12] U.S. Department of Transportation. Smart city challenge, Jun 2017. last
accessed on 09/01/2020.
[13] U.S. Department of Transportation. Smart city challenge vision state-
ments, 04 2016.
[14] Mathieu Fenniak. Home page for the pypdf2 project, 12 2013.
[15] Karen Sparck Jones. A statistical interpretation of term speciﬁcity and
its application in retrieval. Journal of documentation, 1972.
[16] Martin F Porter. An algorithm for sufﬁx stripping. Program, 1980.
[17] James MacQueen. Some methods for classiﬁcation and analysis of mul-
tivariate observations. In Proceedings of the Fifth Berkeley Symposium
on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, volume 1, pages 281–297.
Oakland, CA, USA, 1967.
[18] Ville Satopaa, Jeannie Albrecht, David Irwin, and Barath Raghavan.
Finding a” kneedle” in a haystack: Detecting knee points in system be-
havior. In 2011 31st International Conference on Distributed Computing
Systems Workshop, pages 166–171. IEEE, 2011.
[19] David M Blei, Andrew Y Ng, and Michael I Jordan. Latent dirichlet
allocation.
The Journal of Machine Learning Research, 3:993–1022,
2003.
[20] Ruben S´anchez-Corcuera, Adri´an Nu˜nez-Marcos, Jesus Sesma-Solance,
Aritz Bilbao-Jayo, Rub´en Mulero, Unai Zulaika, Gorka Azkune, and
Aitor Almeida. Smart cities survey: Technologies, application domains
and challenges for the cities of the future.
International Journal of
Distributed Sensor Networks, 15(6):1550147719853984, 2019.
[21] Mojdeh Azad, Nima Hoseinzadeh, Candace Brakewood, Christopher R
Cherry, and Lee D Han. Fully autonomous buses: A literature review and
future research directions. Journal of Advanced Transportation, 2019,
2019.
[22] Mark Campbell, Magnus Egerstedt, Jonathan P How, and Richard M
Murray.
Autonomous driving in urban environments: approaches,
lessons and challenges. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 368(1928):4649–
4672, 2010.
[23] Jasmine DeHart, Makya Stell, and Christan Grant. Social media and the
scourge of visual privacy. Information, 11(2):57, 2020.
[24] Jasmine DeHart and Christan Grant. Visual content privacy leaks on
social media networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.08471, 2018.
[25] Oluwashina Madamori, Esther Max-Onakpoya, Christan Grant, and
Corey Baker. Using delay tolerant networks as a backbone for low-
cost smart cities.
In 2019 IEEE International Conference on Smart
Computing (SMARTCOMP), pages 468–471. IEEE, 2019.
[26] Ari Ker¨anen, J¨org Ott, and Teemu K¨arkk¨ainen.
The one simulator
for dtn protocol evaluation.
In Proceedings of the 2nd international
conference on simulation tools and techniques, page 55. ICST (Institute
for Computer Sciences, Social-Informatics and Telecommunications
Engineering), 2009.
[27] Pan Hui, Jon Crowcroft, and Eiko Yoneki. Bubble rap: Social-based
forwarding in delay-tolerant networks. IEEE Transactions on Mobile
Computing, 10(11):1576–1589, 2011.
[28] Corey E Baker, Allen Starke, Tanisha G Hill-Jarrett, and Janise McNair.
In vivo evaluation of the secure opportunistic schemes middleware using
a delay tolerant social network.
In 2017 IEEE 37th International
Conference on Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS), pages 2537–
2542. IEEE, 2017.
[29] Roy Cabaniss, Srinivasa S Vulli, and Sanjay Madria.
Social group
detection based routing in delay tolerant networks. Wireless networks,
19(8):1979–1993, 2013.
[30] Paolo Costa, Celicia Mascolo, Mirco Musolesi, and Gian Pietro Picco.
Socially-aware routing for publish-subscribe in delay-tolerant mobile ad
hoc networks.
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
26(5):748–760, 2008.
[31] Elizabeth M Daly and Mads Haahr. Social network analysis for infor-
mation ﬂow in disconnected delay-tolerant manets. Mobile Computing,
IEEE Transactions on, 8(5):606–621, 2009.
[32] Wang Gang, Wang Shigang, Liu Cai, and Zhang Xiaorong. Research
and realization on improved manet distance broadcast algorithm based
on percolation theory. In 2012 International Conference on Industrial
Control and Electronics Engineering (ICICEE), pages 96–99. IEEE,
2012.
[33] Wei-jen Hsu, Debojyoti Dutta, and Ahmed Helmy. Csi: A paradigm
for behavior-oriented proﬁle-cast services in mobile networks. Ad Hoc
Networks, 10(8):1586–1602, 2012.
[34] Anders Lindgren, Avri Doria, and Olov Schelen. Probabilistic routing
in intermittently connected networks. In Service Assurance with Partial
and Intermittent Resources, pages 239–254. Springer, 2004.
[35] Mirco Musolesi and Cecilia Mascolo.
Car: context-aware adaptive
routing for delay-tolerant mobile networks.
IEEE Transactions on
Mobile Computing, 8(2):246–260, 2009.
[36] Amit Kr Gupta, Jyotsna Kumar Mandal, and Indrajit Bhattacharya.
Comparative performance analysis of dtn routing protocols in multiple
post-disaster situations. In Contemporary Advances in Innovative and
Applicable Information Technology, pages 199–209. Springer, 2019.
[37] Andreea Picu and Thrasyvoulos Spyropoulos.
Dtn-meteo: Forecast-
ing the performance of dtn protocols under heterogeneous mobility.
IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, 23(2):587–602, 2014.
[38] Roberto Hoyle, Robert Templeman, Denise Anthony, David Crandall,
and Apu Kapadia. Sensitive lifelogs: A privacy analysis of photos from
wearable cameras. In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM conference
on human factors in computing systems, pages 1645–1648. ACM, 2015.
[39] Mohammed Korayem, Robert Templeman, Dennis Chen, David Cran-
dall, and Apu Kapadia.
Enhancing lifelogging privacy by detecting
screens. In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems, pages 4309–4314. ACM, 2016.
[40] Tribhuvanesh Orekondy, Mario Fritz, and Bernt Schiele.
Connecting
pixels to privacy and utility: Automatic redaction of private information
in images. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 8466–8475, 2018.
[41] Yifang Li, Nishant Vishwamitra, Bart P Knijnenburg, Hongxin Hu,
and Kelly Caine.
Blur vs. block: Investigating the effectiveness of
privacy-enhancing obfuscation for images. In 2017 IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW), pages
1343–1351. IEEE, 2017.
[42] Terrance Edward Boult. Pico: Privacy through invertible cryptographic
obscuration. In Computer Vision for Interactive and Intelligent Environ-
ment (CVIIE’05), pages 27–38. IEEE, 2005.
[43] Alexey Kurakin, Ian Goodfellow, and Samy Bengio.
Adversarial
machine learning at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.01236, 2016.
[44] Iryna Korshunova, Wenzhe Shi, Joni Dambre, and Lucas Theis. Fast
face-swap using convolutional neural networks. In Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 3677–3685,
2017.
[45] Bingquan Zhu, Hao Fang, Yanan Sui, and Luming Li.
Deepfakes
for medical video de-identiﬁcation: Privacy protection and diagnostic
information preservation. In Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference
on AI, Ethics, and Society, pages 414–420, 2020.
[46] Sachit Mahajan, Ling-Jyh Chen, and Tzu-Chieh Tsai. Swapitup: A face
swap application for privacy protection. In 2017 IEEE 31st International
Conference on Advanced Information Networking and Applications
(AINA), pages 46–50. IEEE, 2017.
[47] James Cleveland, Gregory S Tribbe, Louis Lombardi, Gilbert DeFre-
itas, and Peter Henderson. Pole-mountable camera support structure,
November 24 2020. US Patent App. 29/713,374.

