1
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
“Smart” Participation: Confronting Theoretical and Operational Perspectives 
 
Clémentine Schelings and Catherine Elsen 
LUCID Lab for User Cognition and Innovative Design 
University of Liège 
Liège, Belgium 
e-mail: clementine.schelings@uliege.be; catherine.elsen@uliege.be
 
 
Abstract—This paper explores the relatively new phenomenon 
of citizen participation in the Smart City context. We present a 
case study comparative analysis of three participatory 
approaches implemented in three European Smart Cities. Each 
of those operational perspectives is studied in view of the 
theoretical concepts conveyed by the scientific state of the art, 
this way highlighting similarities and gaps between theory and 
practice. The results are focused on (i) the various existing 
interpretations of the “citizen participation” and the “Smart 
City” definitions, on (ii) the different selection processes 
applied in all three cases to recruit the participating citizens 
and on (iii) the benefits and drawbacks associated with the 
implementation of participative processes in a Smart City. The 
article closes with a discussion about key elements to keep in 
mind when implementing a bottom-up participative approach 
in the context of a Smart City. Eventually, the confrontation 
between theoretical and practical perspectives results in a 
revisited version of Arstein’s ladder of citizen participation, 
adapted to the Smart City context. 
Keywords-Smart City; citizen participation; Smart City 
definitions; operational perspective; selection of participants. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper is an extended version of a previous, shorter 
publication presented at the conference Smart 2018, the 
Seventh International Conference on Smart Cities, Systems, 
Devices and Technologies [1]. 
The first Smart Cities were essentially focused on 
technological deployment aiming at optimizing urban 
performances, for instance thanks to freely accessible 
internet access, sensors and other pervasive devices. After 
this first wave of completely top-down and techno-centric 
cities (such as Songdo in South Korea or Masdar in the 
United Arab Emirates), we are slowly entering the era of a 
more bottom-up and participative model of Smart Cities. The 
citizens are now given an increasingly important role in the 
making of their smart built environments, because their 
acceptability is essential to insure the sustainability of the 
global smart model [2]. If many researchers acknowledge the 
fact that smart citizens are indeed key to Smart Cities, few 
information is yet available about how to implement a 
renewed participative approach, built on 1970 participatory 
models, in the making of such smart urban environments.  
This research is one of the first steps of a larger research 
project, which is mainly focused on the citizens’ perspective 
regarding the Smart City and the participative approach. This 
paper aims at studying and comparing different participatory 
initiatives conducted in 3 European Smart Cities particularly 
known for their citizen engagement and their bottom-up 
dynamics. The goal here is to document actual participative 
approaches in order to extract some key elements regarding 
citizen participation in the Smart City.  
Comparing scientific perspectives with day-to-day, 
operational implementations of Smart City initiatives, this 
paper is structured in four additional sections. In Section II, 
we present a short literature review about participation in the 
Smart City. Section III then describes the interview-based 
methodology used for the comparative analysis of 
participative processes implemented in three carefully 
selected Smart Cities (one in the United Kingdom, one in the 
Netherlands and one in Spain). Section IV describes the 
obtained results: Subsection A gives the participatory 
context, while Subsection B is focused on the practical vision 
of two key definitions (Smart City and citizen participation) 
compared to more theoretical ones coming from the 
literature review, Subsection C presents the participants’ 
selection processes in the three chosen cases and Subsection 
D focuses on the benefits and drawbacks related to the 
introduction of citizen participation in the Smart City. 
Section V discusses the results and raises some questions in 
regard of what the three chosen Smart Cities consider as 
“best practices”, given their specific contexts. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
This state of the art is kept voluntary short and will only 
present major theoretical models underlying the concepts of 
Smart City and citizen participation. Our subsequent 
intention is indeed to further study literature review in regard 
of empirical results in order to establish a comparison 
between theoretical and operational perspectives. 
Two main concepts are at the root of this research 
project, namely “Smart City” and “citizen participation”. 
Both concepts carry a multitude of (sometimes confused) 
definitions as they designate multifaceted realities [3][4]. As 
far as the “Smart City” concept is concerned, there are 
indeed a multitude of definitions and no real consensus about 
the meaning of this “buzzword” [5]. First of all, one should 
consider the common misconception according to which 
every Smart City is built from scratch, exactly like Songdo 
or Masdar [6]. Contrary to those emblematic and idealized 

2
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
cities, which “are the exception rather than the rule”, the 
“actually existing smart city” is far more nuanced, context-
related and under-construction [6]. Keeping that in mind, we 
start this literature review with Giffinger’s definition, one of 
the most frequently referred to. This definition puts some 
emphasis on the urban performance, which is nurtured by 
both information and communication technologies (ICT) and 
the smart inhabitants [7]. Giffinger’s model dissects the 
concept of Smart City into six axes: economy, environment, 
governance, living, mobility and people [7]. Especially 
because of this “people” component, the citizen participation 
has lately become more and more popular in the Smart City 
context [8][9], building on the realization that citizens’ 
potential rejection of the Smart City concepts could entirely 
jeopardize the sustainability of the global smart model itself 
[5][10]. Examples include the deployment of smart meters in 
each private home, which was among the first techno-
centric, top-down smart initiatives. Although the guiding 
idea was to positively impact both personal consumptions 
and energy sector sustainable goals, acceptability was way 
below expectations as smart meters received a very cold 
reception from the inhabitants, sometimes even complete 
rejection [11][12][13]. Among the reasons for failure, those 
solutions missed the end-users’ actual priorities, needs and 
concerns [14][15] and neglected the potentialities offered by 
users’ active involvement into the design and decision 
processes. Citizens are thus increasingly considered as key 
actors of the making of the Smart City, and their 
sensitization and participation are the first steps towards 
awareness and acceptability [3]. The original vision of 
passive [15] or even invisible citizens [16] grows weaker, 
considering the significant influence of users’ behaviors and 
practices on the adoption of (technological) solutions [14]. 
Gradually, the techno-centric smart environments give way 
to more eco-systemic Smart Cities and a shift is observed 
from the triple helix to the quadruple-helix model [17][18]. 
Side by side with universities, governments and industries, 
citizens are henceforth recognized as the fourth main 
stakeholder of any smart innovation [19]. Their role is no 
longer limited to on-the-move urban sensors and data 
generators [20], but shall extend to ideas generators, co-
creators and co-decision makers given their local knowledge 
and use expertise [15]. Even though many authors nowadays 
share this viewpoint and promote citizens’ engagement and 
empowerment, few information is available about how, 
concretely speaking, one should apply citizen participation in 
the specific context of Smart Cities [16]. In that regard, 
Fehér’s study of a corpus of governmental, business and 
academic documents revealed that “the expected active 
participation of citizens in the smart cities” is one of the least 
documented [21]. Moreover, we suggest that older models of 
citizen participation, such as Arstein’s ladder or Glass’ 
objectives of participation [22][23], should be re-interpreted 
and might differently take place in practice given the 
renewed context of Smart Cities and given the opportunities 
offered by new technologies. 
It is therefore crucial to confront theoretical and practical 
realities and to explore what local actors have in mind when 
referring to citizen participation in the Smart City. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
The methodology used to conduct this research is a 
comparative analysis of three cases, nurtured by semi-
structured interviews with several stakeholders linked to 
smart projects and participative initiatives in each of those 
cases. This paper focuses on three European Smart Cities, 
the first one in the United Kingdom, the second one in the 
Netherlands and the last one in Spain. In all three cities, one 
research lab was chosen because it meets the following 
criteria: it is localized in an internationally recognized Smart 
City; it works in collaboration with the city officials and its 
main research activities are linked to citizen participation in 
future urban environments. The selection of those Smart 
Cities was moreover based on the Smart City Index, an 
international ranking proposed by Cohen, which is one 
among the few to consider some participatory dimension, at 
least beyond the voter turnout. The three finally chosen 
Smart Cities rank well in regard of inclusion (especially 
number of civic engagement activities offered by the 
municipality and voter participation in municipal elections) 
and creativity (in particular, number of registered living labs) 
[24]. 
Beyond those similarities, the three research centers 
remain quite different in their approaches. The Dutch lab 
generally considers self-organized citizens’ communities and 
bottom-up movements as essential triggers for any launched 
project, while the British lab rather tries to integrate a 
participative dimension to existing projects that would not 
make sense otherwise. The Spanish lab holds an intermediate 
position, conducting participative experiments essentially in 
the public space and starting as well from a living 
community or a given context. Thus, the Dutch and the 
Spanish labs are always involved in participatory initiatives, 
but the British lab also conducts some research projects 
without any citizen participation. Another difference 
between the labs lies in the end-use of the material produced 
through the participative process. The British lab seeks to 
develop a marketable product, while the Dutch lab rather 
promotes open-access material that can be freely reused after 
the end of each project. The Spanish lab, on the other hand, 
gets involved in upstream phases of the decision-making 
process 
and 
rather 
delivers 
information 
and 
recommendations for the benefit of the municipality. A last 
difference is linked to the various profiles and backgrounds 
of the members of the three labs that therefore develop 
different identities. The British lab is mainly composed of 
computer scientists using data for socio-technological 
purposes. The Dutch lab brings together researchers with 
data, design and digital humanities backgrounds. The 
Spanish lab, specialized in Arts and Science, includes experts 
in Physical, Chemical, Computer and Social Sciences.  
In practice, each interview was expected to last about one 
hour, but the effective length varies between forty and eighty 
minutes. Several types of stakeholders were interviewed: 
directors of the research centers, labs’ team members, Smart 
City managers, city officials and other experts from the fields 
of participation, technology and urban planning. Given this 
variety of interviewees’ profiles, different sets of questions 

3
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
were prepared, in line with the specific expertise of each 
actor. In addition, some essential issues were discussed with 
the complete sample of respondents, such as their own 
definitions of “Smart City” and “citizen participation”.  
As a first step of our comparative analysis, this paper will 
focus on eight essential interviews and more specifically on 
the results of meetings conducted with three lab directors and 
five team members. We decided to start our study with those 
stakeholders because they are very close to fields’ realities: 
the team members are the day-to-day operational actors, 
while the directors are the spokespersons of each lab and 
therefore structure those labs’ vision and attitude. The idea is 
to understand the global visions of those three labs and to 
compare their different interpretation of the participative 
approach, given their actual perception of the Smart City.  
Globally, eight main themes are addressed through the 
interviews (see Table I). Additional questions regarding the 
presentation of the city (specificities, history, population) 
and the policy (objectives, priorities, citizens’ input) are 
discussed with city officials and Smart City managers, but 
will not be presented in this paper. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The results of the eight interviews are structured in four 
subsections. First, we will present the contexts in which 
citizens become active participants for each city. Then, we 
will present interviewees’ definitions of the Smart City and 
the citizen participation, in comparison with the scientific 
state of the art. We will next compare the participants’ 
selection processes as conducted in all three labs and we will 
study the impact such processes have on the recruited 
citizens’ profiles. Eventually, we will detail the perceived 
benefits and drawbacks resulting from the implementation of 
citizen participation in concrete smart urban environments. 
A. Participatory context 
The citizen participation is a complex process that may 
tire the citizens if their input is repeatedly requested for each 
and every project related to the Smart City. Therefore, it is of 
crucial importance to wisely choose topics for which 
participants’ contribution is considered essential. Each lab 
has a different strategy regarding this issue. The British lab 
focuses on “the stress points in the city (…), priorities, which 
have   been  identified   with  the   council”   and   uses   citizen 
TABLE I.  
MAIN THEMES STRUCTURING THE INTERVIEWS WITH THE 
DIRECTORS AND THE TEAM MEMBERS OF THE LAB 
Common themes 
Directors 
- Presentation of each actor 
(background and role) 
- Own definitions of the two 
main concepts (Smart City and 
citizen participation) 
- Presentation of concrete 
projects (context, success 
stories, possible improvements) 
- Participatory approach 
(benefits, drawbacks, 
challenges) 
- Technology (role, ethics, 
privacy) 
 
 
- Contacts with other stakeholders 
of the ecosystem (city officials, 
citizens, industrial partners) 
 
 
Team members 
- Participatory methodology 
(phases, methods, objectives) 
- Participants (roles, selection 
criteria, profiles) 
participation mainly to get feedbacks about the solutions 
developed by the researchers in cooperation with the local 
authorities. The logic of the Dutch lab is quite different. 
Once again, they start from context-specific urban problems, 
but the chosen topics result from shared interests between the 
citizens’ preoccupations and the local authorities’ priorities. 
Thus citizens are always involved in projects that they feel 
concerned about, and that they wanted to integrate even prior 
to any involvement from the city itself. The Spanish lab, for 
its part, always initiates a participatory process when 
requested by a different stakeholder, be it municipality or 
community members or even sometimes a more complex 
group bringing together several profiles. Therefore, the 
proposed topic always results from a demand of some locally 
involved people. However, even though the lab does not 
choose the specific topic, its expertise in environmental 
health and air quality definitely fuels the participative 
processes. Another difference between the three approaches 
is the timing chosen for citizens’ participation. British 
citizens often participate at the end of the process, while the 
Dutch citizens always participate from the beginning and 
generally during the whole project. Spanish citizens can be 
part of the project from the beginning or join later, especially 
in the case of broad public participation occurring in public 
spaces. A more continuous participation is also possible 
when considering co-design sessions for instance. 
B. Definitions 
The two following subsections aim to define the Smart 
City and the citizen participation on basis of the 
interpretations proposed by the eight interviewees. The 
results are examined with respect to the state of the art, 
highlighting the convergences and the divergences between 
theory and practice. 
1) Smart City: We focus here on the definition of the 
Smart City, as perceived by the stakeholders interviewed on 
the field. On the basis of the most widespread definitions, 
we will compare the different visions hold by those experts 
(see Table II and Table III). 
The first interesting observation is that there is a 
distinction between their current vision (see Table II) and 
their prospective vision (see Table III) of what the Smart 
City is. In other words, the interviewees are fully conscious 
that the Smart City is an ongoing process that can be 
described on the one hand on the basis of current initiatives, 
with their promising achievements and their manifest 
limitations, or, on the other hand, on the basis of the likely 
evolutions and hopes for the future. All eight interviewees 
are moreover fully conscious that their own definitions 
match their personal “way of understanding a Smart City” 
(Director of the Spanish lab) and rely both on their scientific 
background and their perception while experiencing their 
city becoming smarter. In the interviewees’ discourses, we 
obviously find key elements that meet some definitions 
from the state of the art. The interviewees’ propositions are 
identified by codes (see Table  II  and  Table  III),  which  
are  referenced  in  brackets hereafter. 

4
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE II.  
INTERVIEWEES’ CURRENT VISION OF THE SMART CITY 
A Smart City 
is… 
Interviewees 
Directors of the labs (D) 
Team members (M) 
Smart City 
United-
Kingdom 
(U) 
DU1 a technology-  
         connoted word 
DU2 a city for one  
         citizen category 
MU1 a smartphone-   
          adapted city 
MU2 a fuzzy concept 
MU3 the use of data          
         science and artificial  
         intelligence to better  
         understand its needs 
Netherlands 
(N) 
DN1 a set of fully  
         autonomous  
         systems 
DN2 a top-down  
         controlled city 
DN3 an easily  
         managed city 
DN4 a city of “dumb  
         citizens” 
MN1 a set of technological  
         infrastructures 
MN2 a product of big  
         technology companies 
MN3 a concept disconnected  
         from citizens 
MN4 an optimized and  
         efficient city 
MN5 a maybe more  
         efficient city 
MN6 a city developed for  
         the companies 
Spain (S) 
DS1 a multi-meaning  
        word 
MS1 a responsive and  
         reactive city regarding 
         its citizens’ needs 
 
DU = Director of the lab in the United-Kingdom (UK); DN = Director of the lab in the Netherlands; 
DS = Director of the lab in Spain; MU = team Members of the lab in the UK; MN = team Members 
of the lab in the Netherlands; MS = team Member of the lab in Spain. 
First of all, each expert mentions the technological 
aspect of the Smart City, be it considered as a positive or a 
negative element (DU1, DU3, MU1, MU3-4, DN1, MN1-2, 
MN6). Following some authors, new technologies are 
obviously part of the Smart City, in the sense that they 
support any other key aspect of the city such as wellbeing 
and quality of life [8][25]. This vision is shared by the 
interviewees, but perhaps in a more nuanced way as they 
feel that actual Smart Cities may misinterpret this use of 
technology, making it an end per se especially due to the 
market pressure. The Dutch team members even suggest 
that the Smart City, as currently configured, will only 
benefit big companies (MN2, MN6), such as those who 
originally introduced the concept [6]. However, the two 
British team members still believe that technological 
developments will evolve into daily-life facilitators, as 
much for the citizens as for the decision makers (MU4-5, 
MU7). The Dutch lab is more cautious and considers that 
the current practical message conveyed by the Smart City is 
not yet the perfect solution for our future urban ideal (MN5, 
MN7). Even though they recognize that technology should 
help to generate more efficient urban systems (MN4), they 
doubt those technical improvements will suffice to produce 
more livable urban spaces (MN5, MN9). The Spanish lab 
also remains prudent, since the introduction of smartness 
into the city is not only based on technology, but also on the 
people that will “redesign or rethink a little bit the city” 
(DS2). Actually, this nuance and moderate (mis)trust 
regarding the Smart City concept is also the consequence of 
an almost exclusively top-down governance of many smart 
projects    (DN2).    This    approach,    although   neglecting  
TABLE III.  
INTERVIEWEES’ PROSPECTIVE VISION OF THE SMART CITY 
A Smart City 
should be … 
Interviewees 
Directors of the labs (D) 
Team members (M) 
Smart City 
United-
Kingdom 
(U) 
DU3 a technology- 
         improved city 
DU4 an inclusive city 
MU4 a set of 
         facilitating  
         technologies 
MU5 a support in 
         daily life 
MU6 an assistance  
         for everybody 
MU7 a system  
         facilitating  
         decision-making 
Netherlands 
(N) 
DN5 a less obvious  
        city management 
DN6 a city of creative  
        citizens 
DN7 a city of “smart  
        citizens that are able  
        to fulfill their own  
        information needs” 
MN7 / 
MN8 a more citizen- 
         centric city 
MN9 an improved  
         living  
         environment 
Spain (S) 
DS2 a rethink or a  
        redesign of the city 
DS3 a set of solutions  
        defined thanks to  
        citizen participation  
MS2 a dynamic and  
         flexible city 
MS3 an inclusive  
        city 
DU = Director of the lab in the United-Kingdom (UK); DN = Director of the lab in the Netherlands; 
DS = Director of the lab in Spain; MU = team Members of the lab in the UK; MN = team Members 
of the lab in the Netherlands; MS = team Member of the lab in Spain. 
citizens’ input (MN3, MN8), provides the advantage of 
easily managing the city (DN3, DN5) and rather efficiently 
optimizing its day-to-day operation [7][26]. Ben Letaifa yet 
emphasizes the importance of a complementary bottom-up 
approach through citizen participation [5]. Furthermore, 
Giffinger insists on the fact that a city cannot be smart and 
efficient unless citizen’s intelligence is valued and exploited 
[7]. According to the interviewees, citizens should indeed 
play a specific role in their smart urban environments, and 
should be empowered in order to actively participate (DN4, 
DN6-7, DS3). Citizens are indeed best placed to express the 
specific needs of the city, which should orient the solutions 
that ought to be developed (MS1). The Dutch director even 
specifies that citizens should themselves be able to respond 
to their information needs, i.e., to become “self-decisive, 
independent and aware citizens” [7]. This citizen autonomy 
is only possible in an inclusive Smart City (DU2, DU4, 
MU6, MS3) and one of the next big challenges is to limit 
obstacles to such inclusion, such as the digital divide [15]. 
Following one of the Spanish team members, this 
inclusivity is especially hard to reach while the “Smart City 
discourse narrative” focuses exclusively on technological 
aspects, and is therefore far too often “restricted to a 
specific target group”. Finally, compared to the literature, 
one important aspect is missing from the interviewees’ 
discourses: sustainability. Surprisingly, no participant refers 
to environmental and demographic issues while those are 
among the main reasons to promote smart initiatives, 
offering a long-term solution for our urban environments 
[20][27]. This demonstrates the extent to which the Smart 
City    is   a   complex   concept   with   many   meanings   and   no  

5
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
unanimous definition, especially in regard of specific, 
locally constrained situations (MU2, DS1). According to the 
participants, the Smart City should, as far as possible, 
remain dynamic and flexible, i.e., adaptive to every city 
particular context (MS2). 
Giving a definition of such a complex notion is 
sometimes very difficult for the interviewees. Therefore, 
two of them formulate their answer on the basis of 
definitions coming from the state of the art. The researcher 
shows them five references (Table IV) and they can pick 
those that match or contradict their mind, while commenting 
and arguing their choice. The most appropriate definition is 
Giffinger’s [7], while Dameri’s [25], Toppeta’s [28] and 
Hall’s [26] are considered less convincing, probably 
because those three envision the citizen as a recipient, rather 
than a real actor of the Smart City. This idea of a passive 
citizen is obviously not in line with the participatory vision 
of the selected labs, but is clearly ever present in the 
literature. The fifth definition comes from the Smart City 
Institute [29] and is well received by the interviewees, since 
it reflects both technological and eco-systemic aspects of the 
Smart City, including citizens’ equal involvement as the 
other smart actors. 
TABLE IV.  
SMART CITY DEFINITIONS 
Reference 
Definition 
GIFFINGER 
(2007) 
A city well performing in a forward-looking way in 
economy, people, governance, mobility, 
environment, and living, built on the smart 
combination of endowments and activities of self-
decisive, independent and aware citizens. 
HALL 
(2000) 
A city that monitors and integrates conditions of all 
of its critical infrastructures, including roads, 
bridges, tunnels, rails, subways, airports, seaports, 
communications, water, power, even major 
buildings, can better organize its resources, plan its 
preventive maintenance activities, and monitor 
security aspects while maximizing services to its 
citizens. 
DAMERI 
(2013) 
A smart city is a well defined geographical area, in 
which high technologies such as ICT, logistic, 
energy production, and so on, cooperate to create 
benefits for citizens in terms of well being, 
inclusion and participation, environmental quality, 
intelligent development; it is governed by a well 
defined pool of subjects, able to state the rules and 
policy for the city government and development. 
TOPPETA 
(2010) 
A city combining ICT and Web 2.0 technology 
with other organizational, design and planning 
efforts to de- materialize and speed up bureaucratic 
processes and help to identify new, innovative 
solutions to city management complexity, in order 
to improve sustainability and livability. 
SMART CITY 
INSTITUTE 
(2015) 
A “smart city” is a multi-stakeholders’ ecosystem 
(composed with local governments, citizens’ 
associations, multinational and local businesses, 
universities, international institutions...) engaged in 
a sustainability strategy using technologies (ICT, 
engineering, hybrid technologies) as enabler in 
order become more sustainable (economic 
prosperity, social well-being and conservation of 
our natural resources). 
 
2) Citizen participation: Another notion difficult to 
grasp is the citizen participation, although this time it goes 
back to a nearly fifty-year-old concept [30]. Throughout the 
years, the participatory approach has evolved into new 
practices and its “smart” interpretation is certainly still 
another perspective to take into account. Based on the 
experts’ interviews and the keywords they use, we identify 
four main axes around which we summarize their 
propositions in order to characterize participation in the age 
of Smart Cities: communication, citizen control, conditions 
and data manipulation (Figure 1).  
The three labs generally tend to agree on some key 
aspects of citizen participation, but each of them insists on 
different axes. First of all, the British and the Spanish labs 
notice that participation is above all communication, and 
most preferably two-way communication. Information has 
to be exchanged between citizens and power holders, be 
they researchers or local authorities, because every actor’s 
perspective  is  valuable  and  should  at  least  be  listened  to. 
This continuous dialog between the different stakeholders is 
 
Figure 1.  Axes of citizen participation on basis of interviewees’ visions 

6
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
an opportunity to explore everybody’s perspective, to share 
personal experiences, to benefit from each individual 
expertise and to enrich them. There are several levels of 
communication depending on the contribution of the 
participants, who either just receive information, propose 
their own ideas or even negotiate with the power holders. 
British and Spanish actors put a certain emphasis on verbal 
exchanges, which do not yet suffice to qualify as 
participation according to some authors [31]. One step 
further, all three labs agree with Arnstein and consider that 
“citizen participation is citizen power”, meaning that 
citizens should have a real impact on the decision-making of 
any participative process [22]. Citizens are not just 
informed, educated or consulted to ease tensions, but should 
have an actual voice translated into action [22][32]. The 
Dutch and the Spanish labs both consider that this citizen 
control goes hand in hand with involved and empowered 
citizens, which means that they are given the opportunity to 
actively and wisely participate. Furthermore, anybody 
should enjoy such opportunity, according to the British and 
the Dutch labs, irrespective of gender, social status or even 
technology acquaintance. Along with this empowerment, 
the citizens also have a responsibility since they need to 
engage themselves in the participatory process. Therefore, 
beyond being offered with the possibility to participate, all 
three labs are conscious that citizens’ willingness to 
participate is crucial and that they are some conditions that 
can ease the participative process and impact its 
implementation. The Dutch  lab,  in  accordance  with  
Klandermans  and  Oegema, specifies that the participants 
have to be motivated in order to actually take part to the 
project [33]. More importantly, participation often arises 
from an information need, directly expressed by the 
participants or identified after a stimulation phase. 
Consequently, citizens should be present from the early 
phases of the project [34], in order to make sure their needs 
will nurture the project definition. Moreover, the British lab 
is convinced that participation cannot efficiently operate 
without trust and benefits. Citizens are indeed more prone to 
participate if they “foresee the benefits in the long run”, 
such as time and money savings. Following the Spanish lab, 
processes that end up providing concrete actions and results 
also motivate participants. They indeed generally want to be 
agents for change, transforming and impacting their 
environment, their neighborhood, their community or even 
their own person. The Dutch lab adds that it is very 
important to tell people about the ins and outs of the project 
from its beginning, even if sometimes their participation can 
remain quite modest, rather than deluding and letting them 
believe that their individual thoughts will automatically be 
part of the final output. As documented in the literature, 
such tokenism will inevitably result in disappointment, 
mistrust and failure of the participative process [32]. 
Eventually, the fourth axis concerns data manipulation, 
which is intrinsically linked to the era of the Smart Cities. 
This axis has yet not been extensively documented in the 
literature review about citizen participation, maybe because 
there is a temporal gap between participatory theories 
introduced in the 70s and the first references to smart 
technologies appearing in the early 2000s. The “data 
manipulation” designates the way citizens interact with the 
data produced through the participative process. According 
to the Dutch and Spanish labs, citizen participation is not 
limited to data collection, but should extend to their 
understanding, appropriation (interrogation and relation), 
analysis and usage by the citizens in order to create new 
knowledge. Indeed, new technologies might impact 
participative processes and are seen as an empowering 
factor, since “digital technology allows cities to engage with 
citizens in decision-making processes” [9]. This new form 
of participation will enable participants to elaborate their 
own data, to communicate about them, to draw evidence-
based conclusions and to propose relevant actions for their 
local environment. Learning to manipulate data will 
therefore empower the citizens and give more weight to 
their concerns and ideas, while their local expertise is 
sometimes questioned because considered as less legitimate 
by some professionals. 
C. Selection of participants 
Given their different approaches, the three labs also show 
some discrepancies regarding the participants’ selection. 
This section will present which participant profiles are 
targeted when a participative process is implemented, 
according to each Smart City. One recurrent goal in 
participatory processes is to make everyone participate, but 
in practice it is considered as nearly impossible. To select the 
participants, all three labs therefore start from a local 
neighborhood, but their different interpretation of “local” has 
implications on the profiles of the sampled participants. 
Figure 2 summarizes the descriptions proposed by the three 
labs regarding recurrent citizen profiles taking part to their 
smart initiatives. The shaded zones in Figure 2 highlight the 
keywords discribing similar citizens’ profiles in the three 
labs. 
The Dutch lab “select(s) (...) citizens basically by tapping 
into existing platforms or organizations that feed into the 
community” while the British lab focuses on one specific 
geographical area. As a matter of fact, the Dutch 
interpretation is linked to existing communities that have 
already initiated some projects in order to solve local issues. 
In line with its research interests, the Dutch lab chooses to 
support  and  develop  the  ideas  of  the  community, because it  
seems more relevant to tackle actual people’s concerns and 
to meet a real need. The British perspective is quite different 
and rather aims at testing on pilot sites some technologies, 
which would in fine be deployed at scale, requiring to get 
more “general users”. Therefore, the British researchers just 
select a neighborhood and consequently the whole group of  
people living there. Halfway of those two approaches, the 
Spanish lab proceeds on a case-by-case analysis, alternating 
the  recruitment  of  “given  communities  and  neighbors  in 
general”.  This  switch  of  strategy  is  explained by two main 

7
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 2.  Participants’ profiles on basis of interviewees’ selection process 
factors: (1) the initiator of the participative project and (2) 
the chosen participatory method. Actually, the person or the 
group of people who initiates the participative process can 
be either a municipality or a local community itself, which 
will then automatically feed the selected group of citizens. 
In the case of a more top-down initiative, decision-makers 
might face difficulties recruiting those local communities, 
which could claim for autonomy. Moreover, their position 
rather pushes public administrators to select as many people 
as 
possible, 
trying 
to 
reach 
some 
citizens’ 
representativeness. In addition, the participants’ profile will 
also vary depending on the participatory method. For 
instance, co-design workshops about very specific topics 
require a long-term commitment that is more easily 
achieved with organized communities of concerned citizens. 
Conversely, pop-up interventions deployed in public spaces 
in order to sensitize the citizens, explore their perceptions 
and/or test some solutions call “every person passing by” to 
participate. 
Given their divergent selection strategies, Dutch and 
British labs’ participants present different profiles, which are 
all quite well represented in the Spanish samples. As far as 
the Dutch community members are concerned, they are of 
course very active and are described as “involved” and 
“invested” in the topic or even in concrete actions. This also 
means more environmental-conscious citizens that are 
generally interested in any initiative related to the smart city 
agenda. Although the Dutch sample mainly comprises pro-
active citizens, all participants might not be convinced by the 
process, in particular when a change of habits is involved. 
For instance, some people could have strong interest in the 
environmental topic but at the same time believe that they 
already manage their own situation quite successfully, and 
that other people should improve their individual behaviors 
and practices first. Therefore, even if they seem less 
enthusiastic, those participants are still the engaged ones that 
always show up at this kind of participatory process, or that 
have already started their own initiative. Since the British 
recruitment is made on a voluntary basis, the same super-
enthusiastic profiles are also present but this time they are 
not self-organized around common values. The only 
condition to participate to the British project is to be 
equipped, i.e., for instance in a project of garden watering the 
condition is to have a garden. Besides the always-involved 
people, other profiles show up such as careless people, 
technology- and green-reluctant citizens that may decide to 
participate in order to save time or money for instance. 
Contrary to the Dutch communities, the British participants 
therefore constitute a less homogeneous sample presenting a 
limited amount of shared values and interests, but rather a 
group of people motivated to participate for various reasons. 
The Spanish participants, for their part, are closer to the 
British profiles, in the sense that they are sometimes 
showing enthusiasm and sometimes indifference. However, 
those less motivated citizens are only present in the case of 
kiosks for instance or any other one-time opportunity to 
participate. In contrast, in the case of a more demanding and 
continuous participation approach, such as co-design 
sessions, the Spanish sample is mainly composed of 
community members, characterized by higher engagement 
and motivation. 
D. Benefits and drawbacks of smart participation 
This section focuses on the benefits and drawbacks of 
smart participation as they are reported by the interviewees. 
More particularly, our hypothesis is that the implementation 
of a participative process in a Smart City might lead to 
several consequences, as well positive or negative effects 
and externalities. Those (dis)advantages are often already 
documented in the state of the art about citizen participation 
in general, irrespective of its applicability in a Smart City. 
However, this specific digital context may reveal new 
repercussions, which deserve to be taken into account when 
introducing a participatory dynamic in a Smart City. 
1) Benefits: Figure 3 highlights the main benefits 
following our eight respondents. Benefits are organized 
according to three levels of stakeholders: the individual 
level corresponds to the personal gains of one participant, 

8
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the participants’ level refers to the collective advantages 
collected by the people who are involved in the participatory 
process, and the beneficiaries’ level takes into account the 
more global benefits, i.e., for the participants, the 
neighborhood, the local community, the municipality or 
even the city professionals (engineers, architects, urban 
planners, designers). Furthermore, all those contributions 
from the citizen participation to the Smart City agenda are 
perceived at different time phases. Indeed, the pre-
participation benefits are often associated with promises or 
expectations that might be realized in a post-participation 
phase and broaden the extent of benefits achieved. During 
the participative activities, other elements intervene and 
they often constitute essential premises of the final success 
of the whole participatory approach. 
Considering the pre-participation benefits, each lab has a 
different but complementary vision. While the British lab is 
focused on the incentive to reward the citizens for their 
participation, the Dutch lab rather mentions the importance 
of participation to ensure the relevance and the 
sustainability of the project, and the Spanish lab envisions 
participation as a huge opportunity to take action for every 
potential participant. Once again, those three postures 
correspond to their philosophies, respectively starting from 
a community, a project or an alternation between both. 
The three labs are more in line when they consider the 
direct benefits of participation, which occur during the 
process itself. They above all stress the awareness as the 
biggest 
contribution, 
advantageous 
for 
all 
three 
stakeholders’ levels. Indeed, through their participation, the 
citizens become more conscious of the operational 
constraints, i.e., the economic, technical, normative, etc. 
aspects of the project that they may ignore if they are out of 
their personal or professional expertise. Participants also 
gain a clearer view and a better understanding of 
environmental issues and technological innovations, two 
major elements of the Smart City era. The Dutch lab even 
points out that citizens are more aware of their own living 
environment, which they now see with brand new eyes. 
Similarly, the city officials and professionals become 
aware of the citizens’ field perspective, i.e., their actual and 
local problems, needs and usages. Such a practical 
experience of the area is clearly an expertise that the so-
called experts in particular may lack. The Spanish and the 
Dutch labs therefore insist on the necessity to share 
contextual information, whether be between participants or, 
at a larger level, with the professionals, the power holders 
and the communities. Thereby, participants will also 
develop new knowledge and capacities, especially regarding 
data and technologies. Those learning processes and 
awareness favor the citizens’ empowerment, since their new 
capabilities allow them to make “not better choices or 
different choices, but they at least are informed in which 
choices they can make, based on that data” (Director of the 
Dutch lab), as far as their behaviors, lifestyles and habits are  
 
Figure 3.  Benefits of the implementation of a participative process in a 
Smart City 
concerned. 
At the end of the participatory process, the additional 
benefits naturally include the feedbacks, which lead to final 
solutions that are functional and adapted to the citizens’ 
needs and concerns. Besides this likely optimized reception, 
the co-definition of the results makes them richer and more 
valuable. Moreover, participation enables to gather much 
more data, which was very useful when the Spanish lab 
collected air quality measurements through the installation 
of hundreds of chemical sensors for instance. Finally, the 
participation provides a sense of ownership to the 
participants, who feel that they have personally and 
collectively contributed to the project and are recognized for 

9
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the time and the efforts they invested. The community 
comes back with more cohesion and support, and 
participation 
might 
even 
build 
trust 
towards 
the 
municipality. 
2) Drawbacks: 
Figure 
4 
emphasizes 
the 
main 
drawbacks of participation, even though the interviewees 
rather call them “challenges” or “difficulties”. As a matter 
of fact, all the identified downsides can be organized into 
two categories: the threats and barriers that may accentuate 
one critical aspect of the participative process (e.g., 
representativeness), and the resulting consequences, i.e., the 
potential risks and disadvantages, which may slow down, 
compremise or completely derail the participative process. 
In comparison to the state of the art, several drawbacks 
mentioned by the interviewees correspond to the well-
known limits of the traditional 70’s participatory theories. 
The tokenism, or pseudo-participation, is a recurrent 
problem, which results from a symbolic consideration of the 
citizen input, in order to complete the participatory 
obligation and/or to ease one’s conscience [32]. The 
participants’ contribution, limited and often punctual, is 
therefore not taken into account by the power holders [22]. 
Of course, citizens are conscious that their participation 
make few or no difference, so they feel disappointed and 
insignificant because “they thought they were more 
important” and “do not want to be in the margins of 
whatever” (Team member of the Dutch lab). Another 
inescapable issue is the lack of representativeness of the 
sample, which generally includes the most engaged and 
motivated citizens [34]. Following the Dutch and the 
Spanish labs, the main difficulty is to find a way to reach the 
whole citizenry, which is impossible given their various 
profiles, especially regarding language and culture. 
Moreover, some populations are even harder to contact, 
such as the poor and elderly for instance. Both 
representativeness and tokenism are not referred as 
inconvenient by the British lab, given its specific 
participatory strategy. First, the recruitment of citizens 
occurs in a determined geographical area, which eases the 
representativeness. Second, the participants’ input occurs 
during the evaluation phase, which is the moment when 
citizen participation is popularly considered as the most 
valuable and legitimate. 
There is a consensus among the three labs that “time 
constraint is dramatic” (Director of the Spanish lab), as 
much for the researchers or organizers of the participatory 
process than for the participants themselves. The first effect 
of timing is the difficulty to end up with concrete solutions, 
results or actions that will impact policy [34], while being 
committed to the budget and ensuring the continuation of 
the project by the beneficiaries on their own. In the 
literature, this time-consuming aspect of participation is also 
often raised by practitioners who are encouraged to integrate 
participation into their day-to-day work [35]. Timing is also 
critical   for   the   citizens   who  have   other   concerns   and  
 
Figure 4.  Drawbacks of the implementation of a participative process in a 
Smart City 
priorities,  which  may  dissuade  them  to  invest  energy for 
participating. Even when they are informed of the benefits, 
they might sometimes prefer to keep their current situation 
and even pay more money, rather than making additional 
efforts or changing their actual habits and behaviors [14]. 
Convincing them to get involved is therefore even more 
complicated when the foreseen advantages will be only 
perceived at the end of a long process, which makes them 
intangible and pushes participants to progressively lose 
interest. Another element that may sometimes lead to 
abandon the project is the technological issue, which reveals 
particularly present in the case of smart projects. The  
problem is not only related to the unfamiliarity of the 

10
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
citizens with the technologies, but also to their lack of 
equipment to manipulate them, which are the two chore 
characteristics of the digital divide [15]. For instance, the 
Dutch lab found alternatives when they realized that some 
neighborhoods had no Wi-Fi, and the British lab had to deal 
with “users (that) keep breaking the sensors” (Team 
member of the British lab). Furthermore, balancing citizen 
participation and technological development is all the more 
difficult given that it requires a temporal synchronization 
and that the fragile prototypes are available in reduced 
number. Finally, the last limit reported by the interviewees 
is the lack of knowledge, if not naivety, of the citizens in 
certain complex domains [36]. For example, the Spanish lab 
would like to collectively analyze the data with the 
participants, but it remains a task reserved for specialists 
who will “eventually look for certain results and not others” 
(Team member of the Spanish lab) and orient the following 
discussions and decisions. In addition, the citizens 
sometimes face difficulties expressing their needs and 
sometimes propose ideas that are less innovative than 
already-existing solutions. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The participative approach is gaining more and more 
popularity in Smart City projects, but there is very little 
practical advice about how to conduct a participatory 
methodology in such specific context. Given the ground 
experience of the interviewed experts, we identify several 
questions emerging from their ongoing and completed 
projects in terms of concept definitions, selection of 
participants, benefits and drawbacks. Those key elements 
provide useful information both for scientific researchers and 
operational stakeholders. 
First, the various existing interpretations of the Smart 
City concept definitely have an impact on its operational 
implementation. For instance, the concept of pervasive 
technology seems to play a major part in the current vision of 
the Smart City, but the citizen is expected to play a larger 
role in our future smart cities. The interviewees’ prospective 
vision of the Smart City is generally closer to the definitions 
found in the scientific state of the art, while their current 
vision is less optimistic and is probably nurtured by the first 
failures encountered by Smart City projects around the 
world. Moreover, the interviewees’ visions of the Smart City 
are affected by the Smart City discourses, such as the 
marketing literature conveyed by IBM, Cisco or Siemens. 
Undoubtedly, this approach is inappropriate to an “actually 
existing smart city”  [6] such as our three European cases and 
unsatisfactory for our interviewees who therefore develop a 
prospective vision exceeding the techno-centric popular 
belief. Furthermore, this variety of interpretations is also 
linked to the fact that “the smart city concept encompasses 
intangible aspects such as quality of life and well-being 
components, whose measurement is subjective and difficult 
to perform” [37]. One team member of the Dutch lab even 
considers that the technology is just as difficult to grasp, 
since it “is just very much an invisible world and a 
government program”. Given the plethora of interpretations 
and definitions, each ecosystem of actors working on smart 
initiatives should at least, and as a priority, agree on a shared 
vision, generating clear objectives and means to achieve 
them. The question to keep in mind is: how do we define the 
Smart City, and especially regarding the roles played by the 
technologies and by the citizens? Although the absence of a 
consensual definition may seem problematic, it represents at 
the same time an opportunity for the local key stakeholders 
to adjust and to contextualize their own definition, thus 
falling outside the preconceived notion of a technocratic city 
and finding a balance between technological and collective 
intelligences. 
The second attention point concerns the definition of the 
citizen participation. Among the four axes previously 
identified (Figure 1), the communication, the citizen control 
and the conditions are explicitly discussed in the literature 
review, but the data manipulation is not yet part of the 
traditional scientific discourse. Citizen appropriation of the 
produced data is nonetheless a new form of participation and 
this technological dimension is even more crucial in the 
current smart context. This late integration of this data 
component as an additional facet of the citizen participation 
is clue that older concepts introduced in the 70s should 
evolve and that new participatory tools and methods are 
needed to complement the existing ones. Indeed, Arnstein’s 
ladder is nowadays still a valid theory, but it may lack some 
new steps, indicative of the numeric participation.  
Therefore, one question to ask is: how can the new 
technologies support the participative process and the 
citizens’ active, inclusive involvement? Based on the 
operational perspectives of the labs, Figure 5 below is an 
attempt to add this technological component to Arnstein’s 
theory, considering new participatory modes such as data 
manipulation, online platforms, mobile applications and 
sensors. This supplemented version of the original ladder 
attests to the new alternatives and specificities of the numeric 
participation, which oscillates between rather low and rather 
high influence and decision power of the citizens. 
Nonetheless, contrary to Arnstein’s willingness to reach the 
upper levels of citizen power [22], our perspective is that 
every step of the ladder is legitimate (or even 
complementary), except the therapy and the manipulation, if 
the citizens are conscious of their role and of the objective of 
their participation. As one member of the Dutch lab said, 
participation has to be taken seriously, but we believe that 
sometimes more modest participatory processes can fill a 
need, even if the participants remain passive informants for 
instance. Moreover, time constraints render impossible the 
ideal scenario, i.e., some kind of persistently, continuous and 
super-active participation of each participant at each step of 
the process and in each case. In order to avoid weariness and 
overload of participants, facilitators and city officials, we 
suggest to make compromises and choose carefully when a 
full citizen power is necessary and feasible, this choice 
becoming thus one of the biggest challenges when 
implementing a participative process in a Smart City. 
Following Glass, the chosen methodology (and therefore the 
associated citizen decision-power) depends on the objective 
of     the     Participation      (e.g.,     information      exchange, 

11
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 5.  Arnstein’s ladder of citizen participation adapted to the Smart 
City context 
representational 
input, 
education 
or 
decision-making 
supplement) [23]. From our point of view, this decision 
should also particularly rely on the object of the 
participation, which can sometimes require more usage or 
professional expertise, more local or global perspective, 
more deep or “automatic” contribution, etc. The projects 
conducted by the three labs are the proof that several levels 
of participation deserve to exist and result in different 
benefits (and drawbacks). One last impact of the digital era 
on the participatory theories relates to the inclusive 
dimension of the participative process. While the literature 
review often envisions the Smart City as an exclusive 
concept, generating digital divide, the interviewees also 
mention that technology can increase the participation rate, 
because there are much more diffusion channels (e.g., social 
networks) and a better access to information. 
The 
interviewees’ 
interpretations 
about 
citizen 
participation introduce the notion of citizens’ motivation, 
nurturing our third focus point. The results regarding the 
selection of the citizens show that participants can be 
characterized by different motivation spectrums: Dutch 
citizens share the same values while the British participants 
have 
more 
diverse 
interests. 
Following 
Deci, 
the 
participants’ motivation may have intrinsic or extrinsic 
sources [38]. In other words, the citizens can respectively 
decide to participate “because it is inherently interesting or 
enjoyable” or “because it leads to a separable outcome” like 
for instance a reward [38]. In our case, the benefits promoted 
by the British lab, such as technology exclusivity, time or 
money savings, might be identified as extrinsic motivations. 
The Dutch and Spanish participants rather seem to be 
motivated by intrinsic factors, such as the personal 
willingness to take part to the life of their community or to 
collaborate around shared values and interests. According to 
Amabile’s extensive research on the subject, this dichotomy 
between extrinsic and intrinsic motivations has consequences 
on the participants’ creativity: extrinsic motivations could 
undermine the intrinsic motivation and the creative outputs, 
because the subject is not performing for its own sake 
anymore but rather for an external purpose [39]. Therefore, 
in our opinion, extrinsically motivated people will maybe 
more easily grow weary than intrinsically motivated citizens, 
who will probably commit themselves to participate in the 
long run. However, in the domain of technologies, 
participants’ remuneration reveals quite decisive, not so 
much as the primary motivation to participate, but rather as a 
reinforcement of long-term commitment [40]. Consequently, 
our third question is: what are the citizens’ motivations and 
what is the potential impact on the participants’ long-term 
involvement within the project? Our point of view is that 
several sources of motivation are complementary and should 
be mobilized at different stages of the process. On the one 
hand, offering stipend from the beginning presents a high 
risk to participant’s creativity [39]. On the other hand, 
stipends offer the advantage to reach more profiles of 
citizens and to value their engagement as a real job, which 
maintains commitment and reduces dropout  [40]. Therefore, 
the recruitment of the citizens should, as far as possible, be 
based on intrinsic motivations, but some compensation must 
be considered during the process for long-term participation 
or when a more general, mixed public is needed. 
Another important consequence regarding the selection 
of the participants is related to the representativeness of the 
sample. One recurrent wish of the interviewees is to reach 
everybody, but they agree that this dream scenario is too 
optimistic. Therefore, the three labs developed their own 
practical approach. On the one hand, the Dutch lab relies on 
existing communities, already active and probably prone to 
participate. On the other hand, the British lab recruits the 
most motivated citizens from a limited geographical area, 
based on some kind of “first come, first served” rule. Finally, 
the Spanish lab uses both strategies, depending on the 
initiator of the participative process and the chosen 
participatory method. The British lab hopes to get more 
“general users” in the sense that the researchers do not know 
anything about the selected citizens, nor about their diverse 
motivations, leaving the possibility to include participants 
who have reservations about some aspects of the project. 
Even if the British and the Spanish samples are generally 
more heterogeneous, none of the three labs insures a 
representative sample. We should then be aware that each 
approach provides different target audiences and ask 
ourselves: how will the participants be selected and what are 
the consequences on the variety of the citizen profiles and, as 
a result, on the project outcomes? If none of the extreme 
situations is optimal, maybe the Spanish adaptive strategy is 
a good alternative. Indeed, the potential bias of the British 
and the Dutch approaches, i.e., low citizen motivation versus 
only-motivated citizens, are reassessed for each project in 
order to choose the selection criterion that will best support 
this specific case. 
Regarding the benefits of citizen participation, all three 
labs are truly convinced by the participation contribution to 

12
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the making of a Smart City. Their individual interpretations 
sometimes differ, but they all take root in the same vision of 
more aware, empowered and knowledgeable citizens. 
Moreover, they all agree on the importance to mobilize 
citizen’s field perspective, which the professional and 
official stakeholders are definitely lacking. Contrary to the 
state of the art, the interviewees never mentioned the 
professional protectionism [41] or the political alibi [42] as 
major limits, while those are among the most frequent 
reasons a participative process might fail to achieve concrete 
results. Actually, our hypothesis is that our three cases faced 
their own sets of problems, but also represent three success 
stories, which would not have been the case if the 
municipality and the lab were not aware of the benefits of 
citizen participation. Consequently, before launching a 
participative process, every stakeholder should wonder: what 
knowledge or skill can I bring to the others and what can I 
learn from them? Indeed, the realization that collective 
intelligence and professional expertise are complementary 
[43] is the key to build trust and to implement an effective 
participative process. Following Glass, this efficiency also 
relies on the chosen participatory technique that has to fit the 
pursued objective [23]. In order to enhance the impact of the 
participation, we also believe that the technique has to match 
the temporal frame of the participation process. For instance, 
some exploratory methods should not be used too late in the 
design process, at the risk of generating frustration because 
the participants’ proposals cannot be implemented in an 
advanced solution or a nearly-finished project. The Dutch 
and the Spanish labs therefore promote co-design sessions 
with a citizen engagement as soon as the early phases of the 
process, while the British lab invites the participants to test 
some technologies in the late evaluation stages of the 
process. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper considers the citizen participation in the Smart 
City from the operational perspective. Based on interviews 
with field actors, three Smart Cities’ perceptions and 
participative approaches are compared and confronted with 
the literature review. The results show that the theoretical 
definitions of the “Smart City” rather correspond to the 
interviewees’ prospective visions, while their current vision 
is not that optimistic, especially regarding the role citizens 
might play. The interviewees’ interpretation of the “citizen 
participation” is close to the existing theoretical models, but 
enriched by a new dimension related to the technological era, 
which we call “data manipulation”. Regarding the 
participants’ selection, striving to reach every citizen is seen 
as an un-achievable ideal and all three labs develop their own 
alternative approach, tapping into existing communities, 
focusing on a specific geographical area or mixing the two 
strategies on a case-by-case basis. This choice has a direct 
impact on the participants’ profiles, in terms of interests and 
motivations, or even creativity and commitment to the 
project. The perceived benefits of the implementation of 
citizen participation in a Smart City are not really different 
from the ones in the literature review, even though a 
particular emphasis on awareness, empowerment and 
learning suggests that citizens might gain new skills and 
knowledge, 
especially 
regarding 
smart 
technologies. 
Conversely, the drawbacks reveals that some technological 
constraints could jeopardize the smart participation in 
particular, compared to more traditional contexts. The 
nuanced interviewees’ visions highlight key elements that 
should be kept in mind while implementing a participative 
approach in the Smart City. Moreover, confronting practical 
and theoretical perspectives helps us to revise the traditional 
Arnstein’s ladder of citizen participation into an adapted 
version reflecting the Smart City context. Given the variety 
of interpretations, further research will explore other case 
studies nurturing our comparative analysis. Future work will 
also deepen the citizens’ perspective regarding their 
participation in the Smart City (preferences, barriers and 
motivations). 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is part of the “Wal-e-Cities” project, 
funded by the FEDER and the Walloon region. The authors 
would like to thank the funding authorities, as well as all 
who contributed to this research, in particular the 
interviewed lab directors and team members.  
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Schelings and C. Elsen, “The ‘bottom-up smart city’: 
filling the gap between theory and practice,” Proceedings of 
Smart 2018: The Seventh International Conference on Smart 
Cities, 
Systems, 
Devices 
and 
Technologies, 
IARIA, 
Barcelona, pp. 54-60, 2018. 
[2] T. Monfaredzadeh and R. Krueger, “Investigating social 
factors of sustainability in a smart city,” Procedia 
Engineering, vol. 118, pp. 1112-1118, 2015. 
[3] M. Angelidou, “Smart city policies: a spatial approach,” 
Cities, vol. 41, pp. S3-S11,  2014. 
[4] K. Maier, “Citizen participation in planning: climbing a 
ladder?, ” European Planning Studies, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 707-
719, 2001. 
[5] S. Ben Letaifa, “How to strategize smart cities: revealing the 
SMART model,” Journal of Business Research, vol. 68, pp. 
1414-1419, 2015. 
[6] T. Shelton, M. Zook, and A. Wiig, “The ‘actually existing 
smart city’,” Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and 
Society, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 13–25, 2015. 
[7] R. Giffinger et al., Smart cities: ranking of European medium-
sized cities. Centre of Regional Science, Vienna University of 
Technology, 2007. 
[8] R. G. Hollands, “Will the real smart city please stand up? 
Intelligent, progressive or entrepreneurial,” City, vol. 12, no. 
3, pp. 303-320, 2008. 
[9] J. Willems, J. Van den Bergh, and S. Viaene, “Smart city 
projects and citizen participation: the case of London,”  in 
Public sector management in a globalized world, R. 
Andeßner, D. Greiling and R. Vogel, Eds. Wiesbaden: NPO-
Management, Springer Gabler, pp. 249-266, 2017. 
[10] A.-G. Paetz, E. Dütschke, and W. Fichtner, “Smart homes as 
a means to sustainable energy consumption: a study of 
consumer perceptions,” Journal of Consumer Policy, vol. 35, 
pp. 23-41, 2012. 
[11] N. Balta-Ozkan, R. Davidson, M. Bicket, and L. Whitmarsh, 
“Social barriers to the adoption of smart homes,” Energy 
Policy, vol. 63, no. C, pp. 363–374, 2013. 

13
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[12] K. Buchana, N. Banks, I. Preston, and R. Russo, “The British 
public’s perception of the UK smart metering initiative: 
threats and opportunities,” Energy Policy, vol. 91, no. C, pp. 
87-97, 2016. 
[13] R. Bertoldo, M. Poumadère, and L. C. Rodrigues Jr., “When 
meters start to talk: the public’s encounter with smart meters 
in France,” Chemical Physics Letters, vol. 9, pp. 146-156, 
2015. 
[14] F. Bartiaux, “Does environmental information overcome 
practice 
comportmentalisation 
and change consumers’ 
behaviours?,” Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 16, no. 11, 
pp. 1170-1180, 2008. 
[15] D. Gooch, A. Wolff, G. Kortuem, and R. Brown,  
“Reimagining the role of citizens in smart city projects,” 
Adjunct Proceedings of the 2015 ACM International Joint 
Conference on Pervasive and Ubiquitous Computing, New 
York, 2015, pp. 1587-1594. 
[16] V. Thomas, D. Wang, L. Mullagh, and N. Dunn, “Where’s 
Wally? In search of citizen perspectives on the smart city,” 
Sustainability, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 207-219, 2016. 
[17] L. Leydesdorff and M. Deakin, “The triple-helix model of 
smart cities: a neo-evolutionary perspective,” Journal of 
Urban Technology, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 53-63, 2011. 
[18] R. P. Dameri, “Comparing smart and digital city: initiatives 
and strategies in Amsterdam and Genoa. Are they digital 
and/or smart?,” in Smart City, R. P. Dameri and C. Rosenthal-
Sabroux, Eds. Cham: Springer, pp. 45-88, 2014. 
[19] D. Schuurman, B. Baccarne, L. De Marez, and P. Mechant, 
“Smart ideas for smart cities: investigating crowdsourcing for 
generating and selecting ideas for ICT innovation in a city 
context,” Journal of Theoretical and Applied Electronic 
Commerce Research, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 49-62, 2012. 
[20] A. Vanolo, “Is there anybody out there? The place and role of 
citizens in tomorrow’s smart cities,” Futures, vol. 82, pp. 26-
36, 2016. 
[21] K. Fehér, “Contemporary smart citizs: key issues and best 
practices,” Proceedings of Smart 2018: The Seventh 
International Conference on Smart Cities, Devices and 
Technologies, IARIA, Barcelone, pp. 5-10, 2018. 
[22] S. R. Arnstein, “A ladder of citizen participation,” Journal of 
the American Institute of Planners, vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 216-
224, 1969. 
[23] J. J. Glass, “Citizen participation in planning: the relationship 
between objectives and techniques,” Journal of the American 
Institute of Planners, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 180-189, 1979. 
[24] B. Cohen. The smartest cities in the world 2015: 
Methodology. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: http://www. 
fastcoexist. 
com/3038818/the-smartest-cities-in-the-world-
2015-methodology 2019/06/10. 
[25] R. P. Dameri, “Searching for smart city definition: a 
comprehensive proposal,” International Journal of Computers 
& Technology, vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 2544-2551, 2013. 
[26] S. P. Hall, “Creative cities and economic development,” 
Urban Studies, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 639-649, 2000. 
[27] H. Chourabi et al., “Understanding smart cities: an integrative 
framework,” Proceedings of the 45th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, HICSS, Maui, pp. 2289-
2297, 2012. 
[28] D. Toppeta, “The smart city vision: how innovation and ICT 
can build smart, ‘livable’, sustainable cities,” The Innovation 
Knowledge Foundation, vol. 5, pp. 1-9, 2010. 
[29] J. Desdemoustier and N. Crutzen, Smart cities en Belgique: 
analyse qualitative de 11 projets. Smart City Institute, 
University of Liège, 2015. 
[30] M.-H. Bacqué and M. Gauthier, “Participation, urban 
planning and urban studies,” Participations, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 
36-66, 2011. 
[31] R. Luck, “Dialogue in participatory design,” Design studies, 
vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 523-535, 2003. 
[32] R. Luck, “Learning to talk to users in participatory design 
situations,” Design Studies, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 217-242, 2007. 
[33] B. Klandermans and D. Oegema, “Potentials, networks, 
motivations, and barriers: steps towards participation in social 
movements,” American Sociological Review, vol. 52, no. 4, 
pp. 519-531, 1987. 
[34] G. Rowe and L. J. Frewer, “Public participation methods: a 
framework for evaluation,” Science, Technology, & Human 
Values, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 3-29, 2000. 
[35] P. Kristensson, A. Gustafsson, and T. Archer, “Harnessing the 
creative potential among users,” The Journal of Product 
Innovation Management, vol. 21, pp. 4-14, 2004. 
[36] E. Bjögvinsson, P. Ehn, and P.-A. Hillgren, “Design things 
and design thinking: contemporary participatory design 
challenges,” DesignIssues, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 1–16, 2012. 
[37] R. Carli, M. Dotoli, R. Pellegrino, and L. Ranieri, “Measuring 
and managing the smartness of cities: a framework for 
classifying performance indicators,” Proceedings of the 2013 
IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and 
Cybernetics (SMC), pp. 1288-1293, 2013. 
[38] R. M. Ryan and E. L. Deci, “Intrinsic and extrinsic 
motivations: 
classic 
definitions 
and 
new 
directions,” 
Contemporary Educational Psychology, vol. 25, pp. 54-67, 
2000. 
[39] T. M. Amabile, “Social environments that kill creativity,” in 
Readings in Innovation, S. S. Gryskiewiz and D. A. Hills, 
Eds. Greensboro, NC: Center for Creative Leadership, 1992. 
[40] D. L. Kleinman, J. A. Delborne, and A. A. Anderson, 
“Engaging citizens:  the high cost of citizen participation in 
high technology,” Public Understanding of Science, vol. 20, 
no. 2, pp. 221-240, 2011. 
[41] J. Hill, Actions of architecture: architects and creative users. 
Routledge, London, 2003. 
[42] R. A. Irvin and J. Stansbury, “Citizen participation in decision 
making: is it worth the effort?,” Public administration 
review, vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 55-65, 2004. 
[43] E. B.-N. Sanders and P. J. Stappers, “Co-creation and the new 
landscapes of design,” CoDesign, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 5-18, 
2008. 
 

