458
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Considerations for Proposed Compatibility Levels for 9-150 kHz Harmonic 
Emissions Based on Conducted Measurements and Limits in the United States  
 
Elizabeth A. Devore, Adam Birchfield, S. Mark Halpin 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
Auburn University, AL USA 
ead0012@auburn.edu, abb0017@auburn.edu, halpism@auburn.edu 
 
 
Abstract— A key enabling component of the Smart Grid is 
communications. Of particular interest is power line 
communications where very little additional infrastructure is 
needed to establish communication links. In the very vast 
majority of cases, smart meters will be located in the low voltage 
environment and therefore must be designed to operate 
properly in the presence of disturbance levels bounded by 
established compatibility levels. Without standardized limits for 
emissions in this frequency range, levels can and have reached 
the point where smart meter communication disturbances have 
been 
reported. 
The 
International 
Electrotechnical 
Commission’s Technical Committee 77, Sub-Committee 77A, 
Working Group 8 is presently tasked with developing 
compatibility levels for disturbances in the frequency range 2-
150 kHz. This range is particularly important given that 
numerous smart meter products are designed to communicate 
in this band. Communication failures, thought to be due to 
higher-frequency harmonics, have been reported in the 
literature and demonstrated in tests conducted in Europe. All of 
this information is being considered by Working Group 8 and is 
reflected in a proposed compatibility level curve for this higher 
frequency range.  However, only limited (if any) work has been 
done in North America. In the United States, there are no 
defined compatibility levels for 2-150 kHz, but there are limits 
for voltage notches in IEEE Standard 519. In this paper, 
compatibility level curves proposed by European utilities and 
end-user equipment manufacturers are used to evaluate the 
results of initial product testing in the 120 V three-wire low-
voltage environment commonly found in North America. 
Further 
consideration 
is 
given 
to 
the 
measurement, 
propagation, and summation of disturbances at higher 
frequencies based on a model developed for the line(s) between 
in-service equipment and the service point where smart meters 
are connected. The results of the analysis show that the total 
level of disturbance further exceeds the proposed CL curve 
when the tested equipment is in service and that measurements 
taken at the public supply terminals represent measurements 
taken at the service point. 
 
Keywords – smart meters; power line communication; high-
frequency harmonics; EMC standardization; commutation 
notches. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In this paper previous work on the possible impacts of 
high-frequency harmonic emissions on smart meter 
communications [1] is extended. Smart meters are typically 
connected directly at the low-voltage (LV) point of service 
for an end user. These meters make the traditional direct 
measurements of voltages and currents and compute power 
and energy consumption for billing purposes. Of course, 
smart meters are also capable of characterizing the quantities 
measured such as harmonic content and voltage excursions.  
All of these evaluations/calculations are done locally at the 
meter point. When these meters and their enhanced 
capabilities are integrated into a coordinated communication 
and control system, the smart grid is born. Without data 
sharing and communications, there would be no smart grid. 
Therefore, disturbances in meter communications must be 
considered.  
Smart meter communication approaches can be broadly 
divided into two categories: wired and wireless.  Recognition 
and tolerance of the background environment and 
disturbances for wireless systems are covered by numerous 
applicable standards for wireless communications. Similar 
standards for wired systems exist for higher frequencies 
(generally above 150 kHz) and lower frequencies (generally 
below 2 or 3 kHz), but no consensus presently exists in the 
range 2-150 kHz [2]. This frequency range includes the bands 
used by most smart meter manufacturers for communications 
via the power line (PLC).  Nonexistent compatibility levels 
(CLs) and limits in the 2-150 kHz range have resulted in 
smart meter development without regard to standardized 
background emission levels and problems are beginning to 
appear [3]. Other problems in addition to PLC failures have 
also been attributed to harmonics in this range [4]–[6]. All 
industry stakeholders have recognized the need for rapid 
standardization, and numerous activities across Europe have 
resulted in proposed standards. Concerns related to PLC 
systems are most often the main focus for wired systems [3], 
[7]–[9]. 
Working 
Group 
(WG) 
8 
of 
the 
International 
Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) Technical Committee 
(TC) 77, Sub-Committee (SC) 77A is specifically charged 
with reviewing and evaluating the results of these ongoing 
activities and developing consensus CLs in the 2-150 kHz 
frequency range [10]. This task is complicated by the fact that 
numerous end-use products produce emissions in this 
frequency range, usually due to the common use of various 
high switching frequency power converter designs required 
to meet energy efficiency requirements [7], [11]. These high-
frequency emissions are produced by end-use equipment 
categories ranging from entertainment (e.g., televisions and 
displays) to lighting (compact fluorescent and LED ballasts 
and controls). Other sources of high-frequency emissions 
include voltage-source inverters used in motor drives and a 

459
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
number of distributed generation sources that are or could be 
interfaced with the public network. Active infeed converters 
(AICs), normally using high switching frequencies, are used 
to integrate energy from these sources (e.g., solar panels, fuel 
cells, or wind turbines) to the power supply system to be 
made available for other consumers. Distributed energy 
sources use AICs to synchronize voltages and currents to the 
power system or to exchange electrical energy between 
energy storage devices (e.g., batteries) and the system or end-
use equipment. AICs also provide the possibility of adjusting 
the fundamental and controllable harmonic components that 
feed into or are taken from the power line, which in effect 
generates high frequency distortion. It is possible for AICs to 
be used to mitigate pre-existing harmonics in the power 
system [12] if they are controlled as an active filter.  All of 
these emissions combine in the LV network serving the end-
user facility and the cumulative emission levels could reach 
values 
such 
that 
interference 
with 
smart 
meter 
communications occurs.  Alternatively, these high-frequency 
emissions could essentially circulate between local-area 
direct-connected devices, resulting in very little impact on the 
supply system [13]–[15]. 
In the United States, the only standard that pertains to 
disturbances in the 2-150 kHz range is IEEE Standard 519-
2014 [16]. According to Standard 519, a notch is the result of 
disturbances in the normal voltage waveform that lasts less 
than 0.5 cycles, and is initially of opposite polarity than the 
waveform. Therefore, the area of this notch is subtracted from 
the normal waveform. These notches are often caused by 
rectifiers and other nonlinear devices, resulting in higher 
order harmonics. In order to avoid issues related to these 
notches, a total allowable notch area for LV systems is set. 
IEEE Standard 519 only contributes to limits regarding a 
single disturbance source, while the goal of WG8 is to set 
maximum acceptable levels for the sum of all disturbances at 
the point of common coupling (PCC), located between the 
smart meter and the LV system. There are no standards in the 
United States that deal with the cumulative sum of 
disturbances from all high frequency disturbing sources. 
In this paper, proposed CLs are compared to emission 
testing results for some 120 V products in common use in 
North America so that postulates can be developed regarding 
how multiple disturbance-producing products in the 9-150 
kHz range might summate at the point of service where the 
smart meter is located. In order to obtain reliable information 
from smart meters, high frequency disturbances must be 
managed. Therefore, the aim of this work is to present 
disturbance measurements that must be considered for the 
design and operation of smart meters using PLC. For 
measurements, focus is given to the 9-150 kHz frequency 
range because it has been recommended that different effects 
and limiting factors may be present for the frequency ranges 
2-9 kHz and 9-150 kHz [17]. Related works are disclosed in 
Section II. The set-up used for measuring emissions levels is 
explained in Section III. In Section IV, proposed CLs are 
introduced. Further, in Section V, limits based on maximum 
notch area and notch depth set in IEEE Standard 519 for 
voltage notches are used to consider individual disturbance 
sources with regard to the proposed CLs. In Section VI, 
results of tests to assess high-frequency disturbance 
propagation in 120 V, three-wire LV systems are presented 
and compared to proposed CLs. In Section VII, a model for 
the line between the public supply terminals (where 
emissions were measured) and the PCC is considered in order 
to posit how the disturbances from multiple end-user pieces 
of equipment sum at each location. Finally, conclusions and 
future work are provided in Section VIII. 
 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
To date, all testing, research, and evaluation of high-
frequency harmonic product emissions has been focused on 
products used in European LV networks. This may primarily 
be a result of the common use of PLC for smart meter 
communication in European countries [3]. Published results 
of the similarities and differences of multiple product tests 
investigating voltage emissions have not been found in these 
works. Instead, previous testing has been focused on specific 
equipment, namely lighting, such as touch dimmer lamps [4] 
and fluorescent lamps [13], or on current distortion of various 
appliances [19]. 
Further, none of these works provide a solution to the 
problem, rather the data is used to assist in creating standards. 
Smart meter manufacturers stand to benefit from truly 
international specified standards that can be used on a global 
scale. In order to accomplish this, information on products 
and standards used in North American LV networks is 
required. The work presented in the following sections is 
intended to contribute to the European works and aid in the 
development and acceptance of international standards for 
high frequency harmonic disturbances for PLC. 
 
III. 
TEST AND MEASUREMENT APPROACH  
All measurements were carried out on 120 V equipment 
and systems using a 100 MHz digitizing oscilloscope with 
built-in signal processing functions including Fourier 
analysis. Spectral analysis was also conducted off-line using 
digitized data transferred from the oscilloscope to a local 
computer. The tests were carried out using a 120 V supply 
taken directly from the local public network. Equipment was 
connected to the 120 V public supply source using a standard 
three-wire cable rated for continuous operation at 120 V, 15 
A. Measurements are taken at two locations:  (1) the supply 
terminals, M1, and (2) the load equipment connection point, 
M2. Voltage signals were the only quantities that were 
measured; current emissions were not considered in this 
work. The setup is shown in Figure 1. 
As required by electrical codes in the United States, the 
public supply point is grounded at the point of service only.  
The equipment under test (EUT) is grounded by connection 
back to the single ground point at the service; this ground 
conductor is specifically required to be isolated from the 
normal current-carrying conductors. Because smart meters 
will communicate using the power conductors and not the 
ground, the emission levels produced at the EUT terminals 
and the supply voltage terminals are measured between the 

460
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
two power conductors rather than from either conductor to 
the ground. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Test and Measurement Setup 
 
Measurements are made at the points M1 and M2 as shown 
in Figure 1. The measured emission levels at M2 with and 
without the EUT in operation can be used to evaluate the 
emissions due solely to the operation of the EUT. The 
measured levels at M1 with and without the EUT in operation 
can be used to evaluate the propagation of emissions from the 
EUT to the supply point. Of course this propagation is a direct 
function of the frequency response of the power cable and the 
impedance of the supply system along with any other 
connected equipment [13]–[15]. While theoretical models 
can be developed for simple cases, this task can become 
difficult and inaccurate for realistically complex systems and 
is best assessed via direct measurement of input and output 
characteristics (e.g., at M2 and M1). 
Typical emission levels in the range 9-150 kHz are on the 
order of a few millivolts (mV) and are commonly expressed 
in the unit “decibel-microvolt” (dBµV) where 20 dBµV= 
10*1 µV=10 µV, 40 dBµV=100*1 µV=100 µV, etc. A 
decibel (dB) is the logarithmic unit representing the ratio 
between two quantities, and dBµV represents the ratio 
between the measured voltage emissions and 1µV. Expressed 
in this common dBµV unit, typical emission levels in the 
frequency range of interest will be around 80-100 dBµV (10-
100 mV). Plotting the magnitude in dBµV allows possibly 
large variations in ratios to be plotted on a common scale. Of 
course, these emission levels will only be encountered at the 
specific frequencies at which they are produced; much lower 
levels, typically 40-60 dBµV, will be present over the 
majority of the frequency range of interest.  In order to 
resolve these small spectral components with sufficient 
accuracy using a typical oscilloscope/spectrum analyzer, it is 
necessary to remove the power frequency component from 
the measured signal before it is processed by the spectrum 
analyzer. This removal process requires an analog filter of 
band-stop or high-pass design to eliminate the power 
frequency signal or pass without attenuation the higher 
frequencies of interest, respectively. 
A high-pass design was chosen for the measurements 
reported in this work and a custom design was conceived and 
implemented to avoid any over-dependence on commercial 
products. In addition, it is difficult to select any particular 
commercially-available 
product 
based 
on 
accuracy, 
performance, or other criteria because no standardized 
interface coupling exists [18]. The analog filter design is 
shown schematically in Figure 2. 
Because the filter is a custom design, it is necessary to 
validate the expected high-pass frequency characteristics and 
verify that the power frequency component, in this case at 60 
Hz, will be sufficiently attenuated. The simulated frequency 
response characteristic of the filter is shown in Figure 3. It is 
clear from Figure 3 that the filter delivers a significant 
attenuation at the power frequency and corresponding low-
frequency harmonics whereas the response is essentially flat 
with minimal attenuation in the frequency range of interest 
(9-150 kHz). The frequency response was further verified by 
measurement of the frequency response of the constructed 
filter. The result is shown in Figure 4 and verifies the 
essentially flat characteristic and minimal attenuation in the 
9-150 kHz range. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Filter Design and Parameters 
 
 
Figure 3. Simulated Frequency Response of Custom Filter 
 
 
Figure 4. Measured Frequency Response of Custom Filter 
 

461
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
IV. 
COMPATIBILITY LEVELS 
A CL is the level of disturbance above which problems 
(e.g., communication interference) are expected to occur. 
Two CL curves have been proposed in Europe. One of the 
proposed CL curves made by European utilities is shown in 
Figure 5. Shown in the plot are the proposed maximum 
allowable peak levels in dBµV for the 3-150 kHz frequency 
range. The CL curve proposed by European manufacturers is 
given in Figure 6. The maximum allowable emissions are 
again given in dBµV, based on peak values, for the 9-150 
kHz frequency range.  
Considering both figures, the primary discrepancy 
between the proposed curves lies in the 9-50 kHz range. The 
communication issues sited by European utilities have played 
a major role in the development of CLs. As a result, the 
utilities’ CL curve will be used as the primary reference for 
evaluation of the measurements discussed in this paper. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Utility Proposed Compatibility Levels 
 
 
Figure 6.  Manufacturer Proposed Compatibility Levels 
 
V. 
COMMUTATION NOTCH LIMITS 
In order to consider the CLs proposed in Europe, CLs 
based on established standards in North America should be 
considered if they exist. Unfortunately, only limits for 
specific disturbance sources exist in IEEE Standard 519 and 
these do not represent the total, maximum disturbance level 
that is defined by CLs. The ultimate objective, of course, is 
for the limits for individual disturbing sources to result in a 
total summated disturbance level, considering all disturbance 
sources, which does not exceed the maximum permissible 
total disturbance levels, which define the CLs. 
The limits for commutation notches provided in IEEE 
Standard 519-2014 are shown in Table I and are based on the 
variables defined in Figure 7. Based on Figure 7, f(t) was 
written for a 50 Hz sinusoidal waveform, considering the 
general system notch area and depth from Table I. The notch 
area was normalized as a 1V system by dividing by 480V. In 
order to plot the magnitude, f(ω), for the frequency range 2-
150 kHz, the Fourier series was calculated. Figure 8 is the 
plot of the results for the Fourier series and the European 
utility proposed CLs, both given in dBµV based on peak 
values. Both the CLs and the notch limits drop off as 
frequency increases. However, the IEEE limits are based 
solely on commutation notches, and are intended to be 
applied to a specific disturbance. The CL curve is 
representative of the maximum permissible value for the sum 
of all disturbances seen at the PCC. 
TABLE I.  
RECOMMENDED LIMITS ON COMMUTATION NOTCHES[16] 
 
Special 
applicationsa 
General 
system 
Dedicated 
systemb 
Notch depth 
10% 
20% 
50% 
Notch area (AN)c,d 
16400 
22800 
36500 
a. 
Special applications include hospitals and airports. 
b. 
A dedicated system exclusively supplies a specific user or user load. 
c. 
In volt-microseconds at rated voltage and current. 
d. 
The values for AN have been developed for 480 V systems.  
It is necessary to multiply the values given by V/480 for application at all other voltages. 
 
 
Figure 7. Definition of Notch Depth and Notch Area [16] 
 

462
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 8. Utility Proposed CL vs. Commutation Notch Limits 
 
VI. 
MEASUREMENT RESULTS COMPARED TO PROPOSED 
COMPATIBILITY LEVELS 
Measurements were conducted at M1 and M2 in Figure 1 
using the high-pass filter of Figure 2, the digitizing 
oscilloscope, and off-line computer-based spectral analysis.  
Measurements were initially performed at M1 with no EUT 
operating in order to establish a baseline condition. To 
recognize and evaluate expected variations in background 
emission levels over time, the baseline evaluations were 
conducted over a 72 hr period including a normal workday, 
multiple nighttime periods, an end-of-week day, and a 
holiday. These results are shown in Figure 9, averaged over a 
period defined by a particular date and hour-of-day range as 
shown in the figure. The magnitude of the recorded 
measurements were RMS values, with units dBµVRMS. In 
order to compare the proposed CLs on the same scale, the 
RMS values were converted to peak values by dBµVpeak = 
(1.414)*dBµVRMS. The task of multiplying peak values by 
1.414 was achieved by adding 3dB to the measurements.  
 
 
Figure 9.  72 hr Background Emission Levels 
It is clear from Figure 9 that the variations in background 
emission levels are not overly significant. It is equally clear 
that there are significant background emissions in the 
frequency range 60-70 kHz that either exceed or nearly 
exceed the utility’s proposed CL curve. The background 
emission levels in Figure 9 can be used during the emission 
assessment of various operating EUTs.  These longer-time 
background levels are also useful for evaluating potential 
measurement errors; erroneous measurements would likely 
deviate significantly from the established background levels. 
Two major categories of consumer products were tested in 
this work: lighting and televisions (displays).  Measurements 
were taken on both ends of the supply cable impedance 
(approximately 30.5m long power cable as previously 
described) and with and without the EUT in operation. For 
the cases with the EUT disconnected, measurements were 
made both before and after the EUT connection and operation 
so that the reference levels immediately before and after each 
test could be known and, for validation purposes, compared 
to the longer-time results of Figure 9 as appropriate. 
The results of two compact fluorescent lamp (CFL) tests 
are shown in Figure 10 (a) and (b). These results clearly show 
that one of the CFLs produces a noticeable emission around 
120 kHz whereas the other tested lamp provides an 
attenuating effect around 80 kHz at the EUT terminals but not 
at the supply terminals.  From these two tested lamps, it does 
not appear reasonable to make generalizations. However, 
comparing the test results to the proposed CL curve, it is clear 
that disturbance levels still exceed the proposed CL between 
60-70 kHz. In this case, the 3-5 dBµV increase in magnitude 
in the 60-70 kHz range represents the additive effects of end-
user devices and is indicative of the emission level of the 
EUT. 
The results of four LED lamp tests are shown in Figure 11 
(a)-(d).  These results show the effects of a general change 
with some increases and some decreases (a) and (d), an 
increasing change in background emissions (b), and the 
effects of a decreasing change in background emissions (c). 
For all the tested LED lamps, there does not appear to be a 
significant impact on emissions relative to the background 
levels at either the source or load terminals. Again, all of the 
tested LED lamps contribute to exceeding or nearly 
exceeding the proposed CL curve in the 60-70 kHz frequency 
range for each of the tests conducted. In tests (b) and (c), 
before the reference and after, respectively, have a lower 
emission level than measurements taken while the EUT was 
in service for the entire band of interest.  

463
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
(a) 
 
(b)
Figure 10.  CFL Test Results vs. Utility Proposed CL 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 
 
(d)
Figure 11.  LED Test Results vs. Utility Proposed CL

464
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
 
 
(c) 
 
 
(d)
Figure 12.  Television/Monitor Test Results vs. Utility Proposed CL 
 
The results of four television/display tests are shown in 
Figure 12 (a)-(d).  Tests (b) and (d) show some amplification 
and attenuation effects of the power cable, particularly 
around 40-60 kHz and 110-120 kHz (b), and 120-130 kHz 
(d).  The other two tests do not appear to have any single 
dominant features but it is clear that the emission levels 
change with and without the EUT in operation in all cases. 
Again, all tests show that disturbance levels in the 60-70 kHz 
band exceed the utility proposed CL curve. 
It should be clearly noted that the results shown in Figures 
10-12 show the total emission levels with and without the 
EUT in service. While a comparison of the “with” and 
“without” results gives some indication of the emissions 
produced by a particular EUT, this type of general 
observation is not sufficient in many areas, particularly in 
standardization related to equipment emission limits and 
possibly installation-level emission limits. With regard to 
installation-level emission limits, such as those in in IEC 
Standard 61000-3-6, it will be necessary to develop 
applicable summation laws that can be used as a first 
approximation to separate individual emission contributions 
from a measured total emission level. Such a summation law 
could, for example, be used to identify (approximately) the 
emissions produced by the EUTs in Figures 10-12 from the 
total measured levels.  
At this time, no summation law exists in the 2-150 kHz 
band and general comparisons with and without the EUT in 
service are the only things possible. However, the 
commutation notch limits shown in Figure 8, based on IEEE 
Standard 519, can be used to consider the maximum limits 
allowed for specific equipment. The allotted limits for 
individual equipment can then be used to define a summation 
law for this higher frequency range. None of this work can be 
completed until CLs for the 2-150 kHz range are defined.  
Further, in order to measure total disturbances based on 
allotted established limits, it is necessary to develop testing 
and measurement specifications that are applicable to the 
general 2-150 kHz band similar to those which exist for 
products for frequencies below 2-3 kHz as specified in IEC 
Standards 61000-3-2 and 61000-3-12. The measurements 

465
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
shown in Figures 9-12 were taken at the user supply 
terminals, not at the PCC. In order to establish proper 
measurement specifications at the PCC, the lines between the 
PCC and the user supply terminals (where these 
measurements were taken) must be characterized. 
VII. LINE MODELING 
In order for the values measured at the supply terminals to 
reflect the values measured at the PCC, it is necessary to 
multiply measured data at the public supply point by the 
transfer function of the line. The transfer function was 
determined by measuring a 50ft (approximately 15.24m), 
Romex 12-3 (12 gauge, 3 conductor) indoor non-metallic 
wire using an impedance analyzer. This wire was chosen 
because it is commonly used in the United States to wire 
residential indoor branch circuits for outlets, switches, and 
other loads. 
The analyzer was set up so that a signal input and output 
were measured on opposite ends between two of the Romex 
wire conductors. The analyzer was set to measure Vout/Vin 
(V2/V1) over the frequency range 2-150 kHz. The results are 
shown in Figure 13. In order to determine resonances that 
occur in the line, the measurements were conducted in the 2 
kHz-20 
MHz 
frequency 
range. 
Inspection 
of 
the 
measurements shows that resonance does not occur, and the 
gain is approximately 1V/V, in the 2-150 kHz range. 
 
 
Figure 13.  Measured Transfer Function for 12-3 Romex Wire 
 
In order to verify these measurements, equivalent, per-
meter, RLC parameters were calculated to determine the 
resonant frequency. The series dc conductor resistance R, 
series inductance L, and shunt capacitance C parameters were 
calculated using (1), (2), and (3) based on single line 
calculations [20]. According to [21], it is important to note 
that resonances at high frequencies cause issues. However, 
the length of the line is important when considering line 
modeling. The resonant frequency (f0) based on the 
calculated LC values (for the entire 15.24m line) is 
approximately 2.8 MHz. Recognizing the free space for 
conductors to move in the Romex wire, the measured 
distance between conductors (D) is not exact. Considering the 
measured transfer function in Figure 13, the calculated value 
for f0 is reasonable. 
 
𝑅𝑅𝑑𝑑𝑑𝑑 =
𝜌𝜌𝜌𝜌
𝐴𝐴  
(1) 
 
𝐿𝐿 = 
µ
2𝜋𝜋 𝑙𝑙𝑙𝑙
𝐷𝐷
𝑟𝑟′                         (2)  
𝐶𝐶 = 
2𝜋𝜋𝜋𝜋
ln ቀ𝐷𝐷
𝑟𝑟ቁ 
(3) 
Also, based on the calculations and measurements, it is 
reasonable to assert that for short lines such as those used in 
residential homes in the United States (for example, 100ft or 
30.5m), a single, equivalent RLC circuit is sufficient for 
modeling the line between the supply terminals and the PCC. 
This assertion is based on the electrical wavelength, λ, for this 
line. The wavelength (4) is approximately 1.5x105m–2x103m 
from 2-150 kHz for velocity (v) equal to the speed of light. 
Assuming an electrically short line is λ/4, wiring used in 
residential buildings can be assumed to be electrically short 
and modeled using a single RLC line model rather than a 
distributed parameter line model. This assumption is true 
even for velocity (v) much less than the speed of light. 
 
 𝜆𝜆 =
𝑣𝑣
𝑓𝑓 
(4) 
It is clear from these results that the measurements taken 
at the public supply terminals represent measurements taken 
at the service point where any smart meter would likely be 
located. This is true because the characteristics of the line 
between the two points is essentially flat for the 2-150 kHz 
range of interest. As a result, development of standardized 
measuring techniques for high-frequency harmonics can be 
considered at the public supply terminals. 
 
VIII. CONCLUSIONS 
The emission levels for some consumer equipment 
typically used in North America were compared to proposed 
CLs for high-frequency emissions. The results of the analysis 
show that the total level of disturbance further exceeds the 
proposed CL curve when the tested equipment is in service. 
Although there are variations in the recommendations made 
by European manufacturers, the existing difference in 
proposed CLs in the 9-50 kHz range between the utilities and 
manufacturers is not significant because neither level is 
exceeded with or without the tested equipment in service. For 
both the manufacturer and utility proposed CL, disturbance 
levels with and without tested equipment in service exceed 
the limits in the 60-70 kHz range.  
If either of the European proposed CL curves were to be 
adopted in the United States, filtering would be required in 
order to reduce the harmonic levels that surpass the defined 
CLs in the 60-70 kHz range. Specifically, filters added on 

466
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
equipment or at the PCC can help reduce undesired 
harmonics to a value below the chosen CL curve. Although 
PLC is not (currently) the dominant communication 
technique used for smart meter communication in North 
America, it is still of interest for North America to follow 
future proposals made by the IEC and European utilities and 
manufacturers in order to prepare for alternative metering 
methods that may be used in the future. Further, the limits 
based on IEEE Standard 519 notch commutations is 
important to consider regarding a developed summation law 
for lower frequency harmonics once a CL curve is 
established. The summation law from IEC Standard 61000-
3-6 should be evaluated for 2-150 kHz in order to determine 
if the same law may be applied to harmonics above the 50th 
order. 
The evaluation of individual EUTs and the averaged 
day/time background disturbance levels measured confirm 
that individual products can add to background emission 
levels. Although, based on measurements and calculations 
performed, it is reasonable to assume that the measurements 
taken at the supply terminals are the same as measurements 
taken at the meter, further tests examining multiple products 
and additional measurements made at the PCC will be 
necessary for future consideration of CLs in the 9-150 kHz 
range. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The initial work for this project was conducted as a student 
project at Auburn University [1]. Mr. Birchfield is carrying 
out his graduate studies at The University of Illinois Urbana-
Champaign.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1]  M. Arechaveleta, S.M. Halpin, A. Birchfield, W. Pittman, W.E. 
Griffin, and M. Mitchell, “Potential Impacts of 9-150 kHz 
Harmonic Emissions on Smart Grid Communications in the 
United States,” 5th International Conference on Smart Grids, 
Green Communications, and IT Energy-Aware Technologies 
(Energy 2015), May 2015, pp. 59-64. 
[2] R. Burkart and J.W. Kolar, “Overview and Comparison of Grid 
Harmonics and Conducted EMI Standards for LV Converters 
Connected to the MV Distribution Grid,” 1st Power Electronics 
South America Conference and Exhibition, September 2012. 
[3] P. Pakonen, S. Vehmasvaara, M. Pikkarainen, B.A. Siddiqui, 
and P. Verho, "Experiences on Narrowband Powerline 
Communication of Automated Meter Reading Systems in 
Finland," Electric Power Quality and Supply Reliability 
Conference (PQ), June 2012. 
[4]  M. Pikkarainen, S. Vehmasvaara, B.A. Siddiqui, P. Pakonen, 
and P. Verho, "Interference of touch dimmer lamps due to PLC 
and other high frequency signals," Electric Power Quality and 
Supply Reliability Conference (PQ), June 2012. 
[5] G.A. Franklin, "A Practical Guide to Harmonic Frequency 
Interference Affecting High-Voltage Power-Line Carrier 
Coupling Systems," IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, 
April 2009, pp. 630-641. 
[6] B. Gustavsen, "Study of Transformer Resonant Overvoltages 
Caused 
by 
Cable-Transformer 
High-Frequency 
Interaction," IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, April 
2010. 
[7] S.M. Bashi, A.U.M Al-Abulaziz, and N.F. Mailah, “Effects of 
High Power Electronics Converters on PLC Signals,” Journal 
of Applied Sciences, January 2006, pp. 1888-1891. 
[8] S.K. Ronnberg, M.H.J. Bollen, and M. Wahlberg, “Interaction 
Between Narrowband Power-Line Communication and End-
User Equipment,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, 
August 2011, pp. 2034-2039. 
[9] E. de Jaeger, H. Renner, and K. Stockman, “Special Report-
Session 2: Power Quality and Electromagnetic Compatibility,” 
22nd International Conference on Electricity Distribution 
(CIRED), June 2013. 
[10] D. 
Heirman, 
“EMC 
Standards 
Activity,” 
IEEE 
Electromagnetic Compatibility Magazine, January 2014. 
[11] J. Luszcz, “High Frequency Harmonics Emission of Modern 
Power Electronic AC-DC Converters,” 8th International 
Conference on Compatibility and Power Electronics, June 
2013, pp. 269-274. 
[12] IEC/TS 62578 Ed.2, “Power electronics systems and 
equipment - Operation conditions and characteristics of active 
infeed converter (AIC) applications including design 
recommendations for their emission values below 150 kHz,” 
March 2014. 
[13] E.O.A Larsson, C.M. Lundmark, and M.H.J. Bollen, 
“Distortion of Fluorescent Lamps in the Frequency Range 2-
150 kHz,” 7th International Conference on Harmonics and the 
Quality of Power, September 2006. 
[14] S. Ronnberg, M. Wahlberg, M. Bollen, A. Larsson, and M. 
Lundmark, “Measurements of Interaction Between Equipment 
in the Frequency Range 9 to 95 kHz,” 20th International 
Conference on Electricity Distribution (CIRED), June 2009. 
[15] D. Frey, J.L. Schanen, S. Quintana, M. Bollen, and C. Conrath, 
“Study of High Frequency Harmonics Propagation in Industrial 
Networks,” 2012 International Symposium on Electromagnetic 
Compatibility, September 2012. 
[16] IEEE Std 519™-2014, IEEE Recommended Practice and 
Requirements for Harmonic Control in Electric Power 
Systems. 
[17] A. Larsson, "High-frequency Distortion in Power Grids due to 
Electronic Equipment," Licentiate thesis, Dept. Applied 
Physics and Mech. Eng., Luleå Univ. of Tech., Luleå, Sweden, 
2006. 
[18] M. Coenen and A. van Roermund, “Conducted Mains Test 
Method in 2-150 kHz Band,” 2014 International Symposium 
on Electromagnetic Compatibility,” September 2014, pp. 601-
604. 
[19]  B. Sudiarto, A.N. Widyanto, and H. Hirsch, “Current 
Distortion Characteristics of Some Home Appliances in 
Distorted Voltage Environment for Frequency Range of 2-150 
KHz,” International Conference on Renewable Energies and 
Power Quality (ICREPQ’14), April 2014. 
[20]  C.A. Gross, “Transmission Lines” in Power System Analysis, 
2nd ed. New York:  Wiley, 1986, pp. 100-114. 
[21] R. Langella, L. Nunges, F. Pilo, G. Pisano, G. Petretto, S. 
Scalari, and A. Testa, “Preliminary Analysis of MV Cable Line 
Models for High Frequency Harmonic Penetration Studies,” 
Power and Energy Society General Meeting,  July 2011
 

