136
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Building a Cultural Intelligence Decision Support System with Soft-Computing 
Zhao Xin Wu, Roger Nkambou  
Computer Science Department, University of Quebec in 
Montreal, PO Box 8888, Downtown, Montreal, QC. 
H3C 3P8, Canada 
zhao_xin_wu@hotmail.com 
nkambou.roger@uqam.ca 
Jacqueline Bourdeau  
LICEF, Télé-Université, 100 Sherbrooke, O. 
Montreal, QC, H3C 3P8, Canada 
Jacqueline.bourdeau@licef.ca 
 
 
Abstract - The international business and traditional business 
intelligence face challenges in successfully adapting to cultural 
diversity. This paper introduces cultural intelligence as a new 
perspective and a new way to alleviate these challenges.  
Furthermore, based on soft computing technology, this 
research aims to invent a cultural intelligence computational 
model and to implement the model in an expert system. In the 
cultural intelligence domain, this paper presents how this 
model deals with linguistic variables, soft data and human 
decision making with hybrid neuro-fuzzy technology, which 
also possesses parallel computation and the learning abilities.  
Keywords - Cultural Intelligence, Decision Making, Fuzzy 
Logic, Artificial Neural Network, Soft-Computing. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Globalization has dramatically changed the way 
business is conducted. It has intensified worldwide social 
relations and connected workers in distant localities, making 
local concerns global and global concerns local. Individuals, 
companies and organizations have capitalized on this reality 
to establish centers in different countries in order to develop 
their international business activities. In this new reality, 
individuals, companies and organizations must form global 
strategic alliances to deal with worldwide competitors, 
suppliers and customers [1]. When confronted with cultural 
diversity, some are able to make appropriate decisions and 
adapt successfully to the new cultural business environment 
[2], while others are not. What is the decisive factor for 
these opposing responses? How can good decisions be made 
in culturally diverse business environments [3] ?  
In recent years, researchers have shown a vast interest in 
globalization and intercultural management. Ang and Earley 
introduced the concept of cultural intelligence (CQ) to the 
social sciences and management disciplines in 2003 [4]. CQ 
has, therefore, been presented as a new phenomenon 
capable of answering the above-mentioned questions [5]. 
Organizational 
psychology 
and 
human 
resource 
management have paid a great deal of attention to CQ since 
its introduction. These fields of study have yielded valuable 
results that apply to the real business world.  
However, since Earley and Ang put forward the concept 
of CQ in 2003, there has been no research on CQ with 
artificial intelligence (AI) technology with the purpose of 
assisting  individuals, companies and organizations in 
making good decisions in order to function effectively in 
this culturally diverse environment. Indeed, most current 
studies pertaining to CQ do not integrate any AI technology. 
The current state of CQ research in AI leaves an important 
gap in our understanding of what individuals, companies 
and organizations need to function effectively in this global 
work environment. In addition, traditional business 
intelligence (BI) has encountered two challenges: the first 
involves determining the means of adapting to cultural 
diversity; the second pertains to treating cultural soft data 
for decision making [6]. Our claim is that when CQ is 
applied to individuals, companies and organizations in the 
fields of business, it should be computerized. 
This research attempts to offer effective solutions to the 
aforementioned problems. It is the first attempt to invent a 
computational model of CQ implemented in an intelligent 
system to resolve cross-cultural business challenges. The 
main reason for inventing such a system is that, in the real 
business world, there are not enough qualified cultural 
experts to help users make better business decisions, and 
these experts may lose some of their effectiveness after long 
consecutive hours of work. Moreover, the sphere of 
application has been confined to cultural experts and 
researchers. From a user’s point of view, this research offers 
an intelligent system that behaves like an efficient team of 
top cultural experts that works continuously with users. 
Furthermore, this system has the potential to achieve better 
performance results than human experts.  
There are three goals behind such a system that aims to 
help individuals, companies and organizations cooperate 
more effectively with people from different cultural 
backgrounds: (1) to assist them in their business decision-
making processes involving cultural affairs; (2) to assist 
them in improving their CQ capacity, which would be 
particularly well suited to overseas assignments [4]; and (3) 
to facilitate the work of researchers and to equip them with 
more effective tools in their studies on CQ.  
This paper consists of eight sections, which is highly 
focused on the conceptual-theoretical background of CQ 
computational model and the general architecture of our 
system. In Section I, we state the research question and 
research objectives. In Section II, we briefly discuss the 
concepts that are applied to this research, in particular the 
concept of CQ and its dimensions. In this section, the 
relationship between business and CQ will be present. Also 
included is our CQ conceptual model; on the basis of this 
model, we create our CQ computational model. In Section 
III, we provide a detailed explanation of our AI technology 
choices applied to our computational model. Furthermore, 

137
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
we introduce the theory of fuzzy and fuzzy rules that are 
applied to our system. In Section IV, we discuss the 
fundamental CQ computational model. In Section V, we 
demonstrate how our computational model is implemented 
into an expert system. We present the structure of our 
system and identify the main modules in the structure, and 
we explain how these modules work. In addition, we explain 
how we collect and analyze data and knowledge in the CQ 
domain for our system in order to make its design more 
explicit. In Section VI, we present an overview of the 
system’s cognitive architecture and its cognitive processes. 
In Section VII, we explain the details of the evaluation of 
our computational model and the system. Finally, in Section 
VIII, we state the contributions of this research. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW AND RELATED WORK 
This research draws from many different fields, each 
with its own richness, peculiarities and complexities. We 
attempt to bring the many concepts, points of views and 
propositions to work together. As such, the discovery of a 
global theory is an appropriate first step for our research and 
providing a clear view of what is generally understood is a 
necessity in this first step.  
CQ is based on two basic concepts: one is culture, and 
the other is intelligence. In this section, we first define the 
concept of culture. We then explain the concept of 
intelligence. We present definitions of CQ and its 
dimensions from the different points of view of various 
researchers and explain the links between CQ and business.  
A. Culture 
According to a dictionary definition, culture is: “the 
totality of socially transmitted behavior patterns, arts, 
beliefs, institutions, and all other products of human work 
and thought’’ (The American Heritage Dictionary of the 
English language, Fourth Edition, 2000). Dictionary 
definitions of culture can incorporate multiple elements such 
as history, common traits, geographical location, language, 
religion, race, hunting practices, music, agriculture, art, etc.  
Culture is not something that has an existence outside of 
the actions and experiences of the individuals who reproduce 
it. Culture is a context; it informs and shapes individual 
behavior only as it is simultaneously reproduced and 
reinforced by that very behavior. Cohen et al. propose a 
definition of culture [7]: “Culture is an information pool that 
emerges when members of a community attempt to make 
sense of the world and each other as they struggle and 
collaborate with each other to get what they want and need 
(e.g., food, sex, power, acceptance, etc.). Because individuals 
construct their conceptions of the world from their own 
experiences 
and 
for 
their 
own 
motivations, 
their 
understandings vary from one another depending on the 
characteristics of the individuals, the nature of the domain 
learned, and the social situations in which learning takes 
place’’.  
Hofstede [8] defines culture as subjective and considers 
national culture to be a part of a greater global culture. 
Hofstede [9] states that culture is a structure of collectively 
held values and collective mental programming, which 
separate or distinguish various groups of people from others. 
He believes that although there may be various subcultures, 
all nations share a national culture. Hofstede identifies the 
three levels in his model of collective mental programming 
as human nature, culture, and personality (see Fig. 1). All 
three levels of mental programming have an impact on how 
individuals react to their environment. Human nature plays a 
role in the development of culture over time, as well as in the 
development of people. An individual’s culture, although it 
can be the same among a group of people, differs slightly 
with each individual, as an individual may act and behave 
slightly differently than others in his/her culture group due to 
the influence of human nature and personality. An 
individual’s personality indirectly influences culture as it 
plays a role in how an individual accepts or rejects various 
parts of his/her culture. 
 
Figure 1.  Three Levels of Mental Programming (Hofstede, 1980) 
B. Intelligence 
Early research in academic settings tended to view 
intelligence narrowly as the ability to grasp concepts and 
reason correctly with abstractions and solve problems [10]. 
Sternberg et al. [11] identified a new type of intelligence 
known as real-world intelligence. They declared that 
intelligence may be displayed in places other than the 
classroom and focuses on specific content domains. In our 
review of the literature, we found about twenty definitions 
of academic and ‘real-world’ intelligence. Although an 
extraordinary diversity is found within these definitions, 
there are striking commonalities as well. To better 
understand the conceptions of intelligence, we classify and 
summarize the domains referred to by Sternberg et al. [11] 
in Table 1, which covers the majority of definitions of 
intelligence. The framework does not capture the detail of 
any single definition; it shows, however, the degree to 
which there exists a consensus among theorists regarding 
the broad outlines of a definition of intelligence. 
Furthermore, it shows how quite diverse conceptions of 
intelligence all have a certain basic premise in common. 
As we can see in the Table 1, theorists identify three 
main loci of intelligence: (1) intelligence within the 
individual; (2) intelligence within the environment; and (3) 
intelligence within the interaction between the individual and 
the environment. Within these three main loci, there are a 
number of more specific definitions of intelligence. 
 

138
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
1) 
Intelligence within the Individual 
Theorists identifying intelligence as existing within the 
individual define three main levels:  
TABLE 1.        OVERVIEW OF DEFINITIONS OF INTELLIGENCE (STERNBERG 
ET AL., 1986) 
 
 
a) Biological level, which can be established either 
across or within organisms. Intelligence can be viewed 
within the context of the evolution of a single species and 
the genetics of that species, or within the interaction 
between the evolution of an interspecies and the genetics of 
that interspecies. Within organisms, intelligence can be 
viewed in terms of the structure of the organism, or in terms 
of process. Furthermore, it is possible to look at the 
interaction between structure and process. 
b) Molar level emphasizes three principal aspects of 
mental functioning: 
 Cognitive Aspect: This deals with three main kinds 
of cognition: (1) Metacognition; (2) Cognition; and 
(3) the interaction between Metacognition and 
Cognition. Metacognition refers to knowledge 
about and control of one’s cognition. Cognition 
refers to what is known and controlled by 
metacognition. Cognitive theorists place a great 
deal of importance on the interaction between 
metacognition and cognition for individuals to 
function intelligently; metacognition must be 
modified to accommodate cognition and vice versa. 
Both aspects of functioning seem to be a necessity 
for cognitive theorists, regardless of what they are 
called or how they are classified. 
 Motivational Aspect: Motivational theorists argue 
that there is more to intelligence than cognition and 
that 
motivation 
must 
also 
be 
taken 
into 
consideration. 
Three 
principal 
properties 
of 
motivation need to be considered: (1) the level of 
the motivation; (2) the direction of the motivation; 
and (3) the interaction between the level and 
direction of motivation. An individual may have the 
motivation to learn, but this motivation may not be 
equally directed to all kinds of learning; therefore, 
it is necessary to take direction into account. 
Intelligence is affected not only by the amount of 
learning, but also by the kinds of learning, and both 
the amount and kind of learning are affected by 
motivation. 
 Behavioral level: This is an analysis of what one 
does rather than what one thinks about. Behavioral 
theorists argue that intelligence resides in one’s 
behavior rather than in the mental functioning that 
gives rise to the behavior.  
2) 
Intelligence within the Environment 
Some theorists view intelligence as residing within the 
environment, either as a function of one’s culture and 
society, or as a function of one’s niche within the culture and 
society, or both. In essence, culture determines the very 
nature of intelligence. The culture, society or niche within 
the culture and society is generally a function of the demands 
of the environment in which people live, the values held by 
the people within that environment and the interaction 
between these demands and values. 
3) 
Intelligence within the Interaction between the 
Individual and the Environment 
Many theorists define intelligence as the interaction 
between the individual and the environment. Understanding 
intelligence may be facilitated by considering the interaction 
of people with one or more environments and by recognizing 
the possibility that people may be differentially intelligent in 
different environments, depending on the demands of these 
various environments. 
C. Cultural Intelligence and its Dimensions  
In the literature, researchers have different opinions 
regarding the concept of CQ. Earley and Ang [12] present 
CQ as a reflection of people’s ability to collect and process 
information, to form judgments, and to implement effective 
measures in order to adapt to a new cultural context. They 
also indicate that CQ should predict performance and 
adjustment outcomes in multicultural situations when an 
individual is faced with diversity. Earley and Mosakowski 
[13] redefine CQ as the ability of managers to deal 
effectively with different cultures. They suggest that CQ is a 
complementary form of intelligence, which may explain the 
capacity to adapt to cultural diversity, as well as to operate 
in a new cultural setting. Peterson [14] interprets CQ in 
terms of its operation. He believes that the concept of CQ is 
compatible with the cultural values of Hofstede and their 
five main dimensions [15], i.e., individualism versus 
collectivism, masculinity versus femininity, power distance, 
uncertainty avoidance, and short- and long-term orientation. 
Brisling et al. [16] define CQ as the level of success people 
obtain when adapting to another culture. Thomas [17] [18] 
explains CQ as the ability to interact efficiently with people 
who are culturally diverse. Ng and Earley [19] present CQ 
as the ability to be effective in all cultures. Johnson et al. 
[20] define CQ as the ability of an individual to integrate a 

139
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
set of knowledge, skills and personal qualities so as to work 
successfully with people from different cultures and 
countries, both at home and abroad.  
Researchers in this field also use different dimensional 
structures to measure CQ. All of this research is associated 
with conceptual models. These structures seek first to 
explain the attributes that enable people to develop their 
abilities in various cultural contexts, and then to determine 
how people can improve these capabilities. Earley and Ang 
[21] present the first structure of CQ, which integrates the 
following three dimensions: Cognition, Motivation and 
Behavior. While Thomas [22] agrees with this tridimensional 
CQ, he does not share their point of view regarding what 
these three dimensions should be. Therefore, he advocates 
another tridimensional structure. His belief is founded on the 
theory of Ting-Toomey [23], which states that the structure 
of CQ should be based on the skills required for intercultural 
communication, that is to say, knowledge, vigilance and 
behavior. Vigilance acts as a bridge connecting knowledge 
and behavior, which is the key to CQ. Tan [2] believes that 
CQ has three main components: (1) strategic thinking about 
culture; (2) dynamics and persistence; and (3) specific 
behaviors. Tan stresses the importance of behavior as being 
essential to CQ. If the first two parts are not converted into 
action, CQ is meaningless. Ang et al. [6] subsequently 
suggest a multifactor construct based on Sternberg and 
Detterman’s framework of general intelligence [11]. CQ 
similarly focuses on a specific domain-intercultural setting of 
intelligence, and is motivated by the practical reality of 
globalization in the business workplace [12]. They divide 
CQ into metacognitive CQ, cognitive CQ, motivational CQ 
and behavioral CQ. This structure has been widely used in 
the following cultural research and studies. Here, we give 
more details of the role of each of the four CQ dimensions 
from their work: 
1) 
Metacognitive CQ is the critical dimension that  
enables users to move beyond cultural stereotypes and to 
know when and how to apply their cultural knowledge. 
Individuals with a high metacognitive CQ are aware of 
unique individual characteristics, such as diversity within 
cultures and the influence that context has on behavior. 
They know when to suspend judgment and when to look for 
additional cues. Consequently, they engage in more 
appropriate behaviors in different intercultural situations. 
2) 
Cognitive CQ emphasizes the knowledge of 
cultural values and orientations, as well as the knowledge of 
cultural universals such as the legal, political, economic and 
social systems of different cultures. This knowledge 
provides a useful starting point for users in their interactions 
with others. Users with a high cognitive CQ understand key 
issues and differences in behaviors. This helps them to adapt 
their own behaviors appropriately according to the situation, 
and consequently, to interact more effectively with people 
from a culturally different society. 
3) 
Motivational CQ provides the important drive for 
users to persist in intercultural interactions. Users with a 
high motivational CQ are likely to direct more energy 
toward learning and understanding cultural differences. 
They are likely to persist and practice new behaviors even 
when faced with challenges.  
4) 
Behavioral CQ enables users to enact appropriate 
behaviors. Effective intercultural interactions require users 
to possess a high behavioral CQ and to enact the desired 
behaviors. Effective intercultural interactions require 
competences in both verbal language and nonverbal 
behaviors such as gestures and displays of emotion. 
Individuals with a high behavioral CQ are able to adapt to 
their situation and display the appropriate behaviors.  
D. Cultural Intelligence and Business 
Business is becoming increasingly globalized, and 
partnerships are a means to gain a competitive advantage. 
We believe that cultural differences have a greater impact 
on cross-cultural business efficiency than previously 
thought. Cultural backgrounds influence how people think, 
act and interpret information during business activities. 
Thus, the potential for success or failure depends on the 
ability of organizations and leaders to make appropriate 
decisions within a framework of cultural diversity. 
Businesses and leaders must understand and become 
proficient in intercultural communication. In this regard, CQ 
offers strategies to improve cultural perception and to make 
it possible to understand the culturally motivated behavior 
of individuals, companies and organizations. Many articles 
[24] [25] [26] address the importance of CQ and culture in 
the context of international business [27] [28] [29]. Huber 
[30] indicates that the performance of an international 
business, in terms of efficiency and effectiveness, is 
determined by the quality of its organizational intelligence. 
Ang and Andrew [31] specify that organizational 
intelligence is the CQ of businesses. CQ in business is based 
on the research on psychology concerning the CQ of 
individuals, as well as on the views of the organizations. CQ 
permits businesses to collect a set of resources and to 
develop their capabilities. Ang and Andrew suggest that, 
when organizations venture into foreign territories, CQ is a 
necessary predictor of organizational performance. The 
involvement in international trade offers significant 
advantages and challenges to the business development of a 
company. A business may be successful at home because of 
its cultural sensitivity. However, this does not guarantee that 
it will be able to attract international suppliers, partners and 
customers. If the business does not learn to adapt to cultural 
differences, 
it 
risks 
losing 
and 
missing 
business 
opportunities. A business approach that is culturally 
inappropriate may be detrimental when doing business 
abroad. Knowledge and sensitivity toward other cultures 
result in increased business success. Consequently, CQ is of 
the utmost importance when engaging in international 
business practices. 
In sum, research on CQ has provided a new perspective 
and presented a new way to alleviate cross-cultural 
businesses challenges. This research aims to invent a CQ 
computational model in order to process cultural knowledge 
and to support international business decision-making 
processes. 

140
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
E. Development of our Conceptual Model 
Making a good cross-cultural business decision depends 
on many factors. In the past, cultural scholars used CQ only 
to evaluate an individual's ability to adapt to cultural 
diversity. In this study, we consider the cultural factor, 
which is the effect of CQ on business decision-making 
processes. Thus, the concept of CQ is for the first time 
extended in order to assess cross-cultural business decision 
making. Business decisions with a high CQ are expected to 
have a more effective performance in and adjustment to 
multicultural situations.  
Sternberg et al. [11] state that general intelligence has 
four dimensions, i.e., Metacognition, Cognition, Motivation 
and Behavior. They consider the correlation between the 
four dimensions as an entity and take full account of their 
integrity because of their interdependence. Therefore, we 
assume CQ should also include and consider its four 
dimensions and their correlation. We agree that the four 
dimensions of CQ are critical factors that can help 
individuals, companies and organizations to overcome 
cross-cultural challenges. Thus, the result of the main 
theories we developed from this study is that the diverse 
structures of CQ should be considered collectively in order 
to integrate the elements required to respond to the cultural 
knowledge acquired and to respect the decision-making 
process in cross-cultural business activities. Therefore, we 
created a CQ conceptual model in order to complete the 
theories of CQ and the decision-making process required.  
We present our model as a whole aggregate 
multidimensional construct by considering the following 
conditions: (1) the entire construct considers that the four 
CQ dimensions occupy the same important level in 
conceptualization; and (2) the four CQ dimensions form the 
construct. In sum, in our research we put forward the 
cognitive theory that the metacognitive CQ, cognitive CQ, 
motivational CQ and behavioral CQ are four interrelated 
components built into the CQ, and we integrate our theory 
into the model (see Fig. 2). 
 
 
Figure  2.  Cultural intelligence conceptual model 
This conceptual model proposes a cyclical process of 
CQ decision making in four stages, while respecting the 
correlation 
and 
interdependence 
between 
the 
four 
dimensions: (1) It observes the behaviors, promotes active 
thinking and drives individuals to adapt and revise their 
strategies in different cultural settings; (2) It acquires and 
understands the knowledge that can influence individuals’ 
thoughts and behaviors; (3) It considers the implications and 
emotions associated with cultural settings, and it drives 
efforts and energy toward effective functioning in a new 
culture; and (4) It transfers knowledge through verbal and 
nonverbal behaviors to the culturally diverse situations. This 
process enables us to identify the elements of the global CQ 
so we may apply it as a whole, regardless of whether these 
dimensions are decision variables or other measurable 
parameters. In this process, we adopt a holistic approach 
that does not aim to reduce the model to its individual 
components. 
III. 
CHOICES OF AI TECHNOLOGIES 
Individuals, companies and organizations need research 
combining CQ and AI to support them in decision making 
in international business. We have not yet found any 
research that attempts to combine AI and CQ in the context 
of using CQ knowledge to develop a business intelligent 
system. This is a gap in the present research. Below, we 
present how our work meets the challenge of filling the gap 
between AI and CQ studies for business decision-making 
support.  
A. AI Technologies 
We make use of technology solutions to invent a 
computational model based on our conceptual CQ model 
with many complex behaviors without degrading the 
conceptual model’s overall quality of human-like thinking 
in business activities. Business intelligence generally 
involves two types of data:  the first type consists of 
traditional crisp values, or numbers; the second type is 
uncertain, incomplete and imprecise. This information is 
presented in a manner that reflects human thinking and is 
called "soft data." When we introduce the cultural concept 
to cross-cultural business activities, we usually use soft 
information represented by words rather than traditional 
crisp numbers. The traditional computational technique, 
known as "hard" computing, is based on Boolean logic and 
cannot treat cross-cultural business soft data. In order to 
enable computers to emulate a way of thinking that 
resembles that of humans, and in order to improve CQ soft 
data interpretation, we first used fuzzy logic to design the 
computational model. This technology is capable of 
operating with uncertain, imprecise and incomplete 
information. 
It 
attempts 
to 
model 
a 
human-like 
understanding of words in decision-making processes. 
Fuzzy logic technology is used for three reasons: (1) The 
CQ concepts are described in natural language containing 
ambiguous and imprecise linguistic variables, such as "this 
person has low motivation" and "that project is highly risky 
because of this religion." (2) Fuzzy logic is well suited to 
modeling human decision-making processes when dealing 
with "soft criteria." These processes are based on common 
sense and may contain vague and ambiguous terms [32]. (3) 
Fuzzy logic provides a wide range of business cultural 
expressions that can be understood by computers.  
Although fuzzy logic technology has the ability and 
means to understand natural language, it offers no 
mechanism for automatic rule acquisition and adjustment. 
To remedy this defect, the second technology that we 

141
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
choose is the Artificial Neural Network (ANN). ANN 
presents a viable solution for processing incomplete and 
imprecise business cultural information. ANN can learn 
from historical business cultural cases and manage new data 
input and CQ generalization rules of acquired knowledge 
automatically. ANN technology is used for two reasons: 
first of all, it can be used to extract hidden CQ knowledge in 
large quantities of cultural data; second, ANN can also be 
used to correct CQ fuzzy rules. In other words, where 
acquired CQ knowledge is incomplete, ANN can refine the 
knowledge, and where CQ knowledge is inconsistent with 
some given cultural data, neural networks can revise the CQ 
rules. In our computational model, ANN technology avoids 
the tedious and expensive processes of CQ knowledge 
acquisition, validation, and revision. 
Fuzzy logic and ANN are complementary paradigms in 
our 
computational 
model. 
This 
hybrid 
neuro-fuzzy 
technology makes use of the advantages and power of fuzzy 
logic and of ANN. The soft-computing technology infers the 
characteristics of the CQ in an environment of cultural 
diversity and invents an updated computational model 
taking into account the CQ knowledge. This soft-computing 
technology is able to reason and learn in an uncertain and 
imprecise cultural environment. Soft-computing technology 
represents the essence of our computational model. 
Furthermore, because this hybrid technology is applied 
to our computational model, the model represents both a 
symbolic approach and a connectionist approach. CQ 
symbol representations are the product of human cultural 
work, which means that there is direct access to semantic 
CQ knowledge. CQ knowledge about the external cultural 
world is abstracted via perception and represented using a 
symbolic framework. We use CQ symbol manipulation 
processes to equip the model and logical rule-based 
approaches to apply to the model. The CQ symbols are 
interpreted and reasoned about by using fuzzy logic 
technology. 
This 
technology 
for 
CQ 
symbolic 
representation mechanisms allows the model to reason about 
the external cultural world. This method easily and 
efficiently adapts and interacts with the external world, 
predicts the future and uses reasoning capabilities.  
The connectionist approach that we use in the model is 
ANN; it is the construction of skills through a self-
organizational (behavioral) process in which the model 
interacts in real time with its environment. In the 
connectionist approach, the model depends on the parallel 
processing of non-symbolic distributed activation patterns. 
Contrary to the rule-based fuzzy logic that we used in the 
symbolic approach, statistical methods are applied in order 
to process information in this part. 
B. Linguistic Variables and Fuzzy Rules 
The concept of fuzzy logic is not only a technology but 
also a new philosophical concept in the cultural domain. At 
the heart of fuzzy logic lies the concept of a linguistic 
variable. The idea of linguistic variables is one basis of the 
fuzzy set theory. A linguistic variable is a fuzzy variable. 
The cultural values of linguistic variables are words rather 
than numbers. For example, when we say "Cultural 
Intelligence is high," it means that the linguistic variable of 
CQ takes the linguistic value high. We use IF-THEN fuzzy 
rules to incorporate the knowledge of human cultural 
experts. Thus, our linguistic variables are used in fuzzy 
rules. For example:  
Rule 1: 
IF   
metacognition is high AND cognition is 
high AND motivation is high AND 
behavior is high 
THEN    
CQ is high 
The fuzzy set operations used in our system are 
Intersection and Union. For example, the fuzzy operation 
used to create the Intersection of two fuzzy sets A and B is 
as follows:  
     ( )     [  ( )   ( )]    ( )    ( )            
The operation to form the Union of two fuzzy sets A and B 
is as follows: 
    ( )     [  ( )   ( )]    ( )    ( )           
The fuzzy sets are shown in Fig. 3. Each universe of 
discourse consists of three fuzzy sets: Low, Medium and 
High. As we can see in Fig. 3, a person who has a score of 
6.8 in fuzzy logic has a membership in the ‘High’ set with a 
degree of 0.2. At the same time, he/she has also a 
membership in the ‘Medium’ set with a degree of 0.15 This 
means that a person with a score of 6.8 adheres partially to 
several sets. 
 
Figure 3.  Three fuzzy sets: Low, Medium, and High fuzzy sets 
As we explained above, our hybrid neuro-fuzzy 
computational model uses AI technologies and combines the 
advantages of fuzzy logic and ANN. It can be trained to 
develop IF-THEN fuzzy rules. CQ expert knowledge is 
easily incorporated into the structure of the neuro-fuzzy 
model. At the same time, the connectionist structure 
prevents fuzzy inference, which would entail a substantial 
computational burden. 
CQ decision making is often based on the intuition, 
common sense and experience of experts. A large number of 
(2) 
(1) 

142
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
fuzzy rules provide us with a means of modeling how  
experts make decisions in cross-cultural activities. Based on 
these rules, users’ decisions can be evaluated and 
appropriate suggestions can be offered by the system. 
IV. 
DESIGNING THE CULTURAL INTELLIGENCE 
COMPUTATIONAL MODEL 
In this section, we explain how to extract cultural 
information from a business decision-making process and 
how to assess decisions through our CQ computational 
model. The purpose of creating our computational model is 
to help users make decisions in cross-cultural activities. 
A. Computational Model 
On the basis of our whole aggregate multidimensional 
CQ conceptual model (see Fig. 2), we computerize this CQ 
conceptual model into a CQ computational model.  
The model is a multilayer neural network that is 
functionally equivalent to a fuzzy inference model. It uses a 
technique called the fuzzy inference method by Mamdani 
[33]. Fig. 4 illustrates an example of the application of this 
technique in the model through the use of triangular sets.  
 
Figure 4.    Example of Mamdani-Style fuzzy inference using triangular 
sets 
We define the fuzzy inference model as having four crisp 
inputs: Metacognitive CQ, Cognitive CQ, Motivational CQ 
and Behavioral CQ, and as having one output: CQ. For 
example, 
input 
metacognition 
is 
represented 
by 
metacognitive fuzzy sets 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6; output CQ is 
represented by fuzzy sets CQ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. Each row 
represents a rule; each column represents a crisp input 
which determines the degree to which these inputs belong to 
each of the appropriate fuzzy sets. 
Fig. 5 shows the neuro-fuzzy model that corresponds to 
this fuzzy inference model. It is represented with a neural 
network composed of five layers in the model. Each layer of 
the network is associated with a particular step in the fuzzy 
inference process by Mamdani [33]. We also have four 
inputs in our computational model:  Metacognitive CQ, 
Cognitive CQ, Motivational CQ and Behavioral CQ, and 
one output: CQ. 
 
 
We explain the network inference process of the 
computational model as follows: 
 
 
Figure 5.     Computational model of cultural intelligence for decision 
making 
Layer 1 - Inputs: No calculation is made at this layer. Each 
neuron corresponds to an input cultural variable. These 
input values are transmitted directly to the next layer.  
Layer 2 - Fuzzification: Each neuron corresponds to a 
business CQ linguistic label (e.g., High, Medium and Low) 
associated with one of the input CQ variables in Layer 1. In 
other words, the connection of the output, which represents 
the membership value, specifies the degree to which the 
input CQ values belong to the neuron’s fuzzy set. The 
connection is computed at this layer.  
Layer 3 - Fuzzy Rules: The output of a neuron at this layer 
is the cultural fuzzy rules. Each neuron corresponds to one 
CQ fuzzy rule. The CQ fuzzy rule neurons receive inputs 
from Layer 2, which represent CQ fuzzy sets. For example, 
neuron R1 represents CQ rule 1 (Rule 1: IF metacognition is 
high AND cognition is high AND motivation is high AND 
behavior is high THEN CQ is high). Neuron R1 receives 
input from the neurons CQ-MC1 High, CQ-C1 High, CQ-
M1 High and CQ-BEH1 High. 
Layer 4 - Rules Union (or consequence): At this layer, 
neurons have two main tasks: (1) to combine the precedent 
of CQ rules; and (2) to determine the output level (CQ1-
High, CQ2-Medium and CQ3-Low).  
Layer 5 - Combination and Defuzzification: This layer 
combines all the consequential rules and computes the crisp 
output after defuzzification. The composition method "sum-
product" [34] is used. It computes the outputs of the 
membership functions defined by the weighted average of 
their centroids. We apply, in this case, the triangle 
calculation in our computational model, which is the 
simplest calculation of the fuzzy set as shown in Fig. 6.  
 

143
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure  6.  Calculation of cultural intelligence fuzzy sets 
 
The calculation formula (see Equation (3)) of the weighted 
average of the centroids of the clipped fuzzy sets CQ3 
(Low), CQ2 (Medium) and CQ1 (High) is calculated. 
  (                     )  
 
              (    
   )    
              

where a2 and a3  are the respectively center of the medium 
and high triangles; b1, b2 and b3 are the widths of fuzzy sets, 
which correspond to CQ 3, 2 and 1. 
In Fig. 7, we present the first input (MC) of Fig. 5 in 
order to explain the process of obtaining the value of the 
Metacognitive CQ dimension. The other three dimensions, 
i.e., Cognitive CQ, Motivational CQ, and Behavior CQ, 
follow the same process. 
 
Figure 7.  Example of inference to obtain the Metacognition value in the 
computational model 
Fig. 7 shows the neuro-fuzzy model that also respects 
the fuzzy inference model, which has four inputs MC-Q1, 
MC-Q2, MC-Q3 and MC-Q4. The model is composed of 
five layers. Each layer of the neural network is associated 
with the same steps in the fuzzy inference process by 
Mamdani [33]. 
In detail, a business decision in the metacognitive 
dimension can be devised using four aspects. The four 
aspects are expressed in natural language as follows: 1) This 
decision is conscious of the cultural adaptation it uses when 
interacting with people with different cultural backgrounds; 
2) This decision adjusts its cultural adaptation as it interacts 
with people from a culture that is unfamiliar to it; 3) This 
decision is conscious of the cultural adaptation it applies to 
cross-cultural interactions; 4) This decision checks the 
accuracy of its cultural adaptation as it interacts with people 
from different cultures. Thus, we have four inputs to the 
model, which represent these four aspects in the 
metacognitive dimension, and one output: Metacognition 
(MC). 
Layer 1 - Input: Four inputs represent the answers of four 
aspects of users in metacognitive dimension. For example, 
MC-Q1 is the aspect 1 of Metacognitive CQ. These four 
input variables correspond to four neurons (MC-Q1, MC-
Q2, MC-Q3 and MC-Q4), and are transmitted directly to the 
next layer, which is expressed as:  
  ( )    ( )                            
where,   ( ) are the four inputs;   ( ) is the output of the 
four input neurons.  
Layer 2 - Fuzzification: For simplicity, each user answer is 
divided into three fuzzy sets. For example, for aspect 1, the 
input MC-Q1 is represented by three fuzzy sets MC-Q1 
High, Medium and Low. Three other inputs also respect this 
principle, which is represented by the same three fuzzy sets 
High, Medium and Low. We have 12 neurons in this layer. 
Each neuron receives a crisp input and determines the 
membership degree to which this input belongs to the 
neuron’s triangular fuzzy set. A triangular membership 
function by two parameters {a, b} is specified as follows: 
 
                                    
( )    
 
  
  
( )              
 |    |
 
         
 
    
( )    
 
 
                                               
( )     
  
 
                         
 
where a and b are parameters that control the center and the 
width of the triangle,   ( )  is the input, and   ( )  is the 
output.  
Layer 3 - Fuzzy Rule: Every single neuron in this layer 
represents a metacognitive fuzzy rule. For example, R1 
corresponds to Rule 1. The value of yR1 is the output of 
fuzzy rule 1; it also represents the strength of R1. The rule is 
calculated by the fuzzy operation Intersection; therefore, the 
output of neuron yR1 is obtained as: 
   ( )                                      
where                                 are the inputs 
and    ( ) is the output of metacognitive fuzzy rule neuron 
R1. 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 
(6) 

144
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Layer 4 - Rules Union: The neurons in this layer receive 
inputs from the corresponding metacognitive fuzzy rule 
neurons from Layer 3 and combine them. The output of the 
MC is also expressed by fuzzy sets MC High, Medium and 
Low. The fuzzy operation we use is Union. For example, the 
Medium of Metacognition (MCM) is expressed as: 
    ( )     (       )       
where          are the inputs and      ( ) is the output in 
Layer 4. 
Layer 5 - Combination and Defuzzification: Each neuron 
represents a single output of the network. We need to 
combine them into a single fuzzy set. The combined output 
fuzzy set must be defuzzified. Here, we use the same 
calculation and principle as for the CQ to calculate 
Metacognition; the formula is given as follows: 
     
 
                  (    
   )      
                    
 
where MCH represents the metacognitive High, MCM 
represents the metacognitive Medium, and MCL represents 
the metacognitive Low.  
The section above describes our basic concept 
computational model. Applying fuzzy set theory, many 
similar fuzzy inference styles have been built, such as 
Mamdani-style and Sugeno-style. However, in this real 
practical research, many computational bottlenecks are 
needed to break through when implementing fuzzy 
inference process in a neural network.  
B. Supervised Learning 
One of the main properties of the model is supervised 
learning, which has the ability to learn from CQ expert 
experiences and to improve performance by modifying the 
CQ rules through learning. Supervised learning involves 
cultural inputs and cultural outputs that are available to our 
multilayer neuro-fuzzy network. The task of the network is 
to predict or adjust inputs to the desired outputs. 
This multilayer neuro-fuzzy network can apply standard 
learning algorithms, such as back-propagation, to train it. 
The network offers a mechanism for automatic IF-THEN 
rule acquisition and adjustment. This mechanism is very 
useful, especially in situations where cultural experts are 
unable to verbalize the knowledge or problem-solving 
strategy they use. 
The principle of the back-propagation algorithm in 
supervised learning in our model is that we provide the 
model with the final external CQ data that supervised 
learning requires; these data represent the results of a user’s 
decision. Each case contains the original input cultural data 
and the output data offered by CQ human experts to be 
produced by the model. The model compares actual output 
with the CQ experts’ data during the training process. If the 
actual output differs from the data given by experts in the 
training case, the model weights are modified.  
 
Figure 8.  Back-propagation in CQ Neuro-Fuzzy network learning 
Figs. 5 and 7 explain neuro-fuzzy inference structure.  
Fig. 8 shows how to train this neuro-fuzzy network. It is 
from one part of our Fig. 7 with three layers (Input layer, 
Hidden layer and Output layer), as an example to illustrate 
how the neuro-fuzzy network learns by applying the back-
propagation algorithm. MC-Q1 and MC-Q4 refer to neurons 
in the input layer; MC-Q1High, MC-Q2 Medium and MC-
Q1Low refer to neurons in the hidden layer; and R1, R2 and 
Rn refer to neurons in the output layer. We explain our 
model’s learning process theory in three steps as follows: 
Step 1 - Input Signals: We input signals from MC-Q1 to 
MC-Qn into the model; these signals are propagated through 
the neuro-fuzzy network from left to right, while the  
difference signals (or error signals) are propagated from 
right to left.  
Step 2 - Weights Training: To propagate difference 
signals, we start at the output layer and work backward to 
the hidden layer. The difference signal at the output of 
neuron R1 at sequence s is calculated as follows: 
   ( )       ( )      ( )  
where      ( ) is the cultural experts’ desired output data of 
neuron R1 at iteration s.    ( ) is the difference between the 
output     ( )  and the experts’ desired output data at 
iteration . For example, we use a forward procedure method 
to update the CQ rules’ weight           . Rule R1 for 
updating weight at the output layer at iteration s is defined 
as: 
 
         (   )           ( )            ( ) 
 
where           ( ) represents the weight correction of 
the MC-QHR1 at iteration s. 
Step 3 – Iteration: We increase iteration s by one and 
repeat the process until the preset difference criterion is 
satisfied.  
(7) 
(8) 
(10) 
(9) 

145
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Following the above three-step learning procedure, we 
give a concrete example to show how the model obtains the 
desired value after learning. Suppose we have collected five 
people's input data, and get five corresponding CQ results 
from the output of the model as: y = [5, 6, 7, 3, 2]. On the 
other hand, the cultural experts give five desired CQ output 
values as: yd = [7, 7, 6.5, 4.5, 7]. We now use these five 
pairs of input data and desired values to train the model.  
We use this example with two different training 
algorithms to compare how the computational model learns. 
This approach facilitates the comparison of the results of 
two different algorithms that we used in our training 
process. The first algorithm considers the balance of the 
five-layer network and the generalization of the model. As 
shown in Fig. 9, after the training with 10 epochs (an epoch 
is the presentation of an entire training set to the model 
during 
training.) 
The 
vertical 
axis 
(Training-Blue) 
represents the difference (or error) between the system 
outputs and the targets.  
 
 
 
 
Figure   9.   Learning algorithm 1 in computational model 
However, 
the 
model 
learns 
very 
slowly. 
The 
computational model stops learning after 10 epochs, and the 
model reproduces five final results that still differ from the 
desired CQ output values. For example, the first desired data 
requires 7; after training, the model shows the training result 
7.062, with a difference of -0.0620. Thus, as the message 
shows, our performance goal has not quite reached the 
desired value. 
We use the second algorithm to train the model. This 
training method does not consider the balance of the neuro-
fuzzy network and the generalization of the model. After 9 
epochs training processes, we get the new output from the 
model as: y = [7, 7, 6.5, 4.5, 7], shown in Fig. 10.  
 
 
 
Figure  10.  Learning algorithm 2 in computational model 
The output of the model quite accurately resembles the 
desired CQ values yd = [7, 7, 6.5, 4.5, 7] from the cultural 
experts, and we believe our computational model has 
reached the training goal, that is to say, the model has the 
ability to learn new CQ knowledge. 
In this model, we only change the weights following the 
fuzzy rules layer. In order to prevent an overfitting problem, 
we prefer the algorithm 1. However, a detailed description 
of learning algorithms is beyond the scope of this paper. The 
algorithm criterion is that it not only guarantees training 
speed but also considers balance and generalization in our 
neuro-fuzzy computation model. Fig. 11 shows another 
graphic in three dimensions that demonstrates how the 
neuro-fuzzy network converts bad rules weights into the 
desired CQ rules weights. 

146
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
a) 
Bad rules  
 
      b)      Desired rules 
Figure  11.     Example of the result after supervised learning 
V. 
IMPLEMENTING THE MODEL IN AN EXPERT 
SYSTEM 
This section presents the general conceptual structure of 
our system, which includes three parts. First, we explain 
why we implemented our computational model in an expert 
system. Second, we describe the structure of the system. 
Third, we provide details of the CQ domain by collecting 
and analyzing both data and knowledge thus making key 
concepts of the system design more explicit. 
A. Why an Expert System 
In the preceding sections, we presented the two basic 
premises of our computational model through the 
application of soft computing: (1) to study the thought 
processes of human cultural experts; (2) to represent these 
thought processes for computer use; and (3) to be capable of 
acquiring, extracting and analyzing the new knowledge of 
cultural experts. In this section, we want the system should 
be able to express knowledge in a form that is easily 
understood by users and deal with simple requests in natural 
language rather than a programming language. Second, the 
system should act as would an efficient team of cultural 
experts capable of making decisions and providing 
explanations in the decision-making process in culturally 
diverse settings. Hence, we integrated the computational 
model into an expert system, which is designed to mimic the 
decision making of human experts [35] [36].  
B.  Cultural Intelligence Decision Support System 
 The system is called the Cultural Intelligence Decision 
Support System (CIDSS). The CIDSS represents CQ 
knowledge through the heuristic manipulation of a CQ 
database center. The CIDSS has three application domains: 
Business Activities, Expatriate Assignments and Business 
Project Evaluation. Fig. 12 illustrates the general structure 
of the CIDSS. The structure includes four main modules: 
1) 
The 
CQ 
Computional 
Model 
contains 
CQ 
knowledge that is useful for solving business cultural 
problems. The Cultural Intelligence Model in this structure is 
represented by the trained neural-fuzzy network. This 
module supports all the cultural decision-making steps in the 
system. It connects with three different units: New Data, 
Training Data and the Cultural Intelligence Database 
Center. New data include users’ requests for solving a given 
problem that involves cultural business affairs. Training 
Data are a set of training examples that are used for training 
the network during the learning phase. The Cultural 
Intelligence Database Center predominantly contributes to 
the knowledge gathered from the data about different cultural 
aspects, which have been collected from different countries. 
  
 
Figure  12.  General deployment structure of CIDSS 
2) 
The Cultural Intelligence IF-THEN Rules examine 
the CQ knowledge base, which is represented by the 
computational model, and produce rules which are 
implicitly “buried” in the neuro-fuzzy network.  
3) 
The Inference Engine is the core of the CIDSS. It 
controls the flow of business cultural information in the 
system and initiates inference reasoning from the CQ 
knowledge base. It also concludes when the system has 
reached a decision.  
4) 
The Explanation clarifies to the user why and how 
the CIDSS has achieved the specific business cultural 
decsions. These explanations include analyses, advice, 
conclusions and other facts required for deep reasoning.  
As 
a 
hybrid 
intelligent 
system, 
it 
provides 
comprehensive and global solutions and forms a system of 
rules capable of adapting to a multicultural environment. 
This is the context in which the CIDSS was born. We 
combined two intelligent technologies: hybrid neural-fuzzy 
and expert system. The hybrid neural-fuzzy technology 
ensures that  the CIDSS is capable of reasoning and learning 
in an uncertain and imprecise business cultural environment. 
The expert system, meanwhile, uses the knowledge of 
cultural experts and inference procedures in order to solve 
difficult problems normally requiring human expertise in the 

147
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
CQ domain. This synergy improves adaptability, fault-
tolerance robustness and speed of system.  
The CIDSS possesses generic CQ and is not specific to a 
particular culture, such as that of the United States or China. 
The system shows big capabilities of cultural adaptation by 
modeling the human decision-making process in situations 
characterized by cultural diversity. Furthermore, due to its 
intricate cultural schemas and analytical abilities, the system 
can help users identify and understand key issues in cultural 
judgment and decision making. It also gives them the 
corresponding explanations. In this research, C/C++ is 
chosen as the programming language. 
C. Data and Knowledge Acquisition 
When more CQ knowledge has been collected, the 
system becomes stronger. CQ Data for the CIDSS are often 
collected from different sources, there are four different 
types of data in the CIDSS: (1) incompatible data, which is 
often the data we want to store in code and numbers in 
packed decimal format; (2) inconsistent data, which is often 
the same facts represented differently in CQ databases; (3) 
missing data, considered as actual cultural data records that 
often contain blank fields. We usually infer useful 
information from them and fill in the blank fields with 
average values; and (4) examples of previous CQ data that 
we use to train the neuro-fuzzy network. For example, we 
use a self-assessment questionnaire developed by Ang et al. 
[4] as the input data to CIDSS. This questionnaire has 20 
items that measure CQ and was used to collect data for 
studies on the test subjects regarding their capacity for 
cultural adaptation.   
In the process of knowledge acquisition in the CQ 
domain, we collect CQ knowledge by reading books and 
reviewing documents, manuals, papers, etc. We also collect 
additional information by interviewing cultural experts. 
During a number of interviews, cultural experts are asked to 
identify some typical cases, describe how they solve each 
case and explain the reasoning behind each solution. 
However, extracting knowledge from a human expert is a 
difficult process. Usually, cultural experts are unaware of 
the knowledge they have and the problem-solving strategy 
they use and they are often unable to verbalize these. 
Experts may also provide us with incomplete, inconsistent 
or irrelevant information. We then analyze the acquired 
knowledge and repeat the entire process. The example of 
CQ knowledge acquisition is given in Section III.  
VI. 
CIDSS COGNITIVE ARCHITECTURE 
As we mentioned in Section III, the CIDSS uses both the 
symbolic and the connectionist approaches of AI. The 
CIDSS respects the cognitive concepts regarding global CQ 
theories and details how the human mind works in decision-
making processes. Noubel [37] considers that a decision-
making process follows four major steps and describes how 
the path from idea to the action is organized in decision 
making. The sequence is used of the basis of the analysis in 
our cognitive cycle architecture: 
1) 
The reflection level: Intelligence mobilizes and 
cross-fertilizes 
available 
knowledge 
via 
a 
refined 
synchronous or asynchronous dialogue, either through face-
to-face contact or remotely. Dialogues draw on new 
horizons, allow the anticipation of conflicts, and prepare all 
decision makers for consensus.  
2) 
The options formulation level:  This level owes its 
quality to upstream thinking. This is a sensitive step that 
requires as much objectivizing of object-links (i.e., projects, 
threats, needs, etc.) as with elimination processes that 
require strong knowledge mobilization. It usually leads to a 
final option.  
3) 
 Selection of the final option: If steps 1 and 2 are 
managed with intelligence, then the selection of the final 
option is much easier. Candidate options are richer, more 
detailed, more flexible, and ultimately more representative. 
4) 
The action level: This level engages new 
intelligence 
processes, 
knowledge 
interaction 
and 
operational coordination between decision makers. The 
cycle from steps 1 to 4 is permanent and self-inclusive. It 
functions like an endless spiral.  
The CIDSS also relies on engineering concepts in its 
solutions for the design and implementation of software 
information. It offers better learning mechanisms, which 
emulate human intelligence. The CIDSS is a distributed and 
modular architecture. It relies on the functional “cultural 
consciousness” mechanism for much of its operations. Its 
modules communicate and offer information to each other. 
By using its cognitive cycle, the CIDSS recognizes 
business-related information in natural language from its 
complex 
environment. 
The 
CIDSS 
influences 
its 
environment by offering a decision or recommendation to 
users. Fig. 13 describes the cognitive architecture of CIDSS.  
 
Figure 13.  Cognitive architecture of CIDSS 
The three main parts of the architecture are: (1) The 
Input Process presents information or a phrase in natural 
language, which expresses a user’s demand via the input of 
the user interface. Through the Identify Unit to distinguish 
which domain the user wants to consult, the Filter and 
Classifier module takes the inputted information, classifies 
it, and filters what is not useful for analysis in the next 
steps; (2) The Decision Making Process is a neural network 
with fuzzy inference model capabilities. The system can be 
trained to develop IF-THEN CQ fuzzy rules and can 

148
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
determine membership functions for input and output 
variables. 
This 
module 
has 
four 
sub-modules: 
Metacognition (MC), Cognition (C), Motivation (M) and 
Behavior (BEH); (3) The Recommendation explains the 
results of decision making to users in natural language and 
provides suggestions. 
The following describes these steps, which correspond 
to the numbers inside the rectangles in Fig. 13. 
Step 1: The business information is in natural language and 
expresses a problem, a question or a requirement of the user. 
It is input through the user interface. The information enters 
the Identify module, which identifies the information used to 
determine what the user requires. 
Step 2: The business information goes to the Filter and 
Classifier module. In this module, the information is 
classified.  Useful information is filtered from non-useful 
information. The useful information is culturally analyzed in 
the following steps.  
Step 3: To perform this classification, the module is 
associated with the Cultural Intelligence Database Center. 
This center has the necessary data required by the system, 
such as countries, religions, languages and laws.  
Step  4: The classified business cultural data are ready to be 
sent to the Temporary Memory module. This module keeps 
the data temporarily and, at the same time, interacts with the 
other modules.  
Step 5: Modules 5a-Metacognitive, 5b-Congnitive 5c-
Motiviational and 5d-Behavioral collect the business 
cultural data belonging to them in the Temporary Memory.  
Step  6: Each module depends on the consultation of its 
own Permanent Memory. These permanent memory 
modules are 6a for metacognition, 6b for cognition, 6c for 
motivation and 6d for behaviour. Each permanent memory 
represents a complete and specific cultural database that is 
used by its associated module to analyze the business 
cultural information stored in the Temporary Memory.  
Step 7: 7a, 7b, 7c and 7d analyze the business cultural 
information. If data are missing, Permanent Memory 
modules go to the Cultural Intelligence Database Center to 
assist in the cultural analysis of the respective modules. 
Step 8: After the analysis has been completed in each 
module, the four modules interact with each other to adjust 
their respective cultural decisions. This interaction enables 
each module to make a complete and effective decision 
before continuing to the next step. 
Step  9: Following the interaction among the modules of the 
different dimensions of cultural intelligence, the four 
modules in steps 9a, 9b, 9c and 9d send their final cultural 
decisions to the Cultural Intelligence Result module. In this 
module, the decisions of these four modules are generalized 
and offer significant information to the user.  
Step 10: The Explanation module justifies and explains in 
detail using natural language understandable to the user why 
these decisions were presented.  
Step 11: The explanations are sent to the User Interface.  
Figs. 14 and 15 present an example of two outputs of the 
Expatriate Assignment application domain that show how 
the CIDSS can help a user make decisions by taking into 
consideration his/her inputted request. The CIDSS prototype 
system follows the decision-making cycle process shown in 
Fig. 13. The input data are specific business questions in 
natural language provided by users. The system provides 
two outputs as answers to the question. Output 1 (Fig. 14) 
gives a general decision to answer the question put by the 
user.  

Figure 14.  Example of CIDSS prototype system (Output 1) 
Output 2 (Fig. 15) provides more detailed explanations, 
which clarify to the user why the system reached that 
decision. 
 
Figure 15.  Example of CIDSS prototype system (Output 2) 
VII. EVALUATION OF THE MODEL 
Three cultural experts have validated our computational 
CQ model and the CIDSS prototype system. This validation 
ultimately reflects the consistency between the real world 
and the artificial CIDSS system. The CIDSS prototype 
system was also tested with two hundred people by 
measuring their CQ value. The effectiveness and robustness 
of the system is evaluated by carrying out a regression 
analysis on these data. Fig. 16 shows the results of the 
analysis.  
 
 Figure 16.      The regression analysis of two hundred people CQ values  

149
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The correlation coefficient R between the system outputs 
and the corresponding experts’ desired values is calculated, 
R=0.883. After training the system with these data, the final 
R is close to 1. Based on the results of the validation, the 
cultural experts compared the CIDSS results with their own. 
These experts concluded that the cross-cultural business 
decisions recommended by CIDSS are similar to the ones 
suggested by a human expert.  
To date, in the CQ domain, no research on CQ has been 
empirically computerized. This computational model is first 
created with soft-computing technology.  
We also add CIDSS to self-awareness CQ training 
programs as an important means of improving the capacity 
of individuals and organizations to overcome these cross-
cultural challenges. It is critical that employees be able to 
interact effectively with their clients, users, vendors, and 
other professionals from different cultures in today’s global 
workforce. This new work environment requires employees 
to acquire new competencies and unique capabilities in 
order to work effectively beyond traditional cross-cultural 
training. Within this context, the CIDSS provides important 
insights about personal capabilities, as well as information 
on the user’s own CQ in culturally diverse situations. Users 
can get two evaluation (self- and observer evaluations) 
questionnaires available in the CIDSS in order to compare 
their results. Figs. 17 and 18 present two parts of a user’s 
results of the self-evaluation questionnaire in the CIDSS. 
For example, the self-evaluation questionnaire that evaluates 
the user's CQ is presented in the system as follows: 
Result 1: After inputting the answers of the questionnaire to 
a user’s response in the CIDSS, the system provides 
feedback. If a user’s evaluation achieves a high score (e.g., 
greater than 8), the system displays  the following message: 
 
Figure   17.     Result 1- High score: Greater than 8 
Result 2: When the evaluation results are lower than 6, the 
system accordingly gives useful suggestions for personal 
self-development 
as 
required. 
The 
CIDSS 
presents 
recommendations as follows: 
 
Figure  18.   Result 2- Low score: Lower than 6 
This process allows the system first to evaluate the users 
to identify their problems in the CQ domain. The system 
then offers several precise recommendations to users based 
on the results of the evaluation. Moreover, the system uses 
natural language to give users recommendations in order to 
provide the users with a stress-free and friendly evaluation 
environment.  
Organizations could also use the CIDSS (both self- and 
observer evaluations) to train employees for expatriate 
purposes. At this point, the CIDSS serves as an efficient 
team of top CQ experts who accompany individuals or 
organizations that want to have training or insights on how 
to increase their efficiency in culturally diverse settings. 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
To keep up with the pace of globalization, international 
business and traditional BI need to deal with two major 
issues: how to adapt to cultural diversity and how to deal 
with "soft data" or natural language in order to make 
human-like business decisions.  
In order to address these issues, this research attempts to 
build a "culturally aware" system, which helps users make 
decisions in cross-cultural business activities, and enables 
users to solve cultural problems that would otherwise have 
to be solved by cultural experts. Organizations can also use 
the system to evaluate and train employees by providing 
them with specific suggestions to improve their weaknesses 
and develop their cultural skills for expatriate assignments. 
This latter point is of particular importance in modern 
learning theories. 
The other noteworthy points in this research are the 
following: (1) this research treats four CQ dimensions as an 
integrated and interdependent body. As a result, the CQ 
theories are more complete, more efficient and more precise 
in their applications. (2) This research fills that gap between 
CQ and AI. We have made a contribution in the application 
of AI by computerizing CQ. Consequently, this inventive 
research provides the opportunity for delving into new 
research areas and expands the range of intelligence in the 
field of AI. (3) Furthermore, this research simplifies the 
work of researchers by freeing them from heavy, complex, 
repetitive tasks normally carried out manually in the process 
of CQ studies. 
There are some limitations in this research; one of them 
is that it is confined to CQ domain. In the future, there are 
still many aspects to improve such as developing a more 
user friendly interfaces in the commercial version of CIDSS, 
collecting more multicultural data, integrating CIDSS with 
other existing systems. Although the limitations, adapting to 
cultural diversity is a big challenge for the international 
business and traditional BI where this research has 
attempted to give an effective answer. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Z. X. Wu, R. Nkambou, and J. Bourdeau, “Cultural 
Intelligence 
Decision 
Support 
System 
for 
Business 
Activities,” The Second International Conference on Business 
Intelligence and Technology, BUSTECH 2012, Nice, France, 
2012.  

150
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[2] J. S. Tan, “Cultural intelligence and the global economy,” 
Leadership in Action, 24,  pp.19–21, 2004 
[3] Z. H. Gao and C. P. Li, “Research on Cultural Intelligence: 
Review and Prospect,” Advances in Psychological Science, 
Vol. 17, No. 1, pp.180–188, 2009 
[4] S. Ang, and L. Van Dyne, “Handbook of Cultural 
Intelligence,” 1st ed. M.E. Sharpe. Armonk 2008, 2010 
[5] M. Janssens and J. M. Brett, “Cultural intelligence in global 
teams: A fusion model of collaboration,” Group and 
Organization  Management, 31, pp.124–153, 2006 
[6] Z. X. Wu, R. Nkambou, and J. Bourdeau, “The Application of 
AI to Cultural Intelligence, ” The 2012 World Congress in 
Computer Science Computer Engineering and Applied 
Computing-ICAI 2012, The International Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence, Las Vegas, U.S.A. 2012 
[7] H. Cohen and C. Lefebvre,  “Handbook of Categorization in 
Cognitive Science,” Elsevier, Amsterdam, NL. 2005 
[8] G. 
Hofstede, 
“Culture's 
consequences: 
International 
Differences in Work Related Values”. Beverly Hills: Sage. 
1980. 
[9] G. Hofstede, “Cultures and Organizations: Software of the 
Mind”, New York: McGraw Hill. 1997 
[10] F. L. Schmidt and J. E. Hunter, “Select on Intelligence,” In E. 
A. Locke, Ed, The Blackwell HandBook of Organizational 
Principles. Oxford: Blackwell. 2000 
[11] R.Sternberg and K.D. Douglas, “What is Intelligence?” , 
Contemporary Viewpoints on Its nature and definition, Ablex 
publishing corporation, 355 Chestnut Street, Norwood, 
NewJersey 07648, 1986 
[12] P.C. Earler, and S. Ang, “Cultural intelligence: Individual 
interactions across cultures,” Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press, 2003 
[13] P.C. Earley and E. Mosakowski, “Cultural intelligence,” 
Harvard Business Review, 82, pp.139–146,  2004. 
[14] B. Peterson, “Cultural intelligence: A guide to working with 
people from other cultures,” Yarmouth. ME: Intercultural 
Press, 2004. 
[15] G. Hofstede, “Cultures and Organizations: Software of the 
Mind,”  McGraw-Hill, New York, 1991 
[16] R. Brisling, R.Worthley, and B. MacNab, “Cultural 
intelligence: understanding behaviors that serve people’s 
goals,” Group and Organization Management, 2006 
[17] D. C. Thomas and K. Inkson, “Cultural Intelligence People 
Skills for a Global Workforce,” Consulting to Management, 
16 (1). pp. 5-9, March, 2005 
[18] D. C. Thomas, “Domain and development of cultural 
intelligence: The importance of mindfulness,” Group and 
Organization Management, 31, pp.78–99,  2006 
[19] K.Y. Ng and P. C. Earley, “Culture + intelligence: Old 
constructs, 
new 
frontiers,” 
Group 
and 
Organization 
Management, 31, pp. 4–19, 2006 
[20] J. P. Johnson, T. Lenartowicz, and S. Apud, “Cross-cultural 
competence in international business: Toward a definition and 
a model,” Journal of International Business Studies, 37, pp. 
525–543, 2006 
[21] P. C. Earley and S. Ang, “Cultural intelligence: Individual 
interactions,” Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 2003 
[22] D. C. Thomas, “Domain and development of cultural 
intelligence: The importance of mindfulness,” Group and 
Organization Management, 31, pp.78–99,  2006 
[23] S.Ting-Toomey, 
“Communicating 
across 
cultures,” 
NewYork. Guilford, 1999 
[24] S. Ang, L.Van Dyne,  C.K.S. Koh, K. Y. Ng, K.Templer,  J. 
C. Tay, and N. A. Chandrasekar, “Cultural Intelligence: Its 
Measurement and Effects on Cultural Judgment and Decision 
Making, Cultural Adaptation, and Task Performance,” 
Management and Organization Review 3 335–371, 2007 
[25] L. Ottavi, “Cultural Intelligence in the Globalized Work 
Environment, ” December 1, 2009 
[26] G. Hofstede, “The cultural relativity of organizational 
practices and theories,” Journal of International Business 
Studies, 1983 
[27] F. Trompenaars and C. Hampden-Turner,  “Riding the waves 
of culture: Understanding cultural diversity in business,” 
London: Nicholas Brealey Publishing, 1997 
[28] T. Kern and L. P. Willcocks, “Exploring information 
technology outsourcing relationships: Theory and practice,” 
Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 2000 
[29] S. Ang, L.Van Dyne, C.K.S. Koh, and K. Y. Ng, “The 
Measurement of Cultural Intelligence,” Paper presented at the 
2004 Academy of Management Meetings Symposium on 
Cultural Intelligence in the 21st Century, New Orleans, L.A. 
2004 
[30] G. Huber, “A theory of the effects of advanced information 
technologies on organizational design, intelligence, and 
decision-making, ” Academy of Management Review, 1990 
[31] S. Ang and C. I. Andrew, “Cultural Intelligence and Offshore 
Outsourcing 
Success: 
A 
Framework 
of 
Firm-Level 
Intercultural Capability,” Journal compilation, Decision 
Sciences Institute, Decision Sciences Volume 39, Number 3, 
2008 
[32] M. Negnevitsky, “Artificial Intelligence: A Guide to 
Intelligent Systems,” ISBN 0-321-20466-2, British Library 
Cataloguing-in-Publication Data, 2nd Edition, 2005 
[33] E.H. Mamdani and S. Assilian, “An Experiment in Linguistic 
Synthesis with a Fuzzy Logic Controller,” International 
Journal of Man–Machine Studies, 1975 
[34] J.S.R. Jang,  C.T. Sun, and E. Mizutani, “Neuro-Fuzzy and 
Soft Computing: A Computational Approach to Learning and 
Machine Intelligence,” Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ 
1997  
[35] P. Y. K, Chau, “Expert systems and professional services 
marketing,” Journal of Professional Services Marketing, 
vol.7, no.2, pp.79-86. 1991 
[36] M. Steinberg and R. E. Plank, “Implementing Expert Systems 
into Business Marketing Practice,” The Journal of Business 
and Industrial Marketing, vol.5, no.2, pp.15-26, 1990  
[37] J. F. Noubel, “Intelligence Collective : la révolution 
invisible,” The Transitioner.org. 2007 
 
 
 

