Implementing the HERACLES Ontology 
An Ontology as backbone for a Knowledge Base in the Cultural Heritage Protection Domain 
 
Tobias Hellmund 
Fraunhofer IOSB 
Karlsruhe, Germany 
tobias.hellmund@iosb.fraunhofer.de 
Philipp Hertweck 
Fraunhofer IOSB 
Karlsruhe, Germany 
philipp.hertweck@iosb.fraunhofer.de 
Jürgen Moßgraber 
Fraunhofer IOSB 
Karlsruhe, Germany 
juergen.mossgraber@iosb.fraunhofer.de 
 
 
 
Désirée Hilbring 
Fraunhofer IOSB 
Karlsruhe, Germany 
desiree.hilbring@iosb.fraunhofer.de 
Paraskevi Pouli 
Foundation for Research and Technology - Hellas 
Heraklion, Greece 
ppouli@iesl.forth.gr 
Guiseppina Padeletti 
Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, ISMN 
Rome, Italy 
pad@mlib.cnr.it 
 
Abstract—Environmental factors, worsened by the increasing 
climate change impact, represent significant threats to 
European Cultural Heritage (CH) assets. In Europe, the huge 
number and diversity of CH assets, together with the different 
climatological sub-regions aspects, as well as the different 
adaptation policies to climate change adopted (or to be 
adopted) by the different nations, generate a very complex 
scenario. This 
paper will present a 
multidisciplinary 
methodology that will bridge the gap between two different 
worlds: the CH stakeholders and the scientific/technological 
experts. Since protecting cultural heritage assets and 
increasing their resilience against effects caused by the climate 
change is a multidisciplinary task, experts from many domains 
need to work together to meet their conservation goals. In this 
paper we introduce the HERACLES Ontology, which 
structures data and explicitly links adjacent data. Furthermore 
the implementation of the HERACLES Ontology within the 
HERACLES Knowledge Base is described. Use cases and 
benefits of the application are given. The ontology comprises 
the following topics: Cultural Heritage Assets, Stakeholders 
and Roles, Climate and Weather Effects, Risk Management, 
Conservation Actions, Materials, Sensors, Models 
and 
Observations, Standard Operation Procedures/Workflows and 
Damages. 
Keywords – HERACLES, Ontology; Knowledge Base; 
Ontology Visualization; Cultural Heritage; Ontology Population 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Cultural Heritage protection requires multidisciplinary 
teamwork – as discussed in our Paper at the SemaPro 2018 a 
common language is required. An ontology helps to 
explicitly express the knowledge of different domains. The 
presented ontology has been refined and brought to use in 
several modules, which we are going to introduce in this 
paper [1].  
Europe has a significant cultural diversity together with 
exceptional historic architectures and artefact collections that 
attract millions of tourists every year. These incalculable 
values and global assets have to be preserved for future 
generations. Environmental factors, worsened by the 
increasing climate change impact, represent significant 
threats to CH assets such as monuments, historic structures 
and settlements, places of worship, cemeteries and 
archaeological sites. There are almost 400 UNESCO sites in 
Europe, located in different climatic European regions [2], 
[3]. Therefore, eco-compatible solutions and materials for 
the long-term sustainable maintenance and preservation of 
CH in response to the events induced by climate changes are 
a necessity. The research and development of these solutions 
will benefit from an Information and Communication 
platform able to provide a timely up-to-date situational 
awareness about the site, thus supporting decision makers to 
plan the actions necessary for long term and short-term 
158
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

maintenance, intervention and risk management against the 
threats of the climate change. 
Section II, “Related Work” discusses Information and 
Communication Technologies (ICT) and existing ontologies 
and vocabularies in the CH domain. 
Section III, “The HERACLES Project” introduces the 
project in which the ontology is developed and used. 
Section IV presents the creation and content of the 
HERACLES ontology. It covers all relevant domains and 
expands the previous contribution by adding Cultural 
Heritage Elements, Damages, and Reporting to the 
Concepts. 
In Section V, we present the HERACLES Knowledge 
Base (KB) and the HERACLES Mobile Application, in 
which the semantic application of the HERACLES ontology 
proves beneficial. 
Finally, Section VI, “Conclusions and Future Work” 
recapitulates our findings and discusses directions for future 
developments.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
During the last 20 years, there has been an increasing 
interest and demand for specialized scientific technologies 
and methodologies in the CH field. An increasing number of 
experts from different scientific disciplines, such as curators, 
archaeologists, conservators, art historians, scientists and 
engineers, are involved in the analysis and study of CH 
assets and monuments, each one of them using his own 
specialized terminology. To overcome the communication 
gap among the CH experts, it is important to develop tools 
able to solve this issue. Information and Communication 
Technologies can support this interdisciplinary research [4]. 
Firstly, electronic handbooks, web-based knowledge 
platforms together with mobile phone applications, expert 
and decision support systems have been developed to 
improve the handling of the data and to promote the 
dissemination and a better understanding of the scientific 
information from the technical investigations. Above all, 
these ICTs facilitate the cooperation between CH experts. 
Two examples of Web knowledge tools, platforms and 
applications, developed by CH organizations and museums, 
are the following: 
• An interactive website by the TATE Gallery presents 
information about the artworks identity, the materials, the 
structure and the construction technology, the description 
of the conservation steps, the investigation procedures, 
the results and the assessment of their condition state [5]. 
• Diadrasis, a nonprofit organization, has developed an 
online application entitled Viaduct [6], which classifies 
and explains a number of analysis and dating methods 
and provides basic information about the investigation 
methods and the related glossary. 
In parallel, a correct and controlled terminology has 
become 
particularly 
important 
in 
the 
electronic 
documentation and presentation of the assets and of their 
restoration. In this respect, a number of thesauri, terminology 
glossaries, vocabularies and databases have been introduced, 
for example: 
• The Art & Architecture Thesaurus (AAT) is a structured 
vocabulary used to improve the understanding of the 
terms about art, architecture, and material culture [7]. 
• The European illustrated glossary of conservation terms 
for wall paintings and architectural surfaces (EwaGlos) is 
an illustrated glossary of conservation terms translated in 
eleven languages. The core of the glossary includes 
approximately 200 definitions of the terms frequently 
used in the field of the conservation/restoration of the 
wall paintings and of the architectural surfaces [8]. 
• NARCISSE, a European project, has developed a very 
high-resolution image bank, dedicated to the art treasures 
of Europe major museums. A multilingual glossary of 
terms about the conservation of paintings, illustrated with 
various spectral images, was developed [9]. 
• POLYGNOSIS is a web-based knowledge platform, 
designed 
and 
implemented 
with 
an 
educational 
orientation, concerning the optical and laser-based 
investigation methods for the study of CH objects [10]. 
POLYGNOSIS handles information related to the 
analysis of the studied materials and in this respect it 
offers an important background for the HERACLES 
ontology regarding the characterization of materials.  
The design process of the HERACLES ontology 
included the research and analysis of existing ontologies. 
During this, the ontology developed by The International 
Committee for Documentation, an institution of the 
International Council of Museums, CIDOC Conceptual 
Reference Model (CIDOC CRM) was analyzed. CIDOC 
CRM is an ontology intended to facilitate the integration of 
heterogeneous cultural heritage information [11]. It is 
designed since 1996 and has been continuously refined since. 
It offers for cultural heritage and information of interest a 
general data structure, whereas the general purpose are 
museum documentations and exhibition objects shown in 
museums. CIDOC CRM is supra-institutional and can be 
applied independent of any local context. The ontology is 
very progressive at structuring information about the origins 
of an asset, e.g., the creation of an artefact or its 
chronological classification. Yet, the ontology was too 
complex and heavy-weight for the HERACLES project; 
furthermore, it focused mainly on cultural heritage as object 
in an element in an exhibition. Nevertheless, CIDOC CRM 
can be extended with additional models, such as the CRM 
scientific observation model, or the CRM model for 
archeological buildings. 
Acierno et al. introduce in [9] ontological work based on 
CIDOC CRM. The ontology presented ontology expands the 
previously named model by adding buildings and elements 
of buildings through a fine-grained model, which contains 
horizontal and vertical components. Further, it adds 
workflows aiming at the conservation of cultural assets. 
Based on this ontology, a connection between a Building 
159
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Information Modelling Software and the classes describing 
buildings was established, which yielded into a knowledge 
enriched 3D model of the researched artefacts. Both building 
design and knowledge-enriched visualisation are high-grade 
outcome and deserve further examination. 
Zhang et al. introduce an ontology based framework for a 
KB about materials and their compatibilities [13]. This 
domain is important to the HERACLES Project, since 
conservators and restaurateurs often have to find appropriate 
materials with custom properties, on order to repair and 
protect cultural heritage and not worsen its preservation state 
and aesthetics. The focus of this work lies within choosing 
materials for manufacturing processes and omits sensitivities 
or compatibilities of material combinations. Since the 
compatibility of conservation materials used in cultural 
heritage preservation is an important aspect, Zhang’s 
ontology does not meet our requirements. 
In the MONDIS project, Cacciotti et al. developed the 
Monument Damage Ontology [14]. It is suitable for both 
conventional documentation of cultural heritage, as well as 
describing damages occurring on cultural heritage. The 
proposed modelling enables the ontology to distinguish 
between the consequences of an effect (e.g., crack or flaking) 
and the mechanisms that led to it (e.g., temperature changes 
or acid rain). The description of damages and their 
occurrence seems to be well suited for describing damages 
on CH. Also, the authors give suggestions on how to handle 
damages, which are mainly based on historical data. Here, 
the semantics have to be analysed by the reader: no explicit 
semantics for conservation methods are introduced in the 
ontology. 
However, no holistic approach had been undertaken, 
modelling all required domains in an application oriented 
project. Fearing that including new concepts into existing 
ontologies would lead to complexity, it was decided to not 
supplement existing ontologies, but to create a new 
ontological model from scratch trying to keep it as concise as 
possible. The ontology was developed in a workshop with 
stakeholders of the project with in-depth domain knowledge 
background, as described by Moßgraber et al. [15]. Hereby, 
it incorporates all domains that are relevant for the end-users. 
The following sources have been used as reference 
material for the new ontology: the SWEET ontologies 
developed at the NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory [16], the 
materials ontology from Ashino [17] and Open Geospatial 
Consortium (OGC) standards such as the SensorThings 
Application Programming Interface (API) [18] and the 
Internet of Things (IoT) Tasking Capability [19]. 
III. 
THE HERACLES PROJECT 
The main objective of the HERACLES project was to 
design, validate and promote responsive systems and 
solutions for effective resilience of CH against climate 
change effects, considering as mandatory premise a holistic, 
multidisciplinary approach through the involvement of 
different 
expertise 
(end-users, 
industry, 
scientists, 
conservators, restorators and social experts, decision, and 
policy makers) [20]. 
This was pursued with the development of a system 
exploiting an ICT platform able to collect and integrate 
multisource information. With the help of this platform, 
complete and updated awareness was provided. It facilitated 
the integration of innovative measurements improving CH 
resilience, including new solutions for maintenance and 
conservation [21]. 
The validation has taken place on four test sites, namely 
Heraklion in Crete with the Minoan Palace of Knossos and 
the Venetian Sea Fortress of Koules and Gubbio in Italy with 
Consoli Palace and the town walls. These test beds represent 
key study cases for the climate change impact on European 
CH assets. 
The strength of HERACLES solutions is their flexibility 
in evaluating a large quantity of different pieces of 
information utilized via explicit semantic modelling tailored 
to the specific CH assets needs. In this context, end-users 
play a fundamental role. Through consequent end-user focus, 
we aim to develop a complete, yet flexible system that is able 
to embrace other test-beds as well. End-users have an active 
part in the project activities and have permanent access to the 
HERACLES KB, which implements the HERACLES 
ontology presented in this paper. Through the ontology, the 
stored and retrieved knowledge from the KB is language 
independent. 
The HERACLES project endured from May 2017 until 
April 2019. The webpages are still available and will deliver 
information until 2021 [20]. 
IV. 
DESIGN OF THE HERACLES ONTOLOGY 
As outlined in the section “Related Work” we decided to 
create a new concise ontology model. To identify the 
ontological classes and relations, a workshop was held, 
which brought together all stakeholders of the project with 
their different research and domain knowledge backgrounds. 
This group consisted of about 20 persons. For a workshop, 
this number is considered too large, but was necessary due to 
the different required domains.  
The following graphical conventions are used for the 
description of the HERACLES ontology: 
• Green boxes represent concepts; grey boxes represent 
instances. 
• Continuous arrows represent semantic relationships 
between concepts or instances. Inverse relationships are 
omitted for better readability. A label next to an arrow 
describes the relationship. 
• Dashed arrows link subclasses to parent classes. 
• Dotted arrows link instances to their concepts. 
Concepts in the ontology are accompanied by attributes 
(datatype properties). For example, an asset can have 
geographical coordinates or a construction period. For the 
sake of brevity, these are omitted in the ontology pictures. 
160
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

implements
Site
Asset
contains
Cultural 
Heritage
isSubclassOf
Damage
affected
Economic Value
affected
Action
mitigates
Action Type
Damage Type
Risk
Effect Type
mitigatesType
isOfDamageType
causesDamage
impacts
resultsFrom
Cultural Heritage 
Element
hasElement
 
Figure 1.  The main concepts and their object properties of the HERACLES ontology.
The central elements in the ontology are the CH assets 
that need to be protected against the effects of climate 
change. As shown in Figure 1, a top-level class is defined to 
refer to any kind of CH. Risks arise from climate change 
effects which can cause damages to CH.  
A. Cultural Heritage Assets 
Assets, which are the focus of the project, are a subclass 
of CH. The Asset concept is further refined with the concept 
Structure and, below that, Monument, Building or Wall (see 
Figure 2). Via these classes, the actual instances of the test 
beds of the HERACLES project, like the “Knossos Palace”, 
the “Palazzo dei Consoli”, the “Venetian Fortification” and 
the “Gubbio Town wall”, can be included. 
Structure
Settlement
Town
Site
Asset
Building
Wall
Cultural 
Heritage (CH)
isSubclassOf (isSuperclassOf)
 
Figure 2.  Cultural Heritage Asset 
B. Cultural Heritage Element 
In the run of the HERACLES Project, it became clear 
that a Cultural Heritage often grows naturally in the run of 
time and has different trait, characteristics, materials and so 
forth. To take this into account, the class Cultural Heritage 
Element was introduced (Figure 3). It describes parts or 
subparts of a Cultural Heritage, whereas a Cultural Heritage 
Element can also contain another Cultural Heritage Element. 
An example would be the Venetian Fortress in Heraklion, 
which consists of different floors, which again have different 
rooms. 
Cultural 
Heritage (CH)
Cultural Heritage
Element
containsElement
 
Figure 3.  A Cultural Heritage is made up from several Cultural Heritage 
Elements, which can again contain other Cultural Heritage Elements. 
C. Climate Change Effects 
In Figure 4, the distinction between potential, meaning 
things that may occur and facts, in the sense of actual 
occurrences, is emphasized. This distinction applies to 
effects and damage. As an example, the ontology may 
contain flood as a potential effect type that may damage an 
asset. Besides that, the flood episodes that occurred in 
specific years are also registered as actual occurrences in the 
KB. The ontology contains the relationships between 
potential effects (“Effect Type”), follow-up potential effects 
(“leadsToEffect”) and the potential damage (“Damage 
Type”) they may cause. An example with instances for the 
classes shown in Figure 4 is given in Figure 5. The 
parameter Heavy Precipitation can lead to Landslide. If such 
a Landslide hits an asset, it can result in Structural Damage. 
A specific event is shown below these generic types: A 
heavy precipitation episode occurred at a specific date and 
time, which caused a landslide in a specific area, which hits a 
wall and destroys it. 
161
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
Damage
Damage Type
isOfDamageType
Effect
isOfEffectType
causedDamage
Effect Type
causesDamage
leadsToEffect
Parameter
causesEffect
 
Figure 4.  Distinguishing Effect and Damage, Effect Type and Damage Type 
Heavy 
Precipitation
Landslide
leadsToEffectType
Structural
Damage
Heavy precipitation
episode occurred on
30/06/17 wIth
100 l./m2 in 1h.
Landslide at location X
with amount of 
displaced Material.
causesEffect
Collapse of 5 m of wall
at street N.
Precipitation
CausesEffect
 
Figure 5.  Example for effects and caused damage and their types.  
 
D. Sensors and Simulation models 
To capture climate change relevant parameters, sensors 
were modelled according to the SensorThings API standard, 
which was presented by the OGC. The SensorThings API is 
a modern standard for providing an open and unified way to 
connect IoT devices, data and applications over the Web 
[18]. Therefore, the initial design of the ontology classes for 
dealing with sensor metadata is based on the data model of 
the SensorThings API standard. It is reasonable to follow the 
same standard for developing the ontology for simulation 
models. In practice, requesting the execution of a model is 
equivalent to tasking an actuator to perform a particular task 
but, since the tasking part of SensorThings API was not yet 
available, it is not considered in the paper. For this reason, 
the adaptation of the ontology is based on the “Internet of 
Things Tasking Capability” [16], in which an extension of 
the SensorThings API for tasking actuators is proposed. The 
central concept in the diagram (see Figure 6) is the “Asset 
Representation”. 
An Asset Representation is an entity that provides data 
about an asset. It can be regarded as a proxy that enables 
access to the available data about an asset, for example, 
temperatures in a building, images and measurements of the 
building obtained in a measurement campaign or the results 
from a structural model. The actual sensor measurement is 
stored in an observation, which is connected to a data stream. 
The four classes on the left in Figure 7: TaskingCapability, 
Task, InputParameter and ParameterValue, provide support 
to store and manage metadata about the models. The 
TaskingCapability provides a human-readable description of 
the model together with information regarding the API that 
the model provides. In the HERACLES platform, there is an 
additional abstraction layer, namely the KB, which manages 
the metadata of the available models and sensors.  
E. Maintenance and Response Actions 
Situational awareness is achieved through continuous 
monitoring of the status of the CH assets combined with the 
results provided by the simulation models, which enable risk 
assessment. Evaluation of the information provided by the 
system 
and 
on-the-field 
observations 
enable 
the 
identification of actual or potential problems, for instance, 
when a risk level threshold is trespassed or a damage is 
observed. The modeling of such problems has been included 
in the ontology. Maintenance actions not related to an issue 
also need to be documented. In this way, the structure of the 
ontology can serve as a register of past actions that can be 
used to better understand the current situation and support 
the decision making process. Suggested actions are 
documented in formalized guidelines, which are often 
supported by a specific law; these are the Standard Operating 
Procedures (SOPs) (see Figure 7). 
162
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Sensor
Location
DataSet
Parameter
Document
hasMeasurementsOf
hasDataSet
Asset
Representation
Asset
FeatureOfInterest
refersTo
TaskingCapability
Task
ParameterValue
InputParameter
hasInputParameter
isTaskOf
hasParameterValue
isValueFor
providesDataAbout
Service Endpoint
Service Protocol
 
Figure 6.  Classes for managing metadata of sensors, models and measurement campaigns. 
F. Materials 
Since materials have an influence on how an asset is 
affected by climate effects in terms of its resilience to 
weathering and ageing, it is important that the ontology also 
models information about materials and the KB contains 
information about materials and of which materials an asset 
consists of. The material area can be ground for 
experimentation of new solutions to be applied for 
maintenance and restoration/conservation of CH assets. The 
classes to keep materials information in the KB are provided 
in Figure 8. 
The level of detail regarding the information about the 
composition, structure and properties of the materials needs 
further discussion with both materials experts and end users. 
Nevertheless, it should be noted that some ontologies 
associated with the handling of material related information 
already exist [10]. Whereas the detail of such specialized 
ontologies may be too excessive for its application in our use 
cases, they provide a reference to develop a model for the 
HERACLES platform. At the same time, since the 
aforementioned ontologies are not designed with a specific 
application field in mind, extra classes and properties may be 
necessary in the HERACLES platform for its utilization in 
the context of CH conservation. 
 
Action Type
Response
Asset
Representation
Standard Operating 
Procedure (SOP)
Guideline
IsBasedOn
Action
implements
Preventive
Conservation
Remedial
Conservation
Restoration
Conservation
Analysis &
Diagnose
dataOutcomesIn
 
Figure 7.  Maintenance and response actions 
163
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Material
Material Property
Compressive strength
of Travertine_1
Sandstone_1
Travertine_1
materialHasProperty
Material Purpose
Material Use
materialHasUse
Asset
materialUsedIn
materialUsedAs
Hardness of 
Travertine_1
materialHasProperty
materialHasProperty
 
Figure 8.  Classes keeping material information 
 
G. Damages 
An important aspect is modelling damages in this project 
(Figure 9). A Damage affects a Cultural Heritage, which is 
caused by a specific Effect, such as a wet-dry cycle or rapid 
temperature changes (see Figure 4). The twofold approach 
allows categorizing Damages into Damage Types. Damage 
is the actual manifestation of the occurring damage. Through 
the generic categorizations, it is possible to give suggestions 
for specific Action Types that proved successful in the past 
on the same Damage Type. 
 
Damage Type
Damage
isOfDamageType
Cultural Heritage
Action Type
mitigatesType
 
Figure 9.  Classes for damages and its causes 
H. Reporting 
The classes required for reporting are depicted in Figure 
10. A Report reports for a Cultural Heritage. It has a relation 
to a specific Damage Type, where the type of the reported 
Damage is specified. Section V describes the usage of this 
part of the ontology by means of the HERACLES Mobile 
Application. 
Damage Type
Damage
Report
isOfDamageType
Cultural Heritage
reportsForSite
reportsDamageType
affects
 
Figure 10.  Classes describing the domain Reporting 
I. 
Ontology Metrics 
This section provides the metrics of the current state of 
the HERACLES ontology. It includes general metrics like 
the number of classes, data/objects properties and individuals 
and annotation axioms like the numbers of annotation 
property. Inverse properties are excluded in this listing (see 
TABLE I). 
TABLE I.  
ONTOLOGY METRICS 
Metric 
Value 
Class count 
109 
Object property count 
102 
Data properties count 
49 
Individual count 
141 
164
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

V. 
APPLYING THE HERACLES ONTOLOGY 
This section extends the original paper from the SemaPro 
2018. Uses cases, directly related to the HERACLES 
Ontology are described below. The first Section V.A 
introduces the semantic integration of data according to the 
HERACLES ontology. The subsequent Section V.B shows 
scenarios, in which data is retrieved from the ontology. 
A. Structuring Data through the HERACLES Ontology 
The HERACLES KB offers input forms, through which 
data can be semantically integrated (Figure 11). If, for 
example, the creation of a new Asset is required, the input 
form offers text fields for textual descriptions. Links to other 
instances (as allowed by the ontology) can be created 
through selecting the appropriate elements in lists. This is a 
simple creation possibility for non-technical users. The 
picture below shows the creation of an example instance. It 
contains a unique name, as well as a display name. 
Representations of this instance are shown in the Has 
representation list. 
 
 
Figure 11.  The manual creation of an instance and its relationships 
Besides the manual possibility, an online endpoint was 
established. By sending messages per HTTP in the 
appropriate structure to this endpoint, instances in the 
ontology can be created or deleted. The structure must 
adhere to the HERACLES Ontology; otherwise, it is not 
accepted. By using the built-in authentication mechanisms of 
the KB component, the access to these commands can be 
restricted to certain users depending on their associated roles. 
A new Cultural Heritage instance for example, could be 
reported through the message shown in Figure 12. The key 
defaultprefix contains the value of the namespace of the 
HERACLES Ontology. The element newInstance is created 
as instance of CulturalHeritage. The KB assigns the new 
instance the unique name newHeritage and display name 
newHeritage. The key text contains a free description of 
newHeritage. 
 
Figure 12.  Using the online endpoint for machine to machine 
communication 
B. Applying the HERACLES Ontology 
The ontology serves as the backbone of the HERACLES 
KB. Every entry in the KB is also an instance stored 
according to the ontology. Therefore, all relationships to 
other instances are directly available. 
In Figure 16, an excerpt from an entry of the KB is 
shown. The page contains a customized view, showing 
pictures and quick links to the most important relations. On 
the right side, all relationships are shown. These are, for 
example, damages impacting this heritage, reports about this 
heritage or sensors monitoring this heritage. 
If the user wishes, s/he can create ontology pictures, 
which give quick access to the most important or used 
related instances. Figure 13 shows the report testReport, 
which reports a damage of type salt accumulation. A click 
on the boxes will lead the user to the respective entry, where 
a view as shown in Figure 15 will give all available 
information and related data. 
 
 
Figure 13.  An ontology picture customized for the Venetian Fortress 
showing a report reporting about a salt accumulation 
Depending on the user’s authorization status, s/he can 
manipulate the pictures by dragging and dropping or through 
right clicking, as shown below in Figure 14.  
165
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 14.  Tool with graphical ontology visualisation 
The endpoint mentioned in Section V.A is, amongst other 
technology, used by the HERACLES Mobile Application. 
This app allows the user to report damages on site from the 
surveilled cultural heritage. The location, including the 
description by the researcher on site, as well as additional 
pictures, videos or speech messages are transferred to the 
knowledge base where they are presented to the cultural 
heritage manager. Through the semantic structure, not only 
the report, but also the heritage it belongs to, as well as the 
reported damages are presented. 
The picture below shows a testReport that has been sent 
through the HERACLES Mobile Application. It contains the 
damage type, the heritage it is reported for and a picture of 
the reported damage. 
 
 
Figure 15.  The instance page for a hypothetical testReport 
 
 
Figure 16.  An instance page for a cultural heritage showing all related data 
166
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 17.  Using metadata for map views 
Metadata, such as the location is used to visualize the 
position of reports on a map (Figure 17). A click on the icon 
will lead the user to the entry of testReport, as shown in 
Figure 15.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presented the design of the HERACLES 
ontology, which aggregates multiple domains and therefore, 
required the interaction of multiple domain experts. 
Furthermore, it gave an introduction to the usage possibilities 
of an ontology. Bringing it all together in a Knowledge Base 
gives both a commonly agreed on vocabulary, as well as a 
browsable data structure, in which collaborators can access 
all related data. This brings up connections and makes 
correlations understandable. Though the HERACLES 
Project ended in April 2019, the ontology can be the basis for 
further research projects, which need to tackle the problems 
of climate change effects and involve data from 
heterogeneous domains. As written in III, the HERACLES 
Platform, and therefore the HERACLES Ontology, have 
been validated at hand of four different use-cases, in which 
the ontology comprised and linked all collected data [20]. 
Apart from future possibilities, the ontology is 
implemented in the HERACLES KB, in which project end-
users continue working. The ontology is set from now and 
will serve as structure for future data, which is going to be 
integrated into the KB. 
Future projects could focus on reasoning about, or 
integrating rules into the ontology, to make use of its full 
potential. Action should also be taken on mapping concepts 
from the HERACLES ontology to other prominent models, 
like the CIDOC-RM, to guarantee interoperability and 
facilitate the ontology’s reuse. 
The ontology has been published here [22], where the 
interested reader is encouraged to examine it. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation program 
under grant agreement No 700395. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Moßgraber, D. Hilbring, T. Hellmund, P. Pouli, G. 
Padeletti, “An Ontology for Cultural Heritage Protection 
against 
Climate 
Change,” 
The 
Twelfth 
International 
Conference on Advances in Semantic Processing, Athens, 
Greece, 2018. 
[2] UNESCO, Climate Change and World Heritage, world 
heritage 
reports 
22, 
http://whc.unesco.org/documents/publi_wh_papers_22_en.pdf 
last accessed 2018/11/08 
[3] UNESCO, Table Principal Climate Change risks and impacts 
on 
cultural 
heritage, 
WHC-06/30.COM/7.1, 
http://whc.unesco.org/archive/2006/whc06-30com-07.1e.doc, 
last accessed 2018/11/08 
[4] M. Doerr, “Ontologies for Cultural Heritage,” in Handbook 
on Ontologies, International Handbooks on Information 
Systems 19, pp. 463-486, Springer, 2009. 
[5] TATE 
Gallery Homepage, 
http://www.tate.org.uk, last 
accessed 2018/09/21. 
[6] S. Blain, A. Dimitrakopoulou, L. Gomez-Robles and L. 
Tapini, “Viaduct, a communication tool for scientific analysis 
in heritage,” ISBN 978-618-81473-1-7, Diadrasis, 2015. 
[7] AAT (Art & Architecture Thesaurus Online) Homepage, The 
Getty Research Institute, The J. Paul Getty Trust, Los Angeles 
(USA). http://www.getty.edu/research/tools/vocabularies/aat/, 
last accessed 2018/09/21. 
[8] A. Weyer et al. (eds.), “EwaGlos-European Illustrated 
Glossary of Conservation Terms for Wall Paintings and 
Architectural Surfaces,” ISBN: 978-3-7319-0260-7, Michael 
Imhof Verlag, Petersberg, Germany, 2015. 
[9] C. Lahanier and M. Aubert, “Network of art research 
computer image systems in Europe (NARCISSE),” Museums 
and interactive multimedia: proceedings of an international 
conference, pp. 298-304, Cambridge, England, 1993. 
[10] N. Platia et al, “POLYGNOSIS: the development of a 
thesaurus in an Educational Web Platform on optical and 
laser-based investigation methods for cultural heritage 
analysis and diagnosis,” Heritage Science, 5 (50), 2017, 
Doi:10.1186/s40494-017-0163-0. 
[11] P. Le Boeuf, M. Doerr, C. E. Ore and S. Stead, “Definition of 
the CIDOC conceptual reference model,” ICOM/CIDOC 
Documentation Standards Group, 1999. www.cidoc-crm.org, 
last accessed 2018/09/21. 
[12] M. Acierno, S. Cursi, D. Simeone and D. Fiorani, 
“Architectural heritage knowledge modelling: An ontology-
based framework for conservation process,” Journal of 
Cultural Heritage 2017 Vol. 24, pp. 124-133. 
[13] Y. Zhang, X. Luo, Y. Zhao and H.-C. Zhang, “An ontology-
based knowledge framework for engineering material 
selection,” Advanced Engineering Informatics 2015 Vol. 29, 
pp. 985-1000. 
[14] R. Cacciotti, J. Valach, R. Kuneš, M. Čerňanský, M. Blaško 
and P. Křemen, “Monument Damage Information System 
(MONDIS): An Ontological Approach to Cultural Heritage 
Documentation,” ISPRS Annals of Photogrammetry, Remote 
Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences 2013 Vol. II-5/W1, 
pp. 55-60. 
[15] J. Moßgraber, M. Schenk and D. Hilbring, “Modelling of an 
Ontology for a Communication Platform,” Proceedings of 
The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Semantic 
Processing, pp. 97-102, Nice, France, 2015. 
[16] R. G. Raskin and M. J. Pan, “Knowledge representation in the 
semantic web for Earth and environmental terminology 
(SWEET),” Computers & Geosciences, Vol. 31, pp. 1119 – 
1125, 2005. 
167
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[17] T. Ashino, “Materials ontology: An infrastructure for 
exchanging materials information and knowledge,” Data 
Science Journal, Vol. 9, pp. 54-61, 2010. 
[18] S. 
Liang, 
C.-Y. 
Huang 
and 
T. 
Khalafbeigi, 
OGC 
SensorThings API, Open Geospatial Consortium: Wayland, 
MA, USA, 2016. 
[19] C.-Y. Huang and C.-H. Wu, “A Web Service Protocol 
Realizing 
Interoperable 
Internet 
of 
Things 
Tasking 
Capability,” Sensors, Vol. 16(9), 1395, Basel, Switzerland, 
2016. 
[20] HERACLES Homepage, http://www.heracles-project.eu/, last 
accessed 2018/09/21. 
[21] J. Moßgraber, G. Lortal, F. Calabrò and M. Corsi, “An ICT 
Platform to support Decision Makers with Cultural Heritage 
Protection against Climate Events,” Geophysical Research 
Abstracts, Vol. 20, p. 13962, Vienna, Austria, 2018. 
[22] Fraunhofer 
IOSB: 
https://github.com/FraunhoferIOSB/HERACLES, 
last 
accessed 2018/11/08 
168
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

