188
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Three Principles for the Design of Energy Feedback Visualizations
Robert S. Brewer, Yongwen Xu, George E. Lee, Michelle Katchuck, Carleton A. Moore, and Philip M. Johnson
Department of Information and Computer Sciences
University of Hawai‘i at M¯anoa
Honolulu, HI, USA
{rbrewer, yxu, gelee, katchuck, cmoore, johnson}@hawaii.edu
Abstract—To achieve the full beneﬁts of the Smart Grid, end
users must become active participants in the energy ecosystem.
This paper presents the Kukui Cup challenge, a multifaceted
serious game designed around the topic of energy conservation
that incorporates a variety of energy feedback visualizations,
online educational activities, and real-world activities such
as workshops and excursions. We describe our experiences
developing energy feedback visualizations in the Kukui Cup
based on in-lab evaluations and ﬁeld studies in college residence
halls. We learned that energy feedback systems should address
these three factors: 1) they should be actionable, 2) domain
knowledge should go hand in hand with feedback systems,
and 3) feedback must be “sticky” if it is to lead to changes
in behaviors and attitudes. We provide examples of both
successful and unsuccessful visualizations, and discuss how they
address the three factors we have identiﬁed.
Keywords—Visualization, serious games, energy feedback, en-
ergy, energy literacy, smart grid.
I. INTRODUCTION
The development of the Smart Grid and the two-way
communication that it provides, have enabled a variety of
new customer-facing possibilities including real-time feed-
back on electricity usage, real-time pricing, and demand
response. However, to make full use of this potential, end-
users of the Smart Grid will need to be engaged about
their electricity use, and become more energy literate. We
believe that in addition to a Smart Grid, we need Smart
Consumers. One common theme among customer-related
aspects of the Smart Grid is the development of energy
feedback visualizations [1].
In this context, we have developed the Kukui Cup Chal-
lenge, a serious game [2] (a game with additional goals
beyond just entertainment), designed around the topic of
energy. The Kukui Cup includes a variety of energy feedback
visualizations [3] designed to inform and engage the players
about their energy use. The Kukui Cup also includes a
multifaceted online game with educational activities, and
real-world activities such as workshops and excursions [4],
[5].
The Kukui Cup is designed to provide players with insight
into how their behaviors affect energy consumption and pro-
duction. Such behaviors occur on a spectrum, from the short-
term, immediate impact behaviors such as turning off lights,
to the longer-term, collective impact of behaviors such as
considering the energy policies of political candidates when
deciding how to vote. Creating a challenge that helps players
understand energy from this wide scope sets the Kukui Cup
apart from other similar “energy game” initiatives. It also
impacts on our understanding of effective feedback for smart
grid customer-facing applications.
Our work is also inﬂuenced by where we live. Even within
the United States of America, the State of Hawai‘i faces a
number of unique challenges in the pursuit of sustainability
for its citizens, compared to other states. Hawai‘i has fertile
agricultural land, and a variety of renewable energy sources
(wind, solar, geothermal, wave), but it imports 85% of its
food, and over 90% of its energy, in the form of oil and coal.
In fact, Hawai‘i is the most fossil fuel-dependent state in the
United States. The Kukui Cup is designed in the context of
these challenges, and as a remote archipelago, the issues
are felt more keenly here than in many other parts of the
world. While we believe the Kukui Cup can be a useful tool
for addressing global energy challenges, the world will also
need to dramatically increase the amount of energy coming
from renewable sources, and invest in grid infrastructure.
Based on our experiences designing and evaluating energy
feedback in the Kukui Cup with students living in residence
halls, we have three recommendations for designing energy
feedback systems for smart grid consumers:
1) they should be actionable,
2) domain knowledge should go hand in hand with
feedback systems, and
3) feedback must be “sticky” if it is to lead to changes
in behaviors and attitudes.
This paper explores how we came to these conclusions,
and what evidence we have collected that supports these
conclusions.
We ﬁrst describe the Kukui Cup system, followed by an
explanation of how energy goals and baselines are used
in the Kukui Cup. With that foundation, we discuss our
results from developing and deploying the Kukui Cup in
the ﬁeld over two years in the areas of designing energy
feedback visualizations, the importance of energy literacy
in understanding energy feedback, and our use of a serious
game to encourage users to engage with the energy feedback
information. Finally, we end with sections describing our
plans for future work and our conclusions.

189
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
II. THE KUKUI CUP
College residence hall energy competitions have become
a widespread mechanism for engaging students in energy
issues, with more than 160 taking place or being planned
for the 2010–2011 academic year in North America [6].
Residence hall energy competitions are events where resi-
dence halls, or ﬂoors within a residence hall, compete to see
which team will use the least energy over a period of time.
The competitions tap into both the residents’ competitive
urges, and their interest in environmental issues. However,
unlike home residents, the dormitory residents typically do
not ﬁnancially beneﬁt from any reduction in electricity use
resulting from their behavior changes. There is no discount
on their room and board charges even if consumption is
reduced, because the residence hall fees are ﬂat-rate. Since
they lack even a monthly bill as feedback, residents are
largely unaware of their energy usage.
Residence hall energy competition technologies range in
complexity from simple web pages with weekly electricity
data to complicated web applications [7, pp. 6–11]. An early
adopter of the residence hall energy competition, Oberlin
College, developed a real-time electricity consumption feed-
back system as described by Petersen et al. [8]
To build on this area of active energy work, we decided
to target our serious game to college students living in
residence halls. The Kukui Cup extends the typical college
energy competition into a broader energy challenge where
electricity consumption feedback is only one part of a larger
game experience for players. The challenge is named after
the kukui nut (also known as candlenut), which was burned
by Native Hawaiians to provide light, making it an early
form of stored energy in Hawai‘i.
In a Kukui Cup challenge, residents are grouped into
teams based on where they live. Different ﬂoors of a building
or entire buildings can be formed into teams. The electricity
usage of teams is measured either through manual meter
readings or through automated meter data collection. In
addition to the energy competition, the Kukui Cup has a
energy literacy competition where players can earn points
by engaging in educational and social activities on the
challenge website. The point system provides a way to
motivate players to explore and use the system, as the Kukui
Cup is currently deployed as an extracurricular activity.
Much of the point competition revolves around a section
of the challenge website called the Smart Grid Game (SGG).
The Smart Grid Game consists of rows of actions arranged
into columns based on a particular topic (similar to the
popular game show “Jeopardy”), shown in Fig. 1. Clicking
on a square in the SGG shows details about the action and
explains how players can complete the action to earn points.
There are several types of actions: short YouTube videos
on energy and sustainability topics, activities like measuring
the ﬂow rate of a shower, excursions such as visiting a farm
Figure 1.
The Smart Grid Game widget, displaying level 2 actions.
that produces all its own electricity, and commitments such
public declarations of the intent to carpool or not eat meat.
There are also creative actions such as writing a poem about
energy or community engagement actions such as writing a
letter to the editor on a sustainability topic. The ﬂexibility of
the SGG allows us to provide a wide variety of interesting
actions for players to take part in.
The completion of each action (with the exception of
commitments) is veriﬁed through the challenge website
before points are awarded. For activities, players are usually
asked a randomly-selected question, and their answer is
placed in a queue for challenge administrators to review. The
administrator can approve or reject the submission, award
points, and provide feedback on the players’ answers. The
game also supports activities that are veriﬁed by submission
of an uploaded image such as a photo or screenshot.
To encourage players to interact with each other during
the challenge, the Kukui Cup provides a number of social
features. The social bonus provides a way for players to
earn additional points by completing certain actions with
other players. To earn the social bonus, players include the
email address of another player when they complete the
veriﬁcation step for an action. If the submitted email address
corresponds to a player that has completed that same action,
then the submitting player is awarded a small, conﬁgurable
number of points. In addition to incentivizing joint play, the
social bonus can provide a pretext for a player to initiate
contact with another player, such as arranging to attend a
workshop. In the college residence hall setting, it can be
helpful to have such a pretext for meeting new friends. Social
media (in particular Facebook) is integrated into the Kukui
Cup as well. Players can share their game accomplishments
directly on Facebook, and the Kukui Cup Facebook page
is used to share information about the challenge, including
upcoming events and short videos of events that have taken

190
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
place.
As part of the initial log on process to the Kukui Cup
website, new players can enter in the email address of a
referring player to earn a referral bonus. To ensure that
the new player starts actually playing the game, they must
earn a certain number of points before both the referred
and referring player receive the referral bonus points. In the
2012 Kukui Cups, the referral bonus was variable based on
the degree of the new player’s team participation. Therefore,
both new and referring players received more points if the
new player was from a team with few participants. The
variable referral bonus encourages players to reach out to
teams that were not yet involved in the Kukui Cup and gave
a small boost to those new players.
Kukui Cup challenges can also be conﬁgured to provide
incentives to players in the form of prizes for the top scores
both at the individual (points) and team level (points and
energy use). One possible downside with the prizes provided
in the competition as incentives is that they only go to the
top performers in each competition. For those participants
so far behind the leaders that they know they will not win
the point competitions, the prizes provide little incentive,
or possibly a disincentive: why play if there is no way to
win a prize? Another challenge with the prizes is that to be
effective, they had to appeal to all participants, which limits
the options for prizes.
To address the two problems with prizes, we developed
the Rafﬂe Game, inspired by Prabhakar’s work incentivizing
road congestion reduction [9]. In the Rafﬂe Game, there
are a variety of rafﬂe prizes available in each round of the
competition. For each 25 points a participant earns in the
challenge, they receive a virtual rafﬂe ticket. Participants can
allocate their rafﬂe tickets among the prizes available, and
they can change their allocations at any time until the end
of the round. Then a winning ticket is “drawn” from those
allocated to each rafﬂe prize, and the owner of that ticket
wins the prize. Since the winner of each prize is determined
randomly among the allocated tickets, even a player who has
allocated a single ticket can win a prize, thereby providing
less active players with the potential to win prizes. However,
because tickets are earned by earning points through playing
the game, the more participants play the game, the better
their chances of winning rafﬂe prizes. We obtained many
rafﬂe prizes through donations by local businesses, which
resulted in a wide assortment of types of prizes, including
clothing, gift certiﬁcates to restaurants, coupons for outdoor
activities, not all of which were of universal appeal to
participants. The rafﬂe format is especially advantageous
when there are a variety of prizes because participants are
able to pick and choose which prizes they are interested in.
Further, there is opportunity to engage more people with
different interests as a result.
A. Running a Kukui Cup
A Kukui Cup challenge consists of multiple components
working together to provide the entire game experience.
For challenges using real-time energy data, the open source
WattDepot [10] system is used to collect, store, and ana-
lyze the data. The challenge website and associated game
mechanics are provided by the open source Makahiki sys-
tem [7], [11]. The current educational content is tailored
to the needs of college students living in residence halls in
Hawai‘i, but can be tailored to suit other audiences or goals.
The ﬁnal component in a Kukui Cup challenge is the
administrators. Challenge administrators need to plan out
the parameters of the competition (duration, number of
teams), make game design choices such as point rubrics,
customize the educational content for their organization,
organize workshops, review player veriﬁcation submissions,
and distribute prizes. Kukui Cup challenges are labor inten-
sive, but that labor provides the opportunity to interact with
the players more fully and provide them with an expansive
game experience.
B. Field Studies
In addition to in-lab evaluations and beta tests, there have
been two sets of ﬁeld studies of Kukui Cup challenges.
The ﬁrst Kukui Cup challenge took place over 3 weeks
starting in October 2011 in four residence halls for ﬁrst-
year students on the University of Hawai‘i at M¯anoa campus
containing a total of approximately 1070 residents. Pairs of
ﬂoors, referred to as lounges, were the team unit in the 2011
Kukui Cup.
The second set of challenges started in September 2012.
The University of Hawai‘i (UH) 2012 Kukui Cup took place
in the same four residence halls with approximately the
same number of residents, but over the entire nine month
academic year. The ﬁrst month of the competition was an
intensive period with multiple real-world events taking place
each week, while the remaining months were less intensive.
The goal of the much longer time frame is to discourage
short-term and unsustainable behaviors (such as forgoing all
electronic device use).
In addition to the 2012 UH Kukui Cup, two other educa-
tional institutions within the State of Hawaii, Hawaii Paciﬁc
University (approximately 200 residents) and the East-West
Center (approximately 130 residents), have run their own
challenges using the Kukui Cup system with our support.
III. BASELINES AND GOALS
Goal setting has been shown to be an effective tool
in changing energy consumption behavior [12], [13] and
are a common component of energy feedback mechanisms.
Setting achievable goals is important from a game play
perspective, so goals must typically be based on previous
energy use. The most common way to generate a goal is to
calculate a baseline of energy usage based on past energy

191
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
usage, and then set the goal as some percentage reduction
from the baseline.
Two of the most common ways to calculate the electricity
baseline are to average recent prior usage (such as the last
two weeks), or to average usage from previous years. Both of
these methods are problematic because they assume that the
previous usage is representative of future usage, even though
there are many factors that can signiﬁcantly alter electricity
use over time including: occupancy, weather, activities (e.g.,
studying for a big midterm exam), and changes to the build-
ing infrastructure such as efﬁciency upgrades. Any of these
factors can lead to the baseline being an inaccurate predictor
of future usage in an energy competition, as described by
Johnson et al. [14].
Because baselines can be poor predictors of future elec-
tricity use, comparing actual electricity use to the baseline
in order to determine how much electricity was “saved” by
an intervention is misleading and can tempt designers to
make claims about energy saved that cannot be substantiated.
However, comparison of actual electricity usage to a goal
generated from a baseline can be helpful as a game mechanic
to motivate players to conserve energy.
In the 2011 Kukui Cup, we used a baseline that was
derived from an average of the two weeks prior to the chal-
lenge. In the 2012 Kukui Cups, we switched to a dynamic
baseline [14] that consists of the average electricity usage for
the two previous weeks, but the baseline is recomputed every
day throughout the challenge. The dynamic baseline means
that as the challenge progresses, the baseline will include
usage during the challenge. In essence, a goal generated
from a dynamic baseline requires a team to reduce their
energy usage compared to the recent past. Because the base-
line is not a static value picked once before the challenge,
anomalous conditions during the period before the challenge
will soon be replaced with new, more representative data.
We incorporate the energy goal into an energy feedback
game called the Daily Energy Goal Game (DEGG). Each
team has a daily energy goal determined by the baseline.
When a team’s energy usage at the end of the day is equal
to or below the goal, they win the DEGG for that day.
In the 2012 Kukui Cups, the energy competition is scored
by the number of daily energy goals that each team has
achieved, rather than an absolute measure of how much
energy has been used or how much a team has reduced
their usage below the baseline. By counting goals rather
than measures of absolute or relative energy reductions, we
hope to incentivize sustainable longer-term behavior changes
rather than radical short-term changes such as moving out
of the residence hall and into tents (as has been reported
anecdotally in some other energy competitions). In an effort
to link the energy and point competitions, when a team
meets their daily energy goal, each team member receives a
conﬁgurable number of points.
Figure 2.
A bar chart visualization of energy use as compared to a goal.
IV. ENERGY FEEDBACK DESIGN EXPERIENCES
Feedback on electricity consumption has been used as a
means for facilitating energy conservation by researchers in
the human-computer interaction community [3] as well as in
the broader energy efﬁciency [15]–[17] and environmental
psychology [12], [13] communities. One reason for this
focus on feedback is undoubtedly the hidden nature of elec-
tricity, so feedback provides an awareness that is otherwise
unavailable.
There are three main decisions to be considered when
designing an energy feedback visualization:
1) what type of data is to be displayed (power, energy,
etc)?
2) how should the data be displayed to users?
3) on what time scale should the data be displayed?
Decisions on each of these factors will inﬂuence the success
or failure of the visualization.
One of the fundamental principles of energy feedback
in the Kukui Cup is that it be actionable. While any en-
ergy feedback may implicitly encourage energy conservation
behaviors simply by making energy use visible, this level
of feedback does not meet our deﬁnition of actionable. A
feedback display that shows that a home has used 20 kWh
so far on a particular day leaves the viewer with natural
questions: is that a lot? What should I do if I wanted to
reduce my energy use?
A. The Energy Bar Chart Visualization
An early attempt at energy feedback for the Kukui Cup
is shown in Fig. 2. This “Energy Bar Chart” shows hourly
energy use for a team participating in the Kukui Cup over
24 hours as compared to an energy goal. Note that the data
shown in this particular ﬁgure are simulated. Bars that are

192
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 3.
The Power Meter energy feedback visualization.
entirely green show the actual energy usage for that hour and
indicate that the energy use was below the hourly goal. For
mixed red and green bars, the main green portion represents
the energy goal for that hour of the day, while the red tips
of the bars represent the actual usage in excess of the goal.
This form of energy feedback shows the variation in
energy use over the course of a day, which is an important
energy literacy concept. It also shows in what parts of the
day energy use is exceeding the goal, and by how much. By
displaying the times during the day when the hourly goals
are not being met, residents could focus on understanding
what activities are going on during those periods.
As (naive) designers, we felt that this visualization pro-
vided a great deal of useful feedback both clearly and
concisely. However, results of an in-lab evaluation were un-
equivocal: the visualization provided too much information,
the meaning of its components was not obvious, and the
“actionable” aspects were not obvious. This energy feedback
visualization was a failure, and we began a redesign to
address its deﬁciencies.
B. The Power Meter Energy Feedback Visualization
Another early energy feedback visualization developed for
the Kukui Cup was the Power Meter, shown in Fig. 3. The
Power Meter is an example of one of the most common
types of energy feedback visualizations: a near real-time
representation of how much power is being used. In the
UH Kukui Cups, the Power Meter reﬂects the power use of
a team consisting of 54 residents. The meter is calibrated
so that the middle reading (needle pointing straight up)
corresponds to the average team power use computed from
the hourly baseline data, and the range of the meter dial is
set to account for the largest swings in power use based on
historical data. This calibration means that if the needle is
on the right side of the dial it reﬂects more team power use
than “normal” for this hour and day, and conversely if the
needle is on the left side, it corresponds to less power usage
Figure 4.
The Daily Energy Goal Game feedback visualization.
than normal. The calibration is updated each hour to match
the new hourly baseline.
The motivation for the Power Meter is to enable players
to explore their power use in real time by turning devices
in their room and ﬂoor on and off to see how it impacted
their power use, a classic use of high-frequency feedback.
However, we have no evidence that players actually used
the Power Meter visualization in this way. One difference
between the Power Meter as used in the UH Kukui Cup
challenges and similar energy feedback devices in a home
setting is that there are many more people living in the
metered space in the UH Kukui Cups. The large number of
people whose electricity use is being metered could make
it more difﬁcult to see changes due to an individual device,
unless that device uses a large amount of power (such as a
microwave or hair dryer). As a result, we do not currently
know if the Power Meter is successful as a visualization in
our initial settings for the Kukui Cup. However, we have
left the Power Meter as part of all Kukui Cups using real-
time meter data as a counterpoint to the energy-based Daily
Energy Goal Game visualization, in the hope of reinforcing
the difference between power and energy. Understanding the
different between power and energy was one of the energy
literacy topics some participants seemed to have trouble
grasping, so we felt any additional reinforcement might be
helpful.
C. The Daily Energy Goal Game Feedback Visualization
To make our energy feedback easier to understand and
also more actionable, we developed the Daily Energy Goal
Game (DEGG) visualization shown in Fig. 4. The three most
prominent components of the DEGG are:
• the energy consumption so far during the current day,
• the energy goal so far for the current day, and
• a trafﬁc light that shows in the most straightforward
way whether the team is meeting their energy goal.

193
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The display updates once every 10 minutes with new energy
data.
We picked the daily time frame for the game for two
reasons. First, having a daily goal makes behavior changes
more visible and feedback more immediate than a longer
time frame such as weekly or monthly. Second, by concen-
trating on a daily goal, teams that are performing poorly
on a particular day can redouble their efforts to do better
the next day. Similarly, a team that does particularly well
for one day cannot rest on their laurels, as they must make
an effort to conserve every day. This game design reﬂects
our belief that changing energy behaviors is a marathon
and not a sprint: radical short-term changes made to win
an energy competition are unlikely to be sustainable, and
therefore are of very limited utility in achieving long-term
energy conservation.
Residential energy use varies in intensity over the course
of a day: typically low when people are sleeping and much
higher during evening hours. For the students in our studies
living in residence halls, the energy usage peak occurs at
approximately midnight, and the lowest usage is between 8
and 9 AM, which is considerably different than an average
single-family home. There is also daily variation between
days of the week, as the activities taking place on a Monday
night are different than those on a Saturday night. To account
for the hourly and daily variation in energy use, we compute
hourly and daily baselines for energy use, and the goal value
is a percentage reduction from the baseline. The energy
consumption and goal values displayed in the DEGG are
computed over the time period from midnight to the current
time. This choice of time frame is particularly important for
the goal value, because if a daily goal value were simply
spread evenly over the course of a day, players would see
their energy use as always under the goal during low-usage
periods, and going above the goal during the high-usage
periods, possibly to a degree that makes it impossible to
meet the goal for that day.
The DEGG also links the energy conservation competition
with the point competition. When a team meets their daily
energy goal, each team member is awarded an administrator-
conﬁgured number of points. This linkage provides an
additional incentive for players to pay attention to the
energy competition, because successfully reducing energy
use below the goal can signiﬁcantly increase team point
totals.
Below the trafﬁc light display of the DEGG is a list of
actions from the Smart Grid Game that players can take
to either learn more about energy, or directly reduce their
energy use. The actions displayed depend on what actions
the player has already completed in the rest of the system.
The DEGG is therefore highly actionable because it provides
direct links to actions that players can take to reduce their
energy usage, tailored to the opportunities available in their
residence hall.
Figure 5.
The “How can we make our daily goal?” widget.
Evaluation of the DEGG visualization during actual game
play indicated that players do not have a problem under-
standing this visualization. The stoplight image provides
a clear, unambiguous signal, and the actual/goal numbers
provide further context. In addition, the visualization is
explicitly paired with links to descriptions of appropriate
actions for that player in the context of the game and the
team’s current energy use. Log data indicated that players
did click on these links in order to understand how to take
action based on the energy feedback. This energy feedback
visualization is thus a success and has been included in the
current version of the Kukui Cup.
D. The “Wii Hours” Energy Feedback Visualization
In another energy feedback design effort, we created a
small widget below the DEGG titled “How can we make
our daily goal?”, which was intended to give players ideas
on how to improve their team’s energy performance. This
widget, shown in Fig. 5, shows how much the player’s team
energy usage was above the goal, and provides a drop-down
menu of electrical devices commonly present in student
rooms: laptops, XBox 360, Wii, etc. When a device is
selected from the menu, the system displays the approximate
number of hours of device use that would equal the amount
of team energy use over the goal value. The time value is
intended to show players how much device use they would
need to forego in order to get back on track to their energy
goal, and develop their intuition about the relative power use
of different devices (i.e., plasma TVs use much more power
than Wii game consoles). Therefore, a short time value could
point out an easy way to make the goal, and a long time
value would indicate less signiﬁcant energy conservation.
However, during in-lab evaluations of the system, we
found that multiple subjects misinterpreted the time value,
thinking that high time values were bad rather than good.
Since the Wii was the device on the list with the smallest
power use (20 W) compared to an XBox 360 or Playstation
3, it led to the highest time values. Some subjects drew the
conclusion that using a Wii was worse than using an XBox

194
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
360 or Playstation 3, which was precisely the opposite goal
of this widget. One subject even took the time to use our
in-game team discussion forum to post the message “don’t
play wii” after using the widget! Because of this example,
we dubbed this confusion the “Wii problem.”
Clearly, energy feedback that can lead some players to
the opposite conclusion than intended is a failure. The “Wii
Hours” visualization never made it into production, and
we are still searching for a design variant that can convey
this information in an unambiguous fashion to players with
minimal energy literacy.
E. Canopy Energy Feedback
The 2011 Kukui Cup took place over three weeks, and
as part of the game experience we wanted to create a more
advanced level of experience for the top participants in the
competition. The background of the competition website
features a forest theme, so the Canopy is named to convey
that it exists “above” the rest of the website. The Canopy is
conceived as a way to keep the top participants engaged even
if they complete most of the activities available in the Smart
Grid Game. A primary way to retain their engagement is to
offer more sophisticated visualizations that demand more
thought and analysis from the top players.
The Canopy provides a series of “missions” that players
can undertake. Some Canopy missions are to be accom-
plished individually, while other missions require 2 or 3
participants to work together. Players can indicate that
they are “up” for a group mission to ﬁnd other interested
participants. Missions include looking at more advanced
energy visualizations, and also activities such as seeking out
places on campus that are wasting energy.
Canopy missions are like actions available in the rest of
the game, but instead of earning points upon completion,
Canopy activities earn players Canopy Karma, which is a
separate point system for the Canopy. Canopy Karma is used
instead of the standard points to ensure that the Canopy itself
does not unbalance the point competition by providing a way
for the top players to earn more points that are not available
to the rest of the participants.
The energy data and visualizations available in the forest
(the main game area), such as the Daily Energy Goal Game
described earlier, are deliberately simple to avoid confusing
participants with low energy literacy. The requirement for
simplicity means that the energy data shown to players
comes only from the participant’s team. This constraint can
be relaxed in the Canopy, as players are more sophisticated
and presumed to be interested in visualizations that com-
pared teams.
Fig. 6 shows “Energy Hot Spots”, one of several forms
of advanced energy feedback available in the Canopy. This
visualization shows hourly electricity use for a selected team
over the course of a selected week. This breakdown allows
players to examine their usage patterns and see how they
Figure 6.
Energy Hot Spots visualization from the Canopy.
Figure 7.
Heat Map visualization from the Canopy.
change throughout the day, between days of the week, and
between different teams. The Canopy mission based around
the Energy Hot Spots energy feedback asks players the
following questions:
• What hours of the day seem to have the highest energy
use? How does that compare to your own energy use
patterns?
• What differences in energy use do you notice between
teams?
• What are your thoughts on this visualization? What are
its strengths and weaknesses?
Another Canopy visualization is the Heat Map, shown in
Fig. 7. This visualization shows the energy use over time for
all the teams in one residence hall, arranged spatially. This
type of visualization can potentially show patterns related
to the position of teams in a residence hall, and shows how
energy use differs between teams over time. The Canopy
mission based on the Heat Map visualization asks similar
questions as the Hot Spots visualization, with the intent
to make players investigate the visualization and introspect
about their own energy use.
The Canopy was introduced in the third week of the 2011
UHM Kukui Cup, and the top 42 players were invited to
enter the Canopy out of a total of 401 players. Although use
of the Canopy was quite limited, players’ feedback about
these advanced forms of energy feedback was uniformly
positive: they reported enjoying the ability to compare
energy use between teams and seeing what times different
teams energy use peaked.
This positive feedback indicates that the Canopy energy
feedback was a success, and also indicates the critical role
of context and scaffolding in energy feedback design. To
build on the Canopy’s role as another “level” of the game,
in the 2012 UHM Kukui Cup, we removed the Canopy, but

195
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the Smart Grid Game was segmented into explicit levels as
shown earlier in Fig. 1. The advanced visualizations from
the Canopy missions were turned into activities accessible
in the more advanced levels of the Smart Grid Game.
V. DOMAIN KNOWLEDGE AND ENERGY FEEDBACK
Energy feedback systems provide data on some aspect of
behavior with the goal of reducing negative environmental
impact [3]. However, they often assume users possess some
level of domain knowledge about the environmental topic
they hope to address. The term energy literacy has been used
to describe the understanding of energy concepts as they
relate both on the individual level and on the national/global
level.
Some examples of energy literacy are: understanding
the difference between power and energy; knowing that a
microwave uses much more power than a refrigerator, but
that the refrigerator will use much more energy over the
course of the day; and knowing how electricity is generated
in one’s community.
Unfortunately, all indications are that energy literacy
is low in the United States. DeWaters and Powers have
developed an energy literacy survey instrument for middle
and high school students. They found that the student mean
attitude scores were 73%, but that knowledge scores lagged
far behind (42% correct) [18]. Based on their ﬁndings,
they make some recommendations, such as energy curricula
be “hands on, inquiry based, experiential, engaging, and
real-world problem solving...”, and using the campus as a
“learning laboratory”. Similarly, a nationwide survey in the
United States of adults on energy by Southwell et al. found
that the average respondent answered fewer than 60% of the
energy knowledge questions correctly [19]. A online survey
of 505 people in the United States regarding perceptions of
energy consumption and savings conducted by Attari et al.
also found signiﬁcant problems with energy literacy [20].
A. Energy Literacy in Action
One energy literacy topic that we emphasize in the Kukui
Cup is the difference between power and energy, power be-
ing the rate at which energy is being consumed or produced
(measured in watts) and energy is the quantity of work
that can be performed by a system (measured somewhat
confusingly for electricity in kilowatt-hours). In the Kukui
Cup we explain this relationship as being analogous to
speedometer and odometer in a car.
Through answers submitted to the online activities in the
Kukui Cup, we can see that many players have trouble
understanding the concepts of power, energy and their
interrelationship. Players often confuse the two concepts
and often fail to grasp the time sensitivity of power, and
thereby considering devices that consume a lot of power as
“bad” irrespective of how long they are actually used. When
the users of visualizations do not understand the concepts
that are being visualized, understanding of the visualizations
becomes much more difﬁcult. It is for this reason that
we claim that energy feedback systems should incorporate
educational components, or risk being unintelligible to users.
However, we reject the notion that power and energy,
watts and kilowatt-hours are too complicated and that users
should be provided instead with analogies to cars driven or
hamburgers eaten. These energy concepts are important for
effective customer participation in the smart grid, and should
not be reduced to analogies alone.
Domain knowledge can also be provided to participants
in real-world contexts, rather than online contexts. We have
witnessed improvements in players’ energy literacy in the
course of a single workshop. In the energy scavenger hunt
workshop, attendees are grouped into teams of 3–4 people
and provided with a plug load meter that shows the amount
of electrical power consumed by whatever device is plugged
into the meter. Each team is given 30 minutes record the
power use of devices in their rooms and residence halls,
looking for devices with the highest power use they can
ﬁnd, and also the most number of devices with distinct
power use in 10 W intervals. The goals of the workshop
(beyond entertainment) are to train players to measure device
power use, and also to build their intuition about how much
power different devices use. In the 2011 Kukui Cup, after the
teams completed their hunt, each team was asked to present
their results. One team reported that the microwave they
measured used 200 W, and immediately several players from
other teams shouted out that the ﬁrst team must have done
something wrong because microwaves use over 1000 W, as
they started to form their energy intuition based on their own
hunt.
B. Moving Beyond Individual Actions
In addition to shorter activities available in the SGG, the
Kukui Cup also provides creative activities to encourage
more in-depth explorations of energy and sustainability.
These creative activities run the gamut from writing a haiku
about a sustainability topic, to conducting an interview, or
making a video. Creative activity submissions from players
are assigned a point value by administrators based on the
quality of the work and the effort it required to make. We
hope that the creative activities provide a different outlet for
players, and encourage them to think beyond their individual
actions and bring a sense of ownership to the cause of
sustainability.
As mentioned previously, the 2012 UH Kukui Cup took
place over an entire academic year. Much of the educational
content we developed was made available to players in
the ﬁrst intensive month of the challenge, leaving later
rounds with less content, and thereby fewer reasons to
continue playing. To address this problem, and to draw
players into deeper play and understanding of sustainability
issues, players were able to suggest new additions to the

196
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
SGG as part of the game. Players that provided useful
new activities and events for the the game earned points,
and once the new actions were placed into the SGG, they
provided additional educational content for other players.
We also explored ways to tie class work into the Kukui Cup
challenge. With the longer time frame afforded by the nine
month competition, players were able to earn points in the
competition by registering for sustainability-related classes,
and picking sustainability-themed class projects. The goal
of these changes was macro behavior changes like selecting
a sustainability degree program or choosing a more efﬁcient
vehicle at some point in the future. We plan to follow up
with the 2012 Kukui Cup players in future years to assess
whether or not these macro behavioral changes did, in fact,
occur.
There is a proposed renewable energy project in Hawai‘i
called “Big Wind” that would generate as much as 400 MW
of electricity from wind farms covering substantial portions
of two more rural islands (Moloka‘i and L¯ana‘i) with
excellent wind resources. The power would be transmitted
via a new undersea cable to O‘ahu, which has the majority
of the state’s population, but with inferior wind resources.
There are advocates both for and against Big Wind, but
to make an informed decision one should understand how
O‘ahu’s electricity is generated now, and the characteristics
and challenges of wind energy. We hope that the educational
activities that are part of the Kukui Cup will equip players
to make informed choices on these types of thorny policy
questions.
VI. ENERGY FEEDBACK, STICKINESS, AND SERIOUS
GAMES
A meta issue for all energy feedback systems is how
to ensure that they continue to be “sticky” for users, as a
feedback system that users do not view will be unable to
accomplish anything. There are indications that the long-
term impact of energy feedback may be diminished due to
habituation. Froehlich suggests that the average user will
spend less than one minute per day exploring their energy
consumption behaviors [21]. A study by Houde et al. of
households using Google PowerMeter found an “immediate
decrease in electricity consumption, but in the long term
these electricity savings decrease and disappear” [22]. This
ﬁnding suggests that a primary concern for any energy
feedback system is ensuring that users continue to interact
with it over the long term. Put another way, energy feedback
alone is not enough to accomplish the goal of long-range
customer engagement with their energy consumption.
One solution to the lack of stickiness of energy feedback
systems is the incorporation of game play. Serious games
like the Kukui Cup provide an alternative route to promote
both learning and engagement with energy feedback. It is
for this reason that we designed the Kukui Cup as a serious
game that incorporates electricity consumption feedback as
one aspect of the game experience, rather than an energy
feedback system that has been “gamiﬁed” [23]. Gee has
examined how learning takes place in the world of video
games, and contrasted it with the way learning typically
takes place in schools [24]. He points out that good games
are both deep and complicated, but large numbers of players
manage to learn how to play them. Players can spend
enormous amounts of time playing games, and in the process
of playing learn skills in a way not possible in a classroom.
One issue with the Kukui Cup is that the educational
content is largely of interest only until its content has been
assimilated. We do not anticipate that players would want to
revisit most actions unless they were able to earn additional
points. This limited engagement is in contrast to games
that players enjoy playing over and over. Some serious
games, such as the protein folding game Foldit, do manage
to attract repeat players and meet their serious goals [25].
While the Kukui Cup may stop being of interest to players
once they have completed all the content available, we hope
that our attempts to engage players in broader sustainability
opportunities such as taking classes and becoming involved
in campus and community organizations make the Kukui
Cup no longer necessary for them.
While games are not the only way to promote long-term
engagement with energy issues, we submit that any normal
energy feedback system will quickly be abandoned by users
once the novelty wears off. There must be a continuing
reason for users to revisit the system that even the most
novel and interesting energy feedback systems lack.
VII. FUTURE WORK
The Kukui Cup is an ongoing project and we continue
to build upon the four challenges that have been run to
date. One interesting area of future work is moving beyond
just visualizations of energy consumption by incorporating
visualizations of energy generation in the grid. Ecotricity,
a renewable energy utility in the UK, has developed such
a grid-level feedback system [26]. The Ecotricity website
provides a real-time dashboard that displays the types of
energy sources used to power the UK grid (fossil fuels,
nuclear, and renewable) and the overall carbon intensity of
the grid in gCO2 per kWh as shown in Fig. 8. The carbon
intensity display is made actionable through a trafﬁc light
visualization that is green when the grid is emitting less
carbon and red when it emits more carbon, with the intent
that consumers could defer energy use when the grid was
emitting more CO2.
During California’s energy crisis in 2000 and 2001,
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory created a web site
that graphed data from utility organizations [27]. The graphs
showed consumer demand for electricity (actual and fore-
cast), and the utilities’ generation capacity. Darby reports
anecdotal evidence that people viewing the graphs changed

197
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 8.
Ecotricity’s live UK Grid dashboard.
their electricity usage based on the data [15]. In build-
ings generating their own electricity (such as through solar
panels), there are additional opportunities to visualize the
building’s energy consumption along side the generation.
Beyond college campuses, we are planning to expand the
Kukui Cup to other organizations in Hawai‘i including mid-
dle and high schools. Kukui Cups run in schools will require
changes to the educational content to make it relevant to
those students, but may provide opportunities for integration
with the curriculum.
A longer range goal is to integrate the Kukui Cup with
Hawai‘i’s smart grid efforts. The Kukui Cup is currently an
effort-intensive program, so scaling to hundreds of thousands
of players will require scaling the management of the
challenge, ﬁnding a means of funding, and a way for players
to incorporate household energy data fairly, in a completely
heterogenous environment.
One ﬁnal area of research is longitudinal studies of players
after the game is over and they have moved out of the
residence halls. We want to ﬁnd out whether the Kukui
Cup experience actually had lasting impacts on players, and
whether they were able to continue any new behaviors after
leaving the context of the residence hall.
VIII. CONCLUSION
We have described the Kukui Cup serious game, and our
results from ﬁeld trials of the system. We have discussed
some of the energy feedback visualizations we developed,
including both those that succeeded and those that failed.
Based on our experiences, we provide three areas that energy
feedback systems for the smart grid should address: they
should be actionable, they must address users lack of domain
knowledge, and they must ﬁnd ways to be sticky.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research is supported in part by grant IIS-1017126
from the National Science Foundation; the HEI Charita-
ble Foundation; Hawaiian Electric Company; the State of
Hawaii Department of Business, Economic Development
and Tourism. We are also thankful for the support from
the following organizations at the University of Hawai‘i:
the Center for Renewable Energy and Island Sustainability,
Student Housing Services, Facilities Management, and the
Department of Information and Computer Sciences.
We gratefully acknowledge the players of the 2011 and
2012 Kukui Cups and the members of the Kukui Cup
team in addition to the authors who made the vision a
reality: Kaveh Abhari, Hana Bowers, Greg Burgess, Caterina
Desiato, Risa Khamsi, Amanda Pacholok, Morgan de Partee,
Alyse Rutherford, Alex Young, and Chris Zorn.
REFERENCES
[1] R. S. Brewer, Y. Xu, G. E. Lee, M. Katchuck, C. A.
Moore, and P. M. Johnson, “Energy feedback for smart
grid consumers: Lessons learned from the Kukui Cup,” in
Proceedings of Energy 2013, March 2013, pp. 120–126.
[2] M. Zyda, “From visual simulation to virtual reality to games,”
IEEE Computer, vol. 38, no. 9, pp. 25 – 32, Sep 2005.
[3] J. Froehlich, L. Findlater, and J. Landay, “The design
of eco-feedback technology,” in Proceedings of the 28th
international conference on Human factors in computing
systems - CHI ’10.
New York, New York, USA: ACM
Press, Apr. 2010, pp. 1999–2008.
[4] R. S. Brewer, G. E. Lee, and P. M. Johnson, “The Kukui
Cup: a dorm energy competition focused on sustainable
behavior change and energy literacy,” in Proceedings of the
44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences,
January 2011, pp. 1–10.
[5] R. S. Brewer, “Fostering sustained energy behavior change
and
increasing
energy
literacy
in
a
student
housing
energy challenge,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Hawaii,
Department of Information and Computer Sciences, March
2013, [retrieved: December, 2013]. [Online]. Available:
http://csdl.ics.hawaii.edu/techreports/2010/10-08/10-08.pdf
[6] C.
Hodge,
“Dorm
energy
competitions:
Passing
fad
or
powerful
behavior
modiﬁcation
tool?”
Presen-
tation
at
the
2010
Behavior
Energy
and
Cli-
mate
Change
conference,
November
2010.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.stanford.edu/group/peec/cgi-bin/docs/
events/2010/becc/presentations/2C ChelseaHodge.pdf
[re-
trieved: December, 2013].
[7] G. E. Lee, “Makahiki: An extensible open-source platform for
creating energy competitions,” Master’s thesis, University of
Hawaii, June 2012. [Online]. Available: http://csdl.ics.hawaii.
edu/techreports/2011/11-01/11-01.pdf [retrieved: December,
2013].
[8] J. E. Petersen, V. Shunturov, K. Janda, G. Platt, and K. Wein-
berger, “Dormitory residents reduce electricity consumption
when exposed to real-time visual feedback and incentives,”
International Journal of Sustainability in Higher Education,
vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 16–33, 2007.
[9] D. Merugu, B. S. Prabhakar, and N. S. Rama, “An incentive
mechanism for decongesting the roads: a pilot program in
Bangalore,” in Proceedings of NetEcon ’09, ACM Workshop
on the Economics of Networked Systems, July 2009.

198
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[10] R.
S.
Brewer
and
P.
M.
Johnson,
“WattDepot:
An
open source software ecosystem for enterprise-scale energy
data collection, storage, analysis, and visualization,” in
Proceedings of the First International Conference on Smart
Grid Communications, Gaithersburg, MD, October 2010, pp.
91–95.
[11] P. M. Johnson, Y. Xu, R. S. Brewer, C. A. Moore,
G. E. Lee, and A. Connell, “Makahiki+WattDepot: An open
source software stack for next generation energy research
and education,” in Proceedings of the 2013 Conference
on
Information
and
Communication
Technologies
for
Sustainability (ICT4S), February 2013.
[12] L. J. Becker, “Joint effect of feedback and goal setting on per-
formance: A ﬁeld study of residential energy conservation,”
Journal of Applied Psychology, vol. 63, no. 4, pp. 428–433,
1978.
[13] J. H. van Houwelingen and W. F. van Raaij, “The effect of
goal-setting and daily electronic feedback on in-home energy
use,” The Journal of Consumer Research, vol. 16, no. 1, pp.
98–105, June 1989.
[14] P. M. Johnson, Y. Xu, R. S. Brewer, G. E. Lee, M. Katchuck,
and C. A. Moore, “Beyond kWh: Myths and ﬁxes for energy
competition game design,” in Proceedings of Meaningful
Play 2012, October 2012, pp. 1–10.
[15] S. Darby, “The effectiveness of feedback on energy consump-
tion,” Environmental Change Institute, University of Oxford,
Tech. Rep., 2006. [Online]. Available: http://www.eci.ox.ac.
uk/research/energy/downloads/smart-metering-report.pdf [re-
trieved: December, 2013].
[16] A. Faruqui, S. Sergici, and A. Sharif, “The impact of
informational feedback on energy consumption–a survey of
the experimental evidence,” Energy, vol. 35, no. 4, pp.
1598–1608, 2010.
[17] B. Foster and S. Mazur-Stommen, “Results from recent
real-time feedback studies,” American Council for an Energy-
Efﬁcient Economy (ACEEE), Tech. Rep. B122, February
2012. [Online]. Available: http://aceee.org/research-report/
b122 [retrieved: December, 2013].
[18] J. E. DeWaters and S. E. Powers, “Energy literacy of
secondary students in New York State (USA): A measure
of knowledge, affect, and behavior,” Energy Policy, vol. 39,
no. 3, pp. 1699–1710, 2011.
[19] B.
G.
Southwell,
J.
J.
Murphy,
J.
E.
DeWaters,
and P. A. LeBaron, “Americans’ perceived and actual
understanding of energy,” RTI Press, Tech. Rep. RR-0018-
1208, 2012. [Online]. Available: http://www.rti.org/pubs/
rr-0018-1208-southwell.pdf [retrieved: December, 2013].
[20] S. Z. Attari, M. L. DeKay, C. I. Davidson, and W. B.
de Bruin, “Public perceptions of energy consumption and
savings,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
vol. 107, no. 37, pp. 16 054–16 059, 2010.
[21] J. Froehlich, “Moving beyond line graphs: The history and
future of eco-feedback design,” Presentation at the 2010
Behavior Energy and Climate Change conference, 2010.
[Online].
Available:
http://peec.stanford.edu/docs/events/
2010/becc/presentations/3D JonFroehlich.pdf [retrieved: De-
cember, 2013].
[22] S. Houde, A. Todd, A. Sudarshan, J. A. Flora, and K. C.
Armel, “Real-time feedback and electricity consumption:
A ﬁeld experiment assessing the potential for savings and
persistence,” The Energy Journal, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 87–102,
2013.
[23] S.
Deterding,
D.
Dixon,
R.
Khaled,
and
L.
Nacke,
“From game design elements to gamefulness: Deﬁning
“gamiﬁcation”,” in Mindtrek 2011 Proceedings.
ACM
Press, 2011, pp. 9–15.
[24] J. P. Gee, What Video Games Have to Teach Us About
Learning and Literacy.
Palgrave Macmillan, 2007.
[25] F. Khatib, F. DiMaio, S. Cooper, M. Kazmierczyk, M. Gilski,
S. Krzywda,
H. Zabranska,
I. Pichova,
J.
Thompson,
Z. Popovi´c, M. Jaskolski, and D. Baker, “Crystal structure
of a monomeric retroviral protease solved by protein folding
game players,” Nat Struct Mol Biol, vol. 18, no. 10, pp.
1175–1177, 10 2011.
[26] “Ecotricity UK grid live website,” http://www.ecotricity.co.
uk/our-green-energy/energy-independence/uk-grid-live,
[re-
trieved: December, 2013].
[27] E. Bartholomew, C. Bolduc, K. Coughlin, B. Hill, A. Meier,
and R. V. Buskirk, “Current energy website,” http://web.
archive.org/web/20030507025649/http://currentenergy.lbl.
gov/, [retrieved: December, 2013].

