179
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Assessing the Impact of Simulation Games on Education Operation Management 
and the Development of Pedagogical Effectiveness 
 Experimental Study on Cycles One and Two at Two Private Schools in Lebanon 
 
Nour Issa and Hassan M. Khachfe 
Department of Education 
Business, Educational, and Medical Optimization Research Group (BE-MORE) 
The Lebanese International University 
Beirut, Lebanon 
Email: Nour.issa28@hotmail.com, hassan.khachfe@liu.edu.lb 
 
 
Abstract—With the development of the digital age, progress in 
innovation, and the pattern towards more experiential learning 
designs, 
simulation 
games 
are 
progressively 
used 
by 
pedagogical organizations today. This study uses a science 
simulation game, and evaluates the influence of this active 
learning method on education operation management. Data 
was gathered from 308 students in private schools, in south 
Lebanon, on which factor analysis, analysis of variance, and t-
test were used. The findings revealed that simulation gaming 
provides competence and deeper level of learning. The study 
concludes that the use of simulation gaming in education would 
go a long way in enhancing students’ perceptions toward the 
instructions, and stimulate their interest in learning science. 
 
Keywords-game; 
simulations; 
operations 
management; 
effectiveness. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The recent generation of private school students is 
experiencing the world with their personal computers (PCs) 
and handheld devices. Many have invested much energy 
playing computer games and are presently highly skilled at 
learning and applying complex arrangements of standards 
through game playing. Experiencing simulation game by 
students is an effective method for improving education [1].  
Proserpio and Gioia claimed that the pedagogical method of 
the new virtual generation varies from the previously used 
methods. It is significantly more visual, intelligent, and 
concentrated on critical thinking [2]. While this could be 
viewed as a danger to the traditional learning methods, it 
could likewise be viewed as a chance to develop simulation 
games that empower the learning of management practices 
and standards.  
The creators utilize diverse wordings to characterize 
simulation technologies that range from top administration, 
to pilot test programs, to business test systems, to simulation 
games, to large and small scale universes, to learning 
research facilities [3].  Simulations and games are broadly 
utilized in different domains of educational courses. The 
utilization of simulation and games relies to a great extent 
on an educator’s personal capabilities, learning goal and 
familiarity with the courses instead of their basic 
knowledge. The confusion between simulations and games 
has been available from the time that simulation was 
invented [4]. Since game-based learning is becoming more 
important in teaching, there is a need to verify the utilization 
of simulation and games. 
Despite the fact that there have been numerous 
endeavors at elucidation, it is still essential to stretch the 
contrasts between the two concepts and to characterize a 
simulation game. Webster characterizes a simulation as "the 
illustration of the action or qualities of one framework using 
another framework, esp. utilizing a “PC". Strictly speaking, 
simulation involves the description of a part of reality in 
view of an improved and reflective model. 
 Game is any challenge (play) among players working 
under imperatives (rules) for a goal winning, triumph or 
payoff [5]. Game is along these lines a chance to utilize 
one's aptitudes to contend with others. The nomenclature 
additionally proposes a simulation and pleasant action, 
despite the fact that in academic setting diversions ought not 
to be utilized chiefly for entertainment. In reality, Abt 
(1970) alludes to educational games as "significant games." 
A game is not inevitably a simulation [6].  
Simulations and interactive techniques allow students to 
practice something that is not quite the same as what they 
are familiar with [7]. This new experience can prompt more 
noteworthy appreciation of the content as well. Upon 
teaching operation management,  simulation games embrace 
a problem-based learning method [8, 9]. The problem-based 
learning method requires educators to introduce students to 
real-world operation problems that demand to be evaluated 
and solved. 
Simulations are set in the frame of games in pedagogic 
organizations to merge education with fun. Whereas the 
classical educational approaches used are reflecting uneven 
quality of education, most of the private schools are 
implementing simulation as a part of their education 
systems. However, these systems haven’t developed 
monitoring and evaluation of the impact left after using 
simulation games. 
This study seeks to mark this problem through providing 
quantitative 
and 
qualitative 
data 
that 
allows 
the 
stakeholders, including school administration, teachers, and 
learning assistants to evaluate the implementation of 
simulation games, and measure the delivery quality to 
students. 

180
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
This paper is organized into five sections as follows: 
Section two contains a historical view of simulation. Section 
three portrays a literature review of the pedagogical 
simulation, through describing the type of simulation used 
in the study, effectiveness along intrinsic motivation level 
and a critical review of related work. The fourth section 
investigates the research method upon discussing the data 
collection, measurements, findings, analysis of data, and 
hypothesis results. The paper concludes with a brief 
discussion of the results, recommendations, limitation of the 
research and next steps to be taken into account. 
II. 
HISTORICAL VIEW OF SIMULATIONS  
 From a long time ago, simulation and games have been 
employed for training purposes. Their creation is tracked to 
war games that were used in ancient China. War games, 
mainly in the sort of board games, like chess, have 
dependably been well known. In Germany, during the 17th 
century, they were changed into more intellectual and 
composite games [10]. Also, war games assisted the testing 
and the organization of strategic moves during World Wars 
I and II. Web-established models appropriate to distance 
learning are presently used to prepare military planners [11]. 
In a related area, pilot simulators, which are nearly as old as 
the primary plane, were utilized broadly during World War 
II to prepare military pilots [12].  
Games and simulation first appeared in the wide 
educational spot in the late 1950s. Until the mid-1970s, they 
did not exist in the instructional outline development. 
Rather, these activities were basically created by business, 
therapeutic training workforce, and sociologists, who 
adjusted instructional advancements pioneered by the 
military administrations [13]. 
Previously, medicine models were utilized as tools of 
anatomy; mainframe computer-based simulations were 
generally utilized during the 1960s. Within the recent 
advantage of technology, high-vitality human resigned 
simulators of health care providers are being utilized to 
improve 
their 
skills, 
and 
computer-based 
reality 
arrangements help to tutor students in surgical strategies 
[14]. Game simulations in nursing, such as The Ward [15], 
assist students in acquiring choice making, clinical skills, 
and teamwork capabilities. Ellington announced that 
computer-based simulations have been used in science 
education at all levels, including high schools, colleges, and 
universities. The latest software packages comprise 
chemistry [16], physics [17], and hydrology [18]. 
In the last ten years, new simulation games have evolved 
to educate marketing, financial management, project 
management, knowledge management, risk management, 
and microeconomics [19]. 
The scientific field is too substantial and demands more 
examination. Moreover, there has been no guidelines or 
fixed policy recommended by educational institutions or 
governments on the acquisition of simulations in education. 
This is the case in US, Europe, and Australia, where it has 
been the responsibility of the educational institutions or 
educators, throughout the past academic years, to integrate 
simulations into the curriculum [20].  This is the case of 
Lebanon, too. 
III. 
PEDAGOGICAL SIMULATIONS  
This section presents an extensive review of the literature 
on simulation games, and its effectiveness in the context of 
science education as an active learning strategy. Also, it 
reviews related work to clarify the most important scientific 
concepts related to the simulation game that was used in this 
study. 
A. Virtual Simulations  
Simulation games are interactional techniques that show 
social frameworks, and they are interrelated with the 
scientific and practical frameworks around them [21]. The 
utilization of computer in pedagogy fluctuates; it can be a 
device, a help apparatus, and a learning situation. Computer 
simulation for pedagogic purposes, which utilizes the 
computer as a learning domain, is called computer-assisted 
learning (CAL). Those alleged "training simulations" 
commonly come in one of three classifications, according to 
Stančić  [22]: 
• "Live" simulation – real individuals utilize the 
simulated device in the real setting,  
• "Virtual" simulation – real individuals utilize the 
simulated device in a virtual setting, and  
• "Constructive" simulation – simulated individuals 
utilize the simulated device in a virtual setting. 
It is imperative to notice that in every one of the three 
cases, individuals manage the simulated device, and that 
demonstrates the distinction among simulation and 
experimentation. In contrary to experimentation, in 
simulation, individuals are experimenting with a model, and 
not a phenomenon. Moreover, simulation devices are used 
to develop and run the application of the simulation games 
without data acquisition hardware. Information science 
incorporates the greater part of the above-mentioned 
employments of a computer and categories of simulation. 
This is vital for the improvement of long lasting learning, 
with an exceptional aspect of interactivity. 
The improvement of simulations is a multi-step process 
and it must be intended to meet the necessities of the task. 
According to Zapalska, Brozik, and Rudd [23], simulation 
games must encompass the following structure: 
a) Educational goal: the goal of the activity must be 
unambiguous. The objective might be to exhibit or 
take in a reality, a behavior, a skill or some blend 
of the three. A key part of an effective simulation is 
that it addresses a constrained arrangement of 
activities. Attempting to do a lot in a single 
exercise will make a simulation unsuccessful. 
Users must know that as the activity develops, the 
questions may change. This shows that the initial 
suggested questions were limited. It might also 
demonstrate that there are various aspects to the 
activity that should be addressed independently. 

181
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
b) Knowledge: While it is most certainly not 
conceivable to determine precisely what to look for 
during playing the simulation, the accompanying 
inquires must be taken into consideration by the 
teacher: the time must be enough for the practice, 
the simulation instructions should work well, the 
players need to adjust to the rules with no troubles, 
the teacher can observe the unexpected practices 
that take place, and whether the practice 
accomplished its arranged or any unplanned 
objectives. 
c) Social learning and environment: few lessons can 
be learned individually; however, many can be 
learned in a group setting. The utilization of groups 
simplifies scorekeeping in a simulation. It likewise 
requires players to utilize interpersonal skills in 
taking decisions. This connection is regularly a 
significant component, since the players are in fact 
teaching each other about the simulation. The size 
of a group is critical. Group sizes of three to five 
appear to give the best operational attributes [24]. 
These preparatory steps must be thoroughly 
considered before starting the execution of a 
simulation. Actual creation of the simulation ought 
to flow easily from the boundary conditions and the 
established goals. Every simulation occurs inside a 
conceptual 
framework. 
By 
characterizing 
a 
compact 
environment, 
which 
identify 
the 
environment related to the goal of the simulation 
and shows it in a simplified format; the learning 
objectives can be accomplished more effectively 
and quickly. 
d) Students’ perception toward instructions: the 
substance of a simulation is the arrangement of 
transactions among the players. It is vital to 
formulate a general idea of the arrangement of the 
role of every player in the simulation. All 
instructions must lead to the learning objectives. 
The instructions must be composed at this stage. 
The instructions tell the players the way in which 
exchange of transactions can or can't be executed. 
It 
is 
good 
to 
keep 
the 
instructions 
as 
straightforward as possible. The initial design of 
the simulation must have as few instructions and 
limitations as possible. 
e) 
Evaluation: simulations don't create champs or 
losers however; show a procedure. In simulations, 
the evaluation framework is probably going to be 
more anecdotal. Also, it is vital to have the capacity 
to assess the circumstance. It is imperative to 
recognize the objectives and how they can be 
measured, numerically or something else. One 
approach is to measure them regarding how well a 
player's close to the set objectives are met by 
numbering terms or taking a general look at the 
overall portfolio of items. Another approach is to 
concentrate on practices and this can concentrate 
on how players communicated with each other or 
how achievement of the group meets the predefined 
goals. 
The most essential piece of any simulation is reviewing 
the lessons gained from the play. This is the place the 
students’ experiences are changed into education. Simply, 
playing a simulation in a classroom is not adequate, and 
there should be a review that strengthens the activity 
objectives. The debriefing may be the most difficult part of 
any simulation, since it is very conceivable that things 
happened in the simulation are not expected. The simulation 
leader must be aware of everything that is going on during a 
simulation, even the spontaneous situations, and have the 
capacity to make an interpretation of all the simulation steps 
into an arrangement of lessons learned. In case that there are 
various observers, each can include his/her perceptions to the 
debriefing and subsequently enhance the experience. 
Essential concepts that are learned and practiced, while 
playing the simulation turn out to be more important when 
they can connect them with their own experiences. 
Experience and practice, as fundamental components of 
simulation, help students fortify the learned material. As 
students embrace dynamic, systematic and effective data 
gathering, theories no longer end up as abstract concepts that 
are retained. 
B. Effectiveness Along Intrinsic Motivation 
The review of simulation educational games have 
specified that it is a compelling educational technique for 
theoretical advancement in science and additionally 
formative appraisal system, and suggested that it would 
have an advantageous effect on reasonable change.  
Numerous experimental studies revealed that simulation 
games intensify their motivation, including ability, intrigue 
or interest, and endeavors [25][26][27]. Students who 
experienced game based learning domain exhibited higher 
statistical significance of intrinsic motivation than those 
who acquired education in conventional school environment 
[28]. 
 Simulations not only help students to comprehend the 
material better, but also expand students’ interest for the 
content of material. In 2011, Neumann, Neumann, and 
Hood [29] examined computer-based simulations in a 
school statistics course where 38 students consented to take 
part. After the class, the students were reached for a 20 
minutes telephone call and their responses were put into 
defined categories when possible. Utilizing the computer 
based simulation assisted 66 % of students to experience the 
actual-world application of the specific subject, assisted 
60.5 % to comprehend and gain knowledge about the 
material, created interest and attentiveness in 29 % of the 
students, motivated 18 % of the students to discover and 
expanded enjoyment in 16 % of the students. 
 In 2010, Struppert performed a multi-nation study. 
Students in an American, an Australian, and a Swiss 
secondary schools were offered access to a computer-based 
simulation and two arrangements of data over a couple 
months’ time duration. Students in every one of the three 
nations expressed that the game was more interesting at the 
beginning when they played it, but the motivation and 

182
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
interest fainted afterwards. When the review additionally 
asked how the students prefer to learn, evaluations were 
four or above out of five for every one of the three nations 
in both data focuses [30]. 
C.  Critical Review of Related Work 
The studies reviewed by the researcher were used to 
discuss the importance of integrating simulation games in 
education at different fields, and to emphasize on its 
effectiveness.  In reality, this conducted study was built 
upon the directed methods proposed by the previous studies. 
Furthermore, the researcher tended to benefit from the 
analyses of their outcomes, suggestions and implications.  
Their limitations were used as a precaution that the 
researcher tried to overcome for a more successful 
experience.   
The methodology used in the reviewed studies vary, four 
were quantitative and two qualitative.  The first group used 
quantitative methodology through out the collection of data, 
and analyses of the findings. Nguyen (2015) compared web-
based simulation gaming with traditional methods of 
education through experimental methodology [31]. The 
study revealed a higher level of education through 
enhancing the impact of motivation. Kikota et al. (2013) 
discussed 
how 
simulators 
support 
education 
using 
quantitative methodology and collection of data by holding 
interviews and questionnaire [32]. The study concluded that 
the simulator is able to overlap a valid solution and give 
better understanding of complex contexts. Abdullah et al. 
(2013) examined the influence of using business simulation 
as an approach in teaching strategic management [33]. The 
findings obtained from interview and questionnaire showed 
that simulation enriches problem solving analytical skills, 
transfer of knowledge, decision-making, cross-functional 
skills, and adaptable learning. Arias-Aranda and Bustinza- 
Sa’nchez 
(2009) 
compared 
simulation 
games 
with 
traditional teaching method quantitatively [34]. The results 
recorded positive impact on personal control and self esteem 
upon the use of simulation games. 
 The second group composed of two studies that used 
qualitative methodology. Fallatah (2016) evaluated the 
importance of simulation gaming through IPE. The results 
expressed that IPE system reduce medical errors and 
improves patient outcome [35]. Moore (2012) showed the 
difference between simulation games and other teaching 
methods [36], its results demonstrated a higher interest in 
the 
subject 
along 
with 
improvement 
in 
students’ 
accomplishment. In conclusion, the six discussed studies 
and even other studies that were reviewed by the researcher 
emphasize on the positive impact of simulation on 
education, especially with the developing world technology, 
and the challenges faced by the educational system.  
 
IV. 
METHODOLOGY  
The virtual simulation that was employed for this study, 
is framed around a prototype of reality in which the children 
act, perform certain roles, and make decisions essential to 
deal with the intrinsic problematic cases, while utilizing 
specific structured equipment [37][38]. It was particularly 
employed for this study, since it is the one available at the 
examined schools, and it fits the research participants. In 
contrary to the other two simulation methods, the virtual 
simulation requirements such as the computer lab and 
software were found in the schools. In this simulation, 
students examine the theory of how divergent elements and 
their personal decisions may influence large operations. 
‘Helping Plants Grow Well’ is the title of simulation 
employed, which allows students in both grades one and 
two to investigate various quantities of the variables needed 
for plant growth. The third grade simulation game is entitled 
‘Habitat’. It teaches students about proper animal habitat, 
and their position in the food chain. The fourth grade 
simulation is entitled  ‘Life Cycle’. It illustrates plant parts 
and their functions. These simulations are present on BBC 
website [39]. 
This study is classified as descriptive quantitative as it 
analyzes data collected from questionnaires and quantifies 
variations using Statistical Package for the Social Sciences 
(SPSS) software-version 21, where participants were 
generally measured once with the intention of studying the 
impact of using simulation game as an intervention to 
enhance 
the 
academic 
achievement 
of 
science 
as 
independent variable (IV), and development of the 
framework of simulation game practices and competencies 
in the following dimensions: (1) educational goal, (2) 
knowledge, (3) social learning and environment, (4) 
students’ perceptions toward instruction, (5) evaluation, as 
dependent variable (DV). 
A. Data Collection  
The target population for the current study was students 
at cycle’s one and two (6 -10 years old) from Family School 
in Magdouche and National Evangelical School in Nabatieh; 
along with their teachers, learning support assistants, and 
principals. The researcher chose this sample as school 
principals are responsible for giving the permission of using 
this educational method in the classrooms and monitoring 
its outcomes, especially the ones concerned with education 
management, teachers as they execute simulation games and 
compare the results through the grades, and learning support 
assistants since they are present in the classrooms and in 
direct contact with the students. Data was collected from 
March 20, 2017, till April 25, 2017. 
 Students were recruited from the science classes at 
cycles one and two. The researchers selected the sample for 
the study using stratified random sampling method. Robson 
[40] contends a sampling theory that supports stratified 
random sampling as an efficient choice, since the means of 
the stratified samples are likely to be closer to the mean of 
the population overall. 
As stated by Brayman [41], studies that rely on 
qualitative and quantitative configurations are called mixed 
method designs. This combination is considered to be an 
enriching method. A major feature of triangulation method is 
the integration matter. For these reasons, the researcher 
chose a descriptive quantitative research design, and 
employed a mixed mode questionnaire survey instrument. 

183
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
First, greater comprehensive data is acquired in which 
several sources yield validity and verification while 
enhancing similar data. Second, results can be minimized to 
a few numerical statistics and interpreted in shorter 
statements. Finally, it helps in raising the consistency, depth 
and scope in methodological proceedings [42]. 
  The data collection included both control/test and 
pre/post test groups. In addition to a hard copy of the 
questionnaire, which was filled with the assistance of each 
classroom teacher. A total of 158 responses were collected 
from control/test group, and 308 responses at pre/post test 
groups. The control/test group had a different topic then the 
pre/post test group. 
B. Measurements  
In this study, the researcher recruited a set of 
instruments to obtain the required measurements. 
 
The researcher enumerated a sample of 158 
students as a control group to pilot the study. The 
control/test group results were compared and discussed to 
prove the effectiveness of the research. Through obtaining 
the mean, mode, standard deviation and standard error. 
 
Both schools shared the same grading system for 
the science subject, with a 0-10 scale where the passing 
grade is 5 out of 10. Below 5 is considered failure, from 5 to 
6 is acceptable, from 6 to 7 is adequate, from 7 to 8 is good, 
from 8 to 9 is very good, and from 9 to 10 is excellent.  
 
In this study, the researcher recruited questionnaire 
survey computing the effectiveness of using simulation game 
as a teaching method in cycles one and two based and taken 
from Copenhagen University and the American Journal of 
Business Education. The questionnaire was divided into five 
domains, and within lays 21 items. The obtained results 
present the mean, mode, standard deviation, and coefficient 
of variation of each item with their total values. The 
student’s questionnaire included three-likert scale response, 
i.e., -1=disagree, 0=neutral, 1=agree. A smiling face 
indicated that the students agree. A null face indicated that 
the student is unaware of the answer, and an unhappy face 
pointed for disagreeing. It was used with all items. The 
University’s Committee on Research Ethics (LIU-CRE) has 
validated the questionnaire before being used by the 
researcher in the field. 
 
The researcher used other instruments too, the 
academic achievement test of each one of science topic 
selected: Pre-test and Post-test. This instrument supplied the 
opportunity of comparing grades before, and after the 
simulation. It was done through two parts; in the first part 
students took the lesson “ Shapes of Leaves” in a traditional 
method, and got pre simulation game grades, then they 
experienced the simulation “Helping Plants to Grow Well” 
and took post grades.  The pre/post test grades were 
compared to emphasize on the pedagogic impact of the 
simulation game. The obtained results presented the mean, 
standard deviation, and standard error. All students had no 
previous preparation for pre/post test. 
 
Semi-structured approach situated around an 
interview plan was employed to assess the management’s 
Table I.      STUDENTS’ PERCEPTION ON THE SIMULATION GAME 
 
Construct 
Educational goal 
Agree 
(%) 
Neutral           
(%) 
Disagree 
(%) 
1. The simulation game is 
helpful and useful for you 
current lesson. 
80.2 
11 
8.8 
2. The simulation game 
covers the important topics 
in the lesson. 
70.8 
21.8 
7.5 
3. The simulation game has 
increased your knowledge in 
the lesson. 
80.2 
12.3 
7.5 
4. The simulation game has 
transferred some practical 
skills to you. 
56.5 
20.8 
22.7 
5. The simulation game is 
interesting and enjoyable 
88.6 
8.8 
2.6 
Knowledge 
 
 
 
6. The simulation game 
enables you to apply the 
lesson. 
86 
8.8 
5.2 
7. Playing simulation game 
demands more effort than 
you expected. 
37.8 
11.4 
50.8 
8. Playing simulation game 
engaged you more in the 
lesson. 
80.8 
10.7 
8.5 
9. The simulation game was 
good in testing your 
decision-making. 
82.8 
9.1 
8.1 
10. The simulation game 
provided you with the 
knowledge that you can 
use in real life. 
81.5 
12.3 
6.2 
Social learning and 
environment 
 
 
 
11. I worked more with 
other group members. 
69.2 
1.9 
28.9 
12. My group and I dealt 
with the game challenges 
perfectly. 
62.3 
16.3 
21.4 
13. I had fun while playing 
the game with my group. 
66.2 
15.6 
18.2 
14. Teamwork is important 
for performing well in the 
simulation game. 
74.6 
18.9 
6.5 
Student perception toward 
instruction 
15. The simulation game 
instructions were well 
organized. 
70.8 
25.3 
3.9 
16. The simulation game 
organization is acceptable. 
81.5 
14.9 
3.6 
17. The simulation game 
was easy to understand 
and play. 
75.3 
16.6 
8.1 
Evaluation 
18. The simulation game 
results represent your 
decision. 
90.6 
6.5 
2.9 
19. The performance report 
is easy to read. 
55.8 
23.4 
20.8 
20. The time to take the 
decisions was enough. 
57.5 
18.8 
23.7 
21. The animation of the 
simulation game is 
helpful. 
89.9 
6.2 
3.9 
 

184
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
perspective and point of view toward the implementation of 
interactive learning method of simulation gaming in cycles 
one and two. The interview targets the school administration 
with 16 different questions, in addition to a focus group 
discussion of 15 questions, learning support assistants, 
lower elementary education specialist, and school counselor 
to elicit in-depth information on how they are supporting the 
education of students and its consequence.  
 
To get closer insight at the implementation method 
a structured observation was performed by the researcher. 
This helped along with the semi-structured approach to 
determine the barriers that students went through upon 
experiencing the simulation game. 
V. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION  
The questionnaire was distributed to students, to measure 
the impact of simulation game on their academic 
achievement. The science teachers upon reading the 
preceding items assisted students in Cycle One. 
Table I lists the perceived intrinsic motivation through 
out the game. On one hand, the majority of the students 
(88.6%) agreed that the game developed interest. On the 
other hand, a few students (2.8%) disagreed with that. 
Concerning the effort exerted, the students’ perception was 
positive, in which (50.8%) disagreed that the experienced 
game demanded more effort. Explicitly, (74.6%) agreed that 
simulation enhances social learning. Most of the students 
(75.3%) agreed that the game instructions were easy to 
understand, which made them do better. Only a few (2.9%) 
of students didn’t agree that the game results represented 
their decision, therefore the hypothesis suggesting that 
simulation games enhance the decision-making capacity of 
students has been corroborated.  
 
In this examination, the gender percentages show that 
(58.1%) of members were males, and (41.9%) were females. 
As for the grade, (29.2%) of members were in grade 1, 
(24%) them were in grade 2, (21.1%) were in grade 3, and 
(25.6%) were in grade 4. Students involved in this study 
were mostly from cycle one (74.3%), while (25.6%) were 
from the second cycle. 
A. 
Data Analysis 
All statistical analyses were carried out using the SPSS, 
version 21. The analyses that were examined in the study 
included: 
 Grade comparison – To measure the academic 
variation among students, and emphasize on the 
effectiveness of simulation games in academic 
achievement. 
 
Descriptive analysis – To analyze the perceptions 
of participants towards simulation gaming outcome 
practices and competencies in the following five 
domains: (1) educational goal, (2) knowledge, (3) 
social learning and environment, (4) students’ 
perception toward instruction, and (5) evaluation  
 
Cronbach Alpha – To view the reliability of the 
questionnaire 
 
Factor analysis – To measure the validity of the 
questionnaire, 
i.e., 
whether 
it 
contributes 
significantly to the factor it measures and to group 
items accordingly to the factor they measure. 
 
Analysis of variance (ANOVA) and T-Test – To    
see whether there is an effect for demographic 
variables of title and academic qualification of 
participants 
on 
their 
perceptions 
towards 
simulation 
game 
outcome 
practices 
and 
competencies 
in 
the 
afore 
mentioned 
five 
dimensions. 
The researchers started with comparing control-test 
groups at the baseline, through a sample of 158 students 
from National Evangelical School in Nabtieh. The stratified 
random sample continued students from both cycle one and 
two.   
Table III shows that the average mean of the control 
group was lower than that of the test group (7.932< 8.512). 
The average score obtained by the control group is lower 
than that of the test group (7<10), showing that the group 
learned through simulation game achieved a better outcome. 
 However, the standard deviation of the control group was 
higher than that of the test group (1.894> 1.534).   
After comparing the control and test groups, it revealed 
academic progress of the test group students. The researchers 
executed a study quality appraisal on pre-post test groups, 
relying on the basics of the investigated related work listed in 
the study literature. In which the researcher benefited from 
their limitations and went beyond it as much as possible.  
Table II.   DEMOGRAPHICS OF PARTICIPANTS IN TERMS OF 
FREQUENCY AND PERCENTAGE 
 
Demographic Variable 
Frequency 
Percentage 
 
Gender 
Male 
179 
58.1% 
Female 
129 
41.9% 
Total 
308 
100.00% 
 
Grade 
 
1 
90 
29.2% 
2 
74 
24% 
3 
65 
21.1% 
4 
79 
25.6% 
Total 
308 
100.00% 
 
Table III.       DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS SUMMARY FOR 
CONTROL/TEST GROUP 
 
 
Mean 
Mode 
Standard 
deviation 
Standard 
error 
Sample 
size 
Control 
group 
7.392 
7 
1.894 
0.150 
158 
Test 
group 
8.512 
10 
1.534 
0.122 
 
158 
 
 
 
 

185
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 The same topic was taught to students at both schools, 
where the pretest was done at the end of the traditional 
educational method, while the post-test was done at the end 
of the simulation. 
 
Table IV shows the grading results from both intended 
schools. The pre and post-test were the same to exclude any 
possible contamination. The mean value clearly reveals the 
progress that students made upon the practice of simulation 
game, in which their average increased by two grades 
(7.355>9.020). However, the standard deviation was used to 
measure the amount of variation of the set of pre/post data 
values. It shows that the variation in pre-test group (1.986) 
was higher than that of post-test group (1.068). Hence, the 
simulation game experienced by the students was effective. 
At the end of the science course, present students gave 
their response to the questionnaire. 
 
Table V summarizes the result of participants' responses 
to questionnaire items in the five domains: (1) educational 
goal, (2) knowledge, (3) social learning and environment, (4) 
student perception toward instruction, and (5) evaluation. 
This summary indicates that students practice simulation 
games at their schools with an overall mean of (0.607), mode 
of (0.96), SD of (0.617), and CV of (141.29%). The highest 
average value is obtained upon testing the students’ 
perception 
toward 
instruction 
(0.706>0.654>0.605>0.580>0.490), 
indicating 
that 
the 
practice of simulation games enhance the students’ 
recognition of provided instructions. It also, indicates the 
instructions 
in 
the 
used 
simulation 
game 
were 
straightforward and suitable for the students as mentioned 
previously at the explained frame works in the literature 
review.  The use of computerized instructions within the 
simulation game provided a higher academic achievement 
[43].  
The researcher held a couple of tests to ensure the 
reliability and validity of the used questionnaire. For 
reliability cronbach’s alpha is used. As for the reliability, the 
researcher assures that the survey is valid by using different 
statistical measures. For validity, two measures calculated: 
the Kraiser-Meyer-Olkin measure of sampling adequacy and 
Bartlett’s test of Sphericity 
Reliability comes to the forefront when variables 
developed from summated scales are used as predictor 
components in objective models. It is very important to 
know whether the same set of items would elicit the same 
responses, and if the same questions are recast and re-
administered to the same respondents. Cronbach's alpha is a 
measure of internal consistency that is, how closely related 
sets of items are as a group. 
Table VI displays the result of Cronbach's Alpha Test 
for reliability of questionnaire. Alpha coefficient ranges in 
value from 0 to 1. The higher the score, the more reliable 
the generated scale is. The result indicates that Cronbach's 
Alpha for the whole questionnaire is 0.831 (greater than 
0.7). So, the questionnaire is considered reliable. 
The initial stage involved checking the factorability of 
the data. To this end, two tests were performed the Kaiser-
Meyer-Olkin (KMO) measure of sampling adequacy, and 
Table IV. DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS SUMMARY FOR PRE/POST TESTS 
 
 
Mean 
Standard 
deviation 
CV 
Sample 
size 
Pre-test 
7.355 
1.986 
16.2% 
308 
Post-test 
9.020 
1.068 
8.7% 
308 
 
Table V.     DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS SUMMARY FOR THE STUDENTS’  
QUESTIONNAIRE 
 
Factor 
Mean 
Mode 
SD 
CV 
Educational goal 
0.654 
1 
0.494 
111.4% 
Knowledge 
0.580 
0.8 
0.64 
203.26% 
Social learning and 
environment 
0.492 
1 
0.775 
168.7% 
Students perception 
toward instruction 
0.706 
1 
0.553 
79.5% 
Evaluation 
0.605 
1 
0.623 
143.6% 
Total Whole of the 
questionnaire 
0.607
4 
0.96 
0.617 
141.292% 
 
 
TABLE VII.    RESULTS FOR KMO TEST 
 
Factor 
KMO Measure of Sampling 
Adequacy 
Educational goals 
0.718 
Knowledge 
0.663 
Social learning and 
environment 
0.681 
Students perception toward 
instructions 
0.789 
Evaluation 
0.795 
Total Whole of the 
Questionnaire 
0.729 
 
Table VI.   RESULTS OF CRONBACH’S TEST FOR 
RELIABILITY OF QUESTIONNAIRE 
 
Factor 
Cronbach's 
Alpha 
Number of 
Items 
Educational goals 
0.811 
5 
Knowledge 
0.710 
5 
Social learning and 
environment 
0.944 
4 
Students perception 
toward instructions 
0.798 
3 
Evaluation 
0.893 
4 
Total Whole of the 
Questionnaire 
 
0.831 
 
21 
 

186
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the Bartlett’s test of sphericity. KMO values usually vary 
between 0 and 1. For the Bartlett’s test of sphericity, a value 
of (p< 0.05) is essential for adopting the results as 
acceptable. Both tests were performed to test the scale items 
in the questionnaire used for the data collection. 
Table VII displays the results of KMO test. The result 
indicates that KMO test of Sampling Adequacy is 0.729, 
which is above the required level of 0.6 for recognizing the 
acceptability of the results. Hence, the results of the KMO 
test are significant for all five factors. 
Table VIII displays the results of Bartlett’s Sphericity 
test. The result indicates that values of the Bartlett’s 
Sphericity test are also significant for all five factors with 
(p=0.000), and accordingly factor analysis is regarded as 
appropriate. 
Eigenvalues are numbers that specify how spread out the 
data is. Table IX displays the results of Eigenvalues test. 
The results of the Eigenvalues test expose that a high 
percentage of the variance in the sample is clarified by the 
factors involved in the scale. 
The highest percentage of variance was at the student 
perception toward instruction’s domain (74.504 %), while 
the lowest was at the knowledge domain (50.515 %). This 
shows that the students’ answers varied mostly, when they 
were asked about their perception toward the simulation 
instructions. As such, the results are observed as suitable. 
Sad indicated that communalities illustrate how various 
issues can affect the design of the research variables [44]. It 
is the amount of variance a variable shares with all the other 
variables being considered.  This is also the proportion of 
variance explained by the common factors. A value of 
variance that is below (0.3) might be a sign that the item 
does not belong with the other items measuring the variable. 
In practice, variables with a value of communality of 
(0.500) and above are retained. As a result, this validated the 
items used in not only with standardized questionnaire but 
also, the results that correlated with it. 
 
Table X displays the results of communalities for the 
five dimensions. The results indicate that value of 
communalities of all five simulation gaming framework are 
above 0.500, so these variables are retained. 
 
B. Hypothesis results  
The researcher attempts to study the relation between 
learning in social environment and succession of simulating 
gaming that is illustrated by the four factors (dimensions):  
(1) Educational goals, (2) Knowledge, (4) Students 
perception toward instructions, and (5) Evaluation. 
The research questions related to the impact of 
simulation game on education operation management 
through the above four dimensions is: 
 
What is the relation between simulation gaming 
and learning in social environment? 
To study the effect of these variables, the researcher 
used chi-square test for independence; also called Pearson's 
chi-square test or the chi-square test of association, is a non-
parametric test used to discover if there is a relationship 
between two categorical variables, which are the observed 
Table VIII.    RESULTS OF BARTLETT’S SPERICITY TEST 
Factor 
Approximate 
Chi-Square 
Significance 
Educational goals 
43.856 
0.000 
Knowledge 
40.500 
0.000 
Social learning and 
environment 
59.342 
0.000 
Students perception 
toward instructions 
16.747 
0.001 
Evaluation 
52.708 
0.000 
 
 
Table IX.     RESULTS FOR EIGENVALUE TEST 
 
Factor 
Number of 
components 
Initial Eigenvalues 
Total 
% of Variance 
Educational goals 
1 
3.512 
70.230 
Knowledge 
1 
2.526 
50.515 
Social learning and 
environment 
1 
2.509 
62.708 
Students perception 
toward instructions 
1 
2.235 
74.504 
Evaluation 
1 
2.558 
63.951 
 
Table X.       RESULTS FOR COMMUNALITIES TEST 
 
Factor 
Initial 
Extraction 
Educational goal 
5 
0.702 
Knowledge 
5 
0.525 
Social learning and environment 
4 
0.532 
Students’ perceptions toward 
instructions 
3 
0.745 
Evaluation 
4 
0.639 
 

187
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
distribution with a theoretical distribution. This test was 
applied since the variables are ordinals. 
For the interpretation, p-value is compared with  (error 
ratio = 5%, i.e., 0.05). If p-value >   The researcher 
considers the difference insignificant and vice versa. 
H01: There is no statistically significant difference at the 
0.05 level between students’ perception and learning in a 
social environment such as the one provided by the 
simulation game. 
 
Table XI displays the result of the relation between 
students’ perception and social learning toward simulation 
gaming. The result indicates that the total p-value is 0.128 
(greater than 0.05). Result: H01 is accepted. 
However, p-value between educational goals and 
learning in social environment is equal to 0.003, which is 
less than 0.05. Also, p-value between knowledge and 
learning in social environment is equal to 0.035, which is 
less than 0.05. These two factors have a direct relation on 
learning in social environment. 
The researcher studied the effect of demographic 
variables of students (gender and level of grade) on the 
education operation management that is illustrated by the 
five factors (dimensions):  (1) Educational goals, (2) 
Knowledge, (3) Social learning and environment, (4) 
Students perception toward instructions, and (5) Evaluation. 
In order to answer the following research question:  
 
How does simulation gaming affect education 
operation 
management 
toward 
two 
demographic variables gender and grade? 
To study the effect of these variables, the researcher 
used ANOVA test; it’s a parametric test used to compare 
more than two means, and to study if the difference is 
significant or not. Also, the student T-test was applied to 
compare two means. These two tests were applied since the 
general questions are ordinals. 
For the interpretation, p-value is compared with  (error 
ratio = 5%, i.e., 0.05). 
If p-value >   The researcher considers the difference 
insignificant and vice versa. 
Knowing that the level of significance for ANOVA Test 
and independent t-test is 0.05, the results of hypotheses were 
as the following: 
 
Table XII displays the result of the effect of the grade of 
students on the factors of the study in simulation gaming.  
The result indicates that p-value is 0.465 (greater than 0.05). 
 
H02: There is no statistically significant difference at the 
0.05 levels between effective simulation games and 
education operation management toward two demographic 
variables grade. There is no statistically significant 
difference at the level of 0.05 between the demographic 
variable of students’ grade and the effect of simulation 
gaming in the explained five dimensions.  
Table XI.     RESULTS OF THE RELATION BETWEEN STUDENTS’ 
PERCEPTION AND SOCIAL LEARNING TOWARD SIMULATION 
GAMING 
 
 
Pearson chi-
square 
P-value 
N of Valid 
Cases 
Educational goals 
15.899 
0.003 
308 
Knowledge 
10.352 
0.035 
Students perception 
toward instructions 
4.029 
0.402 
Evaluation 
5.972 
0.201 
Total of Factors 
7.250 
0.128 
 
 
Table XII.     RESULTS OF THE EFFECT OF GRADE VARIABLE OF STUDENTS 
ON THE FACTORS OF THE STUDY 
 
Grade 
Factor 
Grade 
1 
Grade 
2 
Grade 
3 
Grade 
4 
P-value 
Educational 
goals 
0.66 
0.70 
0.82 
0.75 
0.170 
Knowledge 
0.67 
0.64 
0.72 
0.78 
0.197 
Social learning 
and 
environment 
0.58 
0.62 
0.68 
0.54 
0.593 
Students 
perception 
toward 
instructions 
0.77 
0.82 
0.77 
0.78 
0.838 
Evaluation 
0.76 
0.72 
0.78 
0.82 
0.531 
Total of Factors 
0.688 
0.700 
0.754 
0.734 
0.465 
 
Table XIII.     Results of the Effect of Gender Variable of Students  
on the Factors of the Study. 
 
Gender 
Factor 
Female 
Male 
P-
value 
Educational goals 
0.70 
0.74 
0.389 
Knowledge 
0.66 
0.73 
0.183 
Social learning and 
environment 
0.57 
0.63 
0.396 
Students perception 
toward instructions 
0.78 
0.79 
0.719 
Evaluation 
0.78 
0.76 
0.663 
Total of Factors 
0.698 
0.73 
0.470 
 
 

188
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Result: H02 is accepted. 
      Table XIII displays the result of the effect of gender of 
students on the factors of the study in simulation gaming. 
H03: There is no statistically significant difference at the 
0.05 levels between effective simulation games and 
education operation management toward two demographic 
variables gender. 
The result indicates that p-value is 0.470 (greater than 0.05). 
There is no statistically significant difference at the level 
of 0.05 between the demographic variable of students’ 
gender on the effect of simulation gaming in the explained 
five dimensions. Result: H03 is accepted. 
The school administration, learning support assistants, 
lower elementary education specialist, school counselor, and 
the researcher recited the barriers that hinder the usefulness 
of simulation gaming in education during the interview, 
focus group discussion, and structured observation as 
following: 
a) Active cooperation: simulation games require 
active cooperation of the students if they are to 
succeed, however, this cooperation might not 
be forthcoming. 
b) Time demands: comparing the time convoluted 
in using simulation games to the learning 
benefits 
established 
is 
essential. 
Certain 
simulation games demand much time during 
experiencing that would exceed the benefits 
established. 
c) Student’s 
outcome: 
upon 
experiencing 
simulation games students might raise a higher 
interest in playing the game. A potential 
outcome of using simulation in a lesson is that 
the student’s education level might be affected, 
when they concentrate more on the game itself 
than the intended lesson. 
d) Technology issues: simulation games face 
hurdles with technology, such as the impotence 
to preview, and the deficiency of accessibility 
to disabled students. 
e) Stress: 
the 
feeling 
of 
uncertainty, 
and 
physiological pressure upon decision-making 
lead to stress among participants.  This might 
cause problems with classroom management, 
and disorder in student’s behavior. 
f) 
Cost: certain requirements of simulation games 
are 
expensive 
which 
set 
a 
barrier 
on 
implementing it. 
These barriers have a negative consequence on the 
effectiveness of simulation games. 
H04: Barriers portrayed in the simulation games does not 
correlate with its effectiveness on students’ education.   
 Results: H04 is rejected. Hence, the researcher accepts 
the alternative hypothesis HA4. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK  
In this section, the analysis of the obtained results under 
the optic of the research questions and sub-questions is 
carried out. Moreover, the chapter reviews the firmness and 
fragility of the current study with a specific end goal to 
include essential recommendations, and implications for 
future research in this field, as proposed by the findings.  
A. Conclusion  
In respect to the relation between students’ perception 
and learning in social environment, the outcome clearly 
showed there is negative relation, yet much emphasis on the 
decision-making, and instruction need to be addressed as 
they are major limitations. 
In regard to the barriers faced during the implementation 
of simulation games in science education, their quantitative 
impact on learning outcome wasn’t assessed due to the 
required time frame to brace behavioral variables. However, 
they are expected to be negative, especially the active 
cooperation, since cooperation is vital to trigger the intrinsic 
motivation of students and obtain the basic goal of using the 
simulation game. Time demands are another vital barrier, 
teachers should consider allowing more time at the 
implementation phase, since the student centered and 
technical aspects of the simulation game demands more 
effort than traditional method of education does. 
In relation to the effect of the simulation game on 
education 
operation 
management 
toward 
the 
two 
demographic variables gender and grade, the outcome 
clearly showed that there is no statistically significant 
difference at the level of 0.05 between the demographic 
variable of students’ gender and grade with the effect of 
simulation gaming in the explained five dimensions. 
The researcher concludes that students have the highest 
perception toward instructions with the highest total mean 
value (0.706) in the five dimensions, and the lowest CV 
(79.5%). While the social learning and environment had a 
negative impact on the implemented simulation game with 
the lowest total mean value (0.492) in the five dimensions. 
The researcher concludes that the students consider that 
the simulation game represents their decisions as indicated 
by item 18 with the highest mean (0.876) in the five 
dimensions. In contrast few students find that the simulation 
game demands more effort upon implementation than the 
expected of a mean value (0.13) in the five dimensions. 
The researcher concludes that the students consider that 
the simulation game as interesting and enjoyable with a 
mean value of (0.860), although practical skills transferred 
to them throughout the simulation game weren’t at a 
significant level, in which the obtained mean value of item 4 
was (0.337). This reflects that the use of simulation games 
doesn’t eradicate the practical application of science topics 
that could be assigned through lab work. Furthermore, the 
fusion of simulation game with acquirement of the practical 
skills would enhance, and facilitate the quality of operations 
used in education management. 
B. Recommendations 
In light of the review of the literature and results of the 
present 
study, 
the 
researcher 
would 
provide 
the 
accompanying pedagogical recommendations: 
1. 
Simulation games are very significant for a 
professional development of educational systems, and for 

189
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the process of education operation management at different 
levels. So, the government should ensure incorporating 
simulation games as a part of the education system. Also, 
the preparation for the simulation game should take into 
consideration the barriers and start decreasing their negative 
impact through enabling informal learning, facilitating 
access to networks, and providing resource support for 
better outcome. 
2. 
The simulation game requires more time than the 
traditional method of education. If the assigned time for the 
simulation isn't fitting, at that point learning is probably not 
going to happen, at any rate to a similar degree. Extra time 
should be apportioned in class for the simulation, and the 
curriculum must be re-organized to enable this new teaching 
method to take up enough time in the class. Hence, the set-
up of the curriculum requirements to represent the exchange 
off between practical skills and theoretical establishment 
can be represented consequently through lab sessions and 
simulation games. 
 
3. 
Teachers should contemplate the preconception of 
students through the simulation program. Also, a specialist 
ought to be available in the school or be made accessible to 
lead a preparation to course for science educators on the 
most proficient method to settle any essential rising 
inconveniences, to guarantee that the lesson proceeds, as it 
should. 
4. 
Planning a simulation for advancing operations 
management education ought to think of some of the issues, 
for example, the simulation site engaging quality, the 
ingress to a supervising framework, and individual 
execution appraisal. Appraisal of team execution should be 
supplemented with individual execution assessment to 
guarantee reasonableness in checking. The utilization of this 
simulation should be formally incorporated into the 
operations management course syllabus for consistency over 
scholarly semesters. 
5. 
Innovation is the future; it is fundamental that 
specialists discover approaches to interface instructions to 
address the issues and eventual fate of the present advanced 
students. Scientists must keep on discovering the best 
techniques to enhance instructions. Basically paying little 
respect to the innovation accessibility, the subtitles 
arrangement, and the instructors’ character, upon choosing 
the proper simulation games for each lesson. 
C. Complications and Limitations of this Study  
There were several limitations that the researchers 
encountered in this study. The two principal limitations 
were: 
1. 
The lack of studies in Lebanon that have examined 
simulation, and 
2. 
The insufficiency 
of prior research 
studies 
evaluating the effectiveness of embedding simulations as a 
part of science education in primary schools. 
Moreover, 
diverse 
studies 
discussing 
dissimilar 
pedagogical programs and cultures, stated earlier, were 
homogenous and similar to the findings of this research. A 
further crucial reason is the lack of any study in Lebanon 
done at the same time of this research that uses simulation in 
the classroom to make use of its results and overcome the 
possible obstacles faced by the researchers.   
Consequently, in order to determine the effectiveness of 
simulation gaming in science education in primary school, 
further research is needed, which must focus on:  
a) 
Teachers perspective against the utilization of 
simulation  
b) 
How encouraging the school administration is in 
utilizing ICT 
c) 
Teacher skills in utilizing ICT, especially the ones 
concerned with simulation gaming.  
D. Implication for Further Study in Lebanon 
There is a deficiency of studies in Lebanon and other 
Arab countries with the close pedagogical environment that 
evaluates the degree of effectiveness of simulation games in 
primary schools for science teaching. Consequently, 
researchers require supplementary studies to decide which 
factors might reinforce or obstruct the implementation of 
simulation in science teaching. 
Moreover, simulation games are applicable through the 
learning process from the school and university levels to the 
long-lasting learning circumstances.  
The researchers suggest that the issue of simulation games 
in science education has two fundamental aspects. 
First, they should be used as a supplement to the educational 
process. Subsequently, the simulation games should be 
included in the science education curriculum, at all 
educational levels. Moreover, the use of simulation games 
should be considered an imperative factor for comparing the 
quality educational curricula that uses it from the 
educational curricula that don't use simulation games. 
Second, science curricula should, at the higher levels of 
study, include a course about simulation games itself. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The researchers would like to extend their gratitude to the 
students (who were involved in this study), the instructors, 
and the administrations of the Family School and The 
National Evangelical School in Nabatieh.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] N. Issa, A. Kawtharani, and H.M. Khachfe, “Developing 
Pedagogical Effectiveness By Assessing the Impact of 
Simulation Gaming On Education Operation Management: 
Experimental Study On Cycles One and Two at Two Private 
Schools in Lebanon,” in The Ninth International Conference 
on Emerging Networks and Systems Intelligence, November 
12-16, 2017, Barcelona, Spain. 
[2] L. Proserpio and A. Gioia, “Teaching the virtual generation. 
Academy of Management Learning and Education,” vol. 6(1), 
pp.  69–80, 2007.   
[3] E. Clarke, “Learning outcomes from business simulation 
exercises: Challenges for the implementation of learning 
technologies,”  Education + Training, vol. 51 Issue: 5/6, 

190
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
pp.448-459, 
2009. 
Available 
from: 
https://doi.org/10.1108/00400910910987246 
[4] M. Lewis and H. Maylor, “Game playing and operations 
management education,” International Journal of Production 
Economics, vol. 105, pp. 134–149, 2007. 
[5] J. Bloomer, “What have simulations and gaming got to do 
with programmed learning and educational technology? 
Programmed learning & educational technology,” vol. 10(4), 
pp. 224–234, 1973. 
[6] C. Abt, “Serious games”. New York: Viking Press, 1970. 
[7] A. Struppert, “It’s a whole new fun different way to learn,” 
Students’ perceptions of learning with an electronic 
simulation: Selected results from three case studies in an 
Australian, an American and a Swiss middle school. The 
International Journal of Learning, vol. 17, pp. 363 – 375, 
2010. 
[8] J. Kanet, “Problem-based Learning - Lessons learned from an 
undergraduate operations management program,” Paper 
presented at the POMS 18th annual conference, Dallas, Texas, 
USA, 2007.  
[9] B. Naik, “Using PBL assignments in undergraduate 
operations management course,” Journal of higher education 
theory and practice, vol. 11(2), pp. 84-90, 2011.   
[10] J. Wolfe, “A history of business teaching games in English-
speaking and post-socialist countries: the origination and 
diffusion of a management education and development 
technology,” Simulation & Gaming, vol. 24, pp. 446–463, 
December 1993. 
[11] M. Gredler, “Educational games and simulations: A 
technology in search of a (research) paradigm.” In D. H. 
Jonassen (Ed.), Handbook of research for educational 
communications and technology, pp. 521-39, 1996. 
[12] F. W. Moroney and W. B. Moroney, “Flight simulation”. In 
D. J. Garland, J. A. Wise, & V. D. Hopkin (Eds.), Handbook 
of aviation human factors. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates, pp. 355–388, 1999. 
[13] E. Gredler, “Educational games and simulations: A 
technology in search of a (research) paradigm”. In D. H. 
Jonassen (Ed.), Handbook of research for educational 
communications and technology, pp. 521-39, 1996. 
[14] P, Bradley, “The history of simulation in medical education 
and possible future directions”. Medical Education, 40(3), pp. 
254–262, 2006. 
[15] D. Stanley and K. Latimer, “The Ward: a simulation game for 
nursing students”. Nursing Education in Practice, 11(1), pp. 
20–25, 2010. 
[16] M. Stieff and U. Wilensky, “Connected chemistry – 
incorporating interactive simulations into the chemistry 
classroom”. Journal of Science Education and Technology, 
12(3), pp. 285–302, 2003. 
[17] E. K. Chang, L. Y. Chen, Y. H.  Lin and T. Y.  Sung, "Effects 
of learning support in simulation-based physics learning”. 
Computers & Education, 51, pp. 1486–1498, 2008. 
[18] R. B. D’Artista and  F. Hellweger, “ Urban hydrology in a 
computer game,” Environmental Modelling and Software, 22, 
1679–1684.Education, 29(1), pp. 25–33, 2007. 
[19] H. Gold and S. Gold, “Beat the market: an interactive 
microeconomics simulation”. The Journal of Economic 
Education, vol. 41(2), 2, p. 216, 2010 
[20] D. Vlachopoulos, and A.  Makri, “The effect of games and 
simulations on higher education: a systematic literature 
review”. International Journal of Educational Technology in 
Higher Education, 14, 2017, pp. 1-33. Retrieved from: 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s41239-017-0062- 
[21] J. H. Klabbers, “On the architecture of game science”. 
Simulation & Gaming, 2018, 49, pp. 207-245. Retrieved 
from: https://doi.org/10.1177/1046878118762534 
[22] H. Stančić, S. Seljan, A. Cetinić, and D. Sanković, 
“Simulation Models in Education,” In Međunarodna Znan. 
Konf. Futur. Inf. Sci, January 2007, pp. 469-481. 
[23] A. Zapalska, D. Brozik and D. Rudd, “Development of active 
learning with simulation and games,” Online Submission, 
2012. 
[24] A. Zapalska., and D. Brozik, “Learning market skills through 
simulation”. Journal of Private Enterprise, pp. 56-70, 2001. 
[25] J. Burguillo, “Using game theory and competition-based 
learning to stimulate student motivation and performance. 
Computers & Education,” vol. 55(2), 2010, pp. 566-575. 
Retrieved 
from: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2010.02.018. 
[26] D. Cordova and M, Lepper, “Intrinsic motivation and the 
process of learning: Beneficial effects of contextualization, 
personalization, 
and 
choice”. 
Journal 
of 
educational 
psychology, vol. 88(4), 1996, p. 715. Retrieved from: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.88.4.715. 
[27] H. Tüzün, M. Yılmaz-Soylu, T. Karakuş, Y. İnal, and  G. 
Kızılkaya, “The effects of computer games on primary school 
students’ achievement and motivation in geography learning. 
Computers & Education,” vol. 52(1), 2009, pp. 68-77. 
Retrieved 
from: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2008.06.008. 
[28] N. Vos, H. Meijden, and E. Denessen, “Effects of 
constructing versus playing an educational game on student 
motivation and deep learning strategy use,” Computers & 
Education, vol. 56(1), 2011, pp. 127-137. Retrieved from: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2010.08.013 
[29] L. Neumann, M. Neumann, and M. Hood, “Evaluating 
computer-based simulations, multimedia and animations that 
help integrate blended learning with lectures in first year 
statistics,” Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, 
vol. 27(2), pp. 274-289, 2011.  
[30] A.  Struppert, “It’s a whole new fun different way to learn.” 
Students’ perceptions of learning with an electronic 
simulation: Selected results from three case studies in an 
Australian, an American and a Swiss middle school. The 
International Journal of Learning, 17, pp. 363 – 375, 2010. 
[31] N. Nguyen, “Motivational Effect of Web-Based Simulation 
Game in Teaching Operations Management”. Journal of 
Education and Training Studies Vol. 3, No. 2. 2015. Retrieved 
from: http://dx.doi.org/10.11114/jets.v3i2.565 
[32] T. Kikota, G. Costab, R. Magalhãesc, S. Fernandesd, 
“Simulation Games as Tools for Integrative Dynamic 
Learning: The Case of the Management Course at the 
University 
of 
Algarve” 
, 
2013 
. 
Retrieved 
from: 
doi:10.1016/j.protcy.2013.12.002 
[33] L. Abdullah, H. Hanafiah, and A. Hashim, “Developing 
Creative Teaching Module: Business Simulation in Teaching 
Strategic Management”. International Education Studies; Vol. 
6, No. 6; 2013. Available from: Canadian Center of Science 
and 
Education. 
Retrieved 
from: 
hp://dx.doi.org/10.5539/ies.v6n6p95. 
[34] D. Arias-Aranda, and O. Bustinza-Sanchez, “Entrepreneurial 
attitude 
and 
conflict 
management 
through 
business 
simulations”. Industrial Management & Data Systems, 109(8), 
pp. 1101–1117, 2009. 
[35] I. Fallatah, “Introducing inter-professional education in 
curricula of Saudi health science schools: An educational 
projection of Saudi Vision 2030”. Journal of Taibah 
University Medical Sciences (2016) .Retrieved from: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j. jtumed.2016.10.008.  
[36] L. Moore, “American history simulations, reenactments, and 
educational 
games: 
a 
supplemental 
middle 
school 
curriculum”, 
2012. 
Retrieved 
from 
https://dspace.sunyconnect.suny.edu/.../Kerrie_Moore_Master
s_Project_May2012.pdf. 

191
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[37] H. Ellington, “Games and simulations – media for the new 
millennium.” In D. Saunders and N. Smalley (Eds.), The 
International simulation and gaming research yearbook. 
London: Kogan Page Vol. 8, pp. 13‐32, 2000. 
[38] A. Piu and C. Fregola, “Transcoding Pattern and Simulation 
Games in Learning Geometry.” A Research in Primary 
School. In S. A. Meijer and R. Smed (Eds.), Frontiers in 
Gaming Simulation, 2014, pp. 21‐28, Switzerland: Springer 
International Publishing.  
[39] “Helping 
Plants 
Grow 
Well” 
British 
Broadcasting 
Corporation (BBC) (http://www.bbc.co.uk/schools/science-
clips/ages/7_8/plants_grow.shtml) 
[40] C. Robson, “Real World Research. A Resource for Social 
Scientists and Practitioner Researches, 2nd edition. Blackwell: 
Oxford,” 2002. 
[41] A. Bryman, “Integrating quantitative and qualitative research: 
how is it done? Qualitative Research”,  6(1), pp. 97-113, 
2006.  
[42] M. Fetters and D. Freshwater,  “The 1+1=3 integration 
challenge”. Journal of Mixed Methods Research, 9, pp. 115–
117, 2015. 
[43] O. Serin, “The effects of the computer-based instruction on 
the achievement and problem solving skills of the science and 
technology students. TOJET: The Turkish Online Journal of 
Educational Technology,” vol. 10(1), January 2011. 
[44] N. S. Sad, “An attitude scale for smart board use in education: 
Validity and reliability studies,” Computers & Education, 58 
(3), pp. 900-907, 2012.                             
 
 
 
 
 
 

