223
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Kinematic Description of Bimanual Performance in Unpredictable Virtual 
Environments 
A Lifespan Study 
 Andrea H Mason, Drew N Rutherford, and      
Andrew R Minkley  
Department of Kinesiology 
University of Wisconsin - Madison 
Madison, USA 
amason@education.wisc.edu, anrutherford@wisc.edu, 
aminkley@wisc.edu 
Patrick J Grabowski 
Department of Physical Therapy 
University of Wisconsin – La Crosse 
La Crosse, USA 
pgrabowski@uwlax.edu
 
Abstract— Immersive virtual environments show great 
promise for use in applications such as design and prototyping, 
data visualization, and rehabilitation of motor impairments. 
However, our understanding of how people of various ages 
process and use sensory information to complete tasks within 
these environments is limited. The purpose of the research 
described here was to characterize motor performance in 
virtual 
environments 
across 
the 
lifespan 
on 
simple, 
foundational skills. Our results indicated that children and 
older adults used different strategies when performing the task 
when compared to young adults.  While older adults adjusted 
for the virtual environment by planning a slower movement, 
children compensated for the artificial environment by relying 
on feedback to a greater extent.  Movement strategies for the 
youngest and oldest groups were also different in the virtual 
environment when compared to results from natural 
environment experiments.  We conclude that children and 
older adults do not plan movements or make use of sensory 
information in a similar fashion to young and middle-aged 
adults when performing in a virtual environment.  The design 
implications of these results are related to differences in 
needed sensory information between children, young and older 
adults, the transfer of training effects between virtual and real 
environments, and important differences between performance 
and learning applications. 
 
 
Keywords- virtual environment; aging; motor control; 
kinematic analysis; bimanual reach to grasp  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
 
With the expansion of the role of computers in schools, 
the workplace, and homes, the population of users who 
make regular use of computing technology has grown 
exponentially.  Unfortunately, Human-Computer Interaction 
(HCI) research has not reflected this demographic reality.  
The purpose of the research reported here is to begin to fill 
this large gap in knowledge by determining how the age of 
the 
user 
influences 
motor 
performance 
in 
virtual 
environments.  In [1], we asked children, young adults, 
middle age adults and older adult participants to perform 
simple and bimanual reach to grasp movements, and 
movements where targets were visually displaced. We 
found that children and older adults used different strategies 
when performing reach to grasp tasks in a virtual 
environment when compared to young adults.  Specifically, 
older adults adjusted for the virtual environment by 
planning a slower movement, while children compensated 
for the artificial environment by relying on feedback to a 
greater extent. In the current paper we extend on [1] by 
including a more detailed literature review, additional and 
detailed kinematic analyses and a more thorough discussion 
of the implication of these results. 
The structure of this paper is as follows. In Section II we 
present a thorough review of the literature upon which this 
work is motivated.  In Section III we describe the 
experimental method used in this paper to investigate the 
roles of age and vision on the performance of reach to grasp 
movements in virtual environments.  In Section IV, the 
results of the statistical analyses are presented and finally, in 
Section V the results are discussed in the context of the 
current 
state 
of 
knowledge 
and 
potential 
applications/implications of this work. 
 
II. 
REVIEW OF LITERATURE 
 
To adequately frame the theory and methods used in the 
research study presented here, this review of literature first 
covers recent work on the influence of age on human 
computer interaction (Section A).  Next, we review the 
current knowledge regarding the control of simple and 
bimanual movements in both natural and computer 
generated environments (Section B) as well as the 
motivation behind using a perturbation task in this study 
(Section C).  Finally, in Section D we present the 
hypotheses for the current study. 
A. 
HCI and Age 
Results of the 2010 US Census show that 17.5% of the 
US population is between the ages of 5 and 18 and a further 
40% of the population is above the age of 45 [2].  It has also 
been reported that Europe is experiencing an aging 

224
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
population, with projections of 35% of the population being 
above the age of 65 by 2025 [3]. Still most HCI research is 
focused on younger people, often university or college 
students [4]. Rather than representing the true population of 
computer users, most experimental HCI research is biased 
heavily towards the cognitive and motor abilities of young 
adults.  
In order to understand how age may influence 
performance 
on 
tasks 
requiring 
human-computer 
interaction, we must first take a step back and understand 
the influence of age on movement performance in general.  
The human body is a constantly changing entity throughout 
the lifespan and all systems of the human body, including 
the sensorimotor system, undergo changes.  Movement 
programming functions are organized quite differently in 
children than in young adults [5], [6].  Further studies have 
shown that children process sensory information from visual 
and proprioceptive receptors differently than adults [7], [8].  
Children tend to rely on visual feedback to a greater extent 
[9].  There is also a general indication that both the 
processing of afferent information, or incoming signals to 
the central nervous system (CNS), and the production of 
efferent information, or outgoing commands, steadily 
changes as a function of age in the developing human.  
Once beyond the “development” stage of the lifespan, into 
older adulthood, the volume of research on age-related 
changes greatly expands.  Multiple authors demonstrate 
physical changes in brain tissues [10]-[12], changes in the 
activation of motor neurons in the brain [13], and a general 
loss of nerve tissue [11], [12].  These tissue changes then 
result in myriad functional declines within the CNS.  There 
is a general deterioration of motor planning [14], [15] and 
anticipatory control [16], as well as slowing of central 
processing [17]-[20].  
These transformations in the sensorimotor system have a 
resultant effect on motor performance in daily life.  Children 
tend to show less accuracy, decreased smoothness of 
movement, and decreased speed when compared to young 
adults [21].  Many of these same manifestations become 
apparent as adults age.  According to Schut [22], most 
physiologic processes begin to decline at a rate of 1% per 
year beginning at age 30.  In general, aging adults 
demonstrate decreases in movement speed [14], [18], 
accuracy [17], strength [23], hand dexterity [24], and 
postural control [25], and increases in reaction time.   
So, how do these lifespan changes in information 
processing within the CNS affect humans as they use 
computer interfaces? Where age-specific research has been 
conducted, the majority relates to the design of standard 
computer interface systems for various age groups.  In 
particular, research has focused on ways to improve 
cognitive performance through specific training or tutorial 
methods (e.g., [26], [27]), or on the age-appropriate design 
of input devices (e.g., [28]-[31]).  There is also a modest 
body of scientific literature which explores the areas of 
motor control in human computer interaction (HCI) as a 
function of age [27], [29].  Most of this information centers 
on the input device, specifically mouse usage in children 
and older adults.  It is reported that there are many age-
related changes, and in general it is quite difficult for 
children and older individuals to use a mouse [27], [28].  
Maintaining adequate pressure and the act of double-
clicking seem to consistently be the most problematic.  
Difficulty with cursor control is named as a top complaint 
among older individuals [4], [26].  It has also been shown 
that performance within a standard computer interface is 
slower and results in a greater number of errors with 
increased age of the operator.   
Much less is known about how age influences 
performance within immersive three-dimensional (3-D) 
virtual environments (VEs) [32]-[34].  Immersive VEs are 
becoming more prominent as the costs of the relevant 
tracking and display technologies decrease.  VEs are 
commonly 
used 
in 
design 
and 
prototyping, 
data 
visualization, medical training, architecture, education, and 
entertainment.  Further, recent research has focused on the 
utility of VEs for rehabilitation of motor impairments such 
as stroke in the elderly and attention deficit hyperactivity 
disorder (ADHD), developmental coordination disorder and 
cerebral palsy in the young [35], [36].  However, because 
there is a paucity of information on how healthy children 
and older adults interact in VEs, it is likely that the success 
of these systems will struggle. Specifically, it is nearly 
impossible to extrapolate design characteristics from healthy 
young adults to special-needs children and older adults.  
Results of the few studies conducted on performance across 
age-groups within virtual environments indicate relevant 
disparities in reactions to environmental immersion, usage 
of various input devices, size estimation ability, and 
navigational skills [32]-[34].  According to Allen et al. [32], 
“these results highlight the importance of considering age 
differences when designing for the population at large.” 
The purpose of the research described here is to 
characterize motor performance in virtual environments 
across the lifespan. To do this we asked participants ranging 
in age from 7 to 90 years to perform a foundational skill 
(bimanual reach to grasp) within a table-top virtual 
environment.  In the following sections, we describe the 
importance of the skill we chose to study. 
B. 
Bimanual Reach to Grasp Skills 
The performance of many everyday activities requires the 
completion of asymmetric but coordinated movements with 
our two hands. For example, touch typing, tying our 
shoelaces, and even reaching for a mug with one hand and a 
coffee pot with the other require the performance of two 
separate but coordinated movements. Many asymmetric 
bimanual tasks such as the ones described above can be 
performed quite effortlessly in natural environments.  This 
seamless control is possible because we use feedforward 
sensory information (vision and proprioception) to pre-plan 

225
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
our movements and feedback sensory information for on-
line corrections during movement execution. 
Recently, bimanual tasks have been targeted as 
important skills to (re)train in rehabilitation protocols 
employing natural environments and virtual reality [37]. In 
rehabilitation training after stroke, these types of tasks are 
important for functional recovery because they require the 
areas of the brain most commonly afflicted by stroke to 
work 
with 
areas 
usually 
left 
undamaged, 
thereby 
maximizing the potential for positive neuroplastic changes 
[38]. 
While the study of bimanual movements has received 
some attention in natural environments, very little is known 
regarding the performance of these types of movements in 
virtual environments [39]. Further, no studies have looked at 
how the control of bimanual skills changes as a result of age 
in VEs.  In order to successfully implement rehabilitation 
and training protocols that make use of these types of tasks 
it is imperative that we first obtain a baseline understanding 
of how neurologically “normal” people across the lifespan 
perform bimanual skills in VEs and how they use sensory 
information for the performance of these skills. 
In natural environments, results from bimanual movement 
studies have indicated that when the two limbs are used to 
accomplish both symmetric and asymmetric task goals, 
coupling between the limbs for certain parameters occurs in 
the temporal domain [40], [41]. In particular, movement 
onset, duration, and end times tend to be similar for the two 
hands when subjects aim toward or reach to grasp targets of 
different sizes or at different locations [40], [41].  However, 
timing differences between the hands have been shown, and 
results indicate that these differences are associated with 
insufficient visual feedback for movement control [42].   In 
the current study we investigated whether the same patterns 
of results are seen in virtual environments and whether these 
patterns change with age.  We employed a target 
perturbation to specifically investigate how sensory (visual) 
information is used on-line by participants of various ages 
to modify their movements.  These paradigms are discussed 
in more detail in the following section. 
 
C. 
Unpredictable Environments: Perturbation Paradigms 
An experimental paradigm that has been successfully 
used to investigate the role of on-line visual information for 
the performance of goal directed tasks uses target 
perturbation to study adjustments to ongoing movements. 
The use of this type of paradigm allows us to discern how 
long it takes the nervous system to adapt to an unexpected 
visual change as well as the efficiency of the adaptation. 
In a target perturbation paradigm, the participant is 
unexpectedly presented with the requirement to alter their 
original movement plan either prior to or after movement 
onset. An example of a typical perturbation paradigm is as 
follows. A visual stimulus is presented to the participant 
prior to movement initiation and the participant generates a 
movement plan appropriate to the acquisition of the target at 
this initial location. Shortly prior to or after movement onset 
the stimulus is suddenly replaced by a second stimulus 
presented at an alternative location. The participant is thus 
required to reorganize their movement to successfully grasp 
the target at its new position. Results of studies using 
perturbation paradigms in both natural [43] and virtual 
environments [39] have indicated increased movement 
times to displaced targets and double velocity peaks in 
kinematic recordings. 
Studying the performance of bimanual perturbation tasks 
in a VE can provide us with important information about 
how participants make use of visual information during the 
execution of a skill.  This is particularly important given that 
the use of sensory information changes across the lifespan 
[44], [45] and all the visual information presented to users 
of VEs must be synthetically created.  By comparing results 
in the VE to studies performed in the “real” world we can 
determine whether performance is similar within these two 
environments.   
 
D. 
Hypotheses 
We asked participants ranging from 7 to 90 years of age 
to perform bimanual reach to grasp movements in a virtual 
environment.  In the first set of trials, target objects 
remained at their initial position throughout the task, giving 
us a baseline performance for each participant.  Based on 
previous 
literature 
on 
age 
differences 
and 
motor 
performance, we expected that younger children and older 
adults would perform the bimanual tasks more slowly than 
the young adults.  Further, we expected that temporal 
synchronization between the two hands would be less strong 
in the youngest and oldest participants due to their reliance 
on visual feedback.  These results would replicate the results 
of studies performed in natural environments.  When 
considering performance in the perturbation conditions, we 
expected the youngest and oldest participants to show a 
decreased ability to respond to the visual displacement of 
the target when compared to the young adults.  Specifically, 
it is known that young children and the elderly process 
sensory/visual information more slowly than young adults 
[21], [22].  Since responding to the perturbation relies on the 
speed of visual information processing, we hypothesized 
that children and older adults would respond more slowly 
and would show less coordinated movements in the 
perturbed conditions than the young adults.   
III. 
METHOD 
 
In the following section we detail the method used to 
determine how age influences performance in virtual 
environments.  We begin by describing our participant pool 
and the experimental apparatus.  Next we describe the tasks 
performed by each participant.  Finally we describe our data 
analysis methods. 

226
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A. 
Participants 
Fifty-one participants were divided into four age 
categories: Children (7-12 years, n=13), Young adults (18-
30 years, n=12), Middle adults (40-50 years, n=12) and 
Older adults (60+ years, n=12). Due to problems with data 
collection final data analysis was conducted on 12 
participants in the “Children” group and 11 participants in 
the “Older adult” group. Decades of motor control research 
have indicated that a sample size of 10-12 participants 
provides sufficient statistical power in this type of reach to 
grasp study. All participants were self-reported right-
handers and had normal or corrected-to-normal vision. All 
participants provided informed consent before taking part in 
the experiment. The protocol was approved by the 
University of Wisconsin-Madison Social and Behavioral 
Science Institutional Review Board. 
 
B. 
Experimental Apparatus 
This experiment was conducted in the Wisconsin Virtual 
Environment (WiscVE) at the University of Wisconsin-
Madison (Fig. 1). In this environment, subjects see three-
dimensional graphical representations of target objects but 
interact with physical objects. Graphic images of two target 
cubes were displayed on a downward facing computer 
monitor. A half-silvered mirror was placed parallel to the 
computer screen, midway between the screen and the table 
surface. The graphic image of the cubes was reflected in the 
mirror and appeared to the participant to be located in the 
workspace on the table surface. Three light emitting diodes 
(LEDs) were positioned on the top surface of two wooden 
target cubes (38 mm). A VisualEyez 3000 motion capture 
system (Phoenix Technologies, Inc., Burnaby) tracked the 
three-dimensional position of the LEDs on the physical 
target cubes. This data was used to generate the 
 
 
superimposed graphical representations of the cubes. The 
lag between motion of the LED and its graphical 
representation was indiscernible to participants. A shield 
was placed below the mirror to prevent subjects from seeing 
the real environment or their hands as they performed the 
reach-to-grasp task. 
Participants wore CrystalEYES™ goggles to obtain a 
stereoscopic view of the graphic images being projected 
onto the mirror. Three LEDs were fixed to the goggles and 
were used to provide the subject with a head-coupled view 
of the virtual environment on the work surface. Thus, when 
the subject moved his/her head, the displayed scene was 
adjusted appropriately for the magnitude and direction of 
head movement. LEDs were also positioned on the subject’s 
right and left thumbs, index fingers and wrists. Data from all 
LEDs was collected at a sampling rate of 120 Hz and was 
stored for data analysis purposes. 
 
C. 
Design and Procedure 
Each trial began with the illumination of two blue 
circular start positions (radius 5 mm) located 12.5 cm to the 
left and right of the participants’ midline. The participants 
moved their hands from the periphery of the workspace to 
place their index fingers and thumbs over the start positions, 
which were haptically indicated by small metal hex nuts. 
When the participants’ hands were correctly positioned, the 
start positions turned yellow. Once both of the participants’ 
hands remained stationary at the start positions for 1 s, the 
two graphic target cubes appeared at a location 20 cm from 
the start position. The task was to reach forward with the 
right and left hands to grasp and lift the two target cubes. 
Grasps were made with a precision grasp (i.e., index finger 
and thumb only) and participants were asked to move at a 
comfortable pace once the target cubes appeared.  
 Participants experienced trials in four experimental 
conditions.  As shown in Fig. 2, in the control condition 
both targets remained at their initial location throughout the 
trial (left target no jump/right target no jump; NN).  As 
shown in Fig. 3, in the three perturbation conditions one or 
both targets were displaced 9 cm toward the participant at 
movement onset (defined as a displacement of 5 mm of the  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Time course a control trial (top-down view). 
Figure 1. Experimental apparatus. 
Move hands from  
periphery to start  
positions 
Target cubes appear. 
Reach forward, 
grasp and lift targets 
1 second 

227
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Time course of perturbation trials (top down view). 
 
thumb LED).  The perturbation conditions consisted of: 1) 
left target jump/right target no jump (JN), 2) left target no 
jump/right target jump (NJ), 3) left target jump, right target 
jump (JJ). 
Participants performed a total of 100 trials.  The first 10 
trials were always control trials (NN).  This allowed 
participants to become comfortable with the task and also 
gave us the opportunity to analyze a set of “control” trials 
where participants had no expectation of a perturbation.  
The remaining 60 control and 30 perturbation trials, 10 in 
each condition, were presented in a random order. 
 
D. 
Data Analysis 
Human motor control, biomechanics and neuroscience 
research has provided a comprehensive description of how 
humans  reach   to  grasp  and manipulate  objects in  natural  
environments under a variety of sensory and environmental 
conditions. By using the same measurement techniques as 
those employed to monitor human performance in natural 
environments, we can compare movement in virtual 
environments to decades of existing human performance 
literature. 
The 
comparisons 
allow 
us 
to 
develop 
comprehensive cognitive models of human performance 
under various sensory feedback conditions. Simple timing 
measures such as movement time provide a general 
description of upper limb movements. However, in motor 
control studies, more complex 3-D kinematic measures such 
as displacement profiles, movement velocity, deceleration 
time, and the formation of the grasp aperture (resultant 
distance between the index finger and thumb for a precision 
pinch grip) have also been used to characterize object 
acquisition movements. By observing regularities in the 3-D 
kinematic and kinetic information, inferences can be made 
regarding how movements are planned and performed by 
the neurocontrol system.   
Peak velocity can be used to measure the open-loop 
processes occurring during target acquisition tasks and is 
thought to reflect motor planning. In contrast, the time from 
peak velocity represented as a percentage of movement time 
can be used as a measure of closed-loop control, where a 
longer time spent decelerating toward the target is equated 
with a greater reliance on feedback. These measures 
combined with movement time allow us to completely 
describe a target acquisition task in terms of open and 
closed loop control.  
For tasks that involve grasping objects, a measure of the 
opening and closing of the hand is also required. Aperture 
can be used to quantify grasp formation. In human 
performance literature larger apertures have been associated 
with more complex tasks that demand greater attentional 
resources [46]. It is believed that a larger aperture is used as 
a compensatory strategy to avoid missing or hitting the 
target. This detailed movement information essentially 
provides a window into the motor control system and allows 
the determination of what sensory feedback characteristics 
are important for movement planning and production. 
We quantified the above kinematic measures of 
movement using position data from the block LED as well 
as LEDs on the wrists of both hands. Start of movement was 
defined as the point where resultant wrist velocity increased 
above a threshold of 5 mm/s and continued increasing to a 
peak.  End of movement was defined as the point where 
vertical block lift velocity increased above 5 mm/s and 
continued increasing to a peak.  Based on these two 
temporal measures we calculated Movement Time (MT) for 
both hands.  The position data were differentiated and peak 
resultant velocity (PV) was extracted.  Percent time from 
peak velocity (PTFPV) was defined as (MT – Time of peak 
velocity)/MT * 100.  We also quantified temporal coupling 
of the two hands by determining whether the hands started 
and ended movement at similar times.  To do this we 
calculated the Absolute Start Offset (ASO: Start Left Hand 
– Start Right Hand) and Absolute End Offset (AEO: End 
Left Hand – End Right Hand). To quantify the grasp, we 
extracted the peak aperture (PA) achieved by the index 
finger and thumb of each hand during the course of the 
movement.  
Data were statistically analyzed in two ways.  First, to 
quantify control performance in the first 10 trials, we 
conducted a 4 Group (Children, Young Adult, Middle 
Adult, Older Adult) X 2 Hand (left, right) repeated measures 
ANOVA on MT, PV, PTFPV and PA.   
To quantify bimanual coupling during the control trials a 
4 Group (Children, Young Adult, Middle Adult, Older 
Adult) repeated measures ANOVA was performed on ASO 
and AEO. To quantify performance during the perturbation 
trials we conducted separate 4 Group (Children, Young 
Adult, Middle Adult, Older Adult) X 4 Condition (JJ, JN, 
NJ, NN) repeated measures ANOVAs for each hand and 
Move hands from  
periphery to start  
positions 
Target cubes appear. 
Reach forward, 
grasp and lift targets 
As soon as 
participant begins 
moving, one or both 
targets perturbed 

228
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
dependent measure.  Post-Hoc analysis on significant main 
effects was done using the Fisher LSD method.   When 
significant interactions occurred, these were further 
explored using simple main effects with Condition as the 
factor.  An a priori alpha level was set at p < 0.05.  
 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The results of our statistical analyses are shown in the 
following sections.  In Section A we present the results for 
the initial set of bimanual control trials that each participant 
performed at the beginning of the experimental session.  In 
Section B we present the results for trials where the target 
could be displaced unexpectedly (i.e., perturbed). 
 
A. 
Initial Performance: Control Trials 
The control trials allow us to determine how bimanual 
performance changes as a function of age within virtual 
environments and whether patterns of performance in VEs 
replicate those seen in natural environments.  Typical 
velocity profiles for children, young adults (middle adults 
resembled young adults) and older adults in the control 
condition are shown in Fig. 4A.  Note that velocities are 
higher for the children and young adults than the older 
adults.  Also note that movement times (as indicated by the 
end of the trace on the time axis) are longer for the children 
and older adults than the young adults.  Finally, note that 
velocity profiles for the young and older adults appear 
smoother than those produced by the children.  The 
decreased smoothness represented in the children’s profiles 
reflects a greater reliance on sensory feedback and error 
correction during movement production.  Results of the 
statistical analyses on the individual kinematic measures are 
presented below. 
0
300 600 900 120015001800
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0
300 600 900 120015001800
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0
300 600 900 120015001800
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0
300 600 900 120015001800
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0
300 600 900 120015001800
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
0
300 600 900 120015001800
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Velocity (mm/s)
Velocity (mm/s)
Child
Young/Middle Adult
Older Adult
A
B
Velocity (mm/s)
Time (ms)
Time (ms)
Time (ms)
Velocity (mm/s)
Velocity (mm/s)
Velocity (mm/s)
Figure 4. Typical velocity profiles for the children, young/middle adults 
and older adults in the A) NN condition, B) JN condition.  
 
400
800
1200
1600
Movement Time (ms)
A
B
C
D
200
300
400
500
Peak Velocity (mm/s)
40
50
60
70
80
Older
Middle 
Young 
Children
Time from Peak Velocity (% MT)
Children
Young 
Middle 
Older
40
60
80
100
Age Group
Age Group
Peak Aperture (mm)
Figure 5. Main effect of Group on movement time, peak velocity, time 
from peak velocity as a percent of movement time and peak aperture in the 
control condition. 
 
Main effects of Group were found for movement time 
(F3,43 = 7.053, p=0.001), peak velocity (F3,43 = 4.335, 
p=0.01), and peak aperture (F3,43 = 3.2, p=0.033). The main 
effect of Group for percent time from peak velocity was 
marginally significant (F3,43 = 4.335, p=0.06).  Results 
indicated that the fastest movement times were found in the 
young and middle aged adults.  Children were significantly 
slower than the young and middle aged adults, whereas 
older adults were only significantly slower than the young 
adults (Fig. 5A).  Further decomposition of the movement 
into its velocity profile indicated that the longer movement 
time used by the older adults was the result of a significantly 
lower peak reaching velocity when compared to all other 
groups (p<0.05).  In contrast, the children achieved a similar 
peak reaching velocity as the young and middle aged adults 
(Fig. 5B).  For the children, the additional movement time 
when compared to the young adults came as the result of a 
longer 
time 
spent 
decelerating 
toward 
the 
target 
(p=0.09)(Fig. 5C).  In contrast, the older adults spent a 
similar proportion of the movement decelerating toward the 
target as the middle-aged and young adults (p>0.05).  These 
results suggest that although both the children and older 
adults perform the reach to grasp task more slowly than the 
young adults, the reason for this slowing is different for the 
two age groups.  Finally, when considering grasp aperture, 
results indicated that the older adults produced a 
significantly larger hand opening when reaching for the 
targets than the young adults (p<0.05).  In contrast, the 
aperture used by the children was similar to the young 
adults (Fig. 5D) 
When looking at coupling between the left and right 
hands, main effects of Group were found for ASO (F3,43 = 
14.03, p<0.001) and AEO (F3,43 = 4.74, p=0.006).  The post- 
LH 
RH 

229
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
0
20
40
60
80
100
Older
Middle
Young
Children
Absolute Start Offset (ms)
Age Group
Children
Young
Middle
Older
0
40
80
120
160
200
Absolute End Offset (ms)
Age Group
A
B
 Figure 6. Main effect of Group on ASO and AEO. 
hoc LSD indicated that children had significantly larger 
offsets at both the start (Fig. 6A) and end (Fig. 6B) of 
movement than any of the other age groups. 
 
B. 
Perturbation Performance 
The perturbation trials allowed us to investigate whether 
differences in the use of on-line visual feedback occur across 
age groups and for different perturbation conditions. Fig. 4B 
shows velocity profiles for the right and left hand in the JN 
condition for the children, young adults and older adults.  
First note that the young adults adjust smoothly to the 
perturbation and efficiently decouple the movements of the 
two hands to effectively grasp the perturbed target at its new 
location.  In contrast, note that the children produce velocity 
profiles that are less smooth and efficient.  These profiles 
provide evidence that the children have greater difficulty 
making use of online sensory information when reorganizing 
for the perturbation.  For the older adults, note the much 
lower peak velocity.  This suggests that older adults pre-plan 
a more conservative movement.   
We analyzed the data separately for the right and left 
hands to simplify interpretation. An interaction between 
Condition and Group (F9,129 = 2.934, p=0.003) was found for 
MT of the right hand. Children had significantly longer MTs 
than all other groups in the NN, JN and JJ conditions (Fig. 
7A).  However, they did have similar MTs to the older adults 
in the NJ condition. The young and middle adults had similar 
MTs across all conditions but the older adults were 
significantly slower than the young adults in the NN and NJ 
conditions only.  Further decomposition of the movement of 
the right hand into its velocity profile revealed a main effect 
of Condition (F3,129 =12.5, p<0.001) and Group (F3,43 = 2.75, 
p=0.055) for peak velocity.  Velocities were highest in the 
NN condition (474.5 ± 14 mm/s), lowest in the JJ condition 
(438.5 ± 14 mm/s) and moderate when only one target was 
perturbed (JN = 456.3 ± 15 mm/s; NJ = 453.0 ± 15.7 mm/s).  
The main effect of Group indicated that older adults had 
significantly lower peak velocities than the young adults 
(Fig. 7B). 
 
 
 
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Age Group
Movement Time - RH (ms)
 NN
 JN
 NJ
 JJ
200
300
400
500
600
 Older
 Middle
 Young
 Age Group
 Children
Peak Velocity RH (mm/s)
A
B
 Children
 Young
 Middle
 Older
 
 Figure 7. Group X Condition interaction for MT and main effect of Group 
for peak velocity of the right hand. 
When considering how participants used visual feedback 
to decelerate toward the target, an interaction between 
Condition and Group (F9,129 = 2.0, p=0.045) was found for 
the right hand.  As seen in Fig. 8, children had longer 
deceleration times than the three other age groups in all 
conditions except NJ.     
Finally, for the grasp portion of the movement, main 
effects of Group (F3,43 = 5.8, p=0.002) and Condition (F3,129 
=2.8, p<0.044) were found for peak aperture for the right 
hand. The main effect of Group indicated that peak apertures 
were larger for the older adults (92.3 ± 3 mm) than the three 
other groups (children = 77.4 ± 2.5 mm; young adult = 80.3 
± 2.7 mm; middle adult = 81.2 ± 2.7 mm).  The main effect 
of Condition indicated that peak apertures were larger when 
neither object was perturbed (83.7 ± 1.2 mm) when 
compared to the other three conditions (JJ = 82.0 ± 1.3 mm; 
JN = 82.5 ± 1.5 mm; NJ = 83.0 ± 1.4 mm). 
 
NN
JN
NJ
JJ
30
40
50
60
70
80
Time from Peak Velocity (% MT)
Condition
 Children
 Young
 Middle
 Older
 
 
Figure 8. Interaction between Condition and Group for deceleration time of 
the right hand. 
 
 
 
 
 

230
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Older
Middle
Young
Children
Group
Movement Time - LH (ms)
NN
JN
NJ
JJ
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Condition
Movement Time - LH (ms)
A
B
 Figure 9. Main effects of Group and Condition on MT of the left hand. 
For MT of the left hand, main effects of group (F3,43 = 
6.04, p=0.002) and condition (F3,129 =10.6, p<0.001) were 
found.  The group main effect indicated that the children 
were significantly slower than the young and middle adults.  
No other significant differences were found (Fig. 9A).  For 
the main effect of condition, results indicated that MTs for 
the left hand were significantly faster in the NN and JJ 
conditions than in the JN and NJ conditions (Fig. 9B). 
Decomposition of movement time into kinematic features 
indicated a main effect of Condition (F3,129 =17.1, p<0.001) 
and a marginally significant main effect of Group (F3,43 = 
2.4, p<0.082) for peak velocity.  The Group effect revealed 
lower peak velocities for the older adults (397.4 ± 30.5 
mm/s) when compared to the young adults (508.7 ± 29 
mm/s) (p < 0.05).  Peak velocities for the children (440.5 ± 
28 mm/s) and middle adults (454.2 ± 29 mm/s) were similar 
to all other groups.  The main effect of Condition revealed 
higher peak velocities in the NN condition (468.3 ± 14 
mm/s) than all other conditions (JJ = 432.7 ± 15; JN = 439.7 
± 146; NJ = 460.1 ± 15 mm/s). An interaction between 
Group X Condition (F3,43 = 2.1, p<0.03) was also found for 
deceleration time (see Fig. 10).  As with the right hand, these 
results indicated that children had longer deceleration times 
than the young and older adults in all conditions.  
 
NN
JN
NJ
JJ
40
50
60
70
Time from Peak Velocity (% MT)
Condition
 Children
 Young
 Middle
 Older
 
Figure 10. Interaction between Condition and Group for deceleration time 
of the left hand. 
 
 
For the grasp portion of the movement main effects of 
Group (F3,43 = 6.9, p=0.001) and Condition (F3,129 = 3.3, 
p<0.02) were found for peak aperture of the left hand.   The 
main effect of Group indicated that peak apertures were 
larger for the older adults (92.1 ± 3 mm) and middle age 
adults (86.2 ± 2.5 mm) than the young adults (79.2 ± 2 mm) 
and children (77.8 ± 2 mm).  The main effect of Condition 
indicated that peak apertures were larger when neither object 
was perturbed (84.7 ± 1.2 mm) or when the right object was 
perturbed (84.4 ± 1.2) than the other two conditions (JJ = 
83.0 ± 1.4 mm; JN = 83.2 ± 1.4 mm). 
When looking at coupling between the two hands during 
perturbation trials, a main effect of group (F3,43 = 15.9, 
p<0.001) indicated that children had significantly larger 
offsets at movement initiation than any other age group (Fig. 
11). For the end of movement, a Group X Condition 
interaction (F9,129 = 2.232, p=0.024) indicated that children 
had significantly larger offsets than all other groups in the 
NN condition (Fig. 12).  The older adults had longer offsets 
than the young adults in the NJ condition.  All groups had 
statistically similar offsets in the JN and JJ conditions.   
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Older
Middle
Young
Children
Absolute Start Offset (ms)
Age Group
 
Figure 11. Main effect of Group on ASO of the left hand. 
 
NN
JN
NJ
JJ
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
Absolute End Offset (ms)
Condition
 Children
 Young 
 Middle
 Older
 
Figure 12. Main effect of Group on AEO. 
 

231
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
A. Performance of Bimanual Movements in VEs across the 
lifespan: Control and Perturbation Conditions 
Each participant began the experiment by performing a 
block of simple bimanual trials without perturbation.  These 
trials allowed us to determine whether age-specific patterns 
of bimanual performance in VEs are similar to the patterns 
seen in the natural environment.  When considering overall 
MT, research in natural environments has indicated that 
children and the elderly typically complete both simple and 
complex tasks more slowly than young adults [47], [48]. A 
similar pattern of results was found in the current study, 
indicating some similarities between VEs and natural 
environments. With respect to bimanual coupling in natural 
environments, prior studies have indicated that both young 
children and older adults exhibit greater offsets at 
movement initiation and movement completion than young 
adults [49], [50]. These results were replicated for the 
children; however, the older adults used similar movement 
offset patterns as the young and middle adults. This 
difference in movement coupling for the elderly subjects 
suggests that they use different control strategies in natural 
compared to virtual environments. Timing differences 
between the hands in bimanual tasks have been associated 
with the requirement to shift visual attention between the 
targets to obtain sufficient feedback [42]. In older adults, 
slowing of visual sensory processing due to aging should 
result in even greater timing differences between the hands 
[45].  The smaller offsets seen in the current study suggest 
that the elderly subjects may have been relying on a 
predominantly feedforward strategy to complete the task 
instead of the typical feedback-based strategy that is seen in 
natural environments.  This conclusion is supported by the 
detailed kinematic measures reported in this study.  In 
particular, peak velocity, which is typically reached early in 
the movement, can be used as a measure of movement 
planning.  Older adults used a lower peak velocity in the 
control trials than subjects in all other groups. This suggests 
that the older adults were in fact using feed-forward 
planning to execute a cautious reach strategy in our virtual 
environment. The larger grasp apertures used by the older 
adults also support the notion of a cautious reaching 
strategy.   
In a previous study investigating age differences on a 
simple reach-to-grasp task in a VE, we also found that older 
adults relied more heavily on a feedforward-based strategy 
[50].  Deceleration time results for the older adults also 
indicated that they spent a similar time using sensory 
information to home-in on the target as the younger adults.  
In contrast, results from reach-to-grasp studies in natural 
environments have indicated that elderly participants 
typically use longer deceleration times than their younger 
counterparts [51]. Again, this points to a difference in 
strategy in the virtual environment when compared to 
natural environments. We hypothesize that the impoverished 
and unnatural feedback available in the virtual environment 
may have made this feedback less useful to the older adults.  
Therefore, the current findings add support to the notion that 
older adults may not rely on similar movement planning and 
execution strategies when performing tasks in VEs when 
compared to similar tasks in a natural environment.  
Unlike the older adults, the children appear to use 
similar strategies in both virtual and natural environments 
for bimanual grasping.  Specifically, it has been found that 
children tend to rely heavily on sensory feedback when 
grasping objects in natural environments [9].  In the current 
study, children produced peak reaching velocities that were 
similar to the young adults, yet their movement times were 
slower.  These longer movement times were the result of an 
increased amount of time spent decelerating toward the 
target.  Increased deceleration times can be used to infer a 
greater reliance on sensory information.  Since sensory 
feedback is important for movement execution in children, 
our results suggest that providing an enriched sensory 
experience may improve their overall performance in VEs.  
Of interest in future work will be to determine whether 
children can achieve higher levels of performance in VEs if 
sensory information is enhanced/augmented when compared 
to natural environments.  This could have significant 
implications with respect to motor skill learning for 
interaction tasks. 
The perturbation conditions allowed us to investigate 
age differences in the visual control of movement in VEs. 
Overall, MT and offset results indicated similar movement 
performance between the ages of 18 and 50 years.  These 
results suggest that design principles extracted from studies 
done on young adults may be applicable to middle-aged 
adults as well.  In contrast, children and older adults 
exhibited distinct performance differences as a function of 
perturbation condition. While their performance was similar 
to the young and middle age groups for certain parameters 
and on certain conditions, the youngest and oldest age 
groups were slower and their movements were less coupled 
in other conditions. Further, the children continued to show 
an increased reliance on sensory feedback (i.e., longer 
deceleration times) whereas the older adults continued to 
rely on cautious movement planning (i.e., lower peak 
velocities). Overall, these results suggest that task 
conditions and age are critical factors when considering the 
design and functionality of VEs.   Children and older adults 
do not plan movements or make use of sensory information 
in a similar fashion to young and middle-aged adults.  
Further, results are clearly task specific.  This suggests that 
it is dangerous for designers to extrapolate performance in 
one task to other tasks.  Instead, our results suggest that age-
related performance must be investigated on a task by task 
basis for the generation of design principles. 

232
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
B. 
Implications for the Design of Training and 
Rehabilitation VEs 
Virtual environments have recently been touted as 
promising tools for training and rehabilitation [35]-[37]. A 
key consideration when designing a fully immersive virtual 
environment is that all sensory information provided to the 
user must be synthetically generated.  As such, designers 
must make informed decisions about what sensory 
information to provide to the user and when that information 
should be provided.  Several studies have been conducted to 
determine how to effectively provide sensory information to 
users for the performance of simple tasks in VEs [52]-[54]. 
Unfortunately, many of those studies have focused 
exclusively on the performance of young adults. As we 
begin to consider the multitude of applications for which 
VEs show promise, it is clear that users of all ages need to 
be considered (i.e., education and rehabilitation).  The 
results of this study allow us to make concrete suggestions 
to designers of VEs.  These relate to differences in needed 
sensory information between children, young and older 
adults, the transfer of training effects between virtual and 
real environments, and important differences between 
performance and learning applications. 
Research has shown striking differences in the use of 
sensory feedback by children, young adults and the elderly 
as they perform motor tasks in natural environments 
[7],[8],[14].  Results of the current study replicate those 
findings and extend them to virtual environments.  These 
findings suggest that designers of virtual environments may 
want to consider enhancing sensory feedback provided to 
the youngest and oldest users of virtual environments as a 
method of improving performance in those age groups.  
Grabowski & Mason [50] found that elderly participants 
performed simple reach to grasp tasks more effectively 
when luminance contrast was increased in the visual 
display.  In contrast, young adult participants experienced a 
point of diminishing returns.  Our current results and the 
results of this previous work suggest that sensory 
information tailored to a participant’s age could lead to 
superior performance in virtual environments.  
When 
considering 
education 
and 
rehabilitation 
applications, the capacity for virtual environments to 
enhance learning hinges on the user’s ability to transfer 
gains made in the VE to improvements in performance in 
the real world.  It has long been known in the human motor 
learning literature that successful transfer occurs when 
similarities in movement strategies between the practice and 
performance environment are greatest [55].  This 
phenomenon is called the encoding specificity principle 
[55]. In the current study we found that children, young, and 
middle-aged adults used similar bimanual strategies in the 
control condition to those reported for natural environments.  
This indicates that the sensory information available in our 
setup 
was 
sufficient 
to 
produce 
“normal” 
motor 
performance in the younger participant groups and could 
lead to positive transfer between the virtual and real 
environments. In contrast the strategies used by the older 
adults in the VE were different than those reported in 
natural environments.   These results suggest that the 
sensory characteristics present in our virtual environment 
did not sufficiently mimic natural environment conditions 
for our elderly participants. It is important to note that visual 
feedback in this study was impoverished and relatively 
crude (i.e., no hand representation, simple table surface and 
object representation, low luminance contrast levels). These 
results suggest that when designing environments for older 
adults, it may be necessary to design tasks and 
environmental feedback conditions that better mimic the 
visual feedback conditions available in the real world in 
order to elicit positive transfer between the two 
environments.  In contrast, younger participants may see 
positive transfer with less realistic visual feedback 
conditions.   
Finally, it is important to consider an apparent 
contradiction between the two previously mentioned 
implications.  Specifically, we first suggested that designers 
may want to enhance the sensory feedback available in the 
virtual environment for younger and older participants.  
These enhancements could lead to sensory feedback that is 
more detailed and easily processed than what is available in 
natural environments (i.e., increased luminance contrast).  
Our next suggestion implies that sensory feedback may need 
to perfectly mimic what is available in natural environments 
in order to ensure positive transfer in learning applications 
for older users.  This contradiction illustrates a third point 
that designers need to consider when determining how to 
provide sensory feedback; the task or application.  It is clear 
that sensory feedback needs to be tailored, not only to the 
age of the user, but also to the application at hand.  
Specifically, applications that are performance based may 
benefit from sensory information that surpasses what is 
available in natural environments, whereas learning/transfer 
applications may need to better mimic the real world.   A 
compromise between these two suggestions may be to use a 
“fading” technique where sensory feedback is initially 
enhanced to elicit improved performance but is faded during 
practice towards more realistic levels to enhance transfer of 
learned skills [55].  We are planning future studies to test 
this hypothesis. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
We would like to thank Brandon Bernardin, Stephanie Ehle, 
and Nick Yeutter for their assistance with data collection 
and analysis. This work was funded by the National Science 
Foundation, grant number 0916119. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A.H. Mason, D.N., Rutherford, and P.J. Grabowski. 
“Bimanual 
performance 
in 
unpredictable 
virtual 
environments: A lifespan study,”  Proceedings of the Sixth 
International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human 

233
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Interactions, ACHI 2013, IARIA Press, March 2013, pp. 263-
268. 
[2] L.M. Howden and J.A. Meyer, “Age and Sex Composition 
2010: 
Census 
Brief,” 
Retrieved 
from 
URL  
http://www.census.gov/prod/cen2010/briefs/c2010br-03.pdf., 
11.25.2013. 
[3] European Commision, “Eurostat Population Projections,”  
Retrieved 
from 
URL 
http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/portal/page/portal/population/
data/main_tables, 11.25.2013 
[4] A. Dickinson, J. Arnott and S. Prior, “Methods for human-
computer interaction research with older people,” Behavioral 
Information Technology, Vol. 26, No. 4, July-August 2007, 
pp. 343-352. 
[5] R.A. Muller, R.D. Rothermel, M.E. Behen, O. Muzik, T.J. 
Mangner, and H.T. Chugani, “Developmental changes of 
cortical and cerebellar motor control: A clinical positron 
emission tomography study with children and adults,” Journal 
of Child Neurology, Vol 13, No. 11, November 1998, pp. 
550-556.  
[6] R.C. Chisholm and R. Karrer, “Movement-related brain 
potentials during hand squeezing in children and adults,” 
International Journal of Neuroscience, Vol 19, No. 1-4, May 
1983, pp. 243-258.  
[7] M.L. Casselbrant, E.M. Mandel, P.J. Sparto, M.S. Redfern,  
and J.M. Furman, “Contribution of vision to balance in 
children four to eight years of age.” Annals of Otology, 
Rhinology, and Laryngology,  Vol. 16, No. 9, September 
2007, pp. 653-657.  
[8] L. Hay, C. Bard, C. Ferrel, I. Olivier, and M. Fleury, “Role of 
proprioceptive information in movement programming and 
control in 5 to 11-year old children,” Human Movement 
Science, Vol 24, No. 2, April 2005, pp. 139-154.  
[9] P.J. Sparto, M.S. Redfern, J.G. Jasko, M.L. Casselbrant, E.M. 
Mandel, and J.M. Furman, “The influence of dynamic visual 
cues for postural control in children aged 7-12 years,” 
Experimental Brain Research, Vol 168, No. 4, January 2006, 
pp. 505-516.  
[10] H.K. Kuo and L.A. Lipsitz, “Cerebral white matter changes 
and geriatric syndromes: Is there a link?” Journals of 
Gerontology Series A: Biological Sciences and Medical 
Sciences, Vol. 59, No. 8, August 2004, pp. 818-826.  
[11] B.B. Andersen, H.J. Gundersen, and B. Pakkenberg, “Aging 
of the human cerebellum: A stereological study,” Journal of  
Comparative Neurology, Vol. 466, No. 3, November 2003, 
pp. 356-365.  
[12] N. Raz and K.M. Rodrigue, “Differential aging of the brain: 
Patterns, cognitive correlates and modifiers,” Neuroscience & 
Biobehavioral Reviews, Vol 30, No. 6,  June 2006, pp. 730-
748.  
[13] P. Rossini, M. Desiato, and M. Caramia, “Age-related 
changes of motor evoked potentials in healthy humans: Non-
invasive evaluation of central and peripheral motor tracts 
excitability and conductivity,”  Brain Research, Vol 593, No. 
1, October 1992, pp. 14-19.  
[14] J.H. Yan JH, J.R. Thomas, and G.E. Stelmach, “Aging and 
rapid aiming arm movement control,” Experimental Aging 
Research, Vol 24, No. 2, April-June 1998, pp. 155-168.  
[15] A. Sterr and P. Dean, “Neural correlates of movement 
preparation in healthy ageing,”  European Journal of 
Neuroscience, Vol 27, No. 1, January 2008, pp. 254-260.  
[16] J.H. Hwang, Y.T. Lee, D.S. Park, and T.K. Kwon, “Age 
affects the latency of the erector spinae response to sudden 
loading,” Clinical Biomechanics, Vol 23, No. 1, January 
2008, pp. 23-29.  
[17] S. Chaput and L. Proteau, “Aging and motor control,” 
Journals of Gerontology Serioes B: Psychological Sciences 
and Social Sciences, Vol 51, No. 6, November 1996, pp. 346-
355.  
[18] K.E. Light, “Information processing for motor performance in 
aging adults,”  Physical Therapy, Vol 70, No, 12, December 
1990, pp.  820-826.  
[19] N. Inui, “Simple reaction times and timing of serial reactions 
of middle-aged and old men,” Perceptual Motor Skills, Vol 
84, No. 1, February 1997, pp. 219-225.  
[20] R.K. Shields, S. Madhavan, K.R. Cole, J.D. Brostad, J.L. 
Demeulenaere, 
C.D. 
Eggers, 
et 
al, 
“Proprioceptive 
coordination of movement sequences in humans.” Clinical 
Neurophysiology, Vol 116, No. 1, January 2005, pp. 87-92.  
[21] J.L. Contreras-Vidal, “Development of forward models for 
hand localization and movement control in 6- to 10-year-old 
children,”  Human Movement Science, Vol 25, No. 4-5, 
October 2006, pp. 634-645.  
[22] L.J. Schut, “Motor system changes in the aging brain: What is 
normal and what is not,” Geriatrics, Vol 53, Suppl 1., 
September 1998, pp. S16-S19.  
[23] M.R. Roos, C.L. Rice, and A.A.Vandervoort, “Age-related 
changes in motor unit function,” Muscle Nerve, Vol 20, No. 
6, June 1997, pp. 679-690.  
[24] R.D. Seidler, J.L. Alberts, and G.E. Stelmach, “Changes in 
multi-joint performance with age,” Motor Control, Vol 6, No. 
1, January 2002, pp. 19-31.  
[25] D.H. Romero and G.E. Stelmach, “Changes in postural 
control 
with 
aging 
and 
parkinson's 
disease”, 
IEEE 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology, Vol 22, No. 2, March-
April 2003, pp. 27-31.  
[26]  K. Günther, P. Schäfer, B. J. Holzner, and G. W. Kemmler, 
“Long-term improvements in cognitive performance through 
computer-assisted cognitive training: A pilot study in a 
residential home for older people,” Aging & Mental Health,  
Vol. 7, No. 3, May 2003, pp. 200-206. 
[27] D. Hawthorn, “Interface design and engagement with older 
people,” Behavioral Information Technology, Vol. 26, No. 4,  
July 2007, pp. 333-341. 
[28] E. Strommen, “Children’s use of mouse-based interfaces to 
control virtual travel,”  In Proceedings of the ACM 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems: 
Celebrating Interdependence: CHI ’94, April 1994, ACM 
Press, New York, NY, pp. 405– 410. 
[29] M.W. Smith, J. Sharit, and S.J. Czaja, “Aging, motor control, 
and the performance of computer mouse tasks,” Human 
Factors, Vol. 41, No. 3, September 1999, pp. 389-396.  
[30] B. Laursen, B.R. Jensen, and A. Ratkevicius, “Performance 
and muscle activity during computer mouse tasks in young 
and elderly adults,” European Journal of Applied Physiology, 
Vol. 84, No. 4, April 2001, pp. 329-336.  
[31] A. Worden, N. Walker, K. Bharat, and S. Hudson, “Making 
computers easier for older adults to use: area cursors and 
sticky icons,” Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI ’97), ACM Press, April 
1997, pp. 266-271. 
[32] R.C. Allen, M.J. Singer, D.P. McDonald, and J.E. Cotton, 
“Age 
differences 
in 
a 
virtual 
reality 
entertainment 
environment: A field study,” Proceedings of the 44th Annual 
Meeting of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 
(IEA/HFES 2000), July 2000, pp. 542-545.  
[33] F.A. McCreary, and R.C. Williges, “Effects of Age and Field-
of-View on Spatial Learning in an Immersive Virtual 
Environment,” Proceedings of the 42nd Annual Meeting of the 
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society (HFES 1998), 
October 1998, pp. 1491-1495. 
[34] D.P. McDonald, D.A. Vincenzi, R.V. Muldoon, R.R. Tyler, 
A.S. Barlow, and J.A. Smither, Performance differences 
between older and younger adults for a virtual environment 

234
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
locomotor task, In M.W. Scerbo and M. Mouloua (Eds.), 
Automation technology and human performance: Current 
research and trends, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates: Mahwah, 
New Jersey, 1999, pp. 262-269. 
[35] M.K. Holden, “Virtual environments for motor rehabilitation: 
review,” Cyberpsycholy and Behavior, Vol. 8, June 2005, pp. 
212-219. 
[36] M. Wang and D. Reid, “Virtual reality in pediatric 
neurorehabilitation: attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, 
autism and cerebral palsy,” Neuroepidemiology, Vol. 36, No. 
1, November 2010, pp. 2-18. 
[37] S. Bermúdez i Badia and M. da Silva Cameirão, “The 
Neurorehabilitation Training Toolkit (NTT): a Novel 
Worldwide Accessible Motor Training Approach for at-Home 
Rehabilitation after Stroke,” Stroke Research and Treatment, 
Februrary 
2012, 
Article 
ID 
802157, 
13 
pages, 
doi:10.1155/2012/802157 
[38] J.H. Cauraugh, S.B. Kim, and A. Duley, “Coupled bilateral 
movements and active neuromuscular stimulation: intralimb 
transfer evidence during bimanual aiming,” Neuroscience 
Letters, Vol. 382, July 2005, pp. 39-44. 
[39] A.H. Mason, “Coordination and control of bimanual 
prehension: 
Effects 
of 
perturbing 
object 
location,” 
Experimental Brain Research, Vol. 188, No. 1,  June 2008, 
pp. 125-139.  
[40] J.A.S. Kelso, D.L. Southard, and D. Goodman, “On the 
coordination 
of 
two-handed 
movements,” 
Journal 
of 
Experimental 
Psychology: 
Human 
Perception 
and 
Performance, Vol. 5, May 1979, pp. 229-238. 
[41] G.M. Jackson, S.R. Jackson, and A. Kritikos,  (1999). 
“Attention for action: Coordination of bimanual reach-to-
grasp movements,” British Journal of Psychology, Vol. 90, 
No. 2, May 1999, pp. 247–270. 
[42] G.P. Bingham, K. Hughes, and M.  Mon-Williams,  “The 
coordination patterns observed when the hands reach-to-grasp 
separate objects,” Experimental Brain Research, Vol. 184, 
No. 3, January 2008, pp. 283–293. 
[43] J. Diedrichsen, R. Nambisan, S. Kennerley, and R.B. Ivry, 
“Independent on-line control of the two hands during 
bimanual reaching,” European Journal of Neuroscience, Vol 
19, No. 6, April 2003, pp. 1643–1652. 
[44] P.J. Sparto, M.S. Redfern, J.G. Jasko, M.L. Casselbrant, E.M. 
Mandel, and J.M. Furman, “The influence of dynamic visual 
cues for postural control in children aged 7-12 years,” 
Experimental Brain Research, Vol. 168, January 2006, pp.  
505-516. 
[45] S. Chaput and L. Proteau, “Aging and motor control,” 
Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and 
Social Sciences, Vol. 51, November 1996, pp. 346-355.  
[46] A.M. Wing, A. Turton, A., and C. Fraser, “Grasp size and 
accuracy of approach in reaching,” Journal of Motor 
Behavior, Vol. 18, No. 3, August 1986, pp  245–260. 
[47] S. Zoia, E. Pezzetta, L. Blason, A. Scabar, M. Carrozzi, M. 
Bulgheroni, and U. Castiello, “A comparison of the reach-to-
grasp movements between children and adults: a kinematic 
study,” Developmental Neuropsychology, Vol. 30, No. 2, 
June 2006, pp. 719–738. 
[48] G.E. Stelmach, P.C. Amrhein, and N.L. Goggin, “Age 
differences 
in 
bimanual 
coordination,” 
Journal 
of 
Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social 
Sciences, Vol. 43, January 1988, pp. 18-23.  
[49] A.H. Mason, J.L. Bruyn, and J.C. Lazarus, “Bimanual 
coordination in children: Manipulation of object distance,” 
Experimental Brain Research, Vol. 231, No. 2, November 
2013, pp. 153-164. 
[50] P. Grabowski and A.H. Mason. Vision for Motor Performance 
in Virtual Environments Across the Lifespan, Virtual Reality 
and Environments, Dr. Cecília Sík Lányi (Ed.), ISBN: 978-
953-51-0579-4, InTech, DOI: 10.5772/37341. April 2012. 
Available from: http://www.intechopen.com/books/virtual-
reality-and-environments/vision-for-motor-performance-in-
virtual-environments-across-the-lifespan 
[51] P.L. Weir, B.J. Mallat, J.L. Leavitt, E.A. Roy, and J.R. 
Macdonald. “Age-related differences in prehension: the 
influence of task goals,” Journal of Motor Behavior, Vol 30, No. 
1, January 1998, pp. 79-89. 
[52] A.H. Mason, “An experimental study on the role of graphical 
information about hand movement when interacting with 
objects in virtual reality environments,” Interacting with 
Computers, Vol 19, No. 3, May 2007, pp. 370-381. 
[53] A.H. Mason and B.J. Bernardin, “The role of visual feedback 
when grasping and transferring objects in a virtual 
environment,” Proceedings of the 5th InternationalConference 
on Enactive Interfaces, November 2008, pp. 111-116. 
[54] A.H. Mason and C.L. MacKenzie, “The effects of visual 
information about selfmovement on grip forces when 
receiving objects in an augmented environment,” Proceedings 
of the 10th international IEEE symposium on haptic interfaces 
for virtual environments and teleoperator systems, March 
2002, pp. 105-112. 
[55] R.A. Magill (2011) Motor Learning and control: Concepts 
and Applications (9th edition), New York, McGraw-Hill.
 

