134
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Visualizing Workload and Emotion Data
in Air Trafﬁc Control: A Tool to Support the
Supervisors Awareness of a Complex Situation
Linda Pfeiffer∗, Tabea Sims‡, and Paul Rosenthal§
∗Institute of Data Science, German Aerospace Center DLR, Jena, Germany
Email: Linda.Pfeiffer@dlr.de
‡ Faculty of Computer Science, Chemnitz University of Technology, Chemnitz, Germany
Email: Tabea.Sims@informatik.tu-chemnitz.de
§Institute of Computer Science, University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany
Email: research@paul-rosenthal.de
Abstract—A supervisor, working in an area control center in air
trafﬁc control has direct impact on the performance of the air
trafﬁc controllers. Thus, he/she has to be well informed about the
situation within the center. In order to support the supervisors
work, researchers try to measure the air trafﬁc controllers’
cognitive workload and stress. Within this paper we present
a visual tool to support the supervisors awareness about this
data. We outline the whole design process including preliminary
studies, the iterative process leading to a ﬁnal prototype, and its
evaluation. We propose a design divided into three views, to serve
the supervisor’s information needs. Using cumulated color values
to represent time series, seems to be a promising approach for
getting a quick overview on the whole situation.
Keywords–air trafﬁc control supervisor; visualization; workload
data; emotion data; decision making.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Usually known for having one of the most stressful jobs
or causing huge delays when being on a strike, air trafﬁc
controllers provide a safe, orderly, and ﬂuent handling of the
air trafﬁc. In this regard, tower controllers coordinate departing
and landing aircraft on airports. On the other hand, airborne
trafﬁc is constantly monitored, managed, and sustained by
area center controllers. In order to overview the whole air
space, it is divided into sectors, where each one is overseen
by two controllers. In fact, this job can be very demanding, so
someone is needed to keep an overview of what is going on
across sectors and prevent them and the assigned controllers
from getting overwhelmed.
This task goes to the air trafﬁc controllers’ supervisors, who
administer air trafﬁc on a bigger scale, mostly by supporting
and directing controllers. Since the air trafﬁc controller’s job is
taxing and his/her emotions may have a big impact on his/her
condition, their supervisors want to know about the controllers’
mental states. This way, they are able to balance out their
workload and to offer better support to them.
At ACHI 2017 [1], we already presented our analysis of
the supervisors’ work and decision processes as well as the re-
sulting requirements for a workload and emotion data display.
In this paper, we present an extended analysis together with
the whole development process and our ﬁnal visualization.
In Sections II and III we introduce the related research
project and the application area. The design process and
methods are presented in Section IV, followed by a description
of our preliminary studies and the resulting design require-
ments in Sections V and VI. We present the ﬁnal design in
Section VIII and conclude in Section X.
II.
STAYCENTERED PROJECT
The main goal in air trafﬁc control is to assure safe,
orderly and ﬂuent handling of the air trafﬁc. This is a highly
demanding task. Thus, the project “StayCentered - Methoden-
basis eines Assistenzsystems f¨ur Fluglotsen (MACeLot)” at the
Chemnitz University of Technology aims for giving support
to air trafﬁc controllers in stressful situations. The resulting
system should be capable of identifying the emotional and
cognitive state of the air trafﬁc controllers. In addition, it
should be able to simulate future states in relation to projected
air trafﬁc some hours in advance [2].
Galvanic skin response, facial action coding, body pos-
ture, vocal properties, eye movements, and pupil dilation
are recorded. These measurements are used to infer emotion
valence, arousal level, and cognitive load. In this work, we
will not discuss limitations or uncertainty of these measure-
ments or used algorithms but postulate that such data can be
gathered as exact as needed. The assistance of the air trafﬁc
controllers should be realized by self-adapting interfaces [3]
and by providing the information to their supervisors. Such a
visualization of the controller’s emotional and cognitive state
may support the supervisors decision upon the opening of a
sector, in order to reduce the controller’s workload.
III.
THE AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL SUPERVISOR
Before going into detail of our work, we want to give a
short description of what an air trafﬁc control supervisor does
and what tools and general environment he is provided with.
As a superior and shift leader of air trafﬁc controllers, the
main work of a supervisor is to manage assignments and shift-
structures of controllers, while regulating their workload by
handling air trafﬁc ﬂow across sectors.
The regulation of trafﬁc ﬂow is done by splitting or
merging sectors, permitting or forbidding special maneuvers
(like, e.g., skydiving or air force trainings) and in extreme
cases even regulating sectors by setting a maximum number

135
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
of allowed planes and rejecting any exceeding trafﬁc, which
usually leads to delays. However, the amount of trafﬁc that
can be handled is limited by the number of present controllers
and the supervisor’s job is to assign them in such a way that
simultaneously no employee is overexerted and air trafﬁc can
ﬂow undisturbed.
Beside the obvious impact of the supervisors’ work to
air trafﬁc safety by organizing shifts and regulating greater
trafﬁc ﬂows, their work is crucial to air trafﬁc safety in several
non-obvious aspects. In general, a good supervisor-employee
relationship has direct impact on the employees’ (air trafﬁc
controllers) work motivation [4]. The supervisor’s emotional
intelligence on both, a personal and a group level, improves
collaboration and communication, as well as the ability for
emotional contagion increases efﬁciency and decreases the
conﬂict potential in teams [5][6]. An investigation by Broach et
al. [7] showed a correlation between the supervisor-controller-
ratio and the number of errors made by air trafﬁc controllers.
The latter suggests that a sufﬁcient number of supervisors
should be present. Supervisors in the German air trafﬁc control
centers usually do not work alone. During a day shift there
are two to three supervisors present. They divide their work
by region, where each one can operate independently but still
help each other if necessary.
The actual working place is located within the area air
trafﬁc control center, often in the middle of the opera-
tions room or a little elevated, providing a good overview.
Other non-controller positions can be found alongside. These
include technical surveillance, data assistants, ﬂight data
agents/operators, ﬂow management position, and the technical
supervisor.
Each supervisor’s workplace comes with a computer,
equipped with two monitors, serving as their main working
tool. Among other work speciﬁc software, the most important
one is a shift management program, where active sectors
are scheduled, air trafﬁc controller’s shifts are organized, and
controllers can be notiﬁed by publishing the current plan on a
separate screen. In addition supervisors have several informa-
tion systems, speciﬁc to each center, as well as communication
devices, such as an email program, a land-line telephone, and
a direct-dial telephone.
IV.
DESIGN PROCESS
We followed an iterative design approach, which has been
proven as good practice in the research ﬁelds of human-
computer interaction and visualization [8][9][10]. Throughout
the whole design process, we tightly cooperated with air trafﬁc
supervisors from the German air trafﬁc service provider DFS
- Deutsche Flugsicherung GmbH.
The ﬁrst phase of the our design process consisted of some
preliminary studies. We did observations in the area control
center, we interviewed seven supervisors, and did a review of
related work. Our main objectives in this phase were: getting to
know the users, their work, and their decision-making process
in order to deﬁne the requirements to our visualization. This
phase was followed by the iterative process of designing, proto-
typing, evaluating, adapting the requirements, and redesigning.
The prototype’s ﬁdelity grew with every iteration. We started
by presenting simple sketches to the supervisors and ended up
with a technical interactive prototype.
V.
PRELIMINARY STUDIES
Main goal of the preliminary studies was the identiﬁcation
of design requirements, such that the intended visualization
serves the supervisors needs best. This implies, ﬁrst establish-
ing an understanding about the supervisors’ tasks and their
way of decision making. Furthermore, we wanted to ﬁnd
about the qualities of stress and emotion data needed by the
supervisors and we wanted to learn from the use of the current
interfaces and from its positive and problematic impact on the
supervisors’ work.
A. Methodology
We did two full-day observations at the end of September
2016 of the supervisors’ working place at the area control
center in Munich, Germany. The researchers had the chance to
ask clarifying questions during the observation and collected
the data by handwritten notes. Furthermore, we interviewed
seven supervisors, each interview lasting 18 - 51 minutes, on
their decision-making process. This included their information
needs, the role of the air trafﬁc controller’s workload and
emotional situation in their decision-making process, as well
as the data’s level of detail favored by the supervisors.
During the interview, we invited the supervisors, to sketch
their decision process and the considered information. This
was done to make them reﬂect their decisions in a structured
way and for not forgetting anything. The data was audio
recorded during the interviews and transliterated. For analysis
purposes, the data was coded and categorized. We did not use a
standardized coding scheme, because of the exploratory nature
of the research questions.
B. Supervisor’s Tasks
Our ﬁrst step for designing a well suited stress and emo-
tion visualization, was to understand the supervisor’s tasks.
The supervisor’s task area includes tasks concerning ongoing
operations and tasks beyond. Beyond ongoing operations, the
supervisors mainly fulﬁll tasks in human-resources manage-
ment. Each supervisor is responsible for 15 to 20 air trafﬁc
controllers. Additionally, they may have optional special tasks,
like the participation in research projects or committees. As a
visualization of workload and emotion data is most beneﬁcial
in ongoing operations we concentrated on this part of the
supervisor’s work.
The principal task of a supervisor is to keep ongoing
operations ﬂuently going. This means, doing everything, such
that the circumstances allow air trafﬁc controllers to handle
air trafﬁc safely, orderly, and ﬂuently. The supervisors called
themselves well-paid secretaries, in order to express that they
are responsible for every concern in the operation room. The
principal task can be divided into sub tasks. At the one hand
there are somehow formalized tasks and at the other hand more
informal tasks. Even the formalized tasks are rarely provided
with clear instructions, allowing for a multitude of alternatives.
The only task with clear instruction is the documentation of
events, which happened during the supervisors shift. This task
is not very favored by the supervisors. According to them, they
are spending too much time documenting insigniﬁcant events.
This may be a task, which is very suitable for automation.
Each day, there are two brieﬁngs scheduled, wherein the
supervisor updates the controllers. Most of their time the
supervisors spend on planning the day’s shift schedule and
solving occurring bottlenecks and problems. We observed two
ways of planning: some supervisors prefer planning of the

136
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
whole shift and changing the schedule if necessary. Others
avoid this strategy, because of the numerous changes and prefer
a piecewise planning. A piece has often a size of about two
hours. On the other hand, there is the solving of bottlenecks
and problems, which may put the safety of aircraft in risk.
This is a very creative task, because of the numerous possible
solutions. Sometimes supervisors even consult their colleagues
and the air trafﬁc controllers on this behalf.
The informal tasks are rather some kind of good practice
and skills. Their implementation depends on the individual
supervisor. Over the entire shift, even if the supervisor seems
to relax a while, he is observing the current situation at the
operation control room and looking for abnormal situations.
Each abnormality may induce safety problems. A controller
speaking to the technician, holding his interaction device in
his hand, may be an indicator for a malfunction of equipment.
Especially, if a controller switches his status on the status
display to a warning level, the supervisor will go to the
controllers working position to assess the situation. In order
to assure the controller’s ability to work under pressure, the
supervisor is trying to determine their daily emotional state
and basic stress level. Thus, he can consider this information
in the shift schedule or, in extreme cases, advise a controller
to rest.
C. Collaboration Aspects
Generally, the supervisor tries to prevent controllers from
stress by using formal means, like splitting up a sector, by regu-
lating the number of aircraft that are allowed to enter the sector,
or by using more informal means like warning the controllers
of a short high trafﬁc peak. Usually the supervisor complies
with ﬂat hierarchies. This has practical effects, like asking the
controllers for their opinion about suggested solutions or by
considering the controllers’ wishes in the shift schedule. They
are also trying to support the air trafﬁc controllers on their
issues, even if they are not in their ﬁeld of responsibility, e.g.,
they check for the location of a meeting.
Altogether, a supervisor needs interpersonal skills, he
should be sensible to individual communication patterns. It
is a well known issue in leadership studies that the political
skills of a supervisor may have a positive impact on the team
performance [11][12]. The ability to identify the others’ needs
by observation and to attune to divers social situations, allows
for better communication and improvements in supporting
the controllers. However, the supervisor is not just concerned
about the controllers issues. He/she also tries to support his
colleague. He/she stands in for his colleague during breaks
and reminds of important tasks. This is appreciated by the
other supervisor.
D. Decision Challenges
There are some typical decisions a supervisor has to face
in his daily work. Besides the decision of the brieﬁng topics,
the most critical decisions are made in the tasks of planning
the day’s shift schedule as well as preventing and solving
bottlenecks and problems. The planning task includes the
decision on which controller has to work at which position.
This decision is guided by several constraints. The solution
should be safe as well as cost efﬁcient. This means that
safety rules need to be met, e.g., considering breaks, two
controllers should be responsible for one sector, assuring that
no controller is overstrained. Simultaneously, every controller
should be busy, taking special tasks, trainings and so on into
consideration.
Potential bottlenecks and problems may be caused by ex-
ternal demands or extraordinary circumstances. The supervisor
has to decide whether to allow for external demands, like
photo ﬂights, gliding ﬂight areas, or planned detonations. Other
external demands are obligatory (e.g., activation of special air
spaces or military trainings) and the supervisor has to decide
on a suitable reaction to this. The decision on the reaction
to extraordinary circumstances includes malfunction of the
technical equipment or potential overloads in trafﬁc quantity,
which may result in splitting up a sector or a regulation of
the number of aircraft. In addition, there may occur staff
concerns, like illness or spontaneous meetings, which force
the supervisor to ﬁnd alternative solutions, like obtaining a
spare controller. In addition, a multitude of other troubles may
occur, e.g., ﬁre alarms.
None of these decisions can be seen separated. Each
decision on one variable of the system has impact on another
and may result in new decisions to be made. For instance, the
decision on splitting up a sector entails a change in the shift
schedule, On the other hand, regulating the number of aircraft
in one sector increases the number of aircraft in other sectors.
E. Problem Solving Variables
Based on their experience, the supervisors identify vari-
ables that are affecting the capacity of a sector or constraining
their scope of action. Information upon these variables should
be available to the supervisors. They should know about the
standard sector plan that tells which sectors should be open.
It is based on statistics of the past years and is the basis for
the shift schedule. The available staff is a framing variable for
the scope of action. This includes the air trafﬁc controllers on
duty as well as controllers, who are around but fulﬁlling other
tasks (paperwork, trainings, meetings, and so on). The latter
may be consulted in the case of stafﬁng shortage. However,
usually the information is hardly available.
Also, the staff’s condition is a factor to the capacity of a
sector: their daily performance, fatigue, and their satisfaction.
To keep satisfaction high, the supervisors try to assure that
the controllers are facing varying demands, which they are
sharing a position with someone with whom they accord, and
that some of their preferences are be met. The information
about alternative tasks, a controller has to do, is necessary in
order to assure cost efﬁciency. However, it is often incomplete.
The main factors on a sector’s capacity are the expected
trafﬁc load and the weather conditions. The weather forecast
is needed two hours in advance. However, up to this day,
weather predictions are not always reliable. The quantity of the
expected trafﬁc is also automatically predicted, by considering
the aircrafts’ ﬂight plans. In consequence, a two-hour forecast
is highly unreliable. Still, with each minute this estimation is
getting more precise. In contrast to the quantity, predicting
the trafﬁc quality is even challenging for an expert. Handling
15 aircraft ﬂying straight in a line may be much more less
demanding than seven aircraft climbing and descending with
different headings.
Extraordinary circumstances as safety issues in the area
control center (e.g., ﬁre alarms) and technical concerns (mal-
function of equipment or the use of backup systems) may
reduce the capacity of a sector extremely. Also, visual clutter
on the radar screen, coming from a lot of aircraft below or

137
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
above the sector, is limiting the sector’s capacity. A variable
that is consulted rather unconscious is the own constitution.
It has some effect on the consideration of external demands
or controllers’ wishes. When a supervisor has not the full
overview of the current situation, he is not willing to generate
any additional workload to his controllers or himself.
This listing of variables is an attempt to get a structured
view on the variables needed by the supervisors and is not
complete, as every situation is unique and may require other
information. Altogether the supervisors are facing complex
problems [13][14]. They have to address many variables that
are interrelated, the time for decision making is limited, and
some events occur unexpectedly (illness, external demands,
emergencies, etc.). They have to outweigh different goals
(safety, cost efﬁciency, controller’s satisfaction) and the in-
formation needed is incomplete or sometimes not reliable.
They make decisions for the future, based on current data,
personal heuristics, and unreliable predictions. The heuristics
they use for problem solving are based on their experience.
They are able to anticipate the effect of the variables on the
sector’s capacity and they know how to weigh the inﬂuence
of a variable to a speciﬁc type of problems.
F. Workload and Emotions
As we are interested in designing a stress and emotion
visualization, we wanted to have a further look into the role
of stress, workload, and emotion data. As stated above, the
supervisors already take the controller’s basic stress level and
severe emotional states into consideration. By now, they have
to look for this information during conversations with the
controllers.
The information on the controllers workload, stress, and
boredom is considered as useful in two terms: A prediction of
the workload in a speciﬁc sector, is seen as alternative approach
to current trafﬁc quantity predictions and may, thus, help with
the planning of the shift schedule. Moreover, an information
upon the controller’s former and current stress level may help
in assigning suitable tasks to the controller. The relevance
of detecting stress seems to be much more important than
boredom. During periods of boredom, controllers lean back
and start chatting. Thus, the supervisors stated that they can
easily observe boredom. In contrast, stress is sometimes not
even recognized by the controllers themselves.
The use of emotion data is seen much more controversial
than the workload data. On the one hand, the emotion data
may be useful when the controller’s emotional state in extreme
situations hinders him from doing his job. On the other hand,
they refuse using this data. This fact arises from the expected
professionalism, from the fear of treating other controllers
unfair, when someone is pretending to be in a bad mood, and
from concerns about privacy. Both, showing the data linked
to an individual controller and showing it linked to a sector,
may be useful. Sector-related data is similar to current trafﬁc
quantity predictions, whereas individual data may help by
assigning each controller a suitable task. There are ethical
concerns about showing the person-related data.
G. Supporting Tools
As already mentioned in Section III, the supervisors’
working places offer a multitude of tools and information
systems to support their decision making. The three main
tools are the shift management program, an overview of the
planned controllers, and a notepad. This physical notepad is
an important tool, since it allows for quick note taking and,
thus, remembering important tasks and lines of thought. This is
necessary, since the supervisor’s thoughts are often interrupted
by incoming demands and information.
These main tools are complemented by a multitude of in-
formation and communication systems, where information can
be retrieved and is pushed through. Conspicuous about the in-
terfaces was the importance of clear arrangement. Consistency
of representations and data between systems and tools are as
important as unambiguous interaction strategies [15][16][17].
For example, using different time zones or coding same
meanings differently would lead to misunderstandings and
inefﬁcient occupation of cognitive resources. In fact, the super-
visors had to transfer data from one tool to another manually,
which took time and cognitive resources. Furthermore, several
similar interaction devices, each of them belonging to another
system, were confounded, slowing the progress down.
VI.
PROBLEM DEFINITION AND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
As we had seen in our preliminary studies, air trafﬁc control
supervisors are dealing with complex problems in their daily
work [1]. These problems cannot be automatized due to the
high complexity and are best suited to be solved by humans,
supported by the computer [18]. In the current problem solving
process, workload and emotion data are already considered
by the supervisors. Emotion data is currently accessed by
observation and conversation with the controllers. Workload
data is currently accessed by observation and by a prediction
of the number of aircraft that will enter the corresponding
airspace.
This assessment could be simpliﬁed by the StayCentered
system by measuring cognitive load and emotion data auto-
matically. The model measures an index for cognitive load,
one for arousal, and one for emotional valence. This mental
state is measured for every single air trafﬁc controller. From
this data, a combined value for each sector is generated as
well as a prediction into the future. Thus, there is a triple of
scalar values (workload, arousal, valence) available for each
time step.
The time frame, shown by the visualization, can not be
inﬁnite. During the interviews the supervisors stated that they
need about two hours of the past values and ten minutes up to
four hours of the predicted values. As the observed planning
period has a length of about two hours, we decided to set the
upper limit of the predicted values there.
R1
In order to consider the controllers state during
scheduling, the workload data needs to be accessible
in an overview over a period of time ranging from
two hours in the past to two hours in the future.
The most important information to the supervisors is
whether a controller is able to fulﬁll his task. As seen in the
preliminary study, the use of emotion data is seen dubiously. So
we decided to restrict emotion data to the data that indicates the
controllers ability to work. First, we thought about restricting
emotion data just to extreme situations. Later, we decided just
to show the arousal level.
The performance in solving a medium to complicated task,
e.g., the task of an air trafﬁc controller, is known to be highest
at an intermediate arousal level, while it is descending at high
and low arousal levels. An overview of this Yerkes-Dodson
law was presented by Teigen [19]. Thus, the arousal values
are a good indicator for the controller’s ability to work, while

138
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
indicating just minimal information on the emotional state.
R2
Emotion data should be restricted to the arousal value
or to only extreme situations, in order to address
ethical issues.
R3
Extreme situations should be visible at a glance. Ex-
treme stress, very high boredom, as well as extreme
negative emotions may hinder the air trafﬁc con-
trollers’ work, so that intervention of the supervisor
may be appropriate.
Thus, the data is reduced to a pair of scalar values per
air trafﬁc controller and sector, evolving in time. Additionally,
there exists an assignment of controllers to the working posi-
tions. The supervisors’ tasks cover looking for bottlenecks,
concerning the workload in the open sectors, as well as
looking for a suitable controller for taking over a position.
Consequently, the workload data is needed in both notional
categories.
R4
The representation of the data should support the
supervisors notional categories. The data should be
available related to the individual controller as well
as to the working positions.
Beside the requirements, resulting from our preliminary
studies, there are also design principles arising from the human
cognitive and perceptual abilities.
R5
The visualization must concentrate on a minimal set
of primitives to produce an expressive and effective
visualization [20] with minimal disturbance of the
work ﬂow. All important features should be easily
identiﬁable and all visual elements should have an
important meaning. Color should only be used when
really needed to highlight very important features and
taking into account human visual perception [21].
VII.
RELATED WORK
In addition to a long tradition on visualizing time-oriented
data, an overview was given by Aigner at el. [22], there exists
also some work that is specialized on emotion data. Most of
the work deals with emotion data deriving from the context of
social media, including work suitable for presenting a single
emotion or emotion data of multiple persons, as well as work
related to time.
Figure 1. A visualization of the value and amount of emotional connections
to a movie as a heat map on a valence-arousal coordinate system [23].
For example, Ha et al. [23] visualize sentiments connected
to movies with their focus on easy recognition of clusters
and intricate network structure. The visualization in Figure 1
is a detail view for one node within that structure, showing
emotions connected to a single movie as a heat map on the
valence-arousal coordinate system. Additionally, some points
in the coordinate system are labeled with the common name
of that emotion.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2. A sentiment visualization, concerning a speciﬁc topic on
twitter [24]. (a) The emotion is shown as arousal and dominance on the
axes, the valence is color coded, and its amount is shown as the size of each
dot. (b) The number of positive and negative posts is shown over time.
Steed et al. [24] constructed a similar view, shown in Figure
2(a), within their visual application to dynamically analyze
twitter sentiment. Their coordinate system uses arousal and
dominance as axes while showing valence in color (orange for
negative and blue for positive). However, this again is just an
additional display, next to a geographical depiction of tweets,
while the main view is a visualization of the amount of tweets
(divided in binary valence) over time, depicted in Figure 2(b).
This view is designed interactively to select time intervals for
further inspection in the other visualizations.
Working on the same problem, of analyzing twitter senti-
ments over time, Wang et al. [25] propose a solution, integrat-
ing valence, arousal, and time into a single visualization, as
shown in Figure 3. Each ring in the circle represents a different
time step (designed to resemble the view in a tunnel), while
the amplitude within the ring is deﬁned by the valence-arousal
coordinate system. Since the curve is additionally color coded
by valence and arousal, the rings could also be displayed as
straight lines. This might be a little less disorienting for some
users. Thus, the amount of tweets, currently shown by the bar
on the left, could also be aligned.
A completely different application is that of Cernea et
al. [26], who designed an emotion visualization on touch
displays. The design gives users direct feedback in the color
and shape of the selection highlighting. However, they also
created a separate view, showing the different emotions of the

139
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 3. Another twitter-sentiment visualization [25]. Each ring is a step in
time, while the curve depicts the valence and arousal.
touch events over time, in order to let users reﬂect and compare
themselves with other users (Figure 4). They display time on
the horizontal axis while valence is shown in direction as well
as size of the bars and arousal is color coded (blue refers to
low arousal and red represents high arousal).
Figure 4. An emotion visualization over time for individual users by Cernea
et al. [26].
The approach of Ohene-Djan et al. [27], illustrated in Fig-
ure 5, was developed to directly track user emotions while they
are watching or listening to some kind of media playing. Thus,
the media player box on the left. At the triangle on the right-
hand side, the recipient is supposed to report current emotions
by accordingly placing his mouse within that triangle. Thus,
valence and uncertainty are measured. The input gets tracked
and displayed in the bottom bar as visual feedback of the
opinion development. Time is the horizontal axis in the bar
while the color gets computed as the distance to each corner of
the triangle, mapped on the opacity of one of the base colors
in RGB. It is also possible to render the results of multiple
users on top of each other, showing the mean opinion of all
of them.
Figure 5. An emotion input interface concerning a video [27]. The bottom
bar shows collected emotions on a time line, while the color shows the value
of each step.
Yet another approach is to use some kind of emoticon, like
the manikins in Figure 6, designed for visual feedback, e.g.,
in questionnaires. Sonderegger et al. [28] even found in a user
study, comparing different pictographs, that the ones shown
in Figure 6 could be further enhanced by using an animated
heart as arousal indicator instead of the rather abstract shape
depicted here. This might be the most intuitive way for emotion
visualization. However, research shows that the bigger the set
size and complexity of the icons, the harder they are to identify,
even more so when they are rather similar [29][30].
Figure 6. An emotion visualization in manikins [28]. The facial expression
shows valence while the shape on the chest depicts arousal.
Figure 7. A visualization of emotions during a work day for personal
reﬂection [31].
Finally, there is also the work of McDuff et al. [31], who
create a very detailed visualization of emotions, connected to

140
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
work. Their goal is to use the device for personal reﬂection
over longer periods of time. The result is shown in Figure 7.
They encode emotions in the bubbles with color showing
valence (pink is positive, purple neutral, and blue negative),
shape showing arousal (calm is round and aroused is pointy),
and opacity showing engagement. Work related information
is indicated by the height and size of the bubbles (desktop
activity), by little icons at the top and bottom of each bar
(meetings), and text (further work related information).
TABLE I. OVERVIEW OF ENCODINGS OF DIFFERENT VARIABLES
IN THE DISCUSSED EMOTION VISUALIZATIONS.
Figure
Valence
Arousal
Time
No. of
Persons
1
horizontal
axis
vertical axis
-
multiple
2(a)
color
vertical axis
-
multiple
2(b)
direction +
color
-
horizontal
axis
multiple
3
horizontal
amplitude +
color
vertical
amplitude +
color
rings (tunnel
view)
multiple
4
size +
direction
color
horizontal
axis
single
5 (Triangle)
horizontal
axis
-
-
single
5 (Bar)
color
-
h. axis
single
6
facial
expression
shape
-
single
7
color
shape
horizontal
axis
single
The summary in Table I gives an overview of the just de-
scribed visualizations and how different variables are encoded.
VIII.
FINAL DESIGN
In this section, we describe the design decisions we made
concerning our workload and emotion visualization for air
trafﬁc control supervisors. As we have seen in our preliminary
studies, air trafﬁc control supervisors consider a lot of informa-
tion for making their decisions. This information is presented
on different screens and media. Hence, it is important to
design the new visualization in a way, which it is minimally
disturbing but clearly communicating critical situations (R3).
Consequently, we decided to split the visualization in an
overview and a detail view. The overview is visible all the
time and details will be available on demand.
Figure 8. Color scale used to indicate a value too low (blue) or to high (red)
for concentrated work.
The main purpose of the overview view is to give a
quick summary on the situation in the center and to clearly
communicate critical situations (R3). Since color is best suited
for being perceived in peripheral vision [32], we decided to
color-code the workload and arousal levels. The chosen color
scale (Figure 8) is diverging, ranging from blue (underload)
over light gray (comfort zone) to red (overload), as proposed
by ColorBrewer [33]. The comfort zone as well as the other
elements are colored in light gray in order to highlight the
most important information of the visualization, which are the
extreme workload and emotion situations (R3, R5).
As pointed out by the experts, the overview should be kept
as simple as possible (minimal set of primitives). Meanwhile
should it not just indicate current critical situations but also
future critical situations. Showing a time line for each sector
is a quite complicated shape not suitable for a quick overview.
Thus, we decided to include future critical situations into the
color coding, by making the light gray fully transparent and
adding an additional opacity value that is decreasing with time.
Finally, we summed up all the future color values to the current
color.
Figure 9. The center view provides an immediate overview of the situation
in the center.
In order to create a visualization that matches the supervi-
sors notional categories, we decided to put these color values
on a map, showing the working positions in the center. On
this map, illustrated in Figure 9, the supervisor sees at a glance
the sector values. In addition, a mouse-over window shows the
data of the air trafﬁc controllers at the working positions. The
colored symbols have the advantage that a smaller version of
them can easily be added to a list (Figure 10). By adding the
smaller symbols to the existing air trafﬁc controller list in the
supervisors planning tool, design requirement R4 is met. The
overview data is now available related to the sectors on the
map and related to the controllers in the list view.
Figure 10. The symbols, known from the center view, can easily be
integrated into a list of controllers (e.g. to the current planning tools).

141
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 11. Line diagrams, supported by color highlighting in the critical areas allow for a more detailed situation analysis.
The overview views show the supervisor whether there
is any critical situation that may require their attention. For
a more detailed analysis of the situation, the supervisor can
choose some controllers or sectors and show them in the detail
view (Figure 11).
The detail view is showing the workload and arousal data
for a period ranging from two hours in the past to two hours
in the future (R1). For each chosen data set, there are two
simple line diagrams shown. These allow the supervisors to
follow the development of the values and to analyze them.
This representation is enhanced by colored areas in order to
highlight the extreme situations of under- and overload.
IX.
EVALUATION
Throughout the design process, we worked closely together
with the air trafﬁc control supervisors and adapted our design
iteratively by considering the supervisors’ feedback. Our ﬁnal
evaluation study touches upon two points. First, we wanted to
ensure that the chosen design of the future stress values as
color values is similarly perceived as usual visualizations of
time series. Second, we asked the participating supervisors to
assess the whole design, including center view, list view, and
detail view.
For reasons of participant availability, we decided to per-
form the evaluation as an online experiment and online survey.
To ensure that the supervisors were undisturbed during the
experiment and that they are using similar hardware, they had
to conﬁrm that they were at a silent place, that they switched
their phones off, and that their screen has at least a minimum
resolution. In order to adapt the physical size of the visual
stimulus, we adapted the size of the images to the size of a
credit card as proposed by Woods et al. [34].
Due to the high specialization, it was only reasonable to
include real air trafﬁc control supervisors, which were hard
to recruit. However, we were able to obtain six air trafﬁc
control supervisors, participating in the study. All of them
were male. Their average age was 47.67 (SD = 3.93), they
had on average 9.5 years (SD = 4.55) of experience as an air
trafﬁc control supervisor, and on average 20.83 years (SD =
5) of experience as an air trafﬁc controller. Due to the small
number of participants, quantitative results of the study should
be interpreted cautious.
The following part of the section describes the two parts
of the evaluation study, by outlining their methods and results,
respectively. The section concludes with an overall discussion
of the results.
A. Comparison of Visualizations for Future Stress Values
Within this part of the study, we compared different visu-
alizations for the future stress levels in order to ensure that the
interpretation of the color values does not differ signiﬁcantly
from other visualizations of time series. Such visualizations
are more familiar to the supervisors, including the line graph,
used in the detail view. The ﬁve visualizations that were
compared are shown in Figure 12. The supervisors obtained
an introduction into each visualization before they did the
tasks with the respective visualization type. The ordering of
the visualization types was randomized, in order to prevent
sequence effects.
Supervisors need to assess the situation of a single air
trafﬁc controller reliably. In addition, they need to get a quick
overview of the situation of multiple controllers. Consequently,
these parts should get investigated in experiments. Further-
more, the user’s satisfaction and perceived usability have an

142
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 12. The visualization methods compared in the evaluation study:
(a) A bar chart with colored bars when the stress threshold is exceeded.
(b) A simple line graph. (c) The color value. (d) A line graph with fully
colored areas till the base line when the stress threshold is exceeded.
(e) A line graph with colored areas when the stress threshold is exceeded.
impact on the success of a visualization. In our experiment,
we compared the perception and interpretation of single graphs
and asked for the supervisors’ subjective ratings.
1) Method: In order to judge the interpretation of a single
time series (future values of a single air trafﬁc controller)
within a short time frame, we presented six scenarios to the
supervisors. The scenarios were developed in cooperation with
supervisor instructors. Each scenario was presented to the
participants for a period of one second. Time of stimulus
presentation was chosen to be longer than time to perceive
and identify objects in pictures (300 ms according to Thorpe et
al. [35]) but still limited in order to simulate a short glance on
the plot in busy times. Afterwards, the supervisors were asked
to assess whether they would want to inspect the situation
further, whether they would instantly react to the situation,
and how they would rate the severity of the situation on a 5-
point-Likert-scale. Each scenario was rated by each supervisor
in each visualization and they were presented in a randomized
order.
The comparison part was concluded by asking participants
to rank the ﬁve visualizations according to personal preference
and clarity aspects.
2) Results: In order to compare the ratings across sce-
narios, we computed for each scenario the mean rating in-
dependent of visualization type. Relative ratings were formed
through the difference between the mean rating of the scenario
and the individual value. The box plots of the supervisors’
relative ratings for the two reaction options are illustrated in
Figure 13.
Figure 13. Box plots of the relative ratings of the supervisors for the option
of further inspecting the situation (top plots) and for the option of
instantaneous reaction to the situation (bottom plots) with respect to the ﬁve
different visualization types. A relative rating of zero would indicate an
optimal visualization.

143
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
As data did not meet the assumptions of parametric tests,
we used the non-parametric Friedman test to compare adapted
ratings between visualization types. The Friedman test about
the related ratings for further inspection of the situation showed
a slight signiﬁcance (χ2(4) = 9.6384, p = 0.04698 < 0.05).
Post-hoc tests were used with Bonferroni correction applied.
The critical difference 37.66031 (α = 0.05, corrected for the
number of tests) was not exceeded in any case.
The relative ratings about instantaneous reaction on the sit-
uation differed signiﬁcantly (χ2(4) = 11.697, p = 0.01975 <
0.05). But post-hoc tests did not show any signiﬁcance.
Figure 14. Box plots of the relative severity ratings (* - is signiﬁcant) with
respect to the ﬁve different visualization types.
Relative ratings about the severity of a situation were
highly signiﬁcant in Friedman test (χ2(4) = 15.231, p =
0.004245 < 0.01). Box plots of the respective relative ratings
are depicted in Figure 14. Post-hoc tests only revealed a signiﬁ-
cant difference between visualization types C and D (difference
= 38.0 > critical difference = 37.66031). In the condition using
the color value (type C) supervisors systematically rated the
situation as less severe than in the condition with visualization
type D.
Figure 15. Mean ranks for supervisors’ personal preference and perceived
clarity with respect to visualization type.
When it comes to the ranking of the visualization types
according to the personal preference, supervisors preferred
visualization types D and E (mean ranks 1.8 and 2.0). They
also considered these two as most clearly structured (mean
ranks 2.2 and 1.2). In both rankings the color value (type C)
was at the second lowest rank (mean ranks 3.6 and 3.8). The
respective mean ranks are illustrated in Figure 15.
B. Assessment of the Overall Design
The second part of the study was an assessment of the
proposed overall design, including all views presented in
Section VIII. The supervisors rated the design according to
several aspects and they had the chance to comment on the
design.
1) Method: First, there was a description of the design, the
supervisors had to read. Then, the rating was performed on a
5-point Likert scale, ranging from 1= “I completely agree to
the statement” to 5 = “I completely disagree”. The statements,
presented in a randomized order, were the following:
•
“I am able to identify sever situations quickly.”
•
“The design is easy to understand.”
•
“The design is well adapted to the requirements of my
•
“The design is complicated.”
•
“I would like to work with the design.”
•
“The design contains too few information.”
•
“The design contains too much information.”
•
“The design is clearly structured.” work.”
The questionnaire ended by asking the supervisors for the
advantages and disadvantages of the design. The answers were
given in free text.
2) Results: The answers to the ratings are depicted in
Figure 16. They were mainly neutral.
Figure 16. Resulting average ratings of the overall design on a 5-point Likert
scale.
The comments revealed that most of the supervisors pre-
ferred the center view for getting an instantaneous overview of
the entire situation and it was perceived as clearly structured.
One of the supervisors perceived the ordering in working
positions as useless, he preferred a list ordered by sector
distribution. Opinions about the detail view were split. One
half pointed out that it shows exactly the information needed.
In contrary, the other half mentioned that there is too much
information shown. Thus, they perceived the detail view as
less intuitive and less clearly structured. There was only one
comment about the list view, which described it as a good
tool for doing the planning for the next hours. One supervisor
perceived the usability of the overall design as complex.
C. Discussion
The impact of using the color value as an indicator for
the future stress situation remains unclear. There was a slight
underestimation of the severity of the stress of one controller
compared to visualization type D. A slight adaption of the
computation of the color value may counterbalance this effect.

144
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
This seems adequate, since the interpretation of the values did
not differ signiﬁcantly in any other case.
The comments indicate that the center view is well suited
for a quick overview and, thus, the use of color values does
not clutter the display. This indicates that the use of color
values for visualizing future stress situations of multiple air
trafﬁc controllers may have advantages which outweigh the
bad rankings for preference and clarity related to single plots.
A further experiment about the perception and interpretation
of multiple plots would give more insights.
The good ranks, that were achieved by visualization type
F, conﬁrm the use of this visualization type in the detail view.
The divided opinion about the amount of information in the
detail view conﬁrms the choice to show this view on demand.
X.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Within this paper, we presented a workload and emotion
data visualization for air trafﬁc control supervisors and the
related design process. Based on a detailed analysis of the work
and decision processes, we developed the design requirements.
Continuing with an iterative design process, including steady
feedback from the users, we ended with a design prototype.
We have evaluated the chosen plot types for presenting future
stress levels and collected feedback about the prototype.
In the ﬁrst part we asked the air trafﬁc control supervisors
to have a glance at single graphs and to assess the perceived
situation according to severity, their wish to further investigate
the situation, or to instantaneously react on it. The results
revealed few difference between interpretation of the chosen
color value and interpretation of standard plots for time series
presentation, like line graphs or bar charts. Although the
ratings on the overall design did not show clear positive nor
negative tendencies, comments indicated that the design is
well understood by the supervisors and that the center view
is perceived as clearly structured.
In order to conclude on the use of the cumulated color
values for time series in this context there is further investiga-
tion needed. The perception and interpretation of color values
for future stress situations of multiple air trafﬁc controllers,
especially a whole center, needs further investigation. For this
case, a study with recorded real-world data may reveal further
issues.
Altogether this piece of work taught us once again the
importance of a detailed examination of the application area
and a tight feedback loop to the users. The use of a single
color value for time series data in a context, where plenty
of those time series have to be interpreted according to their
severity within a glance, seems to be promising. As in the
single plot condition there was marginal difference between
the visualization types. According to the comments, the color
values seemed to contribute to a clear structure in the design.
However, further investigation is needed also in this regard.
Additionally, the project showed that besides the work of an
air trafﬁc controller, there is only little attention payed to the
work of air trafﬁc supervisors, making this application area
worth for further investigation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was accomplished as part of the project “Stay-
Centered - Methodenbasis eines Assistenzsystems f¨ur Center-
lotsen (MACeLot)” at Chemnitz University of Technology. It
was supported and partially funded by the German Federal
Ministry of Education and Research.
We thank the German air navigation service provider DFS
Deutsche Flugsicherung GmbH and the participating supervi-
sors for their support.
REFERENCES
[1]
L. Pfeiffer, T. Sims, and P. Rosenthal, “Visualizing workload and
emotion data in air trafﬁc control - an approach informed by the su-
pervisors decision making process,” in Proceedings of the International
Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions, 2017, pp.
81–87.
[2]
J. Buxbaum, N. H. M¨uller, P. Ohler, L. Pfeiffer, P. Rosenthal, and
G. Valtin, “Emotion-sensitive automation of air trafﬁc control - adapting
air trafﬁc control automation to user emotions,” International Trans-
portation, vol. 68, no. 1, 2016, pp. 36–39.
[3]
L. Pfeiffer, G. Valtin, N. H. M¨uller, and P. Rosenthal, “The mental
organization of air trafﬁc and its implications to an emotion sensitive
assistance system,” International Journal on Advances in Life Sciences,
vol. 8, 2016, pp. 164–174.
[4]
M. Sollitto, M. M. Martin, S. Dusic, K. E. Gibbons, and A. Wa-
genhouser, “Assessing the supervisor-subordinate relationship involving
part-time employees,” International Journal of Business Communica-
tion, vol. 53, no. 1, 2016, pp. 74–96.
[5]
V. U. Druskat and S. B. Wolff, “Building the emotional intelligence of
groups,” Harvard Business Review, vol. 79, no. 3, 2001, pp. 80–91.
[6]
S. G. Barsade and A. P. Knight, “Group affect,” Annual Review of
Organizational Psychology and Organizational Behavior, vol. 2, no. 1,
2015, pp. 21–46.
[7]
D. Broach and C. S. Dollar, “Relationship of employee attitudes and
supervisor-controller ratio to en route operational error rates,” US
Department of Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration, Ofﬁce
of Aerospace Medicine, Tech. Rep., 2002.
[8]
A. Dix, J. E. Finlay, G. D. Abowd, and R. Beale, Human-Computer
Interaction (3rd Edition).
Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-
Hall, Inc., 2004.
[9]
O. Kulyk, R. Kosara, J. Urquiza, and I. Wassink, “Human-centered
aspects,” in Human-centered Visualization Environments: GI-Dagstuhl
Research Seminar, Revised Lectures, A. Kerren, A. Ebert, and J. Meyer,
Eds.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2007, pp. 13–75.
[10]
M. Sedlmair, M. Meyer, and T. Munzner, “Design study methodology:
Reﬂections from the trenches and the stacks,” IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 18, no. 12, 2012, pp. 2431–
2440.
[11]
J. Liu, W. Wang, and K. Cao, “Leader political skill and team per-
formance: A moderated mediation model,” Nankai Business Review
International, vol. 2, no. 1, 2011, pp. 5–22.
[12]
R. L. Brouer, C.-Y. Chiu, and L. Wang, “Political skill dimensions and
transformational leadership in china,” Journal of Managerial Psychol-
ogy, vol. 31, no. 6, 2016, pp. 1040–1056.
[13]
J. Funke, “Complex problem solving: A case for complex cognition?”
Cognitive Processing, vol. 11, no. 2, 2010, pp. 133–142.
[14]
J. Quesada, W. Kintsch, and E. Gomez, “Complex problem-solving:
A ﬁeld in search of a deﬁnition?” Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics
Science, vol. 6, no. 1, 2005, pp. 5–33.
[15]
J. Nielsen, Coordinating User Interfaces for Consistency.
Morgan
Kaufmann, 1989.
[16]
C. Ware, Information Visualization: Perception for Design.
Morgan
Kaufmann, 2013.
[17]
W. Lidwell, K. Holden, and J. Butler, Universal Principles of Design,
Revised and Updated: 125 Ways to Enhance Usability, Inﬂuence Per-
ception, Increase Appeal, Make Better Design Decisions, and Teach
Through Design.
Rockport Publishers, 2010.
[18]
P. Rosenthal, L. Pfeiffer, N. H. M¨uller, and G. Valtin, The Long Way to
Intuitive Visual Analysis of Air Trafﬁc Control Data, 1st ed. Routledge,
2016, ch. 11, pp. 138–148.
[19]
K. H. Teigen, “Yerkes-dodson: A law for all seasons,” Theory &
Psychology, vol. 4, no. 4, 1994, pp. 525–547.
[20]
A. Sears and J. A. Jacko, Eds., The Human-Computer Interaction
Handbook: Fundamentals, Evolving Technologies, and Emerging Ap-
plications.
Lawrence Erlbaum Assoc Inc, 2007.

145
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[21]
E. Tufte, Envisioning Information.
Graphics Press, 1990.
[22]
W. Aigner, S. Miksch, H. Schumann, and C. Tominski, Visualization
of Time-oriented Data.
London: Springer, 2011.
[23]
H. Ha, G.-n. Kim, W. Hwang, H. Choi, and K. Lee, “CosMovis:
Analyzing semantic network of sentiment words in movie reviews,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE Symposium on Large Data Analysis and
Visualization (LDAV).
IEEE, 2014, pp. 113–114.
[24]
C. A. Steed, M. Drouhard, J. Beaver, J. Pyle, and P. L. Bogen, “Matisse:
A visual analytics system for exploring emotion trends in social media
text streams,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Big Data (Big Data).
IEEE, 2015, pp. 807–814.
[25]
F. Y. Wang, A. Sallaberry, K. Klein, M. Takatsuka, and M. Roche,
“SentiCompass: Interactive visualization for exploring and comparing
the sentiments of time-varying twitter data,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
Paciﬁc Visualization Symposium (PaciﬁcVis).
IEEE, 2015, pp. 129–
133.
[26]
D. Cernea, C. Weber, A. Ebert, and A. Kerren, “Emotion-prints:
Interaction-driven emotion visualization on multi-touch interfaces,” in
Proceedings of SPIE, Visualization and Data Analysis, D. L. Kao, M. C.
Hao, M. A. Livingston, and T. Wischgoll, Eds., 2015, pp. 93 970A–
93 970A–15.
[27]
J. Ohene-Djan, A. Sammon, and R. Shipsey, “Colour spectrum’s of
opinion: An information visualisation interface for representing degrees
of emotion in real time,” in Proceedings of the International Conference
on Information Visualisation.
IEEE, 2006, pp. 80–88.
[28]
A. Sonderegger, K. Heyden, A. Chavaillaz, and J. Sauer, “AniSAM &
AniAvatar: Animated visualizations of affective states,” in Proceedings
of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2016, pp. 4828–4837.
[29]
M. D. Byrne, “Using icons to ﬁnd documents: Simplicity is critical,” in
Proceedings of the INTERACT and CHI Conference on Human Factors
in Computing Systems.
ACM, 1993, pp. 446–453.
[30]
L. Nowell, R. Schulman, and D. Hix, “Graphical encoding for infor-
mation visualization: An empirical study,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
Symposium on Information Visualization (InfoVis).
IEEE, 2002, pp.
43–50.
[31]
D. McDuff, A. Karlson, A. Kapoor, A. Roseway, and M. Czerwinski,
“AffectAura: An intelligent system for emotional memory,” in Pro-
ceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems.
ACM, 2012, pp. 849–858.
[32]
R. Rosenholtz, “Capabilities and limitations of peripheral vision,”
Annual Review of Vision Science, vol. 2, no. 1, 2016, pp. 437–457.
[33]
M. Harrower and C. A. Brewer, “Colorbrewer.org: An online tool for
selecting colour schemes for maps,” The Cartographic Journal, vol. 40,
no. 1, 2003, pp. 27–37.
[34]
A. T. Woods, C. Velasco, C. A. Levitan, X. Wan, and C. Spence,
“Conducting perception research over the internet: A tutorial review,”
PeerJ, vol. 3, 2015, p. e1058.
[35]
S. Thorpe, D. Fize, and C. Marlot, “Speed of processing in the human
visual system,” Nature, vol. 381, 07 1996, pp. 520–522.

