Digital Transformation after Covid-19 and  
the Balancing Act of Digital Teaching  
A Qualitative Study 
Alexander Tillmann   
Sarah Voß-Nakkour 
Michael Eichhorn 
Frank Kühn
studiumdigitale, Goethe-University 
Frankfurt, Germany 
{tillmann, voss, eichhorn, fkuehn}@sd.uni-frankfurt.de 
 
Abstract—With the Covid-19 pandemic, academic teaching 
changed fundamentally and university teachers across the 
board came into contact with the opportunities and challenges 
of digital teaching. The impact of this change, with both positive 
and negative consequences, requires adjustments at different 
levels of the university system, ranging from re-design of 
learning formats, to the expansion of qualification offers for 
teachers, to new rules for what is credited towards the teaching 
load. An exploratory study was conducted to examine the 
impact of the pandemic on university faculty attitudes toward 
digital teaching and reflect on the advantages and disadvantages 
that have arisen as a result of digital teaching and what benefits 
the independence of location and time as well as the possibilities 
of digitalization have yielded for teachers and students. 
Additionally, the study aimed to analyze perceptions of and 
opinions on digital teaching as well as statements about future 
teaching. For this purpose, 13 semi-structured interviews with 
higher education teachers and deans of studies at a large 
German university were conducted and analyzed using 
inductive categorization. One result is that teachers describe the 
use of digital tools and methods as more natural and perceive a 
digital culture change, also thanks to improved infrastructure. 
Furthermore, four positions could be identified that describe the 
different perspectives of higher education teachers on the 
possibilities of digital teaching and the value of on-site teaching. 
When assuming a certain degree of heterogeneity among 
students, this results in a tension field of advantages and 
disadvantages for students, depending on the chosen teaching 
formats and preferences of the teachers. In this article, reasons 
behind these four different perspectives are discussed as well as 
recommendations given for the future design of post-pandemic 
teaching. 
Keywords-culture change; digital transformation; digital 
learning and teaching; higher education; digital accessibility. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
During the Covid-19 pandemic, academic teaching 
changed fundamentally and university teachers across the 
board came into contact with the opportunities and challenges 
of digital teaching. The impact of this change brought both 
positive and negative effects [1]. Teaching was largely 
maintained and many teachers experienced an increase in 
digital teaching skills, but the dynamics of the transition often 
led to emergency solutions that only insufficiently exploited 
the didactic potential of digital media [2]. The question arises 
whether, beyond this emergency remote teaching [3], teachers 
today perceive a stronger anchoring as well as more natural 
use of digital media in teaching. Such a digital culture shift 
requires instructors to (voluntarily) move away from familiar 
teaching strategies and practices [4], which many instructors 
are hesitant towards [5]. Conversely, culture change also 
requires students to adapt their learning habits [6]. Graf-
Schlattmann et al. [7] describe a prerequisite for culture 
change as social acceptance in the teaching environment. All 
stakeholders share the conviction that the changes associated 
with transformation are necessary and are associated with both 
individual and organizational benefits. 
 
The first reaction of many universities after the end of the 
full lockdown was to return entirely to on-site teaching. 
However, as experience reports show, this also has many 
disadvantages for students and teachers, and especially the 
aspect of (digital) accessibility [8][9][10]. The (forced) 
experiences with digital teaching, without the possibility to 
meet in presence, were perceived very differently on several 
levels. With regard to study organization, flexibilization, 
study performance and learning success, communication and 
interaction, motivation and competencies, both positive and 
negative experiences were made by students and higher 
education teachers [8]. During the pandemic, it also became 
clear that what is a relief for some can be a complication for 
others [11]. It can be seen that educators must operate in an 
area of tension with respect to post-pandemic digital teaching. 
Considering their own needs and the needs of a heterogeneous 
student body is a particular challenge. Although higher 
education recognizes the diversity of students as reality in its 
mission statements, in reality heterogeneous learning 
situations are rarely taken into account in the conception of 
teaching scenarios, or are only taken into account by teachers 
when students articulate individual needs and request support 
[9]. 
An explorative, qualitative study was used to investigate 
the impact of the pandemic on university teachers' attitudes 
toward digital teaching and whether the experiences during 
the pandemic have led to a digital culture change in teaching. 
This involves a more detailed analysis of the patterns of 
argumentation found among teachers with regard to the 
selection and design of teaching formats and scenarios and 
how they justify their decisions for and against digital 
teaching. Section II describes the conducted qualitative study. 
127
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

We asked about consequences of the pandemic on teaching, 
experiences during the pandemic related online semesters, 
about changing attitudes and possible reservations about 
digital teaching, and the advantages teachers see in digital 
teaching, in order to illuminate a possible area of tension 
caused by different needs and teaching requirements. This 
results in the following three research questions for analysis: 
  
RQ1: What are the perceived impacts and consequences of 
the pandemic on academic teaching for higher education 
teachers in the post-pandemic period? 
 
RQ 2: What reservations do higher education teachers express 
about digital teaching and how does this impact the future 
conception of their courses? 
 
RQ 3: What advantages do teachers see in digital teaching and 
what should be retained after the pandemic induced online 
semesters? 
 
Section II describes the research design, the data collection 
methods, the selection of participants and the methodological 
approach to data analysis. In Section III, the findings from the 
interviews conducted are presented in detail and discussed in 
Section IV Some teachers prefer on-site teaching and have 
concerns about digital methods, while others recognize the 
benefits, such as increased motivation and organizational 
ease. It is emphasized that a balance must be found between 
the advantages and disadvantages of both approaches in order 
to create inclusive and effective teaching. Finally, the last 
Section V, conclusion and future work, highlights the four 
positions that describe the tension between digital and face-
to-face teaching. It emphasizes the importance for teachers to 
consider these different perspectives at both an institutional 
and individual level. 
II. 
METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH 
In order to answer the research questions, a total of 13 
individual interviews were conducted with teachers from a 
large German university. Eight interview partners were from 
faculties of the natural sciences and medicine, three from 
social sciences, and two from the humanities. Among the 13 
interview partners, 10 were simultaneously acting deans of 
studies of their respective faculties. The interviews were 
carried out in German language and the transcripts of the 
interviews were translated into English. The guiding questions 
were slightly modified for this group of persons. The 
individual interviews were carried out between 07/01/2022 
and 08/02/2022 via videocall using Zoom videoconferencing 
software. To ensure the anonymity of the interviewees, no 
further personal data was collected. 
The interview procedure chosen was the problem-centered 
interview according to [12]. This method tries to let interview 
partners speak as freely as possible to come as close as 
possible to an open conversation. At the same time, however, 
the interview is oriented toward a previously determined 
problem, the details of which are compiled in advance in an 
interview guide. For the study, two guides for research 
questions were developed (deans of studies and higher 
education teachers). To avoid the interviewees formulating 
their assessments of reservations and advantages of digital 
teaching too broadly or too abstractly, they were asked to 
describe their experiences and impressions from different 
phases of the COVID-19 pandemic in each case. This is 
reflected in the wording of the questions in the interview 
guides, which respectively refer to the lockdown phase of the 
pandemic with Emergency Remote Teaching [13] and the 
post-pandemic phase, in which teaching returned to a "New 
Normal" [14]. The two interview guides included the 
following questions: 
 
Interview guiding questions for deans of studies: How did 
faculty members perceive virtual teaching during the past 
three online semesters? Are the teaching experiences from this 
time viewed more positively or negatively? To what extent? / 
What 
do 
you 
think 
are 
the 
reasons 
for 
this? 
 
In your estimation, inasmuch did the Corona pandemic change 
attitudes toward digital teaching among faculty members, if at 
all? 
 
What were the reactions of faculty members this semester 
when the "back to on-site teaching" tendency emerged? 
 
What reservations about digital teaching do you currently 
perceive on behalf of the faculty? (technical problems, social 
problems, didactic limitations, etc.). In your estimation, to 
what extent are these reservations related to the experiences 
from the Corona semesters? 
 
Interview questions for teachers: How do you assess your 
experiences with digital teaching during the past Corona 
semesters? What are the reasons for your assessment? 
 
What negative effects of digitalization processes in teaching 
do you see? What kinds of downsides emerge from them? 
 
Has your attitude towards digital teaching changed as a result 
of the pandemic? In what way? 
 
Have you used digital teaching practices, methods and tools 
from the Corona semesters in this semester? - If not, what are 
the reasons for this? 
 
The recorded interviews were automatically transcribed 
with the software Amberscript and completely anonymized so 
that no more conclusions can be drawn about persons or 
subject discipline. Subsequently, the material was analyzed in 
a Qualitative Content Analysis (QCA) according to Mayring 
[15] with the software QCAMap. An inductive evaluation 
method was chosen, in which the category system is 
developed from the material concurrently with the analysis 
and evaluation process, guided by the research questions. The 
coding of the interviews was done in an inter-coder procedure 
with two coders each. The reliability of the overall result was 
ensured by checking all codes during an evaluation 
conference with all four coders. In this session, major 
128
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

categories were also formed from the individual categories, 
which are described in the following section.  
 
III. 
RESULTS OF THE QUALITATIVE  
CONTENT ANALYSIS  
The qualitative content analysis of the transcripts was 
conducted along the three research questions RQ1, RQ2 and 
RQ3 (see Section I) and the results are presented separately 
below. 
 
A. Perceived impacts and consequences of the pandemic on 
academic teaching for higher education teachers in the 
post-pandemic period (RQ1) 
With regard to the perceived impact on post-pandemic 
teaching (RQ1), a total of 32 categories were identified 
during the analysis of the interviews, which could be assigned 
to five superordinate categories (cf. Tab. I). Along these 
upper categories, a selection of the most relevant categories 
will be discussed in more detail below. 
 
1) Digital Normality 
Nearly all interview partners (12 of 13) describe that in the 
course of the pandemic distance learning, a new normality of 
using digital media in teaching has emerged. This digital 
cultural shift toward a New Normal [14] has led to changes in 
the design of teaching that are currently still ongoing and have 
lingering effects. In particular, faculty cite the decreased 
skepticism toward digital teaching due to the growth in 
experience (RQ1-01) during the pandemic. Even if the turn to 
online-supported teaching was not entirely voluntary, in 
retrospect it is seen as valuable, as described by interviewee 
8, for example: 
"So that has definitely been a positive 
side effect of the fact that you were 
forced to teach digitally. That one has 
acquired the techniques and then also 
seen the advantages, which of course 
also exist." (IP08) 
In the course of the positive experiences, the willingness 
of the interviewed teachers to increasingly use digital 
elements in teaching grew (RQ1-19) and to offer events 
hybrid, i.e., both synchronously and asynchronously (RQ1-
17). The fact that the use of digital media has become more 
natural for the lecturers and that the initial skepticism has 
decreased is also observed by interviewee 9. In his function as 
Dean of Studies, he describes the development thus: 
"I think it was an experience and 
development work for many lecturers. 
So, I perceived that as a dean of 
students, [there] was a lot of rejection 
in the beginning. So, people wanted to 
stick close to their usual format, the 
lecture or seminar. So, in the 
beginning, people didn't get along well 
with asynchronous, but thought that if 
anything, then synchronous. And at 
that time I'm standing in my lecture 
hall as usual and well, then a camera 
is running if it has to be. And that was, 
that was a lot of voices at the 
beginning. And then in the three 
semesters, already in the second 
semester, I noticed that there was a 
development that people got involved 
in offering more and more 
asynchronous lectures. This means 
that lectures and seminars are first 
recorded and then made available at 
another time. So, all in all, after the 
three semesters, I would say that the 
overwhelming majority or the vast 
majority of the faculty have found this 
to be an enrichment." (IP09) 
As faculty became more willing to engage in teaching with 
digital media, interviewees also became more eager to try out 
new technologies and experiment with digital elements and 
tools (RQ1-21). At the same time, faculty reported how the 
new digital normal emerged outside the teaching context as 
well. For example, videoconferencing became a natural means 
of communication (RQ1-24) even beyond the Covid19 
pandemic. As further evidence of the incipient cultural change 
towards a new digital normality, attitudes of lecturers towards 
their own digital teaching actions can be seen: The 
respondents are very satisfied with their own digital teaching 
(RQ-3) and, as individual teachers report, would also like to 
continue using digital elements (RQ-8). Even if these teachers 
are still a minority at the moment, interviewee 6 nevertheless 
emphasizes 
"[...] that it's still a minority, but 
maybe not a very small one, that 
would say 'Well, even if it's not 
required at all because of the 
pandemic, I'll definitely turn on online 
elements.'" (IP06) 
Instructors also observe the newly normalcy of digital 
university teaching in changing and continuing student 
behavior. For example, faculty report that students 
increasingly view face-to-face and online teaching as equally 
valid alternatives. On the one hand, while instructors note a 
decreased willingness of students to be mobile due to the 
pandemic (RQ1-6), as well as an increased expectation among 
students that content be additionally offered digitally (RQ1-
27). Students would also prefer to use recordings instead of 
attending face-to-face lectures (RQ1-9) and would be more 
likely to stay away from face-to-face lectures if digital 
alternatives were offered (RQ1-20). On the other hand, 
students do not seem to want the digital normality of 
university teaching to be complete digitization. Rather, 
129
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

students expect digital offerings to be available as a matter of 
course in order to be able to adapt their studies as flexible as 
possible to individual circumstances, as interviewee 9 notes: 
"I think it looks different for students 
than for teachers, yes. With students, 
you hear more often that they really 
want to have a choice, presence or 
digital. For different reasons, personal 
reasons." (IP09) 
TABLE I.  
EFFECTS OF COVID 19 REGARDING DIGITAL TEACHING (RQ1)  
 
CATEGORY 
ID 
CATEGORY NAME 
ABSOLUT 
COUNT 
Digital becomes normal - cultural 
change 
53 
RQ1-1 
Increased experience and 
less scepticism towards 
digital teaching 
19 
RQ1-3 
High satisfaction with own 
digital teaching during C19 
among teachers 
4 
RQ1-6 
Students less willing to 
move after C19 
2 
RQ1-8 
Teachers would like to 
continue teaching digitally 
3 
RQ1-9 
Students want to make more 
use of recordings instead of 
attending face-to-face 
lectures as a result of their 
experience during the 
pandemic 
3 
RQ1-17 
Teachers offer hybrid 
courses (synchronous & 
asynchronous) 
5 
RQ1-18 
Students use face-to-face 
courses despite online offers 
2 
RQ1-19 
Teachers more willing to use 
digital elements 
7 
RQ1-20 
Students stay away from 
face-to-face courses if digital 
alternatives are available 
(e.g., recording, streaming 
etc.) 
2 
RQ1-21 
Teachers start experimenting 
with digital elements and 
tools 
2 
RQ1-24 
Video conferencing has 
become normal and is no 
longer a hurdle 
1 
RQ1-27 
Adoption of digital teaching 
practices and methods in 
face-to-face teaching 
2 
RQ1-30 
Students increasingly use 
digital devices in the courses 
1 
Experience gain 
21 
RQ1-4 
Increased experience and 
more scepticism towards 
digital teaching 
3 
RQ1-10 
Teachers more willing to 
make content available 
digitally 
4 
RQ1-14 
Teachers felt confirmed in 
their opinion regarding 
digital teaching 
3 
RQ1-15 
Teachers are positively 
surprised by the possibilities 
of digital teaching 
2 
RQ1-16 
Teachers could gain 
experience with digital 
teaching 
6 
RQ1-22 
Teachers feel prepared for 
future disruptions to face-to-
face teaching 
2 
RQ1-31 
Students increasingly work 
with digital tools (e.g., for 
seminar recordings etc.) 
1 
Establishment of new organisational 
structures and digital infrastructure 
8 
RQ1-12 
Contributes to learning 
success 
1 
RQ1-25 
Is popular among students 
3 
RQ1-26 
Good online offers are used 
and replace face-to-face 
offerings 
4 
Improvement of teaching 
7 
RQ1-11 
More care in the creation of 
teaching-learning materials 
1 
RQ1-13 
Teachers are more 
concerned with the needs of 
students 
2 
RQ1-23 
Increased student 
participation and 
collaboration 
1 
RQ1-28 
Establishment of innovative 
teaching formats (e.g., 
flipped classroom) 
2 
RQ1-29 
Teachers were happy to 
return to face-to-face 
teaching 
1 
Lowered motivation and willingness to 
perform 
6 
RQ1-2 
Students have agreed on 
online examinations 
1 
130
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

RQ1-5 
Drop in student performance 
due to C19 
3 
RQ1-7 
Corona used as an excuse by 
students for poor academic 
performance 
1 
RQ1-32 
Indiscipline of students with 
digital teaching 
1 
 
95 
 
2) Increase in experience of Teachers in Higher 
Education 
As a further effect of the pandemic on university teaching, 
an increase in experience can be identified in the interviews. 
The interviewees observe this increased experience in dealing 
with digital teaching (RQ1-16) primarily in themselves as 
well as in their colleagues. In this context, they report on the 
special circumstances of the pandemic, which led them to 
methodological-didactic experiments that they would not 
have attempted in normal face-to-face operations: 
"A lot of things during that time, from 
a didactic point of view, were also 
exciting at times, because we had to 
try things that we might never have 
taken on otherwise, or might not have 
even dared to try." (IP11) 
The teachers interviewed would like to continue to use the 
skills they acquired during the pandemic in dealing with 
digital media. This is expressed, for example, in a greater 
willingness to provide content in digital form in addition to 
traditional classroom teaching (RQ1-10): 
"I have learned something and I am 
very happy about that because I can 
now continue to use it. So now I know 
how to make videos and I will 
certainly continue to do that, offer 
videos or Yes, you can also do that for 
exercises. So that's definitely been a 
positive side effect of being forced to 
teach digitally." (IP08) 
The assessments of the teachers regarding the possibilities 
of digital teaching differ greatly. Some teachers report in the 
interviews that they are positively surprised by the didactic 
possibilities of digital teaching (RQ1-15), whereas others feel 
rather confirmed in their opinion of digital teaching (RQ1-14). 
This assessment is shared especially by those interviewees 
who already had a positive attitude towards digital teaching 
before the pandemic, such as interviewee 10: 
"[...] I would say I was open-minded 
about it before. I am now, too. In that 
respect, the real attitude has not 
changed." (IP10) 
However, individual teachers also repeatedly express their 
skepticism about the possibilities of digital teaching in the 
interviews (RQ1-4). Based on their experiences during the 
pandemic, these teachers have a rather negative assessment of 
the effectiveness of digital teaching and, like interviewee 4, 
are rather disillusioned: 
"[...] the reservations have become 
greater. [...] we know how it works, 
but it works badly." (IP04) 
Even if the instructors have different assessments of the 
potential of digital media for university teaching, most of the 
interviewees see themselves as well prepared for future 
interruptions of face-to-face teaching at the university (RQ1-
22), as interviewee 6 also states: 
"And there I would say, however, so 
even if there is once again, let's say, 
forced, a considerable transition is 
necessary, there I would already say, 
based on the experience we have 
gained there, we should actually be 
quite well equipped." (IP06) 
3) Establishment of new organizational structures and 
digital infrastructure 
The perception of a common usage of digital tools and 
methods is accompanied by the perception of a surge in 
digitalization that has facilitated the uncomplicated and low-
threshold use of digital tools due to an improved infrastructure 
(RQ1-25). The establishment of this infrastructure enables 
straightforward digital working for students as well as 
instructors, as an example statement shows. 
“I cannot remember bringing printed-
out slides either; rather the students 
bring their tablets and practically take 
notes on my slides. That is very 
noticeable for me. It seems like there 
was a technology boom among the 
students.” (IP13) 
Moreover, since the onset of the pandemic, digitalization 
services are available at the university, for example at the 
library or in laboratories, making the production and 
distribution of digital materials easier (RQ-26). 
“Using the university library for very 
quickly available scans, for example, 
as digital data. You know, after the 
university library was closed down. 
Everybody perceived that very 
positively.” (IP12) 
These digital materials are then made available 
asynchronously online or used for on-site teaching (RQ1-26). 
As an example of application, interviewee 12 goes on pointing 
out: 
131
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

“And of course, at least that is also the 
case at our department, there has been 
a bit of a shift towards […] well, we 
developed teaching elements, 
developed digital elements, that can 
then be used in on-site teaching.”  
(IP 12) 
However, an improved infrastructure and the provision of 
digital services are not the sole outcome of this surge in 
digitalization. It has also had an impact on the establishing of 
new organizational structures, such as working groups at 
departments that function as Communities of Practice and 
provide cooperative support for the use of digital tools and 
methods (RQ1-12).  
“So, in early April we already 
established a working group on digital 
teaching that I was a member of.” 
(IP05) 
4) Improvement of teaching 
Beyond the infrastructural and organizational changes, 
faculty members also perceive a qualitative improvement of 
teaching to be a result of the pandemic. Firstly, instructors 
report being more diligent in creating teaching-learning 
materials for digital scenarios (RQ1-11). Secondly, also 
during the pandemic, they thoroughly attended to the students’ 
concerns (RQ1-13). 
“During the Corona times, many 
instructors engaged with their students 
quite intensively, so that the social 
aspects were never fully lost.” (IP05) 
That intensive interaction between instructors and students 
is also possible during asynchronous learning phases and 
results in high quality teaching (RQ1-23) can be seen in a 
statement of interviewee 11. 
“So, we’ve reached a higher level, 
which we noticed in the students’ 
inquiries, in the participation and the 
joint work on the material that was 
previously provided online.” (IP11) 
Instructors also acknowledge the increased flexibility of 
their day-to-day business due to the possibilities opened up by 
digitalization (RQ1-29). As an example, interviewee 12 
mentions the practical and flexible option to digitally 
communicate with students via video conferencing. 
“And right now I find that, I don’t find 
that inconvenient or impractical at all, 
the scheduling of, of appointments and 
of supervision meetings, I have in fact 
held several of those via zoom, of 
course also during the past semesters 
after the pandemic. And I believe that 
this is well-received, if you’re just a bit 
flexible.” (IP12) 
5) Decreased motivation and willingness to perform 
In addition to the aforementioned improvements, 
instructors also perceive negative impacts of the pandemic on 
teaching and learning in higher education. Some instructors 
report a drastic decrease in student performance during the 
pandemic (RQ1-5), which manifests in a higher percentage of 
weak exam performances and a lacking willingness to 
perform (RQ1-7). Instructors also observe that some students 
struggle with bridging gaps and making up for deficits as they 
have difficulty motivating themselves to resume their studies, 
thus widening the gap between high- and low-performing 
students. 
“But the low-performing students 
don’t read anymore at all. And then 
you notice, it’s drifting apart.” (IP05) 
Furthermore, individual instructors reported negative 
behavior on behalf of the students during the pandemic. They 
mentioned students colluding during online exams (RQ1-2) as 
well as how some students’ lack of discipline impaired their 
teaching. 
„First you turn off the video, to still 
keep the sound, which keeps working. 
But once it is sound only, suddenly 
there is no reply anymore […] or then 
the mobile phone rings. You know 
these effects. And of course we can 
always attribute this to a lack of 
discipline. We can say, okay, he 
should come to Frankfurt, given that 
being a student is his main occupation, 
he should already get proper 
equipment and a proper DSL 
connection and so on. That’s 
something you can expect, it doesn’t 
cost much these days. But sadly we 
also always have to deal with the 
students’ lack of discipline.” (IP04) 
B. Reservations about digital teaching (RQ2) 
The reservations about digital teaching expressed by the 
teachers in the interviews address social, didactic, 
organizational and technical aspects. The statements of the 
teachers were assigned to a total of 56 different subcategories, 
which in turn can be summarized in 10 main categories (See 
Tab. II). A selection of the most relevant categories will be 
discussed in more detail in the next section. 
 
1) Social aspects: Lack of contact and absence 
Frequent concerns expressed by teachers about digital 
teaching relate to social aspects of the teaching-learning 
process, such as a lack of social contact, insufficient contact 
with the subject and also (physical) absence from the learning 
132
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

location. The interviewees complain that there is no direct 
contact in online scenarios (RQ2-1) and thus no real discourse 
and dialogue as well as no sufficient interaction (RQ2-2). 
Interview partner 3 (IP03) describes it like this: 
“Even in the lectures we try to include 
as many practical elements as 
possible. And even if it’s just a matter 
of discussing problems and getting the 
students involved in the dialogue, so to 
speak, so that they have to think about 
it and follow the train of thought and 
not just sit there and let it wash over 
them. Of course, that doesn’t work in 
the digital world.” (IP03) 
Digital teaching would also lack the spontaneous small 
talk before and after the lecture (RQ2-23). As online lectures 
end abruptly, student communication is assumed to suffer 
(RQ2-39) due to a lack of opportunities for exchange, 
discussion and reflection (RQ2-24, RQ2-25). This is regretted 
by interview partner 5: 
“On the way to the seminar, they talk 
about the content of the seminar, as 
well as about the lecturer. But they 
reflect in the process. This reflection is 
lost.” (IP05) 
2) Pedagogical-didactical reservations and motivational 
aspects 
Some of the reservations expressed in the interviews relate 
to the didactic design possibilities of digital teaching. In the 
eyes of some interview partners, these are less effective than 
those available in face-to-face teaching (RQ2- 36). Likewise, 
the willingness and ability of students to perform presumably 
decreases in online teaching (RQ2-22). Several of the 
interviewees also point out that digital teaching- learning 
formats are didactically flawed and generally do not 
correspond to their ideas of "good" teaching (RQ2-11). 
Interview partner 6 says, for example, videos would tend to 
prevent engagement with texts (RQ2-38): 
“To understand the digitization of 
teaching as a bit of an alternative to 
text-based teaching, so to speak, in the 
direction of, let’s say, video or audio 
content, that would also be a problem 
from our specialist point of view" 
(IP06) 
Teachers are also dissatisfied with the didactic 
possibilities of the existing systems. In their opinion, the 
systems and tools are not very appealing in design and could 
be more playful (RQ2-31). Teachers also perceive the “digital 
divide” associated with online teaching as problematic, i.e. the 
effect that high-achieving students benefit more from digital 
teaching than lower-achieving students, who tend to be 
disadvantaged by the use of online teaching (RQ2-53). 
Interview partner 8 describes their experience as follows: 
“I think that to those who are good 
didn’t matter that much because they 
dealt with it well. But those who are 
not so good, you lost them to a certain 
extent because you couldn’t nudge 
them directly." (IP08) 
The respondents attributed this effect to the fact that 
lower- performing students in particular were less motivated 
in online teaching (RQ2-10). Due to the lack of scheduled 
learning opportunities in presence as well as the lack of social 
exchange, students partly lose the structure for their daily 
study routine (RQ2-47) and learn less as well as less 
independently (RQ2-42). 
 
3) Organizational and legal barriers 
In addition to concerns about the didactic reservations of 
digital teaching, the interview partners also mention 
organizational and legal reservations about the increased use 
of virtual and hybrid teaching formats. Digital teaching is 
above all time-consuming (RQ2-5) and expensive (RQ2-32), 
as teachers sometimes have to familiarize themselves with 
new tools first (RQ2-45), must first create or prepare 
additional materials or provide additional online support. 
According to the interviewees, the additional workload then 
leads to work intensification and deadline pressure (RQ2-27). 
Teachers see it as particularly problematic that the amount of 
work they invest in producing and supporting additional 
digital courses is not remunerated (RQ2-37). Interview 
partner 6 said: 
“Well, I’m basically doing face-to-
face teaching, but I’m also doing a lot 
of nice digital stuff on top of it, a bit of 
personal commitment that you do 
because it’s close to your heart. But 
the effort is somehow not compensated 
in a certain way." (IP06) 
In addition to the extra effort, respondents also raise legal 
concerns about the use of digital teaching. For example, 
Interview partner 3 argues that online is rarely compatible 
with legal regulations such as the licensing regulations for 
medical professions (RQ2-18): 
“If we do not return to real practical 
content, we are not educating future 
doctors properly. That is a very clear 
fact. So we are in breach of the 
licensing regulations, so to speak, if 
we continue to keep them away from 
the hospital bed." (IP03) 
Last but not least, respondents also fear that their digital 
course material will be distributed uncontrolled and illegally 
on the web (RQ2-13). 
133
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
4) Technical barriers 
The implementation of digital teaching is inextricably 
linked to the use of different digital tools, systems and 
technologies. Thus, various reservations are also mentioned in 
the interviews that are closely related to the use of technology 
as well as the specific characteristics of the respective 
technologies used. In addition to infrastructural problems such 
as an inadequate WLAN connection (RQ2-54), the usability 
of the available digital systems is criticized as being 
inadequate, especially for "beginners" and digitally less 
inclined teachers (RQ2-9). Interview partner 10: 
“Where the eLectures are recorded 
and where you can also upload things 
yourself as a user. [...] I also used that 
once, I have to say at the beginning, 
and then found it complicated after 
all." (IP10) 
It is often the university’s own systems that do not work 
well (RQ2-46). Another reservation is the fact that some 
technological solutions (such as AR or VR applications) offer 
didactic advantages, but cannot be used properly on a broader 
scale at present (RQ2-19) as interview partner 3 argues: 
“VR is indeed quite nice, but as I said, 
it is still a long way from being usable 
for all students. There are not enough 
devices." (IP03) 
In addition to these points, which relate more to the 
teachers themselves, the interviewees also bring up technical 
barriers on the part of the students that limit or even prevent 
their participation in digital teaching. First and foremost, an 
insufficient internet connection of the students is mentioned 
(RQ2-17) as well as a general uncertainty of the teachers due 
to the technical challenges on the part of the students  
(RQ2-41). 
 
5) Personal reservations and lack of teaching skills 
 While the reservations about digital teaching described so 
far tended to be of an external nature, the respondents also 
mentioned internal reasons. These include, on the one hand, 
personal sensitivities and preferences of the teachers, but, on 
the other hand, also their own teaching competence levels, 
which are perceived as insufficient. The personal reservations 
mentioned include fear of the unknown (RQ2-49) or the 
uncomfortable feeling of communicating with students via 
camera and microphone (RQ2-40). For example, interview 
partner 12 reports that 
“the tiles were black, and speaking to 
a black screen, especially in the first 
semester, for example, was considered 
by many to be very unusual or difficult 
to get used to and not very 
advantageous." (IP12) 
Furthermore, some teachers have the opinion that a 
majority of their colleagues would prefer face-to-face 
teaching to online teaching (RQ2-34) or they themselves 
could not imagine teaching online (RQ2-48). However, there 
were also complaints about the lack of support from the 
university, especially with technical problems (RQ2-51), 
which prevented them from incorporating more digital 
elements into teaching. Interview partner 11 is disillusioned, 
given that 
“the technical support was rather 
poor and we had to work out a lot on 
our own." (IP11) 
Last but not least, the teachers also surveyed a lack of 
competences as a reason for not offering more digital 
teaching. The main reason cited here is the lack of digital skills 
among teachers (RQ2-4), which made it difficult to deal with 
the tools needed, as interview partner 5 explains: 
“Of course, there were enormous 
difficulties in dealing with a digital 
format, for example. So how do I 
actually do an online session or 
something?" (IP05) 
Similar problems in the use of technologies for digital 
teaching are described by interview partner 2: 
“But I have no idea how to create 
these videos in a visually different way 
and maybe put them on another page. 
[...] Or what is a Scorm learning 
content. These are all things that you 
normally have no idea about" (IP02), 
and interview partner 13 
“How does zooming work? What is 
the best way to do it? [...] There was a 
lot of uncertainty on all sides." (IP13) 
A lack of didactic skills is also cited as a further obstacle 
to the more extensive use of digital teaching (RQ2-20). 
Interview partner 5 recognizes the greater deficit here. 
“For me, it was relatively clear that 
the know-how was still lacking on the 
part of the teachers, both from a 
didactic and a technical point of view. 
Above all from a didactic point of 
view." (IP05) 
In addition to the competence deficit, the interviewees also 
mention the problems caused by the introduction of new 
technologies (RQ2-6) and insufficient guidance and 
134
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

instruction on new digital systems as further barriers to the use 
of digital teaching (RQ2-52). 
 
TABLE II.  
RESERVATIONS ABOUT DIGITAL TEACHING (RQ2) 
 
CATEGORY 
ID 
CATEGORY NAME 
ABSOLUT 
COUNT 
Lack of contact with the subject matter 
32 
RQ2-3 
Blackboard notes difficult to 
transfer into digital format 
3 
RQ2-7 
Experiments and practicals 
not transferable to digital 
13 
RQ2-8 
Lack of haptics, lack of 
contact with real-world 
objects 
10 
RQ2-15 
certain course is not suitable 
for digital teaching 
4 
RQ2-56 
Teaching at the bedside not 
transferable to digital 
2 
Missing competencies 
35 
RQ2-4 
Lack of digital competence 
of teachers 
15 
RQ2-6 
Introduction of new 
technology causes problems 
8 
RQ2-20 
Teachers lack didactic 
competencies for digital 
teaching 
4 
RQ2-21 
Available tools are too 
complicated 
6 
RQ2-52 
Insufficient 
guidance/instruction for new 
digital systems  
2 
Lack of social contact 
56 
RQ2-1 
Lack of direct contact/social 
contact 
23 
RQ2-2 
Online no dialogue/no 
argumentation/no interaction 
possible 
24 
RQ2-22 
Organizational questions can 
be clarified faster and easier 
in presence 
1 
RQ2-23 
In the digital world, "small 
talk" is missing / events end 
abruptly 
1 
RQ2-24 
Without e.g., walking 
together to the place of 
learning, there are no 
opportunities for discussion 
and reflection of the contents 
4 
RQ2-25 
Lack of exchange with 
colleagues 
1 
RQ2-39 
Communication between 
students suffers in the digital 
world in comparison to the 
presence. 
1 
RQ2-50 
Lack of body language in 
video conferences 
1 
Organizational reservations 
29 
RQ2-5 
Organizational reservations 
13 
RQ2-14 
Digital teaching is time-
consuming 
3 
RQ2-27 
Infrastructure operated in 
parallel causes additional 
effort 
1 
RQ2-29 
Digital teaching leads to 
increased workload and time 
pressure 
2 
RQ2-32 
Digital teaching must be 
well prepared 
2 
RQ2-37 
Good digital teaching is 
expensive 
7 
RQ2-45 
(Additional) digital teaching 
offers cause unpaid 
additional work for the 
teachers 
1 
Technical reservations 
25 
RQ2-9 
Usability of systems for 
"beginners" insufficient 
8 
RQ2-17 
Insufficient Internet 
connection for students 
5 
RQ2-19 
Technical solutions not 
widely applicable (e.g., VR) 
2 
RQ2-28 
Affinity for digital teaching / 
digital technologies among 
teachers very heterogeneous 
1 
RQ2-33 
Lack of system freedom 
(e.g., when using an LMS) 
1 
RQ2-41 
Uncertainty due to technical 
challenges on the part of 
students 
2 
RQ2-46 
University's own solutions 
do not work so well 
2 
RQ2-54 
Technical hurdles 
4 
Motivation & learning success 
18 
RQ2-10 
Lack of motivation of 
(lower-performing) students 
for online teaching 
13 
RQ2-16 
Students put off digital 
teaching and do not manage 
to work it up 
1 
RQ2-42 
Students learn less/do not 
learn as independently as 
before 
2 
RQ2-47 
Students lose fixed structures 
for their daily study routine 
2 
Didactic reservations 
27 
135
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

RQ2-11 
Digital formats have 
shortcomings/do not 
correspond to ideas of good 
teaching 
9 
RQ2-12 
Performance of average 
students decreases with 
online teaching 
5 
RQ2-30 
Teachers no longer teach but 
just recycle their old 
screencasts/slides 
2 
RQ2-31 
Systems and tools could be 
more playful 
2 
RQ2-36 
digital teaching is less 
effective than face-to-face 
teaching 
1 
RQ2-38 
digital teaching (especially 
videos) hinders engagement 
with texts 
2 
RQ2-43 
Students have inhibitions to 
participate 
2 
RQ2-44 
Digital teaching is 
dull/boring 
1 
RQ2-53 
Digital teaching favors high-
achieving students and 
disadvantages low-achieving 
students 
3 
Legal reservations 
5 
RQ2-13 
Content from digital events 
ends up on the web 
1 
RQ2-18 
Digital teaching violates 
legal regulations (e.g., 
licensing regulations for 
medical professions) 
4 
Absence 
9 
RQ2-26 
Character of the university 
as a presence university is 
lost 
1 
RQ2-35 
Students no longer come to 
face-to-face courses with 
digital offerings 
7 
RQ2-55 
Students have become 
accustomed to online 
teaching and stay away 
1 
Personal reservations 
10 
RQ2-34 
A majority of lecturers 
prefer face-to-face teaching 
to online teaching 
1 
RQ2-40 
Uncomfortable feeling of 
communicating via camera 
and microphone 
2 
RQ2-48 
Teachers can't imagine 
teaching online 
0 
RQ2-49 
Fear of the unknown 
1 
RQ2-51 
Lack of support from the 
university for technical 
problems 
6 
 
C. Advantages of digital teaching (RQ3) 
In addition to the reservations, the teachers were also 
asked in the interviews about the advantages of digital 
teaching. In their experiences, teachers report on the 
pedagogical-didactical 
and 
technical-organizational 
advantages of digital teaching as well as positively perceived 
effects on students’ motivation and learning success. In 
addition, they talk about advantages that compensate for 
individual disadvantages, as well as about increasing their 
own digital skills. The statements of the teachers were 
assigned to a total of 26 different categories, which in turn can 
be summarized in six main categories (See Tab. III). 
 
1) Pedagogical-didactical, 
motivational 
and 
performance- related advantages 
The temporal and spatial flexibility of digital, 
asynchronous teaching (RQ3-7) in connection with the 
possibilities of uncomplicated repetition of the learning 
materials at one’s own learning pace (RQ3-8), also for the 
preparation and follow-up of synchronous phases, are 
repeatedly mentioned in the interviews as advantages and a 
way to self-determined learning. The following two 
statements are representative of several statements about these 
advantages: 
“So some like it, appreciate it very 
much, that they can schedule things 
themselves, that they can work 
independently at home, when they 
want to." (IP11) 
and 
“Asynchronous elements, especially 
now, when students are supposed to 
work on their own, alone or in study 
groups or so, you can design that well 
or even better with virtual tools." 
(IP12) 
Teachers also perceive that digital teaching is popular with 
students (RQ3-4), motivates students (RQ3-22), and 
contributes to learning success (RQ3-3). Students’ desire to 
have digital teaching as a choice is reported several times. 
Representative of this apparently frequently expressed wish 
are the following two statements: 
“Can’t we also have the material 
virtually as well?" (IP01) 
and 
“With students you also hear more 
often that they really want to have a 
136
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

choice, face-to-face or digital. For 
different reasons, personal reasons." 
(IP09) 
In addition, the high motivational effect of digital teaching 
was also reported during the pandemic: 
“They all turned on their cameras and 
they had a very intense exchange that 
30 minutes were usually not enough 
for because everyone was so engaged 
in it." (IP05) 
And they also perceived an increase in performance 
among some students, as interview partner 4, among others, 
states: 
“We’ve made the observation that 
high-performing students actually 
show performance improvement from 
online teaching." (IP04) 
For the future design of teaching, teachers take with them 
the insight from pandemic times that the mixture of digital and 
face-to-face offers is important, (RQ3-23) as the following 
quote of interview partner 9 illustrates: 
“We cannot replace face-to-face 
teaching with digital offers, but only 
expand and supplement it. That’s 
something that was a clear takeaway." 
(IP09) 
In this context, the development of one’s own 
competencies (RQ3-14) and the further development of one’s 
own teaching (RQ3-1) were also perceived as positive effects 
of the pandemic, as described by interview partner 10 and 2 as 
representative of several statements in this direction: 
“But I have now become acquainted 
with many more opportunities and 
possibilities. In this respect, the 
attitude has changed a little. I think so, 
because now I will also use blended 
learning formats more readily. And in 
this respect, it has changed somewhat, 
because I now take the opportunity 
more easily or more frequently, even 
in a seminar that does not take place 
virtually, but to incorporate real work 
phases that use virtual tools." (IP10). 
“So the bottom line after the three 
semesters, I would say, among the 
colleagues the vast majority or a great 
majority have found this to be an 
enrichment. And as yes [...] now 
looking back at the possibility to 
develop one’s teaching further." 
(IP02) 
With regard to the further development of their own 
teaching, teachers also emphasize that the analysis of data 
generated by digital teaching could be used for a more precise 
didactic evaluation (RQ3-16). 
 
2) Organizational advantages 
 
In the interviews, a whole series of arguments for digital 
teaching came up, which concern advantages for the 
organization of teaching. Emphasis is placed on the easier and 
increased provision of learning content (RQ3-18) and 
recordings (RQ3-6), temporal and spatial independence 
(RQ3-13), and the reusability of digital materials (RQ3-2). For 
some 
programs, 
such 
as 
teacher 
education, 
these 
organizational advantages are of particular importance, as 
interviewee 05 makes clear: 
“I have a lot of teacher trainees who 
have a lot of problems with overlap in 
their curriculum. For them, of course, 
it was a blessing that now in the 
lecture, that they can also participate 
asynchronously." (IP05) 
In addition to making it easier for students to organize their 
studies, teachers also see advantages of digital asynchronous 
teaching for their own work (RQ3-24): 
“Yes, because of course it gives 
teachers the opportunity to create new 
freedom for themselves through the 
asynchronous offers." (IP09) 
The initially high effort to produce digital materials is 
now, after the creation seen as an advantage for students and 
as a relief for themselves, as interviewee 08 states: 
“And I now have digital materials for 
all three semesters. If I teach this 
course again, then in principle I could 
profit from it or I would profit from it, 
then I could make all the digital things 
that I already have, I could then make 
them accessible again. And then, of 
course, that’s very luxurious for the 
students." (IP08). 
3) Advantages of digital teaching that compensate for 
individual disadvantages 
Two interviewees also describe aspects of digital teaching 
that can reduce individual disadvantages for both students and 
teachers. With the help of digital teaching, teachers with 
health risks due to the pandemic were still able to offer and 
conduct courses (RQ3-25). In addition, one interviewee also 
perceives benefits for students whose personality traits allow 
137
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

them to overcome disadvantages of face-to-face formats 
through digital teaching (RQ3-26): 
“And yes, there are students who find 
it convenient when they can turn off 
their camera and then speak quasi-
anonymously." (IP12) 
 
TABLE III.  
ADVANTAGES OF DIGITAL TEACHING (RQ3) 
CATEGORY 
ID 
CATEGORY NAME 
ABSOLUT 
COUNT 
Didactic advantages of digital learning 
27 
RQ3-1 
Digital revision leads to 
improvement 
5 
RQ3-7 
Time independence of 
students (asynchronous 
participation) 
8 
RQ3-8 
Repetition of the material is 
possible in an uncomplicated 
way (e.g., multiple viewing) 
2 
RQ3-9 
Observation/monitoring of 
students more easily 
1 
RQ3-10 
Virtual simulation enables 
new learning experiences 
2 
RQ3-16 
Digital evaluation enables 
more accurate didactic 
evaluation 
1 
RQ3-17 
New didactic possibilities 
8 
Organizational advantages of digital 
learning 
41 
RQ3-2 
Reusability of digital 
material 
13 
RQ3-6 
Lectures can be made 
available later 
5 
RQ3-11 
Division into small groups 
enables intensive 
collaboration 
4 
RQ3-12 
Asynchronous lectures 
prevent overlapping 
schedules 
1 
RQ3-13 
Digital teaching enables 
spatial independence 
11 
RQ3-18 
Increased provision of 
content 
3 
RQ3-20 
Basic courses would not 
need to be held permanently 
1 
RQ3-21 
Organization of courses 
becomes easier with digital 
tools (e.g., LMS) 
1 
RQ3-24 
Asynchronous possibilities 
create freedom 
2 
Motivation and learning success 
29 
RQ3-3 
Contributes to learning 
success 
8 
RQ3-4 
Is popular among students 
10 
RQ3-5 
Good online offers are used 
and replace face-to-face 
offerings 
3 
RQ3-15 
Continued use through 
hybrid offerings ("The mix 
makes the difference!") 
5 
RQ3-22 
Motivation among students 
1 
RQ3-23 
Mix of digital and face-to-
face offerings are important 
2 
Increasing digital competencies 
3 
RQ3-14 
Increase of the own digital 
competence of teachers 
3 
Advantages that lie in the technology 
itself 
1 
RQ3-19 
Digital tools are easy to use 
1 
Advantages that compensate for 
individual disadvantages 
2 
RQ3-25 
Digital teaching preferred for 
health problems 
1 
RQ3-26 
Digital anonymity makes it 
easier for some students to 
participate 
1 
 
 
Fig. 1. The transformation toward a New Normal, with the 
interpenetration of digital media and methods of on-site teaching. 
 
Fig. 2. The Tension field of digital and face-to-face teaching. The four 
positions of a teacher’s view on the benefits and disadvantages 
regarding both settings. 
138
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The results for RQ1 show that teachers perceive changes 
in their own teaching practices as well as in those of their 
colleagues, which they attribute to their experiences during 
the pandemic. These changes can be interpreted as an incipient 
digital culture change. Thus, the teachers observe a stronger 
anchoring of digital media in teaching. The use of digital tools 
in planning and conducting teaching is also becoming more 
natural. Instructors describe how they are changing their 
previous teaching strategies by incorporating lessons learned 
during the pandemic and incorporating their newly acquired 
digital teaching skills. The transformation toward this New 
Normal, with the interpenetration of digital media and 
methods of on-site teaching (Figure 1), means that the 
disadvantages of one or the other form of teaching (on-site 
versus online) can be offset to some extent. If teaching is thus 
set up more broadly in terms of methods (e.g., synchronous 
and asynchronous) and media (e.g., LMS, eLectures, 
videoconferencing), the needs of a heterogeneous student 
body are much more likely to be met. The balance act then 
shifts more to the question of how much resources teachers 
want to or can invest in differentiated teaching. The teachers 
interviewed also recognize changes in the learning actions of 
students in the sense of a cultural shift. Students are adapting 
their previous learning habits and are increasingly demanding 
the integration of digital elements and the provision of digital 
content. It remains to be said, however, that although digital 
cultural change can already be observed in various places, the 
process of change toward post-digital university teaching is 
far from complete. In their assessment of the pandemic 
experience, teachers come to very different conclusions. By 
no means all teachers are convinced of the didactic 
possibilities and the effectiveness of digital teaching and are 
prepared 
to 
change 
their 
teaching 
practices. 
This mixed picture is also reflected in the statements of the 
teachers regarding the advantages as well as the concerns 
about the use of digital media in university teaching (RQ2 and 
RQ3). 
The results show that, after the experience of the 
pandemic, some teachers emphasize the desire for on-site 
teaching and the associated direct contact with students and 
colleagues. This goes hand in hand with teachers’ concerns 
and reservations about digital teaching. Besides the 
pedagogical and didactic difficulties of digital teaching, they 
also see motivational and performance-related problems. In 
addition, there are personal reservations in connection with 
their own lack of competence and perceived organizational, 
technical or legal hurdles. On the other hand, however, some 
advantages of digital teaching are also perceived, for example 
with regard to motivation, pedagogical-didactical possibilities 
and potentials, and organizational facilitation. These different 
perceptions are not necessarily contradictory, but rather reflect 
the individual situation and perspective of teachers and 
students. There is  a tension between the advantages and 
disadvantages of face-to-face and digital teaching, which 
poses a dilemma for the design of teaching (as illustrated in 
Figure 1). Advantages of a format for some may represent 
disadvantages for others. 
 
A. The Tension field of digital and face-to-face teaching 
In addition to aspects of isolation and loneliness or 
difficulties for lower-performing students, the perceived 
disadvantages of digital teaching relate primarily to the lack 
of direct exchange and dialog with students. This perception 
leads to a strong desire on the part of some teachers to return 
to the former face-to-face teaching formats rather than to 
maintain digital ones. This reaction risks overlooking the fact 
that "back to face-to-face" may well be associated with 
disadvantages for some students and teachers. Assuming a 
broad understanding of heterogeneity, respectively diversity 
[12], in which heterogeneous (learning) starting points are 
acknowledged, with different prior knowledge, interests, 
cognitive, motoric and sensory abilities, motivations as well 
as social and cultural backgrounds of students, digital 
elements play an eminently important role with regard to 
diversity-sensitive, inclusive teaching. Disadvantages of a 
purely verbal and fluid face-to-face teaching offer arise, for 
example, for students who have difficulties following due to 
auditory perception disorders, physical hearing impairments, 
reading/spelling difficulties, grief or ADHD/ADS [9] or have 
problems actively participating in presence due to shyness or 
anxiety. Advantages of digital teaching can provide 
significant support. A continuous asynchronous learning offer 
or the possibility to make use of it in addition to face-to-face 
teaching would be very helpful for these students. For 
example, students with reading and spelling difficulties have 
enough time to read texts, use reading programs and apps for 
written assignments, and enter their own written submissions, 
e.g., using text-to-speech software, and have them 
automatically checked for spelling and grammar. In the case 
of concentration difficulties or simply different discussion and 
learning speeds, an asynchronous learning offer can provide 
relief by allowing contributions and tasks or asynchronously 
conducted discussions to be worked on autonomously at one’s 
own pace or in smaller units, so that the working memory is 
less burdened. In addition, for some students in special life 
situations, e.g., when they are prevented from attending due to 
illness, parenthood or other care work, a continuous 
asynchronous learning offer makes it possible to maintain 
their studies in the first place. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The qualitative study identified four positions that can be 
used to describe the tension between the perspectives with 
which teachers view the specific opportunities and threats of 
digital teaching and face-to-face teaching (see Figure 2). In 
the future, these different perspectives must be considered on 
two levels when designing contemporary teaching. For one, 
on the institutional level, in strategic decisions about the goals 
and orientation of academic teaching at the university. For 
another, on the individual level of the single teachers, in the 
planning and realization of their own teaching, but also in the 
reflection of their own teaching activities. In this context, it 
will be crucial to always have different possible solutions in 
mind in a multiperspective sense and to choose solutions that 
take several of these positions into account and lead to a 
139
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

synthesis through dialogue [16]. Interview partner 9 also 
argues in favor of such an approach by speaking out against 
thinking in either/or categories: 
“So it’s neither a demonization of 
digital possibilities, but also not a 
clear prioritization of face-to-face 
presence. Yes, perhaps not just 
prioritization, but really the mix, it’s 
the mix that makes it. Both have their 
place, digital teaching, face-to-face 
teaching, and you can’t replace one 
with the other." 
In the future more research is needed to further explore 
this tension field of digital teaching. On the one hand, the 
perspective of the students is important, whose needs and 
wishes must be taken into account when designing digital 
teaching. On the other hand, the group of persons with special 
needs due to e.g., visual, hearing or motor impairments or with 
care work is interesting. Even if all students (and teachers) 
benefit from digital accessibility in principle, it is this group 
whose needs should be given special attention. Further work 
will focus on the question of how university teaching can 
become more inclusive by incorporating the possibilities of 
digitization [2] and in what form the multi-perspective 
approach described can support this process. One approach 
could be the creation, systematic preparation, and distribution 
of learning designs for inclusive, digital teaching. These 
patterns, which require both individual teachers (individual 
level) and institutes for academic development (institutional 
level) to create, would provide teachers with a valuable source 
of inspiration for designing contemporary teaching. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Tillmann, S. Voß-Nakkour, M. Eichhorn, and F. Kuhn, ‘The 
Tension Field of Digital Teaching From the Perspective of 
Higher 
Education 
Teachers’, 
in 
IARIA 
- 
SMART 
ACCESSIBILITY 2023, The Eighth International Conference 
on Universal Accessibility in the Internet of Things and Smart 
Environments, Venice, Italy, 2023. [Online]. Available from: 
http://personales.upv.es/thinkmind/dl/conferences/smartaccess
ibility/smart_accessibility_2023/smart_accessibility_2023_3_
20_88010.pdf (accessed Dec. 18, 2023) 
[2] M. Eichhorn, A. Tillmann, R. Müller, and A. Rizzo, 
‘translated: Teaching in times of Corona: practice-theoretical 
investigation of teaching action during school closure. 
Unterrichten in Zeiten von Corona: Praxistheoretische 
Untersuchung 
des 
Lehrhandelns 
während 
der 
Schulschließung’, in Medien in der Wissenschaft: Band 77. 
Seamless Learning – lebenslanges, durchgängiges Lernen 
ermöglichen, C. M. Werder and J. Erlemann, Eds., Waxmann 
Verlag GmbH, 2020, pp. 81–90. 
[3]  ‘The Difference Between Emergency Remote Teaching and 
Online Learning’. [Online]. Available from:  
 
https://er.educause.edu/articles/2020/3/the-difference-
between-emergency-remote-teaching-and-online-learning 
(accessed Dec. 18, 2023). 
[4] D. Euler and S. Seufert, ‘translated: Change Management in 
University Teaching: The Sustainable Implementation of e-
Learning 
Innovations. 
Change 
Management 
in 
der 
Hochschullehre: Die nachhaltige Implementierung von e-
Learning-Innovationen’, 2007, doi: 10.3217/ZFHD03/02. 
[5] M. Kerres, ‘translated: Introduction of learning innovations . 
Einführung von Lerninnovationen’, in Mediendidaktik. 
Konzeption und Entwicklung digitaler Lernangebote, M. 
Kerres, Ed., Berlin: De Gruyter, 2018, pp. 491–511. 
[6] D. Euler, ‘translated: Designing the implementation of e-
learning innovations: Promoting the readiness of teachers and 
learners to innovate as central players in implementation. 
Gestaltung 
der 
Implementierung 
von 
E-Learning- 
Innovationen: Förderung der Innovationsbereitschaft von 
Lehrenden und Lernenden als zentrale Akteure der 
Implementierung’, in E-Learning in Hochschulen und 
Bildungszentren, D. Euler and S. Seufert, Eds., Berlin, Boston: 
DE GRUYTER, 2004. doi: 10.1515/9783486593754.561. 
[7] M. Graf-Schlattmann, D. M. Meister, G. Oevel, and M. Wilde, 
‘translated: Collective Willingness to Change as a Key Success 
Factor of Digitization Processes at Universities. Kollektive 
Veränderungsbereitschaft als zentraler Erfolgsfaktor von 
Digitalisierungsprozessen an Hochschulen’, 2020, doi: 
10.3217/ZFHE-15-01/02. 
[8] C. Arndt, T. Ladwig, and S. Knutzen, ‘translated: Between 
curiosity and uncertainty : internal university surveys of 
students and faculty in the virtual summer semester 2020 : 
results of a qualitative content analysis. Zwischen Neugier und 
Verunsicherung : 
interne 
Hochschulbefragungen 
von 
Studierenden und Lehrenden im virtuellen Sommersemester 
2020 : Ergebnisse einer qualitativen Inhaltsanalyse’, Nov. 
2020, doi: 10.15480/882.3090. 
[9] F. A. Rüscher, E. Buchminskaia, S. Chilla, and C. Filk, 
‘translated: 
Digital 
accessibility 
and 
the 
university: 
STUDYasU - a proactive approach to barrier-sensitive digital 
university 
teaching. 
Digitale 
Barrierefreiheit 
und 
die 
Hochschule: STUDYasU – ein proaktiver Ansatz für  barriere-
sensible digitale Hochschullehre’, in Digitale Barrierefreiheit 
in der Bildung weiter denken. Innovative Impulse aus Praxis, 
Technik und Didaktik, S. Voß-Nakkour, L. Rustemeier, M. M. 
Möhring, A. Deitmer, and S. Grimminger, Eds., Frankfurt am 
Main: Universitätsbibliothek Johann Christian Senckenberg, 
2023, pp. 90–100. Accessed: Mar. 09, 2023. doi: 
10.21248/gups.62773. 
[10] G. Marinoni, H. van´t Land, and T. Jensen, ‘The Impact of 
COVID-19 on Higher Education around the World’, IAU, 
Paris, 2020. Accessed: Mar. 09, 2023. [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.iau-
aiu.net/IMG/pdf/iau_covid19_and_he_survey_report_final_m
ay_2020.pdf (accessed Dec. 18, 2023) 
[11] D. Frohwieser, S. Gaaw, S. Hartmann, K. Lenz, and J. Möller, 
‘translated: Between "what’s missing most is time." and "thank 
you for making studying possible." survey of lecturers and 
students on the corona-induced conversion to virtual teaching 
in the summer semester 2020. results of the first survey wave 
in april 2020. Zwischen „Was am meisten fehlt, ist Zeit.“ und 
„Danke, dass ein Studium möglich gemacht wird.“ Befragung 
von Lehrenden und Studierenden zur coronabedingten 
Umstellung auf virtuelle Lehre im Sommersemester 2020‘. 
[Online]. Available from: 
 
 
 
https://tudresden.de/zqa/ressourcen/dateien/publikationen/hoc
hschulmonitoring/Virtuelle_Lehre_2020_Schnellauswertung_
erste_Welle.pdf (accessed Dec. 18, 2023) 
[12] A. Witzel, ‘translated: The problem-centered interview. Das 
problemzentrierte Interview’, in Qualitative Forschung in der 
Psychologie : 
Grundfragen, 
Verfahrensweisen, 
Anwendungsfelder, G. Jüttemann, Ed., Weinheim: Beltz, 1985, 
pp. 227–255. 
[13] M. K. Barbour, R. LaBonte, K. Kelly, C. B. Hodges, S. Moore, 
B. B. Lockee, T. Trust, and M. Bond,  Understanding 
Pandemic 
Pedagogy: 
Differences 
Between 
Emergency 
Remote, 
Remote, 
and 
Online 
Teaching. 
2020. 
doi: 
10.13140/RG.2.2.31848.70401. 
140
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[14] P. Jandrić et al., ‘Teaching in the Age of Covid-19—The New 
Normal’, Postdigital Sci. Educ., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 877–1015, 
Oct. 2022, doi: 10.1007/s42438-022-00332-1. 
[15] P. Mayring, ‘translated: Qualitative Content Analysis: Basics 
and Techniques . Qualitative Inhaltsanalyse: Grundlagen und 
Techniken’, 12., Überarb. Aufl. Weinheim u.a.: Beltz, 2015. 
[16] D. Bohm, ‘translated: The open conversation at the end of the 
discussion. Das offene Gespräch am Ende der Diskussion’. 
Klett-Cotta, 1999
 
141
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

