532
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Supporting the Development and Management of Learning Experiences in 
Location-Based Mobile Games 
The EVANDE project 
 
Dimitris Makris, Konstantinos Makris, Polyxeni 
Arapi, Stavros Christodoulakis 
Laboratory of Distributed Multimedia Information Systems 
and Applications (TUC/MUSIC) 
Technical University of Crete 
Chania, Greece 
e-mail: {dmakris, makris, xenia, stavros}@ced.tuc.gr 
Iasmi Stathi, Eleni Spiridaki, Charalampos Fassoulas 
Natural History Museum of Crete (NHMC) 
University of Crete 
Heraklion, Greece 
e-mail: {iasmi, evande, fassoulas}@nhmc.uoc.gr
 
 
Abstract— Mobile location-based games, exploiting the unique 
capabilities of mobile devices, such as camera, GPS and 
compass, can have high learning potential. On one hand, they 
present a very attractive form of learning for modern students, 
even very young ones, who have already developed their skills 
in computer games and are very familiar with the use of 
mobile devices. On the other hand, location-based games 
provide a unique opportunity for education since they connect 
an area with a story, and their activities may result in social, 
experiential and situated learning. These characteristics can 
make them a powerful tool in a number of applications, 
including education, nature and museum exploration, city 
sightseeing, natural disasters awareness and prevention 
training. In this paper, we present the design and 
implementation of PlayLearn, a platform for the development 
and management of learning experiences in mobile location-
based games, consisting of: (a) an authoring tool, supporting 
the creation and management of games, scenario editing, user 
interface customization and organization of gaming activities, 
and (b) a mobile application, compatible with most state-of-
the-art mobile devices and platforms, supporting the play of 
games created by the authoring tool. Our implementation 
supports the Experience API, allowing the activities that 
happen as part of gaming (learning) experiences to be 
recorded, tracked and shared in a Learning Record Store. 
PlayLearn is part of the EVANDE (Enhancing Volunteer 
Awareness and education against Natural Disasters through E-
learning) project learning infrastructure used for the 
development of mobile games for the training of civil 
protection volunteers and local authorities’ staff. 
Keywords- mobile educational games; location-based games; 
learning experiences; experiential learning. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Location-based services on mobile phones have become 
very popular in recent years. These services have been 
developed to provide location-based information to the user. 
This information derived from the location-based-services 
can be used in entertainment and education to create games 
that use the geographical location of the user or other people 
as an essential part of the game [1]. A -so called- mobile 
location-based-game [2] is a type of pervasive game in 
which the game-play evolves and progresses via a player’s 
location. Thus, mobile location-based games must provide 
some mechanism to allow the player to report their location. 
Frequently, this is performed by some kind of localization 
technology, e.g., by using satellite positioning through GPS. 
The difference between a video game and a location-based 
game focusing on the same story is that the later has a closer 
connection between game and reality. 
In terms of the main objective, mobile location-based 
games may be categorized as games that are created for fun, 
for learning or for mixed objectives [3]. All these categories 
of games seem to have a higher learning potential. On the 
one hand, modern students, even very young ones, have 
already developed skills in computer games and are very 
familiar with the use of mobile devices, and educational 
mobile games can provide a very attractive form of learning 
for them. On the other hand, the location-based games 
provide a unique opportunity for education since they 
connect a geographic area or object with a story. The 
physical and cultural surroundings are an integral part of the 
game space, and the location of the gamers is a key aspect of 
the game-playing activity. By visiting the actual locations, 
the story becomes more authentic and therefore leads to 
better educational results. Essentially, the games of this kind 
allow the user to collect data from the real world and assign 
them to the game’s map. De Souza et al. [4] have observed 
that these activities produce learning that is social, 
experiential and situated. The combination of informal 
learning and mobile outdoor games can be seen as a relevant 
arena for conducting novel learning activities that involve 
learners in different tasks including physical motion, 
problem solving, inquiry and collaboration [5].  
Learning experiences are those events and activities from 
which we learn by experience and can identify, to a certain 
extent, what we have learned. Different Learners have 
different characteristics and preferences (e.g., learning style, 
educational level, background knowledge etc.) and these 
affect how these learning experiences might be organized in 
terms of their activities as well as the learning material that 
should support those activities to achieve specific goals [6]. 

533
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Experiential learning, according to Kolb [7], can exist 
without a teacher and relates solely to the meaning-making 
process of the individual’s direct experience. Knowledge is 
continuously 
gained 
through 
both 
personal 
and 
environmental experiences. 
The Experience API (xAPI) is an eLearning software 
specification that allows learning content and systems to 
speak to each other in a manner that records and tracks all 
types of learning experiences [8]. The results of learning 
experiences are stored in a Learning Record Store (LRS), 
which may exist in a traditional Learning Management 
System (LMS), or on its own (installed or web-based). xAPI 
does not require a learning experience to take place in any 
particular medium (mobile, desktop, tablet), offline or 
online, or in any particular system. By collecting and 
analyzing xAPI for a specific learner, a picture of the 
learner’s activities, achievements, competencies and interests 
can be created, drawing on experiences using multiple 
devices and multiple activities [9]. Exposing data through the 
xAPI provides a means for interoperability but also allows 
for innovation of learning content, experiences, and systems, 
something that is not easily afforded in the current learning 
model [10].  
The use of xAPI with mobile devices is a powerful 
combination which can leverage learning, since it enables 
opportunities for capturing the activities from diverse 
learning experiences that take place exploiting the unique 
capabilities of the mobile platform for learning, such as the 
mobile phone's camera, GPS and compass. This may lead to 
new kinds of learning experiences and a much wider 
adoption of mobile-based performance support [10]. For 
instance, if a learning design was predicated on students 
taking pictures of examples of a particular phenomenon, and 
then sharing and discussing these with other students, the 
xAPI enables the various activities in this learning design to 
be recorded and tracked in an LRS in the form of activity 
streams. Later, the teacher could retrieve this information 
from the LRS, initiate a discussion with the students in the 
class, or even improve the learning design of the game 
according to the results to fit better the needs of the learners 
and learning context. These are only some of the many uses 
and benefits of adopting xAPI to track and share learning 
experiences.  
In this paper, we present the design and implementation 
of PlayLearn, a platform for the management of learning 
experiences in location-based mobile games. The games 
supported follow a flexible model, allowing our framework 
to support a wide variety of games in various applications. 
The platform consists of: (a) an authoring tool (web 
application) supporting the creation and management of 
mobile location-based games, including scenario editing, 
user interface customization and organization of gaming 
activities, and (b) a player application (mobile application) 
for supporting the play of games created using the authoring 
tool. The player application is compatible with most state-of-
the-art mobile devices/platforms, while both tools have been 
designed with flexibility and extensibility in mind. 
Moreover, our implementation supports the Experience API 
(xAPI), allowing the activities that happen as part of the 
gaming (learning) experiences to be recorded,  tracked and 
shared in a Learning Record Store (LRS). 
PlayLearn is part of EVANDE project learning 
infrastructure. EVANDE (Enhancing Volunteer Awareness 
and education against Natural Disasters through E-learning) 
[11] is a European project co-funded under the Union Civil 
Protection Mechanism. It aims to create a new learning tool 
to train civil protection volunteers and local authorities’ staff 
on the topics of floods, forest fires, earthquakes and 
European civil protection policies through the identification 
of best practices and knowledge, the development an e-
learning platform and tools to host e-learning courses, games 
and training activities, as well as the organization and 
implementation of local-based dissemination and training 
actions. Two piloting e-games based on mobile devices (e.g., 
tablets, mobile smart phones) are being developed within the 
framework of the European project. One of them is presented 
in detail in this paper. 
The structure of the rest of this paper is as follows: 
Section II presents systems and research related to this work. 
Section III specifies the model for describing educational 
games.  Section IV presents the architecture that has been 
designed and implemented, while Section V provides some 
more insight on the implementation of the platform. Section 
VI introduces EVANDE project and describes in detail how 
this framework and infrastructure is used for the creation and 
management of mobile games for the training of civil 
protection volunteers and local authorities’ staff presenting 
one of the two main piloting game scenarios developed. 
Finally, Section VII summarizes and reviews the presented 
work and sketches some perspectives for future extensions. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Various types of location-based games and platforms 
have extensively been reported by several authors, such as in 
[3] and [5]. In this section, we are focusing on those that are 
closer to our work.  
Geocaching [12] is an outdoor activity where players try 
either to find hidden caches using GPS coordinates, or hide 
their own caches and register their location. Activities are 
supported by: (a) a desktop application enabling the 
searching, filtering and previewing of geocaches, as well as 
(b) a mobile application that in addition to the previous 
features provides basic navigational assistance. Geocaching 
applications support strictly basic treasure hunt outdoor 
activities without providing in depth game experience. On 
the contrary, PlayLearn provides a game authoring tool and a 
player application supporting different game types based on 
a great variety of activities that can be either bounded or not 
to specific locations. Using our tools, the user is able to 
create his own game, share it and play it with others. 
Furthermore, we provide the capability to organize location 
based events allowing the participants to have a real in depth 
gaming experience either by competing or cooperating. 
WHAIWHAI [13] is an interactive story based on a 
gaming platform and developed to offer a way of exploring 
the less touristic and unknown city places. Players are 
supposed to walk the city, collect clues, answer enigmas and 
discover popular and traditional tales. Although games are 

534
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
customizable in terms of difficulty, time limit and number of 
players, WHAIWHAI is limited to exploration activities. On 
the contrary, PlayLearn provides tools and services for 
creating and playing various types of games, exploited under 
different contexts and targeting users of certain age groups. 
Tourality [14] is a location-based game where the user’s 
main goal is to visit several predefined spots of certain 
interest. In multiplayer mode, the game focuses on time, 
requiring the user to be faster than the others, maintain a high 
score and compete either by participating in a team or alone. 
Although 
Tourality 
enhances 
competitiveness 
and 
cooperation, it focuses strictly to these characteristics leaving 
aside any in depth educational activity that a game may 
provide. On the contrary, using PlayLearn a user is able to 
create different games consisted of a variety of educational 
activities based on specific user profiles. By doing so, the 
player of these games, apart from visiting a set of specific 
places, is able to browse educational material of different 
types (video, image, sound, text), answer riddles, perform 
metadata annotation tasks, search for hidden treasures, get 
rewards etc. 
AnswerTree [15] is a collaborative mobile location-based 
educational game designed to teach 8-12 year old players 
about trees and wildlife. The game is designed around 
collecting virtual information cards about notable trees by 
answering questions. Collaboration is encouraged by the fact 
that solutions to these questions are obtainable through 
sharing knowledge with other cardholders. Apart from this, 
AnswerTree is a static game targeting users of specific 
profile, interests and goals. On the other hand, using 
PlayLearn users are able to achieve the same goals while 
having the opportunity to extend their game (either by 
creating their own educational activities or selecting from a 
broad set of preexisting ones), personalize the user interface 
and organize events. 
ARIS [16] is a platform for creating and playing mobile 
games, tours and interactive stories and it is considered the 
most relevant work compared to ours. Its authoring tool is 
available as desktop application and provides the ability to 
specify the game location, create quests and upload 
multimedia files. Apart from these features, it does not 
provide any functionality for organizing gaming events 
focused on player profiles, and unlike PlayLearn’s authoring 
application, the game creator cannot customize the user 
interface of the game. Another important limitation is that 
ARIS game player application is designed as a mobile 
application available only for iPhones. On the contrary, we 
provide a game player for the majority of mobile phone 
operating systems including iOS, Android and Windows. 
Additionally, PlayLearn’s game player application is also 
available through the browser. 
III. 
MODEL 
The model developed and supported by the PlayLearn 
platform for the creation of location-based educational 
games has been designed with flexibility and extensibility in 
mind, to be able to describe as many as possible different 
types of games. Figure 1 presents the core model entities in 
the form of a class diagram. 
The Users of the system include both game creators and 
players, differentiating based on their role. The Game class 
represents the games which can be created, managed and 
played by Users using PlayLearn. A Game has a goal and 
consists of several descriptive and presentation metadata, 
while it is possible for the creator to adapt its Presentation 
Layout (e.g., color set, icon set, fonts, language, logo, etc). A 
Game consists of a sequence of Activities with certain 
objectives that have to be tackled by the player to support the 
game goal. Activities consist of Tasks which are considered 
as the actions to be performed in order to achieve the 
respective activities’ objectives. There are currently four 
types of Tasks:  
 
Move is a type of Task in which the user needs to 
navigate in order to reach a specific destination. 
 
Inspect is a type of Task in which the user has to 
read a text document, apothegm or any other piece 
of information in textual form (Textual Information), 
or view an image/video and listen to a sound 
(Multimedia Object). 
 
Answer the Question is a type of task in which the 
user should provide an answer for a given question. 
The type of the question can be of many types, 
including Multiple Choice, True – False, Text (the 
player should provide his answer in plain text), 
Hangman (the player needs to find a hidden word), 
QR Code (the player scans a pattern code, after 
searching for it in a specified location range), etc. 
 
Capture is a type of task in which the user has to 
record a video, take a photo, or record a sound. It can 
 
 
Figure 1. PlayLearn core model 
 

535
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 3. PlayLearn conceptual architecture 
be extended to require the Annotation of the 
captured Multimedia Object with metadata. 
The Multimedia Object class represents multimedia 
objects of type: video, image, text, and audio. Each type of 
Multimedia Object is depicted as a different class, holding its 
own descriptive attributes. The Audio class represents the 
multimedia objects of type sound. Optionally, it contains a 
GPS point specifying the location that has been recorded. 
The Image class represents the multimedia objects that are of 
type image. Optionally, it contains a GPS point with 
information about the location where it was captured, as well 
as other descriptive metadata. The Video class represents the 
multimedia objects that are of type video. Optionally, it 
contains a list of GPS points with information about the 
location where it was recorded, as well as any other 
information provided by the camera. The list of GPS points 
can be used to recreate the path that the user took for the 
duration of the capturing. Each User has a Portfolio that 
corresponds to a library with Multimedia Objects, which are 
used in games creation. 
Games can be used for the organization of gaming 
Events, which can be created and shared by Users in order to 
promote gaming activities in certain locations. Each Event 
may refer to a specific game, location and date/time. 
Additionally, the list of the event participants can be either 
open or restricted to specific user groups. Since Games can 
be bounded to a specific place, such information along with 
game classification, target group, rating and difficulty can be 
used for game searching and filtering. 
Figure 2 presents a simple game example for a visit of 
preliminary school pupils to a Botanical garden to explore 
olive trees, consisting of three activities corresponding to the 
pre-visit, visit and post-visit phases. 
IV. 
ARCHITECTURE 
 
Built as a web application, the system adopts the Rich 
Internet Application (RIA) principles, which promote the 
development of web applications as desktop applications 
performing business logic operations on the server side, as 
well as on the client side. The client side logic operates 
within the web browser running on a user’s local computer, 
while the server side logic operates on the web server hosting 
the application. 
Figure 3 presents the conceptual architecture of the 
PlayLearn platform. The main parts of this architecture are: 
(a) The Game Authoring Tool used by the Educator for the 
creation of games, providing functionality for game scenario 
design, game and event management, and UI customization, 
and (b) the Mobile Apps providing both Native UI to support 
mobile devices with different OS (Android, iOS, Windows) 
and a Web UI, which are used by the Learners to download 
and play the games created by the Authoring Tool during 
events organized by the Educators. The Game Authoring 
Tool and the Mobile Apps are supported by a number of 
services and repositories that are described in detail in the 
following paragraphs. 
The overall system architecture is presented in Figure 4. 
For the development of the application we adopted several 
design patterns [17]. The use of well-established and 
documented design patterns speeds up the development 
process, since they provide reusable solutions to the most 
common software design problems [18][19]. The Model-
View-Controller (MVC) design pattern [20][21] and the 
Observer pattern were used on the client side, and a multi-
tier architecture was implemented on the server side, which 
are described in the following sections. 
A. Server Side 
The Server Side part of our platform adopts a multi-
layered architectural pattern consisting of three basic layers 
 
Figure 2. A simple game example for a visit to a Botanical garden to 
explore olive trees, consisting of three activities corresponding to the pre-
visit, visit and post-visit phases 

536
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(Figure 4): The Service Layer, the Business Logic Layer and 
the Data Layer. This increases the system’s maintainability, 
reusability of the components, scalability, robustness, and 
security. 
The Service Layer controls the communication between 
the client-side logic and the server-side logic, by exposing a 
set of services (operations) to the client-side components 
[22]. These services comprise the middle-ware concealing 
the application business logic from the client and have been 
built as RESTful [23][24]. The basic system services are: 
 
CRUD Services, facilitating the creation, retrieval, 
update and deletion of a game, an event associated 
with a game, a user etc. 
 
External Access Services, providing the means for 
the client side and external systems to use the data of 
the system. 
 
Multimedia Access Services, enabling access to the 
uploaded multimedia files and their respective 
thumbnails,  and 
 
LRS Services, facilitating the creation of statements. 
A Learning Record Store (LRS) is a place to store 
learning records and is connected with the xAPI. As 
xAPI-enabled activities generate statements, they’re 
sent to an LRS. The LRS is simply a repository for 
learning records that can be accessed by a Learning 
Management System (LMS) or a reporting tool. 
The Business Logic Layer, also known as Domain Layer, 
contains the business logic of the application and separates it 
from the Data Layer and the Service Layer. In more detail: 
 
The Game Management Module is responsible for 
the game management, as well as for the activity and 
task (de)composition in our system. 
 
The Event Management Module is responsible for 
the event management. 
 
The Search Management Module handles the search 
and filter queries posed on our dataset and delivers 
the obtained results to the appropriate component of 
the Service Layer. 
 
The Multimedia Management Module is responsible 
for managing the persistence and serving of 
multimedia files, as well as for performing basic 
metadata extraction and thumbnail generation. 
 
The LRS Parser/Manipulator Module is responsible 
for the persistence and accessing of gaming results 
that have been collected and obtained during a 
gaming activity. 
The Data Layer accommodates external systems which 
are used to index and persist both data and multimedia files. 
Such systems are:  
 
The Data Repository, storing all the data of the 
system, 
 
the File Repository, persisting the multimedia files 
and thumbnails, and  
 
the Learning Record Store, archiving the collected 
results of the gaming activities which have been 
already performed. 
 
B. Client Side 
The Client Side of the PlayLearn applications is 
responsible for the interaction with the user. It refers to both 
the authoring tool (web application) and the player 
application (mobile application). All the actions performed 
by an individual are handled by the client side logic which 
undertakes the presentation of the information as well as the 
communication with the server. In order to achieve a high 
level of decoupling between the components forming the 
client logic we adopted the Model View Controller (MVC) 
design pattern, as well as the Observer pattern. The usage of 
the MVC pattern introduces the separation of the 
responsibilities for the visual display and the event handling 
behavior into different entities, named respectively, View 
and Controller. 
The Model refers to the business objects which are being 
used by our system. When the system needs to present 
information about a business object, the client side requests 
the respective information from the server side using the 
services that the later exposes. Similarly, when an update on 
the Model needs to be persisted, the client side sends the 
updated Model to the server side, triggering the indexing and 
storage of the business objects by the appropriate modules 
and external systems. 
The Views are responsible for the presentation of 
information in the user interface. Each view controls a 
number of widgets on the application’s graphical user 
interface. It consists of several handlers that are responsible 
for listening user actions, as well as HTML templates that 
define the presentation of the widgets. 
The Controllers are the modules that respond to the user 
input and interact with the Views in order to perform any 
change on the user interface. Furthermore, they maintain the 
Model and change it appropriately. Every View has a 
dedicated Controller managing, handling and propagating 
any changes that are to be performed or have already been 
performed to the user interface. Moreover, there are several 
cases where a "composite" Controller manages a number of 
other Controllers in order to create complex widgets. 
The Router is used for deep-linking URLs to controllers 
and views. It manages the URL of the client browsers, 
Figure 4. PlayLearn system architecture 

537
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
providing a different path to each distinct interface, without 
raising a browser event that will force a reload on the whole 
page. When the URL changes the Router analyzes the new 
path and handles the transition to the new View. This is 
performed using mappings between the different URLs 
supported in the system, the Controllers and the Views. 
The Multilinguality Support module manages the 
translation of the user interface elements through the use of 
certain configuration files. The process is easily adaptable 
and the system can be extended to support any language with 
minimum effort. It is worth to mention that currently the 
graphical user interfaces of the system have been already 
translated in English and Greek. 
 
V. 
IMPLEMENTATION 
The 
PlayLearn 
platform 
has 
been 
successfully 
implemented as described in the previous sections. Its server 
side is based on Java and makes extensive use of the Spring 
Framework in order to tackle certain backend aspects like 
data access. For persistency storage, MongoDB is used. One 
of the reasons that led us to choose MongoDB is that most of 
our data does not conform to a rigid relational schema. 
Hence, we cannot bind it in the structure of a relational 
database and we need some more flexibility. Due to the fact 
that MongoDB allows us to store parts of our data in 
different forms with minor effort, our back end is considered 
compatible with the Learning Record Store and xAPI. 
Moreover, this makes our system capable of supporting 
interoperability with other external systems with minimum 
effort. 
Regarding the client side, both the game authoring tool 
and the player application are based on the latest web-
application standards, rely on the JavaScript programming 
language and make extensive use of the AngularJS 
framework. Moreover, they have been created in order to 
match different user requirements, and thus their user 
interfaces are implemented differently in order to match the 
goals of their stakeholders. Apart from JavaScript, the user 
interface layout has been built using HTML5 and CSS3. The 
player application has been packaged as a native mobile 
application with the use of Phonegap, making it compatible 
with all the major mobile platforms. This allows our 
application to run without the need of internet access, or 
loading its source each time that the user accesses it. 
Additionally, the use of Apache Cordova allowed us to 
provide more functionality by using various native platform 
features that are otherwise unavailable to web applications. 
Figure 5 presents the graphical user interface of the game 
authoring tool. More specifically, it shows the use of the 
scenario editor while the user creates a new task of type 
“Capture” in order to populate an already existing activity of 
a game named “Explore Olive Trees”. The left side of the 
user interface is used for presenting the game activity list, 
while the right side is used as the main working area for 
customizing activity tasks. The top bar is used for the main 
menu inspection, user interface customization (in terms of 
language and layout), as well as for changing personal 
settings. Figure 6 presents the graphical user interface of the 
mobile application that was generated by the game authoring 
tool in Figure 5. The screenshot on the left side shows the 
preview that is presented to the user just before starting the 
game. It includes basic information such as the event, the 
game, the creator and the list of activities that need to be 
completed. On the other hand, the screenshot on the right has 
been taken during playing the game and shows an activity 
task of type “Move” requiring the user to use the map in 
order to navigate to a specific spot of interest. 
 
VI. 
GAMES DEVELOPMENT IN EVANDE PROJECT 
The Laboratory of Distributed Multimedia Information 
Systems and Applications at the Technical University of 
Crete (TUC/MUSIC), the developer of PlayLearn, is 
collaborating with the Natural History Museum of Crete 
(NHMC) in order to develop and run two piloting e-games 
based on mobile devices (e.g., tablets, mobile smart phones) 
within the framework of the European project EVANDE. 
EVANDE (Enhancing Volunteer Awareness and education 
 
Figure 5. Game authoring tool (web application) 
 
Figure 6. Player application (mobile application) 

538
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
against Natural Disasters through E-learning) [11] is a 
European project co-funded by the European Union Civil 
Protection 
Mechanism 
(Grant 
Agreement 
No. 
ECHO/SUB/2014/693261). EVANDE is targeting to the 
training of civil protection volunteers and local authorities’ 
staff on the topics of floods, forest fires, earthquakes and 
European civil protection policies. Additionally, the 
EVANDE project aims at the exchange of experiences in 
order to strengthen the cross-border collaboration and 
effectiveness of civil protection policies and activities among 
the participating countries and the involved target groups. 
The EVANDE project (2015-2016) is coordinated by the 
Natural History Museum of Crete-University of Crete, in 
Greece and involves also the following partners: 
 
Technical University of Crete - Laboratory of 
Distributed Multimedia Information Systems and 
Applications, GREECE 
 
Consorci De La Ribera, SPAIN 
 
Beigua European & Global Geopark, ITALY   
 
Earthquake Planning & Protection Organisation, 
GREECE 
 
Fondazione Hallgarten – Franhetti/Centro Studi e 
Formazione Villa Montesca, ITALY 
 
Centre for Educational Initiatives, BULGARIA 
Several activities are developed by EVANDE project. 
Besides mobile games, these activities also include the 
publication of technical reports on natural hazards, the 
European civil protection policies and best practices and the 
organization of an international volunteers’ meeting in Italy.  
Among the main outcomes of the EVANDE project, the 
development of an e-learning platform [25] is also included, 
to train local authorities’ staff and civil protection volunteers 
on floods, forest fires, earthquakes and European civil 
protection policies. The e-learning courses are free of charge 
and require only a simple registration. 
 
A. Education and Public Awareness in Natural History 
Museum of Crete 
The Natural History Museum of Crete (NHMC) 
(nhmc.uoc.gr) is a pioneer institute at national and European 
level in the study and management of the natural 
environment, 
in 
public 
awareness, 
education 
and 
sensibilisation of local people as well as visitors from abroad 
through its Centre of Environmental Training (NHMC-CET), 
in linking university activities with the Society and is also 
involved in the set-up of a network of Ecological Museums. 
In its permanent Exhibition Halls, of 3500 m2, in the city of 
Heraklion, Crete, the natural environment of the eastern 
Mediterranean area with special emphasis on Greece and 
Crete is displayed.  
Combining its scientific and educational knowledge, 
NHMC pursues special interest in Integrated Learning 
Strategy Plan for the active diffusion of the knowledge 
accumulated to all sectors of the society.  More specifically, 
Education and Learning in NHMC follow 5 strategic poles: 
a) Bridging NHMC with Formal and Informal Education: 36 
educational workshops for school groups connect NHMC 
with school curricula and families, using Inquiry-based 
learning, 
theatrical 
games, 
creative 
manufacturing, 
observation exercises, field trips, ICT games etc.; b) Life 
Long Learning: in NHMC-CET, more than 4000 teachers 
and other professionals have been trained on Environmental 
and Pedagogical issues. All training courses have been 
Quality assured and Validated; c) Volunteering: members of 
the club “Friends of the NHMC” participate in several indoor 
and outdoor activities; d) Awareness of People with Special 
Needs: specialized workshops take place; e) Editions: 
educational packages for Eastern Mediterranean natural 
environment are produced. 
Most of the educational and public awareness activities 
are carried out into NHMC permanent Exhibition Halls, 
where the NHMC Centre for Environmental Training 
(NHMC-CET) is also activated. 
 
B. EVANDE mobile games 
Promoting exploration with mobile location-based 
educational games is vital to be able to teach players 
knowledge about specific areas where a crisis can happen 
[26]. A location-based game provides a low-cost solution for 
promoting exploration, as it can easily be extended to any 
area. Due to their nature, mobile location-based games 
comprise a powerful learning tool in study and awareness of 
the nature, characteristics and evolution of physical 
phenomena and practicing on the field on best practices and 
strategies to prevent and respond on the most effective 
manner, benefiting the maximum from human and technical 
resources. For example, a vital part of understanding the 
risks of an earthquake or flood event is to have knowledge of 
one’s local area. In an evacuation scenario, knowing where it 
is safe to go is important. Training on these issues is among 
the main topics covered by the EVANDE project. 
The mobile games produced in the context of EVANDE 
project aim to test innovative methods for the training of 
civil protection volunteers and local authorities’ staff, 
through the use of new technologies. In addition, they aim to 
enrich all the educational activities of the NHMC offered to 
schools, families, local and international visitors. 
One of the game scenarios developed aims to simulate an 
earthquake drill. In this scenario, players (civil protection 
volunteers or local authorities’ staff working in civil 
protection) are supposed to act as rescuers that have the task 
of saving a family trapped in the Exhibition Halls of the 
NHMC during an earthquake. They are given information 
about the escape map of the NHMC and the assembly 
outdoor points that are defined by the local civil protection 
emergency plans. They need to select their protective and 
rescuing equipment and take virtual decisions during the 
unexpected virtual incidents they face in their rescue 
operation. The aim of the unexpected incidents is to test the 
knowledge of players and encourage their critical thinking 
and team work. An indicative example of an unexpected 
incident that the e-game includes is the case of an injured 
person that interrupts the normal rescuing operation of the 
family. Once the players manage to rescue the people in need 
(the family and the injured person) they have to reach an 

539
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
outdoor assembly point to avoid the risk of tsunami that 
might appear during the virtual earthquake. The exact game 
scenario is presented in detail in Table I. As a result of this e-
game scenario, players familiarize themselves with rescue 
operations and problems and gain knowledge on the real 
assembly points of their local emergency plans.  
NHMC’s facilitators will have the chance after the end of 
the e-game to reflect with players on civil protection 
guidelines and preparedness measures. Players can share 
with NHMC’s staff their experience with rescue operations 
and define the existing challenges and the proposals for 
improvement of the drills or the local emergency plans. In 
addition, the conclusions of the piloting operation can be 
used for the planning of follow-up activities in the 
framework of the wider educational programs of the NHMC. 
TABLE I.  
A GAME SCENARIO SIMULATING AN EARTHQUAKE DRILL 
Game title 
Rescuing a family and accompanying it to the 
assembly point defined by the evacuation 
plan/local emergency plan of Heraklion of the 
Municipality of Heraklion 
Game goal 
There is a strong earthquake happening during 
the visit of a family to “Ereunotopos” in the 
NHMC. As a result, a mother and a child are 
trapped in the night camping space of 
“Ereunotopos” due to the fall of the ceiling. The 
persons are still safe and sound however they 
can’t walk, according to the information that the 
emergency base station has. The player needs to 
provide first aid to the family and accompany it 
to the assembly point outdoors, near to the 
NHMC. 
Locations 
where the 
activities of 
the game will 
take place  
Point 1: Base floor, entrance of the NHMC, 
virtual emergency base station (Starting point) 
Point 2: Stares connecting the outdoor yard (-1 
floor) with the main streetPoint 3: Lift  
Point 4:  Night camping space (“Ereunotopos”), 
Exhibition halls of the NHMC, where the family 
is. An injured person is also there. (-1 floor).  
Point 5: Emergency exit the outdoor yard (-1 
floor) 
Point 6: Assembly point (outdoor space 
between the 3rd Elementary School and the 
Church of Agia Triada) (Ending point) 
Time 
restriction/Ti
me available 
to perform 
the game 
No time restriction 
Information 
about the 
score to be 
achieved by 
the winner  
Players gain 1 point if they reply correctly to 
some questions. 
 
 
ACTIVITY 1 
Players’ preparation (informing players about their tasks, the 
equipment they need to take, the NHMC emergency (evacuation) 
plan, the Evacuation Plan with Assembly points as defined by the 
Local Emergency Plan of the Municipality of Heraklion) 
Loca-
tion 
Task 
type 
Task description  
Sc
or
e 
Point 1 
Inspect 
You have to locate the mother with the 
child who are trapped in “Ereunotopos” 
(-1 floor), provide them with fist aid 
and accompany them to the most 
suitable 
assembly 
point 
of 
the 
Municipality of Heraklion. Before 
starting, you should get informed about 
the NHMC’s emergency (evacuation) 
plan,  the Evacuation Plan with 
Assembly points as defined by the 
Local 
Emergency 
Plan 
of 
the 
Municipality of Heraklion) and take 
your equipment from the base station. 
 
Point 1 
Inspect 
Emergency and Evacuation Plan with 
Assembly points (Local Emergency 
Plan of the Municipality of Heraklion). 
 
 
 
Point 1 
Answer 
the 
question 
(multi 
choice) 
Choose the most suitable set of 
equipment: 
1. Helmet, phosphoric jacket, torch, 
whistle, 
first 
aid 
box, 
wireless 
communication equipment, emergency 
and evacuations plan in printed version 
(CORRECT),  
2.  Combat boots, torch, gloves, first 
aid box,  emergency and evacuations 
plan in printed version (WRONG) 
1 
 
Point 1 
Inspect 
You took your equipment and you are 
ready to start your mission! In the 
middle of your route you will find QR 
codes that you need to scan in order to 
confirm if your route is correct and in 
line with the emergency/evacuation 
plan. 
 
Point 1 
Move 
Move towards the -1 floor where 
“Ereunotopos” and the family are. 
 
ACTIVITY 2 
Locating the trapped family, provision of first aid to the family, 
accompanying the family to the assembly point outdoors, exit 
from the “Ereunotopos” 
Point 2 
or 
Point 3 
Answer 
the 
question 
(QR 
code) 
Did I choose the right way to move 
from one floor to the other? Scan the 
QR code. 
1. If player is at stares - Point 2 
(CORRECT) QR code text: Yes. In the 
cases of the earthquakes we don’t use 
the lift. There is danger to be trapped 
there. 
2. If player is at the lift - Point 3 
(WRONG)  
QR code text: No. Your selection was 
wrong. There is danger to be trapped in 
the lift. Go to the stairs (Point 2). 
1 
Point 2 
Move 
Continue your route from the stairs 
(Point 2) to the night camping site in 
 

540
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
“Ereunotopos”, where the family is 
(Point 4, -1 floor).  
Point 4 
Answer 
the 
question 
(QR 
code) 
Find the QR code and scan it in order 
to confirm that you arrived at the right 
place. 
QR code text: You arrived at the right 
place. 
 
Point 4 
Inspect 
You just arrived but you see there is an 
injured person that can’t walk. 
 
Point 4 
Answer 
the 
question 
(multi 
choice) 
What do you do in such case? Choose 
the correct answer.  
1. I provide the first aids to the injured 
person 
and 
to 
the 
family 
and 
accompany all to the assembly station. 
(WRONG) 
2. I inform the emergency base station 
about the injured person. I provide the 
first aids to the injured person but 
continue my route with the family in 
order to rescue them. (CORRECT) 
1 
Point 4 
Move 
Continue 
your 
route 
from 
“Ereunotopos” 
(Point 
4) 
to 
the 
assembly place through the emergency 
exit door (Point 5).  
 
Point 5 
Answer 
the 
question 
(QR 
code) 
Find the QR code and scan it to 
confirm that you selected the right 
emergency exit door (Point 5). 
QR code text: You have selected the 
right emergency exit door. 
 
ACTIVITY 3 
Choosing the safest assembly point according to the guidelines of 
the Institute of Geodynamics (after you exit from the NHCM) . 
Point 5 
Inspect 
The Institute of Geodynamics issued 
guidelines due to a possible tsunami 
caused by the earthquake. In case of 
tsunami, 
people 
must 
distance 
themselves from the coast, due to the 
difficulty in predicting the wave high. 
 
Point 5 
Answer 
the 
question 
(multi 
choice) 
Which Assembly Point is the most 
suitable according to the guidelines of 
the Institute of Geodynamics?  
1. Playground of Bodosakeio School. 
(WRONG)   
2. Outdoor space between the 3rd 
Elementary School and the Church of 
Agia Triada.  (CORRECT) 
1 
Point 5 
Move 
Move to the Assembly Point of the 
outdoor 
space 
between 
the 
3rd 
Elementary School and the Church of 
Agia Triada (Point 6)  
(The GPS and an interactive map are 
used to help the player reach the 
destination) 
 
Point 6 
Answer 
the 
question 
(QR 
code) 
Find the QR code and scan it in order 
to confirm that you reached the 
Assembly Point of the outdoor space 
between the 3rd Elementary School and 
the Church of Agia Triada.   
QR code text: You are at the right 
place. You reached the Assembly Point 
between the 3rd Elementary School and 
the Church of Agia Triada. 
 
Point 6 
Inspect 
The outdoor space between the 3rd 
Elementary School and the Church of 
Agia Triada is the best option between 
 
the two assembly points because is 
more distant from the coast. When 
there is a tsunami risk, you have to 
distance yourself from the coast, as 
much as possible. 
Point 6 
Inspect 
Congratulations! You completed your 
mission. Press next to see your score 
and end the game. 
 
 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
In 
this 
paper, 
we 
presented 
the 
design 
and 
implementation 
of 
PlayLearn, 
a 
platform 
for 
the 
development and management of learning experiences in 
location-based games. PlayLearn provides an authoring tool 
(web application) supporting the creation and management 
of mobile location-based games, including scenario editing, 
user interface customization and organization of gaming 
activities, and a player application (mobile application) 
supporting the play of games that have been created using 
our authoring tool. The PlayLearn’s player application is 
compatible 
with 
most 
state-of-the-art 
mobile 
devices/platforms, while both tools have been designed with 
flexibility and extensibility in mind. The underlying model 
supports a great variety of basic building blocks that can be 
exploited by a user in order to create a great range of 
complex and structured location-based gaming experiences. 
The activities that happen as part of these gaming (learning) 
experiences are recorded, tracked and shared in a Learning 
Record Store (LRS) by supporting xAPI. Both applications 
have been evaluated for their usability through the use of 
pluralistic walkthroughs and extensive paper prototyping. 
PlayLearn is part of the EVANDE project learning 
infrastructure used for the development of mobile games for 
the training of civil protection volunteers and local 
authorities’ staff. The pilot testing of the mobile games 
developed during the EVANDE project can lead to their 
improvement for wider use in the future, ensuring the follow 
up of the project. More specifically, these e-games: a) could 
be combined with other civil protection educational tools 
developed by the NHMC within the frames of previous and 
running European civil protection projects, such as PATCH 
(ECHO 070401/2009/540426/SUB/A4) [27], RACCE (EU, 
Civil Protection Financial Instrument, 070401/2010/579066 
/SUB/C4) [28],  SEE (ECHO/SUB/2012/638511) [29], 
CPMODEL 
(ECHO/SUB/2014/693249) 
[30], 
EPRES 
(ECHO/SUB/2014/698447) [31], etc.) and b) could be 
integrated with several educational programmes and/or 
pathways implemented for school groups, families and 
individual visitors, such as “I am protected by the seismic 
danger”, etc.  
In terms of the technical infrastructure, our future plans 
also include the following: (a) direct connection with 
repositories persisting observational data like GBIF, 
BioCASE and Natural Europe [32], in order to easily enrich 
the educational content of a game, (b) direct connection with 
well known cultural heritage repositories like Europeana 
[33], and (c) enabling the creation of observations during the 

541
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
play of a game [34], as well as their further dissemination to 
related repositories. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work presented in this paper is partially funded in 
the scope of the EVANDE (Enhancing Volunteer Awareness 
and education against Natural Disasters through E-learning) 
project co-funded under the Union Civil Protection 
Mechanism, Grant Agreement No. ECHO/SUB/2014/  
693261. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] D. Makris, K. Makris, P. Arapi, and S. Christodoulakis, 
“PlayLearn: 
A 
Platform 
for 
the 
Development 
and 
Management of Learning Experiences in Location-Based 
Mobile Games,” The Eighth International Conference on 
Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning (eLmL 2016) IARIA, 
Apr. 2016, pp. 43-48, ISSN: 2308-4367, ISBN: 978-1-61208-
471-8. 
[2] Location-based 
game. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https//en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Location-based_game 
2016.11.30 
[3] N. Avouris and N. Yiannoutsou, “A review of mobile 
location-based games for learning across physical and virtual 
spaces,” Journal of Universal Computer Science, 2012, vol. 
18 (15), pp. 2120-2142, Aug. 2012, doi:   
10.3217/jucs-
018-15-2120. 
[4] De. Souza, E. Silva, and G. C Delacruz, “Hybrid Reality 
Games Reframed Potential Uses in Educational Contexts,” 
Games and Culture, Sage Publications, vol. 1 (3), pp. 231-
251, Jul. 2006, doi: 10.1177/1555412006290443.  
[5] D. Spikol and M. Milrad, “Physical activities and playful 
learning using mobile games,” Research and Practice in 
Technology Enhanced Learning, vol. 3 (3), pp. 275–295, Nov. 
2008,  doi: 10.1142/S1793206808000562 
[6] P. 
Arapi, 
N. 
Moumoutzis, 
M 
Mylonakis, 
and 
S. 
Christodoulakis, “A Framework and an Architecture for 
Supporting Interoperability Between Digital Libraries and 
eLearning Applications,” Book chapter in “Digital Libraries: 
Research and Development: First International DELOS 
Conference, Pisa, Italy, February 13-14, 2007, Revised 
Selected Papers”, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, vol. 4877, pp. 
137-146, doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-77088-6_13. 
[7] D. A. Kolb, Experiential learning. [Online]. Available from: 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Experiential_learning 
2016.11.30 
[8] J. Delano and A. Shahrazad, “Using the Experience API to 
Track Learning,” Infoline (Numbered), vol. 1304, American 
Society for Training & Development, 2013. 
[9] P. Durlach, J. Poltrack, K. Murray, and D. Regan, 
“Modernizing Education,” MT2, vol. 18(5), 2013. 
[10] K. Murray, P. Berking, J. Haag, and N. Hruska, “Mobile 
Learning and ADL’s Experience API,” Connections, vol. 12 
(1), 2012, pp. 45–49. 
[11] EVANDE - Enhancing Volunteer Awareness and education 
against Natural Disasters through E-learning. [Online]. 
Available from: http://www.evande.eu 2016.11.30 
[12] Geocaching. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.geocaching.com/ 2016.11.30 
[13] WHAIWHAI. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.whaiwhai.com/en/ 2016.11.30 
[14] Tourality. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.tourality.com/ 2016.11.30 
[15] A. Moore, J. Goulding, E. Brown, and J. Swan, “AnswerTree 
– a Hyperplace-based Game for Collaborative Mobile 
Learning,” The mLearn Conference, Oct. 2009. 
[16] ARIS Games. [Online]. Available from: http://arisgames.org/ 
2016.11.30 
[17] E. Gamma, R. Helm, R. Johnson, and J. Vlissides, Design 
Patterns, Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software. 
Addison-Wesley, 1995. 
[18] D. Alur, D. Malks, and J. Crupi, Core J2EE Patterns: Best 
Practices and Design Strategies (2nd Edition). Prentice Hall, 2 
edition, 2003. 
[19] M. Fowler, Patterns of Enterprise Application Architecture. 
Addison-Wesley, Boston, ersteauflage edition, 2003. 
[20] T. Reenskaug, Models - Views - Controllers. Technical 
report, Technical Note, Xerox Parc, 1979. 
[21] T. Reenskaug, The Model-View-Controller (MVC) Its Past 
and Present, 2003. 
[22] G. Alonso, Web Services: Concepts, Architectures and 
Applications. Springer, 2004. 
[23] C. Pautasso, O. Zimmermann, and F. Leymann, “RESTful 
Web Services vs. "Big" Web Services: Making the Right 
Architectural Decision,” The 17th international conference on 
World Wide Web, ACM, Apr. 2008, pp. 805–814, doi: 
10.1145/1367497.1367606. 
[24] R. T. Fielding and R. N. Taylor, “Principled Design of the 
Modern Web Architecture,” ACM Transactions on Internet 
Technology (TOIT), vol.2(2), pp. 115–150, May 2002, doi: 
10.1145/514183.514185. 
[25] EVANDE 
e-learning 
platform 
(Coursevo). 
[Online]. 
Available from: http://evande.coursevo.com 2016.11.30 
[26] I. Di Loreto, S. Mora, and M. Divitini, “Collaborative Serious 
Games for Crisis Management: An Overview,” The IEEE 
21st International Workshop on Enabling Technologies: 
Infrastructure for Collaborative Enterprises (WETICE 2012), 
Jun. 2012, pp. 352-357, doi: 10.1109/WETICE.2012.25. 
[27] PATCH – Prevention Analysis and Tools for Cultural 
Heritage. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
http://www.montesca.it/patch/index.asp 2016.11.30 
[28] RACCE - Raising earthquake Awareness & Coping 
Children's 
Emotions. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
http://racce.nhmc.uoc.gr/ 2016.11.30 
[29] SEE - Safeguarding Educational Environment. [Online]. 
Available from: http://www.montesca.eu/see/ 2016.11.30 
[30] CPMODEL - Civil Protection Massive Open Developed E-
Learning for strategies of Resilience. [Online]. Available 
from: http://www.cpmodel.eu/ 2016.11.30 
[31] E-preS - Monitoring and Evaluation of Natural Hazard 
Preparedness at School Environment. [Online]. Available 
from: http://e-pres.di.uoa.gr/ 2016.11.30 
[32] G. Skevakis, K. Makris, V. Kalokyri, P. Arapi, and S. 
Christodoulakis, “Metadata Management, Interoperability and 
Linked Data Publishing Support for Natural History 
Museums,” International Journal on Digital Libraries (IJDL), 
vol. 14 (3), pp. 127–140, Aug. 2014,  doi:10.1007/s00799-
014-0114-2. 
[33] K. Makris et al., “Federating Natural History Museums in 
Natural Europe,” The 7th Metadata and Semantics Research 
Conference (MTSR 2013), Special track on Metadata & 
Semantics for Cultural Collections & Applications, Nov. 
2013, pp. 361-372, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-03437-9_35. 
[34] C. 
Tsinaraki, 
G. 
Skevakis, 
I. 
Trochatou, 
and 
S. 
Christodoulakis, “MoM-NOCS: Management of Mobile 
Multimedia Nature Observations using Crowd Sourcing,” The 
11th International Conference on Advances in Mobile 
Computing & Multimedia (MoMM 2013), ACM, pp. 395-
404, Dec. 2013, doi: 10.1145/2536853.2536887. 

