237
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Geo-Temporal Visual Analysis of Customer Feedback Data
Based on Self-Organizing Sentiment Maps
Halld´or Janetzko, Dominik J¨ackle and Tobias Schreck
University of Konstanz
Konstanz, Germany
Email: Halldor.Janetzko@uni.kn, Dominik.Jaeckle@uni.kn, Tobias.Schreck@uni.kn
Abstract—The success of a company is often dependent on the
quality of their Customer Relationship Management (CRM).
Knowledge about customer’s concerns and needs can be a huge
advantage over competitors but is hard to gain. Large amounts
of textual feedback from customers via surveys or emails has
to be manually processed, condensed, and lead to decision
makers. As this process is quite expensive and error-prone, CRM
data is in practice often neglected. We therefore propose an
automatic analysis and visualization approach helping analysts
in ﬁnding interesting patterns. We combine opinion mining with
the geospatial location of a review to enable a context-aware
analysis of the CRM data. Instead of overwhelming the user
by showing the details ﬁrst, we visually group similar patterns
together and aggregate them by applying Self-Organizing Maps
in an interactive analysis application. We extend this approach
by integrating temporal and seasonal analyses showing these
inﬂuences on the CRM data. Our technique is able to cope
with unstructured customer feedback data and shows location
dependencies of signiﬁcant terms and sentiments. The capabilities
of our approach are shown in a case-study using real-world
customer feedback data exploring and describing interesting
ﬁndings.
Keywords-customer relationship management, review analysis,
self-organizing maps, sentiment analysis.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Many companies with business in the world wide web
collect reviews and customer feedback of their products and
services. One common way of assessing customer satisfaction
are grading schemes (e.g., one to ﬁve stars) and free text
forms allowing more detailed customer comments. But aside
from showing the average rating or the distribution of ratings,
more sophisticated and consequently also more expressive
analyses are performed very rarely. This is surprising, as the
free text provided by customers is a valuable source of hints
with respect to customer needs and satisfaction levels, but a
manual inspection is often not feasible. Modern approaches
of text processing and visualization can help at this end,
by summarizing important themes and sentiments in large
amounts of text.
An effective analysis of textual customer feedback should
involve and examine different aspects of the text content. The
most obvious one is the frequency of statements or terms.
Simple statistics and visualization methods like word clouds
may help to get a ﬁrst impression of most important keywords.
But simple statistics do not help to analyze, whether the
customers liked or disliked these points. The next important
aspect is the sentiment extracted from the context of the
addressed keywords occurring in the text. E.g., customers
may complain or praise products or services, and by using
sentiment analysis, we aim at capturing this notion. From a
company’s point of view, negative statements are in many
cases more important to analyze than the positive ones, to
improve customer satisfaction. But the computation of one
single sentiment score is not very expressive as customers
might review more than one aspect, and different customers
may have different opinions. Therefore, the challenge is to
arrive at a ﬁne-grained analysis of this complex data. The
sentiment analysis should assign sentiment scores with respect
to the attributes of the product or service, instead of computing
one value. Customers, for instance, could like a certain bought
product, at the same time complain about a too complicated
ordering process.
Yet another key aspect holding valuable information in
customer feedback data is the geospatial location. Customer
feedback can be geolocated by several ways, including having
the customer address in a corporate database, or by geo-
resolving the IP address an anonymous web feedback was
provided. From that we can derive the geospatial distribution
of customer feedback, which is important for two reasons.
First, for global companies, cultural differences may inﬂuence
the customers’ conception and country speciﬁc products or
services should be offered. Second, besides cultural differences
there is another aspect which may change customer’s needs.
The geographic location determines for instance the climate
and may also impose delivery obstacles resulting from the
geographic topology. In very dry areas, for example, it may
be reasonable to leave a parcel outside the customer’s housing,
but in rainy areas the customer may complain about a soaked
product. Concerning the topology, hard to reach customers
(e.g., islands or exclaves) may complain about long delivery
times, but there may be nothing the company could do about
it.
This paper is an extended version of our previous work
[1]. Compared to the previous work, we additionally take the
time dimension of the customer feedback data into account.
Performing temporal and seasonal analyses reveals further
interesting patterns and insights.
Our main motivation for this work was the following starting
hypothesis, to be explored on a real-world CRM data set:
“The geographic position of reviewing customers correlates to

238
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 1.
Visualization of customer feedback data using sentiment analysis and self organizing maps. Term groups with different sentiment scores are visible
and additionally the geospatial distribution of the terms is displayed. The brightness of the background represents the coherence of the geographic distribution
for each SOM node. [1]
their satisfaction levels and needs.” We wanted to see, whether
there are differences in customer preferences caused by the
geospatial location. The result of this analysis could help to
improve the customer satisfaction by detecting differences in
customer needs. Companies can therefore differentiate better
among their customers and can easily focus and channel their
efforts. Furthermore, we believe that the season of the review
inﬂuences the sentiment for some terms. It is interesting to
see which terms are affected by the temporal dimension and
which not, to improve the company’s reactions. For instance,
the need for support could be much higher after Christmas,
as typically many technical devices are bought in this time
period.
In this paper, we perform customer feedback analysis based
on sentiment maps. Sentiment maps are the result of preceding
opinion mining steps, where the occurrence of a term is drawn
on a geographic map. The color used hereby depicts the
sentiment and the sentiment map consequently shows not only
the geospatial distribution of the term but simultaneously also
the sentiment distribution. Following this approach leads to one
sentiment map for each term. Further details of this approach
can be found in the beginning of the analysis results section
of this paper. A result of our technique is depicted in Figure 1.
We present in this paper our methodology analyzing cus-
tomer feedback with respect to sentiment and geospatial
customer location. Our contributions are the combined text
and geospatial analysis of customer feedback data and the
visual representation allowing a comparative analysis. Fur-
thermore, we show that there are indeed frequent feedback
terms (concepts) with a high geospatial dependency. The paper
is structured as follows. First, we will give an overview to
existing and related work in Section II, and then detail our
approach in Section III. Findings from an application to a
real-world data set will be discussed in Section IV. We will
conclude with an outlook to future work.
II.
RELATED WORK
Our work relates to the wider area of visual data analysis.
We discuss a body of work on visual cluster analysis with Self-
Organizing Maps, on analysis of geospatial and time-oriented
data, and on feature-based text visualization.
A. Self-Organizing Maps for Visual Data Analysis
Many problems in visual data analysis require the reduction
of data to perform meaningful analysis on a reduced version of
data. Clustering reduces the data to a smaller number of groups
to easier analyze and compare; and dimensionality reduction
reduces the number of dimensions of data items to consider,
and to project data to 2D displays. The Self-Organizing Map
(SOM) algorithm [2] is a well-known method, which provides
both data reduction and projection in an integrated framework.
As a neural-network type method it learns a set of prototype
vectors arranged on a regular grid, typically embedded in
2D. The method typically provides robust results in both
data clustering and 2D layouting. Using regular 2D grids as
neural structures for the SOM training, visualization in form
of heatmaps, component planes, and distance distributions
comprise basic methods for visual exploration of data using
SOM processing [3]. SOM-based Visual Analysis to date has
considered different application domains, including ﬁnancial
data analysis based on multivariate data models [4], analysis
of web clickstream data using Markov Chain models [5],
trajectory-oriented data [6], or time-oriented data [7]. Image
Sorter [8] proposed to visually analyze collections of images
by training a SOM over color features extracted from the
images. We here follow that idea, in that we analyze geospatial
heatmaps of sentiment scores using SOM of respective color
features as well.
B. SOM-Based Visual Analysis of Geospatial Data
Many application problems involve georeferenced data
items, and visual analysis approaches have been identiﬁed as

239
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
very helpful also for geospatial data analysis processes [9].
Choropleth (or thematic) maps are a basic, popular technique
to show the distribution of a scalar value over a land-covering
map [10]. Also, SOM-based approaches have been studied
in context of geospatial data analysis, and proven useful to
this end. When considering georeferenced data with SOM,
basically two approaches exist. First, in the joint data model,
one single data representation is formed by combining spatial
and other multivariate data into a single vector representation
which is input to the SOM method. Examples include [11],
where a joint vector representation for both geolocation and
demographic data was formed for census data analysis. More
methods can be found in [12]. As a second approach, linked
views integrate visual data analysis of each data aspect (ge-
olocation, time, multivariate measures, etc.) in separate views
combined by Brushing & Linking. One example system is [13],
where a linked view system proposed the joint visual analysis
of geospatial and multivariate data. Also, in [14], we proposed
to jointly analyze geospatial and temporal phenomena by
a linked view. There, SOM clusters can be computed for
either data perspective, and the correspondence of clusters to
the other perspective is shown by an auxiliary view. In our
approach we do not consider geolocation data explicit for the
SOM generation, but implicitly by the spatial-sensitive color
features extracted from sentiment heatmaps generated from
text data (cf. also Section III for details).
C. Visual Analysis of Temporal Data
Also, the temporal dimension plays an important role in
many data analysis problems. Typical tasks relating to analysis
of time include the comparison of data across time, ﬁnding
similarities, trends, and correlations among variables. The
time dimension can be accommodated for analysis either
interactively or automatically. On the interactive side, users
may select time intervals of interest for navigation and drill-
down operations. On the automatic side, many approaches exist
for detecting interesting intervals in time series [15], or ﬁnding
clusters of similar temporal patterns for seasonal comparison
[16]. There exists a rich body of work on visualization of time
series data. Speciﬁc visual representations have been proposed
to cope with the many challenges of time-oriented data, in-
cluding long, multivatiate, unevenly spaced or categorical time
series [17]. In one previous work, we proposed an interactive
system for cluster-based analysis of time series data sets, which
also included the possiblity to search by visual example, e.g.,
allowing the user to sketch a target line chart to retrieve [18]. In
that system, the SOM approach was found useful to support the
exploration of large time series data. While the SOM method
can be an effective layout generator to compare many time
series, there exist alternative layout schemes which can rely on
user-selected or content-based ordering schemes to create small
multiple displays. In [19], a taxonomy of layout strategies
is given. In this paper, we rely on the SOM for generating
geospatial and text-oriented data displays for comparison of
customer feedback data. We will make use of small multiple
displays to compare situations across time for identiﬁcation of
trends and patterns.
D. Feature-based Text Visualization
Finally, we relate to a body of work in visual document
analysis. In general, feature-based document analysis abstracts
a document (or collection, or stream) by a set of features
which are more easy to visualize, as compared to the content
of the documents. Numerous document features for different
applications have been studied to date. For example, features
scoring the readability of documents have been proposed
in [20], and features applicable to classify authorship of
documents have been surveyed in [21]. Sentiment features
rate the polarity (in terms of positiveness of negativeness of
statements) in a given text. In combination with time-series
analysis, sentiment features can be used, e.g., to detect critical
customer opinions in near real time, as possibly arising from
some feedback channel [22]. In [23], we applied sentiment
analysis to customer feedback data and analyzed it by means
of geospatial heatmaps generated for the sentiments. While in
[23], we considered only small sets of such heatmaps which
we sequentially inspected, the focus of our work here is the
comparative analysis of large numbers of sentiment maps,
based on the SOM method.
III.
TECHNIQUE
Our approach enables the geospatial visual comparison of
customer feedback sentiments by using a Self-Organizing
overview display. Figure 2 shows the overall process that is
divided into four steps: (1) First, we extract a color feature
vector for each sentiment map. (2) Second, we train the SOM
and assign every sentiment map exactly one node. In step (3),
we aggregate all sentiment maps that are located on the same
map node. (4) Finally, we calculate the coherence and enhance
the aggregated sentiment map with the content terms from the
represented customer review texts. To analyze temporal data,
we partition the dataset according to the date and process the
proposed pipeline multiple times for each partition separately.
We afterwards use of small multiple displays to compare
different dates. We next detail these steps.
A. Process Pipeline
In order to process one partition of a temporal varying
dataset, the introduced pipeline is processed exactly once.
In this section, we describe the four different steps towards
a sentiment SOM, before treating multiple temporal varying
datasets.
Feature Vector Extraction. The feature vector we use as
input to the SOM computation consists of localized RGB color
values. We create a grid overlay for each sentiment map and
calculate the color mean value for each cell. The mean value is
determined by the color value of each single pixel contained in
the corresponding grid cell. The representative feature vector
for any sentiment map is created using the RGB color model.
All RGB mean values are forming the feature vector:
Picture1 = (R1,1 G1,1 B1,1 R1,2 G1,2 B1,2 R1,3 G1,3 B1,3 . . .)
Ri,j represents the value of R for picture i and cell j. This
format is used as feature vector representing one sentiment

240
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
fast delivery
to set up
to show
4
1
2
3
4
Figure 2.
Process pipeline to create self-organizing sentiment maps. The self-organizing sentiment map is determined by (1) extracting corresponding feature
vectors, (2) calculating the best matching unit, (3) aggregating similar images according to the SOM, and ﬁnally (4) mapping the coherence and the additional
information like the used terms to the images. [1]
map; each picture is assigned exactly one vector. Then, the
extracted feature vectors are used to train the SOM using the
SOMPAK implementation [24] (see also Figure 2 (1)).
Sentiment Map Classiﬁcation. We apply a standard SOM
training process following best practices suggested in [24].
Based on the deﬁned SOM grid resolution, the prototype
vectors are linearly initialized. Then, two learning phases are
applied. First, a coarse learning is performed with a larger
training radius, so that every considered node has a wide
impact factor. Then, a ﬁne-tuning training step is performed
with a smaller training radius. Once the SOM-training has
ﬁnished, the best matching prototype vector on the SOM grid
(best matching unit, or bmu) is determined for each sentiment
map by ﬁnding the node with the minimum distance (1).
bmu(SM) =
M
min
k=1


v
u
u
t
N
X
i=1
(v(SM).i − v(nodek).i)2

 (1)
We iterate over all sentiment maps and calculate the best
matching unit for each sentiment map SM. Then, we iterate all
M trained SOM nodes and calculate the minimum Euclidean
distance between the sentiment map and the trained SOM
node. Therefore, the feature vector of the sentiment map and
the vector of the SOM node are used. The corresponding vector
is determined via the function v() with size N. The control
variable i addresses every single vector entry. Finally, the
sentiment map is assigned to the SOM node with the minimum
distance (see also Figure 2 (2)). The grid size can be chosen
individually for each application.
Similarity-based Sentiment Map Aggregation. As the
outcome of the SOM and bmu mapping, multiple sentiment
images may share the same SOM node. Therefore, we need
to provide aggregation of such sets of maps. To ﬁnd a repre-
sentative image for those sentiment maps different approaches
are possible. We here chose to apply visual aggregation and
merge all similar images into one. Therefore, every sentiment
map is assigned a transparency value, so that we are able
to create one image by lying one sentiment map upon each
other. The resulting image visualizes all aggregated sentiment
areas. By adding multiple pictures on top of each other, the last
added picture on top has the highest impact according to the
process of alpha composition in terms of occlusion [25]. For
that reason, we calculate the intersection of sentiment maps
on our own based on the color, shown in Figure 2 (3).
Coherence Mapping and Map Enhancement. The last
step of the pipeline is twofold: First, we map the background
of the aggregated sentiment map to its coherence. Second,
we enhance the aggregated sentiment map with additional
information.
Aggregating multiple sentiment maps may result in an
image showing a constant distribution. But when comparing all
contained sentiment maps, the sentiment maps might be very
diverse regarding to geospatial distributions. In order to under-
stand the composition of those aggregated sentiment clusters
it is important to deﬁne a quality criterion: the coherence of
the sentiment maps. Thus, we make use of the background
and deﬁne a coherence measure. The coherence measure (2)
expresses how similar two sentiment maps are according to
its feature vector. The coherence is mapped to the color range
from black (high coherence) to white (very low coherence).
coherence(SMS) =
N
P
i=1
N
P
j=i
dist(SMSi, SMSj)
N · (N + 1)
2
(2)
The coherence is calculated for N sentiment maps (SMS)
addressing the same SOM node. Summarizing, we build the
average of all pictures including a distance function. We
then sum the distance value of each sentiment map to all
other sentiment maps. The distance function dist between two
sentiment maps is deﬁned in equation (3).
dist(p, q) =
s
M
P
k=1
(v(p).k − v(q).k)2
|{i ∈ 1..M : ¬(v(p).i = v(q).i = 0)}|
(3)
The distance function requires two sentiment maps as parame-
ters with dimension M. The Euclidean distance is normalized

241
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
by the number of vector dimensions M excluding all dimen-
sions with zero values in both dimensions. The problem of a
possible low coherence raises with the algorithm of the SOM:
To calculate the similarity in the second step the Euclidean
distance combines sentiment maps that are very sparse, as the
exact locations do not matter.
Sentiment Keyword Visualization. Every sentiment map
corresponds to one term. As a consequence, if multiple senti-
ment maps are aggregated, the resulting image corresponds to
multiple terms. Hence, we combine the aggregated sentiment
maps with a simple but effective text representation: All terms
are drawn semi-transparent with a gray border on top of the
aggregated image. Also, the amount of sentiment maps that
have been aggregated is indicated by a red number on the
top left corner. Using an intelligent text layout algorithm,
the analyst can easily identify the terms corresponding to the
image; the text uses the full width and height to be easy to
read. Figure 2 (4) illustrates the automatic labeling result.
Depending on the chosen grid size in the ﬁrst step (feature
vector extraction), the ﬁnal result may differ. To allow data
abstraction and overview large data sets, we typically chose
a relatively small grid size, where the amounts of nodes is
signiﬁcantly smaller than the amount of considered sentiment
maps.
B. Comparable Analysis of Temporal Data
For the analysis of temporal data, our technique needs to
be extended as shown in Figure 3. In the previous section, the
data according to only one time window has been processed
in order to create the sentiment map. In case of a temporal
dataset, we adapt our proposed technique: First, the temporal
data is partitioned by date respectively. Second, the process
pipeline is executed for each data partition separately; but the
training phases change to obtain comparable layouts. Finally,
all resulting sentiment maps are layouted and visualized. The
visualization allows to compare multiple datasets by using the
technique of small multiples.
Data Partitioning. To analyze the temporal dimension, we
partition the data corresponding to predeﬁned intervals by
the user. For the analysis of seasonal trends, for example,
the dataset is divided into the quarters of a year or years
respectively. Each partition is treated separately.
Small Multiple Displays is a grid-like visualization tech-
nique allowing the comparison of similar graphics. We make
use of this technique to visualize multiple sentiment map
instances at the same time; this enables a seasonal comparison.
We chose a square algorithm to layout all small multiples via a
grid. Each grid cell is assigned one sentiment map. Therefore,
we initially calculate the grid before assigning the sentiment
maps.
rows =
lp
|SM|
m
(4)
cols =
|SM|
rows

(5)
We calculate the amount of rows (rows) by ceiling the result
of the square root of the amount of all sentiment maps SM.
Figure 3.
Adapted pipeline towards seasonal sentiment maps. First, the
temporal data is partitioned according to user selected temporal intervals.
Second, the process pipeline (see Figure 2) is processed for each partition
separately in order to create small multiple displays. The sentiment maps are
made comparable by performing the ﬁne training on the same feature vector
basis.
Then, we use this value to calculate the amount of columns
cols. This step is especially necessary for an odd amount of
sentiment map results. After the necessary amount of rows
and columns has been calculated, a uniform width and height
is assigned to each grid cell. In order to allocate resulting
sentiment maps, we iterate through all columns and all rows
assigning the corresponding spot to the sentiment map.
a) Positive term occurrences
c) Negative term occurrences
b) Blurred positive occurrences
d) Blurred negative occurrences
e) Combined term occurrences
red 
channel
green
channel
Figure 4.
The location maps of positive (a) and negative (c) review terms
are blurred to increase the visual saliency and to give a visual aggregation
(b, d). Both blurred location maps are then combined (e) by using the RGB
channels and show the distribution of positive (green), neutral (yellow) and
negative (red) term occurrences. [1]

242
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 5.
Resulting overview visualization of the SOM analysis process. There are SOM nodes like the one in the lower left being highlighted with a bright
background showing a high internal diversity. [1]
IV.
ANALYSIS RESULTS
We applied our methods described above to sentiment maps
of a real-world data set of collected customer reviews. The
reviews were collected after online purchases via an online
survey. The data set consists out of 86,812 customer reviews
with an average of 18.4 words per review (the median is 12
words per review). In this section, we will ﬁrst describe the
input images resulting from a technique called sentiment maps
more in detail. Afterwards, we will discuss interesting ﬁnd-
ings with respect to the geographic distribution of frequently
reported review terms.
Sentiment Maps. Sentiment maps allow the user to inspect
the geospatial sentiment distribution of individual terms and
are introduced in [23]. After collecting all terms of all reviews
excluding stop words one visualization for each of these
terms is created. More speciﬁcally, ﬁrst all occurrences of
the respective term are determined and the sentiment value
for these occurrences are retrieved. The data is then used to
generate the sentiment map as illustrated in Figure 4. The
data is ﬁrst partitioned into two subsets: the occurrences with
positive sentiment in Figure 4(a) and occurrences with negative
sentiment in Figure 4(c). The two partitions are processed
separately. A Gaussian blurring function is applied in order
to spatially extend the occurrences and increase the visual
salience of the geospatial distribution patterns. The result
is a blurred representation for both sentiments showing the
respective geospatial occurrences as depicted in Figures 4(b)
and 4(d). Finally, a combined image is created by using the
RGB channels of the RGB color model. The blurred image
of the negative occurrences is put in the red channel, and
the green channel is used for the positive occurrences. Conse-
quently, locations with both positive and negative sentiments

243
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
will result in yellow colors, while pure positive sentiments
will result in green colors. We did not differentiate within
negative sentiments or positive sentiments respectively as this
differentiation is highly user and application dependent. But
sentiment maps could be extended by this possibility. The ﬁnal
result of this technique can be seen in Figure 4(e).
Geospatial Analysis and Findings. We applied the tech-
nique described in Section III to a dataset consisting of
327 sentiment maps. These terms were found in preceding
document mining steps and contains the words being nouns,
verbs, and adjectives. Note that some of these terms are even
compound nouns like ”phone call“ or negated verbs like ”not
to send“. The resulting overview visualization can be seen in
Figure 5.
On an abstract level there is a clear grouping and ordering
of the sentiment maps visible. Terms with only negative
occurrences (reddish images) are located in the upper left while
positive terms (greenish sentiment maps) are located in the
lower right. The ﬁrst diagonal consists of terms being either
mentioned negatively and positively equally often (upper right)
and terms with a geospatial, diverse distribution (lower left).
The SOM analysis enables the analyst to get a fast overview
over terms being mentioned always positive or negative.
The strongly highlighted, white node of Figure 5 in the lower
left contains eleven terms showing a very diverse geospatial
distribution. As this is the node being highlighted most we
will investigate this node in the following paragraphs. Detailed
analysis via drill-down techniques are possible in our system
and reveal the geospatial distribution for each single term.
The visualization of all eleven contained terms is depicted in
Figure 6.
Figure 6.
Visual representation of all sentiment maps (in reading order: to
suggest, staple, nightmare, to listen, hawaii, phone rep, side, case manager,
porch, adapter, mini) contained in the lower left node of Figure 5. [1]
Inspecting the sentiment maps more in detail reveals that this
node mainly contains sentiment maps with sparse and diverse
geospatial distributions.
The most obvious sentiment map contained in this SOM
node is the term ”hawaii“. This term is occurring mostly
positively and collocated with the geospatial position of the
Hawaiian islands. Inspecting the customer comments in detail,
we found that customers liked the free shipping possibilities
to Hawaii, which seems not to be taken for granted. Service
managers can learn from this information that (Hawaiian)
customers do care about the shipping procedure and that free
shipping might be an advantage over competitors.
Also, the term ”case manager“ (third row, second column in
Figure 6) shows an interesting pattern. Although mostly men-
tioned negatively because of language issues – the customer
support was hard to understand because of foreign accents
– there are many positive occurrences in Houston, Texas
where customers liked the support regarding their printers.
Service managers should now investigate further what the
characteristics about the problems in Houston were.
Two further interesting sentiment maps are the ones of
”nightmare“ and ”porch“. Investigating the underlying reviews
shows that the preceding sentiment analysis did not work
correctly as all the reviews were purely negative. This is not a
drawback of the method per se, but exempliﬁes the uncertainty
of any sentiment analysis and the sensitivity of our method to
the input data. The comments regarding the term ”porch“ were
mentioning that the parcel was left unattended on the porch.
The term ”nightmare“ was used in cases where the process of
ordering and returning products did not go smoothly.
Temporal Analysis and Findings. We performed a tem-
poral analysis of the sentiment distribution by partitioning the
data set according to the time dimension. We used the quarters
of a year in order to group the reviews into meaningful units.
The analysis is initiated by computing the overall sentiment of
the customer feedback messages. Then, we use the resulting
sentiment score per message. Figure 7 shows the results. The
time dimension is denoted on the x-axis and the sentiment
scores on the y-axis. Unfortunately, the differences of the sen-
timent distributions are not signiﬁcant as all boxes do overlap
each other. Consequently, the overall sentiment distribution
does not signiﬁcantly vary over time when analyzed without
any geospatial reference.
We further statistically analyzed and computed the sentiment
distribution over time per term. We consequently selected all
signiﬁcant terms contained in the data set and inspected the
occurrences. For each of them we assigned the sentiment. The
sentiment scores were grouped by the quarter of the year they
were received. Then, for each of these groups, we computed
the average sentiment. In our case, this lead to the quarters
Q3/2007 to Q1/2010 with the related average sentiment scores.
As a last step, we compute the variance of these average
sentiment scores resulting in a number, that describes, how
much the sentiment score changed over time. Sorting this list
of terms and sentiment changes over time leads to the most
interesting terms, which can be inspected manually.
The simple temporal, statistical analysis described above,
helped us in assessing which of the terms show interesting

244
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
l
2007/Q3
2007/Q4
2008/Q1
2008/Q2
2008/Q3
2008/Q4
2009/Q1
2009/Q2
2009/Q3
2009/Q4
2010/Q1
−2
−1
0
1
2
Quarter
Sentiment Score
Figure 7.
Statistical analysis of the sentiment scores distribution over
the different quarters. No signiﬁcant difference between the distributions is
observable.
behavior over time. But these statistical approaches do not
reveal interesting ﬁndings per se as the geospatial reference
is not regarded at all. As described in the technique section
above, we partitioned the data set into meaningful time units
– in our case into quarters of a year – and computed for these
time units sentiment maps. In the following paragraphs, we
will show interesting terms found by computing the variance
in sentiment scores over the time quarters.
We investigated the top candidates found by the method
above and present the corresponding sentiment maps. The ﬁrst
one we inspected is the term camera, shown in Figure 8,
as it has one the highest variance scores. Comparing the
different quarters of the year, it is obvious that only in the ﬁrst
quarter the term camera is mentioned positively in California.
Interestingly, the second and forth quarters seem quite similar
in the sentiment distribution. With this information, the CRM
expert can inspect the corresponding feedback messages and
plan special actions, such as special offers or sending apology
messages.
The second term we present here, is the term salesman in
Figure 9. Again, this term seems also being very sensitive
to the time dimension and is not uniformly distributed. Fur-
thermore, the term salesman seems to be more frequent in
the ﬁrst and last quarter compared to the other quarters. The
reason might be that there is more need for guidance in the
time around Thanksgiving and Christmas because of presents
and salesman are important then.
In order to analyze the temporal development of the senti-
ment of all terms, we applied the Self-Organizing Map layout
to the sentiment maps of one year and place them as small
camera - Q1
camera - Q2
camera - Q4
camera - Q3
Figure 8.
The term camera shows one of the highest sentiment variation
over time and reveals interesting patterns.
salesman - Q1
salesman - Q2
salesman - Q4
salesman - Q3
Figure 9.
The term salesman shows one of the highest sentiment variation
over time and reveals interesting patterns.
multiples side-by-side. By comparing the positions of the same
term over the different years, a shift in sentiment becomes
obvious. We exempliﬁed one of these changes over time in
Figure 10. We highlight the SOM node of the same term by
Brushing & Linking and investigated in this example the term
customer service. The term is mentioned quite ambiguous in
the ﬁrst year, but has a quite good overall sentiment distribution
in the second year. Unfortunately, it is mentioned worse every
year than, with the worst opinion in the last year. This shift
of sentiment is visible by the movement of the term from the
right side (mostly positive opinions) to the left side (mostly
negative comments).
V.
CONCLUSION
We presented our approach to visually compare and inspect
large sets of textual customer feedback with respect to senti-
ment expressed regarding key concepts, and geographic distri-
bution. For each concept, a sentiment map was rendered and

245
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
(a) 2007
(b) 2008
(c) 2009
(d) 2010
Figure 10.
Comparison of the SOM layouts of the sentiment maps of different years. We highlighted the SOM node containing the term customer service by
a red rectangle. The sentiment development over time is very good visible, as 2008 is the year with the best opinion about the customer service.
all maps were visually clustered and aggregated by the SOM
approach. Interaction methods allow navigating the overview
visualizations and drilling down for detailed inspection. Fur-
ther temporal analyses of the customer feedback revealed sea-
sonal inﬂuences on the customer opinion. Application ﬁndings
presented indicate that key concepts and their sentiment scores
being highly dependent on geographic position. Such ﬁndings
can be very helpful in analyzing service levels across locations,
products, customers, and similar applications in CRM. Our
analysis system can be easily used on top of existing CRM
systems, as we only need the text and the geographic position
of the reviews.
We have several ideas to extend our work in future for
improved analysis. One possibility improving the visual rep-
resentation is the integration of semantic zoom approaches.
Semantic zoom can allow merging neighboring SOM nodes
to reduce the level of detail. Additionally, semantic zoom
can be applied to the shown terms by using an ontology.
The terms will be grouped by the ontology and only the
common parent of a set of related concepts will be visual-
ized. The ontology also leads to another extension possibility
we are going to integrate in future. We plan to show the
hierarchic relationships between terms directly on the SOM
representation. Last but not least, we want to consider more
detailed map visualizations concerning production facilities
and income distributions among different cities correlating
geospatial dependent properties with the text features.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been supported by the Consensus project and
has been partly funded by the European Commission’s 7th
Framework Programme through theme ICT-2013.5.4 ICT for
Governance and Policy Modelling under contract no.611688.
We are thankful to Ming Hao of Hewlett-Packard Labs
for fruitful collaboration on the analysis of geo-referenced
customer review report data. We also thank the Helsinki
University of Technology for providing the SOMPAK imple-
mentation which we used in this study.

246
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
REFERENCES
[1]
H. Janetzko, D. J¨ackle, and T. Schreck, “Comparative visual analysis
of large customer feedback based on self-organizing sentiment maps,”
Proc. International Conference on Advances in Information Mining and
Management, 2013, pp. 12–17.
[2]
T. Kohonen, Self-Organizing Maps.
Springer-Verlag, 2001.
[3]
J. Vesanto, “SOM-based data visualization methods,” Intelligent Data
Analysis, vol. 3, no. 2, 1999, pp. 111–126.
[4]
G. J. Deboeck and T. K. Kohonen, Eds., Visual Explorations in Finance:
with Self-Organizing Maps.
Springer, 1998.
[5]
J. Wei, Z. Shen, N. Sundaresan, and K.-L. Ma, “Visual cluster explo-
ration of web clickstream data,” in IEEE VAST, 2012, pp. 3–12.
[6]
T. Schreck, J. Bernard, T. von Landesberger, and J. Kohlhammer,
“Visual cluster analysis of trajectory data with interactive kohonen
maps,” Information Visualization, vol. 8, no. 1, 2009, pp. 14–29,
accessed June 13, 2014. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1057/
ivs.2008.29
[7]
J. Bernard, J. Brase, D. Fellner, O. Koepler, J. Kohlhammer, T. Ruppert,
T. Schreck, and I. Sens, “A visual digital library approach for time-
oriented scientiﬁc primary data,” Springer International Journal of
Digital Libraries, ECDL 2010 Special Issue, 2011, pp. 111–123.
[8]
K. U. Barthel, “Improved image retrieval using automatic image sorting
and semi-automatic generation of image semantics,” Image Analysis
for Multimedia Interactive Services, International Workshop on, vol. 0,
2008, pp. 227–230.
[9]
N. Andrienko and G. Andrienko, Exploratory Analysis of Spatial and
Temporal Data: A Systematic Approach.
Springer-Verlag, 2005.
[10]
A. M. MacEachren, How Maps Work - Representation, Visualization,
and Design.
Guilford Press, 2004.
[11]
F.
Bao,
V.
Lobo,
and
M.
Painho,
“The
self-organizing
map,
the geo-som, and relevant variants for geosciences,” Computers
&
Geosciences,
vol.
31,
no.
2,
2005,
pp.
155
–
163,
accessed June 13, 2014, geospatial Research in Europe: AGILE
2003. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
B6V7D-4F0851H-2/2/ac6bd99e54c5ff81db9a173604b0d3aa
[12]
P. Agarwal and A. Skupin, Eds., Self-Organising Maps: Applications
in Geographic Information Science.
Wiley, 2008.
[13]
D. Guo, J. Chen, A. M. MacEachren, and K. Liao, “A visualization
system for space-time and multivariate patterns (VIS-STAMP),” IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 12, no. 6,
2006, pp. 1461–1474.
[14]
G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko, S. Bremm, T. Schreck, T. von Landes-
berger, P. Bak, and D. A. Keim, “Space-in-time and time-in-space
self-organizing maps for exploring spatiotemporal patterns,” Computer
Graphics Forum, vol. 29, no. 3, 2010, pp. 913–92.
[15]
R. Kincaid, “SignalLens: Focus+context applied to electronic time
series,” IEEE Trans. on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 16,
2010, pp. 900–907.
[16]
J. Van Wijk and E. Van Selow, “Cluster and calendar based visualiza-
tion of time series data,” in Proc. IEEE Symposium on Information
Visualization.
IEEE Computer Society, 1999, pp. 4–.
[17]
W. Aigner, S. Miksch, H. Schumann, and C. Tominski, Visualization
of Time-Oriented Data.
Springer-Verlag New York Inc, 2011.
[18]
J. Bernard, J. Brase, D. Fellner, O. Koepler, J. Kohlhammer, T. Ruppert,
T. Schreck, and I. Sens, “A visual digital library approach for time-
oriented scientiﬁc primary data,” Springer International Journal on
Digital Libraries, ECDL 2010 Special Issue, 2011, pp. 1–13.
[19]
M. Ward, “A taxonomy of glyph placement strategies for multidimen-
sional data visualization,” Information Visualization, vol. 1, no. 3/4,
Dec. 2002, pp. 194–210.
[20]
D. Oelke, D. Spretke, A. Stoffel, and D. A. Keim, “Visual readability
analysis: How to make your writings easier to read,” IEEE Transactions
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 18, no. 5, May 2012, pp.
662–674.
[21]
P. Juola, “Authorship attribution,” Found. Trends Inf. Retr., vol. 1,
no. 3, Dec. 2006, pp. 233–334, accessed June 13, 2014. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/1500000005
[22]
C. Rohrdantz, M. C. Hao, U. Dayal, L.-E. Haug, and D. A. Keim,
“Feature-based visual sentiment analysis of text document streams,”
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, Special Issue
on Intelligent Visual Interfaces for Text Analysis, vol. 3, no. 2, 2012,
pp. 26:1–26:25.
[23]
M. C. Hao, C. Rohrdantz, H. Janetzko, D. A. Keim, U. Dayal, L.-E.
Haug, M. Hsu, and F. Stoffel, “Visual sentiment analysis of customer
feedback streams using geo-temporal term associations,” Information
Visualization, Jun. 2013.
[24]
T. Kohonen, J. Hynninen, J. Kangas, and J. Laaksonen, “SOM PAK:
The self-organizing map program package,” Helsinki University of
Technology, Tech. Rep. A31, 1996.
[25]
T. Porter and T. Duff, “Compositing digital images,” in Proceedings
of the 11th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive
techniques, ser. SIGGRAPH ’84.
New York, NY, USA: ACM,
1984, pp. 253–259, accessed June 13, 2014. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/800031.808606

