470
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Towards the Live City – Paving the Way to Real-time Urbanism 
 
 
SENSEable 
City Lab 
MIT 
Cambridge, US 
berno@mit.edu 
 
Inst. of 
Geography 
University of 
Heidelberg, 
GER 
Alexander Zipf 
Inst. of Geography 
University of 
Heidelberg, GER 
alexander.zipf@geog. 
uni-heidelberg.de 
Euro Beinat  
Dept. of Geoinformatics 
University of Salzburg, 
AUT  
euro.beinat 
@sbg.ac.at 
 
Philipp Breuss-
Schneeweis 
Wikitude GmbH 
Salzburg, AUT 
philipp.breuss 
@wikitude.com 
Marc Boher 
Urbiotica 
Barcelona, ESP  
marc.boher 
@urbiotica.com 
 
 
Abstract—In contrast to projections, which stated that the 
wide-spread distribution of high-speed Internet connections 
would render geographical distance irrelevant, cities have 
recently gained importance in academic research. Yet, real-
time monitoring of urban processes is widely unexplored. We 
present the concept of a Live City, in which the city is regarded 
as an actuated near real-time control system creating a 
feedback loop between the citizens, environmental monitoring 
systems, the city management and ubiquitous information 
services. After clarifying the term ‘live’ – as opposed to 
common understanding of ‘real-time’ – we identify four main 
barriers towards the implementation of the Live City: 
methodological 
issues, 
technical/technological 
problems, 
lacking quantification of economic revenues, and finally 
privacy and legislative questions. In this paper, we discuss 
those challenges and point out potential future research 
pathways towards the realisation of a Live City – ranging from 
sensor network developments, real-time quality assurance and 
new user interface paradigms to world-wide legislation 
measures, a standardised urban operating system and the idea 
of a ‘tuned’ city. 
Keywords-live city; ubiquitous sensor networks; real-time 
city; urban services; real-time information services. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Based on the fast rise of digital communication 
technologies [1], projections stated that the wide-spread 
distribution of high-speed internet connections will render 
geographical distance irrelevant [2],[3], and that cities are 
not more than mere artefacts of the industrial age [4]. As a 
side effect, cities were presumed to drastically decrease in 
importance as physical and social connections, and would 
play an increasingly ancillary role in socio-technical 
research. 
In reality, the world developed completely differently – 
cities are back in the centre of research. In fact, a United 
Nations (UN) report, which has been released before the 
World Population Day in 2007, states that for the first time in 
history, more people now live in cities than rural areas [5]. 
Thus, cities in their multi-layered complexity in terms of 
social interactions, living space provision, infrastructure 
development and other crucial human factors of everyday 
life have re-gained importance in scientific research. This 
arises from the fact – amongst others – that major 
developments of scientific and technological innovation took 
place in the urban context [6],[7]. 
However, in research on urban areas, especially real-time 
monitoring 
of 
urban 
processes 
and 
target-oriented 
deployment of digital services, are still widely unexplored. 
These research fields have recently received a lot of attention 
due to the fast rise of inexpensive pervasive sensor 
technologies, which made ubiquitous sensing feasible and 
enrich research on cities with uncharted up-to-date 
information layers through connecting the physical to the 
virtual world, as shown in Fig. 1. 
 
 
Figure 1. Live City – Connecting Physical and Virtual Worlds. [8] 
 
One driver towards this vision is the diminishing digital 
divide on a global scale. While the digital divide within 
countries is still strongly affecting the degree of access to 
information and knowledge, the global digital divide is 
decreasing due to the fast rise of Information and 
Communications Technology (ICT) markets in China, India, 
South-East Asia, South America and Africa. Mobile phone 
penetration (mobile subscriptions per 100 inhabitants) has 
been at 76.2% of the world’s population in 2010, where it is 
at 94.1% in the Americas and at 131.5% in Commonwealth 
of Independent States (CIS) [9]. The two fastest growing 
mobile phone markets China and India currently face a 
penetration rate of 64% and 70%, which makes a total 
number of 1.69 billion subscribers in those two countries 
alone. 
 
Bernd Resch 

471
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
This development builds the basis for the installation of 
urban real-time services. In a recent report on Digital Urban 
Renewal [10], the author states that major demand-side 
drivers for digital urban projects are the increasing focus on 
sustainability and emissions reduction, continued pressure on 
the urban transport infrastructure, and increasing pressures 
on citizen services due to demographic shifts, amongst 
others. On the supply side, several drivers have been 
identified including the ongoing evolution of the Internet as 
an underlying framework for services, new connectivity 
technologies, sensor networks and augmented reality. 
All these comprehensive ideas supporting the paradigm 
of assessing, analysing and influencing urban environments 
in (near) real time (s. Section III for a disambiguation of 
‘real-time’ and ‘live’) require a number of cognitive 
concepts, spatio-temporal algorithms and technological 
developments to be feasible. 
However, we are still facing a lack of experience in 
assessing urban dynamics in real time. One reason is that 
ambient and continuous monitoring is an enormous 
challenge, and this is particularly true in the urban context, 
which poses very specific challenges. These comprise well-
known 
technological 
questions, 
but 
also 
significant 
economical, social and political ones, which are rapidly 
gaining importance. This applies to a wide range of recent 
developments connected to live cities such as the Internet of 
things, pervasive sensing or ubiquitous urban monitoring. 
Over the last few years, researchers and practitioners 
have also dealt with the apparent disconnect between the 
technical 
capabilities 
developed 
by 
researchers 
and 
technology firms in the broad context of smart cities and the 
actual adoption rates in cities. It can be argued that this 
follows the normal pattern of innovation adoption, and that 
in Geoffrey's Moore language the technologies have not yet 
"crossed the chasm" of adoption. However, a few patterns 
seem to emerge in urban environments, stressing the social 
and organisational nature innovation in addition to the 
technology aspects. 
An important aspect to mention is that real-time and 
smart cities are nowadays often associated and developed 
under the umbrella of energy-related questions and 
applications, such as the Strategic Energy Technology 
initiative [11] by the European Commission. This paper tries 
to present a more holistic and comprehensive definition of a 
Live City. We see the city as a multi-layered construct 
containing multiple dimensions of social, technological and 
physical interconnections, i.e., as an actuated multi-
dimensional conglomerate of heterogeneous processes, in 
which the citizens are the central component. 
Towards the realisation of a Live City, we are currently 
experiencing a fast progressing technology development, 
which is not only moving ahead quickly, but which is 
moving ahead of society. This development can be compared 
with a stream moving at high speed, on which we are 
paddling to remain on the same spot or at least not to drift off 
too fast. The question, which we have to tackle in this regard, 
is where our goal for the future lies: down-stream, 
somewhere near our current spot, or even up-stream? 
In this paper, we try to illustrate possible pathways to 
answering this multi-dimensional question. We incorporate 
societal, technical, political, privacy and economic issues 
into our rationale. We are well aware of shortcomings in 
terms of completeness and technical thoroughness. The 
paper shall be considered a first leap towards a Live City 
‘Installation Guide’. 
This paper is organised as follows: after this introduction 
we illustrate a few examples on existing approaches towards 
Live Cites in Section II before giving a disambiguation of the 
term ‘live’ in Section III. Section IV discusses challenges in 
current research on the Live City and Section V illustrates 
potential future research avenues, before Section VI 
summarises conclusions from the paper. 
II. 
STATE-OF-THE-ART – REAL-TIME AND LIVE CITIES 
One of the first implementations of a ‘real-time city’ has 
been done by the MIT SENSEable City Lab [8]. This 
research group has considerably coined the term ‘real-time 
city’, particularly through visualising the city as a real-time 
and pulsating entity. In further research initiatives, the 
SENSEable City Lab investigated human mobility patterns, 
the usage of pervasive sensors to assess urban dynamics, 
event-based anomaly detection in ICT infrastructures, and 
correlations 
between 
ICT 
usage 
and 
socio-cultural 
developments. The major shortcoming in this research is that 
no generic long-term goals are addressed apart from singular 
implementations in selected cities. 
A new and innovative idea in the context of assessing 
urban dynamics in real time is the concept of Living Labs. 
According to [12], a Living Lab is a ‘real-life test and 
experimentation environment where users and producers co-
create innovations’. Living Labs are strongly driven by the 
European Commission, which characterises them as Public-
Private-People Partnerships (PPPP) for user-driven open 
innovation. A Living Lab is basically composed of four main 
components: co-creation (co-design by users and producers), 
exploration (discovering emerging usages, behaviours and 
market opportunities), experimentation (implementing live 
scenarios) and evaluation (assessment of concepts, products 
and services). Even though the concept of Living Labs has 
rapidly gained attention over the last decade, it has not been 
holistically explored in terms of general research challenges 
and concrete future points of action. 
Also, much research is performed in the area of smart 
cities (in particular in South Korea also the term ‘ubiquitous 
cities’ is popular). For instance, IBM has implemented a 
number of urban services in the course of their ‘Smarter 
Planet’ programme [13]. Within this initiative research is 
performed together with cities all over the world to 
implement applications in the areas of city management, 
citizen services, business opportunities, transport, water 
supply, communication and energy. The goal is to seize 
opportunities and build sustainable prosperity, by making 
cities ‘smarter’. Despite the seminal nature and the broad 
awareness for the concept, smart cities are currently mostly 
understood in terms of energy-related questions (particularly 
in the European Union), i.e., nearly no trans-disciplinary 
approaches have been developed. 

472
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A sensor-driven approach to ubiquitous urban monitoring 
is presented in [14] and in [15]. The authors present a 
measurement infrastructure for pervasive monitoring 
applications 
using 
ubiquitous 
embedded 
sensing 
technologies with a focus on urban applications. The system 
has been conceived in such a modular way that the base 
platform can be used within a variety of sensor web 
application fields such as environmental monitoring, 
biometric parameter surveillance, critical infrastructure 
protection or energy network observation. Several show 
cases have been implemented and validated in the areas of 
urban air quality monitoring, public health, radiation safety, 
and exposure modelling. Yet, these approaches mainly focus 
on technical and methodological developments and do not 
account for wider challenges such as societal, political and 
legislative aspects. 
III. 
A DISAMBIGUATION OF THE TERM ‘LIVE’ 
The term ‘Live City’ originates from the modification of 
the expression ‘Real-time City’ as definitions and usages of 
the latter expression are vague and vary on a quite broad 
scale. 
Anthony Townsend presents a highly mobile phone 
centric definition of a real-time city by stating that ‘the 
cellular telephone […] will undoubtedly lead to fundamental 
transformations in individuals’ perceptions of self and the 
world, and consequently the way they collectively construct 
that world’ [16]. The author sees the real-time city as a 
potential platform for dedicated advertising and states that 
‘accessibility becomes more important than mobility’. This 
implies that it will be more critical to access urban services 
rather than moving around physically. This in turn means 
that the digital (i.e., mobile phone) infrastructure will be 
more 
important 
than 
the 
physical 
(i.e., 
transport) 
infrastructure. 
A possible definition of urban informatics – a term 
closely related the real-time city – is ‘the collection, 
classification, storage, retrieval, and dissemination of 
recorded knowledge of, relating to, characteristic of, or 
constituting a city’ [17]. This definition gives a more 
holistic, but rather general view on the term ‘real-time city’, 
which centers around information and knowledge while 
cultural, social, political and privacy aspects remain greatly 
untouched. 
Apart from these definitions, the term is generally 
understood as providing spatial information about the city in 
a timely manner without necessarily accounting for a 
feedback loop or dynamic processes. 
In these interpretations of the expression ‘real-time’, it 
has been strongly mitigated. The term ‘real-time’ originated 
in the field of computer science, where it initially described a 
process, which is completed ‘without any delay’. This broad 
view was then divided into hard and soft real-time demands. 
Soft real-time basically defines that deadlines are important, 
but the whole system will still function correctly if deadlines 
are occasionally missed. The latter is not true for hard real-
time systems. Another term to express non-rigorous temporal 
requirements is ‘near real-time’, which describes a delay 
introduced into real-time applications, e.g., by automated 
data processing or data transmission [18]. Hence, the term 
accounts for the delay between the occurrence of an event 
and the subsequent use of the processed data. 
These definitions of the term ‘real-time’ have been set up 
for the domain of computer science. Thus, it is important to 
evaluate and re-define the expression in the context of urban 
geography. Naturally, strict real-time requirements are a 
central aspect in monitoring applications, whereby these 
demands are highly application-specific and can vary 
significantly. Therefore, they are not a fundamental goal in 
the field of urban geography, as the term ‘real-time’ is 
primarily defined by an ‘exact point in time’, which is the 
same for all data sources to create a significant measurement 
outcome. Secondarily, the term defines the possibility to start 
a synchronous communication at a certain time, which might 
often be important for geographical monitoring applications, 
e.g., to enable the generation of an exact development graph 
for temporal pollutant dispersion over a defined period of 
time in precise intervals. 
Additionally to the suggestion of assessability of the 
environment in the ‘now’, the expression ‘Live City’ also 
implies a feedback loop. The term ‘city’ does not only define 
the description of location-aware parameters, but also entails 
the exploration of causal patterns in these data. In the context 
of geo-sensor network and monitoring applications, this in 
turn means that the urban environment is not only analysed 
remotely by examining quasi-static data, but the procedure of 
sensing and processing live data offers the possibility of 
modifying the urban context in an ad-hoc fashion. 
In conclusion, it can be stated that the strict term ‘real-
time’ can be interpreted as ‘at present’ for urban monitoring 
applications, in the sense that the aim is to assess the 
environment ‘now’, not a historical and perhaps outdated 
representation. However, these topicality requirements can 
vary depending on the application context. For instance, an 
update on traffic conditions does not have to exceed a delay 
of a couple of minutes when this information is used for 
navigation instructions, whereas a 30 minute update interval 
can well be sufficient for short-term trip planning. 
To account for this non-rigorous requirement, the term 
‘Live City’ seems better suited than ‘Real-time City’. In this 
reflection, ‘near real-time’ appears to be closest to ‘live’, as 
it does not impose rigid deadlines and the expression itself 
suggests dynamic adaptation of a time period according to 
different usage contexts. 
 

473
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
IV. 
CHALLENGES IN CURRENT RESEARCH ON THE LIVE 
CITY 
The urban context poses many challenges to pervasive 
monitoring and sensing systems. Particular issues arise for 
the deployment of near real-time information services in the 
city. These range from physical sensor mounting to social 
and privacy implications. Furthermore, the sensitive urban 
political landscape has to be accounted for, which might 
cause unforeseen challenges. Naturally, technical challenges 
play a key role in the establishment of Live Cities. 
A. Technological and Technical Issues 
The first essential technological challenge is the 
integration of different data sources owned by governmental 
institutions, public bodies, energy providers and private 
sensor network operators. This problem can potentially be 
tackled with self-contained and well-conceived data 
encapsulation 
standards 
– 
independent 
of 
specific 
applications – and enforced by legal entities, as discussed in 
sub-chapter V.B. However, the adaptation of existing sensors 
to new interoperability standards is costly for data owners 
and network operators in the short term, and so increased 
awareness of the benefits of open standards is required. 
From a technical viewpoint, unresolved research 
challenges for ubiquitous urban monitoring infrastructures 
are manifold. These challenges range from finding a uniform 
representation method for measurement values, optimising 
data routing algorithms in multi-hop networks, data fusion, 
and developing optimal data visualisation and presentation 
methods. The latter issue is an essential aspect in real-time 
decision support systems, as different user groups might 
need different views on the underlying information. For 
example, in case of emergency local authorities might want a 
socio-economic picture of the affected areas, while first-
response forces are interested in topography and people’s 
current locations, and the public might want general 
information about the predicted development of a disaster. 
In addition, there are a number of well-known technical 
issues in the establishment of urban monitoring systems 
(energy supply, sensor mote size, robustness, routing, ad-hoc 
network connections, reliability, connectivity, self-healing 
mechanisms, etc.). These have to be addressed as the case 
arises depending on specific requirements of the end 
application. Thus, they are not part of the presented research. 
Furthermore, highly unpredictable challenges exist 
arising from the openly accessible, dynamic and variable 
urban environment, such as severe weather conditions, 
malfunctioning hardware, connectivity, or even theft and 
vandalism. These general and mostly technical issues are 
well elaborated and shall not be discussed within this paper. 
B. Various Stakeholders 
Other issues for the installation of a Live City are 
thematic challenges and socio-political concerns, which are 
rapidly gaining importance. The feedback loop depicted in 
Fig. 2 is a key factor in designing urban monitoring systems. 
In practice, various kinds of stakeholders have to be 
considered 
including 
citizens, 
information 
providers, 
research institutions, politicians, the city management, or 
other influential interest groups. This cycle involves all steps 
of the deployment process from planning, deployment, 
customised information provision, and feedback from the 
citizens and other interest groups [19]. 
 
 
Figure 2. Feedback Loop Enabling the Live City. 
 
Regarding the cycle depicted in Fig. 2, a common pattern 
refers to the network of actors that constitute the city from 
the decision-making point of view. While for simplicity we 
may indicate "city management" as the entity that supervises 
investments and decisions, in practice the end result of city 
innovations is the consequence of decisions made by a 
network of public and private actors, each one with a 
separate agenda and specific political or commercial 
objectives. The synchronisation, or lack thereof, between 
these actors frequently determines speed, depth and extent of 
adoption of new technologies, and the impact that 
technology ultimately has on the city. The process of public-
private partnerships (PPP) and the governance of technology 
innovation in urban environments are frequently secondary 
concerns of technology vendors and scientists. 
Another important methodological peculiarity of the 
urban context is that there are large variations within 
continuous physical phenomena over small spatial and 
temporal scales. For instance, due to topographical, physical 
or radiometric irregularities, pollutant concentration can 
differ considerably, even on opposite sides of the street. This 
variability tends to make individual point measurements less 
likely to be representative of the system as a whole. The 
consequence of this dilemma is an evolving argument for 
environmental 
regulations 
based 
on 
comprehensive 
 

474
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
monitoring data rather than mathematical modelling, and this 
demand is likely to grow. 
C. The Value of Sensing Collective Behaviour versus 
Privacy Implications 
Although we experience quickly increasing awareness of 
the opportunities of digital mobile communication, the 
question arises how we can engage people to contribute 
actively being ‘human data sources’ and involve themselves 
into re-designing urban processes. This is necessary in order 
to leverage collective information in areas such as 
environmental monitoring, emergency management, traffic 
monitoring, or e-tourism. One example, in which this kind of 
volunteered data was of invaluable importance, were the 
earthquake and the subsequent tsunami in Japan in March 
2011. In this case, the Tweet-o-Meter [20] application has 
been used to find anomalies in Twitter activity. Right after 
the earthquake, people started to post status reports, video 
streams, and conditions of destroyed houses and cities, 
which could be interpreted in near real time as an indicator 
for an extraordinary event. Furthermore, information could 
be semantically extracted from personal comments and 
posts. In this context, an important but yet poorly research 
issue is the use of incentive schemes to encourage people to 
contribute their data. Current approaches mostly comprise 
‘feedback’ and ‘gamification’, but their practical suitability 
has not been fully proven yet. 
Early implementations and deployments also show the 
impact of new sources of evidence on the way organisations 
operate. As an example, police forces can greatly benefit 
from real-time feeds of urban information showing 
anomalies in the collective city behaviour that may underline 
safety risks or attention areas. While this is increasingly 
feasible through data mining of real-time data feeds, the 
challenge for law enforcement is how to react to this 
information, which questions the normal planning and 
operational practices. 
Faced with real-time or even predictive safety alerts, 
should the police forces adopt a dynamic allocation of 
resources based on demand and supply mediated by 
technology or use this input as an extra source of evidence 
for existing management practices? How does this impact 
labour, skills, equipment or work shift? What are the legal or 
institutional implications? All city organisations are faced 
with similar questions, which emerge because technologies 
have enabled new information streams forcing them to 
reconsider established practices and operations. While it can 
be argued that this is the case for any organisation facing 
disrupting technologies, in urban settings the issue is 
compounded by the fact that many institutions face the same 
challenge simultaneously, and the degree to which 
organisations succeed or fail depends only in part on 
themselves. 
This development raises the challenge to find the balance 
between providing pervasive real-time information while still 
preserving people’s privacy. Strategies to address this stress 
field are described in sub-Section 0. In addition, it seems 
self-evident that the provided information has to be highly 
accurate, reliable and unambiguous. Thus, quality control 
and error prevention mechanisms including appropriate 
external calibration are even more important for monitoring 
networks in the city than in other, less connected, 
environments. The issue of quality control will be further 
discussed in sub-Section V.A. 
In terms of privacy, the claim might arise that we need to 
be aware of our personal and private data before we share 
them. The essential question in this context, however, is how 
we can raise awareness of ways to deal with that matter. 
Terms and conditions of digital services and technology are 
mostly hardly understandable to non tech-experts. Thus, 
more simple and binding ways of communicating this kind 
of information have to be found. 
Finally, some more unpredictable challenges posed by 
the dynamic and volatile physical environment in the city are 
radical weather conditions, malfunctioning hardware, 
restricted connectivity, or even theft and vandalism. 
Moreover, there are a number of rather obvious but non-
trivial challenges to be addressed, such as optimal 
positioning of sensors, high spatial and temporal variability 
of measured parameters or rapid changes in the urban 
structure, which might cause considerable bias in the 
measurements. 
V. 
DISCUSSION: FUTURE RESEARCH AVENUES 
From the challenges described in Section IV we can 
derive a number of essential research questions, which have 
to be tackled in the area of Live Cities. These can be divided 
into methodological aspects, technical and technological 
issues, questions on privacy and legislation, and the 
assessment of economic benefits, which arise through the 
installation of a Live City. 
A. Methodological Research 
Over the last years prospects were made that ‘data would 
be the new oil’ [21],[22]. It has been stated that - like oil - 
data cannot be used without first being refined. This means 
that raw data is just the basic ingredient for the final product 
of contextual information that can be used to support 
strategic and operational decisions. Thus, a central issue in 
terms of providing real-time information services is the 
analysis of data according to algorithmic requirements, 
representation of information on different scales, context-
supported data processing, and user-tailored information 
provision aligned with the needs of different user groups. 
In general, the deployment of a large number of sensors 
ensures more representative results together with an 
understanding of temporal and spatial variability. However, 
deploying sensor networks is costly, politically sensitive and 
requires much time. One way to overcome these issues is to 
‘sense people’ and their immediate surroundings using 
everyday devices such as mobile phones or digital cameras, 
as proposed by Goodchild [23]. These can replace – or at 
least complement – the extensive deployment of specialised 
city-wide sensor networks. The basic trade-off of this 
people-centric approach is between cost efficiency and real-
time fidelity. The idea of using existing devices to sense the 
city is crucial, but it requires more research on sensing 

475
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
accuracy, data accessibility and privacy, location precision, 
and interoperability in terms of data and exchange formats. 
In terms of geo-data sources, Volunteered Geographic 
Information (VGI) plays a key role in realising the idea of a 
Live City. We are already experiencing an overwhelming 
willingness of citizens to contribute their personal 
observations ranging from opinions posted on Facebook to 
Tweets about local events or commented photo uploads on 
Flickr. As mentioned in Section IV, this kind of collective 
information can potentially have a vital impact on 
operational real-time strategies in areas such as emergency 
management, dynamic traffic control or city management. 
A central issue in VGI is the representativeness of 
volunteered information [23],[24]. We argue that defining 
or deriving consistent semantics in user-generated content 
possibly requires the combination of bottom-up and top-
down 
approaches. 
In 
bottom-up 
approaches, 
user 
communities build their own semantic objects and 
connections between those by using their own personal 
taxonomies. In contrast, top-down approaches – mostly 
academically driven – try to define semantic rules and 
ontological connections in a generic way prior to and 
independently of the end application. 
Only the combination of those using Linked Data 
concepts (rather than rigid and inflexible ontology 
approaches) 
can 
lead 
to 
domain-independent 
and 
comprehensive semantic models, which are needed to 
cover the whole breadth of topics, users and applications in 
the Live City. This requires standardisation on two levels – 
firstly on sensor data level (encodings for measurements) and 
secondly on phenomenon level (measurand encodings). In 
this regards, semantic search will be an essential concept to 
extract knowledge and information from user-generated data 
combined with sensor measurements. 
An aspect, which is strongly connected to availability of 
data sources, is openness of data. As argued by Jonathan 
Raper [25], quality of decision-support is increasing with the 
quality and the quantity of available data sources. We are 
currently facing a situation that in most cases, too little data 
are available to support well-informed decisions in near real 
time. This raises the question how data owners such as 
companies in the environmental sector, energy providers or 
sensor network operators can be animated to open their data 
repositories for public use. 
On the contrary, we might face a vast amount of data 
freely available in the near future, contributed by a variety of 
different data producers – mostly non-quality assured data 
stemming from private observations or sensor networks. This 
of course raises the question of trustworthiness of these data. 
Thus, automated quality assurance mechanisms have to be 
developed for uncertainty estimation, dynamic error 
detection, correction and prevention. In this research area, 
 
Figure 3. Urban Operating System. 

476
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
we are currently seeing different approaches in development 
including Complex Event Processing (CEP) [14] for error 
detection, standardisation efforts for representing uncertainty 
in sensor data (e.g., Uncertainty Markup Language - 
UncertML) [26], or proprietary profiles to define validity 
ranges for particular observations. Only when these 
questions are solved, reliability and completeness of 
recommendations can be ensured. 
Up to now quality analysis on VGI (e.g., [27],[28],[29]) 
focused on completeness as well as geometrical and 
semantic accuracy, but considered only few timeslots and 
neglected the (near) real time aspect of a Live City. 
Interestingly this kind of data can also be used to improve 
the data situation through intelligent algorithms as [30] 
shows. 
Furthermore, measurements are only available in a quasi-
continuous distribution due to the high spatial and temporal 
variability of ad-hoc data collection. Addressing this issue 
will require complex distribution models and efficient 
resource discovery mechanisms in order to ensure 
adaptability to rapidly changing conditions. 
B. Technical and Technological Research 
Practical 
experiences 
show 
that 
urban 
growth 
necessitates management with focus on efficiency and 
durability. The careful integration and managing of acquired 
information and ensuring a bigger and better interoperability 
of various services will ultimately drive successful 
management of the urban space. Consequently cities need an 
‘urban operating system’ which will endow them with new 
intelligence in coordinating and interconnecting all services. 
Those services comprise provision of real-time information 
on mobile devices facilitating smarter movement around the 
city, and the optimisation of services for city and contractor 
agents of public service to improve information exchange 
and to provide public access to open data in order to 
encourage citizen participation. 
The urban operating system, illustrated in Fig. 3, consists 
of a setup of material and software architecture and allows 
for addressing the challenges mentioned in Section IV by 
taking 
into account constraints 
linked 
to outdated 
infrastructure: 
 
Acquisition of the information in real time 
 
Transportation of the information from public road 
network to information system 
 
Integration of systems deployed in the city (parking 
spaces, 
streetlights, 
traffic 
systems, 
waste 
management, etc.) 
 
Processing, dissemination, publication and storage 
of information in real time (real-time publication 
and dissemination, and provision of historical data 
for dynamic data mining processes) 
In effect, the urban operating system acts as a connecting 
base layer, which enables the interplay of urban objects, 
public infrastructure and the citizens. Like this, people can 
benefit by gaining access to real-time information about the 
city (traffic conditions, air quality, social activities, public 
transport, health-related issues, etc.). This entails citizens to 
base their short-term decisions on real-world conditions, 
which are conveyed on demand in near real time. 
This in turn requires the continuous assessment of urban 
processes, which requires the broad installation of sensor 
networks. The deployment of sensor networks implies a 
number of challenges, particularly in urban settings. Apart 
from technical research in the area of sensor networks 
regarding miniaturisation, energy supply, robustness, ad-hoc 
network connections, reliability, connectivity, self-healing 
mechanisms, etc., standardisation and interoperability are 
vital prerequisites for establishing pervasive and holistic 
monitoring 
systems. 
As 
current 
sensor 
network 
implementations are mostly built up in proprietary single-
purpose 
systems, 
efforts 
to 
develop 
a 
uniform 
communication protocol will be needed [31]. One very 
promising approach in this field is the Sensor Web 
Enablement (SWE) initiative [32] by the Open Geospatial 
Consortium 
(OGC). 
SWE 
aims 
to 
make 
sensors 
discoverable, accessible and controllable over the Internet. 
SWE 
currently 
consists 
of 
seven 
standards 
and 
interoperability reports, including the Sensor Observation 
Service (SOS) for observation data retrieval, Observations 
and Measurements (O&M) for sensor data encoding, Sensor 
Markup Language (SensorML) for platform description and 
the Sensor Alert Service (SAS) for event-based data 
transmission. More details about SWE can be found on the 
 
Figure 4. Live Geography – Standardised Geo-Sensor Data Analysis Architecture. 

477
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
OGC web site1. 
In terms of integrating various kinds of real-time data 
such as sensor measurements, meteorological data, energy 
system states and human observations with existing sensor 
and analysis systems, the creation of a standardised 
measurement infrastructure using well-conceived data and 
service standards is a major technical challenge. An essential 
factor will be the integration of new developments with 
existing community projects such as Ushahidi or Twitter to 
create new possibilities for high-quality information. This 
will potentially result in increased situational awareness and 
enhanced 
Common 
Operational 
Pictures 
(COP). 
Furthermore, this development supports infrastructure-
oriented approaches and directives such as Global 
Monitoring for Environment and Security (GMES), 
Infrastructure for Spatial Information in Europe (INSPIRE) 
and the Shared Environmental Information Space (SEIS). 
The Live Geography infrastructure [31] is a first step towards 
the realisation of a generic workflow-oriented geo-sensor 
data analysis architecture. As shown in Fig. 4, the Live 
Geography workflow covers all essential parts including 
standardised sensors, sensor fusion, web-based data 
processing and geo-data visualisation, and is generic enough 
to integrate all data sources relevant to Live City 
applications. 
Here, an important future research area is the 
development of generic and portable sensor fusion 
algorithms, which are a vital prerequisite to combine data 
stemming from different heterogeneous sensor networks. 
Sensor fusion basically stands for the harmonisation of data 
in terms of units of measure, time zones, measurement 
models and observation semantics. To be compliant with the 
requirements of a ‘Live’ City, the fusion process has to 
happen in near real time. [33] presents an approach for on-
the-fly integration of measurements coming from different 
SOS instances using the free open-source server GeoServer2. 
The system harmonises measurements in real time and 
provides them on the fly via standardised OGC web service 
interfaces such as the Web Feature Service (WFS) and the 
Web Map Service (WMS). Although this implementation is 
still improvable in terms of fusion capabilities, it 
demonstrates a seminal approach towards sensor fusion. 
The next step in a Live City workflow is geo-analysis of 
real-time data sources, i.e., the refinement of raw data 
towards user group-specific information, which can then be 
used for short-term decision support. This analysis process 
can be implemented by the OGC Web Processing Service 
(WPS) in a standardised way in general. But the WPS 
architecture is very generic in its current version so that the 
developments of further specialised (domain-specific) 
application profiles are necessary as is argued in [34],[35] 
and [36]. The power of using WPS for implementing more 
complex analysis functionality for urban models has for 
instance been shown in [37]. 
Another methodological issue in terms of communication 
technology is the availability of ubiquitous communication 
                                                           
1 http://www.opengeospatial.org 
2 http://www.geoserver.org 
media. Today, we presume a fully functioning Internet to 
transmit information. However, in case of emergency, this 
layer is potentially not available, as we experienced for 
instance during hurricane Katrina in 2005 in New Orleans. 
Thus, we have to find alternate possibilities to communicate 
critical information independently of existing infrastructures. 
Possible solutions comprise long-range ad-hoc networks or 
the construction of a robust communication core network, 
which can withstand external influences such as tsunamis, 
earthquakes, storms, avalanches or even vandalism. 
The Live City concept naturally implies the provision of 
user-tailored information in near real time. However, we 
have to consider that fulfilling this requirement is not always 
possible, for instance if data analysis algorithms are very 
complex and laborious, or if base data are only updated in 
certain intervals. Despite these restrictions we have to find 
algorithmic methods to accurately predict developments in 
our environment even in case of reduced data availability. 
This can for instance happen through the integration of well-
calibrated 
models 
and 
spatio-temporal 
interpolation 
algorithms. This approach can naturally only mitigate the 
drawback of imprecise information, but not eliminate it. 
A tightly related research challenge is the creation of 
ubiquitous user interfaces. Here, we tend to think about 
visionary devices and gadgets, but even today we have the 
need to develop solutions for some application domains like 
Live Cities, where an extremely wide range of legacy user 
interfaces is being used at different places, but still requiring 
a stringent link amongst each other. This means that people 
need to share the same information and be aware of other 
users of the system – in particular their location. The roles of 
these users are highly dynamic and change with time and 
space – so do the user interfaces they need to interact with 
up-to-date shared knowledge and each other. 
A wide range of users exists within the Live City – from 
the general public, management centres, governmental 
institutions and urban planners to researchers and specialised 
maintenance staff. All of them need to access and interact 
with geospatial information in an truly ubiquitous way, i.e., 
simultaneously at different places with different devices: in 
the management central on interactive large screen wall 
displays, outdoor with tablet computers or smartphones, or 
potentially with new augmented reality devices – in 
particular as hands need to stay free for more authentic and 
pure experiences of the city. 
Even wearable computing appliances start to play a 
central role and have to be considered for special. In this 
context, a highly interesting aspect is that we do not only 
have alphanumeric data to be presented, but the users need to 
interact 
with 
highly 
interactive 
spatiotemporal 
information (2D+t and 3D+t) on this broad range of devices 
– but in all cases users need to access similar functionality 
and information in an ad-hoc fashion. Some of this 
information is public or shared, some is restricted to distinct 
users or user roles. Still, there is a need of consistency – at 
least on the mental level for the interaction and visualisation 
metaphors used. This consistency is required because people 
might get confused and make errors if they need to switch 

478
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
too often between different paradigms – something that 
needs to be minimised extremely in real-time applications. 
Another interface-related problem is that Live City 
applications can often not rely on the wireless network – as 
mentioned above. In consequence, there is a need for 
supporting both autonomous and collaborative decision-
making and interaction. This makes user interface design 
for different user groups a particular challenge. Currently we 
have to deal with a wide range of these challenges in the case 
of city management systems using today’s technology (also 
to guarantee robustness of the application), but it is clear that 
new ubiquitous UI devices, metaphors and paradigms have a 
large potential in this area. 
This also includes the provision of real-time data and 
information in 3D, as illustrated in Fig. 5. Integrating up-to-
date sensor data, such as environmental, traffic-related or 
safety-relevant data can significantly improve the value of 
urban information systems. This requires the visualisation of 
3D city and landscape models and the interactive navigation 
through the scene, which again raises a number of research 
challenges such as representation of 3D data on small 
screens, optimised information reduction, guaranteeing 
highest-possible representativeness of the data, creating 
urban dispersion models or sufficient update cycles. 
 
 
Figure 5. Integration of Sensor Data in 3D Environments. [38] 
 
C. Privacy and Legislation Measures 
Particularly in the area of user interaction and public 
participation procedures, a crucial question in the context of 
Live Cities is how we can preserve people’s privacy dealing 
with ubiquitous information and partly personal data. One 
possible solution to address this issue is to make use of new 
Collective Sensing approaches. This methodology tries not 
to exploit a single person’s measurements and data, but 
analyses 
aggregated 
anonymised 
data 
coming 
from 
collective networks, such as Twitter, Flickr or the mobile 
phone network [39]. Like this, we can gain a coarse picture 
of the situation in our environment without involving 
personal details of single persons. In case of tracking 
applications or services, in which personal data are involved, 
people have to have an opt-in/opt-out possibility. This means 
that users can decide themselves whether they want to use 
the application – and also withdraw their consent - being 
aware of the type and amount of data that is collected and 
transmitted. 
Another central issue in deploying monitoring systems in 
the city is the personal impact of fine-grained urban sensing, 
as terms like ‘air quality’ or ‘pollutant dispersion’ are only 
surrogates for a much wider and more direct influence on 
people, such as life expectation, respiratory diseases or 
quality of life. This raises the demand of finding the right 
level of information provision. More accurate, finer-grained 
or more complete information might in many cases not 
necessarily be worthwhile having, as this could allow for 
drawing conclusions on a very small scale, in extreme cases 
even on the individual. This again could entail a dramatic 
impact in a very wide range of areas like health care, the 
insurance sector, housing markets or urban planning and 
management. 
A central question in this context is: can we actually 
achieve a system, in which transactions are not tracked or 
traced? Thinking about mobile phone calls, credit card 
payments or automated toll collection, each of the underlying 
systems has to have some kind of logging functionality in 
order to file payments and generated automated reports. In 
these cases it is probably just not possible prevent storage – 
at least for a short time. Thus, legal frameworks have to be 
developed on national, trans-national and global levels. The 
largest limiting factor in this regard is the varying 
interpretation of ‘privacy’ in different parts of the world. For 
instance, privacy can be traded like a good by its owner in 
the USA, whereas it is protected by law in the European 
Union. This means that supra-national legislation bodies and 
initiatives are called upon to set up appropriate world-wide 
regulations. 
As shown in Fig. 6, legislation and governments play a 
highly different role in these two settings. 
 
 
Figure 6. Different Understandings of Privacy. 
 
This also includes the critical question of data 
ownership – who owns the data: the data producers (i.e., the 
citizens or a mobile phone network operator), the institutions 
that host a system to collect data, or the data providers? 
Furthermore, if sensitive data is analysed to produce 
 
 

479
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
anonymised information layers, who is responsible if 
decisions that are based on this information are wrong due to 
lacking quality of the base data? In conclusion, the issues of 
privacy, data ownership, accessibility, integrity and liability 
have to be tackled thoroughly all at once and not separately 
from each other. 
In case of tracking applications or services, in which 
personal data are involved, people should have an opt-
in/opt-out possibility. This means that users can decide 
themselves whether they want to use the application – and 
also withdraw their consent – being aware of the type and 
amount of data that is collected and transmitted. 
D. Assessing the Economic Value of Live Cities Services 
and Applications 
Finally, an important aspect is the assessment of the 
economic value of establishing a Live City. Concrete 
revenues have not yet been defined, which would compel 
this kind of investment. Thus, we need to find instruments to 
quantify financial benefits of ubiquitous information 
services, city-wide sensor networks and mobile applications 
collecting user-generated information on the current status of 
the city. 
It is symptomatic that previous experiences demonstrate 
that the understanding of the network of decision makers, 
actors, institutional stakeholders and power entities is of 
paramount importance to introduce successful changes. In 
many situations it may be necessary to create ad-hoc 
structures that facilitate urban innovation, for instance 
incubators, private-public partnerships, special purpose 
vehicles, ad-hoc institutions and many more. As we 
increasingly understand the relationship between smart cities 
and institutional arrangements, research will be needed to 
formulate models that can be replicated across cities and 
cultures, and provide a more sustainable basis for innovation 
adoption in cities. 
From a quantitative viewpoint, the economic value of 
Live City services and applications can be either defined in 
concrete revenues or as an after effect of improved 
quality of life. The Economist Intelligence Unit’s liveability 
ranking [40] quantifies the challenges that might be 
presented to an individual's lifestyle in 140 cities worldwide. 
Each city is assigned a score for over 30 qualitative and 
quantitative factors across five broad categories: Stability, 
Healthcare, 
Culture 
and 
Environment, 
Education, 
Infrastructure. 
These five categories basically sum up ‘what people 
want’. Interestingly, each of these categories can to some 
extent be improved or optimised by applying the principals 
of a Live City as described in this paper. In turn, improving a 
city's quality of life leads to a contented work force and 
families, and in turn, to increased economic value.  
Most cites have not been planned from the ground-up and 
grew organically. The technologies that have been developed 
in the few last years, like pervasive sensors to assess urban 
dynamics and especially mobile technologies, offer new 
opportunities to ‘tune’ and ‘fine-tune’ the urban processes 
within cities, just as any other process can be optimised. 
These urban processes can be transportation related, to 
monitor and direct the daily traffic in real time, optimise 
parking spaces and navigation to available parking, or simply 
to help people with their daily tasks, finding jobs, finding 
housing, connecting people in spare time, showing where 
less people are for leisure-time activities or where many 
people are for night life. Tools that bring the feedback loop 
directly to people make it easy to promote events and give 
people instruments to rate the attractiveness of these 
happenings. 
Mobile technologies and the available development 
ecosystems offer great opportunities for young start-ups to 
build GPS-enabled, crowd-sourced, location-based apps. Just 
one example is the Wikitude World Browser [41], amongst 
500.000 other apps, which are tailored at individual needs. 
Igniting and funding a start-up scene can be the starting point 
for any government to build a connected Live City: start-ups 
create jobs and apps, which in turn, if tailored for locals, 
benefit the people in the city and improve the quality of life. 
The improved economic value of a ‘tuned’ city, i.e., 
better traffic management, optimised parking services, better 
housing and job search, city services and applications that 
deliver location-based news, events and happenings can be 
enormous. On one hand there can be cost saving advantages, 
for instance in considerable fuel savings if available parking 
spaces are reserved on a first-come-first-served policy and 
the driver is routed to this parking space rather than having 
to circle looking for a parking space. 
A further important element in adopting smart 
technologies for urban innovation is the need to facilitate 
experimentation. The growth of the Internet industry in the 
last decade has brought about a model of companies largely 
based on small-scale experimentation, controlled failure and 
rapid adaptation. The idea that an internet company can be 
"planned and executed" (the waterfall model) has been 
replaced by the idea that an internet company "grows" 
through trial and errors while finding what works and what 
doesn't, accepting that strategy is constructed ex-post, 
rather than ex-ante. This modus operandi is being considered 
in many other sectors, which recognize the benefit of 
adaptability in the face of rapid external change. 
Most cities, on the contrary, still work on long planning 
horizons and waterfall planning models are the norm. While 
cities cannot be compared to software projects, there are 
many areas of urban development that do not require 
infrastructure planning and investment and could be 
candidates for some radical review. The fact that we can 
increasingly measure the city in real-time and feedback the 
results of urban modifications in near real-time makes it 
conceivable to adopt trial-and-error policies on a much larger 
scale. While there are examples available, there is a strong 
need to develop management frameworks that would 
support organisations in this effort. 
On the revenue side Google has shown in the last few 
years that Internet advertisement actually works. Google 
matches the search terms people enter in their search engine 
with ads. This works so well that it grew to 30 billion 
revenue per year, operating a million servers worldwide, 
serving 1 billion search requests every day. One key to 

480
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
generating revenue in the field of Live Cities may be to apply 
what Google did with the Internet to the real world, offering 
information and search services that focus on time, location, 
context and people rather than on simply search terms. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In opposition to projections, which stated that the wide-
spread distribution of high-speed internet connections would 
render geographical distance irrelevant, cities have recently 
become the centre of interest in academic research. However, 
especially real-time monitoring of urban processes is 
widely unexplored and has recently received a lot of 
attention due to the fast rise of inexpensive pervasive sensor 
technologies, which made ubiquitous sensing feasible and 
enriches research on cities with uncharted up-to-date 
information layers. 
Within this vision of a Live City, the city is not only 
regarded as a geographical area characterised by a dense 
accumulation of people or buildings, but more as a multi-
layered construct containing multiple dimensions of social, 
technological and physical interconnections. Through this 
viewpoint of urban areas as an actuated multi-dimensional 
conglomerates of dynamic processes, the city itself can 
also be seen as a complex near real-time control system 
creating a feedback loop between the citizens, environmental 
monitoring systems, the city management and ubiquitous 
information services. 
In the Live City, the everyday citizen is empowered to 
monitor the environment with sensor-enabled mobile 
devices. This feedback of ‘sensed’ or personally observed 
data, which is then analysed and provided to citizens as 
decision-supporting information, can change people’s 
behaviour in how they use the city and perceive their 
environment by supporting their short-term decisions in near 
real time. However, this requires promotion of the user 
appropriation of the information through awareness of 
limitations. 
Basically, we identified four main barriers towards the 
implementation of the Live City concept: methodological 
issues, 
technical/technological 
problems, 
lacking 
quantification of the economic benefits, and finally privacy 
and legislative questions. We discussed these challenges and 
highlighted future research avenues in Sections IV and V. 
We believe that promoting the Live City concept will 
trigger a profound rethinking process in collaboration and 
cooperation efforts between different authorities. Also, a 
people-centric view of measuring, sharing, and discussing 
urban environments might increase agencies’ and decision 
makers’ understanding of a community’s claims leading to 
proactive democracy in urban decision-making processes. 
In terms of privacy and personal data collection, it is 
evident that everybody has to have the right to decide what 
kind of personal data is collected by whom, and for which 
purposes these data are used. In this context, people have to 
have an opt-out possibility to withdraw their consent to 
personal data collection. This is particularly important in the 
context of collective sensing, which tries not to exploit single 
people’s measurements and data, but analyses aggregated 
anonymised data coming from collective networks, such as 
Twitter, Flickr or the mobile phone network. 
Regarding the vision of digital earth, as formulated by Al 
Gore [42], both negative and positive aspects have to be 
addressed: positive aspects like emergency support, traffic 
congestion prevention, or, generally speaking, holistic real-
time situational awareness of our environment; but also 
potential negative developments such as unwanted directed 
advertising, unauthorised tracking or extensive data mining 
have to be considered. 
As mentioned in the Introduction, we are experiencing a 
fast progressing technology development, which is already 
moving ahead of society. The deciding final question can be: 
If we compare this development with a stream moving at 
high speed, on which we are paddling to remain on the same 
spot or at least not to drift off too fast, where does our goal 
for the future lie: down-stream, somewhere near our current 
spot, or even up-stream? In the end, legislation bodies are 
called upon to set the legal stage for leveraging Live City 
technologies, exploit economic opportunities, but still 
preserve citizens’ privacy. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the audience of the panel 
discussion ‘The Real-time City: Technology - Innovation - 
Society’ at GI Forum and AGIT conferences (July 2011, 
Salzburg, Austria) for their valuable contributions to the 
discussion, which partly served as input for this publication. 
In particular, the authors would like to thank Prof. Dr. 
Manfred Ehlers and Prof. Dr. Petra Staufer-Steinnocher their 
fruitful comments. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Resch, B., Zipf, A., Breuss-Schneeweis, P., Beinat, E., and 
Boher, M. (2012) Live Cities and Urban Services - A Multi-
dimensional Stress Field between Technology, Innovation and 
Society. In: Proceedings of the 4th International Conference 
on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, 
and Services - GEOProcessing 2012, Valencia, Spain, January 
30 - February 4 2012, pp. 28-34. 
[2] Cairncross, F. (1997) The Death of Distance: How the 
Communications Revolution Will Change Our Lives. Harvard 
Business School Press, Boston, MA, USA, 1997. 
[3] Borsch, 
S. 
(2009) 
Distance 
is 
Dying. 
http://blogs.scholastic.com/accelerating_change/2009/07/dista
nce-is-dying.html, 7 July 2009. (21 August 2011) 
[4] Gilder, G. and Peters, T. (1995) City vs. Country: The Impact 
of Technology on Location. Forbes ASAP, 155(5), pp. 56-61, 
27 February 1995. 
[5] United Nations Population Fund (2007) State of World 
Population 2007: Unleashing the Potential of Urban Growth. 
United Nations Population Fund Report, ISBN 978-
0897148078, New York, NY, UNFPA, 2007. 
[6] Dierig, S., Lachmund, J., and Mendelsohn, A. (2000) Science 
and the City. http://vlp.mpiwg-berlin.mpg.de, Workshop, Max 
Planck Institute for the History of Science, Berlin, Germany, 
1-3 December 2000. (10 September 2011) 
[7] Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (2007) 
Urban 
Sciences. 
http://www.urbansciences.eu, 
Interdisciplinary Research Programme on Urbanization & 
Urban culture in The Netherlands, 2007. (26 August 2011) 

481
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[8] SENSEable City Laboratory (2009) MIT SENSEable City 
Lab. http://senseable.mit.edu, September 2011. (14 September 
2011) 
[9] International Telecommunication Union (2010) Key Global 
Telecom Indicators for the World Telecommunication Service 
Sector. http://www.itu.int, 21 October 2010. (17 September 
2011) 
[10] Green, J. (2011) Digital Urban Renewal - Retro-fitting 
Existing Cities with Smart Solutions is the Urban Challenge 
of the 21st Century. http://www.cisco.com, Ovum Report 
OT00037-004, April 2011. (11 September 2011) 
[11] European Commission (2012) European Initiative on Smart 
Cities 
- 
SETIS. 
http://setis.ec.europa.eu/about-
setis/technology-roadmap/european-initiative-on-smart-cities, 
September 2012. 
[12] ENoLL (2011) Open Living Labs | The First Step towards a 
new 
Innovation 
System. 
http://www.openlivinglabs.eu, 
September 2011. (11 September 2011) 
[13] IBM (2009) A Vision of Smarter Cities - How Cities Can 
Lead the Way into a Prosperous and Sustainable Future. 
http://www.ibm.com, 
IBM 
Global 
Business 
Services 
Executive Report, 2009. (04 September 2011) 
[14] Resch, B., Lippautz, M., and Mittlboeck, M. (2010) Pervasive 
Monitoring - A Standardised Sensor Web Approach for 
Intelligent Sensing Infrastructures. Sensors - Special Issue 
‘Intelligent Sensors 2010’, 10(12), 2010, pp. 11440-11467. 
[15] Murty, R., Mainland, G., Rose, I., Chowdhury, A., Gosain, 
A., Bers, J., and Welsh, M. (2008) CitySense: A Vision for an 
Urban-Scale Wireless Networking Testbed. Proceedings of 
the 2008 IEEE International Conference on Technologies for 
Homeland Security, Waltham, MA, May 2008. 
[16] Townsend, A.M. (2000) Life in the Real-time City: Mobile 
Telephones and Urban Metabolism. Journal of Urban 
Technology. (7)2, pp.85-104, 2000. 
[17] Foth, M. (Ed.) (2009) Handbook of Research on Urban 
Informatics: The Practice and Promise of the Real-Time City. 
ISBN 978-1-60566-152-0, Hershey, PA: Information Science 
Reference, IGI Global.. 
[18] General Services Administration (1996) Federal Standard 
1037C. Telecommunications: Glossary of Telecommunication 
Terms, http://www.its.bldrdoc.gov, 7 August 1996. (11 
September 2011) 
[19] Resch, B., Mittlboeck, M., Lipson, S., Welsh, M., Bers, J., 
Britter, R., and Ratti, C. (2009) Urban Sensing Revisited – 
Common Scents: Towards Standardised Geo-sensor Networks 
for Public Health Monitoring in the City. In: Proceedings of 
the 11th International Conference on Computers in Urban 
Planning and Urban Management - CUPUM2009, Hong 
Kong, 16-18 June 2009. 
[20] UCL Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis (2011) Tweet-o-
Meter - Giving You an Insight into Twitter Activity from 
Around the World!. http://www.casa.ucl.ac.uk/tom, 
12 
September 2011. (12 September 2011) 
[21] Palmer, M. (2006) Data is the New Oil. http://ana.blogs.com, 
3 November 2006. (12 September 2011) 
[22] Kennedy, 
J. 
(2011) 
Data 
is 
the 
New 
Oil. 
http://www.siliconrepublic.com, 23 June 2011. (12 September 
2011) 
[23] Goodchild, M.F. (2007) Citizens as Voluntary Sensors: 
Spatial Data Infrastructure in the World of Web 2.0. 
International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructures Research, 
vol. 2, pp. 24-32, 2007. 
[24] Craglia, M., Goodchild, M.F., Annoni, A., Camera, G., 
Gould, M., Kuhn, W., Mark, D., Masser, I., Maguire, D., 
Liang, S., and Parsons, E. (2008) Next-Generation Digital 
Earth: A Position Paper from the Vespucci Initiative for the 
Advancement 
of 
Geographic 
Information 
Science. 
International Journal of Spatial Data Infrastructures Research, 
vol. 3, pp. 146-167. 
[25] Raper, J. (2011) Realising the Benefits of Open Geodata: 
Lessons from London's Experience. Keynote at AGIT 2011, 6 
July 2011, Salzburg, Austria. 
[26] Williams, M., Cornford, D., Bastin, L., and Pebesma, E. 
(2008) Uncertainty Markup Language (UncertML). OGC 
Discussion Paper 08-122r2, Version 0.6, 8 April 2009. (14 
August 2011) 
[27] Neis, P., Zielstra, D., and Zipf, A. (2012) The Street Network 
Evolution of Crowdsourced Maps – OpenStreetMap in 
Germany 2007-2011. In: Murgante, B., Borruso, G. And 
Gibin, 
M. 
(2012) 
Future 
Internet. 
Special 
Issue 
"NeoGeography 
and 
WikiPlanning”, 
(DOI 
10.3390/fi4010001), 2012(4), pp. 1-21. 
[28] Helbich M., Amelunxen C., Neis P., and Zipf A. (2010) 
Investigations on Locational Accuracy of Volunteered 
Geographic 
Information 
Using 
OpenStreetMap 
Data.  
GIScience 2010 Workshop, Zurich, Switzerland, 14-17 
September 2010. 
[29] Roick, O., Loos, L., and Zipf, A. (2012) Visualizing Spatio-
temporal Quality Metrics of Volunteered Geographic 
Information 
– 
A 
Case 
Study 
for 
OpenStreetMap. 
Geoinformatik 2012. Mobilität und Umwelt. Braunschweig. 
Germany. 
[30] Hagenauer, J. and Helbich, M. (2012) Mining Urban Land 
Use Patterns from Volunteered Geographic Information Using 
Genetic 
Algorithms 
and 
Artificial 
Neural 
Networks. 
International Journal of Geographical Information Science 
(IJGIS), 26(6), pp. 963-982. 
[31] Resch, B., Blaschke, T., and Mittlboeck, M. (2010) Live 
Geography - Interoperable Geo-Sensor Webs Facilitating the 
Vision of Digital Earth. International Journal on Advances in 
Networks and Services, 3(3&4), 2010, pp. 323-332. 
[32] Botts, M., Percivall, G., Reed, C., and Davidson, J. (Eds.) 
(2007) OGC Sensor Web Enablement: Overview And High 
Level Architecture. http://www.opengeospatial.org, OpenGIS 
White Paper OGC 07-165, Version 3, 28 December 2007. (17 
August 2011) 
[33] Resch, B. (2012) On-the-fly Sensor Fusion for Real-time Data 
Integration. In: Löwner M.-O., Hillen, F. and Wohlfahrt, R. 
(2012) Geoinformatik 2012 – Mobilität und Umwelt, ISBN-
10: 3844008888, Shaker Verlag, Braunschweig, Germany, pp. 
229-236. 
[34] Göbel, R. and Zipf, A.(2008) How to Define 3D 
Geoprocessing Operations for the OGC Web Processing 
Service (WPS)? Towards a Classification of 3D Operations. 
12th International Conference on Computational Science and 
Its Applications (ICCSA), Perugia, Italy, 30 June-3 July 2008. 
[35] Lanig S. and A. Zipf (2010) Proposal for a Web Processing 
Services (WPS) Application Profile for 3D Processing 
Analysis. 2nd International Conference on Advanced 
Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services 
(GEOProcessing 2010), St. Maarten, Netherlands Antilles, 
10-15 February 2010, pp. 117-122. 
[36] Resch, B., Sagl, G., Blaschke, T., and Mittlboeck, M. (2010) 
Distributed Web-processing for Ubiquitous Information 
Services - OGC WPS Critically Revisited. In: Proceedings of 
the 6th International Conference on Geographic Information 
Science 
(GIScience2010), 
Zurich, 
Switzerland, 
14-17 
September 2010. 
[37] Stollberg, B. and Zipf, A. (2009): Development of a WPS 
Process Chaining Tool and Application in a Disaster 
Management Use Case for Urban Areas.   UDMS 2009. 27th 
Urban Data Management Symposium, Ljubljana , Slovenia.^ 
[38] Mayer, C. and Zipf, A. (2009) Integration and Visualization 
of Dynamic Sensor Data into 3D Spatial Data Infrastructures 
in a standardized way.  GeoViz 2009 – Contribution of 

482
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Geovisualization to the concept of the Digital City. 
Workshop. Hamburg. Germany. 
[39] Calabrese, F., Di Lorenzo, G., Liu, L., and Ratti, C. (in press) 
Estimating Origin-destination Flows Using Opportunistically 
Collected Mobile Phone Location Data from One Million 
Users in Boston Metropolitan Area. IEEE Pervasive 
Computing, 2011. 
[40] Economist Intelligence Unit (2011) Liveability Ranking and 
Overview 2011. http://www.eiu.com, February 2011. (4 
September 2011) 
[41] Wikitude GmbH (2011) Wikitude World Browser |  Wikitude. 
http://www.wikitude.com, September 2011. (13 September 
2011) 
[42] Gore, A. (2010) The Digital Earth: Understanding our planet 
in the 21st Century. Speech by Vice President Al Gore, Given 
at the California Science Center, Los Angeles, California, 
http://www.isde5.org, 31 January 2008. (4 September 2011) 
 

