565
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Designing for Capacities Rather Than Disabilities 
Investigating the relationship between psychomotor capacities and interaction opportunities
Suhas Govind Joshi 
Department of Informatics 
Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
joshi@ifi.uio.no 
 
 
Abstract— This paper explores how designing based on 
psychomotor capacities instead of disabilities can reconnect old 
people with technology. We introduce four alternative designs 
for radios to demonstrate how facilitating a design process that 
acknowledges psychomotor challenges associated with aging 
can both help participants rediscover their own psychomotor 
capacities 
and 
simultaneously 
re-establish 
meaningful 
interaction. The paper presents findings from quantitative 
analysis of performance testing and qualitative analysis from 
reflection activities involving 65 participants over four years. 
We use our findings in a discussion of how we can incorporate 
knowledge about the participants’ psychomotor capacities in 
the design process to help design artifacts that can prolong 
interaction.  
Keywords — psychomotor abilities; elderly; radio; assistive 
technology. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The radio is an important device to many. This is 
particularly the case for the oldest generation in Norway 
where the radio is one of the most appreciated and well-used 
devices among older adults. In a local care home in Oslo 
(with the average resident age of 84 years), which was part 
of our empirical context, we observed that 91% of the 90 
elderly residents had a radio device in the home that they 
would use on an average day. However, most radios are 
operated by the use of hands and fingers and rely on 
psychomotor capacities that may decline during old age [1]. 
Not acknowledging such bodily changes may complicate or 
prevent interaction with technology. Our prior studies have 
demonstrated how something seemingly simple as a radio is 
not considered as simple or functional when aging 
symptoms appear [2]. 
This paper aims at investigating how a better 
understanding of both psychomotor abilities and disabilities 
can help inform the design process and aid people re-
establish and prolong interaction with radios. Our aim is to 
shift the design process from revolving around disabilities 
and instead acknowledge that despite declining functional 
abilities all people still inhabit psychomotor capacities that 
can be utilized in the design process. By collaborating with 
participants who are no longer able to operate commercial 
radios, we have co-designed four radios and used them to 
explore opportunities for them to re-enable their interaction 
with radios. We present four different functioning radios 
that are specifically designed for older people and discuss 
the psychomotor properties of these interfaces regarding the 
interaction opportunities they offer. Our study involved 65 
participants who contributed to our research between 2013-
2016. To anchor our understanding of how these physical 
changes manifest themselves, we apply Fleishman’s 
taxonomy of psychomotor abilities and skills [3] to identify, 
measure, and discuss the participants' ability to operate the 
four different radios. The paper presents two phases of an 
investigation focusing on a various aspect of the relationship 
between psychomotor abilities and interaction with radios. 
The first phase includes a statistical analysis of performance 
testing of three of the four radios. The results are used to 
demonstrate how various participants preferred different 
interfaces based on their psychomotor capacities, and how 
participants with motor challenges in certain cases were able 
to match the performance of older adults without these 
difficulties. The second phase included three activities 
where participants explored and assessed their own 
psychomotor capacities – both individually and in groups – 
and provides insight into how participants experienced 
interacting with the four radios and what actions and 
interfaces that proved the most challenging. 
The paper is structured as follows. We introduce the 
motivation for focusing on the radio in Section II.  In 
Section III, related work on psychomotor and age-related 
studies within HCI is presented, while Section IV covers the 
taxonomy used to describe and measure psychomotor 
abilities. The two phases and involved research methods, as 
well as the four developed radios, are outlined in Section V 
followed by results and analysis in Section VI. The paper 
ends with a discussion where we argue that both the design 
result 
and 
the 
design 
process 
can 
benefit 
from 
acknowledging the psychomotor challenges associated with 
old age.  
 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
According to statistics from Statistics Norway (SSB), 
the older part of the population (aged 67-79) remains stable 
in the national average of radio listening in Norway [4]. The 
red line in Figure 1 shows an overview of the mean 

566
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
percentage of the population who listens to the radio while 
the blue line shows the corresponding percentage for people 
aged 67-79. 
The number of minutes in average spent listening to the 
radio is illustrated in Figure 2, and as we can read from the 
graph, there is only one recorded case in the past 23 years 
(1997) where the elderly fraction of the population on 
average would listen less to the radio compared to the 
general population. We can also read from Figures 1 and 2 
that even in years where the number of elderly radio 
listeners was lower than the national average (i.e., 1994, 
1995, 2001, 2009, and 2010), the number of minutes spent 
in front of the radio was higher for the elderly radio 
listeners. The difference between the older generation and 
the rest of the population seems to have diverged over time, 
and the difference in a ten-year perspective is now greater 
than ever. The mean difference between the amount of time 
the elderly used for radio listening compared with the rest of 
the population in the period from 1991 to 2000 was 7.0 
minutes while the corresponding difference in the period 
from 2005 to 2014 was over four times larger (33.1 
minutes). This difference demonstrates an interesting 
phenomenon, namely that the radio as a piece of technology 
is not on its way to extinction. Quite the contrary, they are 
on the rise again regarding both share of the population that 
listens to the radio (Figure 1), and the number of minutes 
spent in front of the radio per day (Figure 2). 
 
Figure 1. Percentage of population listening to the radio on an average day  
 
 
Figure 2. Number of minutes spent listening to the radio on an average day 
In our prior research (e.g., [5] and [2]) we have 
discussed aspects of the role technology has in the lives of 
older adults. We have touched upon related topics such as 
the 
social 
importance 
of 
being 
able 
to 
operate 
communicative technologies such as radios to stay in touch 
with the outside world [5]. We also explored deeper issues 
concerning the ability to operate such devices and the way 
such 
devices 
are 
presented, 
e.g., 
design 
that 
is 
oversimplified or stigmatizing [2]. These studies have 
concentrated on the experience of interacting with 
technology and would consequently be better suited to 
further discuss the social and contextual aspects of 
interaction with technologies, for instance, loneliness and 
boredom. However, in this paper, the focus remains on the 
psychomotor ability to interact with the radio, and more 
precisely re-establishing a lost relationship between old 
users and technology. 
 
III. 
RELATED WORK 
A long time has passed since researchers began 
systematically investigating the relationship between aging-
related disabilities such as arthritis and the ability to interact 
with computers [6]. Morgan et al. [7] described significant 
differences in the execution of movement when comparing 
young adults with older adults, and more precisely the 
speed, sub-movements, and smoothness in movement. 
Similarly, Riviere & Thakor [8] use a comparative study 
between young, old, and motor-disabled subjects with 
regards to performance when operating tracking with a 
computer mouse. Their study claims that both aging and 
motor disability affect performance by increasing the 
inaccuracy and nonlinearity. Age has an apparent impact on 
our ability to interact and the extent to which we are able to 
adapt to new interaction mechanisms. This partly manifests 
itself through changes in psychomotor capacities. A recent 
study [9] claims the existence of age-related differences in 
the strategic repertoire, distribution, and execution within 
the sensorimotor domain. Regardless of the age of the 
intended user group, fine psychomotor abilities should be 
included in the determining of successful interactions [10].  
One of the very few laws that attempt to descriptively 
explain 
the 
psychomotor 
role 
of 
human-computer 
interaction through mathematical formulas is Fitts’ law. The 
original model was formulated over six decades ago and 
attempted described the linear relationship between 
movement time and index of difficulty. The model is still 
used today to quantify the difficulty of performing tasks and 
was in 2002 included in the ISO standard ISO 9241-9, 
which concerns non-keyboard input devices. However, 
since its conception, the model has undergone several 
modifications and refinements and does not pertain a 
universally accepted formulation today [11]. A shortcoming 
of Fitts’ law is its ability to properly determine and evaluate 
differently observed result in the psychomotor performance 
when studying different task types, varying motor skills and 

567
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
differences in motor performance [12]. Others have argued 
that there are several factors affecting our endpoint 
performance not adequately captured in the mathematical 
model [13]. 
In the context of aging, studies on how psychomotor 
abilities affect user performance with computer tasks within 
the field of HCI can also be traced back to at least the early 
90s where researchers claimed and studied a relationship 
between the two [8]. Studies have been conducted within 
the field of HCI focusing on traditional interfaces, including 
WIMP and trackpads. For instance, psychomotor skills are 
an essential part of the ability to operate a computer mouse, 
and several studies have investigated the relation between 
psychomotor abilities and use performance operating a 
mouse or trackpad [6][10][14]-[17]. Common for most of 
these studies is that they include several components that 
make up the list of psychomotor abilities described in 
Fleishman taxonomy, e.g., precision control, arm-hand 
steadiness, manual dexterity and wrist-finger speed [13]. [6, 10, 14, 15, 16, 17] 
Previous exploration of various input mechanisms and 
the physical properties of the design also contributes to our 
research. For instance, the research of [18] argues that 
proper understanding of materials used in the design can 
help support habits and reinforce competences; hence, the 
exploration of input mechanisms and modes of operation 
becomes important to the understanding and experience 
during use. The aging process introduces changes to 
cognitive and bodily capacities that may complicate or 
extend the training required to incorporate new interaction 
mechanisms or patterns [19]. Similarly, the importance of 
acknowledging the strong relationship between the design 
and the homely environment has been the emphasis of 
several studies, e.g., [20, 21], and we have seen similar 
tendencies in our own prior explorations [2]. Several studies 
have argued for a strong relationship between material 
attributes[22, 23, 24]and the perceived experience of digital devices 
[22]-[24], and that wrongful use of materials can by itself 
contribute to people withstanding from engaging with 
technology [20, 25]. We have also conducted exploration of 
materials in design within our empirical context and 
investigated the role of materials in perceived familiarity 
and context-adaptability [21, 26]. 
 
IV. 
PSYCHOMOTOR ABILITIES 
People undergo multiple reductions in both cognitive 
and motor skills as when entering later stages of life. In this 
study, we have chosen to focus on reduced psychomotor 
capacities in the hands and fingers, and how these changes 
affect the likeability to interact with radios. We have chosen 
not to describe this shift as a limitation in the ability to 
interact since that would indicate an impossibility in the 
interaction between these individuals and the radio as 
technology. Instead, we believe that despite the undeniable 
changes in bodily capacities, our ability to interact with 
technology is not deprived, or necessarily not even reduced. 
We aim to demonstrate how adapting the technology to 
these changes in physical capacities can prolong and re-
establish interaction. Nevertheless, the focus of this study is 
older people with symptoms, illnesses, and diagnoses 
associated with reduced capabilities in the hands and 
fingers. This includes individual types of rheumatic 
disorders associated with hands and fingers, osteoarthritis, 
as well as more general motor system disabilities such as 
Parkinson’s disease. Non-diagnosed older adults showing 
symptoms affecting hands and fingers, such as trembling, 
involuntary movements, spasms were also included, as fine 
motor skills tend to decline with age [27]. We expanded our 
experimental group with elderly people claiming inability to 
operate radios, despite not being able to provide a medical 
record of a specific disability, as challenges associated with 
aging like inadequate blood flow and circulation to the 
muscles, injuries, stress, fatigue may also produce spasm in 
muscles that would reduce the psychomotor capacities. 
Several residents in our empirical context also reported 
similar symptoms of cramps from medical side effects, in 
particular from medication related to Parkinson's disease 
and Osteoporosis. Other types of developmental or genetic 
disorders that may have an impact on psychomotor 
capabilities, but that are not particularly prominent 
symptoms among the older adults, were not included in this 
study (e.g., Down's syndrome, cerebral palsy and dystonia). 
 
A. Fleishman’s taxonomy 
Based on cognitive, sensory, physical, and psychomotor 
factors, Fleishman derived 52 skills and abilities describing 
human performance. Although this model was initially 
developed for a job-related environment, the taxonomy of 
Fleishman describes abilities and skills that can be 
associated with performance in everyday tasks [28]. The 
taxonomy separates abilities from skills; abilities are defined 
as characteristics and traits shaped throughout the first phase 
of our lives while skills describe the degree to which we can 
effectively carry out an action directly related to a given 
task. Common for the two is that both skills and abilities 
related to psychomotor capacities involve complex 
movement patterns and require practice and maintenance in 
order to remain intact [29]. 
As the aging process does not follow a schematic or 
linear development, it is hard to consider any abilities or 
skills as less relevant than others. For instance, the cognitive 
factor constitutes the biggest share of skills and abilities and 
is obviously relevant also in the discussion of aging-related 
reduction of interaction capacities. It is further apparent that 
some of the motoric challenges stem from changes in the 
cognitive capacities, e.g., ideomotor apraxia where changes 
in semantic memory capacity reduce the ability to plan or 
complete motor actions. Studying this category involves 
abilities and skills that fuse cognitive, perceptual and 
physical abilities [30].  

568
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 3. The four radios included in the study 
Studies that focus on older adults with motor challenges 
in their hands tend to carry an increased attention towards 
the abilities and skills that fall under the taxonomic category 
of physical factors. This is because the muscular restrictions 
and reduced bodily capabilities in the hands mainly tend to 
affect the abilities and skills covered by this category. 
Examples of abilities and skills included in this category are 
stamina, physical strength and flexibility, balance, and 
coordination. In previous studies of digital devices in the 
context of older adults, we have been concerned with both 
stamina and physical strength (e.g., in [2]), but in this paper, 
we mainly focus on psychomotor factors. This is because 
most of the actions associated with the operation of a radio 
and other similar digital devices require movement and a 
configuration of hands and body that relies on the ability to 
combine physical movement with cognitive functions. Thus, 
psychomotor factors constitute our main interest, as this 
organically includes physical skills such as coordination, 
dexterity, reaction and manipulation. Unlike physical 
factors, psychomotor factors are also subjected to the 
influence of reduction in skills and abilities associated with 
secondary categories; psychomotor capacities often depend 
on a supportive capacity in addition to the physical. A 
reduction in other seemingly unrelated features (e.g., visual 
impairment) may, as Jacko & Vitense [30] point out, have 
an impact on psychomotor skills. 
 
B. Scope 
Our study is limited to psychomotor challenges of hands 
and fingers. Due to inadequate access to fully medically-
assessed participants, as well as claimed expertise, we do 
not address the impact of the decline in cognitive abilities 
and skills in this paper (e.g., dementia, depression, and 
forgetfulness). Our scope does not allow us to identify the 
best interfaces for a given disease but instead let us study 
the relationship and possible correlation between motor 
challenges and performance when interacting with radio 
interfaces. Nor do we want to identify all skills and abilities 
that are included in the performance of work-related tasks; 

569
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
we aim to identify the specific abilities and skills that are 
involved in the operation of radios, and affected by reduced 
capacity in the hands and fingers. Abilities and skills in the 
taxonomy of Fleishmann are described as independent of 
each other [13], and it should consequently be possible only 
to study a selection of these. A similar approach has been 
conducted in prior research, more specifically in the 
research of [13, 15, 16, 17]. Table I gives an overview of the 
psychomotor abilities included in our study. A description is 
provided for each ability based on the original taxonomy of 
Fleishman [3] in the right column of the table. 
 
TABLE I. OVERVIEW OF PSYCHOMOTOR ABILITIES 
 
Psychomotor ability 
Description 
Precision control 
Ability to move control and the degree to 
which they can be moved quickly and 
repeatedly to exact positions. 
Arm-hand steadiness 
Ability to keep the hand and arm steady, 
both when suspended in air and while 
moving. Independent of strength and speed. 
Manual dexterity 
Ability to make quick and skillful 
coordinated movements with arms and one 
or both hands, as well as the ability to 
assemble, grab and move objects. 
Finger dexterity 
Ability to make quick, skillful, and 
coordinated movements with fingers of one 
or both hands. 
Wrist-finger speed 
Ability to repeat fast movements with wrist 
and fingers. 
Multi-limb 
coordination 
Ability to use two or more limbs 
simultaneously to coordinate movements 
when the body is not in motion. 
 
While all the abilities and skills described in the 
psychomotor category of the taxonomy are relevant in a 
broader scope, we have excluded certain abilities and skills 
from our test. These are abilities that are not relevant for our 
purposes, and the decision is taken by both the physical 
challenges we are focusing on, and the digital components 
and interfaces included in the study. Not all abilities are 
relevant for the operation of our radios; hence, measuring 
these abilities would be difficult with the radios. More 
precisely, rate control, reaction time, speed of limb 
movement, and response orientation have been excluded. 
The reason is that these four abilities are not directly 
determining the capacity to interact with our four radios, but 
instead, describe the degree to which we can interact with 
them, as well as the performance during use. Rate control is 
not appropriate in situations where speed and direction of an 
object are perfectly predictable [30] while the other three 
(reaction time, speed of limb movement, and orientation 
response) mainly concern efficiency of performance, rather 
than the distinctive ability to perform them. Also, both 
reaction time and response orientation are intended to 
capture our reaction to a given signal and our ability to 
quickly initiate the response routine, something which 
would be unnatural in a context where our participants are 
testing our radios. Thus, these four abilities have not been 
included in our tests. 
 
V. RESEARCH METHOD 
A. Radio #1 
The first radio is the top-left radio in Figure 3, and it was 
developed in 2013. The focus of the radio is to provide an 
interface that provides users with similar experiences and 
interaction mechanisms as they are used to from their 
traditional radios. The feedback one gets from operating 
radio is reminiscent of interaction found in traditional radios 
with a distinct response to actions. The focus has also been 
on finding the materials that provide the best grip and 
resistance during the interaction. We have explored the 
properties of various materials (wood, steel, plastic) to find 
the best functioning design for the knobs. The main 
interaction takes place by turning on a coarse switch that 
clearly snaps in place when selecting the channel. A second 
switch is used to adjust the volume.  
 
B. Radio #2 
The second radio is the top-right radio from Figure 3, 
and was developed in 2014. This radio depends on physical 
interaction and does not use traditional switches or buttons. 
As with the other two radios, this radio is also screenless. 
The user operates the radio with the use of wooden cubes 
with built-in Near Field Communication (NFC) chips. The 
NFC chips are preconfigured with a given radio channel, 
and by placing these physical cubes on top of the radio, one 
interacts with the interface. By placing a piece with a given 
channel on top of the radio starts playing. Removing the 
cube ends the playback. The focus has been on designing a 
radio that does not require fine motor skills in fingers. 
During the design process, material, weight, size and shape 
were explored in consultation with users to find the best 
objects for physical operation of the radio. 
 
C. Radio #3 
The third radio is the bottom-left radio in Figure 3, and 
was developed in 2015. The purpose of this radio was to 
allow users with tremors, involuntary twitching, and 
reduced fine motor skills to operate it. The radio is made of 
oak and has an aluminum cylinder with a wooden knob that 
automatically snaps to predefined positions using magnets. 
One operates the radio by positioning the wooden knob at a 
predefined position. A secondary exploratory feature is that 
the wooden knob swivels around the cylinder. The design of 
the radio offers deliberate constraints that prevent users 
from making mistakes during the interaction. The wooden 
knob is locked to the pole and the magnet in the cylinder 

570
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
both guides and limits the positioning. This allows 
involuntary actions to have less impact on the accuracy. 
 
D. Radio #4 
The fourth radio is the bottom-right radio in Figure 3, 
and was developed in 2016. The radio is made of wood and 
covered with pearl gray oak to blend into homely 
environments. A simple slider allows adjustment of volume 
while the pods represent radio channels or podcasts similar 
to Radio #2. Circular pods are placed in a hollowed and 
lowered circle to initiate the radio and removing the pods 
ends the operation. RFID tags are used to communicate 
between pods and the radio. The pods are coated with soft 
felt fabrics with strong colors and contrast to help guide the 
channel selection. The design of the pods is meant to be 
strong, durable, and easily graspable for people with a 
reduction in dexterity and motor challenges. 
 
E. Research design 
This study was divided into two phases. Our two phases 
included 65 participants in total, with 52 participating 
during the first phase and 13 participating during the second 
phase. The requirement for participation during both phases 
was that the participant suffered from reduced ability or no 
ability to operate a store-bought radio and thus needed a 
more customized interface. The three store-bought radios 
used for participant selection were Pinell Supersound DAB, 
Pop DAB Radio and Argon DAB Radio, three highly 
popular brands in Norway. The data for this study was 
collected in the period 2013-2016. The four radios used in 
this study were also built during the same period. 
The first phase emphasized statistical analysis of 
psychomotor performance tied to the three first radios, i.e., 
Radio #1-3. The goal was to explore whether participants 
were able to interact with our alternative radio designs and 
how their performance scored compared to an independent 
control group. The second phase revolved around three 
activities, and we relied on qualitative methods to get the 
participants to reflect upon their own psychomotor 
capacities. This phase introduced Radio #4 as both a fourth 
alternative design and a thinking tool to help participants 
explore, assess, and discuss their psychomotor interaction 
challenges and opportunities. 
This study was conducted at three local care facilities in 
Oslo. Each care facility consists of a set of apartments, with 
the largest holding 90 apartments. The care facilities consist 
of senior residents residing in independent apartments, but 
with shared access to a range of facilities, e.g., cafeteria, 
lounge, fitness center, and 24-hour staffed reception. The 
limited access to participants with motor challenges in 
hands and fingers led to four years of data gathering in order 
to yield an appropriate set of data.  
 
F. Phase 1: Performance testing of psychomotor abilities  
39 participants (M = 82.1 years, SD = 6.31) participated 
in six tests of Radio #1-3. For each test, we recruited an 
independent control group consisting of 13 older adults with 
no apparent motor disabilities (M = 80.4 years, SD = 5.29) 
who were asked to perform the same tasks as the 
experimental group. The testing in the first phase involved 
52 participants in total. Most people had medical 
documentation to assess their motor disabilities. The 
documentation was provided to us by themselves or by the 
local care home administration with their consent. A few 
participants unable to operate store-bought radios and in the 
lack of proper medical documentation of disability were 
also invited to participate in the experimental group as they 
showed symptoms similar to those with proper diagnoses. 
Table II gives an overview of the participants and the 
documented or self-assessed disability or illness. 
 
 
TABLE II. OVERVIEW OF PARTICIPANT GROUPS IN PHASE 1 
 
Disability or illness 
N 
Cramps 
8 
Muscle stiffness 
3 
Osteoarthritis 
8 
Parkinson’s disease 
4 
Rheumatoid arthritis 
3 
Tremor 
13 
Control group 
13 
Total 
52 
 
The participants in both groups were asked to interact 
with the three radios Radio #1-3 through a series of repeated 
tasks to measure their psychomotor performance. Three 
different tables and eight chairs were used to provide all 
participants with a setup that supported their preferred 
bodily configuration. Some participants were also sitting in 
their wheelchairs during the test, specifically three 
participants from the experimental group and one participant 
from the control group. For each of the radios, the 
participants were given a set of tasks that mimicked the 
context 
applicable 
parts 
of 
assignments 
given 
in 
standardized tests of psychomotor abilities, e.g., rotary 
pursuit test, steadiness tester, Minnesota manual dexterity 
test, Purdue pegboard, tapping board (as seen in [13], as 
well as O’Connor finger dexterity test, box and block test, 
Jebsen hand function test, and Moberg pick-up test. We also 
took into consideration the values embedded into 
psychomotor abilities defined in prior research, e.g. some of 
the skills defined by [29] such as timing, response ability, 
and speed, as well as the tasks presented in [12], most 
notably steadiness and aim. 

571
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
As we used our own set of tasks, the results are not 
meant to demonstrate the external validity and be directly 
comparable to other test results, but instead provide a set of 
tasks applicable to the four radios, thereby providing us with 
a measurement comparable within the study. To eliminate 
learning effects and bias due to unfamiliarity with novel 
interaction mechanisms, each participant was given a 
demonstration of the intended interaction of each radio, and 
each participant conducted ten trials for each radio (similar 
to [6]). The task order was randomized for each participant. 
We relied on randomized repeated measures to minimize 
bias due to interpersonal variations between tests. The task 
set consisted of 12 tasks: gripping, turning, positioning, re-
positioning, and resetting the main and secondary 
interaction element, as well as lifting and moving the radio. 
Time (seconds), error (count) and precision (position and 
distance) were observed and measured for each task, and the 
performance was graded on a normalized scale from 1-10 to 
make 
the 
performance 
metrics 
comparable. 
The 
computationally-generated normalized score used the four 
metrics above (seconds, count, position, and distance) to 
calculate the final score. Thus, the performance scores are 
not intended to be comparable beyond the scope of our 
research. In Figure 4, we see two participants from the 
experimental group testing the positioning and re-
positioning of the main interaction element for Radio #2. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Two residents participating in psychomotor measurements 
 
G. Phase 2: Reflection on psychomotor abilities  
The second phase continued the exploration of how 13 
participants (M = 81.1 years, SD = 5.5) – who were 
recruited 
following 
the 
exact 
same 
participation 
requirements as during the first phase – experienced the 
radios. Table III provides an overview of the participants 
who contributed to the second phase. The goal of this phase 
was to facilitate environments for participants to both 
individually and collectively explore, assess, and discuss 
their own psychomotor capacities. This was achieved by 
investigating how different modes of input affected the 
operating of the three radios introduced during the first 
phase, as well as through an exploration of a newly 
introduced fourth radio (Radio #4). Four participants in the 
second phase had previously been part of the experimental 
group of the first phase, and to allow them to continue their 
exploration we introduced a fourth radio as a new 
alternative. The second phase consisted of three main 
activities; (1) think-aloud testing of Radio #4, (2) semi-
structured demonstrative interview, and (3) input device 
workshop. All 13 participants took part in all three 
activities. All three activities yielded qualitative feedback 
that supplemented the quantitative results from the previous 
phase. 
 
TABLE III. OVERVIEW OF PARTICIPANT GROUPS IN PHASE 2 
 
Disability or illness 
N 
Cramps 
3 
Muscle stiffness 
2 
Rheumatoid arthritis 
4 
Tremor 
4 
Total 
13 
 
The first activity was the think-aloud testing of the 
fourth radio. This radio was new to all participants, 
including those who had participated previously. The 
participants were asked to follow the same 12 randomly-
ordered tasks as those used during the first phase where 
Radio #1-3 were evaluated. Rather than measuring time, 
error, or precision like we emphasized during the first phase, 
we gave the participants space to explain the details they 
perceived as most important as we moved along the tasks. 
Our experience from the former phase suggested that not all 
tasks were seen as equally difficult or interesting; we 
expected the distribution of time and attention to not be 
portioned equally across the 12 tasks amongst the 
participants. The testing was conducted in 13 single-
sessions. 
Following the think-aloud testing, we conducted a semi-
structured demonstrative interview with where we asked all 
13 participants to demonstrate challenges with the four 
radios and elaborate on the main difficulties during the 
interaction. We also structured parts of the interview to 
concentrate on those tasks and interaction forms that the 
participants mastered. We did not provide any tasks or 
present the radios in a particular order; the participants were 
free to use any radio or any task to demonstrate their 
experienced challenges and mastery. As we had previously 
seen wide ranges of physical and cognitive endurance in 
participation during similar activities [31] we did not 
enforce any time limits; the participants were free to 
participate for as long as they desired themselves. Due to 
these 
practical 
limitations 
with 
participation, 
these 
interviews were held in single sessions or with small groups.  
The final activity was a workshop conducted in two 
sessions with five and eight participants respectively and 
gave the participants an opportunity to explore various input 
mechanisms for the four radios. To accommodate the 
workshop, we brought various elements that were 
compatible with the four radios such as different types of 
knobs, wheels, blocks and rings. The different components 

572
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
were of different shapes, sizes, textures, and materials and 
represented the variety of physical options. We organized 
this exploration as a workshop to help the participants learn 
about their own psychomotor capacities before making any 
comments or self-assessments as purely interview-based 
exploration might have yielded gender-based biases as 
found by [28] who suggested a tendency of men estimating 
their own capacities higher than their female counterparts. 
The workshop followed a similar structure as we had 
previously facilitated in [21, 26] where we focused on the 
exploration of various material components. Participants 
were asked to first freely explore and discuss the various 
components before presenting their favorites to the rest of 
the group. A selection of the components is depicted in 
Figure 5. 
 
 
 
Figure 5: A selection of components used during the input device workshop 
 
VI. 
RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
 
A. Phase 1: Performance testing of psychomotor abilities  
The means and standard deviations for the psychomotor 
performance on a normalized scale from 1-10 across both 
groups are shown in Table IV. As expected, the control 
group had a better performance relatively compared to the 
experimental group across all three radios. The variation 
was larger for the control group, and we can read from the 
table that both groups demonstrated a similar within-group 
performance for each of the three radios. The average 
performance score was 7.43 (SD = 0.32) for the control 
group while it was 4.60 (SD = 0.22) for the experimental 
group. In Figure 6, we present the estimated marginal means 
for the control group vs. the regular group for all three 
radios. 
 
TABLE IV. PSYCHOMOTOR PERFORMANCE SCORE 
Mean 
Std.  
Deviation 
 
N 
Radio # 
Group 
Lower  
Bound 
Upper  
Bound 
1 
Control 
7.385 
.7372 
6.730 
8.039 
13 
Experimental 
4.517 
1.2824 
6.471 
7.658 
39 
2 
Control 
7.064 
.5755 
7.156 
8.536 
13 
Experimental 
4.389 
1.1787 
4.139 
4.895 
39 
3 
Control 
7.846 
.4328 
4.046 
4.732 
13 
Experimental 
4.897 
1.4000 
4.499 
5.296 
39 
 
A 2 (group: selection or control) x 3 (radio: #1, #2 or #3) 
between-subjects analysis of variance (ANOVA) was 
conducted to study the psychomotor performance between 
the three radios as a function of the performance. We 
registered significant main effects of group, F(1,150) = 
173.6, p < .005, n = .536, and radio, F(2,150) = 3.1, p = 
.048, n = .040. The main effects were not qualified by an 
interaction between group and radio, F(2,150) = 0.142, p = 
0.867, ηp2 = .002. The participants in the selection group (M 
= 4.601, SD = .107) had significantly lower performance 
than the participants in the control group (M = 7.432, SD = 
.186). The analysis also revealed a slightly lower 
performance difference between the three radios: (M = 
5.951, SD = .186), (M = 5.726, SD = .186), and (M = 6.372, 
SD = .186). Levene’s test for equality of variances was 
found to be violated for the present analysis (p = .001), and 
Bonferroni post-hoc analysis for the radios showed that 
Radio #2 had significantly lower performance than Radio #3 
at the .05 level, while differences between Radios #1 and #2 
and Radios #1 and #3 were not significant. 
 
 
Figure 6. Estimated marginal means of performance for both groups 
 

573
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The results from Figure 6 only demonstrated how the 
estimated marginal means of the overall performance for all 
participants in the treatment group compared to the control 
group. For a post hoc evaluation of the performance within 
the experimental group, we performed a separate repeated 
measure analyses for each level within the grouping factor 
to study the relationship between performance and 
psychomotor disability.  
We analyzed the data with mixed-design ANOVA using 
a within-subjects factor of disability (cramp, muscle, 
osteoarthritis, Parkinson's disease, Rheumatoid Arthritis, 
Tremor) and a between-subject factor of radio (Radio #1, 
Radio #2, and Radio #3). Mauchly’s test indicated that the 
assumption of sphericity had been violated (χ2(2) = 2.681, p 
= .026). Degrees of freedom were corrected using Huynh-
Feldt estimates of sphericity (ε = 1.000) as Greenhouse-
Geisser estimates reported an epsilon value above 0.75 (ε = 
.926) [32]. There were non-significant main effects of 
disability, F(2, 66)  =  5.566, p = .006 and radio, F = (1, 33) 
= 8.129, p = .007. However, the main effects were qualified 
by a significant interaction between disability and radio, 
F(10, 66) = 17.011, p < .001. In Figure 7, we demonstrate 
how the interaction between disability and radio yielded a 
significant variation in the estimated marginal means of 
performance. 
 
 
Figure 7. Performance for each disability group across Radio #1-3 
 
Again, the statistical results of this study do not attempt 
to provide a medical explanation for the performance but 
instead demonstrates a significant correlation in order to 
exemplify the need for various interfaces when addressing 
older adults with psychomotor disabilities. The study only 
claims the presence of a significant difference in 
performance but does not provide any solutions. 
 
B. Phase 2: Reflection on psychomotor abilities  
The qualitative results generated in the second phase 
complements the statistical analysis from the first phase by 
providing additional positive and negative perspectives on 
the interaction with radios. The qualitative data from the 
three activities (think-aloud testing of Radio #4, semi-
structured demonstrative interview, and input device 
workshop) were clustered in order to support a holistic 
analysis of the relationship between psychomotor abilities 
and challenges that arose during use of the radios. In 
general, the feedback from the participants provided more 
depth to our understanding, but also contributed to 
increasing both the individual and general knowledge 
amongst the participants. For instance, we clearly saw how 
the co-exploration with other participants during the input 
device workshop and demonstrative interviews had an 
impact on the participants’ own self-assessment. 11 out of 
the 13 participants expressed a positive attitude towards 
more than one radio as it was usually a minor issue with the 
design that prevented the interaction. One participant 
(female, 81) said that there were very small and precise 
details that prevented her from using the less-favored radios 
and that she thought she was alone in caring about those 
details. However, through the three activities of the second 
phase, participants were exposed to the challenges of other 
people as well as design alternatives that contributed to 
learning about alternative interfaces and interaction 
mechanisms. This mutual learning amongst the participants 
positively affected their self-esteem and self-assessment as 
well as the general level of knowledge about the relationship 
between psychomotor difficulties and their impact on 
opportunities for interaction.  
Since the statistical analysis from the first phase 
revealed that all participants found purpose with at least one 
radio, we wanted to further analyze the relationship between 
psychomotor abilities and concrete tasks. We did not look 
for a correlation between specific psychomotor disabilities 
and tasks during this phase, but rather which tasks that 
introduced the most challenging interaction for our 
participant group as a whole. From the list of 12 tasks, only 
two proved to be consistently perceived as challenging. The 
first common challenging task was the turning of knobs and 
wheels. 
Regardless 
of 
material, 
the 
double-action 
interaction, i.e., retaining a grip and simultaneously turning 
the hand, was the most eminent challenge. The following 
input device workshop confirmed that coarse and jagged 
knobs and wheels significantly helped on both the grip and 
resistance. According to the participants, the main challenge 
was both retaining a firm grip on the knob and 
simultaneously turning and twisting the knob back and 
forth. The coarse and jagged input devices helped to 
interlock the fingers to the knob or wheel and thereby 
required less pressure on retaining the grip as the hand 
turned the knob. One participant (male, 78) said that his grip 
would slip once he started turning his hand as he could not 
concentrate on maneuvering the fingers and the wrist 

574
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
simultaneously and that the resistance of the jagged edges of 
the knob supported his concentration. Another important 
way of counteracting the challenges of turning knobs was to 
relieve the demand for precision by applying steps with 
automatic snapping (such as with Radio #1). This helped 
participants rely less on accuracy and put less pressure on 
precise movements, something that proved particularly 
difficult for those experiencing tremor or cramps. Nine 
participants expressed concerns with turning in general, but 
with the snapping gesture of Radio #1 only three retained 
their attitude towards knobs as challenging interfaces. 
The second-most challenging tasks was positioning and 
re-positioning. During the think-aloud testing of Radio #4 
similar patterns as seen during the testing of Radio #2 in the 
first phase emerged. Participants struggled with precise 
movement of the pods in the air when there were no 
embodied constraints to restrict involuntary movements and 
help maneuver or pace the motion. The results from the 
think-aloud testing of Radio #4 revealed similar issues as 
with Radio #2 where participants would struggle with the 
operation due to the raising of the pods midair to initiate the 
interaction; lifting, suspending, and moving the pods 
through the air required both jerking and stretching of the 
arm. Several participants said they were dependent on 
physical constraints to prevent involuntary movements even 
during the short duration of the input interaction. Radio #1 
and Radio #3 were particularly favored by these participants 
as the design prevented adverse effects such as dropping 
pieces or undoing past actions. Even with unintended 
actions such as sudden spasms or cramps, the design would 
prevent disruptive consequences. Both Radio #2 and Radio 
#4 depended on solid cubes or pods to control the radio, and 
they were partially inoperable to certain participants. These 
constraints were of particular importance to one female 
participant (81): “The sturdiness of the metal bar on Radio 
#3 neutralizes any involuntary movements I make with its 
weight and texture, and the friction prevents the wooden 
ring from sliding away from where I left it”. Still, there 
were no significant correlations between the type of 
psychomotor disability and the degree of need for such 
physical constraints, but the sample size of 13 participants 
may not be large enough to identify such patterns. When 
combined with having to precisely place the pods in a 
designated area, the combination of strength, flexibility, and 
accuracy made this task troublesome for many participants. 
One participant (male, 84) expressed a desire for a snapping 
mechanisms that would allow the placement or drop to 
depend less on accuracy similar to the snapping of the knob 
in Radio #1: “If it had snapping properties such as found in 
magnets, it would put less effort on the placement and allow 
for more concentration of moving the object through the 
air”. If we analyze the data from all three activities of the 
second phase, this issue of positioning was reported by eight 
participants. However, simple constraints such as the 
slightly elevated borders encircling the placement zone on 
Radio #2 made a decisive difference for four of the 
participants.  
The demonstrative interviews also revealed that the 
participants were highly concerned with progress during the 
interaction. Most participants stated that they were not 
directly bothered by using a few attempts to start the radio. 
The most important factor was whether the failed attempt 
would reset their progress or not. For instance, turning the 
knob on Radio #1 in the right direction, even if not reaching 
the desired channel, would still get the user closer to the 
goal. A half-finished attempt would allow the user to 
continue the operation in the next attempt. On the other 
hand, Radio #2 used cubes that when used unsuccessfully 
would reset the interaction. We expected participants to be 
able to hit the top surface at least when not dropping the 
cube within the designated square, yet only one participant 
was able to do so. The struggle was tied to the raising of the 
cube and all incomplete attempts at interaction ended mid-
air, and in the best-case scenario, the cube would drop on 
the table next to the radio. Several participants commented 
that the limited surface area outside the square area was too 
narrow to have the cube land on top of the radio in case of 
missing the square. Thus, it was not failed attempts that 
would eventually lead to demotivation and frustration; it 
was not experiencing a sense of progress during the failed 
attempts. One participant (male, 80) summarized this issue 
by saying that he did not mind having to repeat gestures to 
get it right – that was how he already dealt with various 
equipment in his home – but the moment he felt no 
progress, he lost interest. 
 
VII. DISCUSSION 
A. Psychomotor disabilities as a shift rather than a loss 
The analysis from the first phase presented in the 
previous section demonstrates some significant findings. 
First and foremost, we see that grouping all older adults in 
one common category cannot be considered scientifically 
justifiable when their needs, capacities, and performances 
are so different. To group the participants in one common 
category is both stigmatizing and improper design practice 
as it neglects individual needs. Also, we have presented 
empirical data suggesting that even the specific group of 
older people suffering from motor deficits in the hands and 
fingers would highly benefit from designs that paid 
individual attention to their needs. 
At first glance, it might look like Figure 6 illustrates a 
steady and consistent difference between the control group 
and the experimental group. However, this was not the case. 
Irregularities in performance resulted in statistically 
counteracting mean values, and glancing at Figure 6 one 
may wrongfully conclude that the older participants yielded 
a seemingly equal performance score for each radio 
regardless of their motor capacities. However, as presented 
in the secondary analysis of the relationship between disease 

575
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
and performance (illustrated in Figure 7), we see 
performance scores with high fluctuation within each group. 
We can confirm this by looking at the statistical analysis 
which indicated a significant interaction between disability 
and radio (p <.001). 
One way of understanding this phenomenon is to look at 
average performance score for each group. The participants 
who suffered from trembling serve as a good illustration. 
This group, which accounted for a third of the participants 
in the experimental group, had the lowest performance score 
on Radio #2 (M = 4.19, SD = 0.40), an intermediate 
performance score on Radio #1 (M = 05.07, SD = 1.57), and 
the highest on Radio #3 (M = 6.08, SD = 0.98). These 
results can be explained by the different types and various 
symptoms of tremor. Participants reported issues with 
intention tremor that could affect their aim, specific tremor 
which influenced goal-oriented action), as well as general 
stressing tremor. As Radio #2 required participants to raise a 
cube in midair and place it within a designated area, it was 
difficult for several participants to operate this radio. With 
more degrees of freedom compared with the other two 
radios, there was more room for both intentional and 
deliberate errors. This group performed best on Radio # 3 as 
involuntary movements would not give adverse effect or 
hinder progress in solving the task.  
A similar pattern can be seen in the group of participants 
who suffered from Rheumatoid Arthritis. They reported 
challenges with swelling, decreased sensitivity and reduced 
mobility, which resulted in problems with the interface of 
Radio# 1 (M = 2.83, SD = 0.99). The reduction in 
sensitivity, in particular, would mean that they struggled 
more with sensing moving, clicking, and snapping feedback 
from the radio. However, they delivered a good average 
performance score for Radio # 2 (M = 6.28, SD = 1.74), 
suggesting that they still had the capacity for interaction. 
Thus, loss or reduction in motor capacities does not an 
automatically 
reduce 
or 
deprive 
our 
interaction 
opportunities; it mainly shifts them. All four of our radios 
were developed to allow people with motor impairments in 
their hands and fingers to still use these limbs for 
interaction. Moreover, our results suggest that they are 
highly capable of doing so if presented the right interface. In 
their studies of differences in pointing movements between 
older and younger users, [17] argues that older people 
maintain the use of residual sensory information (vision and 
proprioception) and can achieve similar precision levels as 
younger users. However, the radios in our study do not need 
to be operated by hands and fingers. There are also 
opportunities 
that 
explore 
new 
bodily 
uses 
and 
configurations. In certain context, radios are naturally 
operated through different interaction mechanisms, e.g., in 
cars. Prior studies have also demonstrated interaction 
opportunities for people with motor disabilities by the use of 
other bodily capacities. For instance, [33] uses head gesture 
recognition for wheelchair control for older adults who have 
Parkinson's disease and other restrictions in limb movement. 
The authors of [34] study wrist rotation as input 
mechanisms for mobile devices, and suggest that both 
hands-free and eyes-free interaction techniques would be 
feasible with further research. The research of [35] uses a 
voice-driven drawing application to include users with 
motor impairments. 
We should never exclude any people as potential users 
just because their capacities prevent them from using a 
given interface. Incompetence or inability in use should not 
be tied to technologies, but instead, be a use dimension 
related to the specific interaction mechanisms that the 
technology provides. Radio might be considered one piece 
of technology, but there are limitless opportunities when it 
comes to the way it is presented to the user. The results in 
this paper have demonstrated that people can re-establish 
meaningful relationships with technology by shifting the 
way of presentation. 
 
B. Designing with psychomotor abilities in mind 
The second phase provided insight into how we should 
address the matter of psychomotor challenges both during 
the design process and in the design artifact. The self-
assessment amongst the participants strongly depended on 
how the participants were given an opportunity to explore 
and reflect upon their own capacities; experiencing design 
alternatives as simple or demanding helped participants 
express and explain their perspectives during all three 
activities. Presenting participants with a wide selection of 
alternatives has previously helped us to support decision-
making and mutual learning the during design processes 
[31]. The input device workshop clearly helped participants 
obtain an insight into own capacities and preferences that 
would not have been possible without actually interacting 
with physical prototypes and objects. Some aspects of 
psychomotor abilities, e.g., tactics or response-ability [29], 
are hard for participants to imagine and reflecting upon 
these capacities supported by physical props to enhance the 
exploration clearly contributed to a more insightful and 
honest feedback. During the input device workshop, the 
participants in both groups unanimously agreed that 
amongst the alternatives they were exploring they could all 
find several components that they would be able to operate. 
The different components exploited material properties such 
as texture, size, shape, and color to provide various ways of 
providing input. It was important for the participants’ self-
esteem to revisit various modes of input and thereby 
reminding themselves of their capacities despite their 
psychomotor 
challenges. 
This 
also 
motivated 
the 
participants to talk more positively about their own bodily 
capacities and reflect about their psychomotor challenges 
with a more optimistic and salutogenic outlook. While we 
did not investigate gender-based differences with regards to 
self-assessment of psychomotor abilities – something [28] 
argued could yield differences between genders – we 
believe the input device workshop helped participants 

576
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
realize both own capacities and limitations and adjust their 
self-estimates accordingly. In future studies, it would be 
interesting to further investigate the correlation between 
participants' self-assessment own psychomotor abilities and 
their performance by the use of standardized models such as 
those presented in [28]. 
We also registered how participants would successfully 
perform tasks that required a single type of psychomotor 
ability, but would struggle when the tasks introduced 
multiple actions depending on several types of abilities. The 
trouble of performing simultaneous actions has been 
previously addressed by [6], and the issue became 
particularly evident during the second phase where 
participants explained how both turning and positioning 
required simultaneous rather than sequential actions and put 
more pressure on their abilities. The results from the second 
phase suggest that constraining design, e.g., the aluminum 
bar in Radio #3 or the volume slider in Radio #4, helps 
reduce the number of simultaneous actions required to 
perform a task. While several participants favored radio #2 
and #4, the elevated position of the placement area on top of 
both radios became a challenge when the placement also 
required accuracy. This issue was further enhanced by the 
level of difficulty of the individual tasks, in particular, 
accuracy. Preciseness in gestures and movements was 
considered one of the most isolated challenging issues as the 
tension, flexibility, and endurance required for precise 
maneuvering usually involved a high level of physical effort 
and concentration. This observation is supported by the 
registered patterns presented in [12], where it is claimed that 
accuracy levels are only kept constant when contributing 
more time. Thus, we clearly saw value in understanding and 
addressing the psychomotor capacities, both individually 
and combined, when shaping the interface of the radio. In 
particular, physical and embodied constraint as well as 
guides for movement reduced the simultaneous actions 
required from the participants and eased the physical 
demand from the user. 
Another way of reducing the tension from simultaneous 
actions was to support psychomotor capacities with cues. In 
particular, participants suffering from reduced mobility and 
sensitivity emphasized the importance of visual cues to 
support tactile or haptic feedback. Radio #4 did not provide 
as clear borders for the placement zone as Radio #2 and 
certain participants were insecure about their own precision 
once the pod was placed as they could not feel the pod 
dropping into the shallow circular pit. One participant said 
that just increasing the depth of the circular area of Radio #4 
would have provided better feedback from him as the 
physical constraints would be enforced as well as help 
provide visual feedback of correct placement. In our 
empirical context, we have previously seen how material 
characteristics can not only influence how the participant 
understand the interaction but by its properties, e.g., surface, 
shape, and color, provide cues on how to properly interact 
with technology [21, 26]. 
C. Extending and re-establishing purposeful interactions 
It is important to note that none of the three radios used 
in the first phase were perceived as uniformly better than the 
rest. Each radio would yield good scores with one or more 
groups, but there was always another group that would 
struggle with the same interface. This supports our claim 
that radios designed for a specific group of people, and with 
features that may even fully compensate for the motor 
deficit, will still not necessarily work for everyone. Hence, 
the results of this study demonstrate not only the need but 
also the possibility, to make individual adjustments in the 
design of interfaces. Even though we developed four radios, 
they all utilized nearly identical hardware, and the basic 
electronic components are the same in all four radios. The 
back of the three radios Radio #1-3 and how their hardware 
is enclosed in similar casement taking up roughly the same 
size is demonstrated in Figure 8. They were developed in 
four 
independent 
processes 
focusing 
on 
various 
psychomotor challenges, yet we see that only the packaging, 
i.e., the "outer shell" enclosing technology, is changed. By 
designing four different interfaces, we have shown that it is 
possible to re-enable an entire group of older adults who 
would otherwise have to abandon interaction with radios. 
We achieved this while letting them continue to use their 
hands and fingers, something which is not a requirement for 
successful interaction. If we expand the design area to 
include all other bodily capacities, the potential to re-
establish purposeful interaction would be even greater, and 
the chance is simultaneously greater for technology to 
remain meaningful longer, even when living through a 
decline in psychomotor capacities. To offer users a variety 
of interfaces on top of the technology also provides users 
the ability to customize the interaction to their capacity 
levels, even if they were to discover at some point that some 
of their motor skills develop in a positive sense. Adapting to 
skill levels is encouraged by [29]. It would also open up 
more room to address changes in movements, actions and 
bodily configurations as psychomotor skills among user 
group changed. The authors of [7] suggest that there is a 
natural discontinuation in slow movements among older 
people. This is also supported by [6] who suggest that older 
participants depend on interfaces that allow for more sub-
movements in interaction. In general, it is considered 
reasonable to spend more time on interface adaptations 
since the majority of prior research only studied two-factor 
analysis of the interaction and psychomotor capacity in a 
context where other conditions such as frequency of use and 
expertise could have had an impact on the interaction [10]. 
 
 
 
Figure 8. The back of the three radios Radio #1-3 

577
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
In our empirical context, this idea of introducing 
multiple interfaces is of particular importance as Norway is 
facing an infrastructural change where all radios are 
switching 
from 
FM 
broadcasting 
to 
digital 
audio 
broadcasting (DAB). This will render all current FM radios 
unusable as of 2017. People with older radios are forced to 
buy new devices where the interaction may depend on users 
properly learning and understanding new interfaces, new 
terminologies, new frequencies and new mechanisms. 
However, prior research simultaneously suggests that 
elderly people are less willing to modify current strategies 
or adapt new strategies [6, 36]. This forced transition gives 
us a golden opportunity to introduce a variety of interaction 
mechanisms that can be incorporated into routines and 
habits while people are relatively able-bodied and only 
shows early symptoms. By doing so, the technology could 
potentially remain with them even if they were to enter a 
downward phase with reduction of capacities. If someone 
should not develop symptoms consistent with the 
expectations, having incorporated these new interaction 
mechanisms may still have a positive effect as it is often the 
underlying factors that are to be blamed for reduction of 
psychomotor skills, e.g., in the performance of tasks aiming 
[13]. 
Another important factor is the degree of stigmatization 
associated with use. Technology tailor-made for a particular 
group of people often succumbs to design choices so 
distinctive that other people can interpret the intended users 
their weaknesses just from the design itself. Our participants 
claimed that all four radios, but, in particular, Radio #3 and 
Radio #4, had an appealingly aesthetic look that did not 
suggest being specifically designed for the target audience. 
The design did not emit the stigmatizing radiance often 
found in technology tailored for the elderly [5]. Early 
exposure to interfaces that can have a secondary function 
later will also allow older users to make acquaintances with 
interaction mechanisms that have not yet become vital for 
their use. This would mean fewer chances of experiencing 
the design and interface as stigmatizing, even though it 
sometime in the future may become the very interaction 
mechanism 
allowing 
interaction; 
the 
interaction 
is 
associated with routines and habits rather than to imposed 
solutions.  
This discussion of avoiding stigmatizing design further 
aligns with the idea of universal design. Design tailored for 
specific disabilities or illnesses does not exclude people 
without disabilities from using them. On the contrary, we 
found that the design of our four radios, and, in particular, 
Radio #3, appealed to participants and stakeholders that 
were not in the user group such as family members, 
employees at the care home, and even our self as designers. 
In future research, it would be interesting to investigate this 
aspect of the design further. While our results does not 
provide any significant evidence of one radio fully re-
establishing interaction for all types of psychomotor 
disabilities, we did see examples of radios elevating the 
interaction performance to the level of the control group for 
multiple types of disabilities and illness (as demonstrated 
with Radio #1 and Radio #2 in Figure 7). It is therefore not 
unreasonable for further research on this topic to generate 
designs that can reach even more people and help users 
achieve even better performance scores. Nevertheless, the 
aesthetics of the four radios demonstrate the important 
underlying idea that design tailored for a specific user group 
can very well be fully usable and appealing to everyone. 
There is no reason that design for older adults cannot be 
design for all. 
 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
This paper has attempted to bring attention to the 
richness of psychomotor capacities that still inhabits aging 
bodies. Despite certain capacities declining or disappearing, 
a better understanding of both the psychomotor abilities and 
disabilities of the participants can help inform the design 
and thereby re-establish and prolong interaction. We have 
used four radios co-developed with old people to 
demonstrate how people unable to operate commercial 
radios have not only rediscovered interaction opportunities 
but simultaneously achieved levels of performance 
comparable to people operating commercial radios. We 
have also facelifted activities that has generated important 
knowledge about what types of interfaces and interaction 
mechanisms that proved the most difficult and how we can 
address those issues in the design of radios. A total of 65 
participants were involved over four years in two phases to 
help gather the data used in this paper. Our findings are 
limited to our empirical context but still demonstrate on a 
broader scale how the body inhabits capacities that when 
understood and acknowledged properly can help users 
continue to interact with technology despite experiencing 
psychomotor disabilities.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
S. G. Joshi, “Re-establishing Interaction Through Design of 
Alternative Interfaces,” in eTELEMED 2016, The Eighth 
International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and 
Social Medicine. Venice,  Italy: IARIA, pp. 220-229, 2016. 
[2] 
S. G. Joshi, “Designing for Experienced Simplicity. Why 
Analytic and Imagined Simplicity Fail in Design of Assistive 
Technology,” The International Journal on Advances in 
Intelligent Systems, 8(3&4): pp. 324-338, 2015. 
[3] 
E. A. Fleishman and M. E. Reilly, “Handbook of human 
abilities: 
Definitions, 
measurements, 
and 
job 
task 
requirements,” Consulting Psychologists Press, 1992. 
[4] 
S. Norway, "Norwegian Media Barometer, 2014," SSB, 
2014. 
[5] 
S. G. Joshi, "Emerging ethical considerations from the 
perspectives of the elderly," in Ninth International 
Conference on Cultural Attitudes in computer-Human 
Interactions, M. Strano, H. Hrachovec, and S. Fragos, pp. 1-
15, 2014. 

578
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[6] 
M. W. Smith, J. Sharit, and S. J. Czaja, “Aging, motor 
control, and the performance of computer mouse tasks,” 
Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and 
Ergonomics Society, 41(3): pp. 389-396, 1999. 
[7] 
M. Morgan, et al., “Age-related motor slowness: simply 
strategic?,” Journal of gerontology, 49(3): pp. M133-M139, 
1994. 
[8] 
C. N. Riviere and N. V. Thakor, “Effects of age and 
disability on tracking tasks with a computer mouse: 
Accuracy and linearity,” Journal of Rehabilitation Research 
and Development, 33: pp. 6-15, 1996. 
[9] 
C. Poletti, R. Sleimen-Malkoun, J.-J. Temprado, and P. 
Lemaire, “Older 
and 
younger 
adults’ 
strategies 
in 
sensorimotor tasks: Insights from Fitts’ pointing task,” 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and 
Performance, 41(2): p. 542, 2015. 
[10] C. Sutter and M. Ziefle, “Psychomotor user characteristics as 
predictors for a successful usage of small input devices,” in 
Proceedings of the HCI International 2005. 
[11] R. W. Soukoreff and I. S. Mackenzie, “Towards a standard 
for pointing device evaluation, perspectives on 27 years of 
Fitts’ law research in HCI,” International journal of human-
computer studies, 61(6): pp. 751-789, 2004. 
[12] C. Sutter and M. Ziefle. “Psychomotor performance of input 
device users and optimized cursor control,” in Proceedings of 
the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual 
Meeting. SAGE Publications. pp. 742-746, 2006. 
[13] Y. Cheong, R. L. Shehab, and C. Ling, “Effects of age and 
psychomotor ability on kinematics of mouse-mediated 
aiming movement,” Ergonomics, 56(6): pp. 1006-1020, 
2013. 
[14] Y.-K. Cheong, "Performance and movement kinematics of 
mouse pointing task: Perspectives from age, psychomotor 
ability, and visual ability," University of Oklahoma, 2007. 
[15] N. Đorđević, D. Rančić, and A. Dimitrijević. “Evaluation of 
User Cognitive Abilities for HCI,” in Proceedings of the 11th 
WSEAS International Conference on COMPUTERS, Agios 
Nikolaos, Crete Island, Greece, Citeseer, pp. 468-473, 2007. 
[16] J. Knight and G. Salvendy, “Psychomotor work capabilities.” 
Handbook of industrial engineering, 2nd edition, Wiley-
Interscience, New York, pp. 978-989, 1992. 
[17] L. Zhang, J. Yang, Y. Inai, Q. Huang, and J. Wu, “Effects of 
aging on pointing movements under restricted visual 
feedback conditions,” Human movement science, 40: pp. 1-
13, 2015. 
[18] J. Krasner, “Accumulated lives: Metaphor, materiality, and 
the homes of the elderly,” Literature and Medicine, 24(2): 
pp. 209-230, 2006. 
[19] W. Spreicer, “Tangible interfaces as a chance for higher 
technology acceptance by the elderly,” in Proceedings of the 
12th International Conference on Computer Systems and 
Technologies, ACM, pp. 311-316, 2011. 
[20] T. Hirsch, et al. “The ELDer project: social, emotional, and 
environmental 
factors 
in 
the 
design 
of 
eldercare 
technologies,” in Proceedings on the 2000 conference on 
Universal Usability, ACM, pp. 72-79, 2000. 
[21] S. G. Joshi and H. Bråthen, “Lowering the Threshold: 
Reconnecting Elderly Users with Assistive Technology 
Through Tangible Interfaces,” in International Conference on 
Human Aspects of IT for the Aged Population, Springer, pp. 
52-63, 2016. 
[22] Y. Fernaeus and P. Sundström, "The material move how 
materials matter in interaction design research," in 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
Designing 
Interactive 
Systems 
Conference, ACM: Newcastle Upon Tyne, United Kingdom, 
pp. 486-495, 2012. 
[23] A. Vallgårda and J. Redström, “Computational composites,” 
in Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors 
in computing systems. ACM, pp. 513-522, 2007. 
[24] M. Wiberg, “Methodology for materiality: interaction design 
research through a material lens,” Personal and Ubiquitous 
Computing, 18(3): pp. 625-636, 2014. 
[25] T. Greenhalgh, et al., “What matters to older people with 
assisted living needs? A phenomenological analysis of the 
use and non-use of telehealth and telecare,” Social Science & 
Medicine, 93: pp. 86-94, 2013. 
[26] S. G. Joshi and H. Bråthen, “The Role of Materials in Design 
of Familiar and Contextual Assistive Technologies,” in 
International Conference on Interfaces and Human Computer 
Interaction 2016, IADIS Press, pp. 101-109, 2016. 
[27] B. Makofske, “Manual Dexterity,” in Encyclopedia of 
Clinical Neuropsychology, Springer, pp. 1522-1523, 2011. 
[28] A. Furnham, S. Von Stumm, A. Makendrayogam, and T. 
Chamorro-Premuzic, “A Taxonomy of Self-Estimated 
Human Performance: The General Factor,” Journal of 
Individual Differences, 30(4): pp. 188-193, 2009. 
[29] M. H. Fogtmann, “Kinesthetic empathy interaction–
exploring the possibilities of psychomotor abilities in 
interaction design,” in Second International Workshop on 
Physicality, p. 37, 2007. 
[30] J. A. Jacko and H. S. Vitense, “A review and reappraisal of 
information technologies within a conceptual framework for 
individuals with disabilities,” Universal Access in the 
Information Society, 1(1): pp. 56-76, 2001. 
[31] S. G. Joshi and T. Bratteteig, “Designing for Prolonged 
Mastery. On involving old people in Participatory Design,” 
Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, 28(1): pp. 3-
36, 2016. 
[32] A. Field and G. Hole, “How to design and report 
experiments,” Sage, 2002. 
[33] J. Gray, P. Jia, H. H. Hu, T. Lu, and K. Yuan, “Head gesture 
recognition for hands-free control of an intelligent 
wheelchair,” Industrial Robot: An International Journal, 
34(1): pp. 60-68, 2007. 
[34] A. Crossan, J. Williamson, S. Brewster, and R. Murray-
Smith, “Wrist rotation for interaction in mobile contexts,” in 
Proceedings of the 10th international conference on Human 
computer interaction with mobile devices and services, 
ACM, pp. 435-438, 2008. 
[35] S. Harada, J. O. Wobbrock, and J. A. Landay, “Voicedraw: a 
hands-free voice-driven drawing application for people with 
motor impairments,” in Proceedings of the 9th international 
ACM 
SIGACCESS 
conference 
on 
Computers 
and 
accessibility, ACM, pp. 27-34, 2007. 
[36] N. Walker, D. A. Philbin, and A. D. Fisk, “Age-related 
differences in movement control: Adjusting submovement 
structure to optimize performance,” The Journals of 
Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social 
Sciences, 52(1): pp. 40-53, 1997. 
 

