290
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Line-Drawing Presentation Strategy with an Active-Wheel Mouse  
After-Recognition-Go Strategy vs. While-Perceiving-Go Strategy 
 
Yoshihiko Nomura, Yoshiaki Kashino 
Graduate School of Engineering 
Mie University 
Tsu, Japan 
e-mails: {nomura, y-kashino}@int.mach.mie-u.ac.jp 
Tokuhiro Sugiura 
Center for Information Technologies and Networks 
Mie University 
Tsu, Japan 
e-mail: sugiura @ cc.mie-u.ac.jp 
 
Abstract—The objective of this study is to 
examine 
presentation strategies for line-drawing recognition by using a 
finger-tactile interface, i.e., an “active-wheel mouse,” which can 
present slippages to users via users’ fingertip skin. The 
interface embodies an active wheel being rotatable in any 
direction, with any speed and for any time-duration. Through 
the slippage stimuli, the interface can present stroke motions 
with any direction, velocity and length to users. In this paper, 
we proposed two kinds of presentation strategies, called an 
“after-recognition-go strategy” and a “while-perceiving-go 
strategy” for single-stroke line-drawings. The former strategy 
employs an open-loop control scheme with no-feedback, and 
the latter one does a closed-loop control scheme with online-
feedback. Next, the perceptual performances were compared 
between the two strategies via a psychophysical experiment, in 
which single-stroke line-drawing consisting of up to three 
straight-line segments were recognized. In the experiment, the 
length, direction, and velocity were randomly chosen within 50 
- 150 mm, 0 - 359 deg, and 12 - 50 mm/s, respectively. In order 
to examine performance, we introduced objective and 
subjective evaluation values. As for the objective evaluation 
variables, the mean and the variance were calculated for (root 
mean squared errors (RSMEs) of the motion-related variables 
such as lengths, angles, and mean-velocities and for RSMEs of 
the time-durations, while, as for the subjective evaluation 
variable, questionnaire survey was conducted. As a result of 
the experiment, in comparison with the while-perceiving-go 
strategy, the after-recognition-go strategy was recommended 
for further development of the finger-tactile interface, based 
on the significant reduction of time-duration and on no mental-
fatigue reports in a questionnaire: in the case of for the  after-
recognition-go strategy, the means and the standard deviations 
of RSMEs were -19.3 ± 40.7 mm (for length), 5.0 ± 15.9 degree 
(for angle), and 9.2 ± 22.3 mm/s (for mean-velocity).  
Keywords-fingerpad; tactile sensation; slippage; interface; 
multiple strokes; presentation and recognition strategy. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Human beings get a large amount of information via 
vision from the surroundings. Therefore, once we lose our 
vision, we shall suffer inconveniences in daily life. Many 
assistive devices were developed as an alternative. Visually 
impaired persons utilize sensations other than the vision 
such as skin-sensations and proprioceptive sensations.  
This paper describes an extended version of the previous 
paper by Nomura et al. [1], and the objective is to develop an 
operational strategy by utilizing our developed tactile-device, 
i.e., an active-wheel mouse by Nomura et al. [2] [3].  
Some handy-and-portable devices have also been 
proposed for character presentation and walking route 
guidance. Tsuda et al. [4] and Causo et al. [5] proposed 
vibrotactile stimulations-based interface for instructing arm 
motions. Norman et al. [6] and Gleeson et al. [7] proposed 
skin-stretch-based interface for instructing planar hand 
motion guidance. Ion et al. [8] proposed a tactile display 
that drags a physical tactor across the skin in 2D for 
instructing geometric shapes or characters. Tsagarakis et al. 
[9] proposed a slippage display composed of two cone-
shaped rollers for instructing 2D directions. Moscatelli et al. 
[10] and Webster et al. [11] proposed a ball rotation-based 
mechanism for instructing 2D slippages. Provancher et al. 
[12] proposed a skin stretch-based 1D directional interface. 
Gwilliam et al. [13] proposed a skin stretch-based tactile 
display in conjunction of a joystick-based force feedback 
system. Koslover et al. [14] combined a skin stretch-based 
tactile display with vibrotactile and voice guidance system. 
They can present motion information by using tactors, and, 
yet, there are some tasks to be solved: ① the number of 
physical properties to be presented was restricted in such a 
way that only motion direction can be presented, ② the 
working area was also restricted to several millimeters. 
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. 
Section II outlines our developed active-wheel mouse, and 
Section III introduces two line-drawing-stroke presenting 
strategies to be compared: one is an after-recognition-go 
strategy, and the other a while-perceiving-go strategy. Next, 
two experiments follow the system descriptions. Practically, 
in Section IV, perceptual characteristics of simple patterns of 
1-, 2-, and 3-strokes are presented as a basic study, and, in 
Section V, those for complicated patterns of 5-strokes are 
presented as an example of practical applications. The paper 
closes with a conclusion and remarks for further 
developments. 

291
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
II. ACTIVE-WHEEL MOUSE, A FINGER-TACTILE INTERFACE 
A. Apparatus 
We have previously presented an active-wheel mouse 
[2][3]: a specific mouse interface, at the front of which a 
finger-tactile interface is attached as shown in Figure 1. A 
wheel is embedded in the finger-tactile interface, and the 
diameter and thickness of the wheel are 20 mm and 6 mm, 
respectively (see Figure 2). In particular, it is noted that 
raised dots in this work are formed on the wheel peripheral 
surface to enhance slippage perceptual performance as well 
as Nomura et al. [2][3]: as for the raised dots, the height is 
0.5 mm, and the diameter of the bottom circle is 1.7 mm. 
The dot interval was designed as 10.5 mm so that the dots 
appear one by one on the finger-pad: it was concluded that 
the one-by-one appearance made the slippage perception 
easier as in Nomura et al. [15][16]. The finger-tactile 
interface rotates a wheel around the wheel central axis in 
any horizontal direction by two stepping motors (M15SP-
2N and M25SP-6NK (Mitsumi Electric Co., LTD., Tokyo, 
Japan) (see Figure 3). Installed in a wheel rotating part, the 
former stepping motor rotates the wheel, while the latter 
stepping motor swivels the wheel rotating part. The rotation 
and swivel result in a velocity and direction of wheel 
slippage on finger-pad, respectively. The velocity together 
with the time duration decides slippage length.   
Holding the mouse body and touching their finger-pad on 
the rotating wheel periphery from above, users accept 
slippage stimulus (see Figure 3). Here, note that the 
circumference of the wheel is circular, and the shape of the 
slippage itself is not a straight line, but an arc. Since it is not 
easy for us to perceive the arc-shaped slippages, users were 
instructed not to perceive the slippage as an arc segment, but 
as a straight-line segment. 
 
  
 
(a) Active-wheel mouse                    (b) Wheel-rotating part. 
Figure 1. Active-wheel mouse. 
 
 
Figure 2. Configuration of wheel: raised dots are formed on the wheel 
periphery.
(a) Stepping motor and gear chain for rotation and those for swivel. 
 
(b) Side view of the finger-tactile interface.  
Figure 3. Fnger-tactile interface in use. 
III. 
LINE-DRAWING-STROKE PRESENTING STRATEGIES  
Two control schemes were applied as line-drawing-
stroke presenting strategies: one is off-line control scheme 
and the other is on-line control scheme. The off-line control 
scheme is represented by a line-drawing-stroke presenting 
strategy called “after-recognition-go strategy”, and the on-
line one by that called “while-perceiving-go strategy.” The 
two strategies will be explained in the following. In the 
following, the word “a line drawing” represents a kinked line 
consisting of straight-line segments, and the word “a stroke” 
represent a dynamic motion corresponding to each of the 
straight line-segments. 
A. After-Recognition-Go Strategy 
The first strategy for presenting line-drawing-strokes, 
that is, the after-recognition-go strategy, is carried out in the 
following procedure.  
 
[Step 1] Subjects hold the mouse in their right hand. Then, 
they touch their index finger-pad on the wheel from 
above. 
[Step 2] Finger-tactile interface swivels the rotating unit in 
a given direction. Next, it rotates the wheel with a 
given velocity and angle. While accepting the slippage 
stimulus during the rotation (see Figure 4 ① ), the 
subjects recognize the stimulus as a straight line 
motion (see Figure 4 ②.) 
[Step 3]  Just after the wheel rotation finished, the subjects 
drag the active-wheel mouse so as to reproduce their 
recognized motion (see Figure 4 ③). 
[Step 4] The subjects memorize the drag motion as a stroke  
(see Figure 4 ④). 

292
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
[Step 5] Just after memorizing the stroke, the subjects send 
a signal by pressing a button with the left hand. 
[Step 6] Return to [Step 2] till all the strokes are memorized. 
 
 
Figure 4. “After-recognition-go strategy” for line-drawing-stroke teaching 
& learning: the acronym, AWM, represents the active-wheel mouse. 
B. While-Perceiving-Go Strategy 
In this section, the second presenting strategy for line-
drawing-strokes, i.e., the while-perceiving-go strategy, is 
explained.  
 
[Step 1] Subjects hold the mouth in their right hand. Then, 
he touches their index finger-pad on the wheel. 
[Step 2] The finger-tactile interface swivels in a specific 
direction. At a time, the wheel rotates with another 
specific velocity under a positional feedback control 
scheme. That is, as shown in Figure 5, the direction is 
given by the direction from the present position to a 
sub-goal (the point between two consecutive segments) 
of a desired locus. The velocity is given by the desired 
velocity at the proximal point on a desired trajectory.  
[Step 3] While accepting the slippage stimulus, the subjects 
recognize the stimulus as a straight line motion not of 
the desired stroke, but that of a stroke to be headed for 
the sub-goal, and drag the active-wheel mouse along 
with the recognized motion (see Figure 6 ① and ②). 
[Step 4] The subjects memorize the motion from the 
starting to the arrival point as a stroke (see Figure 6 ③). 
[Step 5] Just after memorizing the stroke, the subjects send 
a signal by pressing a button with their left hand. 
[Step 6] Return to [Step 2] till all the strokes are presented. 
 
 
Figure 5. A positional feedback scheme employed in “while-perceiving-
go strategy “ as a stroke presentation method. The slippage velocity is 
given as the desired velocity at the proximal point on a desired trajectory. 
 
Figure 6. “While-perceiving-go strategy” for  stroke presentation. The step 
② in this figure can be regarded as an on-line integration of the steps ② 
and ③ in Figure 4, i.e., the “after-recognition-go strategy.” 
IV. 
BASIC EXPERIMENT 
A. Experimental Method 
1) 
Experimental conditions 
In order to confirm a potential of the “after-recognition-
go strategy” as a drawing presentation, a line drawing 
learning experiment was carried out. 
Five healthy right handed males in their 20s (22~24, 22.6 
(mean) ± 0.9 (SD)) participated in the experiment. We have 
prepared six line-drawings that consisted of straight lines 
from single stroke to three strokes as shown in Figure 7. All 
the strokes were of the uniform motion, i.e., constant-
velocity straight line motion. The factors and the factor 
levels are shown in Table I, and, in the trials, the levels for 
each of the presentation-strategy factor and the stroke-
number factor were given by a pseudo-random order. 
 
 
Figure 7. Presented drawings used for a line drawing learning experiment. 
TABLE I. FACTORS AND FACTOR LEVELS IN BASIC EXPERIMENT. 
Factor 
Level 
Subject 
5 males 
Presentation strategy 
While-perceiving go, After-recognition go 
Presented line drawing 
6 in total: 2 patterns with 1-stroke, 2-strokes, and 
3-strokes, respectively 
Length 
Randomly chosen between 50 - 150 mm  
Speed 
Randomly chosen between 12 - 50 mm/s 
Direction 
Randomly chosen between 0 - 359 deg. 
 
2) 
Procedure of while-perceiving-go strategy 
In the case of the while-perceiving-go strategy, targeted 
n-stroke line-drawings were presented through the locus and 
the velocity block. Each of the blocks is conducted, stroke 
by stroke, along with the order of a stroke of a target line-
drawing (see Figure 8 (a)). 
 

293
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
[1st half: locus block]  
① Perception & reproduction process: in the order of a 
stroke of a target line-drawing, while accepting a 
slippage and recognizing a locus, subjects reproduce 
their recognized locus (see Figure 6).  
② Reproduction process: they reproduce all their 
recognized n-stroke loci. 
The pair of ① and ② is called “a locus sub-block,” and 
is iterated n-times for the n-stroke line-drawing. 
  
[2nd half: velocity block]  
① Perception & reproduction process: in the order of a 
stroke, while accepting a slippage and recognizing a 
velocity, subjects reproduce a stroke with their 
recognized velocity, remembering the corresponding 
locus memorized in the 1st half.  
② Reproduction process: they reproduce all their 
recognized multi-strokes. 
The pair of ① and ② is called “a velocity sub-block,” and 
is iterated n-times for the n-stroke line-drawing. 
 
3) 
Procedure of after-recognition-go strategy 
In this strategy, targeted n-stroke line-drawings were 
similarly presented by the above explained procedure except 
for the perception & reproduction process. Figure 8 (b) 
shows an example of the process. Just after a locus and 
velocity have been presented for each stroke, subjects 
reproduce the locus and velocity (see Figure 4). 
 
 
 (a) Procedure of while-perceiving-go strategy for the three line-drawings of 1-, 2-, and 3-strokes: red lines show desired loci; blue lines do reproduced loci. 
 
 
(b) Detail of the 1st locus subprocess and the 1st velocity subprocess for a line drawing of 3-strokes in the after-recognition-go strategy. 
Figure 8. Organization of experimental procedure. 

294
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
4) 
Evaluation values 
We obtained secants from actual strokes: the word 
“secant” represents the line segment connected from a start 
to an end point. Next, we defined evaluation values by the 
differences of the lengths as well as the angles between the 
desired strokes and the secants of the actual strokes for each 
of the strokes (see Figure 9). That is, 
 
Δl = lsecant  – ldesired  
 
(1) 
 
Δ𝜃 = 𝜃secant  – 𝜃desired  
 
(2) 
 
In addition, the velocity difference of vmean from vdesired 
was also introduced as the other evaluation value:  
 
Δv = vmean  – vdesired  
 
(3) 
 
where vmean is the mean velocity of the varying actual 
velocity, and vdesired is the desired velocity. 
 
Figure 9. Evaluation values: the differences of lengths and angles between 
the secants of actual trajectory and the desired trajectory. 
B. Experimental Results 
Taking examples of the three-stroke drawings, loci and 
time-varying velocities by the after-recognition-go strategy 
are shown in Figure 10 (a) and (b), respectively. As other 
examples, loci using either the after-recognition-go strategy 
or the while-perceiving-go strategy are shown in Figure 11 
(a) and (b), respectively. It can be seen that the reproduced 
lengths and angles as well as the velocities fairly differ from 
the presented ones, but, yet, rough geometrical features were 
reproduced. The distortion is considered to mainly come 
from individual differences in the relationship between the 
presented and reproduced lengths. The errors of lengths, 
angles, velocities were evaluated by the root mean squared 
errors (RSME) and are shown in Figure 12. These are 
discussed in the following subsection.  
 
 
(a) Some recognized loci. 
 
(b) Some recognized velocity variations in relationship to time. 
Figure 10. Some examples of the recognition with three-stroke drawings. 
 
 
Stroke pattern 1 
 
Presented locus 
 
 
 
Reproduced loci 
 
2nd trial in the 1st locus sub-block 
12th trial in the 3rd velocity 
sub-block 
Sub. 
A 
 
 
Sub. 
B 
 
 
Sub. 
C 
 
 
Sub. 
D 
 
 
Sub. 
E 
 
 
Figure 11. (a) Loci reproduced by the five subjects for the stroke pattern 1. 
using  after-recognition-go strategy. The light gray-colored arrows show 
the locus is of the first stroke. 

295
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
Stroke pattern 2 
 
Presented locus 
 
 
 
Reproduced loci 
 
2nd trial in the 1st locus sub-block 
12th trial in the 3rd velocity 
sub-block 
Sub. 
A 
 
 
Sub. 
B 
 
 
Sub. 
C 
 
 
Sub. 
D 
 
 
Sub. 
E 
 
 
Figure 11. (b) Loci reproduced by the five subjects for the stroke pattern 2. 
using  after-recognition-go strategy. 
 
 
Figure 12. Root mean squared errors with respect to the recognized length, 
angles, and velocities  for multi-stroke drawings: the acronym, ARG-S, 
represents the after-recognition-go strategy, and WPG-S does the while-
perceiving-go strategy. 
C. Discussion 
1) 
Statistical t-test on population means of the errors 
First, based on a statistical t-test, the population means 
of the errors of the lengths, angles, and velocities from the 
presented ones, as well as those of the time duration of the 
reproduced strokes are compared between the after-
recognition-go 
strategy 
and 
the 
while-perceiving-go 
strategy: the population means of the errors are regarded as 
systematic errors. As a result, we cannot find significant 
differences between the after-recognition-go strategy and 
the while-perceiving-go strategy (see Figure 13 (a-1), (b), 
and (c), respectively, and Table II). On the other hand, with 
respect to the per-stroke time duration, the after-recognition-
go strategy was superior to the while-perceiving-go strategy 
by a significant level of 1 %: “a test statistic t of 2.70” > “a 
critical value T29,280.01 of 2.00” as shown in Figure 13 (d): 
T29,280.01 and F59,580.001 in the following subsection represent 
TDOF1,DOF2significant level and FDOF1,DOF2significant level, respectively. 
 
2) 
Statistical F-test on variance ratios of the errors 
Second, in order to examine random errors, the 
variances of the errors between the after-recognition-go 
strategy and the while-perceiving-go strategy were tested by 
using another statistical F-test for variance ratios.  The after-
recognition-go strategy was inferior to the while-perceiving-
go strategy by a significant level of 0.1 % with respect to the 
variances of the reproduced lengths and angles: “a test 
statistic F of 2.94” > “a critical value F59,580.001 of 2.40 with 
respect to the reproduced lengths”; “a test statistic F of 
3.03” > “a critical value F59,580.001 of 2.40 with respect to the 
reproduced angles”. Yet, there was no significant difference 
between the variances of the reproduced velocities.  
Here, taking notice of a personal variation in the 
slippage-perception 
characteristics, 
i.e., 
a 
nonlinear 
relationship between the perceived and presented slippage 

296
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
length [3][15][16] (see Figure 14), we have introduced a 
correction measure to compensate the nonlinear relationship. 
That is, the relationships between the presented and mean-
perceived length were preliminarily calibrated for each of 
the subjects. Then, based on the calibrated relationships, the 
reproduced lengths were corrected, subject by subject (see 
Figure 13 (a-2) and Table III). Consequently, the errors in 
the after-recognition-go strategy were more effectively 
reduced than those in the while-perceiving-go strategy, and 
the significant difference in the length error variances 
between both strategies has disappeared. As a result, there 
was no significant difference in the length errors not only 
for means but also for variances. 
Incidentally, with respect to the per-stroke time- 
duration, the after-recognition-go strategy was, vice versa, 
superior to the while-perceiving-go strategy by a significant 
level of 0.1 %: a test statistic F of 5.57 > a critical value 
F29,280.001 of 3.34. 
 
 
(a-1) Raw length data.            (a-2) Length data corrected by personal relation 
between perceived and presented length. 
 
  
 
(b) Raw angle data. 
 
(c)  Raw velocity data. 
 
 
(d)  Raw time-duration per stroke data. 
 
Figure 13. Root mean squared errors with respect to the recognized length, 
angles, and velocities  for multi-stroke drawings. 
TABLE II. MEAN AND STAN. DEVI. OF RAW LENGTH DATA. 
Mean
Stan. devi.
Mean
Stan. devi.
Length [mm]
-19.3
40.7
-12.2
23.7
Angle　 [deg]
5.0
15.9
0.4
9.1
Velocity  [mm/s]
9.2
22.3
5.0
24.3
After-Recognition Go  Strategy
While-perceiving Go Strategy
 
TABLE III. MEAN AND STAN. DEVI. FOR LENGTH DATA CORRECTED BY 
PERSONAL RELATIONS BETWEEN PERCEIVED AND PRESENTED LENGTH.. 
Mean
Stan. devi.
Mean
Stan. devi.
Length [mm]
-12.1
29.3
-13.9
24.5
After-Recognition Go  Strategy
While-perceiving Go Strategy
 
 
 
Figure 14. A nonlinear relationship between the perceived and presented 
slippage length. We have a tendency: when longer slippages are presented, 
we perceived shorter;  while when shorter slippages are presented, we 
perceived longer. The relationship differs from person by person.     
3) 
Subjects’ report 
We collected opinions with how subjects felt the 
experiment from a viewpoint of mental impression: all the 
subjects reported that they felt much more exhausted in the 
while-perceiving-go strategy than in the after-recognition-go 
strategy near the sub-goals. It suggests that humans are not 
able to catch up with the closed-loop feedback-control 
scheme.  
 
4) 
Comprehensive evaluation 
The performances described in the preceding subsections 
are comprehensively summarized as follows. First, the errors 
of the corrected lengths showed no significant difference 
both in means and in variances. Second, the errors of the 
angles showed no significant difference in means, although 
they showed significant difference in variances. Third, the 
errors of the velocities showed no significant difference both 
in means and in variances. Thus, from the viewpoint of 
motion, there was almost no significant difference. On the 
other hand, with respect to the time-duration per stroke, the 
after-recognition-go strategy showed significant superiority 
to those in the while-perceiving-go strategy. In addition, the 
subjects reported that they felt much less exhausted in the 
after-recognition-go strategy than in the while-perceiving-go 
strategy. Comprehensively, the after-recognition-go strategy 
was recommended for further studies. 

297
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
V. 
PRACTICAL EXPERIMENT 
A. Experimental Method: Conditions and Procedures 
We carried out a practical experiment in order to confirm 
the effectiveness of the selected stroke-presentation strategy, 
i.e., the after-recognition-go strategy. As a practical 
experiment, the number of strokes was increased to five, and 
stroke-length variations in a line drawing were enlarged. 
The experimental conditions are shown in Table IV. 
The procedure was almost the same as that in Section 
IV.A.2) except that each stroke pattern was presented only 
once, and no repetition was allowed. In addition, the 
presented lengths were individually adjusted to cancel 
individual nonlinear relationships of perceived lengths. 
TABLE IV . FACTORS AND LEVELS IN PRACTICAL EXPERIMENT. 
Factor 
Level 
Subject 
3 males (around age 23) 
Presentation strategy 
After-recognition-go strategy 
Presented stroke pattern 
2 patterns of 5-strokes 
Length 
Randomly chosen between 10 - 150 mm  
Speed 
Randomly chosen between 12.5 - 70 mm/s 
Direction 
Randomly chosen between 0 - 359 deg. 
 
B. Experimental Results 
Experimental results are shown in Figure 15. Although it 
leaves much to be improved, the perceived patterns capture 
the essential geometrical features of such complicate 
presented patterns. It shows a potential of the proposed 
finger tactile interface and the stroke presentation strategy. 
 
 
Figure 15. Experimental results of multi-stroke line drawing perception by 
using the active-wheel mouse. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Two multiple-stroke presenting strategies using a finger 
tactile interface, i.e., an active-wheel mouse, were presented: 
one is an after-recognition-go strategy, and the other is a 
while-perceiving-go strategy. Multiple-stroke recognition 
experiments confirmed the following conclusions. 
Although there were almost no significant differences 
between both of the strategies in terms of error means and 
variances with respect to lengths, angles, velocities, the after-
recognition-go strategy was superior to the while-perceiving-
go strategy in terms of means and variances with respect to 
the time-duration. In addition, all the subjects reported that 
they were much less exhausted in the after-recognition-go 
strategy than in the while-perceiving-go strategy. As a result, 
it can be said that the while-perceiving-go strategy that 
employs a closed-loop on-line positional feedback scheme 
does not work well, while the after-recognition-go strategy 
that employs an open-loop control scheme does work better. 
In the future, accuracy and efficiency will need to be 
furthermore improved. Applicable scope is expected, to be 
extended for such strokes as curved and accelerated strokes. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was partly supported by KAKENHI (Grant-in-
Aid for Challenging Exploratory Research 15H02929 from 
Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS). The 
authors wish to thank Mr. K. Katsuta for his contribution to 
the experiment. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Y. Nomura, Y. Kashino, and T. Sugiura, “Line-drawing presentation 
strategies with an active-wheel mouse,” Proc. the Eleventh 
International 
Conference 
on 
Advances 
in 
Computer-Human 
Interactions, pp. 199-203, Rome, March 2018. ISSN: 2308-4138, 
ISBN: 978-1-61208-616-3. 
[2] Y. Nomura and S. Oike, “Active-wheel mouse for human-computer 
interface: 
slippage-perception 
characteristics 
on 
fingerpad,” 
Proceedings of 10th International Conference, UAHCI 2016, Part of 
HCI International 2016, part II, pp. 54-61, 2016. 
[3]  Y. Nomura, Y. Kashino, and S. Oike, “Proposal of active-wheel-
based finger-tactile interface and its slippage-presenting functions,” 
Transactions of the JSME, vol. 83, no. 852, pp. 1-17, 2017 (in 
Japanese). 
[4] N. Tsuda, N. Kato, and Y. Nomura, “Instruction of arm motion for 
calligraphy using vibrotactile stimulations,” 2011 IEEE/ASME 
International Conference in Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics, pp. 
677-682, 2011. 
[5] A. Causo, S. H. Yeo, and I. M. Chen, “Vibrotactile motors on 
stationary arm as directional feedback to correct arm posture,” 2012 
IEEE/ASME International Conference in Advanced Intelligent 
Mechatronics, pp. 202-207, 2012. 
[6] S. L. Norman, A. J. Doxon, B. T. Gleeson, and W. R. Provancher, 
“Planar hand motion guidance using fingertip skin-stretch feedback,” 
IEEE Transactions on Haptics, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 121-130, 2014. 
[7] B. T. Gleeson, S. K. Horschel, and W. R. Provancher, “Perception of 
direction for applied tangential skin displacement: effects of speed, 
displacement, and repetition,” IEEE Transactions on Haptics, vol. 3, 
no. 3, pp. 177-188, 2010. 
[8] A. Ion, E. J. Wang, and P. Baudisch, “Skin drag displays: dragging a 
physical tactor across the user's skin produces a stronger tactile 
stimulus than vibrotactile,” Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 2501-2504, 
2015. 
[9] N. G. Tsagarakis, T. Horne, and D. G. Caldwell, “Slip aestheasis: A 
portable 2d slip/skin stretch display for the fingertip,” Eurohaptics 
Conference, 2005 and Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for Virtual 
Environment and Teleoperator Systems, pp. 214-219, 2005. 
[10] A. Moscatelli, A. Naceri, and M. Ernst, “Navigation in the fingertip,” 
IEEE World Haptics Conference, pp. 519-523, 2013. 
[11] R. J. Webster III, T. E. Murphy, L. N. Verner, and A. M. Okamura, 
“A novel two-dimensional tactile slip display: design, kinematics and 
perceptual experiments,” ACM Transactions on Applied Perception, 
vol. 2, no.2, pp. 150-165, 2005. 

298
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
[12] W. R. Provancher and N. D. Sylvester, “Fingerpad skin stretch 
increases the perception of virtual friction,” IEEE Transactions on 
Haptics, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 212-223, 2009. 
[13] L. T. Gwilliam, A. J. Doxon and W. R. Provancher, “Haptic matching 
of directional force and skin stretch feedback cues,” IEEE World 
Haptics Conference, pp. 19-14, 2013. 
[14] R. L. Koslover, B. T. Gleeson, J. T. De Bever, and W. R. Provancher, 
“Mobile navigation using haptic, audio, and visual direction cues with 
a handheld test platform,” IEEE Transactions on Haptics, vol. 5, no. 1, 
pp. 33-38, 2012. 
[15] Y. Nomura and K. Iwabu, “Length perceptual characteristics on 
raised-dot slippages,” Human-Computer Interfaces and Interactivity: 
Emergent Research and Applications, IGI Global, pp. 286-308, 2014. 
[16] Y. Nomura and H. Kato, “Raised-dot slippage perception on 
fingerpad using active wheel device,” Recent Advances on Using 
Virtual Reality Technologies for Rehabilitation, Nova Science 
Publishers, Inc., New York, pp. 165-172, 2015 
 

