Access to Escape: Didactic Conception and
Accessible Game Design of a VR-Escape Room for
Accessibility Education
Saba Mateen
studiumdigitale
Goethe University Frankfurt
Frankfurt am Main, Germany
mateen@sd.uni-frankfurt.de
Paula Wiesem¨uller
studiumdigitale
Goethe University Frankfurt
Frankfurt am Main, Germany
wiesemueller@sd.uni-frankfurt.de
Sarah Voß-Nakkour
studiumdigitale
Goethe University Frankfurt
Frankfurt am Main, Germany
voss@sd.uni-frankfurt.de
Abstract—Access to Escape is a Virtual Reality (VR) Escape
Room, aimed at sensitizing computer science students to the im-
portance of digital accessibility. Since these students will develop
digital content in the future, this target group is an important
starting point to create awareness towards the topic. This article
outlines the development of a VR game based on the viewpoints
of Accessibility Education, Game Accessibility, and accessible VR
to offer access to a wide range of people. The primary objective
is to address the research question of what steps are necessary to
create an accessible VR game and what the design process should
entail to achieve this goal. The first step involves developing a
didactic conception to create an educationally valuable learning
offer. A guide by didactic expert Kerres is presented, which
supports the development process of a didactic design including
the application to the VR-Escape Room. The development process
of Access to Escape also showed that the Game Accessibility
Guidelines (GAG) workflow offered a low-threshold starting
point, for example, by making the vast amount of accessibility
guidelines more tangible. Here, it should be emphasized that the
prioritization, as suggested by the workflow, must not lead to
the exclusion of any applicable guidelines, since every guideline
is needed to guarantee an accessible game experience. However,
during the implementation process of our VR-Escape Room,
it became apparent that many resources and a well-defined
time schedule are needed to achieve a fully accessible game. To
counteract this issue, more information material and open-source
solutions are needed to meet all accessibility requirements. An
evaluation of the first development phase of Access to Escape
showed that the VR-Escape Room is a suitable format for
educating about accessibility and, based on these results, further
steps regarding the development are discussed such as the use
of Artificial Intelligence, a multiplayer mode or the transfer to
other topics.
Index Terms—Accessibility Education; Virtual Reality; Game
Accessibility; Escape Room; Didactic Design.
I. INTRODUCTION
With the increasingly digital nature of everyday life, the
importance of digital accessibility moves further into focus.
This makes it necessary to bring the topic closer to developers
of digital content. As a possible solution, we developed
Access to Escape providing a low-threshold starting point for
dealing with digital accessibility [1]. As computer science
students represent the future developers of digital products, it
is necessary to educate these stakeholders on the importance of
digital accessibility and teach them methods for implementing
inclusive software. Using an immersive learning format such
as a VR game, it was aimed to sensitize the players by
making barriers more tangible and thus relatable. Although
gamification and VR technology offer benefits such as the
mentioned immersion, they also introduce new challenges,
including the need for accessible VR gaming experiences.
To design an accessible VR-Escape Room, we formulate the
following research question:
“What does the design process for creating an accessible
VR game entail, and what implementation steps are necessary
to achieve this goal?”
To address the presented research question, we will first give
an overview of the related topics in Section II, which includes
Accessibility Education, Game Accessibility, and Accessible
VR. Then, in Section III, we outline the considerations made
regarding the didactic design of the learning offer. Section
IV will offer an overview of the implementation of Access to
Escape. We will explain the game story and the corresponding
learning goals, how we implemented the GAG workflow, and
demonstrate the outcome of the implemented accessibility
features. The evaluation of the developed VR-Escape Room
is presented in Section V. The lessons learned and limitations
of the VR-Escape Room will then be discussed in Section
VI. Finally, in Section VII, we summarize our findings and
formulate tasks for future work.
II. DISCIPLINES OF ACCESSIBILITY
For a successful implementation of our research objectives,
it is necessary to consider different disciplines of digital
accessibility. Access to Escape, for one, represents a tool for
learners to grasp the content related to digital accessibility.
For another, the VR game needs to be accessible so it can
be played by every learner. The following subsections address
the topics necessary to achieve the objectives. The teaching of
accessibility and connected specifications will be discussed.
Further, the requirements for accessible game design and
inclusive VR applications will be examined.
113
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A. Accessibility Education
Accessibility Education is a broad field in which learners
are supposed to acquire various competences: Initially, they
need to develop theoretical understanding and procedural
knowledge regarding accessibility [2]. Only with the aid of
this foundational knowledge, learners can develop technical
skills in this discipline.
To teach these skills, educators need resources that can
teach accessibility while considering the current knowledge
and skill set of students [3]. As digital accessibility is still
not a widespread mandatory subject at every university, it is
necessary to create such learning materials that provide a low-
threshold introduction to the subject, so even students who
do not have any prior educational knowledge about digital
accessibility can have easy access to the content.
In order to provide that simple introduction to the topic,
it is beneficial to make barriers tangible and thus provide
learners with a realistic experience [4]. For example, Kletenik
and Adler [5] developed three games in which the players
are confronted with simulated disabilities to raise awareness
of accessibility. It became apparent that the students who
played these games increased their empathy for people with
impairments or disabilities and also their motivation to design
more accessible content.
These results provide a constructive basis for the devel-
opment of additional learning materials. However, in future
conceptualizations, the following insight could be considered,
which could further enhance the awareness-raising effect: To
make simulated barriers even more immersive, VR technology
has the potential to create experiences that make them as
tangible as possible [6].
B. Game Accessibility
Game Accessibility describes the subarea of game develop-
ment that addresses the removal of barriers for people with
impairments or disabilities [7]. It should be emphasized that
removing the barriers, and by that, creating an accessible
game, is limited by the game rules. Games often include
intended barriers, which represent the challenges of the game
story. If those challenges were removed, the intention and / or
the entertaining character of the game could be compromised.
For the development of accessible games that comply
with the corresponding game rules, the Game Accessibility
Guidelines (GAG) [8] by the International Game Developers
Association (IGDA) have been established in different elab-
orations [7], [9], [10], [11]. The GAG [8] are guidelines,
which are based on an online survey that gathered methods
to make games more accessible to different user groups. The
current version (May 2021) includes 122 guidelines that can
be classified according to motor, cognitive, visual, auditory,
linguistic, and general barriers. Each of these six groups is
classified again into three subgroups (basic, intermediate, and
advanced). The classification into these subgroups depends on
the following three factors:
Reach: People benefiting from meeting the requirements.
Impact: Qualitative difference for players.
Value: The cost incurred for implementation.
The basic guidelines [8] describe accessibility features that
make playing easier for a large number of players and are also
easy to implement. The intermediate guidelines [8] include
features that require additional planning and resources, but
are still easy to implement and reach many players. Finally,
the advanced guidelines [8] involve complex modifications
and high costs. Although only a few specific players benefit
quantitatively from these modifications, they have a very high
qualitative value for those players.
The need for each guideline of the GAG is emphasized by
a realistic use case, making the traceability of a barrier easier
for developers [8]. Further support provided by the guidelines
are the listed best-practice games that have particularly well
implemented the respective guideline.
Regarding the implementation of accessible games, the
following workflow is recommended by the IGDA [8]:
1) Familiarize: Before the implementation phase begins,
the guidelines must be considered, since a variety of
requirements can already be met through simple design
decisions in the conception phase.
2) Evaluate & plan: In the second phase, it must be inves-
tigated which guidelines will be relevant and applicable
in the context of the planned game to create a reduced
subset of requirements to be implemented.
3) Prioritize & schedule: The selected requirements from
the second phase are prioritized according to the avail-
able resources and scheduled in the development plan.
4) Implement: To achieve the best results, experts and
players with a disability or impairment should also test
the game during the implementation phase.
5) Inform: Players should be made aware of the imple-
mented guidelines in tutorials and loading screens, as
there is a risk that they will go unnoticed in various
menu settings.
6) Review & learn: Information on how often players have
used accessibility features helps future projects when
conducting the third phase, especially when prioritizing
requirements.
C. Accessible VR
The use of VR is steadily increasing and is becoming a
more prevalent tool in education. This makes access to VR
technology even more important. The developer manual of the
company Oculus emphasizes that accessible VR applications
can reach a wider range of users [12]. VR applications are
considered accessible when people with different types of
visual, auditory, mobility, perceptual, and cognitive impair-
ments can interact with the given content. The manual presents
procedures for seven application areas of a VR application,
which partly overlap with the GAG and the Web Content
Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) [7]. The sections of the
manual are presented in the following:
User Experience (UX) and User Interaction (UI) [12]: To
achieve an inclusive UX, game developers must first become
aware of exclusive UX design. As an example of such an
114
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

exclusive design, the chosen size of the play area is mentioned:
Players with a limited movement area could experience a
below-average or even unplayable user experience. Only when
the game can be completed without blockages or external help,
an inclusive UX design is achieved. It must be constantly
tested to see if this is the case. For example, it is useful to play
the game with disabled sound or color filters. Also, the use of
auditory, visual, and haptic interaction possibilities makes the
UX more inclusive.
Controls and Interactions [12]: The predefined controls of
a game can hinder players, for example those with motor
impairments, from interacting with the game. To improve this
situation, selection options and alternative types of interaction
should be presented. Modifications help not only people with
disabilities but also all players. For example, the ability to
re-assign control keys not only helps players who cannot
fulfill the default input requirements due to motor impairments
but also benefits habitual players who prefer personalized
interaction.
Movement and Locomotion [12]: In order for the movement
of players in the virtual world to be feasible for everyone,
among other things, developers must consider how a person
who cannot move in the real world could still move around
in the virtual world. For example, navigation via joysticks
eliminates the barrier for players who cannot move freely in
the real world.
Display [12]: Personalizing screen displays, such as variable
brightness settings, is now standard on many devices. In
VR applications, this personalization is even more important
because the complete occupancy of the visual space and the
proximity to the human eye pose a risk of sensory overload. A
personalized display prevents this danger for all players, with
and without impairments. For example, the ability to enlarge
text elements or objects in the virtual world can support people
with visual impairments.
App Design [12]: Elements of app design can support the
accessibility of VR applications. For example, a clear and
mandatory tutorial at the beginning of the game provides
the opportunity to become familiar with the game mechanics.
Clearly defined rules and objectives help players stay focused
on the game. Through such methods, the basic understanding
of the game can be simplified for all players. Additionally,
the game can be made more accessible by adding a Guiding
Character. For players who were unable to process auditory,
visual, or haptic signals, these characters can, for example,
provide additional hints.
Audio [12]: In addition to the possibilities of visual and
haptic interaction, audio offers another form of communica-
tion. Short and simple audio tracks can signal actions and
processes. However, despite the advantages of sound, the
option should be kept open to deactivate it without loss: People
who, for example, have difficulty concentrating and therefore
choose to turn off the sound, must not experience any loss of
information.
Captions and Subtitling [12]: Captions refer to the textual
reproduction of spoken dialogues. Whereas, subtitling refers to
the translated textual reproduction of spoken foreign-language
dialogues. These forms of information transfer help a variety
of people: players with hearing or cognitive impairments,
players who do not understand the game language, and players
who prefer to read dialogues instead of hearing them.
III. DIDACTIC DESIGN
We created the didactic design of Access to Escape using
Kerres’ guide [13]. To support the development process of
learning offers the guide uses various analysis and decision
steps. In the following, the individual steps will be briefly
introduced and applied to the VR-Escape Room.
A. Contexts
According to Kerres, the educational context of the learning
offer has to be defined first [13]. Here, a distinction is made
between three types of contexts into which a learning offer can
be classified: Formal education describes intended institutional
education with the aim of a degree such as school or university
education. Non-formal education does not aim at a degree but
it is still intended and organised. In contrast, informal learning
is unintentional and takes place in everyday life, for example,
through conversations.
Access to Escape is a virtual learning environment that
enables knowledge acquisition through independent interaction
with the game assisted by educators. Currently, the game is
not embedded in a university lecture and thus constitutes a
learning offer in a non-formal education context. However, if
the game will be offered in connection to a course it can be
considered as part of formal education.
B. Stakeholder
The learners’ characteristics need to be identified and thus
the target group will be defined. To enable this identification,
Kerres introduces several attributes including number of par-
ticipants, level of education and motivation [13]. Special focus
is on the prior knowledge of the learners. In addition, other
actors such as teachers, as well as the constellation between
the participants are important.
The VR-Escape Room is primarily intended to enable com-
puter science students to identify and ideally remove barriers.
This target group should be made aware of barriers as early
as possible in their studies, so that these barriers can be taken
into account in the further course of their education.
C. Educational Concern
Based on the used guide, a learning offer aims to solve
an educational problem [13]. For this, it is necessary to
first identify the problem and then formulate an educational
concern in concrete terms. In this context, the understanding of
education must be determined: Kerres distinguishes between
Education as Disposition, where the goal is the development
of competences, Education as Transaction with the goal of
developing qualifications, and Education as Transformation,
where the aim is personality development.
115
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The educational problem that we try to solve with our learn-
ing offer is the insufficient presence of digital accessibility in
the study field of computer science even though those students
will create digital content in the future. With this in mind,
the educational concern can be formulated as follows: Digital
accessibility must be considered and implemented by develop-
ers of digital content. However, there is a lack of awareness
of digital barriers and the opportunity to get familiar with
the topic easily. The understanding of education regarding
the learning offer can be split up into all three categories.
The learners should be empowered to identify and preferably
eliminate barriers (education as disposition). The obtained
knowledge can support the learners career opportunities as
digital accessibility gains importance due to the digitisation
of everyday life (education as transaction). Further, Access
to Escape gives learners the opportunity to be sensitized
to barriers and thus expand their view of the environment
(education as transformation).
D. Teaching Objectives
Teaching objectives are structured within the context of the
competence domain and competence dimensions and catego-
rized by performance levels [13]:
Competence domains include the subject competence (un-
derstanding and knowledge about the world), self competence
(regulation of one’s actions) and social competence (interac-
tion with others).
The competence dimensions describe knowledge, motor or
cognitive skills, and attitudes, values, and norms each regard-
ing objects, individuals, and oneself.
Within the context of competence domains and dimensions,
various performance levels can be achieved. Learners may re-
call knowledge about subject competences, comprehend them
in greater depth, or achieve even higher levels of performance.
The VR-Escape Room intends to teach subject competence
related to accessibility, which is why the performance levels
are applied to said competence domain. Regarding the di-
mension “knowledge”, learners are supposed to achieve the
following performance levels:
Remembering: Learners can recognize and reproduce bar-
riers they have encountered during the game; Understanding:
Learners can find examples of similar barriers and explain why
such a barrier is a hindrance; Apply: Learners can apply the
acquired knowledge by identifying and removing barriers.
Further, the learners should develop skills in the cognitive
phase, which means the barriers are known and can be
described verbally and also in the associative phase meaning
the possibilities to remove a barrier are known and can be
applied.
Lastly, the VR-Escape Room is supposed to affect the
attitudes of the learners in the following aspects:
Attentive: Learners are willing to engage with new norms
and values; Reacting: Learners voluntarily pay attention to
digital barriers as they continue to study and integrate their
knowledge into further developmental tasks; Values: The learn-
ers recognize the importance of digital accessibility and take it
into account in their further work; Adopting Values: Learners
adopt the learned values into their value system.
E. Selection of the Teaching Content
Based on the teaching objectives (see Subsection III-D), the
teaching content for the competence dimensions “knowledge”,
“skills”, and “attitudes” must now be defined. Using different
positions offered by Kerres [13], the teaching content for the
VR-Escape Room was identified:
Position A: “Teaching content can be justified by future
requirements and qualification needs.” [13] - Increasingly,
employers are obliged to provide a barrier-free presence [14],
which requires qualified employees. They should know and
be able to apply the basic concepts of digital accessibility.
Position B: “Teaching content should enable an educational
experience that changes the person. (transformation)” [13] -
By confronting learners with real-life challenges, a formative
experience should be made possible. Thereby the learners
are sensitized to barriers and their consequences. Position C:
“Teaching content can be defined based on an analysis of tasks
to be performed.” [13] - Since the range of topics in digital
accessibility is very broad, the teaching content must be made
concrete. Tasks can look like so:
For example, if the task is to develop a low-barrier website,
the WCAG must be considered (Step 1: Finding the Guide-
lines). Understanding the specific barriers (Step 2: Under-
standing the success criterion) and the corresponding solutions
(Step 3: Understanding the Solutions) are a necessity for
creating barrier-free access to a website. The modular structure
of the guidelines allows the definition of clearly delimited
tasks from which teaching content can be derived. Each
success criterion deals with one barrier and thus corresponds
to one potential task. Further, the validity of the WCAG is
not exclusively limited to web content. For example, correct
language markup of texts must also be available in a game or
other applications. Selected WCAG success criteria that are
universally applicable are therefore suitable teaching content.
Considering these positions, the following teaching contents
could be identified: speech markup, alternative text, represen-
tation of color, heading hierarchies, and appropriate button
size.
F. Didactic Principles
Learning offers can be structured as more expository or
exploratory [13]. The former describes a step-by-step introduc-
tion and practice of the teaching content. The latter conveys
teaching content through the direct confrontation with complex
problems.
The VR-Escape Room consists of elements of both prin-
ciples. Explorative elements are the flatly structured teaching
material, which do not build upon each other, the non-formal
learning situation since the teaching contents do not belong
to a formal course, the very diverse target group consisting of
students of different levels of knowledge and learning motiva-
tions and the self-study learning habit of the target group.
Further, the playful VR learning offer can trigger intrinsic
116
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

motivation among students (explorative). If instructors choose
to use the game alongside a lecture and reward it, for example,
with bonus points, it can also stimulate extrinsic motivation
in students (expository). Another expository element is the
limited prior knowledge of the target group. According to
the module handbook, students have little exposure to digital
accessibility [15].
G. Learning Times
The learning process is characterized by three components,
which are stimulated to different degrees by the learning offer
[13].
Learning by reception includes learning by taking in and
processing presented information. The component communi-
cation refers to the learning theory behaviorism, which states
that learning is influenced by external factors: Feedback or
reinforcement from the environment informs about the correct-
ness and incorrectness of an issue and leads to learning. The
third component construction describes that simple processes
in the environment can be learned by trial and error. Through
experiences, pushing boundaries, and reflecting on processes,
not only are predefined contents learned, but rather new
horizons are discovered.
Essentially, the three components presented can be at-
tributed to the three competence dimensions (see Subsection
III-D). Reception is mainly concerned with the transfer of
knowledge, communication is related to attitudes, and con-
struction contributes to the acquisition of skills.
The largest part of the planned learning activity is devoted
to learning through construction. This is due to the game me-
chanics of Access to Escape, which involves solving puzzles
through independent interaction within the given space. The
remaining components of the learning process involve learning
through reception and learning through communication. Prior
to the game, players receive information that is relevant to
their understanding of the game; in a concluding debriefing,
a series of information is presented for learners to absorb and
process (learning through reception). Through hints and en-
couragement before and during the game, as well as feedback
on insights during the debriefing, information is conveyed in
an interpersonal manner (learning through communication).
H. Learning Processes
The introduced components of reception, communication
and construction (see Subsection III-G) will be used to break
down how learning processes can be initiated by the learning
offer, according to Kerres [13].
Reception: Asking the question of how learning processes
can be supported by the presentation of information, Kerres
focuses on the so-called didactisation of the presentation.
Here, various approaches are introduced, which support the
learning process through a curtain presentation of information.
One approach being the use of questions to initiate independent
thinking processes. Instead of just naming facts and results, the
learners develop a solution to given questions. The VR-Escape
Room goes one step further: Learners figure out the questions
on their own as they are confronted with barriers. Only by
eliminating the barriers, they can go on within the game.
This inevitably raises the question of how accessibility can
be implemented in the respective area. If the learners cannot
define the questions on their own or cannot find an answer,
hints can be received at any time. Further, Kerres mentions
the use of examples to vividly present complex content and by
that, support the learning process. All puzzles are examples of
a barrier. One of the puzzles shows that conveying information
only through color is a barrier. The learners have to figure out
another way to convey information and can thus remove the
barrier.
Communication: Kerres claims that communication always
includes a content level and a relationship level. On the content
level, knowledge regarding accessibility is conveyed through
the learning offer. On the relationship level, power and appro-
priate behavior on the side of the teachers are essential aspects
to consider. The aim is to create an environment conducive
to learning. In the case of the VR-Escape Room, a power
imbalance can almost completely be ruled out. Knowledge is
conveyed in a playfully without an evaluation of performance.
Throughout the game, the learners can ask for hints and are
supported by teachers.
Construction: Here, the question arises as to which learning
activity can best initiate cognitive activation. Kerres describes
that especially the active engagement with the learning content
leads to learning success. Learning activities, like summarizing
or drawing, are said to promote learning. The VR-Escape
Room is no suitable learning offer to apply these learning
activities. However, another type of activity can be reached in
the game: Through the practical examination of the content
in a virtual environment, cognitive activation is stimulated to
subsequently build up competences. This is intended to enable
learners to apply the learning content in future situations.
I. Learning Spaces and Learning Media
The learning spaces and learning media play an important
role concerning the learning process and finally the learning
success. According to Kerres, learning spaces have the po-
tential to influence the learning experience [13]. The learning
offer can convey information through different learning media,
also influencing the learning experience. Every learning room
features a didactic design and therefore has the potential to
influence the learning experience. The resources available,
but also the furniture in the room, are factors that influence
learning and teaching. In addition, learning spaces have a so-
called affordance, which means they suggest certain behaviors:
While some rooms may encourage focused individual work,
others encourage creative group work. There are also differ-
ences in the digital world: Some digital learning spaces may
be particularly helpful for flexible, self-determined learning,
while others have a positive effect on group dynamics and thus
promote collaborative learning. Here, it should be noted that
the extent of the influence that a learning space has on learning
behavior is a subjective perception varying from person to
person.
117
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Access to Escape is a learning offer, which uses playful
elements and tension to achieve learning success. Since the
aim is to make barriers tangible, the use of VR as a learning
medium is ideal as it can recreate a realistic experience. In
addition, the immersion associated with VR can encourage
learners to stick with it. The individual rooms in Access
to Escape should not appear cramped, but should not be
too spacious either so that the learner does not lose their
orientation. By using appropriate light sources and unobtrusive
sounds, the focus should be entirely on learning and not be
wasted on disruptive factors.
J. Learning Organization
Based on Kerres’ definition, learning organization describes
how the learning offer is organized in terms of time, whether
and when synchronous or asynchronous elements are planned,
and which social forms should be used [13]. However, due to
its current short-term and isolated use, the VR-Escape Room
does not fit the concept of learning organization. For now,
there is no plan for recurring use of the learning offer; rather,
the Escape Room only needs to be completed once. Since the
learners will use the learning offer alone, the social form can
clearly be defined as individual work (with supervision).
K. Evaluation
Evaluating a learning offer provides insights into the pos-
itive as well as negative aspects of an implemented concept.
Based on the identified characteristics, future teaching can be
made more efficient and effective. Four key evaluation areas
include:
• Acceptance: Learner perspectives and invested resources
(time).
• Engagement: Cognitive, emotional, and behavioral in-
volvement.
• Learning Outcomes: Competences acquired.
• Consequences: Effects on individuals, organizations, and
society.
The VR-Escape Room is evaluated using the method of obser-
vation, open-ended feedback as well as two questionnaires: the
User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ) and the Goethe Uni-
versity Frankfurt’s Course Evaluation Questionnaire (CEQ).
The UEQ provides insights into the acceptance and learning
engagement parameters of the learning offer. The CEQ also
assesses learning engagement in the learning process, evaluates
the scope of learning outcomes, and hints at the prospects of
learning consequences. Further details on the questionnaires,
their application, and results can be found in Section V.
L. Examination
Examinations play a crucial role in assessing developed
competences in both formal and non-formal educational offers.
It is the responsibility of educators to design an examination
format that aligns with the instructional methods employed.
For instance, if the primary focus for achieving teaching
and learning objectives was on pure knowledge transfer, the
examination format should not include complex application
tasks to avoid a discrepancy between the learning and testing
situations.
Competence assessment through an examination is not
planned in the first phase of this project. Several reasons un-
derlie this decision: Firstly, the VR-Escape Room constitutes
a learning activity that is conducted only once. Consequently,
the amount of content that can be covered through the learning
offering is limited. The plan is to introduce learners to five
barriers in a playful manner, which does not allow for the
creation of a comprehensive examination. It is only during
the debriefing, following the completion of the game that
participants are explicitly informed about the learning content.
Assessing the learning content immediately in a subsequent
examination would only reflect whether learners have tem-
porarily memorized the information from the debriefing. How-
ever, assessing competence acquisition in the case of Access
to Escape is more about whether learners are sensitized to
the barriers in the long term and can recognize them and
provide solutions even after a significant amount of time
has passed. Furthermore, the developed learning offer was
evaluated during a pandemic. The presence of an examination
and the associated effort could have had a discouraging effect
on the already reduced number of participants. Due to these
reasons, competence assessment was not initially planned. To
still be able to make a statement about the added value of
the learning offer and its consequences, the focus shifts to
evaluation (see Section V).
IV. IMPLEMENTATION
The implementation is divided into different sections: First,
we introduce the VR-Escape Room Access to Escape and its
learning objectives. They specify what skills and knowledge
the learners are supposed to gain. Next, the application of
the GAG workflow is presented, which exemplifies how the
workflow can be integrated into the development process.
Finally, the implemented accessibility features are presented
and categories for clustering them are proposed.
A. Access to Escape
At the beginning of the game, the player is in a university
building and has to find a certain auditorium. Initially, the
person playing is on the first floor where a training room
is located. As soon as the player is ready, they can use an
elevator to go to the desired location but because of a defect,
the elevator crashes shortly after. Finally, the player lands on
the basement floor where five puzzles, each representing a
barrier, need to be solved to get the elevator running again.
• Puzzle 1: Once the elevator crashes onto the basement
floor, a security box opens. In it, a numerical code - the
so-called security code - can be seen. There are also
three symbols: the London Eye, the Eiffel Tower and
the Brandenburg Gate. Under each of the landmarks is
a slot. Initially, the card is in the Eiffel Tower slot. To
open the elevator doors, the security code must be figured
out. Just as in real life, they are supposed to press the
emergency button, recognizable by the yellow bell (see
118
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 1. Puzzle 1: Interior view of the elevator after the crash.
Fig. 2. Access card and scanner to enter a room.
Figure 1). However, the following announcement is not
understandable, as it sounds like the French sound image
but does not contain any French text. Only when the
mentioned card is inserted into the Brandenburg Gate
slot the originally German text can be understood. After
entering the correct code, which was hinted at by the
announcement, the elevator doors open.
The incomprehensible speaker announcement is caused
by an incorrect language setting, which introduces the
learning objective of the first puzzle: WCAG success
criterion 3.1.1 Language of Page (Level A). This success
criterion requires the ability to programmatically deter-
mine the language of the content at hand. People who use
a screen reader will encounter this barrier, for example,
when a web page has no or an incorrect language tag.
If the screen reader pronounces text in a different sound
than the language in which the text is written, the read-out
Fig. 3. Puzzle 2: Overview of the room.
Fig. 4. Puzzle 3: Using a color filter, the player experiences the perception
of a person with a color vision deficiency (deuteranopia).
text is very difficult or even impossible to understand.
As soon as the player leaves the elevator, they find themselves
in the foyer of the former computer science learning center.
Various objects can be seen there, some of which resemble the
atmosphere of an abandoned building. One object, however, is
relevant for the further game: On a shelf is an access card on
which the outline of Goethe’s head is depicted in reference to
the Goethe University Frankfurt (see Figure 2). The scanners
on the doors leading from the foyer to other rooms also show
a Goethe head. The players should recognize that the access
card must be placed on the scanner to open a door. Only one
of the doors can be opened with the first access card. Once
the correct door is opened, the player can start puzzle 2 (see
Figure 3).
• Puzzle 2: Within the entered room, a multitude of blocks
are distributed, which are labeled with different letters.
An important code, which is needed to move on within
the game is projected onto a wall as an extremely blurry
image. On another wall, there is a hint: “bei uns k¨onnen
Alle Leute Teilnehmen” (engl. “with us all people can
participate”, see Figure 3). The incorrect capitalization
indicates the solution word: “A”, “L”, “T”. By placing
the correct cubes in the designated trays, an alternative
text appears on the monitor. In addition, the image on the
projector screen becomes sharp. Both provide information
about the code that is needed to open the door lock in
the room, which hides another access card. In case the
player does not find the solution through the clue on the
wall alone, there is a Guiding Character, which appears
here for the first time and accompanies the player with
clues throughout the game. This Guiding Character is a
robot chicken that is supposed to represent a project from
a university module and claims to have been left behind
in this place.
Puzzle 2 introduces the player to the difficulties caused by
inaccessible graphics, which are mentioned in the WCAG
success criterion 1.1.1 Non-text Content (Level A). Here,
it is described that non-text content needs an alternative
textual access point.
• Puzzle 3: After solving the previous puzzle, the player
receives another card that allows them to enter a room
119
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 5. Puzzle 4: Three button options next to the magic carpet, each
representing a different heading level.
containing a color-dependent puzzle. However, just a few
seconds after entering the room, they can only see a
limited amount of colors due to a color filter, which
imitates the color vision deficiency deuteranopia (see
Figure 4). As they cannot perceive all colors, the player
must consider other ways to convey information, in this
case through patterns: To solve the puzzle, the player
needs to arrange some blocks on the shelf. But currently,
the colors of these blocks look quite similar, making it
impossible to get the correct order. The player needs to
find a so-called color-scanner, which can add patterns to
the blocks. After that, the puzzle can easily be solved.
Here, the player is introduced to the content of WCAG
success criterion 1.4.1 Use of Color (Level A), which
states that color should not be the only way to convey
information. If content is conveyed through color alone,
people with limited color perception may not be able to
assimilate this information.
• Puzzle 4: In the next room, a cliff has to be crossed
by choosing the correct order of labeled buttons, which
represent heading levels (see Figure 5) and by that,
the player becomes familiar with the content of WCAG
success criterion 1.3.1 Info and Relationships (Level
A). This success criterion requires that the structure of
(web) content must be programmatically determinable.
If the correctness of the heading order is not given, the
comprehensibility of the digital content is limited.
With a hint from the Guiding Character, the player
can cross the cliff, using a so-called magic carpet. The
challenge is to understand that the correct heading order
is given whenever the current heading level is followed by
a level that is either lower, equivalent, or only one level
above the existing level. The player can choose between
three different buttons each representing a heading level.
If the player selects the wrong button they will travel
down to that level but immediately get back to the previ-
ous position. Only by selecting the correct level, they will
advance to a position further ahead and can then choose
the next button. Due to simulator sickness, which can
occur within a virtual environment [16], we implemented
another game mode to solve this puzzle: The player is
Fig. 6. Puzzle 5: Overview of the room.
standing in front of a panel divided into three pieces
each representing a heading level equivalent to the buttons
of the first game mode. Through teleportation to the
piece representing the correct heading level, a new panel
appears and the player can again try to select the correct
level. Using one of these game modes, the player can
finally reach the other side of the room where they find
a board with six bits on it that is necessary to solve the
last puzzle.
• Puzzle 5: The board discovered in the previous puzzle
can now be combined with the existing board in the foyer
(see Figure 6). This allows the solution of the resulting
propositional logic equation. To operate the lights, three
buttons below them can be used: the “OFF” button,
which deactivates the respective light; the “ON” button,
which activates it; and a “?” button, randomly toggling
each of the six lights. The challenge arises from the
“ON” button’s small size (see Figure 7), often leading
to inadvertent contact with surrounding buttons. After
several wrong attempts, the puzzle gets blocked by a wall
sliding over the light panel. Simultaneously, an audible
signal sounds, and a fuse box opens. Among those is
the “Lamp Function” fuse, enabling interaction with the
light panel. There is also a lever related to button size,
initially set to “small”. Switching it enlarges the “ON”
button to match the others. Consequently, the puzzle can
be effortlessly solved following the logical equation and
by that, the elevator can be reactivated.
This puzzle is based on WCAG success criterion 2.5.5
Target Size (Level AAA), which states the necessity to
maintain a minimum size for buttons (and other interac-
tive elements) in order to guarantee their operability for
all users.
B. Implementation of GAG Workflow
The development process of the VR-Escape Room follows
the phases of the IGDA workflow for an accessible implemen-
tation:
Phase 1 - Familiarization: The structure and content of the
GAG and the presented Oculus manual were considered.
Phase 2 - Evaluate & Plan: The GAG are provided in the
form of an Excel spreadsheet in which each row represents
a success criterion whereas the Oculus manual contains var-
120
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 7. Puzzle 5: Inaccessible target size of the “ON” Button making it
impossible to select the element.
Fig. 8. Excel spreadsheet with a rating of guidelines.
ious texts, which are spread over several pages. To allow a
structured evaluation, we converted the content of the Oculus
manual into an organized Excel spreadsheet. The further
evaluation of the now prepared guidelines was approached
together with the following phase.
Phase 3 - Prioritizing & Scheduling: The prioritization of
the guidelines has been carried out in several steps. First,
it was decided that, in addition to the Oculus manual, only
the basic GAG guidelines would be considered. These do
not require a complex implementation and yet help a large
number of gamers, making them a suitable basis for the
first prototypical implementation. In the next step, the Excel
spreadsheet from phase 2 was extended by two additional
columns, “Importance” and “Ease”, which take a value be-
tween 1 (important resp. easy) and 3 (rather unimportant resp.
difficult) for each guideline (see Figure 8). “Importance” is
used to indicate how necessary a guideline is for the concrete
game experience of Access to Escape. Thus, the guideline
to use a readable text size is associated with the importance
of “1”, whereas the guideline to inform about accessibility
features during the game is rated with the importance of
“2”. The latter policy aims to improve the game experience
by providing information; the former policy aims to provide
a basic perceptible game experience, which is why it is
considered more important. “Ease” describes how complex
and time-consuming a potential implementation of the policy
is estimated. After determining whether a policy applies to the
game (see Phase 2), the values of “Importance” and “Ease”
were discussed and recorded. By looking at the final scores, a
prioritization of the guidelines or features could be performed.
Phase 4 - Implementation: Throughout the development
process, the game was evaluated by usability and accessibility
experts. Because of these evaluations, an implemented puzzle
could be identified as a trigger for simulator sickness and thus
as non-accessible. Therefore, an alternative path to the game
was developed, which avoids the sickness-indicating factors.
Phase 5 - Informing: Game-internal informing was not con-
sidered in the context of the prototypical VR-Escape Room.
Access to Escape does not have any settings that can be
accessed by the players but the implemented policies represent
features that are inevitably encountered in the game anyways.
Phase 6 - Assessing & Learning: The testing phase of
Access to Escape included 11 participants with connections
to the study field of computer science [17]. We were present
throughout the testing, which made it easy to observe how
the participants reacted to the accessibility features. Here, it
became apparent that the implemented features were also able
to provide a better gaming experience for players without
impairments or disabilities. They showed positive reactions to
multiple access possibilities. Examples are the textual content
conveyance through subtitles, the auditory signaling of events
via sound effects, and the haptic feedback in the form of
different vibration patterns of the controllers.
C. Implementation of Accessibility Features
This section sketches the implemented and discarded guide-
lines and presents different categories in which these guide-
lines can be clustered. The respective categories are not to be
considered disjunctively; thus, a guideline that is assigned to
one category may also be part of another. In the following, the
categories and exemplary associated guidelines are presented
in ascending order of effort.
1. Implementation by the game engine: Besides guidelines,
which have to be implemented manually, there are also acces-
sibility features, which can be implemented by pre-developed
templates of the chosen game engine (in our case Unreal
Engine), such as: “Representation of the controllers in the
virtual environment” [12]. In order for the players to have
a reference to the real controllers during the game and to
simplify their use, a virtual copy of the controllers should be
displayed (see Figure 7). This not only shows the position of
the buttons on the controllers, so that the players do not have to
remember them, but also marks the position of the controllers
in the real space, and thus simplifies their findability [12]. The
game engine Unreal also provides this feature in the engine’s
own VR-template.
2. Implementation based on prior knowledge of accessibil-
ity: Further, there are such guidelines that can be implemented
simply and with small expenditure, if there is knowledge
of their necessity. One of these guidelines being: “Ensure
no essential information is conveyed by a color alone” [8].
Since not everyone can perceive information through color,
an alternative form of communication must be implemented
[8]. This can be in the form of patterns, icons, or text.
In Access to Escape, a combination of these approaches is
used. At one point, color signals the activation of a button,
121
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 9. Visualization of captions of spoken dialogue of the Guiding
Character.
which is additionally symbolized by sound and changing text.
Another example are color-coded blocks that are equipped
with patterns, so that they can be clearly differentiated without
the visibility of color.
3. Implementation through elementary game design: A
subset of the guidelines can be grouped under features that
every common game design includes to make the application
fundamentally playable, for example: “Placing UI elements
in a user-friendly way” [12]. For an unrestricted gaming
experience, the elements of the user interface must be easily
accessible and visibly positioned, otherwise the game flow
suffers [12]. The chosen position should indicate the relation
of the element to the rest of the room.
In our VR-Escape Room, the guideline was planned into the
visual conception of the games. The previous considerations
about the positioning of individual UI elements have greatly
simplified the fulfillment of this guideline.
4. Implementation through high effort: The guidelines sets
also include policies that require costly implementation, such
as “Provide subtitles for all important speech” [8]. Purely au-
ditory instructions and narrations exclude persons with hearing
impairments or persons who are more likely to take in written
information from a full game experience [8]. To counteract
this, the use of subtitles can be considered.
However, the implementation of these is not possible with-
out further effort using Unreal Engine. The option to add
subtitles to audio tracks is offered, but these are displayed
in a font size that is too small and in an unsuitable position in
the game. During our research, no option could be found to
change font size and position, so another approach had to be
taken: The subtitles are currently displayed as a separate text
field based on predefined time frames (see Figure 9). Due to
the complexity of this approach, the subtitles in the prototype
were only implemented as an exemplary feature in one scene
of the game.
5. Implementation not possible: Lastly, there are policies
that have not been implemented. In our case this had several
reasons; for one, the guidelines may not be in accordance
with the game rules or the game form: “Provide details of
accessibility features on packaging and / or website” [8]. To
benefit from the implemented accessibility features, players
must first be made aware of them [8]. If these are implemented
but not advertised, players may overlook them and, therefore,
assume that the game is not playable for them. In addition,
advertising the features can increase search engine traffic and
distinguish the application from other games of the same kind.
However, since Access to Escape is only a prototype and
currently no public deployment is planned, this policy was not
implemented for the current application.
For another, the reason for the lack of implementation may
be resource constraints, as some implementations of policies
may require additional expertise or time:
“Personalization of Controller-Based Movements” [12]. For
example, players who have difficulty holding a game-required
arm position for an extended period of time should have the
opportunity to personalize controller-based movements [12]. If
a position, such as an outstretched arm, cannot be achieved in
the real world, it should nevertheless be possible to personalize
the parameters of size, rotation or distance, so the virtual arm
can be fully extended or moved to a different position. Due
to different mobility abilities, these “hand profiles” should
be implemented individually for the left and right hand.
This guideline was not implemented within Access to Escape
due to its extensive implementation work and project time
restrictions.
V. EVALUATION
The evaluation study was conducted with the support
of eleven participants from the field of computer science,
as they are the primary target audience for the planned
learning concept. Among the participants, there were two
former students and nine individuals currently pursuing their
studies. Over a period of three weeks, they were invited
to play the VR-Escape Room in person. After completing
the game, the participants were asked to take part in an
online survey on-site. This survey was created using the
survey and examination software evasys, which is used at the
Goethe University Frankfurt, among other places, for quality
management purposes. The survey primarily consists of two
questionnaires: the User Experience Questionnaire (UEQ)
[18] and the Course Evaluation Questionnaire (CEQ) [19].
In addition, open feedback was collected, and observations
were
documented.
A
comprehensive
elaboration
of
the
evaluation results can be found in [17]. Following, the results
concerning Accessibility Education collected by the CEQ
will be presented.
For the establishment of the VR-Escape Room as a learning
offer, it is necessary to evaluate it as such. The CEQ is
employed to gather feedback from learners, enabling the iden-
tification of positive aspects of the learning offering as well
as the investigation and improvement of negative aspects. The
CEQ is structured into three sections: General, Educational
Objectives and Learning Format. Out of a total of 17 items,
15 are assessed using a 6-point Likert scale (1: strongly agree
- 6: strongly disagree). The remaining two items consist of
open questions.
As Table I shows, the implemented learning format has
the potential to increase knowledge regarding accessibility
by understandably conveying content. A somewhat diverse
122
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE I. CEQ - General: Mean values (1: strongly agree - 6: strongly
disagree).
Statement (translated from German)
Mean
Standard
deviation
The completion of the Escape Room leads to an
increase in knowledge.
1.5
0.5
The content is presented in an understandable
manner.
1.5
0.7
The relevance of the topics covered is evident.
1.8
1.0
TABLE II. CEQ - Educational Claim: Mean values (1: strongly agree - 6:
strongly disagree).
Statement (translated from German)
Mean
Standard
deviation
The learning experience makes me see things dif-
ferently and makes me recognize new connections.
1.5
0.7
The covered topic is comprehensively explored
and reflected upon.
1.5
0.5
The learning offer helps me develop my own
perspective.
1.5
0.7
range of opinions follows the statement “The relevance of the
topics covered is evident.” The majority fully agrees with this
statement, but one person each chose the options “somewhat
agree” and “somewhat disagree”. This feedback is significant
as a primary focus of the learning offer is to convey the
importance of the topic of accessibility and exhibits a matter
for further inspection.
The items “The learning experience makes me see things
differently and makes me recognize new connections.” and
“The learning offer helps me develop my own perspective.”
both receive identical and mostly positive ratings, suggest-
ing that this goal has been achieved (see Table II). The
positive agreement with the statement “The covered topic is
comprehensively explored and reflected upon” supports the
hypothesis that initial steps towards addressing the educational
objective of teaching about accessibility and initiating a sense
of sensitization have been taken.
The results of the last section of the CEQ show the
advantage of an innovative learning format. The participants
stated interest in the learning offer due to the use of VR and the
Escape Room format even though it was a voluntary learning
session about a rather unknown topic (see Table III).
Additional free-text feedback, analyzed using the Summa-
tive Qualitative Content Analysis according to Mayring [20],
particularly emphasizes awareness of the topic of accessibility.
TABLE III. CEQ - Learning Format: Mean values (1: strongly agree - 6:
strongly disagree).
Statement (translated from German)
Mean
Standard
deviation
VR has sparked my interest to take part in this
offer.
1.5
0.7
I participated because I am interested in Escape
Rooms.
1.2
0.4
In five free-text responses, it is highlighted that the VR-Escape
Room, for example, “creates attention for a topic that often
seems intangible to outsiders” (translated from German) and
that “the feeling of having a disadvantage in everyday life be-
comes practical” (translated from German). Additional benefits
of the VR-Escape Room for teaching Accessibility Education
can be summarized under the advantages of playful learning,
originality, appealing aesthetics, and simplified learning.
VI. DISCUSSION & LIMITATIONS
Access to Escape covers accessibility in two kinds of
ways: The VR-Escape Room was implemented following
the GAG workflow to achieve a low-barrier application
(Game Accessibility). Further, Access to Escape is supposed
to educate about accessibility, so the players experience
sensitization for the topic and develop an understanding
of different kinds of barriers and how to avoid them
(Accessibility Education).
Focusing on the first goal of Access to Escape, creating
a low-barrier application, challenges need to be addressed.
The discipline of Game Accessibility deals with eliminating
avoidable barriers for people with disabilities or impairments
within the framework of game rules [7]. This creates a
dilemma between adhering to the game rules and making the
game as accessible as possible. Game rules typically require
overcoming intended barriers that are presented in the form
of game challenges.
For example, a digital chess game where each move is
timed cannot fulfill the guideline of variable game speed
without violating the game rules [11]. Furthermore, not
every guideline is relevant to every game. For example, the
guideline that requires the use of subtitles cannot be applied
to a game that does not have audio. Therefore, developers
must be aware that a game may not be entirely accessible due
to the game rules but also that a game can still be accessible
even if not every single guideline is met. Thus, developers
are faced with the challenge of recognizing which guidelines
are feasible and relevant for the game.
Within the scope of this work, the GAG workflow has
proven to be a suitable approach, especially for the needed
structured exploration of the guidelines. Furthermore, the
transfer of this workflow to other guidelines has also been
successful and can be recommended. However, developers
must
consider
that
a
resource-based
prioritization,
as
suggested in phase 3 of the GAG workflow, cannot produce
an accessible application. This goal can only be achieved
by implementing all applicable guidelines. The EU Directive
2016/2102 (39) also emphasizes this fact: “Only legitimate
reasons should be taken into account in any assessment of
the extent to which the accessibility requirements cannot be
met because they would impose a disproportionate burden.
Lack of priority, time, or knowledge should not be considered
as legitimate reasons.” Therefore, while the GAG workflow
provides a structured approach to developing a low-barrier
application, it is only suitable for implementing an accessible
application if prioritization within the workflow does not lead
123
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

to the exclusion of other applicable policies. This is crucial
as each guideline ensures the access to the presented content
for a specific target group and further, as confirmed by our
results, they can improve the game experience for everybody.
To comply with all applicable guidelines, it is necessary to
schedule enough time to implement accessibility features
that were not achieved to the desired extent in the discussed
implementation. In retrospect, it could be recognized that
a classification of guidelines into categories is possible,
which could support better time management during the
development process. Another aspect that must be addressed
early on during the development process is the cooperation
with people affected by impairments or disabilities. Since
no test person stated that they are affected, the question
of inclusion can only be answered theoretically, not practically.
Having addressed Game Accessibility, we shift our focus
to the objectives regarding Accessibility Education.
To clearly define the scope and objectives of the learning
offer, Kerres’ guide provided a supporting framework [13].
Contexts, stakeholder, teaching objectives and many more
components could be specified on a common understanding of
the terms and their attributes. Considerations and challenges
regarding the learning format and the learning content could
be identified.
As defined in Subsection III-D, learners are supposed to
acquire competences to remember and understand encountered
barriers as well as apply that knowledge by identifying and
removing similar ones. The attainment of this goal cannot be
answered definitely as there was no examination conducted.
This poses a gap that needs to be closed. To do that, the
challenges regarding the format of a potential examination
need to be addressed (see Subsection III-L), e.g., with the
help of long-term participants who could be examined after a
longer period of time.
However,
tendencies
regarding
the
teaching
objective
concerning the attitudes of the learners could be identified.
The majority of learners stated that they recognized the
importance of digital accessibility (see Section V). They
experienced a newfound perspective on everyday barriers
and felt more aware of otherwise intangible challenges
[17], which emphasizes the suitability of the format for this
competence dimension.
Another advantage a novel learning format [17] like a
VR-Escape Room holds, can be defined by the intrinsic
motivation it is able to evoke (see Section V). Students
voluntarily registered to participate in the learning session,
even though it covered a rather theoretical
topic like
accessibility. Their motives can be defined by the use of VR
and the interest in Escape Rooms.
In conclusion, the development of an accessible VR game
requires enough resources and a well-defined time schedule.
To plan these factors, the GAG workflow offers a supporting
guide but is not sufficient on its own, which is why thor-
ough research and more tangible implementation templates
are needed. Moreover, Kerres’ guide provided a common
foundation for the definition of the learning offer. Expanding
on this, the considerations taken in the conception phase
simplified the merge of the didactic and technical design. They
reported a sense of sensitization and understanding of barriers.
A research gap left open states the examination for learning
success regarding the competence dimensions of knowledge
and cognitive skills. Overall, Access to Escape represents
a learning format that has the potential to effectively raise
awareness among students, and its development process can be
replicated through the proper utilization of support resources
such as those provided by GAG or Kerres.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
As a result of the development of Access to Escape, ap-
proaches to create accessible and innovative learning offers
in fields like Accessibility Education could be identified.
While Access to Escape provides a foundation for tackling
the challenge of delivering learning content in an engaging
manner, numerous opportunities for further enhancement and
expansion were formulated.
A. Conclusion
Summarizing, the research question “What does the design
process for creating an accessible VR game entail and what
implementation steps are necessary to achieve this goal?”
can be answered supported by Kerres’ guide and the GAG
workflow.
The former offers guidance throughout the development
process of a didactic design for a learning offer. It highlighted
various aspects that need to be taken into account to create a
game that can be used in educational settings.
Based on the results of the developed didactic concept,
the game can then be designed accessible using the GAG.
The GAG workflow provides a suitable starting point for
developing accessible games and a structured approach to
working with large sets of accessibility guidelines like the
GAG and the Oculus manual. The workflow is especially
useful for identifying and prioritizing policies that can be
implemented in a first implementation cycle. But here, the
examination of the guidelines alone is not sufficient for a
sustainable assessment of which prioritization these features
should take. A retrospective view of the implemented features
shows that preceding steps are needed, like the consideration
of the features that the chosen game engine already offers,
as well as the documentation of existing implementations.
Here, the classification into the categories presented in this
paper could benefit the development process. They offer the
possibility of assessing the workload that would be needed
to meet each guideline. However, since many guidelines fall
under the category of “Implementation through high effort” or
“Implementation not possible”, our VR-Escape Room Access
to Escape cannot meet the requirements of an accessible VR
game. Our research phase indicated that there is a need for
low-level solutions for accessible games and VR applications
so that accessibility features that were classified under the
124
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 10. Three phases of development and research: creation, extension, and
optimization.
mentioned categories can ideally be classified into “Imple-
mentation by game engine”. Since this is not the case yet,
the guidelines were implemented in an exemplary manner at
various points in our VR-Escape Room, but not consistently,
which is unsatisfactory and needs to be addressed in future
design iterations. Another aspect that needs to be included in
future work is the evaluation of Access to Escape by people
with impairments or disabilities to get reliable insights into
the accessibility of the VR game.
B. Future Work
The evaluation of Access to Escape in the first development
phase shows that the selected format of a VR-Escape Room
is suitable for sensitizing students to digital barriers that may
arise (see Section V). This subsection gives an overview of
the further development, the related research questions, and
discusses different approaches for future work. Figure 10
shows three phases, being creation, extension and optimization
of development and research.
With a focus on accessibility [1] and the implementation
in VR [17] the first phase has been completed and the results
have been published. The initial work is about the game
design of the VR-Escape Room, the definition of the topics
covered, a state-of-the-art analysis, the implementation of
Access to Escape, and a first evaluation.
The next steps of development and research are divided
into two further phases (see Figure 10), which may overlap
in time. In the second phase, the VR-Escape Room will be
further developed and improved, and in the third phase, an
expansion and integration of learning analytics approaches
and AI will be considered.
Following, the conceptual and technical development,
game accessibility, possible integration into teaching, and
the examination of the learning success are described in detail.
1) Further technical development:
Development environment: After the first development cy-
cle, the question is whether to migrate the VR-Escape Room
from Unreal to Unity. A main argument is that it can then be
integrated into an overall concept of new learning and teaching
spaces as part of other ongoing projects such as fuels [21].
However, this step would involve considerable effort.
Improvements based on evaluation results and user feedback
The evaluation has shown that the current state of develop-
ment still needs adjustments and improvement (see Section
V). Besides bugfixing, one improvement would be that the
Guiding Character provide more assistance, e.g., through time-
independent hints.
Multiplayer mode: The current single-player game could
be enhanced by a multiplayer mode, increasing the players’
motivation. This would also be in line with the typical game
mechanics of an Escape Room, which includes team play to
encourage the discussion of different approaches.
Learning Analytics & Artificial Intelligence: By integrating
learning analytics methods into the VR-Escape Room, learn-
ing data can be analyzed. The identification of the relevant
data and appropriate collection methods are subject to future
projects. Further research will address the elaboration of
different scenarios for the application of Artificial Intelligence
(AI) such as interactive and adaptive assistance.
Transfer to other topics: Access to Escape was implemented
for Accessibility Education. The transfer of the designed
learning format to other topics will be approached. This in-
cludes the development of an easy replication process and the
evaluation of learning success in different fields. Here, projects
like UEmbed [22] could allow users without programming
knowledge to create a game using the Unreal Engine. Since the
tool is modifiable, it could be integrated into the VR-Escape
Room project and expanded with new features. For example,
options for the type of in-game navigation can be enabled or
disabled in advance.
2) Conceptual development:
Cooperation with accessibility stakeholders In further de-
velopment, increased cooperation with accessibility experts
and organizations is sought, and people with disabilities or
impairments should be involved in the development process.
Addition of in-depth learning content Access to Escape
currently covers the content of five WCAG success criteria.
Approaches to the integration of more information on these
criteria need to be discussed. However, the presentation of
information within the game should not disturb the game
flow. Therefore, one strategy would be to create additional
material, including explanations of the barriers encountered
within Access to Escape.
Addition of new learning content In the first version of
Access to Escape, success criteria were selected from the
WCAG and conveyed through puzzles. The goal of future
iterations is to include additional success criteria.
3) Game Accessibility:
Using the GAG workflow, a clear prioritization of the
guidelines was made, making it possible to identify a first set
of guidelines that were implemented within the project scope
of Access to Escape. However, this can only be a starting point
as an accessible application requires the implementation of all
applicable guidelines. In future development, the integration
of remaining guidelines is a main goal.
125
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

4) Integration into educational context:
Currently, Access to Escape is not integrated into any
university courses. Following the optimization of the VR-
Escape Room during phases two and three, it should be
considered how to integrate it into courses and curricular
planning. One possibility is to develop a module as an addition
to an existing course or to create a new, stand-alone course
focused on accessibility, e.g., as part of Open Educational
Resources (OER).
5) Evaluation:
User testing and feedback User testing with people from
different backgrounds, including people with disabilities or
impairments is planned to gather feedback on the accessibility
of Access to Escape. This feedback can be used to iterate and
improve accessibility features and the overall user experience.
Evaluation of impact Further, studies are planned on how to
assess the effect of the learning offer on the awareness and
knowledge of digital accessibility among participants.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Mateen, P. Wiesem¨uller, and S. Voß-Nakkour, “Design of an Acces-
sible VR-Escape Room for Accessibility Education,” SMART ACCES-
SIBILITY, IARIA, 2023.
[2] S. Lewthwaite and D. Sloan, “Exploring pedagogical culture for ac-
cessibility education in computing science,” in Proceedings of the 13th
International Web for All Conference, 2016, pp. 1–4.
[3] Y. N. El-Glaly, “Teaching Accessibility to Software Engineering Stu-
dents,” in Proceedings of the 51st ACM Technical Symposium on
Computer Science Education, 2020, pp. 121–127.
[4] C. Putnam, M. Dahman, E. Rose, J. Cheng, and G. Bradford, “Teaching
Accessibility, Learning Empathy,” in Proceedings of the 17th Interna-
tional ACM SIGACCESS Conference on Computers & Accessibility,
2015, pp. 333–334.
[5] D. Kletenik and R. F. Adler, “Let’s Play: Increasing Accessibility
Awareness and Empathy Through Games,” in Proceedings of the 53rd
ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education V. 1, 2022,
pp. 182–188.
[6] S. Kavanagh, A. Luxton-Reilly, B. Wuensche, and B. Plimmer, “A
systematic review of virtual reality in education,” Themes in Science
and Technology Education, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 85–119, 2017.
[7] T. Westin, J. J. Ku, J. Dupire, and I. Hamilton, “Game Accessibility
Guidelines and WCAG 2.0 – A Gap Analysis,” in International Con-
ference on Computers Helping People with Special Needs.
Springer,
2018, pp. 270–279.
[8] I.
G.
D.
Association.
(2021)
”Game
Accessibility
Guide-
lines
-
A
straightforward
reference
for
inclusive
game
design”.
Last
visited:
2023.09.15.
[Online].
Available:
https://gameaccessibilityguidelines.com/
[9] R. Ossman, “Guidelines for developing accessible games,” Retrieved
August, vol. 12, p. 2011, 2006.
[10] J. R. Porter and J. A. Kientz, “An empirical study of issues and
barriers to mainstream video game accessibility,” in Proceedings of
the 15th international ACM SIGACCESS conference on computers and
accessibility, 2013, pp. 1–8.
[11] B. Yuan, E. Folmer, and F. C. Harris, “Game accessibility: a survey,”
Universal Access in the Information Society, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 81–100,
2011.
[12] Oculus. (2022) ”Designing Accessible VR”. Last visited: 2023.09.15.
[Online].
Available:
https://developer.oculus.com/resources/design-
accessible-vr/
[13] M. Kerres, Didaktik. Lernangebote gestalten. (engl. ’Didactics. Design-
ing learning offers.’).
Waxmann, 2021.
[14] German Bundestag, “Verpflichtung von privatwirtschaftlichen Un-
ternehmen zur Herstellung von Barrierefreiheit in den USA, ¨Osterreich
und der Schweiz. (engl. ’Obligation of private sector companies to create
accessibility in the USA, Austria and Switzerland.’),” 2018.
[15] I.
for
Computer
Science
(Goethe
University
Frankfurt).
(2021)
Modulkatalog Bachelorstudiengang Informatik (engl. ’The module
catalog
for
the
bachelor’s
program
in
computer
science’).
Last
visited:
2023.09.15.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.uni-
frankfurt.de/104692860.pdf
[16] C. Palmer and J. Williamson, Virtual Reality Blueprints: Create com-
pelling VR experiences for mobile and desktop.
Packt Publishing Ltd,
2018.
[17] P. Wiesem¨uller, S. Mateen, S. Voß-Nakkour, and A. Dengel, “Access to
Escape - An Immersive Game-Based Learning Experience for Accessi-
bility Education in Virtual Reality,” in 2023 9th International Conference
of the Immersive Learning Research Network (iLRN).
IEEE, 2023.
[18] M. Schrepp, “User experience questionnaire handbook,” All you need to
know to apply the UEQ successfully in your project, 2015.
[19] studiumdigitale.
(2022)
Qualit¨atsentwicklung
durch
Evaluation
(engl.
’Quality
development
through
evaluation.’).
Last
visited:
2023.09.15.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.studiumdigitale.uni-
frankfurt.de/58533111/Evaluation
[20] P. Mayring, Qualitative Inhaltsanalyse (engl. ’Qualitative content anal-
ysis’).
UVK Univ.-Verl. Konstanz, 1994, vol. 14, ch. 4.
[21] fuels. (2023) fuels – future learning spaces. Last visited: 2023.09.15.
[Online]. Available: https://futurelearning.space/
[22] I. Hossain, L. Weist, and S. Voß-Nakkour, “UEmbed: An Authoring Tool
to Make Game Development Accessible for Users Without Knowledge
of Coding,” SMART ACCESSIBILITY, IARIA, 2023.
126
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 16 no 3 & 4, year 2023, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2023, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

