507
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Iterative Evaluation of a Driver Assistant Client in ICT-Systems in the
Context of Urban Logistics and Electric Vehicles
Johan Buchholz, Sebastian Apel, Christian Stolcis and Volkmar Schau
Chair of Software Technology
Friedrich Schiller University Jena, Germany
Email: {johan.buchholz, sebastian.apel, christian.stolcis, volkmar.schau}@uni-jena.de
Abstract—Information and communication technology (ICT) sys-
tems for electric vehicles (EVs), which support planning, mon-
itoring and analysing urban area logistics can become complex
and difﬁcult to use. In Smart City Logistik (SCL) project a
driver assistant client (DAC) was developed to help to overcome
fears, limited information and uncertainty in the context of
urban logistics. To evaluate the users’ needs and intentions an
iterative and open approach was designed and consequently used.
Triangulation helped to get the best possible insights out of
each of three phases of development, and the ﬁndings were
used to improve the DAC. A lot of uncertainty accompanied
the beginning of the project, so qualitative information was
gathered to understand how the drivers work routines look like
and which attitudes towards new technologies prevailed. A more
quantitative approach helped to collect a broad range of opinions
on speciﬁc usability topics before a ﬁnal simulated system setup
contributes to ask a wide variety of users their experiences. This
agile and iterative approach helped to identify important aspects
while designing the DAC and compare different solutions, e.g.,
regarding necessary functionalities, menu-structure, font, button-
size, and other parameters. The implementation of these ﬁndings
enabled the project partners to develop a broadly accepted user
interface and system that will be used in electric vehicles in urban
logistics.
Keywords–Survey; Usability; Electric Vehicles; Simulated Envi-
ronment.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Since the need of delivering goods increased massively in
the past decade and will increase further in the next years
[2], the use of electric vehicles (EVs) for last-mile delivery
could help to reduce the air and sound pollution substantially,
especially in inner cities1. In fact, most researchers agree that
even well beyond 2020, the capacity of batteries will not
ﬁt future range demands [3]. This restriction affects mainly
available EVs, which are designed for the transportation of
goods. Therefore, many companies have qualms to use this
new technology because of range limitations, low density of
recharging stations, and long charging time [4]. Nevertheless,
no matter which technological restrictions appear with EVs
compared to traditional vehicles, for most companies it all
comes down to the ability to plan the vehicle usage, including
the certainty that the planned tour can be done. In fact, many
companies interviewed during the Smart City Logistik (SCL)
1This paper is an extended version of a contribution to the international
conference on advances in computer-human interactions (ACHI) 2016 in
Venice, Italy [1].
project, have already tours within the range of an EV, or at
least can adopt tours with little effort.
The research project SCL pursues the goal to develop such
a system, which provides relevant information on EV-speciﬁc
restrictions and helps to overcome fears and to support the
usage within urban logistics. As part of the German special
federal research program for Information and Communication
Technologies for Electric Mobility II (ICT II) [5], the SCL
project supports the integration of EVs in ﬂeets through the
usage of information and communication technology (ICT).
One of the most important parts of such a holistic system
is the assistance of the driver. In a complex socio-technical
system where EVs are used within urban logistics, the driver
needs to cope with additional information (such as range,
battery status, etc.) to fulﬁl his primary task of delivering
goods. To reduce stress and uncertainty resulting from these
important additional parameters, a driver assistant client (DAC)
focussing on the needs of drivers was developed, evaluated,
and implemented as a prototype during the SCL project.
Therefore, a concept for technology assessment was developed,
combining existing methods from social and computer sciences
for the speciﬁc project. In an agile managed project, we needed
to focus on methods that provided ﬂexibility and direct user
feedback. The results help to achieve the goal, to develop and
improve mockup and demonstrator along the users’ needs. This
general concept can be applied to other projects in the ﬁeld
of computer-human interaction, which are confronted with
similar conditions and challenges regarding uncertainty and
user expectancies.
In Section II existing work regarding the DAC, the proto-
type evaluation and other ICT-systems for EVs will be outlined
brieﬂy. A more detailed picture of the problem, the purpose of
the DAC, and its main functionality will be given in Section
III. Subsequently, the research design to improve the DAC in
an iterative procedure and to assess the users’ expectations will
be outlined. It consists of three primary qualitative and quan-
titative surveys: In a ﬁrst step, seven drivers were interviewed
to get insights into their daily routines and attitudes towards
supporting technology. This step is described in Section IV.
The subsequent Section V shows how these ﬁndings were
used to build the prototype. Later, 43 participants tested two
different DAC prototypes and evaluated them with a focus
on usability (Section VI). The third part of the evaluation
includes the development of the functional demonstrator and is
accompanied by a simulator-based test with participants from
logistic companies and is described in Section VII.

508
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
II.
STATE OF THE ART
Previous work on methods for software design shows a
broad range of techniques that can be applied in different
development stages. Cognitive walkthroughs, heuristic eval-
uation, formal usability inspections [6] offer interesting and
valuable insights into a development process. More theoretical
work focusses on the users’ needs and expectancies as relevant
factors for technology acceptance. Factors that inﬂuence the
use of a socio-technical system cover the perceived usefulness,
the attitude towards using a technology, and others [7], [8].
Other works in the ﬁeld of DACs or EVs point out important
factors that are relevant in the given context [9], but focus
too much on the economic decisions of private households
and cannot be adapted entirely to our project. Unfortunately,
knowledge about important factors while using the DAC in a
commercial context in EVs is rare. When it comes to a long-
term research project in a ﬁeld, where user acceptance is rather
unknown, a ﬂexible methodology that provides different forms
of knowledge in various project stages is needed. Therefore,
methods from social sciences were used. A qualitative research
part is used to gather knowledge [10], and quantitative research
helps to evaluate existing knowledge and design within a
broader range of participants [11].
Apart from the very project, different projects investigate
multiple aspects of the emerging technology of EVs and are
funded within the German Information and Communication
Technologies for Electric Mobility II (ICT EM II) program.
The focus of ICT EM II is on new concepts for intelli-
gent technology in EVs (Smart Car), combined with power
supply (Smart Grid) and ideas for mobility (Smart Trafﬁc)
[12]. Projects like sMobility, iZEUS, Adaptive City Mobility
(ACM), eTelematik and E-Wald focus on EV use in different
kind of scenarios. However, all of them use ICT-systems to
support different kind of EV-users. These projects indicate the
broad range of driver assistance systems and mobile clients,
as well as the need to evaluate them.
In a complex socio-technical system where EVs are used
within different kinds of scenarios and the driver needs to cope
with additional information (such as range, battery status, etc.)
to fulﬁl his primary task, it is essential to reduce stress and
uncertainty resulting from these important additional parame-
ters. The used DAC has to ﬁt the drivers needs, which have to
be assessed thoroughly in each project.
III.
THE DRIVER ASSISTANCE CLIENT
In the context of urban logistics, the driver has to cope with
a lot of information, which often comes along with stress and
the insecurity about the actual range of an EV. Since the range
depends on a lot of parameters (e.g., battery capacity, driving
speed, weather conditions, weight, etc.), the consideration of
all those inﬂuencing parameters would be a complex process
while driving. To reduce stress and eliminate insecurity, the
DAC was developed. Basically, it works as a navigation sys-
tem, providing optimised routes for EV, considering different
range-affecting parameters of the vehicle while focussing on
the planned tour. At the start of a tour, the driver can retrieve
the tour on the DAC, which is already optimised and considers
all parameters for the EV he is using. During the tour, the
driver will be navigated to each point, gets information on
possible changes to the tour, and all relevant information (e.g.,
trafﬁc and weather conditions). As a result of this, the driver is
relieved from thoughts about the range of the vehicle. Because
the tour is always optimised and adapted to changes, the driver
will be able to perform his tour and drive back carefree to the
starting point.
Since the DAC should assist the driver while driving and
reduce the added complexity, it needs to be easy-to-use in
a vehicle. To ﬁnd an optimal way to support the driver we
elaborated an approach for the realisation of the DAC, wherein
each iteration the acceptance and usability have been evaluated.
The ﬁndings were used to improve further versions of the
DAC.
IV.
THE INTERVIEW
In theoretical discourses on technology use, EV and driver
assistance systems, different factors that inﬂuence the attitude,
expectations, and acceptability towards these technologies in
general public, are described [7, p. 188] [8, p. 447]. Beside
these common factors, there may be particular ones among
employees in logistics who use EV, which result from their
speciﬁc situation (e.g., the employer-employee relationship
leads to an involuntary use of the system). In the ﬁrst place, the
professional drivers need to perform their work task without
unwanted disruptions by technological peculiarities and EV-
speciﬁc uncertainties. To overcome the theoretical debate on
barriers and drivers of technology acceptance, empirical ev-
idence was gathered in qualitative interviews. Seven drivers
from different companies were interviewed, using a semi-
structured guide that was developed in advance. The inter-
viewees were asked about their common work tasks, their
attitude towards new technologies in general and EVs in
detail, their expectations towards a DAC, some demographic
items, and their employment biography. A content analysis
of the interviews was conducted, and the deductive-inductive
creation of categories [13] shed light on possible acceptance
factors and requirements regarding a DAC in EV-based urban
logistics. In theoretical debates, the general acceptance factors
are described as perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use,
the attitude towards using a technology [7, p. 188], and some
models include the behavioural intention to use the system
as well. These factors are inﬂuenced by moderators such as
subjective norms, experience, the image of technology, job
relevance, output quality, or the voluntariness of use [8, p. 447].
We found empiric evidence in the interviews regarding these
items. Using the computer-assisted qualitative data analysis
software f4analyse [14], we found out that the drivers tend to
prefer a passive system. The system should give them useful
information on important events during their tour, while not
forcing them to act in a single, speciﬁed way. Other hints
pointed in the direction of up-to-date maps, estimation and
inclusion of time and range restrictions, the ease of use of
and favoured support while implementing the system. These
important factors for technology users were considered while
developing the ﬁrst versions of the DAC.
V.
BUILDING THE PROTOTYPE
Taking into account the requirements that were identiﬁed in
the interviews, as well as previous research, a ﬁrst horizontal
prototype was developed. Horizontal means in this case that
the prototype has no real functionality, and was designed
as a draft for the evaluation of the user interface. Figure 1
shows the tour overview and Figure 2 shows the information

509
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 1. Tour overview of Prototype 1
overview of the prototype. Both ﬁgures offer an impression of
the main design. The main menu has been arranged on the top
to allow switching directly between the main views such as
tour information, navigation, map, vehicle status, direct call,
messages and common information. To allow the navigation
through different information, the submenu is arranged on the
left side in each view. Since the DAC should be used on
a mobile device with touch screen, big buttons were used,
enriched with understandable and clear icons. After login
the user directly views the tour overview with all relevant
information on stops and clients. While driving, the user will
mainly use the navigation view, which represents the route
guidance.
During the development of the ﬁrst prototype, some details
of the design were questioned. So, a second prototype was
build, which offers the same basic functionality, but has
a slightly different user interface (UI) regarding the views.
Figure 3 shows the tour overview for the second prototype.
The main menu is also situated on the top of the screen and
the submenu also on the left side, whereas the view of the
content is divided into two parts, the item list and the content
of the selected item. In Prototype 1, the list disappears when
an item is selected, in Prototype 2 the item list remains visual,
so the user can always see which item is currently selected.
Another difference compared to Prototype 1 is the overview
of the main menu shown in Figure 4, which shows up directly
Figure 2. Navigation view of Prototype 1
Figure 3. Tour overview of Prototype 2
after login. This UI provides an overview of all available
functionalities. Creating two prototypes allowed to evaluate
more options and the advantages and disadvantages from
slightly different views. The evaluation itself and the results
are described in the next section.
VI.
PROTOTYPE EVALUATION
After developing the ﬁrst two DAC-prototypes, possible
users were asked for feedback in an online survey, targeting
potential difﬁculties that may appear while using EVs in
logistics. Before the users performed some basic tasks using
the two prototypes, they were asked about different aspects
of usability, using a standardised questionnaire focussing on
the EN ISO 9241-110 norm [15], which was slightly adapted
to the research context. For questions regarding the functions
of the DAC, perceived ease of use, and intuitiveness, the
users were asked to rank the particular characteristics of the
prototypes on an ordinal 7-step-scale and to add qualitative
information in free-text ﬁelds. Due to limitations in availability
of interview partners at the partner companies who took part
in the research project (and the resulting inefﬁciency to carry
out the study on-site), an online questionnaire was developed
using LimeSurvey [16], and an additional device with the
DAC prototypes was brought to the partner companies. In
each company, a contact person was instructed and responsible
for conducting the evaluation. The access to the questionnaire
was restricted by a 6-digit access code, which was handed
out to the interviewees by the contact person in an envelope
with some further instructions on the evaluation procedure.
While the code itself was in a non-personalized envelope,
it was possible to track the respondents’ company and the
order in which both prototypes were evaluated. The evaluation
order was randomised based on the access code, which also
made it possible to match the answers to the proper prototype.
With this step, distortions as a result of answer patterns
were prevented, and this procedure offered a high level of
depersonalization. The online questionnaire was accessible for
a period of 14 weeks, and the users were able to participate
independently, at their individual best point in time. When
participating, the users opened the envelope, accessed the
online questionnaire and answered some fundamental ques-
tions before the ﬁrst prototype was shown on the second
screen. After performing some tasks, the users were asked
to answer questions and rate the usability of the prototype,

510
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 4. Main menu of Prototype 2
before the same procedure started for the second prototype.
The questionnaire concluded with free-text ﬁelds for ideas of
improvement and some demographic questions.
With this approach, standardised and comparative informa-
tion, as well as qualitative insights into the perceived usability
of the two evaluated prototypes were gathered from 45 users.
While two answers were excluded from the SPSS analysis due
to reasonable doubt of sufﬁciency (e.g., when the evaluation
of DAC was carried out in just a few seconds), the remaining
43 cases gave us some interesting insights on the usability of
the evaluated prototypes.
First we examined the data and searched for feasible
answer patterns between the ﬁrst and second part of the
questionnaire. It might be possible that the ﬁrst evaluated
mockup is rated below the second one in general (e.g., because
of learning effects). Table I summarises the result of a sign test,
addressing this question. The hypothesis is that the answers
to the ﬁrst and second part of our survey may differentiate
simply due to the order of the questions. However, the null
hypothesis (that the answers do not differentiate between the
ﬁrst and second block of questions) cannot be rejected in most
TABLE I. The result of the sign-test is used to check possible pattern of
answers regarding the order of our evaluated mockups.
Statements (comparison of similar answers within the
ﬁrst and second part of this survey)
Exact
sig.
(2-
sided)
1) The software offer required functionalities to handle
tasks efﬁciently.
,115
2) The software is easy to use.
,388
3) The software facilitates a simple orientation through a
uniform design.
,607
4) The used icons / terms reﬂect the underlying function-
ality.
,115
5) The size of the used buttons is appropriate.
,227
6) The size of the used icons is appropriate.
1,000
7) The size of the used fonts is appropriate.
,286
8) The software has a uniform concept for different kinds
of interactions.
,143
9) The software requires little time to learn.
,344
10) The Software is easy to understand without any
external support or user manual.
1,000
11) The software allows an easy switching between menus
or masks.
,359
12) The software provides an excellent overview of their
feature set.
,824
13) The software does not miss to inform about whether
an entry was successful or not.
,070
Figure 5. Tour overview of the demonstrator
cases. Regarding Table I, only the answers to question 13
tend to differentiate between the ﬁrst and second part of the
survey. This speciﬁc question used a double negative within its
statement and the remarks in the free-text ﬁelds suggest that
this confused at least some participants. As a consequence we
decided to drop this question.
In Table II, the median values to the closed statements
are compared. Medians are used because of our input values,
which can not be interpreted as a linear value due to the ordinal
7-step-scale. Regarding Prototype 1 and 2, the median values
vary slightly only. The result tends to show a median around
4 to 6, while 4 is interpreted as a neutral rating and 5 to
6 as a positive rating. However, the used buttons within the
prototypes were evaluated differently. The answers from the
free-text ﬁelds complement our analysis.
As a conclusion we can summarize that in general, none
of the two prototypes was evaluated better than the other.
According to our analysis, Prototype 1 showed better results re-
garding the usability, while Prototype 2 achieved better results
in clearness of design and intuitiveness. Based on these results,
a set of adaptations was elaborated. Basically, it combines
the positive characteristics of both prototypes. Finally, these
adaptations were used to build a functional demonstrator of
the DAC, which is described in the next section.
VII.
THE FUNCTIONAL DEMONSTRATOR AND
EVALUATION
The most important difference regarding the prototypes
and the demonstrator is that the latter is fully functional.
Compared to the indicated functionality of the prototypes, the
demonstrator has been reduced, based on the results of the
evaluation. The remaining main functionality covers the tour
overview, turn by turn navigation, status overview and settings.
Figure 5 shows the tour overview and on the upper border
the main menu. The submenu has been removed completely,
so that the available space could be used in a better way.
Also, the navigation view has been improved by removing
unimportant buttons, such as the zoom in and out buttons (see
Figure 6). To save space and reduce complexity, the vehicle
status and common information (e.g., weather, trafﬁc, etc.)
have been merged into the status overview, and the direct call
and messages views have been removed.
After two iterations, the DAC has been implemented as a
fully functional demonstrator based on the recommendations of

511
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 6. Navigation view of the demonstrator
the participants during the evaluation. To ensure a high quality
and a high usefulness, another iteration step concluded the
project. In order to get further information on usability, the
driver should use the DAC during his normal working day. To
collect more data on possible insufﬁciencies, one ﬁnal eval-
uation was carried out. This one focussed on drivers without
particular EV-experience and was planned as a quantitative
questionnaire.
Due to the fact that only a few drivers at the partner
companies were able to participate while actually using EVs
and the DAC, the signiﬁcance of the results is restricted as a
consequence. To overcome this problem, the demonstrator was
evaluated by a higher number of professional drivers in Eltrilo
[17], a simulator that was developed during the SCL project
and is capable of simulating a real-world environment based
on map data. Speciﬁc scenarios (e.g., transportation from a
hub into town with multiple stops) can be simulated and be
part of the evaluation.
Figure 7 presents the Eltrilo cabin schema. In front of the
driver, a ﬂat screen is the new virtual glass windshield in this
setup. Besides the steering wheel, there are two additional
small screens which form the cockpit. The cockpit touch screen
allows switching cabin equipment (e.g., radio, air condition,
lights) on or off. On the second screen, a navigation system
TABLE II. Table with median values according to closed questions within
the mockup evaluation.
Statements
Median
Prototyp 1
Median
Prototyp 2
1) The software offer required functionalities
to handle tasks efﬁciently.
4 (+/-)
4 (+/-)
2) The software is easy to use.
5 (+)
5 (+)
3) The software facilitates a simple orienta-
tion through a uniform design.
5 (+)
5 (+)
4) The used icons / terms reﬂect the under-
lying functionality.
5 (+)
5 (+)
5) The size of the used buttons is appropriate.
5 (+)
6 (++)
6) The size of the used icons is appropriate.
5 (+)
5 (+)
7) The size of the used fonts is appropriate.
4 (+/-)
4 (+/-)
8) The software has a uniform concept for
different kinds of interactions.
5 (+)
5 (+)
9) The software requires little time to learn.
4 (+/-)
4 (+/-)
10) The Software is easy to understand with-
out any external support or user manual.
4 (+/-)
4 (+/-)
11) The software allows an easy switching
between menus or masks.
5 (+)
5 (+)
12) The software provides an excellent
overview of their feature set.
5 (+)
5 (+)
Screen
instead of glass
Cabin
Touch Controlls
Steering Wheel /
Accelerator
Ext. Screen
for Spectators
Figure 7. The Functional Demonstrator.
and the cabin state (e.g., velocity is displayed). The driver
assistance client is installed in the cockpit.
This simulator setup represents all components as used in
real scenarios. The environment itself is based on real map
data and generated through the procedural mechanism. This
environment simulates speciﬁc scenarios like transportation
from the hub into town with multiple stops. The simulation
environment can create entirely terrain with height proﬁles,
different types of roads, houses and road signs based on
various kind of input data (e.g., ASTER GDEM V2 for height
proﬁles and Open Street Map (OSM) data for road and house
information).
Getting this into practice requires functional components as
shown in Fig. 8. Primarily, some virtual simulation environ-
ment are necessary (1) and combined with real components,
e.g., the DAC (2) and server (3). Realistic simulation behaviour
and position mapping is possible. The componentes are linked
to the simulation through a simulated telematic unit2 (4) by us-
ing a data interface. Finally, this setup needs the car simulation
(5) itself, some consumption simulation (6) which produces
consumption based on user input when interaction with the
simulated car and in-car electronics (7), e.g., speedometer and
switches for hardware elements like light and air condition. A
more detailed overview of components and architectural drafts
2Hardware element to gather telemetric data in real scenarios.
Real Components
Simulation Environment
Procedural Visualizer 
for Real Map Data
Car Simulation
Consumption 
Simulation
Simulated 
Telematic Unit
Driver Assistance 
Client
Server
In-Car Electronics 
e.g. Speedometer
Data Port
TCP/IP based 
access through 
WLAN
1
4
5
6
2
3
7
Figure 8. Components within the simulation environment.

512
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE III. Table with median, min and max values according to closed
questions within the demonstrator evaluation.
Statement
Median
Min.
Max.
1) The software offer required functionalities
to handle tasks efﬁciently.
5 (+)
1 (—)
7 (+++)
2) The software requires redundant input.
5 (+)
2 (–)
7 (+++)
3) The software provides enough information
about input which is allowed and necessary.
5,5 (+)
1 (—)
6 (++)
4) The software provides situation based
explanations, in the case of asking for, which
is helpful.
5 (+)
1 (—)
7 (+++)
5) The software facilitates a simple orienta-
tion through a uniform design.
5 (+)
3 (-)
6 (++)
6) The software provides enough information
about current running tasks.
5 (+)
2 (–)
7 (+++)
7) The software has a uniform concept for
different kinds of interactions.
5 (+)
4 (+/-)
7 (+++)
8) The software requires little time to learn.
5,5 (+)
1 (—)
7 (+++)
9) The software requires that you have to
remember a lot of details.
5 (+)
1 (—)
7 (+++)
10) The software is easy to understand with-
out any external support or user manual.
5 (+)
1 (—)
7 (+++)
11) The software enforces an unnecessarily
rigid compliance of processing steps.
4 (+/-)
2 (–)
5
12) The software allows an easy switching
between menus or masks.
5 (+)
4 (+/-)
7 (+++)
13) The software enforces unnecessary inter-
ruptions of work.
5 (+)
1 (—)
7 (+++)
14) The software provides easy to understand
error messages.
4 (+/-)
1 (—)
7 (+++)
15) The software requires at mistakes, on the
whole, a slight correction effort.
4 (+/-)
1 (—)
5
16) The software provides accurate trou-
bleshooting information.
4 (+/-)
1 (—)
5
17) The software can adapt well to my
personal, individual nature of the work exe-
cution.
4,5 (+)
3 (-)
7 (+++)
18) The software is adaptable to varying
tasks by myself, according to its possibilities.
5 (+)
4 (+/-)
7 (+++)
is published in [18] and [17].
In order to use Eltrilo, the DAC was installed into the
simulator and connected to the live-system via a mobile
network connection. In a ﬁrst step, the participants received
some detailed instructions on what they should do on their
tour and how to use the DAC while performing their tasks
in the simulator. During the simulation, some events affecting
the tour were triggered, to simulate unpredictable changes of
plans. In a second step, the participants were asked to answer a
questionnaire on their experience in the demonstrator, as well
regarding usability. The approach is similar and comparable
to the investigation described in Section VI but bases on the
improved demonstrator.
The simulator experiment was conducted in three different
companies and ten drivers answered the questionnaire. Table
III reﬂects the median, minimum and maximum values of the
closed questions. The overall result tends to show a median
around 4 to 5. Furthermore, the users were capable to use
this system in combination with the DAC. All users were
able to fulﬁl their virtual logistical task within a previously
unknown scenario. Some users remark that the navigation
system needs to react faster, has to give an improved overview
on trafﬁc information, and has to inform about exceptions and
problems earlier. Regarding the functionality, some participants
remarked that it is adequate, but has to become more stable.
However, the last evaluation step doesn’t replace the evaluation
of experiences with the system in daily work routines. The
results visualise a ﬁrst trend and require more user feedback
and experiences for further results.
VIII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The development of a technological solution requires mul-
tiple iteration steps, a fact that is crucial for the evaluation
and that is considered in the presented research design: open-
ing up for qualitative information in the beginning of the
project, where knowledge is limited and uncertainty about
important acceptance factors is high, before focussing on the
gathered knowledge and comparable evaluation questions with
regard to existing norms and standards, is one way to assess
technology development and to gain valuable information on
user expectancy and experience. Due to the agile project
management, the technology evaluation has to be open at any
point in time for new information and changes, and needs
to combine appropriate qualitative and quantitative research
methods. This helps to achieve the best possible results, which
can be implemented in further technology development.
This approach was used in the SCL project consequently.
The ﬁrst interview showed important aspects in the drivers’
daily work routines that had to be considered while developing
the DAC. The drivers prefer a passive system that gives hints
and relevant, up-to-date information. The prototype evaluation
revealed the positive aspects of two slightly different mockups
that were implemented in the functional demonstrator. Two
iterations resulted in a fully functional prototype of the DAC,
which is broadly accepted by possible users. The third iteration
step was done using a complex simulator environment, which
used real map data and consumption simulations in combina-
tion with the other components used in SCL. The evaluation
with ten participants showed that this system helps to fulﬁll
the main task of the users in general and to reduce complexity.
However, simulator stability has to be improved. In another
step, feedback from the experiences while using the system
in EVs in daily routines might complement the ﬁndings of
this evaluation that accompanied the development of the SCL
system.
Finally, these results will help developers while creating
DACs in the context of EVs. As a next step, the evaluation
can be carried out by a higher number of participants from
different contexts (e.g., private users as well) to ﬁnd additional
use cases for the developed technological system. Additionally,
it is required to expand this evaluation within a ﬁnal study to
get experimental data with working drivers. From a method-
ological perspective, a systematical analysis of methods for
the evaluation of user expectancies can help to learn from
different disciplines (e.g., computer sciences, social sciences)
and to optimise the way, socio-technical systems are created
and adapted to the users’ needs.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank all members of the SCL research
team here at FSU Jena – there are too many to name them
all in person. We would also like to extend our gratitude to
our partners within the research consortium, end users, as well
as research institutions and industrial developers. This project
is supported by the German Federal Ministry for Economic
Affairs and Energy in the IKT-II f¨ur Elektromobilit¨at program
under grant 01ME121(-33).
REFERENCES
[1]
C. Stolcis, J. Buchholz, and V. Schau, “Evaluation of a driver assistant
client in the context of urban logistics,” in ACHI 2016: The Ninth In-
ternational Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interactions,

513
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 3 & 4, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A. L. Cul´en, L. Miller, I. Giannopulu, and B. Gersbeck-Schierholz, Eds.
Venice, Italy: IARIA XPS Press, April 2016, pp. 235–239.
[2]
European Commission, A roadmap for completing the single market
for parcel delivery.
Brussels: European Commission, 2013.
[3]
K. Young, W. Caisheng, L. Y. Wang, and K. Strunz, Electric Vehicle
Battery Technologies, 1st ed.
New York: Springer Science+Business
Media, 2015.
[4]
Nationale Platform Elektromobilit¨at, Ladeinfrastruktur f¨ur Elektro-
fahrzeuge in Deutschland. Statusbericht und Handlungsempfehlung
2015 (Recharging Infrastructure for Electric Vehicles in Germany.
Status Report and Recommended Action.
Nationale Platform Elek-
tromobilit¨at, 2015.
[5]
Bundesministerium
f¨ur
Wirtschaft
und
Energie,
“IKT
f¨ur
Elektromobilit¨at
(ICT
for
Electromobility)
II,”
Internet,
http://www.bmwi.de/BMWi/Redaktion/PDF/Publikationen/
Technologie-und-Innovation/ikt-elektromobilitaet,property=pdf,
bereich=bmwi2012,sprache=de,rwb=true.pdf, 2016.03.16, 2013.
[6]
J. Nielsen, “Usability inspection methods,” in Conference Companion
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ser. CHI ’94.
New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 1994, pp. 413–414. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/259963.260531
[7]
V. Venkatesh and F. D. Davis, “A theoretical extension of the technol-
ogy acceptance model: Four longitudinal ﬁeld studies,” Management
Science, vol. 46, no. 2, 2000, pp. 186–204.
[8]
V. Venkatesh, M. G. Morris, G. B. Davis, and F. D. Davis, “User
acceptance of information technology: Toward a uniﬁed view,” MIS
Quarterly, vol. 27, no. 3, 2003, pp. 425–478.
[9]
S. Arndt, Evaluierung der Akzeptanz von Fahrerassistenzsystemen.
Modell zum Kaufverhalten von Endkunden.
VS, Verl. f¨ur Sozial-
wissenschaften, 2011.
[10]
J. Gl¨aser and G. Laudel, Experteninterviews und qualitative Inhaltsanal-
yse.
Wiesbaden: VS Verlag f¨ur Sozialwissenschaften, 2009.
[11]
R. Schnell, P. B. Hill, and E. Esser, Methoden der empirischen Sozial-
forschung.
M¨unchen [u.a.]: Oldenbourg, 2008.
[12]
Bundesregierung
Deutschland,
“IKT
f¨ur
Elektromobilit¨at
II,”
Internet,
http://www.bmwi.de/BMWi/Redaktion/PDF/Publikationen/
Technologie-und-Innovation/ikt-elektromobilitaet,property=pdf,
bereich=bmwi2012,sprache=de,rwb=true.pdf, visited 2015-10-21, Mai
2013.
[13]
U. Kuckartz, Qualitative Inhaltsanalyse. Methoden, Praxis, Com-
puterunterst¨utzung (Qualitative Content Analysis. Methods, Practice,
Computer-assistance).
Weilheim und Basel: Beltz Juventa, 2012.
[14]
Dr. dresing and Pehl GmbH, f4analyse 1.0.0-rc4- Computer Assisted
Qualitative Data Analysis Software (CAQDAS), Internet, https://www.
audiotranskription.de/f4-analyse, 2016.03.16, Marburg.
[15]
J. Pr¨umper, “Isonorm 9241/110-s: Evaluation of software based
upon
international
standard
iso
9241,
part
110
-
manuscript
questionnaire,”
Internet,
http://people.f3.htw-berlin.de/Professoren/
Pruemper/instrumente/ISONORM 9241 110-S 2010.pdf, 2016.03.16,
Berlin, 2010.
[16]
C. Schmitz and LimeSurvey Core Development Team, “Limesurvey -
free open source survey tool,” Internet, https://www.limesurvey.org/en/,
2016.03.16.
[17]
V. Schau, S. Apel, K. Gebhardt, J. Kretzschmar, M. Mauch, and
C. Stolcis, “Evaluating ict-systems for electric vehicles within simulated
environments,” in Proceedings for the 19th Gulf Engineering Forum
Smart Solutions, Kuwait City, in press.
[18]
V. Schau, S. Apel, K. Gebhardt, J. Kretzschmar, C. Stolcis, M. Mauch,
and J. Buchholz, “Intelligent infrastructure for last-mile and short-
distance freight transportation with electric vehicles in the domain of
smart city logistic,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on
Vehicle Technology and Intelligent Transport Systems, April 2016, pp.
149–159.

