131
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
                                                                                                                                                                                    
Advanced e-Learning by Inducing Shared Intentionality: 
Foundation of Coherent Intelligence for Grounds of e-Curriculum 
Igor Val Danilov 
Academic Center for Coherent Intelligence 
ACCI 
Rome, Italy 
e-mail: igor_val.danilov@acci.center 
Sandra Mihailova 
Rīga Stradiņš University 
RSU 
Riga, Latvia 
e-mail: sandra.mihailova@rsu.lv 
Abstract— How is initial social knowledge acquired? The 
primary data entry (PDE) problem provides an understanding 
of the modality of social interaction between organisms 
disabled to communicate. The paper proposes the Model of 
Coherent Intelligence (MCI) and its neural foundation. The 
MCI shows how interpersonal dynamics shape shared 
intentionality in intimately related individuals. This hypothesis 
postulates two ideas: (1) cognition begins from a separation of 
sensory cues: Long Term Potentiation (LTP) can only be 
induced in neurons of particular Modality Specific (M-S) 
gateways (not all)–selective induction promotes selective 
sensitivity to the chaos of stimuli. (2) Neurons can learn Spike 
Timing Dependent Plasticity (STDP) by repeating the timing 
code of other organisms' mature neurons to modulate certain 
synaptic strength, which triggers either LTP or Long Term 
Depression. The paper suggests that shared intentionality in 
humans is the evolution outcome. Social animals demonstrate 
the quality of goal-directed coherence. The paper defines it as 
the ability of organisms to select only one stimulus for the 
entire group instantly. The manuscript shows the candidate for 
triggering the mechanism of goal-directed coherence and 
shared intentionality. The protein molecules contribute to 
animals' interaction ability, from essential motility organs in 
simple organisms (by presenting in receptors) to neural circuit 
assembly regulation and STDP in humans (by presenting in 
neurons). The study shows a direction for developing e-
learning through stimulating learners' shared intentionality. 
An actual application of this approach is e-curriculum for 
children from 2 years of age.  
Keywords-coherent intelligence; goal-directed coherence; 
shared intentionality; e-learning; embodied cognition 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
This article is an extension of the conference presentation 
“New findings in education: primary data entry in shaping 
intentionality and cognition” [1]. The academic knowledge 
on the study of mind historically and conceptually has settled 
three main approaches within cognitive science: cognitivism, 
connectionism, and embodied dynamicism [2]. Many 
theories of mind combine all three approaches, where they 
co-exist in various hybrid forms. The more interesting of 
them are the Embodied dynamic system [2], the theory of 
innate intersubjectivity and innate foundations of neonatal 
imitation [3], the theory of natural pedagogy [4], and the 
theory of sensitivities and expectations [5]. All these theories 
are plausible; the current paper observes different views to 
engage a gap in knowledge. 
According to Thompson [2], cognitivism (the metaphor 
is the mind as digital computer) and connectionism (the mind 
as neuronal network), in different ways, appeal to the same 
computational principle of cognition. This principle based 
upon processing a signal within neuronal networks. This 
computational principle certainly requires the primary data 
entry as a necessary initial condition to launch processing. 
None algorithm and/or a sequence of instructions may 
perform the computation of any process without 
corresponding to the specific situation inputs, that should 
substitute variables and parameters of the formulas. The 
algorithm remains just a set of mathematical variables 
without this input. This argument may mean the necessity to 
input an initial set of social phenomena of the specific 
community to trigger this system – the Primary Data Entry 
(PDE) problem [6].  
According to embodied cognitivists, the mind is an 
autonomous system by its self-organizing and self-
controlling dynamics, which does not have inputs and 
outputs in the usual sense, and determines the cognitive 
domain in which it operates [2][7][8]. This approach is 
grounded on the dynamical hypothesis [9]. However, this 
interpretation of a dynamic system is not accurate [1]. Why 
does the dynamic system need PDE: 
Argument A. According this approach embodied features 
of cognition deeply depend upon characteristics of the 
physical body. If the agent's beyond-the-brain body plays a 
significant causal role, then the primary data yet makes sense 
[1]. 
Argument B. In mathematics, a dynamic systems model 
is a set of evolution equations. It means that entering primary 
data is required. The dynamic system may not begin its life 
cycle without introducing initial conditions corresponding to 
specific situation inputs and parameters [1]. 
Argument C. The dynamical system hypothesis [9] has 
not claimed the lack of initial conditions. Dynamicists track 
primary data less than dynamic changes inside. However, it 
does not mean that primary data do not exist and do not 
necessary [1].  
Given these above arguments, the PDE problem must be 
considered in the onset of cognition. The embodied dynamic 

132
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
                                                                                                                                                                                    
system approach tends to solve the above-noted gap by 
introducing the notion of dynamically embodied information 
[2]. Although, to introduce this concept, it is necessary to 
explain the categorization of reality through intentionality. 
According to embodied cognition approach, symbols encode 
the local topological properties of neuronal maps [2], a 
dynamic action pattern. The sensorimotor motor network 
yields pairing of the binary cue stimulus with the particular 
symbol saved in the structures and processes that embody 
meanings. 'Representational “vehicles” are temporally 
extended patterns of activity that can crisscross the brain-
body-world boundaries, and the meanings or contents they 
embody are brought forth or enacted in the context of the 
system’s structural coupling with its environment [2, p.36].' 
This idea requires introducing the nature of intentionality. In 
a multi-stimuli environment, the stimulus-consequence pair 
is unpredictable due to the many irrelevant stimuli claiming 
to be associated with the embodied dynamic information 
randomly. The bond of stimulus-consequence pair of a social 
phenomenon in the sensorimotor network requires 
categorizing reality by the nervous system before applying 
the innate reflex about this social phenomenon to a specific 
case. Therefore, dynamically embodied information can be 
useful if intentionality is already in place. However, the 
embodied dynamic system introduces intentionality without 
a biological and / or physical basis. The theory of natural 
pedagogy [4], and the theory of sensitivities and expectations 
[5], as well as many others may not solve the problem of 
PDE [9].  
According to Trevarthen and Delafield-Butt [11], primary 
consciousness develops in embryogenesis and is the first 
operative in early fetal life. 'Consciousness as "acting with 
knowledge" requires a nervous system that regulates 
prospective perception in intentional engagement with the 
world [11, p. 22]’. In the first trimester, patterns of sensory 
regulation of movements of the fetus' body and limbs gain 
affective evaluation and sensitivity for sounds and rhythms 
of other human presence [11]. It means that the pure nervous 
system should already possess intentionality as well as initial 
knowledge about social reality: human sounds and rhythms 
also yield meanings. Even if fetuses can hear different 
sounds and feel rhythms from outside of the womb, this does 
not mean that they alone (independently) can process their 
meanings. 
Searle et al. [12] argued that intentionality is the mental 
power of minds to represent or symbolize things, properties, 
and states of affairs. According to Crane [13], mental states 
or events or processes which have objects in this sense are 
traditionally called 'intentional,' and 'intentionality' is, for this 
reason, the general term for this defining characteristic of 
thought. The meaning of directed action implies the purpose 
of the action, which first requires the categorization of 
reality. It is a dichotomy of what happens first. Current 
knowledge does not solve it. 
Tomasello [14], through the study on ontogenesis and 
phylogenesis, introduced the hypothesis of gradually 
increasing social bond development in children referred to 
time slices: (1) emotion sharing from the birth, (2) joint 
intentionality from the nine-month revolution, (3) collective 
intentionality at around three years of age, (4) reason and 
responsibility. Tomasello [14] introduced the beginning of 
cognition  through the newborns' basic motive force of 
sharing intentionality. However, the mechanism of such 
emotion coordination is not clear because it is grounded on 
emotion sharing [14]. Whether or not protoconversations 
imply understanding emotional states. Many researchers, 
including the authors, believe that the hypothesis about the 
universality of emotional expressions is formed by limited 
experimental methods, since other research designs show the 
opposite outcome [15]-[19]. There is no evidence of a 
genetic mechanism that can link meaning in mind with 
certain social reality to apply an appropriate emotional 
pattern to a specific situation. Even if one assumes that the 
hypothesis of universal emotional expressions proves innate 
emotional patterns together with their meanings; even if 
newborns may alone recognize the basic facial expressions 
of caregivers and the specific situation to apply them; but in 
this case, newborns do not have time for such a "training 
course", because they demonstrate their achievements 
already in the first hours of life [20]. If there is no innate 
mechanism, then, apparently, emotional contagion can occur 
between individuals without their awareness [10][20][22]; it 
can happen even without awareness of the emotional stimuli 
existence [22]. Section II discusses the hyperscanning 
studies' outcomes, showing brain-to-brain synchronization. 
Section III presents the hypothesis of the neuronal 
foundation of shared intentionality. Section IV discusses the 
physical ground of goal-directed coherence–a forerunner of 
shared intentionality. Section V elaborates all findings.  
II.
PROBLEM: HOW DOES SOCIAL INTERACTION 
ENCOURAGE COGNITION 
Brain-to-brain relationships shape the mind during 
moment-to-moment interactions [23]. The dichotomy of 
newborns' succeed in beginning knowing and their 
communicative disability challenges our knowledge on 
social interaction modalities [20]. We believe that 
understanding the problem of the intentionality emergence in 
an organism at the beginning can explain the problem of 
PDE and the onset of consciousness. This knowledge can 
contribute to the study of cognition because obviously if and 
as soon as this implicit modality occurs it continues the 
whole rest of life. We believe that the caregivers' 
intentionality forms the intentionality in newborns. Fetuses 
and newborns are not able to behave intentionally on their 
own due to the lack of meaningful (informative) sensory 
interaction at the beginning [6][20][24]. We predict an 
implicit modality of social interaction that provides shared 
intentionality at the beginning. Cooperation in a group 
enhances intentionality, providing categorization. 
According to Valencia and Froese [23], their review of 
studies based on EEG- and fNIRS hyperscanning 
methodologies shows evidence of inter-brain 
synchronization in the fastest frequency bands, supporting 
the possibility of extended consciousness. Among 
hyperscanning studies, we have chosen 4 studies conducted 
without explicit interaction between subjects. These studies 
compared differences of brain-to-brain synchronization in 
subjects when participants solved tasks together as 
confronting to the condition in which: (i) the subjects solved 
them individually [25][26]; (ii) the same task when 

133
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
                                                                                                                                                                                    
interacting with a machine [27]; (iii) the individuals from 
another team solved the same problem [28]. These studies 
declared an exclusion of sensory interaction between 
subjects. However, it should be noted that the subjects of all 
these studies knew about social encounters during the 
experiments. Therefore, instead of mental collaboration their 
results may simply mean an increase of brain activity due to 
similar emotional arousal in participants stimulated by the 
social encounter. 
The near-infrared spectroscopy study (non-
hyperscanning) on asleep newborns shows an increase of the 
neural response to a familiar (English language) versus 
unfamiliar language (Tagalog, a Filipino language) spoken 
by strangers in both conditions [29]. The language stimuli 
(the identical low-pass filtered sentences) were played 
through two speakers approximately 1.5 m from the infants’ 
head. According to May et al. [29], these findings show that 
the newborn’s neural processing of language is influenced by 
early language experience due to neonate brain responds to 
familiar versus unfamiliar language. To our mind, this 
outcome may lead to evidence of another inference. This 
experiment was not a hyperscanning technique. However, 
subjects were in pairs with their caregivers. Neonates 
classified these sound stimuli without the ability to perceive 
them. Sleeping newborns' brains reacted to sound stimuli that 
their sensing could not provide due to their brains' sensory 
isolation to meaningless and unfamiliar sounds. Sleepers 
seem to enter a standby mode, allowing them to balance the 
monitoring of their surroundings with sensory isolation [30]. 
Sleepers are sensitive to the semantic content of an auditory 
stream [30]-[32] and amplify relevant, meaningful stimuli 
[30][32]. The sleeping brain retains some residual 
information processing capacity, which, however, does not 
form enduring memories [33]. Neonates are not able to 
understand even Mother's speech although her sound is 
familiar. Given all these, any speech for neonates is 
meaningless, and asleep newborns may not be sensitive to 
the sounds even their native tongue (the language spoken by 
the mother during pregnancy) in experiments when these 
sounds were pronounced by outsiders. However, they were 
sensitive to them. Sleeping newborns' brains reacted to sound 
stimuli that their sensing could not provide due to their 
brains' sensory isolation to meaningless and unfamiliar 
sounds. We believe that this outcome may mean the implicit 
modality of newborns' interaction with caregivers since any 
other explanation of this outcome is excluded.  
Recent hyperscanning shows an increase of coordinated 
neuronal activities in subjects during collective efforts 
without communication via sensory cues [34]. What are the 
neurobiological grounds of coordinated neuronal activities? 
III.
FOUNDATION OF COHERENT INTELLIGENCE 
A. Experiments on Problem-Solving in Groups 
Recent research of 24 online experiments presented that 
unprimed participants show a more significant accuracy level 
when they complete the thought task simultaneously with 
confederates who are primed with the correct answer; if they 
were emotionally stimulated and completed the tasks without 
communication [10]. Primary groups [35] show empirical 
evidence of a more significant accuracy in problem-solving 
in the coherent intelligence state. In specific, we conducted 
13 experiments in dyads (116 subjects) with P-value < 0,001 
(probability-value in null hypothesis significance testing), 
and 7 experiments in primary group adults (41 subjects) with 
the P-value < 0,002. Experiments with 43 secondary group 
subjects (unfamiliar adults, M=20) show the effect only with 
the task of unfamiliar language translation. Non-semantic 
tasks–with synthetic language and two-color round symbols–
did not stimulate the effect in 2 experiments with 207 
secondary group subjects (unfamiliar). These results are 
consistent with research Danilov et al. [36] [37]. 
B. The Model of Coherent Intelligence 
According to Danilov and Mihailova [24], a supranormal 
environmental case–e.g., first hours after birth–stimulates 
supranormal sensation in dyads. This can push the inherited 
mechanism of social entrainment of infants to the rhythm of 
the mother. Both the supranormal sensation and social 
entrainment may stimulate the common emotional arousal. 
The latter is increased by the ongoing supranormal sensation 
and the occurring rhythm of arbitrary movements of the 
infant. The continuing supranormal sensation and ever-
increasing arousal of the infant and the mother along with the 
rhythm of the infant’s unintentional movements stimulate 
early imitation and emotional contagion. The problem is how 
the infant capture and reproduce the kinematic of 
movements.  
The MCI proposes that common emotional arousal 
together with the identical rhythm create coherent mental 
processes in dyads–Coherent Intelligence (Figure 1). At 
Sensorimotor Stage (by Piaget, or Stage 3 of the Model of 
Hierarchical Complexity MHC [38]), organisms do not 
maintain bilateral communication. According to Danilov and 
Mihailova [24], individuals are able to interact by 
distinguishing perceptual signals of identical modality by 
their significance. This ability can contribute to ostensive 
cues. After all, this meaningless interaction modifies into 
communication when individuals imbue perceptual impulses 
with mutually implied meanings, cascading their signals in 
response to the history of relations between them [24]. 
Figure 1. Interpersonal dynamics in Model of Coherent Intelligence[24] 

134
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
                                                                                                                                                                                    
C. Neuronal Foundation of the MCI 
It seems consistent to say that intention arises from 
conscious intentionality, or intentionality shapes intention if 
intentionality becomes conscious. Specific brain regions may 
be engaged in shared sensory/cognitive processes 
irrespective of the feedback's valence and in encoding the 
subjective relevance of the feedback [39][40]. 
Outside areas involved in this processing, additional 
brain areas are specifically engaged according to the 
particular communicative modality [41]. According to 
Tettamanti et al. [42], Intention Processing Network (IPN) 
involves the medial prefrontal cortex, precuneus, bilateral 
posterior superior temporal sulcus, and temporoparietal 
junctions. Depending on different social interaction 
modalities, the IPN is complemented by activation of 
additional brain areas, reflecting different Modality-Specific 
(M-S) input gateways to the IPN [42]. The M-S gateways 
mediate the structural and semantic decoding of stimuli and 
provide M-S information [42]. Sensory inputs of a specific 
modality can activate the precise association of certain 
sensorimotor networks with specific brain emotion circuits 
[42].  
We believe that this emotion-motion dynamics can 
involve the particular cognitive process of a high order. 
When two or more organisms are in common emotional 
arousal and simultaneously in the interactional synchrony, 
then these two different experiences may meet each other in 
high-order cognitive processing. Emotional arousal can 
trigger evolutionarily old brain circuits, which interact with 
high-order cognitive and linguistic processing [43]. It seems 
uncontroversial to say that infants' pure nervous system may 
experience emotions, but only primitive ones related to 
survival, such as those associated with hunger and pain. 
However, newborns cannot express emotions themselves 
appropriately to a specific social case on their own, even 
though they possess inherited neuronal patterns of primitive 
emotional impressions. They also cannot understand the 
expression of others' emotions (as is discussed above). They 
are only capable of experiencing primitive emotions, not 
correctly expressing them independently. Research on 
insects–organisms in stage 3 of MHC [38] like human 
newborns–assumes that they also experience emotions [44]. 
Researchers argued that agitated honeybees exhibit 
pessimistic cognitive biases: 'Whether animals experience 
human-like emotions is controversial and of immense 
societal concern. The next reason is that animals cannot 
provide subjective reports of how they feel, emotional state 
can only be inferred using physiological, cognitive, and 
behavioral measures. In humans, negative feelings are 
reliably correlated with pessimistic cognitive biases, defined 
as the increased expectation of bad outcomes. Recently, 
mammals and birds with poor welfare have also been found 
to display pessimistic-like decision making, but cognitive 
biases have not thus far been explored in invertebrates [44].' 
In parallel, interactional synchrony stimulates a 
sensorimotor network engaging neural networks responsible 
for communicative intention processing (including high-
order cognitive and linguistic processing)[41]. Neural 
networks of emotional excitation and the sensorimotor 
networks are separately connected to many different M-S 
gateways. Meanwhile their coherence intersects in certain 
M-S gateways of each organism depending on (i) pattern of 
neural circuit engaged through emotional excitation and (ii) 
pattern of the sensorimotor network [41].  
We propose a rough hypothesis of how Long-Term 
Potentiation (LTP) can be induced only in particular M-S 
gateways, retaining information about the certain received 
stimulus [1]. Different areas of the brain exhibit different 
forms of LTP, their types depend on a number of factors, 
such as age and the neuron's anatomic location. However, the 
common processes are the same for all. The simple nature of 
Hebbian learning, based only on the coincidence of pre- and 
post-synaptic activity, LTP is persistent, lasting from several 
minutes to many months, and it is this persistence that 
separates LTP from other forms of synaptic plasticity [45]. 
Spike-timing-dependent plasticity (STDP)–that involves the 
pairing of pre- and postsynaptic action potentials (APs)–
causes a variation of LTP or Long-Term Depression (LTD) 
[46]. The timing between pre- and postsynaptic APs 
modulates synaptic strength, triggering LTP or LTD [46]. 
The sign and magnitude of the change in synaptic strength 
depend on the relative timing between spikes of two 
connected neurons (the pre- and postsynaptic neuron) [46]. 
The structural organization of excitatory inputs supporting 
STDP remains unknown [46]. Even though the ensemble of 
emotion-motion integrated networks weakly stimulates the 
intersected neurons in their junction with M-S gateways. If 
all M-S gateways also simultaneously receive weak 
stimulation from the receptors (due to the chaos of stimuli 
received by the pure nervous system), then this multi-signal 
contributes to LTP in the neurons of particular M-S gateway 
at the junction of this emotion-motion ensemble due to the 
effect of the synaptic cooperativity, because of the following. 
LTP can be induced either by strong tetanic stimulation of a 
single pathway to a synapse, or cooperatively via the weaker 
stimulation of many. Neurons from the gateways in the 
connections of these networks receive cooperative 
stimulation [1]. Induction of cooperativity can ensure LTP.  
According to Tazerart et al. [46], the synaptic 
cooperativity of only two neighboring synaptic inputs onto 
spines in the basal dendrites of L5 pyramidal neurons 
extends the pre–post timing window that can trigger 
potentiation. The engaged M-S gateways retain a certain 
stimulus, while other M-S gateways (also of the same 
sensory modality) remain depressed without keeping 
information of other stimuli. Therefore, specific M-S 
gateways are sensitive, and all these organisms respond to 
specific sensory modalities. Figure 2 shows a very rough 
schematic picture of this process. The induced emotion and 
sensorimotor networks (they are red in the picture) together 
activate certain M-S gateway even with weak stimulation of 
sensory input. The different colors of M-S gateways refer to 
different sensory modalities. At this point, the analysis 
encounters the ground of the PDE problem of how immature 
neurons learn the timing code to modulate certain synaptic 
strength, which triggers either LTP or LTD. Because the 
structural organization of excitatory inputs supporting STDP 
remains unknown [46]. 
The study of the PDE problem leads to the analysis of the 
axiomatic foundations of Psychology, Sociology, and 
Neuroscience–the basic notions that form these sciences–
from the perspectives of the actual scientific paradigm.  

135
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
                                                                                                                                                                                    
Figure 2. The very schematic picture of  M-S Gateway Activation [1]. 
The question of "how can the blank mind begin to learn 
from social interaction" is reduced to "how immature 
neurons learn the timing code to modulate certain synaptic 
strength, that triggers either LTP or LTD"[1]. The sign and 
magnitude of the change in synaptic strength depend on the 
relative timing between spikes of two connected neurons (the 
pre- and postsynaptic neuron) [1]. How can neurons of an 
immature organism (even a newborn) learn the structural 
organization of excitatory inputs that support STDP? The 
further arguments show why we believe that the 
entanglement state of neurons can contribute to simultaneous 
LTP in neurons. 
The daily routine develops neuronal patterns of primitive 
emotions and sensorimotor neuronal patterns in infants. 
Their everyday coherency with the social world forms 
various integrated neuronal patterns of different emotions 
from the existing ensemble of emotion scripts in their 
community. We believe that caregivers contribute to the 
formation of emotion scripts and, consequently, shaping of 
specific neuronal patterns in infants [1]. Obviously, adults 
experienced intentionality before their coherent mental 
process began with newborns. Life experience taught them 
particular emotion scripts and defined their precise motion 
kinematics, that formed more elaborated sensorimotor 
patterns. In routine cooperation with newborns, a caregiver 
enters in interactional synchrony with a newborn, under the 
influence of supranormal stimuli, being in social 
entrainment. Therefore, the similar M-S gateways are excited 
in the dyad. Meanwhile, the adult's current intentionality has 
already triggered a particular network that includes current 
emotion patterns and sensorimotor patterns. Part of it 
corresponds to a primitive complex emotion-sensorimotor 
network in the newborn with similar M-S gateways. This 
newborn's primitive network is less developed, although it is 
similar to the part of the adult's integrated complex network. 
It can be assumed that the neurons in the connections of 
different excited emotion patterns and sensorimotor patterns 
of both neural systems receive similar stimulation due to 
interactional synchrony and emotional arousal of organisms. 
The neurons of mature organism receive LTP, being induced 
cooperatively via many stimulations. If simultaneously, 
neurons of mature and immature organisms are also induced 
by a single harmonic oscillator, these neurons of specific M-
S gateways go into the coordinated state [47]. According to 
Danilov [46], due to STDP, the precise order and timing of 
pre- and postsynaptic action potentials trigger LTP or LTD 
regulating the connection strengths between neurons. These 
M-S gateways of the neonate begin to react on the high-
frequency sequence of stimulation in the same way as those 
M-S gateways in the caregiver and receive LTP [47]. The 
relationships of these neurons teach the specific M-S 
gateway of the newborn to react to the specific stimulation, 
supporting STDP in responding to a particular emotional and 
sensorimotor neural pattern [47]. In such a manner neurons 
of mature organisms train newborns' neurons, being in 
coherence; because the adult and infant neurons behave as a 
single unit [1]. 
Therefore, specific M-S gateways are sensitive in dyads, 
and these organisms equally respond to specific sensory 
modalities [1]. The induction of t-LTP and t-LTD in single 
spines follows a bidirectional Hebbian STDP learning rule 
[46]. Hebbian theory claims that an increase in synaptic 
efficacy arises from the learning process. The PDE problem 
in the chaos of irrelevant stimuli requires a teaching 
mechanism from the beginning. The coordinated state of 
neurons is a possible option of their cooperative activity, how 
infants' neurons learn spike-timing-dependent plasticity [1]. 
Emotion sharing indicates implicit modality of social 
interaction. The coordinated state of neurons in the certain 
M-S gateways is a possible option of how infants' neurons 
learn STDP [1]. This involvement of similar networks and 
the sensibility of the certain M-S gateways lasts as long as is 
necessary to teach the immature nervous system. The 
coordinated state of these neurons ensures their immediate 
response to the specific stimulus, regardless of the spatial 
division of organisms. Therefore, specific M-S gateways are 
sensitive, and these organisms equally respond to specific 
sensory modalities. This is an old evolutionary mechanism 
because interaction without sensory cues should be the 
primary and archetypal modality in biological systems 
beginning from bacteria. Section IV shows why we believe 
so. 
IV.
GOAL-DIRECTED COHERENCE 
Knowledge about a coordinated state of neurons from 
different organisms can complement the set of social 
interaction modalities. The manuscript shows two possible 
options for involving cells into a coordinated state: 
entanglement of entire cells or their coordinated activity due 
to an agent (chemical element or compound). In the latter 
option, the entangled state of the agent leads cells to 
coordinated cooperation. Three candidates can pretend to 
become such an agent: they are the atom of hydrogen [48], 
the Posner molecule [49], and protein. According to Danilov 
and Mihailova [50], the idea of the protein as the agent 

136
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
                                                                                                                                                                                    
seems to be more plausible from the two other above 
mentioned. 
A. Protein as the Agent 
Proteins become biologically active only when folded 
into a three-dimensional structure of amino acids formed into 
particular, highly complex configurations. A relatively small 
protein of only 100 amino acids folds into its functional 
shape in nanoseconds [51]. This high rate of choosing 
through a vast number of different possible configurations (at 
least 10 to the power of 100 options!)[50] in forming the 
precise symmetric configuration corresponds only to 
quantum mechanisms [50]-[55]. Consequently, it is possible 
to assume that quantum mechanisms can have a widespread 
connection mode between protein molecules in nature.  
In bacteria, protein takes part in photoreceptors [56]. The 
review on the photoreceptors in plant-associated bacteria 
identified common traits such as protein-protein interaction 
during signal transduction [57]. Even more, these light-
sensitive proteins seem to control infectivity and virulence to 
a level that generates not too much harm to the plant host 
[57], interacting with plants cells.  These facts are relevant to 
quantum relationships between amino acids of bacteria 
proteins and between amino acids of bacteria and those from 
the plant [50]. In humans, protein Reelin is essential for 
hippocampal integrity and synaptic plasticity. According to 
Faini et al. [58], this molecule contributes to neural circuit 
assembly, refinement, and function, as well as axonal 
guidance, synaptogenesis, and dendritic spine formation. 
Thus, the entanglement between protein molecules of 
neurons from different organisms could become a candidate 
for their connection that leads to neurons' coordinated 
activity in different organisms [50].  
B. Goal-Directed Coherence in Biological Systems 
Social animals demonstrate the quality of goal-directed 
coherence. This quality is defined by the ability of organisms 
to select only one stimulus for the entire group instantly. It 
seems that its main features can be defined as follows: a) 
bypassing sensing (insensitivity to sensory perception), b) 
independence from a distance, c) instantaneousness in time. 
There are a few arguments why proposes this definition: 
a) Bypassing sensing. Bacteria are the smallest free-
living (self-replicating) organisms. They were among the 
first life forms to appear on Earth. The phenomenon of 
community phototaxis in bacteria is the concerted movement 
of an entire colony of cells towards or away from the light 
source which mechanism is still undefined [59]. According 
to Danilov [60], by themselves, photoreceptors of bacteria 
cannot measure the field gradient and show the direction of 
movement. However, community phototaxis involves direct 
sensing of the position of a light source [60]. The ability of 
the single cell to independently determine the direction of 
movement contradicts the simplicity of its internal structure-
organization [60]. 
According to Zirbes et al. [61], earthworms demonstrate 
the cooperative ability to choose the same direction of 
movement as their conspecifics. According to Danilov [60], 
this earthworms' ability shows the incongruence of the 
complexity required communication and a set of sensory 
modalities in earthworms because their simple nervous 
system and sensory receptors make communication 
impossible. Therefore, the only possible explanation for 
earthworms' cooperative achievements with a 
communicative disability is that these organisms can 
together separate sensory stimuli according to their 
significance [60]. For this reason, they need to share the 
significance of the specific cue. 
b) Independence from a distance. Individual ants perform 
large distance foraging excursions up to 1200 m, from which 
they return on a direct, shortcut way to their nests and can 
infer this ground distance when walking over hills [62]. 
Individual ants successfully perform this task without direct 
visibility of the goal and changes in the environment (wind, 
light, etc.). They seem to choose the certain path strategy 
from different options through interaction with their nest-
mates on a case-by-case basis [60]. There is a dichotomy 
between the perceptual ability of organisms and 
environmental conditions–such as inappropriate distance, 
landscape, and weather–that are needed for successful 
interaction through sensory cues [60].  
c) Instantaneousness in time. According to Danilov [60], 
flocks of birds, schools of fish, and hordes of insects also 
show the phenotype of the synchronization, performing the 
cooperative movements. Moreover, these social organisms 
can instantly change the direction of movement and shape 
fantastic collective forms in motion at a high rate. These 
collective movements intend the joint ability of organisms to 
choose the same direction of movement that required 
simultaneous information exchange. The high-speed rate of 
changing movement direction can mean the interaction 
modality that proceeds instantaneously, bypassing sensory 
receptors. Furthermore, all biological systems demonstrate 
instant interaction if they successfully perform the two 
previous features of bypassing sensing and interacting, 
overcoming insuperable distance. Indeed, in a multi-stimuli 
environment, when many organisms are required to instantly 
choose one stimulus from a dozen irrelevant ones, only 
simultaneous information exchange (instant) provides the 
correct solution for choosing the one correct stimulus for the 
whole group. 
Many other biological systems also show two or three 
features of the quality of goal-directed coherence. Such a 
quality is presented in the mother-fetus dyads in humans. 
The intriguing facts of fetal facial expressions, voice 
recognition, and twin fetuses co-movement highlight the 
vital role of interaction in mother-fetus dyads in cognitive 
development [60]. Common sense assumes that this is the 
way it should be, while biology emphasizes separating these 
organisms. Fetuses own their autonomous nervous system. 
There is no communication between these organisms–the 
mother can not explain to her fetus social meanings using 
sensory cues. Even the mother's voice is a social cue, 
unintelligible for her fetus. Indeed, the meaning "mother" 
begins from self-awareness, from understanding the 
meanings of "self" and "other" and then understanding many 
other essential needs–just hearing a sound every minute does 
not lead to understanding its meaning. Even an undeveloped 
nervous system of fetuses casts doubt on the possibility of 
communication, and even more so the absence of abstract 
thinking at this stage of development. Nevertheless, the 
above facts show that, during gestation, some social learning 
succeeds, despite the absence of communication. 

137
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
                                                                                                                                                                                    
According to Darwinism, if inherited valuable qualities 
appear in every generation, the useful variations become so 
noticeable that the organism evolves into a new species over 
several generations.  If the quality has been preserved over 
many generations of a phylogenetic ancestor, it manifests 
itself in one form or another in different species of its 
offspring. These arguments mean that quality preserved in 
simple organisms through many generations should manifest 
itself in one form or another in more developed animals. 
Even in simple organisms, the sustainability of an 
organism's development in colonies (first of all, increased 
protection against predators and foraging efficiency) 
contributes to the propagation of the corresponding 
phenotypic features. If the quality of goal-directed coherence 
propagates in different species through an evolution 
development, this quality's single primary physical 
mechanism could exist. The entanglement between protein 
molecules from different organisms could become a 
candidate for triggering this physical mechanism. Because 
this molecule contributes to animals' interaction ability, 
beginning from essential motility organs in simple organisms 
(by presenting in receptors) to neural circuit assembly 
regulation and spike-timing-dependent plasticity in neurons 
of organisms with the nervous system. 
Nevertheless, there are three candidates for this 
coherence mechanism of the organisms' cooperativity. 
Further research is needed to understand if this physical 
mechanism exists in all animals and because of what agent. 
C. Findings in Physics for Goal-Directed Coherence  
In physics, all matter with a temperature greater than 
absolute zero emits thermal radiation, consisting of 
electromagnetic fields. Coherence means a fixed relationship 
between the phase of waves of a single frequency and 
identical waveforms of two or more waves. Therefore, two 
neurons can become coherent in the case of features 
correspondence of their radiation. Quantum coherence 
appears from the interference of particles' quantum waves 
with each other.  
According to the received view in physics, in short, 
coherence is converted into quantum entanglement. Streltsov 
et al. [63] argued that coherence in a system is converted into 
entanglement with another separate system. Any nonzero 
coherence in a system can be converted into an equal amount 
of entanglement between that system and another initially 
incoherent one [63]. From this perspective, a single harmonic 
oscillator can induce quantum entanglement in two or more 
particles of different systems if the properties of this 
electromagnetic field are such as it induces coherence of 
these particles.  
Marletto et al. [64] argued that they found empirical 
evidence of entanglement between bacteria and the light 
(modeled as a single quantum harmonic oscillator). If so, this 
empirical data is probably the first evidence of quantum 
entanglement within a colony of one of the most ancient 
living organisms in nature. However, this result can also be 
regarded as a coordinated activity of the bacteria colony due 
to a single harmonic oscillator. That is, even though the 
experiments by Marletto et al. [64] have shown the 
entanglement of objects close to quantum scale size, 
according to the received view in physics, these cells are not 
the objects of quantum physics. Therefore, the conclusion 
can be threefold. First, as these authors argued, they induced 
the entanglement between bacteria. The generation of 
entanglement between increasingly macroscopic and 
disparate systems is an ongoing effort in quantum science 
[65]. Recent studies have shown that the behavior of objects 
15 micrometers in size is consistent with the quantum 
world's laws, such as the phenomenon of quantum 
entanglement [66]. In comparison, a neuron's nucleus has a 
diameter of 3 to 18 micrometers, and a neuron has a size of 4 
to 100 micrometers. Second, these objects can also be 
considered systems of atoms. While this is also entanglement 
however from this point of view, it can be defined as an 
entangled state between two or more quantum systems. For 
instance, recent studies showed that it is also possible. An 
entangled state was generated between a millimeter-sized 
dielectric membrane and an ensemble of 109 atoms [65]. 
Third, the experimenters observed the coordinated activity of 
bacteria due to the entangled state of an agent in these cells. 
The current article proposes that the amino acids from the 
protein molecules or the protein molecules themselves can 
become such an agent of the entanglement.  
The article considers protein molecules in photoreceptors 
of bacteria (and neurons as well) as the agent of this 
coherence. From this perspective, the single harmonic 
oscillator can entangle the protein molecules (or amino acids 
from the protein molecules) from different bacteria receptors. 
The coordinated states of photoreceptors of different bacteria 
lead to coordination in their motility. From this point of view, 
during the experiment by Marletto et al. [64], a single 
harmonic oscillator with identical frequency and waveform 
electromagnetic field as in protein amino acids (or the whole 
protein molecules) induced entanglement of different cells' 
proteins promoting similar activity of bacteria. Considering 
the essential role of protein in simple organisms (in the 
activity of the photoreceptors) and organisms with the 
nervous system (in neural circuit assembly regulation and 
spike-timing-dependent plasticity in neurons), the quality of 
Goal-Directed Coherence might be the ground of biological 
systems and widely distributed in nature. 
Moreover, the properties of quantum entangled systems 
promote coordinated activity in biological systems 
overcoming the long distance between organisms. 
Entanglement is an essential property of multipartite 
quantum systems, characterized by the inseparability of 
quantum states of objects regardless of their spatial 
separation [65]. A recent study tested quantum entanglement 
over great distances, sending entangled pairs of photons to 
three ground stations across China—each separated by more 
than 1200 kilometers. Yin et al. used the Micius satellite, 
which was launched last year and is equipped with a 
specialized quantum optical payload. They successfully 
demonstrated the satellite-based entanglement distribution to 
receiver stations separated by more than 1200 km [67]. 
Therefore, goal-directed coherence in biological systems 
(shared intentionality in humans) should also be possible in a 
long distance between organisms. 
The study shows a possible direction for progress in e-
learning by designing an advanced e-curriculum that can 
stimulate shared intentionality in students. We believe that 
the ideas mentioned above contribute to an advanced e-

138
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
                                                                                                                                                                                    
learning curriculum for young children. Recent case studies 
(conducted online) with the educational task to children aged 
12 to 33 months show coordinating actions in the absence of 
communication through sensory cues in the mother-child 
dyads that promoted numerosity in infants and toddlers in a 
short course at an age younger than others (before then peers 
do) [68] [69]. 
V.
CONCLUSIONS 
The current study discussed a possible foundation of 
Shared intentionality for stimulating Coherent Intelligence 
that can form grounds of advanced e-curriculum. The 
analysis of recent empirical data yields a hypothesis of 
beginning cognition–the Model of Coherent Intelligence and 
its neuronal foundation of how the pure nervous system 
distinguishes sensory stimuli. This hypothesis postulates two 
new ideas of the PDE basis: (1) cognition begins from a 
separation of sensory stimuli: LTP can only be induced in 
neurons of particular M-S gateways (not all)–selective 
induction promotes selective sensitivity to the chaos of 
irrelevant stimuli. (2) Neurons can learn STDP in social 
interaction by repeating the timing code of other organisms' 
mature neurons to modulate certain synaptic strength, which 
triggers either LTP or LTD [1]. We believe that the MCI 
shapes intentionality in intimately related individuals. 
Coherent Intelligence is the integration of M-S gateways of 
particular brain areas, which contributes to different 
organisms' sensibility to similar sensory inputs [1].  
Recent hyperscanning shows an increase in coordinated 
neuronal activities in subjects during collective efforts in the 
absence of communication through sensory cues [34]. This 
finding may mean indirect evidence of the hypothesis about 
the Model of Coherent Intelligence and its neuronal 
foundation. In addition, a growing body of literature on 
increasing the efficiency of cooperative decision-making in 
groups without sensory cues between subjects [10][24][36]
[37] also shows empirical indirect evidence of the MCI.  
The paper suggested that this social quality of humans is 
the outcome of evolution development. Social animals 
demonstrate the quality of Goal-Directed Coherence. The 
paper defined this quality as the ability of organisms to 
instantly select only one stimulus for the entire group. It also 
argued its main features: a) bypassing sensing (insensitivity 
to sensory perception), b) independence from a distance, c) 
instantaneousness in time. 
The manuscript showed the candidate for triggering this 
physical mechanism–entanglement between protein 
molecules from different organisms (or amino acids from the 
protein molecules). This molecule contributes to animals' 
interaction ability, from essential motility organs in simple 
organisms (by presenting in receptors) to neural circuit 
assembly regulation and spike-timing-dependent plasticity in 
organisms with a nervous system (by presenting in neurons). 
Nevertheless, the paper proposed three candidates for this 
coherence mechanism of the organisms' cooperativity. 
Further research is needed to understand if this physical 
mechanism exists in all animals and what kind of agent it is. 
We believe that this approach may contribute to studying 
the mind and, specifically, understanding the appearance of 
intentionality. In addition, we believe that these findings may 
contribute to an advanced e-curriculum, specifically in 
teaching children from 2 years of age with communication 
disabilities. Further research can also examine whether the 
MCI can provide a contactless interaction of the computer 
with neuronal circuits, in which the computer would become 
a part of the extended mind. This approach provides a wide 
range of possibilities for developing advanced intelligence 
systems, in specific a human-computer interface. 
AUTHORS CONTRIBUTION 
Igor Val Danilov formulated the hypothesis and wrote the 
first draft of the manuscript. Igor Val Danilov and Sandra 
Mihailova improved the text over several iterations.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors express their gratitude to Iegor Reznikoff, 
Emeritus Professor of University of Paris X-Nanterre France, 
for commenting on this paper. 
REFERENCES 
1.
I.Val Danilov and S. Mihailova, "New Findings in Education: 
Primary Data Entry in Shaping Intentionality and Cognition." 
The Thirteenth International Conference on Advanced 
Cognitive Technologies, and Applications, COGNITIVE 2021, 
April 18 – 22, 2021 in Porto, Portugal. 
2.
E. Thompson, Mind in Life: biology, phenomenology, and the 
sciences of mind. The Belknap press of Harvard University 
press. Cambridge, Massachusetts London, England. 1st 
Harvard University Press paperback edition. 2010. 
3.
J. Delafield-Butt and C. Trevarthen, Theories of the 
development of human communication. 2012. [Online]. 
Available from: https://strathprints.strath.ac.uk/39831/1/ 
Delafield_Butt_Trevarthen_2012_Theories_of_the_developm 
ent_of_human_communication_final_edit_060312.pdf 
[retrieved: March, 2021].  
4.
G. Csibra and G. Gergely, "Natural Pedagogy," Trends Cogn. 
Sci., vol. 13, pp. 148–153, 2009. 
5.
S. R. Waxman and E. M. Leddon, "Early Word-Learning and 
Conceptual Development". The Wiley-Blackwell Handbook of 
Childhood Cognitive Development. 2010. [Online] Available 
from: https://www.academia.edu/12821552/Early_Word- 
Learning_and_Conceptual_Development [retrieved: March, 
2021]. 
6.
I. Val Danilov, "Imitation or Early Imitation: Towards the 
Problem of Primary Data Entry." The Journal of Higher 
Education Theory and Practice (JHETP). 21(4), 2021. https://
doi.org/10.33423/jhetp.v21i4.4222. 
7.
F. J. Varela, Principles of Biological Autonomy. 
ISBN-10:0135009502, ISBN-13:978-0135009505. 1979. 
8.
F. J. Varela and P. Bourgine, "Towards a practice of 
autonomous systems. In Towards a Practice of Autonomous 
Systems." The first European conference on Artificial Life, ed. 
F. J. Varela and P. Bourgine, pp. xi–xviii. Cambridge: MIT 
Press. 1992. 
9.
T. Van Gelder, "The dynamical hypothesis in cognitive 
science." Behavioral and Brain Sciences, vol. 21 (5), pp.
615-628. 1998. DOI: 10.1017/s0140525x98001733.   
10. I. Val Danilov and S. Mihailova, "Knowledge Sharing through 
Social Interaction: Towards the Problem of Primary Data 
Entry." The 11th Eurasian Conference on Language & Social 
Sciences which is held in Gjakova University, Kosovo. p.226. 
2021. [Online] Available from http://eclss.org/

139
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
                                                                                                                                                                                    
publicationsfordoi/ abst11act8boo8k2021a.pdf. [retrieved: 
March, 2021]. 
11. J. Delafield-Butt and C. Trevarthen, Development of human 
consciousness. 2016. [Online]. Available from: https:// 
strathprints.strath.ac.uk/id/eprint/57845. [retrieved: March, 
2021]. 
12. J. R. Searle, W. S. Slusser, and M. Slusser, Intentionality: An 
Essay in the Philosophy of Mind. Cambridge University Press. 
1983. 
13. T. Crane, "Intentionalism." The Oxford Handbook to the 
Philosophy of Mind. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 
474–493. 2009. 
14. M. Tomasello, Becoming human: A theory of ontogeny. 
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. 2019. https:// 
doi.org/10.4159/9780674988651.  
15. R. E. Jack, "Culture and facial expressions of emotion". Visual 
Cognition vol. 21, pp. 1248–1286, 2013, https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/13506285.2013.8353.  
16. C. Crivelli and M. Gendron, In e Science of Facial Expression 
(eds José-Miguel Fernández-Dols & James A. Russell) Oxford 
University Press, 2017.  
17. L. F. Barrett, R. Adolphs, S. Marsella, A. Martinez, and S. 
Pollak, "Emotional Expressions Reconsidered: Challenges to 
Inferring Emotion in Human Facial Movements." 
Psychological Science in the Public Interest, vol. 20, pp. 1–68. 
2019. https:// doi.org/10.1177/1529100619832930.  
18. K. Hoemann et al., "Context facilitates performance on a 
classic cross-cultural emotion perception task". Emotion. 
(Washington, DC). vol. 19, pp. 1292–1313. 2019. 
19. M. Gendron, K. Hoemann, A. N. Crittenden, S. M. Mangola, 
G. A. Ruark, and L. F. Barret, "Emotion Perception in Hadza 
Hunter-Gatherers". Scientific reports, vol. 10, pp. 3867 , 2020. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-60257-2. 
20. I. Val. Danilov, "Social Interaction in Knowledge Acquisition: 
Advanced Curriculum. Critical Review of Studies Relevant to 
Social Behavior of Infants". The Twelfth International 
Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies and 
Applications COGNITIVE2020. 2020. 
21. J. Decety and P. L. Jackson, "The functional architecture of 
human empathy". Behavioral and Cognitive Neuroscience 
Reviews, vol. 3, pp. 71-100. 2004. 
22. M. Tamietto et al., "Unseen facial and bodily expressions 
trigger fast emotional reactions". PNAS, vol. 106: pp. 
17661-17666, 2009. 
23. A. L. Valencia and T. Froese, "What binds us? Inter-brain 
neural synchronization and its implications for theories of 
human consciousness". Neuroscience of Consciousness, vol. 
6(1), 2020. doi: 10.1093/nc/niaa010. 
24. I. Val Danilov and S. Mihailova, "Emotions in e-Learning: The 
Review Promotes Advanced Curriculum by Studying Social 
Interaction". The International Conference on Lifelong 
Education and Leadership for All (ICLEL). pp.8-17. ERIC 
Number: ED606507. 2020. [Online] Available from: https://
faf348ef-5904-4b29-9cf9-98b675786628.filesusr.com/ugd/
d546b1_2d77ecc9e07f4b0fb2cccce23af201f7.pdf. [retrieved: 
March, 2021]. 
25. C. Szymanski et al., "Teams on the same wavelength perform 
better: Inter-brain phase synchronization constitutes a neural 
substrate for social facilitation". Neuroimage, vol. 15, pp. 
425–436, 2017. 
26. F. A. Fishburn et al., "Putting our heads together: interpersonal 
neural synchronization as a biological mechanism for shared 
intentionality". Soc Cogn Affect Neurosci, vol. 13, pp. 841–
849, 2018. 
27. Y. Hu et al., "Inter-brain synchrony and cooperation context in 
interactive decision making". Biol Psychol, vol. 133, pp. 54–
62, 2018. 
28. L. Astolfi et al., "Neuroelectrical hyperscanning measures 
simultaneous brain activity in humans". Brain Topogr, vol. 23, 
pp. 243–256, 2010. 
29. L. May, K. Byers-Heinlein, J. Gervain, and J. F. Werker, 
"Language and the newborn brain: does prenatal language 
experience shape the neonate neural response to speech?" 
Front. Psychology, vol. 2, pp. 222, 2011, doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.
2011.00222.  
30. T. Andrillon and S. Kouider, "The vigilant sleeper: neural 
mechanisms of sensory (de)coupling during sleep." Current 
Opinion in Physiology,  vol. 15, pp. 47–59, 2020. 
31. A. Ibanez, V. Lopez, and C. Cornejo, "ERPs and contextual 
semantic discrimination: degrees of congruence in 
wakefulness and sleep." Brain Lang, vol. 98, pp. 264-275, 
2006. 
32. G. Legendre, T. Andrillon, M. Koroma, and S. Kouider, 
"Sleepers track informative speech in a multitalker 
environment." Nat Hum Behav, vol. 3, pp. 274-283, 2019. 
33. R. Cox, I. Korjoukov, M. de Boer, and L. M. Talamini, "Sound 
Asleep: Processing and Retention of Slow Oscillation Phase-
Targeted Stimuli." PLoS ONE, vol. 9(7), pp. e101567. 2014, 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0101567. 
34. D.R Painter, J.J. Kim, A.I. Renton et al. 2021. Joint control of 
visually guided actions involves concordant increases in 
behavioural and neural coupling. Commun Biol 4: 816. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s42003-021-02319-3  
35. C. H. Cooley, Social organization: A study of the larger mind , 
(pp. 23-31). New York, NY: Charles Scribner's Sons, xvii, pp. 
426, 1909. 
36. I. Val Danilov, S. Mihailova, and V. Perepjolkina, 
"Unconscious social interaction, coherent intelligence in 
learning." The 12th annual conference. ICERI 2019. doi: 
10.21125/iceri.2019.0606.  
37. I. Val Danilov and S. Mihailova, "Intentionality vs Chaos: 
Brain Connectivity through Emotions and Cooperation Levels 
beyond Sensory Modalities." The Thirteenth International 
Conference on Advanced Cognitive Technologies, and 
Applications, COGNITIVE 2021, April 18 – 22, 2021 in 
Porto, Portugal. 
38. M. L. Commons, "The fundamental issues with behavioral 
development." Behavioral Development Bulletin, vol. 21(1), 
pp. 1-12, 2016, http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/bdb0000022. 
39. S. Oldham, C. Murawski, A. Fornito, G. Youssef, M. Yucel, 
and V. Lorenzetti,  "The anticipation and outcome phases of 
reward and loss processing: A neuroimaging meta-analysis of 
the monetary incentive delay task." Human Brain Mapping, 
vol. 39, pp. 3398-3418, 2018. 
40. D. Martinsa et al., "Mapping social reward and punishment 
processing in the human brain: A voxel-based meta-analysis of 
neuroimaging findings using the Social Incentive Delay task." 
2 0 2 1 , b i o R x i v p r e p r i n t d o i : h t t p s : / / d o i . o rg / 
10.1101/2020.05.28.121475.  
41. I. Enrici, M. Adenzato, S. Cappa, B. G. Bara, and M. 
Tettamanti, "Intention Processing in Communication: A 
Common Brain Network for Language and Gestures." Journal 
of Cognitive Neuroscience, volume 23, issue 9, pp. 
2415-2431, 2011, https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2010.21594.  
42. M. Tettamanti, M. M. Vaghi, B. G. Bara, S. F. Cappa, I. Enrici, 
and M. Adenzato, "Effective connectivity gateways to the 
Theory of Mind network in processing communicative 
intention." NeuroImage, vol. 155, pp. 169-176, 2017, doi:
10.1016/ j.neuroimage.2017.04.050.  
43. L. Nummenmaa et al., "Emotional speech synchronizes brains 
across listeners and engages large-scale dynamic brain 
networks." NeuroImage, vol. 102, pp. 498-509, 2014. 

140
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
                                                                                                                                                                                    
44. M. Bateson et al., "Agitated honeybees exhibit pessimistic 
cognitive biases." Curr Biol., vol. 21;21(12), pp. 1070-1073, 
2011, doi:10.1016/ j.cub.2011.05.017.  
45. W. C. Abraham, "How long will long-term potentiation last?" 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. 
Series B, Biological Sciences. vol. 358 (1432), pp. 735–744, 
2003, doi:10.1098/rstb.2002.1222.  
46. S. Tazerart et al., "A spike-timing-dependent plasticity rule for 
dendritic spines." Nat Commun vol. 11, pp. 4276, 2020, 
https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41467-020-17861-7.  
47. I. Val Danilov, “Human-Centered Computing Based on Shared 
Intentionality in Human Cognition Model: A New Approach 
To Contactless Human-Computer System.” 23rd International 
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, along with CSCE 
congress, 2021. 
48. D. K. F. Meijer, I. Jerman, A. V. Melkikh, and V. I. Sbitnev, 
“Biophysics of Consciousness: A Scale-Invariant Acoustic 
Information Code of a Superfluid Quantum Space Guides the 
Mental Attribute of the Universe”, along with “Rhythmic 
Oscillations in Proteins to Human Cognition”, edited by 
Anirban Bandyopadhyay and Kanad Ray, Springer Nature 
S i n g a p o r e P t e L t d . 2 0 2 1 , h t t p s : / / d o i . o r g /
10.1007/978-981-15-7253-1. 
49. M. P. A. Fisher, “Quantum cognition: The possibility of 
processing with nuclear spins in the brain.” Annals of Physics, 
Volume 362, pp. 593-602, 2015. ISSN 0003-4916, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.aop.2015.08.020. 
50. I. Val Danilov and S. Mihailova, "Neuronal Coherence Agent 
for Shared Intentionality: Hypothesis of Neurobiological 
Processes during Social Interaction." OBM Neurobiology. In 
press, 2021. 
51. L. Luo and J. Lu, “Temperature Dependence of Protein 
Folding Deduced from Quantum Transition.” 2011 https://
arxiv.org/abs/1102.3748 
52. M. Baiesi, E. Orlandini, F. Seno et al. "Sequence and structural 
patterns detected in entangled proteins reveal the importance 
of co-translational folding." Sci Rep 9, 8426, 2019. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-44928-3 
53. D. Banerjee, “Energy transfer and entanglement in an optically 
active solution of amino acids.” Quantum Physics, arXiv:
1909.07795 .2019. 
54. J. I. Sulkowska, “On folding of entangled proteins: knots, 
lassos, links and θ-curves." Current Opinion in Structural 
Biology, Volume 60, pp. 131-141, 2020. ISSN 0959-440X, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbi.2020.01.007. 
55. S. H. Zangbar, T. Ghadiri, M.S. Vafaee et al. "A potential 
entanglement between the spinal cord and hippocampus: Theta 
rhythm correlates with neurogenesis deficiency following 
spinal cord injury in male rats." J Neurosci Res. 98: pp. 2451– 
2467, 2020. https://doi.org/10.1002/jnr.24719. 
56. C. Storey, C. Y. Allan, P. R. Fisher, “Phototaxis: Microbial.” 
Wi l e y O n l i n e L i b r a r y, 2 0 2 0 , h t t p s : / / d o i . o rg /
10.1002/9780470015902.a0000399.pub3 
57. A. Losi and W. Gärtner, “A light life together: photosensing in 
the plant microbiota” , Photochemical & Photobiological 
Sciences, 20: pp. 451–473, 2021. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s43630-021-00029-7. 
58. G. Faini, F. Del Bene, S. Albadri, “Reelin functions beyond 
neuronal migration: from synaptogenesis to network activity 
modulation,” Current Opinion in Neurobiology, Volume 66, 
pp. 135-143, 2021. ISSN 0959-4388, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.conb.2020.10.009. 
59. A. Wilde and C. W. Mullineaux, "Light-controlled motility in 
prokaryotes and the problem of directional light perception." 
FEMS Microbiology Reviews, fux045(41), pp. 900–922, 
2017. doi: 10.1093/femsre/fux045. 
60. I. Val Danilov, “Contactless Human-Computer Systems via 
Shared Intentionality: A Concept Design for the Next 
Generation of Smart Prosthetic Limbs”, in: Arai K. (eds) 
Proceedings of the Future Technologies Conference (FTC) 
2021, Volume 3. FTC 2021. Lecture Notes in Networks and 
Systems, vol 360. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/
10.1007/978-3-030-89912-7_59. 
61. L. Zirbes, J.-L. Deneubourg, Y. Brostaux, E. Haubruge, "A 
New Case of Consensual Decision: Collective Movement in 
Earthworms." Wiley Online Library, 116(6), 2010. https:// 
doi.org/10.1111/j.1439-0310.2010.01768.x. 
62. B. Ronacher, "Path integration in a three – dimensional world: 
the case of desert ants." Journal of Comparative Physiology 
A., 2020. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00359-020-01401-1. 
63. A. Streltsov, U. Singh, H.S. Dhar et al. "Measuring Quantum 
Coherence with Entanglement." Phys. Rev. Lett. 115, 020403. 
2015. doi:https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett. 115.020403 . 
64. C. Marletto, D. M. Coles, T. Farrow, and V. Vedral, 
"Entanglement between living bacteria and quantized light 
witnessed by Rabi splitting." Journal of Physics 
Communications, vol. 2(10), 2018. http://iopscience.iop.org/
article/10.1088/2399-6528/aae224/meta. 
65. R. A. Thomas et al., "Entanglement between distant 
macroscopic mechanical and spin systems." Nat. Phys., 2020. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41567-020-1031-5.  
66. M. Sillanpää and S. Hong, "Spooky quantum entanglement 
goes big in new experiments." [Online] Science News 25 April 
2018. Available from: https:// www.sciencenews.org/article/
spooky-quantum-entanglement-goes-big-new-experiments. 
[retrieved: March, 2021]. 
67. J. Yin et al., "Satellite-based entanglement distribution over 
1200 kilometers" [Online] Science: vol. 356, issue 6343, pp. 
1140-1144, doi:10.1126/science.aan3211, 2017. [retrieved: 
March, 2021]. 
68. I. Val Danilov, S. Mihailova, and I. Reznikoff, "Frontiers in 
Cognition for Education: Coherent Intelligence in e-Learning 
for Beginners Aged 1 to 3 years." The 20th Int'l Conf on e-
Learning, e-Business, Enterprise Information Systems, and e-
Government, along with CSCE congress, 2021. 
69. I. Val Danilov, S. Mihailova, and I. Reznikoff, “Shared 
Intentionality in Advanced Problem Based Learning: Deep 
Levels of Thinking in Coherent Intelligence”, The 17th Int'l 
Conf on Frontiers in Education: Computer Science and 
Computer Engineering, Along with CSCE congress, 2021. 

