82
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Virtual Team Leadership and Operation in the Automotive Industry: Profile of a 
Research Case Study 
Anatoli Quade  
School of Business 
University of Gloucestershire 
Cheltenham, UK 
E-Mail: Anatoli.quade@arcor.de 
Martin Wynn 
Computing and Engineering 
University of Gloucestershire 
Cheltenham, UK 
E-Mail: MWynn@glos.ac.uk 
David Dawson 
School of Business 
University of Gloucestershire 
Cheltenham, UK 
E-Mail: DDawson@glos.ac.uk 
Abstract – The impact of digitalisation on industry and society 
at large is huge and has parallels with the advent of the internet 
more than twenty years ago. In the automotive sector, 
companies are also confronted with the implications of the so-
called megatrends of connected car, autonomous vehicles, 
sharing/subscription, and electrification, which are challenging 
current business models and working practices. This has 
brought about new approaches to project management 
practices, notably those relating to collaborating over distance 
between and within dispersed teams. Researchers and 
practitioners have started to think more comprehensively about 
the complexity of projects with virtual teams, and how best to 
manage them. This article is the result of the distillation of 
relevant literature relating to virtual teams and the analysis of 
in-depth interviews undertaken with industry experts. It puts 
forward a model (V-CORPS) for virtual team leadership and 
management. The authors believe these results can be of value 
in providing guidance for practitioners working in virtual 
teams, and as an analytical framework for further research 
studies in this field. 
Keywords – Project management; virtual teams; virtual 
leadership; German automotive industry; V-CORPS model  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Recent research set out a provisional model for virtual 
project leadership in the automotive industry [1]. Here, this 
model – the V-CORPS model (Virtual – Create the team; 
Organise the team; Relationship building; Performance 
evaluation; Sign-off and closure) - is developed in more detail, 
and particular focus is put on the underpinning research 
process. The model is of particular relevance because of the 
globalisation of the automotive industry and the dramatic 
changes in underlying business models and ways of working 
that are impacting the companies in this sector. This has 
brought working in virtual teams to the fore, presenting new 
challenges for project management, such as projects being led 
from a distance, with dispersed team members. This has given 
rise to the concept of “virtual leadership” (or “e-leadership”), 
which focuses on the social influencing capabilities of leaders 
of virtual teams. 
Jugdev et al. [2] concluded that project management can 
be seen as a holistic discipline for achieving organisational 
efficiency, effectiveness, and innovation. Team leading plays 
a key role here. An examination of the extant literature on 
virtual leadership reveals issues relating to project complexity, 
social process, value creation, conceptualisation, and 
practitioner development [3]. Virtual teams face a number of 
issues that can impede effective project delivery – different 
time zones, different cultures, lack of face-to-face meetings, 
reduced productivity and increased miscommunication [4]. 
The research project reported on here had the goal of 
rethinking project management leadership for dispersed teams 
in the automotive industry, looking particularly at team 
leading from a distance and its influence on team members. 
As recently noted in the National Instruments Research 
Handbook [5] “within the next 10 years, we will see 
remarkable change in the automotive industry from improved 
engine efficiency to autonomous vehicles to electrification” 
and virtual project management will likely be of increasing 
importance in an industry undergoing rapid and radical 
change. Deloitte [6] see this as consisting of four main trends 
- Connected car, Autonomous vehicles, Sharing/subscription, 
and Electrification - for which the acronym CASE is often 
used. This is leading to major changes in many aspects of the 
industry’s operations, where issues need to be resolved in 
parallel and at speed, often in different geographical locations. 
Effective operation through virtual teams will become of 
increasing significance. 
This paper is structured around five main sections. 
Following this Introduction, Section 2 outlines the research 
methodology and positions the two research objectives 
addressed in this article. Section 3 then reports the critical 
success factors (CSFs) drawn from current literature relevant 
to the research aim. Subsequently, Section 4 discusses the 
development of the initial V-CORPS framework, which was 
mainly based on concepts from the extant literature. Section 5 
then outlines how the model was further developed, enhanced, 
and validated through a series of expert interviews carried out 
between October 2020 to April 2021. The final section 
provides an overall conclusion to the issues discussed in the 
paper and suggests how the model could be further developed 
and enhanced. 
II. 
RESEARCH METHODOLGY 
Research design represents the structure that guides the 
appropriate research methods for the execution of data 
collection, and the subsequent analysis of the gathered data. In 
an initial stage, available literature in the automotive industry 
and in other industry sectors was investigated to ascertain 
current thinking on the leading and management of virtual 

83
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
teams working on specific projects. Concepts and ideas from 
other disciplines were evaluated and adopted if deemed of 
value for leading virtual teams in the automotive industry. 
This was an integrative review [7] which aimed to synthesize 
areas of conceptual knowledge that could contribute to a better 
understanding of virtual team leadership and management, 
and lead to the development of an operational model. 
An integrative literature review can provide an overview 
of the literature in a given field, encompassing the foremost 
ideas, models and debates, especially the concept that is not 
explicitly stated before – in this case the dynamics of virtual 
team leadership and management. It can provide the basis for 
a summary of the existing evidence concerning this theme and 
identify gaps in the current literature that may highlight 
possible areas for further investigation. It can also help build 
a framework or model for new research activities. This is 
particularly suitable when the research area is in the early 
stages of development, where key questions remain 
unanswered and an accurate picture of current thinking and 
evidence to date is required to promote the development of 
new models or methods.  
The review of existing literature allowed the identification 
of critical success factors for the successful leading of virtual 
teams, and the construction of a provisional model for virtual 
team leading and management, which has now been 
progressed through primary research based on in-depth 
interviews with industry practitioners. A model of virtual 
project leadership in the automotive industry does not yet 
exist, and this research aimed to address this gap in the 
literature and in practice. 
 
Figure 1. The research onion (based on Saunders et al. [8]) 
In terms of the methodological choices made for the 
primary research undertaken in the study, the “research onion” 
developed by Saunders et al. [8] provides a useful structure 
and guide to record elements of the methodology. The onion 
is separated into layers, each relating to an element of research 
method (Figure 1). The outer layer of the research onion refers 
to the philosophical position of the researcher, which in this 
case is interpretivist. This position allows the integration of 
humanistic qualitative methods and interests in a study [9], 
this being appropriate for research that considered the 
opinions and experiences of experts in the automotive field. 
The next layer of the research onion indicates the approach 
used for theory development. Here, the inductive approach 
was chosen. Inductive reasoning is used when collective 
observations and experiences, including knowledge attained 
from other individuals and working practices, are combined to 
establish a “general truth” or acknowledged fact. The 
inductive approach was adopted in the analysis of empirical 
data, which was appropriate here because the model was built 
upon existing methods, experiences, and working practices 
relating to virtual team building and leading in the automotive 
industry.  
TABLE I. ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF INTERVIEWEES 
1. 
Head of Product Innovation: 25 years of work experience as a director of product 
development, with different teams and 22 product patents. 
2. 
Head of Project Management: 26 years of work experience as project manager 
in the automotive industry. 
3. 
President EMEA: 15 years of work experience as a Plant and Project Manager  
4. 
Vice President: 21 years of work experience as a Product costing analyst 
5. 
Project Manager: 7 years of work experience as a Project Manager 
6. 
Product Manager: 6 years of work experience as a Product Manager in China 
7. 
Head of Product Innovation: 18 years of work experience as Project and Product 
Manager. 
8. 
Vice President Business Development: 20 years of work experience in sales 
and project development. 
9. 
President and CEO: 30 years of work experience in Product development and 
strategic Project Management. 
10. 
Project Manager: 15 years of work experience as a Project Manager in the 
automotive industry. 
11. 
Senior Key Account Manager: 15 years of work experience in the sales sector. 
12. 
Product Certification Manager: 19 years of work experience in programme 
management and product certification in the European and Japanese regions. 
13. 
Agile Coach: 22 years of work experience in Project Management. 
14. 
Project Manager: 10 years of work experience in the automotive area. 
15. 
COO EMEA Region: 20 years of work experience in automotive engineering, and 
10 years as a Managing director. 
16. 
Development Director: 22 years of work experience in automotive engineering, 
and 16 years product development responsible 
17. 
Industry Representative in EMEA and CIS region: 17 years of work experience, 
and 13 years in project management 
18. 
Product Manager: 7 years of work experience as a Product Manager in CIS region 
The aim was to create a model for virtual team building 
and leadership. A qualitative multi-methods investigation was 
pursued, which has its challenges, as different methodological 
traditions bring with them different communication traditions 
that are associated with different technical, rhetorical, and 
aesthetic criteria and norms. In an initial survey of views and 
perspectives, eighteen senior staff (Table 1) from a single 
automotive supplier were requested to complete a 
questionnaire, containing questions regarding the initial 
model and some open-ended questions. This was followed-up 
by semi-structured interviews to clarify the findings from the 
questionnaire. Yin [10] considers the interview as an 
important source for data collection, although the way in 
which an interview is conducted can be structured in several 
different formats. Here, the first step of this process involved 
the completion of a questionnaire by the interviewee, while 

84
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the second step used the questionnaire responses as the basis 
for discussion during the face-to-face interviews.  
Using feedback from the initial round of interviews, the V-
CORPS model was developed and enhanced. The model and 
the proposed activities and actions were then fed back to the 
interviewees, allowing the model to be refined and validated 
in a second round of interviews. In this sense, this was a 
research case study focusing on a single automotive supplier 
in Germany. The timeline was cross-sectional (commonly 
referred to as a “snapshot”) and provided an insight into the 
current automotive working environment. The company is a 
part of a supply chain of a larger group, and is primarily 
responsible for the Europe, Middle East, and Africa (EMEA) 
region. In 2018, the company had approximately 50,000 
employees distributed over 98 production sites in 25 countries 
worldwide, with a turnover of €7.5 billion, as well as an 
annual investment in research and development of circa €1.2 
billion. The company’s language is English, and it works as a 
matrix organisation across a large geographical area and thus 
leadership over distance is of the utmost importance. 
The company, in 2021, is engaged in more than twenty 
projects operating across the EMEA region, and with the 
increasing complexity of vehicles resulting in more complex 
and extensive projects, an expansion of different suppliers for 
vehicle projects overall is required for the OEMs. A 
centralised project work scheme is more time efficient for the 
OEMs, so that suppliers and sub-suppliers will be able to work 
according to the same project standards. This time efficiency 
is necessary due to the rigid time limits of development 
projects, which usually last for approximately 2 to 2.5 years, 
as both the complexity of the vehicles and component 
requirements have increased significantly.  
In this context, the research objectives (ROs) addressed in 
the research and reported on here are: 
RO1. To review existing literature on virtual leadership 
and virtual teams and identify critical success factors for the 
e-leadership of virtual teams in the automotive industry. 
RO2. To develop a new operational model for the e-
leadership of virtual teams that minimises personal contact 
and optimises project outcomes in the automotive industry. 
III. 
CRITICAL SUCCESS FACTORS 
Project management has become more versatile and 
complex in terms of people and project leading over the past 
few 
decades, 
especially 
when 
project 
teams 
are 
geographically dispersed. This has been done with the 
support of a variety of project management methods and 
concepts and the use of faster and cheaper communication 
technology, 
which 
have 
collectively 
facilitated 
the 
achievement of project goals and milestones more 
effectively. Whether these methods would also work for 
virtually managed teams in the automotive industry is a gap 
in the literature. A review of the extant literature suggests a 
number of factors as critical to the building and leadership of 
virtual teams. These may be seen as key concepts emerging 
from the integrative literature search on project management 
and team development, which the authors have considered of 
particular relevance to virtual team leadership and 
management. They are taken from the literature on both the 
automotive industry and other different industry sectors, and 
the relevant elements of project management methodologies. 
These CSFs are as follows: 
Build trust: A number of authors, including Maes and 
Weldy [11] and Ford et al. [12], have emphasised that trust 
between leaders and their team members, as well as amongst 
team members themselves, is the most important aspect for 
leading from a distance, and that it is possible to see trust as 
a key starting point for working with virtual teams. The 
building of trust is a pre-requisite for team cohesion, and the 
gaining of trust is part of social influence for distance-led 
team members, as discussed by Scheunemann and Bühlmann 
[13]. It is a major challenge in overcoming distance and time 
barriers and winning over team members. Building trust is an 
essential and challenging aspect for leading, and this is 
highlighted in the literature [11] [14]. Ford et al. [12] describe 
trust as the key to a capable virtual team.  
Create a team structure: A team operating virtually, at a 
distance, needs to be underpinned and supported by a clear 
team structure. A team structure can engender intra-team 
communications and foster a collective, shared approach to 
the working behaviour of the team. This structure can be 
viewed as a contract for team members that allows them to 
pursue individual and project objectives effectively. 
Klitmøller and Lauring [15] found that communication and 
knowledge sharing were more challenging in a virtual team 
environment than with face-to-face counterparts, and that a 
clear team structure was essential in overcoming these 
challenges.   
Overcome cultural and language barriers: The avoidance 
of the possible negative impact of cultural differences is a 
necessary preventive measure to mitigate possible bias 
between the different team members. Nader et al. [16] note 
that cultural barriers are a serious impediment to the 
effectiveness of virtual teams. It is essential that the general 
understanding and respect of culture is recognised by the 
leader, and that neither origin nor gender plays a role in the 
team, with only ability and merit counting. 
Language barriers are an important issue which cannot be 
underestimated. Due to the fact that the members of virtual 
teams often do not speak the same language, many companies 
opt for mutual understanding through English [13]. It is 
essential that the leader considers this issue and 
accommodates 
language 
differences 
during 
complex 
negotiations. Team members may need to develop agreed 
procedures for avoiding misunderstandings and time wasting 
through misinterpreted instructions or information. 
Manage time and distance barriers: One of the most 
important pre-requisites for successful virtual working is the 
effective management of time and distance barriers. The 
“follow the sun methodology” allows the phased deployment 
of teams around the globe, and the increased use of 
collaboration and communication tools can facilitate more 
autonomous work, and yet also allow all team members to be 

85
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
in one virtual space during critical situations. Effective 
communication across time and distance barriers is essential 
to give team members a form of security (the feeling that they 
are not alone) and can be seen as the “project life-blood” of 
the team. Layng [4] found that communication was a key 
factor in the success of virtual teams. 
There is a range of available technologies to support 
communication and co-working in virtual teams, which have 
seen increased deployment in the lockdown periods brought 
in as a response to the coronavirus pandemic. In addition to 
standard phone, texting and email, there are more 
sophisticated messaging services like Microsoft Teams, 
WhatsApp and Facebook Messenger. Video conferencing 
and meeting tools such as Skype and Zoom support virtual 
meetings across time and distance boundaries, and many of 
the standard project and document management tools will be 
used by virtual teams. Similarly, if virtual teams are 
interacting with the customer, shared access to customer files 
(probably via a customer relationship management system) 
will be necessary. The use of the Cloud to provide shared 
access to these software systems is an option.  
Influence through horizontal communication: Virtual 
teams are frequently multi-functional, composed of 
individuals and specialists drawn from different departments, 
with virtual leaders who often have no direct line 
management authority. Influencing skills are thus of 
particular importance, especially in virtual teams when there 
are limited opportunities for face-to-face meetings. The 
influencing of team members can take place through adopting 
elements of nonviolent communication (Observations, 
Feelings, Needs/Values, and Requests) to minimise 
escalation of disagreements and minor disputes among team 
members. Alistoun and Upfold [17] discussed how virtual 
team leaders can be trained to successfully influence team 
members, deploying computer-mediated communication, 
building trust, shortening subjective distance, sharing 
information, processing gains and losses, dealing with 
feelings of isolation, encouraging participation, and 
enhancing coordination and cohesion. If the leader can appear 
to communicate on the same hierarchical level as team 
members (horizontal communication), the leader is seen to be 
on the “same wavelength” as the team members, only 
revealing their true hierarchical position in urgent or 
emergency situations. Influencing team members is a topic 
which has an impact on team and work behaviour, and must 
be considered before and during the project, and constantly 
being improved upon by getting to know the team members. 
To have social influence on team members, virtual team 
leaders need to use a range different communication 
technology to ensure a social presence [18]. The use of 
communication technology makes the virtual socialisation of 
team members possible, allowing leaders to assess their 
teams’ capabilities, and receive, provide and accept feedback 
from their team members. For team members, it promotes a 
sense of connectedness to leaders, as well as allowing leaders 
to create a social presence [19]. 
These CSFs suggest the key issues for establishing a 
successful virtual team, but also indicate which factors are 
necessary for successful virtual leading. The tendency to 
work virtually is growing [10], and recent research reports an 
improvement in the effectiveness of virtual teams from less 
than 30% in 2006 [20] to 68% in 2016 [21]. 
IV. BUILDING THE V-CORPS MODEL 
The automotive industry operates globally and working 
with virtual teams has become an inevitability. Building a 
team that has to work virtually requires the main focus to be 
on people. The integrative literature review suggests that 
virtual team development and leadership can usefully be 
based on the team development stages defined by Tuckman 
[22] and Tuckman and Jensen [23] for small co-located 
teams. 
 
Figure 2. Stages of team development (after Tuckman [22])  
The four stages depicted in Figure 2 can be seen as the 
group developmental process for interpersonal relationships 
between team members of co-located teams. In the first part 
of the model's development, interpersonal relationships and 
task activities are considered, resulting in a four-stage model 
in which each stage needs to be successfully navigated in 
order to reach effective group functioning [22]. 
TABLE II. TUCKMAN AND JENSEN’S GROUP STRUCTURE AND TASK 
ACTIVITIES [25] 
Stages 
Group structure  
Task activity 
Forming 
Testing and dependence 
Orientation of the task 
Storming 
Intragroup conflict 
Emotional response to 
task demands  
Norming 
In-group feeling and 
cohesiveness 
development; new 
standards evolve, and 
new roles are adopted 
Open exchange of 
relevant 
interpretations; 
personal opinions are 
expressed 
Performing 
Roles become flexible and 
functional; structural 
issues have been 
resolved; structure can 
support task performance  
Interpersonal 
structure becomes the 
tool of task activities; 
group energy is 
channelled into the 
task; solutions can 
emerge 

86
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Adjourning 
Anxiety about separation 
and termination; sadness; 
feelings; towards the 
leader and group 
members 
Self-evaluation 
Tuckman and Jenson [23] added one further stage – 
Adjourning - as a separate and distinct final stage in which 
separation of team members would be considered. The stages 
of development are not seen as a process, but more as a life 
cycle (Figure 3) for spin-off and reintegration of team 
members. Tuckman and Jensen [23] found that in groups 
where substantial amounts of activity take place, 
interpersonal relationships are developed, and group 
dissolution becomes an extremely important issue for many 
of the members. The authors developed the model to indicate, 
for each stage, a description of their associated group 
structures and task activities (Table 2). The group structures 
were seen as “the pattern of interpersonal relationships - the 
way members act and relate to one another”, whilst task 
activities were “the content of interaction as related to the task 
at hand” [25].  
Tuckman’s model has some limitations. It was developed 
with therapeutic groups in mind, and its interpretation and 
application in other working environments is challenging. 
Cassidy [26] notes that the Storming stage in particular may 
not be clearly defined for practitioners outside of therapeutic 
groups. It is thus difficult to apply directly to daily working 
lives and needs to be customised for individual team 
development situations. The model also does not consider 
how team personnel may change over time and the steps that 
must be taken to introduce and integrate new team members, 
which is particularly challenging when a project is at an 
advanced stage [27]. The objective of the research, therefore, 
was to attempt to adapt this model to the automotive industry, 
and at the same time to interweave the CSFs discussed above 
into a new adapted framework, customised for this industry 
sector.
Figure 3. Tuckman and Jensen’s Group Development Lifecycle 
 
 [23] 
The initial framework (Table 3) looked to build upon the 
CSFs identified in the literature and incorporate some of the 
thinking evident in Tuckman’s model. In addition, elements 
of project management methodologies were incorporated into 
the five-stage model, which also takes into consideration a 
number of management challenges for virtual teams – such 
as differences in employment and occupational health 
legislation across different countries, norms regarding social 
interaction, a lack of mutual knowledge of context and access 
to dispersed knowledge, stress and fatigue issues, and data 
security [28] [29].  
It is important to note the differences between co-located 
and virtual teams, and how they communicate to reach their 
goals. As pointed out by Berry [30], a co-located team is a 
group of individuals who interact interdependently and who 
are brought together or come together voluntarily to achieve 
certain outcomes or accomplish particular tasks and are able 
to have face-to-face conversations or meetings at any time. 
Virtual teams could theoretically comprise the same 
individuals as co-located teams, with the premise of working 
over the world and communicating through the use of 
information and communications technology. Virtual team 
members consist of individuals spread across geographies, 
cultures and time zones.  
Managing virtual teams is different to, and more complex 
than, managing face-to-face teams. Virtual teams are groups 
of individuals that still share most of the characteristics and 
dynamics found in traditional teams. The challenge for virtual 
teams is in cultural differences, mentalities, work-settings etc., 
which are of significance for the virtual leader when 
influencing team members from a distance. Cortellazzo et al. 
[31] state that when focusing on behavioural norms, it is 
particularly important for virtual teams to have a clear 
definition of the norms pertaining to their use of 
communication tools, through which information flows and 
activities are performed. Berry [30] suggests that the effective 
management of virtual teams requires knowledge and 
understanding of the fundamental principles of team 
dynamics, regardless of the time, space, and communication 
differences between virtual and face-to-face working 
environments. 
These considerations and the CSFs discussed above 
underpinned the development of the initial 5-stage model for 
virtual leadership and management of virtual teams. Using 
indicators evident in the existing literature, some initial key 
activities were assigned to each cell in the 5x5 matrix (Table 
3). The stages in the model are outlined below. 
Creating the team: To support virtual team members in 
achieving a high level of performance, some key 
considerations need to be taken into consideration in the 
creation of the team. The choice of the appropriate team 
members is vital – not only those that have the relevant work 
experience for project requirements, but also those that are 
able to work remotely, being self-motivated and independent. 
The project manager has to make a pre-analysis of the team 
members and speak to their line mangers to get an impression  
Forming
orientation, 
testing and 
dependence
Storming
resistance to 
group influence 
and task 
requirements
Norming
openness to 
other group 
members
Performing
constructive 
action
Adjourning
disengagement

87
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
of their ability to work in a virtual environment. This pre-
analysis is essential prior to taking the next steps of team 
member selection since virtual teams tend to be more sensitive 
to trust issues and the need for communication [32]. 
Caulat [20] concludes that people who are very process-
oriented and structure-driven might be effective when 
managing the virtual process of communication between the 
members during a project but might find it challenging to 
facilitate and participate in virtual meetings where spontaneity 
is required.  
Cross-cultural awareness is also necessary for team 
cohesion, influence, and trust promotion. It is essential that the 
project manager be in place as the first team-building measure, 
with an overview of team member actions and reactions, 
especially during the team creation period. The project 
manager can assess how team members score against the 
project CSFs. 
Building trust, as Seshadri and Elangovan [33] note, is an 
interpersonal challenge faced by managers to foster 
collaboration with team members through communication and 
building relationships. Caulat [20] argued that, by working  
with cultures as diverse as Japanese, Indian, Swedish, and 
Russian, she realised that cross-cultural awareness may help 
in understanding each other, but that it is certainly not 
sufficient for establishing a sound basis for the development 
of trust within the team. Although the pre-investigation of 
team members is essential, it is the first meeting where the 
project manager meets his team face-to-face, and can leave a 
positive, lasting impression, which can establish the tone and 
modus operandi for future project procedures [34]. 
Organising the team: Maintaining a uniform team 
structure before and during the project is an essential factor in 
avoiding time-consuming discussions regarding the modus 
operandi of the team.  
The organisation of virtual team structures needs special 
consideration, not only for the establishment of working 
procedures, but also regarding social aspects, and the 
avoidance of miscommunication or misunderstandings which 
can affect the entire team’s behaviour. It is essential to 
sensitise each team member to the potential impact of social 
behaviour. This structure is significant in facilitating 
communication and knowledge sharing, which is more 
challenging than with face-to-face counterparts [17].  
TABLE III. THE INITIAL V-CORPS MODEL 
CSF/ V-CORPS 
Stage 
Creation 
Organisation 
Relationship 
Building 
Performance 
Evaluation 
Sign-off & Closure 
Build trust 
First impressions 
– preferably via a 
face-to-face 
meeting – are 
important in 
building trust 
Clearly define project 
tasks and responsibilities 
and assign roles for 
individual team members 
Conduct the “Big Five” 
analysis of each team 
member 
Offer support in critical 
situations 
Performance 
evaluation underlines 
mutual dependence of 
team members in 
achieving successful 
project outcomes 
Acknowledgement of 
lessons learned and 
reflection on team 
leading can reinforce 
mutual trust and 
respect 
Create team 
structure 
Explain and apply 
corporate policies 
for team working 
Clarify expected 
outcomes 
Define and agree terms 
and conditions, project 
rules and team 
composition 
Introduce ‘team 
working contract’ and a 
team chat/forum to 
facilitate team 
communication  
Highlight the 
importance of the 
team structure in 
achieving project 
success 
Team dissolution. 
Creation of long-lasting 
relationships 
Overcome 
cultural and 
language barriers 
Establish whether 
any cultural or 
language barriers 
exist 
Clarify support actions 
and steps to be taken in 
the event of language or 
cultural issues. Provide a 
common understanding 
of working posture and 
customer requirements 
Equal treatment and 
support during 
breakdown of 
communication. 
Explain how and when 
to escalate properly to 
avoid time wasting 
Stress the importance 
of a standard work-
culture across the 
team. Ensure that 
team performance 
comes before 
individuality 
Private contact data 
exchange (if desirable). 
Stay in touch with team 
members after project 
closure 
Manage time 
and distance 
barriers 
Investigate and 
evaluate 
implications of 
geographical 
differences and 
discuss how to 
overcome them 
Define ways of working to 
accommodate time and 
distance issues. Establish 
technology platforms to 
be used for virtual team 
operations 
Show dependencies 
between tasks and 
team members. 
Implement simulation 
procedures to avoid 
unnecessary product 
testing. 
Review impacts of 
time and distance 
differences across the 
team  
Adjust working 
practices accordingly 
Provide appropriate 
training 
Avoid anxiety about 
separation and project 
closure 
Influence 
through 
horizontal 
communication 
Round of 
interviews  
Project manager 
treats team 
members as 
equals 
Highlight the importance 
of teamwork and the 
value of the project to 
the company 
Intervene only when 
necessary, e.g., key 
decisions, supportive 
role, problem 
escalation 
Create a relaxed 
environment while 
focusing the team on 
specific project 
milestones. Avoid 
coercion 
Project evaluation. 
Encourage mutual 
support. Team 
members leave the 
project feeling 
appreciated 
 

88
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A clear organizational structure is also of particular 
importance when dealing with a complicated project 
environment that includes challenges in language, political 
climates, organisational policies, time zones, and cultures 
[35]. To counteract these challenges, it is essential to outline 
the CSFs for the project through the organisation stage and 
discuss each of them with the team members, to define rules 
for working with each other. The project manager may need 
to act as a moderator between the team members and intervene 
in critical situations (e.g., escalations between team 
members).  
It is also essential to consider the language skills of the 
team members before and during the project process because 
virtual workers with low language proficiency invoke 
apprehension and uncertainty in individuals [36]. The 
organisational structure can be used as the framework, within 
which issues can be tackled and team cohesion enhanced, and 
through which the project manager can discuss and explain 
what he/she expects from team members. 
Relationship building: The team organization structure 
provides the starting point for relationship building between 
the project manager and the team members. Building 
relationships is the foundation of all teamwork, especially for 
virtual teams, and can help counteract the multiple negative 
aspects of working over distance [4]. It is necessary to 
confront prejudices about the working performances of the 
different nationalities of team members.  
It is advisable that communication between the individual 
team members takes place at least two weeks before the start 
of the project [4], as this will, in the best case, enable the group 
to become more socially grounded through a personal meeting 
or by participating in "virtual water cooler communication", 
thereby increasing their loyalty to the group [37] [38]. This 
will support relationship building and similarities between the 
team members can be found before the project starts. It is 
important for virtual leading teams to create a social 
environment to promote team cohesion, which will be 
established through interpersonal challenges for the project 
manager and ensure that team members communicate with 
each other, build relationships and foster trust [32]. This builds 
commonalities, which creates sympathy, trust and encourage 
team spirit.  
In the relationship building phase, a number of techniques 
can be used, such as Goldberg’s Big Five model [39] for 
assessing and understanding personality traits. Project 
managers can try to analyse themselves and the team members 
to find out what kind of leadership is right for each member, 
and how to employ the right team member in the right 
position. This model is also useful for relationship building 
between team members, for working from a distance and 
improving mutual influencing effectiveness. The leader must 
not neglect the social behaviour of the team members, and one 
possible tactic here is to book a short slot at the beginning of 
each team meeting to speak about non-project themes. This 
gives an added value of trust, which can greatly improve team 
effectiveness and relationship building. 
Performance evaluation: Leading a team during a project 
is an evolving and ongoing process. It is essential to update 
the team regularly and be responsible for enabling 
communication. The more team members are up to date, the 
better their performance is, and the fewer miscommunications 
and misunderstandings there are. It is advisable to try to bring 
more personality and dependency to the virtual world. It is 
also important to make clear to team members that their 
performance levels depend on each other, and to get them to 
consider what kind of impact their performance has on project 
outcomes and the company. The quality and effectiveness of 
information exchange also impacts on team performance – 
used correctly, it can empower individuals, alter behaviour, 
and help develop a cohesive team.  
The same is true for decision-taking, where team 
performance counts. Care taken by the project manager (for 
example in including all team members in certain decisions) 
can enhance the overall performance of the whole team. In 
virtual teams, language and mental barriers must be 
considered. Shared understanding of key decision options is 
important. Horizontal communication is essential, where team 
members get the feeling that they are on the same working 
level and can contribute to a discussion and decision. 
Sign-off and closure: The bonding between team members 
during the project phases can create a form of psychological 
contract, which will reflect the social team influence of the 
project manager, and that of the team members themselves. 
The dissolution of this contract is a key element of the project 
sign-off and closure stage, and it is an important aspect for the 
possible future creation of new virtual teams. King [40] 
defines a psychological contract as an individual’s belief in 
the perception of reciprocal obligations between that person 
and another party. For working in a virtual team, this can be 
considered as a contract between team members, which is 
unofficial, but essential for the project. 
The disbanding of the psychological contract will likely 
involve a meeting between the project manager and the entire 
team on site when project completion meetings can be held 
with each team member. Project disbandment can be done in 
a virtual way, but psychological effectiveness, in terms of the 
appreciation of individual team members, is not as valuable as 
when there is a local presence face-to-face. In the final 
discussion, both positive and negative aspects of the project 
can be reviewed, and the further growth of the team in 
subsequent projects can be discussed. The project manager 
should also have their team ready at the end of the project to 
give some reflection and feedback on the project management 
process, so that negative aspects can be aired and reviewed. 
V. 
MODEL DEVELOPMENT AND VALIDATION  
The V-CORPS model was developed and refined in a 
series of stages. A questionnaire was designed to reflect the 
initial V-CORPS model and emailed to eighteen experts, all 
with relevant experience in project management (Table 1). 
The questionnaire contained eight questions relating to the 
initial model and respondents were asked to give their views 
on its contents. Some used a Likert scale [8] allowing 
respondents to register their level of agreement or 

89
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
disagreement with certain statements relating to the model. 
The questionnaire concluded with questions aimed at 
identifying whether or not some CSFs were necessary for the 
final build of the model, and to further understand the value 
of these CSFs in the experts’ opinion. This feedback provided 
an indicator of support or otherwise for the general direction 
of travel embodied in the model, and of the possible future 
development of the activities at each stage (Table 4). It gave 
a clear picture of the views of the experts regarding the 
challenges of virtual project management, and the obstacles 
of virtual team building and leadership in the automotive 
industry. In addition, it also became clear that secondary 
aspects such as capacity bottlenecks and time-critical project 
milestones are particularly important in a virtual environment 
and can undermine project success. The answers in the 
questionnaire also highlighted how strongly the experts felt a 
duty towards their team members and their commitment to 
playing the main role in a functioning project. 
TABLE IV. INITIAL QUESTIONNAIRE FINDINGS: ORGANISATION STAGE 
 
Overall, the experts showed a keen interest on the V-
CORPS model, and this provided a basis for subsequent 
discussion in one-to-one interviews to flesh out further 
suggestions and recommendations relating to each cell in the 
matrix – trying to garner as many ideas as possible for 
activities that would typically be required across a virtual 
project. This produced a significant number of new ideas and 
activities for each cell in the matrix, which were recorded in 
the model, cell by cell. In a second round of interviews, this 
material was then presented back to interviewees for 
discussion and prioritisation, thereby providing the basis for 
a filtering process (Figure 4), which identified the activities 
that were generally supported by the experts for each stage in 
the model. The final operational V-CORPS model (Table 5) 
was again returned to interviewees for final comment and 
ratification. 
 
Figure 4. Example of activity reduction in the relationship Building 
 
      Trust stage for the Building Trust CSF 
This represented the final step in a research process that 
comprised six interlinked steps, each of which was 
undertaken sequentially (Figure 5). Research was based on a 
survey conducted in a single company, but due to the 
selection of experts (from line management to the CEO) a 
wide range of data was obtained. The interviews were 
analysed through data reduction and coding. These were 
summarised in the form of statements and implemented in the 
model’s development. The conceptual framework was 
validated through a survey and semi-structured interviews 
with eighteen experts. These data were used to create a 
preliminary operational V-CORPS model, which was then 
tested and validated via a follow-up survey with six experts. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Question 
Outcome 
Finding 
Research action 
Organisation Stage 
1.  
94.4% positive feedback 
5.6% negative feedback 
A clearly-defined role in a 
team for each team 
member promotes team 
cohesion and trust 
improvement 
Definition of roles in a team is a 
part of trust building which must 
be implemented in the model 
2.  
100% positive feedback 
Adherence to project rules 
and procedures is important 
To be implemented in the model 
and considered as a critical factor 
3.  
100% positive feedback 
Team has to know how to 
escalate when necessary 
The model must indicate that the 
leader needs to clarify the 
escalation process 
4.  
94.4% positive feedback 
5.6% negative feedback 
The definition of working 
guidelines is important in 
virtual teams 
This must be evidenced in the 
model 
5.  
88.3% positive feedback 
5.9% no opinion 
5.9% negative feedback 
Emphasising the team is 
one unit is important for the 
team in the early stages  
Clarify regarding this CSF in the 
model 
 
 
Figure 5. The V-CORPS model development and evaluation research        
process 
 
 
Literature review to identify
the CSFs 
Conceptual framework 
(preliminary V-CORPS)
Survey & Semi-
structured Interviews
18 participants
Conceptual V-CORPS
Model 
Survey
6 participants
Operational V-CORPS 
Model

90
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
VI. 
CONCLUSION  
The research project reported upon here has now 
successfully addressed the two main research objectives 
noted above. Analysis of the existing literature was used as 
the basis for the development of five CSFs for virtual teams. 
Then, by taking some of the principles and concepts from 
Tuckman’s staged model for group facilitation [22], and 
combining them with the CSFs, a new model for virtual team 
operation in the digital era was developed, refined, and 
validated. The CSFs have relevance to each of the five stages 
on the V-CORPS model, which can be used as a guideline 
and point of departure for those assembling and leading 
virtual teams. This will require new ways of working and a 
change in management culture and can best be viewed as 
what Chan Kim and Mauborgne [41] call “non-disruptive 
creation.” They suggest that, compared with disruptive 
change in business models, “non-disruptive creation opens a 
less threatening path to innovation for established 
companies”, and that “it doesn’t directly challenge the 
existing order or the people who make their livelihoods based 
on it” (p.9).  
All stages on the V-CORPS model are important, but as 
Tuckman [25] concluded in his studies of group 
development, the outcomes from the performance evaluation 
stage will be critical to final project results. This means, from 
the leader’s perspective, it is necessary to bring the team to 
the most effective performance level to fulfil the project 
requirements. Team creation, team organisation and 
relationship building are all of significance in supporting and 
progressing this objective. It is also important that virtual 
teams are equipped with the process capability and 
technology support to respond to changes quickly and 
effectively [42].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This research clearly has its limitations. It is based 
primarily on a set of interviews from one company in the 
automotive supply chain, and project realities in other 
industry sectors will vary in some regards. This suggests 
testing and development of the model in other corporate 
environments, in which virtual projects play a significant 
role, would be worthwhile. This could include not only other 
automotive companies, but also other industries involved in 
product development using globally dispersed resources. As 
globalisation and the widening application of digital 
technologies changes working practices, frameworks like the 
V-CORPS model that provide guidance on the process and 
people aspects of change management will be of increasing 
relevance and value.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

91
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE V. THE VALIDATED V-CORPS MODEL  
CSF/ V-
CORPS 
Stage 
Creation 
Organisation 
Relationship Building 
Performance Evaluation 
Sign-off & Closure 
Build 
trust 
• 
Get first impressions (Face-
to-face or video meeting) 
• 
Be 
prepared 
to 
answer 
questions from the team  
• 
Facilitate introductions to 
each other (What am I good 
at?) 
• 
Get to know each other 
through games (Common 
first task) 
• 
Offer help as requested 
• 
Get a first impression from the 
respective team members and 
show appreciation 
• 
Show trust in the team and the 
project 
• 
Find out each team member’s 
expectations 
• 
Create an outage plan 
• 
Promote mutual assistance in the 
team 
• 
Connect through social media 
• 
Create a WhatsApp group 
• 
Conduct an assessment of each 
team member 
• 
Handle introverted and extroverted 
team members accordingly 
• 
Consider the needs of the team as a 
whole 
• 
Create outside activities 
• 
Promote appreciation 
• 
Provide feedback to team and the 
leader (two-way) 
• 
Offer support in critical situations 
• 
Create rules of conduct amongst 
each other 
• Outline 
the 
importance 
of 
reliability 
between 
team 
members and the dependency 
on performance 
• Review the concerns of team 
members 
identified 
in 
the 
relationship 
phase 
(appreciation) 
• Create commitment 
• Show 
the 
consequences 
of 
subtasks for the whole team 
• Create compatibility 
• Use Agile project planning tools 
• Acknowledge 
lessons 
learnt, 
reporting 
results 
into 
the 
company  
• Recognize 
the 
team's 
achievements 
and 
celebrate 
them 
• Get constructive feedback in 
both directions (360 ° feedback, 
no negative emotions) 
• Leave a positive impression 
• Admit mistakes openly 
• Use virtual meetings & Big data 
analyses 
Create 
team 
structure 
• 
Address corporate policies 
• 
Develop vision and mission  
• 
Explain project scope 
• 
Address project guidelines 
and values 
• 
Highlight the common goal 
and the expectations of the 
team and the leader  
• 
Create 
a 
team 
charter, 
explaining why people are 
there and what to expect  
 
• 
Assign 
roles 
for 
individual 
members 
• 
Discuss working methods 
• 
Determine meeting culture 
• 
Address consequences in case of 
non-compliance  
• 
Provide 
understanding 
of 
exceptions for special cases 
• 
Highlight 
importance 
of 
completing tasks on time and 
communicating when not 
• 
Set 
technology 
standards, 
procedures, and guidelines. 
• 
Organise standard IT training 
programme 
 
• 
Agree working practices 
• 
Establish communication channels 
and technical team communication 
• 
Create on-site visits (if possible) 
• 
Create regular meetings (15 min 
stand up meeting if possible) 
• 
Promote mutual support  
• 
Create virtual face-to-face meetings 
and a chat/forum 
• 
Call instead of email! 
• 
Create rules for the decision-making 
and reporting processes 
• 
Present the effectiveness through 
cloud computing 
• Highlight the importance and the 
effectiveness of the project 
structure 
• Create project goals and regular 
effectiveness reviews 
• Create measurement and key 
indicators for the team 
• Consider retrospective issues 
(are there points that have crept 
in that stand in the way) 
• React to changes quickly! 
• Reduce reactive work 
• Ensure smooth team dissolution 
• Create a long-lasting relationship 
• Write 
letters 
of 
recommendation 
• Show consideration for each 
individual team function 
• Build / enlarge network 
Overcom
e cultural 
and 
language 
barriers 
• 
Identify cultural or language 
barriers and address them 
• 
Ensure common language  
• 
Organize cultural training – 
and use as an ice breaker  
• 
Build confidence from the 
first stage 
• 
Observe company guidelines and 
policies 
• 
Define support actions and the 
steps to be taken should an issue 
arise 
• 
Identify and support language 
weaknesses 
• 
Take 
away 
the 
fear 
of 
communicating with the leader 
• 
Explain 
work 
organization 
correctly 
• 
Emphasise that private views 
have no place in professional life 
• 
Create cross-cultural seminars 
• 
Active mobile use 
• 
Develop corporate identity 
• 
Intervene in an emergency 
• 
Create consequences for certain 
actions 
• 
Appoint 
a 
mediator 
who 
understands the culture and will 
support you as a coach 
• 
Exemplify professional and equal 
treatment in the team 
• Stress the importance of work-
culture 
• Ensure that performance comes 
before individuality 
• Avoid pack formation in the 
team 
• Promote team spirit across 
locations 
• Characterize discipline 
• Respect Individuality  
• Exchange (if desirable) private 
contact data  
• Stay 
in 
touch 
with 
team 
members after project end 
• Create an individual farewell 
according to cultural customs and 
norms 
• Maintain on-going network  
• Stay connected through social 
media 
Manage 
time and 
distance 
barriers 
• 
Introduce 
and 
regulate 
technology deployment 
• 
Investigate 
means 
of 
communication (are we up to 
date?) 
• 
Define 
communication 
channels (usual times) 
• 
Address 
hardware 
and 
software resources for the 
team 
• 
Develop regular exchange of 
information 
(weekly 
feedback) 
• 
Define team planning (how 
do I use the team members to 
save my time) 
• 
Define the use of working tools 
for the project 
• 
Define the preparatory work to 
avoid time loss due to time 
differences (e.g., Follow the Sun 
methodology) 
• 
Define 
processes, 
methods, 
documents, with templates as 
appropriate 
• 
Make special tools available for 
certain functions 
• 
Define working time windows 
• 
Analyze distribution of working 
hours 
• 
Define time for communication 
• 
Organize training if necessary 
• 
Offer help (mutually) 
• 
Show dependencies between tasks 
and team members 
• 
Ensure that team members can rely 
on one another 
• 
Develop regular results review 
• 
Increase 
promotion 
of 
understanding 
• 
Offer support with prioritization 
• 
Underline that the behaviour of an 
individual influences team results 
• 
Create flowcharts and solution 
paths 
• 
Present Big Data analyses 
 
• Demonstrate ways of working 
that avoid wasting time 
• Specify tools for teamwork in 
detail 
• Emphasise that methods and 
procedures must be known and 
followed 
• Work on training courses and 
problems in a team 
• Work in a way that promotes 
quality 
• Present the effectiveness of cloud 
computing 
• 
Avoid anxiety about separation 
and ending 
• 
Promote contact retention 
• 
Offer 
perspective 
wherever 
possible 
• 
Give self-confidence 
• 
Give outlook for possible future 
projects and cooperation 
Influence 
through 
horizont
al 
communi
cation 
• 
Create round of interviews 
• 
Champion 
working 
in 
a 
collaborative way 
• 
Develop flat hierarchy 
• 
Distribute 
roles 
and 
responsibilities 
• 
Show openness for social 
media 
• 
Present Agile Methods 
• 
Highlight the importance of 
teamwork (One team = One unit) 
• 
Develop 
equality 
(equal 
treatment for all team members) 
• 
Create 
understanding 
and 
acceptance by the team that the 
leader has overall responsibility 
• 
Develop ‘acting as a team’ (get 
through success and failure 
together) 
• 
Give positive feedback where 
possible 
• 
Address errors openly 
• 
Intervene only when crucial e.g., 
key decision making, supportive 
roles, and escalating situations 
• 
Maintain self-control 
• 
Keep calm (no heated actions) 
• 
Create a pastoral care function 
• 
Be consistent in using the virtual 
meetings technology 
• Create an environment where 
the team can focus on project 
milestones 
• Avoid increased workload 
• Always 
motivate 
to 
communicate 
• Establish an environment based 
on trust 
• Function as a role model 
• 
Ensure team members leave the 
project feeling appreciated 
• 
Encourage mutual respect after 
project completion  
 

92
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
REFERENCES   
[1] A. Quade, M. Wynn, and D. Dawson, “Collaboration through 
virtual teams: towards an operational model for virtual 
project leadership in the automotive industry”, the Tenth 
International Conference on Advanced Collaborative 
Networks, Systems and Applications, COLLA 2020, Porto, 
Portugal. 
[2] K. Jugdev, J. Thomas, and C. Delisle, “Rethinking Project 
Management: Old Truths and New Insights”, International 
Project Management Journal, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 36-43, 2001. 
[3] P. Svejvig and P. Andersen, “Rethinking project 
management: A structured literature review with a critical 
look at the brave new world”, International Journal of Project 
Management, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 278-290, 2015. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijproman.2014.06.004. 
[4] J. Layng, “The Virtual Communication Aspect: A Critical 
Review of Virtual Studies Over the Last 15 Years”, Journal 
of Literacy and Technology, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 172-218, 
2016. 
[5] National Instruments, Automotive Research User Handbook: 
prototypes and testbeds to validate the transportation 
solutions of tomorrow, National Instruments, 2018. 
[6] Deloitte, CASE automotive  trends and insights, 2021. 
Available 
at: 
https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/pages/manufacturing/topic
s/case-automotive-industry.html [Retrieved August, 2021] 
[7] R.J. Torraco, “Writing integrative literature reviews: Using  
the Past and Present to Explore the Future”. Human Resource 
Development Review, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 404–428. doi: 
10.1177/1534484316671606 
[8] M. Saunders, P. Lewis, and A. Thornhill, Research Methods 
for Business Students, 8th ed., Pearson Education Limited, 
2018 
[9] D. Layder, Understanding Social Theory, 2nd ed., 2006. 
doi:10.4135/9781446279052 
[10] R. K. Yin,  Applications of Case Study Research, 3rd ed., 
SAGE Publications Inc., 2012 
[11] J. Maes and T. Weldy, “Building Effective Virtual Teams: 
Expanding OD Research and Practice”, Organization 
Development Journal, vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 83-90, 2018. 
[12] R. Ford, R. Piccolo, and L. Ford, “Strategies for building 
effective virtual teams: Trust is key”, Business Horizons, vol. 
60, no. 1, pp. 25-34, 2017. 
[13] Y. Scheunemann and B. Bühlmann, “It’s Time for a Virtual 
Team Driver’s License”. Evernote + Google, 1 – 23, 2018. 
Available 
at: 
https://evernote.com/c/assets/marketing/virtual-team-
management/virtual-team-whitepaper-r3.pdf. 
[Retrieved 
May, 2020] 
[14] V. Seshadri and N. Elangovan, “Role of Manager in 
Geographically Distributed Team”, Journal of Management, 
vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 122-129, 2019. Available at: 
http://www.iaeme.com/JOM/issues.asp?JType=JOM&VTy
pe=6&IType=1 [Retrieved May, 2020]. 
[15] A. Klitmøller and J. Lauring, “When global virtual teams 
share knowledge: Media richness, cultural difference and 
language commonality”, Journal of World Business, vol. 48, 
no. 3, pp. 398-406, 2013. doi:10.1016/j.jwb.2012.07.023. 
[16] A. Nader, A. Shamsuddin, and T. Zahari, “Virtual Teams: a 
Literature Review”, Australian Journal of Basic and Applied 
Sciences, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 2653-2669, 2009. 
[17] G. Alistoun and C. Upfold, “A Proposed Framework for 
Guiding the Effective Implementation of an Informal 
Communication System for Virtual Teams”, Proceedings of 
the European Conference on Information Management & 
Evaluation, 2012. 
[18] A. Walvoord, E. Redden, L. Elliott, and M. Coovert, 
“Empowering followers in virtual teams: Guiding principles 
from theory and practice”, Computers in Human Behavior, 
vol. 
24, 
no. 
5, 
pp. 
1884-1906, 
2008. 
doi:10.1016/j.chb.2008.02.006. 
[19] L. Cowan, “e-Leadership: Leading in a Virtual Environment 
– Guiding Principles For Nurse Leaders”, Nursing 
Economics, vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 312-322, 2014. 
[20] G. Caulat, Virtual leadership. 360 The Ashridge Journal, pp. 
6-11, 2006. 
[21] C. Solomon, Trends in Global Virtual Teams, 2016. 
Available 
at: 
http://cdn.culturewizard.com/PDF/Trends_in_VT_Report_4
-17-2016.pdf [Retrieved May, 2020]. 
[22] B. W. Tuckman, “Developmental Sequence in Small 
Groups”, Psychological Bulletin, vol. 63, no. 6, pp. 384-399, 
1965.  
[23] B. W. Tuckman and M. Jensen, “Stages of Small-Group 
Development Revisited”, Group & Organization Studies, 
vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 419-427. 1977. 
[24] D. A. Bonebright, D. A. (2010), “40 years of storming: a 
historical review of Tuckman's model of small group 
development”,  Human Resource Development International, 
vol. 
13, 
no. 
1, 
pp. 
111-120, 
2010. 
doi:10.1080/13678861003589099 
[25] B. W. Tuckman, “Developmental sequence in small groups”, 
Group Facilitation: A Research and Applications Journal, 
vol. 3, pp. 66-81, 2001. 
[26] K. Cassidy, “Tuckman Revisited: Proposing a New Model of 
Group 
Development 
for 
Practitioners”, 
Journal 
of 
Experiential Education,vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 413-417. 2007 
[27] T. Rickards and S. Moger, “Creative Leadership Processes in 
Project Team Development: An Alternative to Tuckman's 
Stage Model”, British Journal of Management, vol. 11, no. 4, 
pp. 273-283, 2000. doi:10.1111/1467-8551.00173 
[28] P. Pyöriä, “Managing telework: risks, fears and rules”, 
Management Research Review, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 386-399, 
2011. doi:10.1108/01409171111117843. 
[29] J. MacDuffie, “HRM and Distributed Work”, The Academy 
of Management Annals, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 549-615, 2007. 
doi:10.1080/078559817.  
[30] G. Berry, “Enhancing Effectiveness on Virtual Teams: 
Understanding 
Why 
Traditional 
Team 
Skills 
Are 
Insufficient”, Journal of Business Communication, vol. 48, 
no. 2, pp. 186-206, 2011. doi:10.1177/0021943610397270. 
[31] L. Cortellazzo, E. Bruni, and R. Zampieri, “The Role of 
Leadership in a Digitalized World: A Review”, Front 
Psychol, 
vol. 
10, 
pp. 
1-21, 
2019 
doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2019.01938. 
[32] B. Rosen, S. Furst, and R. Blackburn, “ Overcoming Barriers 
to Knowledge Sharing in Virtual Teams”, Organizational 
Dynamics, 
vol. 
36, 
no. 
3, 
pp. 
259-273, 
2007. 
doi:10.1016/j.orgdyn.2007.04.007. 
[33] V. Seshadri and N. Elangovan, “Role of Manager in 
Geographically Distributed Team”, Journal of Management, 
vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 122-129, 2019. Available at: 
http://www.iaeme.com/JOM/issues.asp?JType=JOM&VTy
pe=6&IType=1 [Retrieved May, 2020].  
[34] I. Zigurs, “Leadership in Virtual Teams: Oxymoron or 
Opportunity?”, Organizational Dynamics, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 
339 – 351, 2003. 
[35] D. Barnwell, S. Nedrick, E. Rudolph, M. Sesay and W. 
Wellen, “Leadership of International and Virtual Project 
Teams”, International Journal of Global Business, vol. 7, 
no.2, pp. 1-8, 2014. 
[36] T. Neeley, P. Hinds, and C. Cramton, “The (Un)Hidden 
Turmoil 
of 
Language 
in 
Global 
Collaboration”, 

93
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Organizational Dynamics, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 236-244, 2012. 
doi:10.1016/j.orgdyn.2012.03.008. 
[37] A. Akkirman and D. Harris, “Organizational communication 
satisfaction in the virtual workplace”, The Journal of 
Management Development, vol. 24, nos 5/6, pp. 397-409, 
2005. 
[38] H. Duckworth, “How TRW Automotive helps global virtual 
teams perform at the top of their game”, Global Business and 
Organizational Excellence, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 6-16, 2008. 
doi:10.1002/joe.20237. 
[39] L. Goldberg, “An Alternative ‘Description of Personality’: 
The Big-Five Factor Structure”, Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 1216 – 1229, 1990. 
[40] J. King, “White-collar reactions to job insecurity and the role 
of the psychological contract: Implications for human 
resource management”, Human Resource Management, vol. 
39, no. 1, pp. 79-92, 2000.  
[41] W. Chan Kim and R. Mauborgne, “Nondisruptive Creation: 
Rethinking Innovation and Growth”, Sloan Management 
Review, 
Spring, 
2019. 
Available 
at: 
https://sloanreview.mit.edu/article/nondisruptive-creation-
rethinking-innovation-and-growth/ [Retrieved April 25, 
2021]. 
[42] G. Schmidt, “Virtual Leadership: An Important Leadership 
Context”, Industrial and Organizational Psychology, vol. 7, 
no. 2, pp. 182-187, 2015. doi:10.1111/iops.12129. 
 

