356
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Machine Learning Methods Applied on Long Term Data Analysis for Rain 
Detection in a Partial Discharge Sensor Network 
 
Leandro H. S. Silva, Sergio C. Oliveira 
Polytechnic School of Pernambuco 
University of Pernambuco 
Recife - PE, Brazil 
{lhss, scampello }@ecomp.poli.br 
Eduardo Fontana 
Department of Electronics and Systems 
Federal University of Pernambuco 
 Recife-PE, Brazil 
fontana@ufpe.br
 
 
Abstract — Partial discharges (PD) on the surface of high 
voltage insulators are directly related with the accumulation of 
pollution. A complete partial discharge sensor network was 
previously developed and has been in operation for 
approximately three years. This system records the PD 
activity, classifying it into four levels. As the PD activity is 
influenced by the weather conditions, each sensor system in the 
network also measures the one-hour average temperature and 
relative humidity. Also a fuzzy inference system was developed 
to extract the flashover occurrence risk level based on the 
partial discharge activity recorded. However, a strong rain 
event can wash insulators almost instantaneously, in turn 
decreasing the risk level. For a correct interpretation of the 
results it is important to properly analyze the weather data to 
detect the rain occurrence. This paper presents a comparison 
among three machine learning techniques for rain detection 
from humidity and temperature data, namely, Naïve Bayes 
Classifier, 
Support 
Vector 
Machines 
and 
Multilayer 
Perceptron Neural Network. These are trained on data 
gathered by meteorological stations located nearby the PD 
sensors and used in conjunction with the data obtained by the 
Sensor Network. Studies on the generalization training power 
and long term data analysis on sensor data are performed and 
presented. 
Keywords- Partial discharges; rain detection; pattern 
recognition; leakage current; insulators;  sensor network.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
High-voltage transmission lines are affected by many 
problems. One of them is the pollution accumulated on the 
surface of the insulators that support the conducting cables in 
the towers. When combined with high relative humidity the 
pollution layer becomes a conductive layer. A leakage 
current flows through this conductive layer causing irregular 
heating and then humidity evaporation, creating thin dry 
bands. The increase of electric charges in the boundaries of 
dry bands causes high electric fields that produce partial 
discharges (PD) across dry bands [1], [2]. The PD 
phenomenon can increase in rate and intensity until a 
complete discharge, known as flashover, bypasses all 
insulators, in turn causing an outage in power transmission 
[3]. 
One way to avoid flashover events is to remove the 
pollution layer deposited over the insulator string by periodic 
washing. However, this is a high-cost operation and failures 
may occur during the procedure. 
Aiming to assist the decision regarding the need for 
maintenance, a sensor network was previously developed to 
detect and classify partial discharges according to their 
frequency of occurrence and intensity [4]. This system 
comprises an optical sensor coupled to an optical fiber, 
which transmits the leakage current signal [5] to an 
electronic processing module, which has also a temperature 
and a humidity sensor [6]. The collected data are transmitted 
via satellite and stored in a database. 
A fuzzy inference system has been developed in order to 
extract the flashover risk occurrence. The risk level is 
incremented and decremented according to the level of 
partial discharge activity considering its intrinsic relation 
with relative humidity [7]. The use of a fuzzy system has the 
advantage of being able to represent uncertainties of natural 
language. 
However, on strong rain events the insulators are washed 
ceasing the risk of flashover. This almost instantaneous risk 
variation is not reflected on the fuzzy risk level. This work 
aims to develop a system capable of detecting the 
instantaneous cleaning of the insulator by strong rains, based 
on the available humidity and temperature data. Rain 
detection would make the fuzzy risk classification system 
more precise and turn the maintenance schedule more robust, 
reducing costs due to unnecessary washes. 
Common electronic rain sensors are only capable of 
detecting rain in a small surface and are not capable of 
quantifying the event [8]. Electromechanical rain sensors are 
capable 
of 
easily 
detecting 
and 
quantifying 
rain. 
Nevertheless, when installed in outdoor environments this 
kind of sensor accumulates water, in turn attracting 
infestation by wasps or bees. The presence of these insects 
increases the risk for operators of the power transmission 
company and increases the failure rate of the rain sensor 
itself once the hives might block the mechanical parts of the 
sensor. 
Temperature and humidity data gathered by the sensor 
network exhibits a daily regular pattern. This pattern is 
changed by rain events and a new rain pattern starts to occur. 
So, a pattern recognition system can be applied to detect the 
insulator washing by rain. A pattern recognition prototype 
system was developed based on the reliable data obtained 
from the Brazilian Institute of Meteorology (INMET) 

357
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
database. This database has humidity and temperature 
information as well as the amount of rain precipitation per 
hour.  
This paper compares three well know machine learning 
algorithms applied for the task of rain detection: Naïve 
Bayes Classifier, Support Vector Machine (SVM) and 
Artificial Neural Network Multilayer Perceptron (ANN 
MLP) [1]. Based on previous results [1], the MLP was 
applied in a data set gathered by the partial discharge sensor 
network and visual inspections were carried out to ensure 
empirically the success of the proposed rain detection 
strategy. 
II. 
SATELLITE SENSOR SYSTEM NETWORK 
The sensor network is composed by six monitoring nodes 
and it has been in operation for three years in the Northeast 
region of Brazil. Each node is composed by an optical 
sensor, an electronic processing module and a satellite 
transmission modem [4], as illustrated in Fig. 1. 
Each hour the sensor node transmits the partial 
discharges activities, average temperature and average 
humidity. The partial discharge activity is classified into four 
current ranges named N1 to N4, which are related to current 
pulses larger than 5, 10, 20 and 40 mA, respectively [4]. 
The information gathered by each sensor is organized 
into two 64-bit packets and transmitted via satellite each half 
hour. After reception the data are stored in a database. The 
access to this database is provided by a system called ADECI 
(a portuguese acronym for Electric Performance Evaluation 
on Insulator Strings). Only identified employees of CHESF 
(the generation and distribution company in the Northeast 
region of Brazil) can access the information.  
III. 
DATA SETS AND RAIN PATTERN 
The temperature and humidity have an almost regular 
daily behavior. During the day, the temperature is high and 
the humidity is low; at night the temperature falls down and 
the humidity goes up. During rain events this behavior is 
modified because the rain causes an immediate increase in 
humidity and decrease in temperature. This behavior can be 
seen in Fig. 2 – during rain events, that start to occur beyond 
the dashed line time point, the temperature falls down and 
the humidity goes up. This behavior is better observed in 
heavy rain events.  
The INMET meteorological stations data is organized as 
daily 24 string data containing average temperature and 
humidity as well as the amount of rain precipitation in 
millimeters per hour. Linear interpolations were used to 
complete the series on every data missing less than 5 
consecutive hours. When the time period of the missing data 
was larger than 5 hours, data for the full day were excluded 
from the database. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Sensor node for partial discharge monitoring. 
 
Figure 2.  Plots of temperature and humidity patterns and the respective 
amount of rain. 
The INMET database was used to train each detection 
rain model for further use on the ADECI database. Fig. 3 
shows the sensor network topology and each node of the 
nearest INMET meteorological station. Although each sensor 
node has a near INMET station, the distance between them is 
about tens of kilometers and a rain event in the INMET 
station does not imply a similar occurrence in the nearest 
sensor location.  
The data set was organized on day-long vectors as shown 
in Table I. Parameters T0 to T23 represent the temperatures 
uniformly distributed in 24 hours, as well as U0 to U23 
represent the corresponding humidity values. If the day has a 
total rain precipitation larger than 1 mm, the day is classified 
as rainy. Otherwise it is classified as no-rain. 
TABLE I.  
DATA SET ATTRIBUTES AND CLASS. 
Attributes 
Class 
T0 
… 
T23 
U0 
… 
U23 
[rain / no-rain] 
 
 
High Voltage Line
Grounded Structure
High Voltage Line
Fiber-Optic Sensor
Fiber
Link
Sealed Cupboard
Battery
Charge
Controller
Fiber
Processing
Module
Satelite
Modem
Solar Panel
Humidity and 
temperature 
sensors

358
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 3.  Sensor node and INMET station location. 
IV. 
APPLIED TECHNIQUES 
A. Naïve Bayes Classifier 
A Naïve Bayes Classifier [9] is a supervised-learning 
statistical 
technique. 
A 
vector 
 
 represents 
  
features            . In this work, each dimension of 
vector   comprehends an attribute of the database. The a 
posteriori probability of having rained in a specified day can 
be calculated using Bayes theorem as 
 
                          
    
  

In (1),      is the probability of   occurring in the data set 
and           is the likelihood probability of   occurring in 
the rain class. 
By using the naïve assumption, i.e., the attributes are 
conditionally independent, the likelihood probably of 
          is 
 
                      
 
   
  

It means that under the naïve assumption, the conditional 
distribution over the rain class can be expressed as 
 
           
                   
 
   
  

where  , the evidence, is a scaling factor dependent only on  
the features of the   vector. 
All the Naïve Bayes Classifier parameters (the class prior 
and feature probability distributions) can be approximated 
with relative frequencies from the training set. In this work 
the continuous values associated with each class were 
considered to have a Gaussian distribution. 
B. Multilayer Perceptron Neural Network  
The ANN MLP [10] is an artificial neural network whose 
architecture is based on multiple layers of neurons: an input 
layer, one or more hidden layers and an output layer. The 
number of hidden layers can be changed depending on the 
application. 
Each neuron can be seen as an element with inputs, 
weights, one activation function and the output signal. The 
output signal of each neuron is given by 
 
             
 
   
   

where    is the output signal of the  -th neuron,     is the i-th 
entry of the j-th neuron,     is the i-th weight of the  j-th 
neuron and  is the activation function. In this work the 
sigmoid function was used as activation function [10]. The 
signal is propagated from the input layer to the output layer – 
where the classifier result is available.  
The training of an MLP consists on adjusting the 
weights. The objective is to train the MLP network to 
achieve a balance between the ability to respond correctly to 
the input patterns used for training and the ability to provide 
good results for other similar inputs, i.e., train the network to 
be capable of performing generalization. For this task, the 
classic backpropagation algorithm was used to realize the 
training of the neural network [10]. 
C. Support Vector Machine 
The SVM [11] is a statistically robust learning method in 
which the training process consists of finding an optimal 
hyperplane which maximizes the margin between two 
classes of data in the kernel induced feature space.  
Given an input data of   samples              
classified into two classes, each one of the classes associated 
with labels are       for the positive class (rain) and 
      for the negative class (no-rain), respectively. For 
linear data, it is possible to determine the hyperplane  
 
             

where   is an M-dimensional vector and   is a scalar. This 
separating hyperplane should satisfy the constraints 
 
                 
                  

Furthermore, as the SVM searches for an optimal 
hyperplane, the margin width between the support vectors 
and the optimum hyperplane must be maximized, as shown 
in Fig. 4. The margin is calculated as 
 
    
 
       

so       must be minimized. 

359
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 4.  Support Vectors and separating hyperplane. 
There is also the introduction of positive slack variables   , 
to measure the distance between the margin and the 
vectors     , which means that some mistakes can be 
tolerated. The optimal hyperplane separating the data can be 
obtained by solving the optimization problem 
 
    
             
 
   
  

subject to 
 
                  

The constraints aim to put the instances with positive 
label at one side of the margin of the hyperplane, and the 
ones with negative labels at the other side. Parameter   
represents the cost, which is a positive constant specified by 
the user. 
The optimization problem of the SVM is usually solved 
by introducing the lagrangian multipliers   , transforming 
the problem on the dual quadratic optimization. 
The SVM method can also be used to classify nonlinear 
problems. By using a nonlinear mapping function, called 
Kernel function, the original data are mapped into a high-
dimensional feature space, where the linear classification is 
possible. There are different Kernel functions used in SVMs, 
such as linear, polynomial, sigmoidal and Gaussian RBF. 
The selection of the better Kernel function is very important, 
since this function will define the feature space in which the 
training set examples will be classified [11].  
V. 
METHODOLOGY 
A. Experiments to setup parameters 
At first, some experimental arrangements were made in 
order to evaluate the best setup parameter for the ANN MLP 
and for the SVM approaches. 
For the ANN MLP, the number of hidden layers was 
limited in two. The tested topologies are shown in Table II. 
There are two MLP output neurons, one indicates the rain 
class and the other indicates the no-rain class. The validation 
set, necessary to avoid overfit was generated by selecting 
randomly 30% of the normalized complete data set. 
TABLE II.  
EXPERIMENTAL ARANGEMENT FOR MLP. 
Neuron quantity 
First hidden layer 
Second hidden layer 
10 
0 
20 
0 
30 
0 
40 
0 
5 
5 
10 
10 
20 
20 
30 
30 
 
 
For the SVM, four kernel functions were tested: radial 
basis, linear, sigmoid and polynomial. For each kernel 
function the   parameter assumed, respectively, the values 1, 
5, 10 and 30. The   parameter was fixed at 0.001. And for 
the Naïve Bayes Classifier a Gaussian distribution function 
was assumed. 
The test method for all experiments was the stratified 
cross-validation 5-fold. For the MLP the experiment was 
repeated twenty times. The Coruripe INMET database (near 
São Miguel dos Campos in the map of Fig. 3) was used to 
evaluate the best setup parameter for each technique. 
The metrics used to compare the three techniques are the 
TP (True Positive) rate and the F-Measure. The F-Measure is 
an accuracy evaluation that considers the precision 
generating an overall score about the classifier. For this 
application, the TP of no-rain class is a very important 
measure, and this rate must be maximized. A false positive 
for the rain class will cause a decrease of the risk level of a 
flashover and the prediction system can miss the flashover 
event because of this false positive rain detection. 
B. Experiments to evaluate the training applied to other 
data bases 
With the best setup parameters, all three techniques were 
trained with the data from Coruripe INMET station and the 
trained models were applied in all others INMET stations. 
The main objective was to evaluate if a training 
performed on one station could be applied to another one. 
The geographic limits of the training and the influence of the 
climate were also investigated. 
C. Results on ADECI data 
The trained models were applied on ADECI databases 
aiming to verify if the rain detection was satisfactorily. The 
analysis of these experiments could not be measured 
quantitatively because the ADECI data does not include the 
rain information. Instead careful visual inspections were 
made to identify the temperature and humidity behavior 
changes in order to qualitatively verify the results obtained. 
Those visual inspections will be better described in section 
VI-C. 
VI. 
RESULTS 
A. Evaluation of setup parameters 
Table III presents the results for the Naïve Bayes 
Classifier. There are no parameters to adjust on this 

360
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
classifier. The numbers in the table indicate that the Naïve 
Bayes Classifier achieves TP rates over 0.5 for both classes.  
However, the FP (false positive) rate of the no-rain class is 
still high for the application (the FP for the no-rain class is 
0.227). The high result of FP no-rain is a bad issue as it can 
lead to unnecessary maintenance action for insulators wash. 
Table IV presents the results for all ANN MLP 
topologies experimented. 
TABLE III.  
EXPERIMENTAL ARANGEMENT FOR NAÏVE BAYES 
CLASSIFIER. 
TP rate rain 
TP rate no-rain 
F-Measure rain class 
0.807 
0.798 
0.746 
TABLE IV.  
RESULTS FOR ANN MLP. 
Topology 
(as in 
Table II) 
TP rate rain 
class 
TP rate 
no-rain class 
F-Measure 
rain class 
10, 0 
0.802 (0.047) 
0.873 (0.020) 
0.790 (0.016) 
20, 0 
0.793 (0.049) 
0.877 (0.022) 
0.788 (0.016) 
30, 0 
0.784 (0.049) 
0.878 (0.021) 
0.783 (0.016) 
40, 0 
0.784 (0.049) 
0.878 (0.021) 
0.783 (0.016) 
5, 5 
0.810 (0.050) 
0.866 (0.025) 
0.791 (0.016) 
10, 10 
0.810 (0.051) 
0.869 (0.024) 
0.792 (0.017) 
20, 20 
0.814 (0.049) 
0.867 (0.022) 
0.793 (0.016) 
30,30 
0.812 (0.051) 
0.867 (0.022) 
0.793 (0.018) 
 
In order to choose the best topology for the ANN MLP, 
statistical tests were made. With the Shapiro Wilk test [12] 
all samples follow the normal distribution, and with the F 
test, all samples have the same variance. Complying with 
these assumptions, the T-Student test was applied to evaluate 
the best topology with statistical significance. The result of 
the T-Student test proves that there is no statistical difference 
between the topologies. So, the topology with fewer neurons 
in one layer was chosen. As shown in the highlighted cells in 
Table IV the results of the ANN MLP were better than those 
of the Naïve Bayes Classifier.  
Table V presents the results for the SVM. In this table, 
only the best results for each kernel function are presented. 
As the SVM classifier presents a unique solution, the set 
of parameters that resulted on the highest F-Measure was 
chosen (Radial Basis kernel function and   equals 10.0). 
The results obtained with training and execution of the 
classifiers within the same database show that the rain 
pattern recognition is possible. 
B. Training Generalization 
A complete investigation about the best data training set 
is presented in Figs. 5 to 9. In these figures each INMET 
station was used as the data training set and the trained 
classifiers were tested on all stations, including that selected 
for training. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5 exhibits the results obtained using Sobral INMET 
station as the training data set. All three classifiers were able 
to achieve good results of the True Positive no-rain patterns 
but the True Positive rates for the rain pattern were too low 
and unacceptable. It might be due to the few rain patterns on 
the 
INMET 
Sobral 
database. 
Instead, 
the 
small 
generalization power of Sobral station, all three classifiers 
present acceptable results when evaluated on the Sobral 
database itself. 
TABLE V.  
RESULTS FOR SVM. 
Kernel 
Function 
C 
TP rate 
rain 
TP rate 
no-rain 
F-Measure 
rain 
Linear 
1 
0.758 
0.896 
0.781 
5 
0.754 
0.880 
0.767 
10 
0.754 
0.880 
0.767 
Polynomial 
(3 degree) 
1 
0.256 
0.973 
0.393 
5 
0.575 
0.929 
0.676 
10 
0.643 
0.916 
0.717 
Radial 
Basis 
1 
0.720 
0.910 
0.766 
5 
0.749 
0.889 
0.777 
10 
0.758 
0.902 
0.785 
Sigmoidal 
 
1 
0.671 
0.921 
0.741 
5 
0.744 
0.905 
0.778 
10 
0.754 
0.905 
0.784 
  
Fig. 6 exhibits the results obtained using Fortaleza 
INMET station as the training data set. Likewise as the 
training with the data of Sobral, this training with Fortaleza 
data exhibits good results for the no-rain class for all three 
classifiers on all locations, but Sobral. For the rain class, 
acceptable results were achieved on all databases and 
classifiers, except for Mossoró. The SVM and MLP 
classifiers produced better results for both rain and no-rain 
classes. 
 
 
Figure 5.  True positive rates for all nodes with Sobral data set training. 
 

361
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Using the Mossoró INMET station as the training 
database, only acceptable results for the no-rain class were 
obtained. Results for the Mossoró station itself, presented in 
Fig. 7, are worse than those of Fig. 6, obtained by training 
with the Fortaleza database. 
For the Garanhuns and Coruripe INMET stations the best 
results obtained are with the respective databases. Figs. 8 and 
9 clearly show that all three classifiers yielded excellent 
results for both the rain and no-rain classes when the trained 
classifiers were applied to the corresponding database. 
 
 
Figure 6.  True positive rates for all nodes with Fortaleza data set training.  
 
Figure 7.  True positive rates for all nodes with Mossoró data set training. 
Comparing all databases, the best option to predict the 
rain event in a given node of the sensor network is to use the 
database of its nearest INMET station. 
Given that only the SVM and MLP classifiers presented 
good results, both of them could be chosen for the following 
analysis. 
 
 
Figure 8.  True positive rates for all nodes with Garanhuns data set 
training. 
 
Figure 9.  True positive rates for all nodes with Coruripe data set training. 
C. Preliminary Evaluation on the ADECI data 
The ADECI data does not include the information about 
the amount of rain, so, a visual analysis was made in order to 
verify results. In this preliminary investigation, the ANN 
MLP classifier was tested on the ADECI databases. 
Fig. 10 shows the result of the ANN MLP classifier 
trained with the data from Coruripe INMET station and 
applied to the São Miguel dos Campos sensor system. The 
result of the ANN MLP is a binary neuron indicating class 
rain (one) and no-rain (zero). As can be seen in Fig. 10, the 
rain pattern was successfully recognized in some data 
subsets. The visual analysis of the rain pattern matches with 
the previous patterns in Fig. 2. Fig. 11 shows the result of the 
same ANN MLP applied in the Mossoró sensor system. 
There are some possible rain events not successfully 
recognized. These events are marked in Figs. 10 and 11. 

362
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
However, for every rain detected, the visual analysis of 
temperature and humidity suggests a rain event.   
If a rain is not properly detected, as indicated in Figs. 10 
and 11, the risk level will not be reset. If the risk level before 
the rain event was high enough to require schedule 
maintenance, this maintenance will happen, even with the 
insulator rain wash, causing an unnecessary spending by the 
electric company. But some rain events were detected, and in 
these 
cases 
the 
maintenance 
schedule 
could 
be 
reprogrammed with this new information. It is not possible to 
quantify the rain detection efficiency but visually it is 
possible to verify that 6 out of the 9 rain events in Fig. 10 
were properly detected. 
Furthermore, during a rain event, naturally there is an 
increase in the activity rate, mainly in the N1 range as can be 
seen in the last rain event, marked in Fig. 10. This activity 
increase causes an increment in the risk level leading to 
wrong interpretations. With the proper rain detection 
strategy, the activity increase can be related to the rain event 
and the risk level is not increased. 
Regarding the rain events that were not recognized in the 
data of Figs.10 and 11, the general visual analysis suggests 
that the false negative rain rate was higher for the Mossoró 
records relative to those of São Miguel dos Campos. The 
efficiency decrease observed in the Mossoró station suggests 
that it decreases with distance, indicating that one single 
model cannot be used to analyze all network nodes. 
D. Long term ADECI data Analisys 
After the training generalization described in Section VI-
C, the classifiers were applied on long term ADECI data 
from Mossoró and São Miguel dos Campos. For the Mossoró 
ADECI data analysis, the ANN MLP classifiers trained on 
Mossoró and Coruripe INMET stations were used.  
Fig. 12 shows only seven rain patterns recognized when 
the MLP trained on INMET Mossoró was applied on the 
Mossoró ADECI data. Fig. 13 presents the results obtained 
by the MLP trained on Coruripe INMET and applied on the 
ADECI data of Mossoró. The first 20 days are typically not 
rainy days and the pollution deposition was registered as 
activities on ranges N1 to N4. A small electric activity 
variation, which could be explained by a rain event, was 
observed. Only the MLP trained on Coruripe station was 
able to detect this possible event. Between days 25 and 275 
there is no significant electric activity registered on ranges 
N1 to N4. This is because many of the rain events, shown in 
Fig. 13, clean the insulators. 
In the last 100 days of the experiment, strong rain events 
are detected by both MLP results of Figs. 12 and 13. It is 
easy to reinforce the results shown in Figs. 7 and 9 that the 
best station (at this moment) for detecting rain events 
occurring at the Mossoró node is the Coruripe INMET 
station. The Mossoró INMET station data has 574 no-rain 
examples against only 70 rain examples; while the Coruripe 
INMET station data has 422 no-rain examples and 211 rain 
examples. In other words, the Coruripe INMET station is a 
more balanced database. 
The severe weather conditions near Mossoró with high 
temperatures and low relative humidity damaged the 
humidity sensors. Even after its replacement on day 240, 
approximately six month later the sensor was damaged 
again. Even with the malfunction of the humidity sensors the 
ANN MLP classifier was able to detect the rain pattern 
recorded by the temperature sensor in Mossoró. It means that 
the daily pattern recorded by the temperature sensor alone 
contains enough information to allow inferring the 
occurrence of rain events. For further experiments, a feature 
selection can be used to reduce the amount of data presented 
to the classifier.  
Loss of data transmission were expected below 2% as 
specified by the satellite link providers [4]. But sequential 
losses were observed for periods longer than a few days. The 
causes of these large losses remain unknown, but strong rain 
events can jam the satellite transmitting signals producing 
these outages. In spite of these losses, future sensor system 
firmware updates will reduce these effects with the 
incorporation of data delivery checks and requests for 
package retransmissions. 
Both ANN MLP classifiers trained on Mossoró and 
Coruripe INMET stations were applied on the long term 
ADECI data of São Miguel dos Campos. Results are 
presented in Figs. 14 and 15 for a period almost two years 
long. After the initial humidity sensor calibration on the first 
70 days the sensor behaves very well for almost 600 days. 
After this period of continuous work the humidity sensor 
appears to exhibit malfunction yielding unreliable records.  
Again, periods of no data transmission were observed, 
some of which occurring simultaneously with the periods of 
data loss verified in the Mossoró sensor system. Given that 
the distance between the two stations is approximately 600 
km, and the cities have significant differences in climate, 
these transmission losses probably occurred due to an overall 
outage of the satellite link.  
During the first 50 days of experiment, few rain events 
were observed, as indicated in Figs. 14 and 15. This period 
corresponds to the dry season and the absence of rainy days 
is reinforced by the activities registered by the sensor 
network on ranges N1 to N4. 
The period between days 50 and 350 corresponds to the 
rainy season and a large number of rain events were 
observed, as indicated in the plots of Figs. 14 and 15. Again 
the absence of PD activities during this period reinforces the 
presence of many rainy events as correctly detected by the 
ANN MLP classifier. 
Approximately one year after the sensor installation, a 
new dry season initiated near day 350. The electric activity 
on the polluted insulators increases again (ranges N1 to N4) 
and few rain events were detected. The classifier trained on 
Mossoró INMET station detected only two rain events 
between days 400 and 450, against four rain events detected 
by the classifier trained on Coruripe INMET station. The two 
last rain events, observed only on Fig. 15, are the most 
important difference of Figs. 14 and 15. These two rains 
match with the activity decrease, meaning that these rains 
washed the insulators naturally preventing partial discharges 
to grow to dangerous values. 
 
 

363
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
Figure 10.  ADECI registers from São Miguel dos Campos sensor system and rain detection by ANN MLP classifier for 80 days.  
 
Figure 11.  ADECI registers from Mossoró sensor system and rain detection by ANN MLP classifier for 28 days. 
 
Possible rain event not 
recognized 

364
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Comparing Figs. 14 and 15, it is possible to infer that the 
data of Fig.15 exhibit a better correlation between the 
detected rain events and the activities recorded on ranges N1 
to N4. This visual analysis on the ADECI data of São Miguel 
dos Campos confirms the more efficient training data set of 
Coruripe INMET station as expected by results of Figs. 7 
and 9.  
These initial analyses on the ADECI data from São 
Miguel dos Campos and Mossoró visually shows that a 
balanced database for training the MLP classifier is more 
important that the climate differences. Due to that, some 
algorithms to balance the input data for the classifiers must 
be used in future works.  
 
 
Figure 12.  Application of ANN MLP classifier trained and applied on Mossoró INMET and ADECI data, respectively.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This work presented a successful attempt to detect rain 
from the analysis of relative humidity and temperature data 
obtained from Chesf’s sensor network. Results show that it 
is possible to detect rain events and use them to improve 
the flashover risk classification.  
The initial tests were performed on the reliable data 
from INMET meteorological stations in the Northeast 
Region of Brazil. Three techniques employed, namely, 
Naïve Bayes Classifier, ANN MLP and SVM, presented 
acceptable results when tested on data from the same 
database. However, when the classifiers were trained with 
data from one station and applied to a distinct station, only 
the SVM and ANN MLP classifiers presented acceptable 
results. Given the different climates between the station 
sites, the generalization ability of the classifier is an 
important feature. Since SVM and ANN MLP presented 
similar results, only the ANN MLP was used as the 
classifier to be used with de ADECI data. 
In the initial tests the ANN MLP trained with the São 
Miguel dos Campos INMET station was applied in data 
sets from the ADECI database. Data gathered by ADECI 
from two sensor locations in the network stations were 
used to evaluate the ANN MLP. The rain pattern was 
successfully recognized in this database, with some false 
negatives. Long term studies were performed on the 
ADECI data recorded by the Mossoró and São Miguel dos 
Campos sensor systems. The two closest INMET stations 
chosen for direct and cross tests confirmed that the best 
option is to perform training on a database from a nearby 
INMET station.  
The results of this work can help improve the 
maintenance schedule system of the electric utility 
company. Without a rain detection attribute, when a rain 
event occurs, the sudden PD activity increase can give a 
false indication of risk of flashover. With the addition of 
the rain detection attribute, this effect will not be taken into 
account and after the rain event, the predicted risk of 
flashover can be reset because the insulators were washed. 

365
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 13.  Application of ANN MLP classifier trained on Coruripe INMET and applied on Mossoró ADECI data. 
 
Figure 14.  ANN MLP classifier trained on Mossoró INMET and applied on São Miguel dos Campos ADECI data. 

366
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 15.  ANN MLP classifier trained on Coruripe INMET and applied on São Miguel dos Campos ADECI data. 
Future work on the use of machine learning methods for 
rain detection will be directed to the evaluation of the 
threshold for rain precipitation to allow classifying or not a 
given day as rainy. Data sets from different locations will 
also be used in order to test the influence of climate 
characteristics on the proposed approach for rain detection 
and define the geographical boundary within which the same 
model can be applied.  
Another improvement on the flashover risk prediction 
system is to use more than one classifier in order to prevent 
false positive and negative results. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors thank CHESF.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
L. H. S. Silva, S. C. Oliveira, and E. Fontana, “Evaluation of Machine 
Learning Methods in a Rain Detection System for Partial Discharge 
Data Analysis,” INTELLI 2013 : The Second 
International 
Conference on Intelligent Systems and Applications, pp. 176–183, 
2013. 
[2] 
M. G. Danikas, “The definitions used for partial discharge 
phenomena,” IEEE Transactions on Electrical Insulation, vol. 28, no. 
6, pp. 1075–1081, 1993. 
[3] 
E. O. Abdelaziz, M. Javoronkov, C. Abdeliziz, G. Fethi, and B. 
Zohra, “Prevention of the interruptions due to the phenomena of the 
electric insulators pollution,” Control, Communiation and Signal 
Processing, 2004. First International Symposium on, pp. 493–497, 
2004. 
[4] 
E. Fontana, J. F. Martins-Filho, S. C. Oliveira, F. J. M. M. Cavalcanti, 
R. A. Lima, G. O. Cavalcanti, T. L. Prata, and R. B. Lima, “Sensor 
Network for Monitoring the State of Pollution of High-Voltage 
Insulators Via Satellite,” IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, vol. 
27, no. 2, pp. 953–962, Apr. 2012. 
[5] 
E. Thalassinakis and C. G. Karagiannopoulos, “Measurements and 
interpretations concerning leakage currents on polluted high voltage 
insulators,” vol. 421, pp. 421–426, 2003. 
[6] 
E. Fontana, S. Oliveira, F. J. M. M. Cavalcanti, R. Lima, J. f. Martins-
Filho, and E. Meneses-Pacheco, “Novel Sensor System for Leakage 
Current Detection on Insulator Strings of Overhead Transmission 
Lines,” in 2006 IEEE PES Power Systems Conference and 
Exposition, 2006, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 2255–2255. 
[7] 
H. O. de Lima, S. C. Oliveira, and E. Fontana, “Flashover risk 
prediction on polluted insulators strings of high voltage transmission 
lines,” in 2011 11th International Conference on Intelligent Systems 
Design and Applications, 2011, pp. 397–401. 
[8] 
K. N. Choi, “Omni-directional rain sensor utilizing scattered light 
reflection by water particle on automotive windshield glass,” in 2011 
IEEE SENSORS Proceedings, 2011, pp. 1728–1731. 
[9] 
R. Duda, P. Hart, and D. Stork, Pattern Classification. Wiley-
Interscience; 2 edition (October 2000), 2000, p. 654. 
[10] S. Haykin, Neural Networks: A Comprehensive Foundation. PTR 
Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA,: Prentice Hall, 1994. 
[11] A. Christmann and I. Steinwart, Support Vector Machines, Springer. 
New York, NY: Springer New York, 2008. 
[12] G. K. Kanji, 100 Statistical Tests, 3rd editio. London: SAGE 
Publications Ltd, 2006, p. 256.  
 

