A Life-cycle Equipment Labeling System for Machine Classiﬁcation in Smart Factories
Susana Aguiar, Rui Pinto, Jo˜ao Reis, Gil Gonc¸alves
Institute for Systems and Robotics
Faculty of Engineering of University of Porto
Rua Dr. Roberto Frias, s/n 4200-465, Porto, Portugal
Email: {saguiar, rpinto, jpcreis, gil}@fe.up.pt
Abstract—Nowadays, due to ever decreasing product life cycles
and high external pressure to cut costs, the ramp-up of production
lines must be signiﬁcantly shortened and simpliﬁed. This is
only possible if a forecast of the impact of modiﬁcation within
an existing production environment is available, helping during
decision making of production methods. This type of predictions
will have a direct impact on the cost-effective production process,
maintaining concerns regarding the environmental and social
impacts. These are the ideas behind the project Innovative
Reuse of modular knowledge Based devices and technologies for
Old, Renewed and New factories (ReBorn). The present paper
describes the System Assessment Tool, a software application
developed in ReBorn, which is used for assessing the sustain-
ability of highly adaptive production systems through the use of
Reliability, Life Cycle Cost and Life Cycle Assessment metrics, in
the form of a equipment labeling scheme. This labeling scheme
consists on classifying the dependability of industrial equipment,
based on the collected metrics. To that intent, several simulation
processes were performed, in order to assess the suitability of
the labeling system, in comparison to the Quality metric that is
highly preferable among the industrial partners. The simulation
results show that a two-layer equipment labeling system is the
most suitable approach to be used for classiﬁcation.
Keywords–Smart factories; Equipment label; Life-cycle assess-
ment; Re-use; Production systems.
I.
INTRODUCTION
ReBorn was a European Project funded by the Seventh
Framework Programme of the European Commission. The vi-
sion of ReBorn was to demonstrate strategies and technologies
that support a new paradigm for the re-use of production
equipment in factories. This re-use will give new life to
decommissioned production systems and equipment, helping
them to be “reborn” in new production lines. Such new
strategies will contribute to sustainable, resource-friendly and
green manufacturing and, at the same time, deliver economic
and competitive advantages for the manufacturing sector.
The developments made in ReBorn allow production equip-
ment to extend its life cycle, contributing to economic and
environmental sustainability of production systems [1]. This
concept of modular production equipment may also be re-
used between different production systems, after servicing and
upgrading. This new business paradigm will move from an
equipment-based business to a value added business, where
equipment servicing and equipment knowledge are main busi-
ness drivers.
The
proposed
paradigm
is
built
on
self-aware
and
knowledge-based equipment, which requires capabilities to
collect and manage information, regarding its functionalities,
evolution over time due to its use and wear, and maintenance
operations, upgrade and refurbishment over lifetime. For this to
be possible, versatile and modular task-driven plug&produce
devices, with built-in capabilities for self-assessment and op-
timal re-use were implemented, along with strategies for their
re-use and models for factory layout design and adaptive
conﬁguration.
The ReBorn [2] developments demonstrated to be suc-
cessful for intelligent machine repair, upgrade and re-use of
equipment, and (re-)design of factory layouts [3]. Most of
these developments were demonstrated within several indus-
trial demonstration scenarios at 2016 AUTOMATICA fair (21-
24 June) in Munich, Germany [4].
During its life-cycle, industrial equipment goes through
three main stages, namely 1) the initial incorporation into the
production line, 2) the operation and maintenance/upgrade, and
3) the end-of-use and disassemble. Throughout these stages
failures or malfunctions can potentially cause costly machine
downtime or even downtime in the entire production system.
Downtime of equipment operation is usually avoided based on
engineers and shop-ﬂoor operators decision making, which are
most of the times based on the experience of these individuals.
Sometimes the individual’s know-how and gained knowledge
by experience is hard to be transferred to other individuals
and may be lost [5]. This problem was tackled in ReBorn by
developing a software tool named Workbench.
The Workbench is a decision making support tool, which
combines simulations with the historical process data gath-
ered at equipment level. It provides methods and algorithms
for assessing the various potential possibilities of industrial
equipment, regarding change, upgrade, reuse, dismantle and
disposal. These possibilities are evaluated based on the cor-
responding reconﬁguration effect on the overall system cost,
performance and status throughout the life-cycle(s) of the
manufacturing system. The analysis and comparison of indus-
trial equipment is achieved using a System Assessment Tool
(SAT), which performs Life Cycle Cost (LCC) and Life Cycle
Assessment (LCA) analysis, based on reliability metrics.
In order to have a more generic and simple way of
comparing industrial equipment, the SAT has a functionality,
which main goal is to calculate an equipment Label. This Label
measures a dependability factor, as for example the appliances
energy consumption label, grades equipments from A to F,
being A very dependable and F less dependable. This paper
presents three simulations that were deﬁned and executed, in
order to test the usability and correctness of the Label. The
basic idea behind all the three simulations is to use as much
102
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

information as possible, from the information available in the
SAT, that is, all the metrics that the SAT can calculate. Each
metric has a weight associated to it, which was deﬁned based
on a questionnaire that was sent to the industrial partners of
the ReBorn project. The equipment Label simulations indicate
that using all the metrics available in a straight way might
not give the best results, because this allows the possibility of
having equipments with a Label grade that is higher or lower,
with a difference of two or more grades, than the quality grade,
which is, for the industrial ReBorn partners, the most important
metric. This lead to a two layer Label scheme that provides
grading results closer to the values of the most important
metrics.
This paper is organized in ﬁve more sections. Section II
deﬁnes the concepts of LCC and LCA and overviews the
current state of the art, regarding tools and metrics used to
perform this type of equipment analysis. In section III, an
overview of the Workbench tool is presented, along with a
description of its different modules, including the SAT. In
Section IV, a detailed analysis and description of the SAT is
presented. Section V explains one of the SAT functionalities,
the equipment Label, where several simulations are deﬁned
and its results presented and discussed. Finally, Section VI
concludes the paper by exposing some ﬁnal remarks about the
work developed.
II.
RELATED WORK
Several models, tools, and standards have been developed
to analyze equipment reliability [6], [7], LCC [8]–[12], and
LCA [13]–[18]. Although these techniques have usually been
treated as separate analysis tools, deﬁned by their own metrics
and standards, some authors attempted to bring them closer
[19]–[22] by presenting the relation between different sustain-
ability assessment tools, focusing on the life cycle assessment
as central concept for sustainability [23]. For the interested
reader, several surveys of existing methodologies and tools
regarding equipment analysis have been performed over the
years [11], [21], [23]–[25].
A. Life Cycle Assessment
LCA is an approach for assessing industrial systems from
creation to disposal [26]–[30]. This approach begins with the
gathering of raw materials of the mother nature to create the
product, ending when the product is dismantle and the disposal
of all materials to the environment [14], [15].
According to Currant [13], LCA had its beginnings in the
1960’s due to concerns over the limitations of raw materials
and energy resources. The work published by Harold Smith
[31] is considered as one of the ﬁrsts in this ﬁeld. In that work
he reported his calculations of cumulative energy requirements
for the production of chemical intermediates and products.
In 1969, researchers initiated an internal study for The
Coca-Cola Company (that was not ofﬁcially published but it
is mentioned in most of the LCA works [13], [32], [33]),
which laid the foundation for the current methods of life cycle
inventory analysis in the United States. In this study, the used
raw materials and fuels, as well as the environmental loadings
from the manufacturing processes for each container, were
quantiﬁed. The comparison between the different beverage
containers allowed to determine which container had the lowest
releases to the environment and which least affected the supply
of natural resources. The process of quantifying the resource
use and environmental releases of products became known as
a Resource and Environmental Proﬁle Analysis (REPA) in the
United States, and as Ecobalance in Europe.
From 1975 through the early 1980’s, as inﬂuence of
the oil crisis faded, environmental concerns shifted to issues
of hazardous and household waste management. However,
throughout this time, life cycle inventory analysis continued to
be conducted and the methodology improved through a slow
stream of about two studies per year, most of which focused on
energy requirements. During this time, European interest grew
with the establishment of an Environment Directorate (DG
X1) by the European Commission [34]. European LCA prac-
titioners developed approaches parallel to those being used in
the USA. Besides working to standardize pollution regulations
throughout Europe, DG X1 issued the Liquid Food Container
Directive in 1985, which charged member companies with
monitoring the energy and raw materials consumption and
solid waste generation of liquid food containers. When solid
waste became a worldwide issue in 1988, LCA emerged again
as a tool for environmental problems analysis.
In 1991, concerns over the inappropriate use of LCA to
make broad marketing claims made by product manufacturers
resulted in a statement issued by eleven State Attorneys
General in the USA, denouncing the use of LCA results to
promote products. Such assessments should be conducted by
uniform methods, by reaching a consensus on how this type of
environmental comparison can be advertised non-deceptively.
This action, along with pressure from other environmental
organizations to standardize LCA methodology, led to the de-
velopment of the LCA standards in the International Standards
Organization (ISO) 14000 series (1997 through 2002) [35].
In 2002, the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP)
joined forces with the Society of Environmental Toxicology
and Chemistry (SETAC) to launch the Life Cycle Initiative,
an international partnership. This Initiative has characterized
by three programs: (1) the Life Cycle Management (LCM) pro-
gram creates awareness and improves skills of decision-makers
by producing information materials, establishing forums for
sharing best practice, and carrying out training programs in all
parts of the world; (2) the Life Cycle Inventory (LCI) program
improves global access to transparent, high quality life cycle
data, by hosting and facilitating expert groups work results
in web-based information systems; (3) the Life Cycle Impact
Assessment (LCIA) program increases the quality and global
reach of life cycle indicators, by promoting the exchange of
views among experts, whose work results in a set of widely
accepted recommendations.
Figure 1. Life Cycle Stages (Source: EPA, 1993 [36]).
103
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

LCA evaluates all stages of a product’s life cycle, from
the perspective that they are interdependent, meaning that one
operation leads to the next. Figure 1 presents the possible
life cycle stages that can be considered in a LCA as well
as the typical inputs and outputs measured. LCA enables the
estimation of cumulative environmental impacts that resulted
from all stages in the product life cycle, often including
impacts not considered in more traditional analyses (e.g., raw
material extraction, material transportation, ultimate product
disposal, etc.). By including these impacts throughout the
product life cycle, LCA provides a comprehensive view of the
environmental aspects of the product or process and a more
accurate picture of the true environmental trade-offs in product
and process selection.
The LCA process is a systematic, phased approach and
consists of four components as illustrated in Figure 2: 1)
Goal Deﬁnition and Scope - Deﬁne and describe the product,
process or activity, by establishing the context in which the
assessment is to be made and identify the boundaries and
environmental effects to be reviewed for the assessment; 2)
Inventory Analysis - Identify and quantify energy, water and
materials usage and environmental releases, such as air emis-
sions, solid waste disposal and waste water discharges; 3) Im-
pact Assessment - Assess the potential human and ecological
effects of energy, water, material usage and the environmental
releases identiﬁed in the inventory analysis. Inputs and outputs
are categorized in different impact categories midpoints, such
as climate change and land use, and endpoints, such as human
health and resource depletion; 4) Interpretation - Evaluate the
results of the inventory analysis and impact assessment, in
order to select the preferred product, process or service with
a clear understanding of the uncertainty and the assumptions
used to generate the results.
Figure 2. Phases of a LCA Process.
Conducting a LCA study have the main beneﬁt of develop-
ing a systematic evaluation of the environmental consequences
associated with the creation of a given product. This evalua-
tion provides means to analyze the environmental trade-offs
associated with one or more speciﬁc products/processes, in
order to help the stakeholder gain acceptance for the planned
action. Moreover, the evaluation allows to quantify environ-
mental releases to air, water and land, in relation to each
life cycle stage and/or major contributing process, assisting
in the identiﬁcation of signiﬁcant shifts in environmental
impacts between life cycle stages and environmental media.
Also, the assessment of the human and ecological effects
of material consumption and environmental releases to the
local community, region, and world allows to identify impacts
to one or more speciﬁc environmental areas of concern and
compare the health and ecological impacts between speciﬁc
products/processes.
However, LCA studies may present some limitations, such
as very high resource and time consuming processes. Data
gathering can be problematic, due to availability issues, result-
ing in inaccuracy of the ﬁnal results. Also, a LCA study will
not determine which product or process is the most cost ef-
fective or works the best. The information provided by a LCA
study is used as a small component of a more comprehensive
decision process, such as Life Cycle Managements.
B. LCC - Life Cycle Costing
LCC is a process used to determine the sum of all the
costs associated with an asset or with part of an asset. These
costs include acquisition, installation, operation, maintenance,
refurbishment, and disposal. LCC can be carried out during
any or all phases of an asset’s life cycle. LCC processes
usually include steps such as [8], [10]–[12], [19]: 1) Life
Cost Planning, which concerns the assessment and comparison
of options/alternatives during the design/ acquisition phase;
2) Selection and development of the LCC model, namely
designing cost breakdown structure, identifying data sources
and uncertainties; 3) Application of LCC model; and 4)
Documentation and review of LCC results.
The main goal for carrying out LCC calculations is to
aid decision making regarding assessment and control of
costs, by identifying cost signiﬁcant items, selection of work
and expenditure of planning proﬁles. Early identiﬁcation of
acquisition and ownership costs enables the decision-maker
to balance performance, reliability, maintenance support and
other goals against life cycle costs. Decisions made early in
an asset’s life cycle have a greater inﬂuence on the Life Cycle
Costing than those made late, leading to the development of
the concept of discounted costs. The LCC process can be
divided into several steps, which are represented in Figure
3. As it can be seen in this ﬁgure, the LCC process has 6
stages, that are divided into two groups. The ﬁrst step is to
develop a plan that addresses the purpose, and scope of the
analysis. The second step is the selection or development of
the LCC model that will conform with the objectives of the
analysis. Step three is the application of the model deﬁned in
step two. In Step four all the results gathered in the analysis
are documented, and the Life Cost Planning phase is ﬁnished.
In Step ﬁve, the model deﬁned in step two is applied using
nominal costs, initiating the Life Cost Analysis. Finally, step
six involves the continuous monitoring in order to identify
areas in which cost savings may be made and to provide
feedback for future life cost planning activities. This step
ﬁnishes the Life Cost Analysis phase. All these steps may
be performed iteratively as needed. Assumptions made at each
step should be rigorously documented to facilitate iterations
and to help in the interpretation of the results of the analysis.
The method used to estimate the cost elements in LCC
calculations will depend on the amount of information needed
to establish the usage patterns and operational characteristics,
in order to infer the expected remaining life, along with the
information needed to understand the technology employed.
In [12] several methods are presented. The Engineering Cost
Method is used when there is detailed and accurate capital and
104
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 3. LCC Process.
operational cost data for the study. It involves the direct esti-
mation of a particular cost element by examining component-
by-component. It uses standard established cost factors, such
as ﬁrm engineering and/or manufacturing estimates, in order
to develop the cost of each element and its relationship to
other elements (known as Cost Element Relationships - CER).
The Analogous Cost Method provides the same level of detail
as the Engineering Cost Method, but draws on historical data
from similar components that have analogous size, technol-
ogy, use patterns and operational characteristics. Finally, the
Parametric Cost Method is employed when actual or historical
detailed component data is limited to known parameters. These
available data from existing cost analyses is used to develop
a mathematical regression or progression formula, which can
be solved for the cost estimate required.
The basic deterministic methods are underlying virtually
all LCC investigations. The process begins with the customer
needs and ultimately ends with the customer selecting a
preferred option. In this context, the LCC procedure em-
ployed is used to support a decision-making process focused
on customer satisfaction. The deterministic approach assigns
each LCC input variable a ﬁxed discrete value. The analyst
determines the most likely input parameters values that occur,
usually based on historical evidence or professional judgment.
Collectively, these input values are used to compute a sin-
gle LCC estimation. Traditionally, applications of LCC have
been deterministic ones. A deterministic LCC computation
is straightforward and can be conducted manually using a
calculator or automatically with a spreadsheet. However, it fails
to convey the degree of uncertainty associated with the Present
Value (PV) estimate.
The deterministic method of the LCC investigations allows
to have a logical ordering of analytical activities and a means
of ranking [11]. This ranking includes feasible options for
the construction, refurbishment, and on-going management
and support of infrastructures. However, this straightforward
deterministic approach provides little guidance to the engineer
or designer, which attempts to adequately represent the com-
plexity and uncertainty inherent to LCC investigations. For
this reason, the basic method is usually extended. A common
extension to the basic method of LCC involves the use of
sensitivity analysis and risk analysis [37]. Sensitivity analysis
involves the behavior of model variables over predetermined
bounds to determine their relative effect on model outcome.
Through this process, analysts can identify some subset of
model variables that exert signiﬁcant inﬂuence on model re-
sults and/or determine break-even points that alter the ranking
of considered options.
Following an initial deterministic ranking of feasible design
options, sensitivity analysis is employed to establish the sen-
sitivity of model results and rankings across model variables
of particular concern to analysts and decision makers. While
sensitivity analysis provides decision-makers insights regard-
ing the ﬂexibility of model results across a range of variable
estimates and corresponding bounds, it has some shortcomings.
First, it may fail to identify a dominant alternative among
considered design options. This is certainly the case where
perturbations in model variables disturb the ranking of feasible
design options. Second, since sensitivity analysis typically
involves the independent perturbation of each model variable,
engineers and, therefore, customers do not gain a sense of the
combined and simultaneous inﬂuence of several “perturbed”
model variables on LCC results and rankings. Finally, in the
absence of deﬁned probability distributions, the likelihood that
particular values occur is unexplored.
The purpose of risk analysis is to address these shortcom-
ings through probabilistic comparison of considered options.
Used properly, risk analysis addresses the bulk of limitations
associated with sensitivity analysis.
C. Tools
Currently, there are several tools that can perform LCA
and/or LCC calculations. In this subsection, some of the most
commonly used tool will be brieﬂy described.
The Economic Input-Output Life Cycle Assessment (EIO-
LCA) [38] method estimates the materials and energy re-
sources required for activities in the economy, and the environ-
mental emissions resulting from those activities. Researchers
at the Green Design Institute of Carnegie Mellon University
operationalized the Leontief’s method in the mid-1990s, since
sufﬁcient computing power was widely available to perform
the large-scale matrix manipulations required in real-time.
Their work consisted on developing a user-friendly on-line
tool that implemented the EIO-LCA method. The website
performed fast and easy evaluations to a commodity or service,
as well as its supply chain. The EIO-LCA method, models, and
results represent the inventory stage of the LCA. The results
are used to estimate the environmental emissions or resource
consumption associated with the life cycle of an industrial
sector. However, it fails to estimate the actual environmental
or human health impacts that the emissions or consumption
patterns cause. The results of the EIO-LCA analysis represent
the impacts from a change in demand on an industrial sector.
As a LCA tool, the EIO-LCA models applied are incomplete,
since the included environmental effects are limited.
EconomyMap [39] is another tool, which uses CEDA 3.0
LCA Economic Input/Output (EIO) database [40], to provide
visualization of the same economic activity and indirect en-
vironmental impacts. It provides an easy way to dynamically
explore and understand the sources and ﬂow of goods, services,
and environmental impacts among major industrial sectors.
EconomyMap is intended to be a free resource for public
interest lawyers and policymakers, to help them identify and
prioritize opportunities to reduce environmental impacts. It
also serves as an educational resource for broader audiences.
openLCA [41] is a professional LCA tool and footprint
software created by GreenDelta in 2006, with a broad range
of features and many available databases. It is an open source
software and is publicly available to be modiﬁed, offering
resources such as professional life cycle modeling, up-to-date
105
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

usability, a broad choice of life cycle databases and a collab-
oration environment for teams. Gabi6 [42] is a sustainability
solution with a powerful LCA engine to support several appli-
cations, namely Life Cycle Assessment, Life Cycle Costing,
Life Cycle Reporting and Life Cycle Working Environment.
Gabi6 - GaBi [42] is a product sustainability solution with
a powerful LCA engine to support the following applications:
(1) LCA, characterized by the design for environment, eco-
efﬁciency, eco-design and efﬁcient value chains. Products
should meet environmental regulations, by reducing material,
energy and resource use, as well as smaller environmental
footprints such as fewer GHG emissions, reduced water con-
sumption and waste. Also, the efﬁciency of value chains should
be enhanced; (2) LCC, characterized by the designing and
optimization of products and processes for cost reduction; (3)
Life Cycle Reporting, characterized by the product sustain-
able marketing, sustainability reporting and LCA knowledge
sharing. Environmental communication, product sustainability
and analysis for internal departments, management and supply
chain should be reported, using product sustainability claims
and Environmental Product Declarations (EPDs); (4) Life
Cycle Working Environment, characterized by a responsible
manufacturing, where manufacturing process should address
social responsibilities.
III.
WORKBENCH
The Workbench is a web based on-line tool developed
in the scope of the ReBorn project, used to demonstrate
novel factory layout design techniques. This tool will help
manufacturers to keep their production at an optimal level of
efﬁciency and, therefore, at the most optimal point of operation
in terms of time, costs and quality. The Workbench integrates
ﬁve different models to support the system design phase,
namely the Requirements Conﬁgurator, the Marketplace, the
Solution Generator, the System Assessment Tool, and the
Layout Planner. The Workbench user interface is represented
in Figure 4.
Figure 4. ReBorn Workbench Web Application.
The Workbench offers a fully integrated environment for
generating multiple solutions, aiming at reducing signiﬁcantly
the time of the overall design process. It also provides the
ability to explore the different solutions generated by the
different tools, which opens the scope for considering options
within a reduced time frame. It has the capability to ask and
receive component’s data, needed for a dedicated simulation
task. With the help of real data, based on discrete event
simulations, the Workbench helps to ensure shorter ramp-
up and change-over times and, therefore, reduce costs. The
different modules can run independently or they can work
together, through the modiﬁcation and sharing of Automation
Markup Language (AML) ﬁles [43]. The Workbench modules
will be described in the next sections.
A. Requirements Conﬁgurator Module
The Requirements Conﬁgurator is a tool for gathering all
key requirements of a production line and provide the captured
data in a formalized way. This process achieved by a web ap-
plication, which guides the user through several forms, in order
to collect its inputs. Each user is asked to input information
regarding the company (name and country), the factory, such
as available space and the layout, Key Performance Indicators
(KPIs), components that are required for the production (di-
mensions and required feeder), and assembly processes, which
speciﬁes how an assembly is built together. The requirements
information is stored and available to be re-used later, when
different scenarios or corrections are considered. As soon as
the requirements speciﬁcations are stored, they are formalized
in the ReBorn enhanced AutomationML format and exported
in AML ﬁle, which will be used by other modules in the
Workbench for further processing. Figure 5 represents the
Requirements Conﬁgurator web application.
Figure 5. Requirements Conﬁgurator Web Application.
B. Marketplace Module
The ReBorn Marketplace (RBM) [44] is an on-line plat-
form that allows industrial equipment owners and buyers to
have a common ground to communicate, offering services like
Platform as a System (PaaS). The RBM enables a multi-sided
environment that allows connection between market actors,
regarding industrial equipment re-selling. Figure 6 represents
the Marketplace web application.
The RBM is a n-sided market, with service providers on
one end and service consumers on the other. This market is
attractive to service suppliers, since they are able to quickly
respond to demand. This demand side is comprised of any
potential end-user to the services being provided in the plat-
form. Service Consumers comprise the marketplace partici-
pants, which mainly relate to the RBM service offerings. The
Marketplace Service Suppliers can normally be instantiated
by any entity capable of offering its services to the platform
106
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 6. Marketplace Web Application.
while altogether adding value to the platform’s base propo-
sition. Service Suppliers are industrial equipment builders
who provide equipment, as well as equipment information,
functionalities (software), and operations. Entities capable of
providing complementing services to the platform, in order
to co-create value, are labeled as Complementors. These can
be, for instance, independent software developers that provide
additional equipment functionalities.
C. Solution Generator Module
The Solution Generator provides conﬁguration solutions,
based on the established requirements gathered by the Require-
ments Conﬁgurator and the existing equipment modules (both
old and new). This module requires the use of IBM ILOG
CPLEX [45], which is a software optimization package. The
Solution Generator uses the information in the AML ﬁle to
signiﬁcantly reduce the solution space. Then, it generates an
AML ﬁle for each of the optimized solutions generated. Figure
7 represents the Solution Generator module.
Figure 7. Solution Generator Application.
D. Layout Planner Module
The Layout Planner is the component of the Workbench
responsible for ﬁnding the optimized layout for the factory
shop ﬂoor. It delivers an equipment layout solution, taking
into consideration several constraints like space restrictions,
equipment to be included and restrictions on material ﬂow.
The Layout Planner provides several optimization methods in
order to ﬁnd a solution that minimizes the total cost of material
handling associated with the equipment layout considered. This
cost is calculated by the the sum of the costs of having speciﬁc
equipment located in a given area of the shop ﬂoor layout and
the costs of material handling between equipment. Material
handling costs are represented by the relationship between ﬂow
of material and distance between equipments. Pinto et al. [3]
developed an approach based on Genetic Algorithms (GA),
which was implemented in the Layout Planner and proved to
be more efﬁcient that other genetic algorithm approaches to
tackle Facility Layout Problems (FLP). Figure 8 represents
the Layout Planner module.
Figure 8. Layout Planner Web Application.
E. System Assessment Tool Module
The SAT integrates reliability and life cycle status informa-
tion during early design and costing of assembly automation
projects. The life-long cost assessment of the system is accom-
plished through the data collection of the system performance
throughout its life cycle. Based on this performance data, the
SAT performs the life cycle cost assessment and analysis of the
effect on the overall reconﬁgured system. Figure 9 represents
the SAT module.
The SAT is able to compare machines and production
lines in terms of: 1) Reliability metrics, such as failure rate,
Mean Time Between Failure (MTBF), Mean Time To Re-
pair (MTTR), reliability, availability, performance, quality and
Overall Equipment Effectiveness (OEE); 2) LCC metrics, such
as Future Value (FV), PV, Net Present Cost (NPC) and Net
Present Value (NPV) with initial costs; and 3) LCA metrics,
such as life cycle emissions and impact categories, like Global
Warming Potential or Ozone Depleting Potential. A detailed
overview of the SAT is presented in the next section.
IV.
SYSTEM ASSESSMENT TOOL
The SAT has two main objectives, namely providing an
easy and intuitive way for a user to compare machines or
production lines and providing a web API service, capable of
receiving requests and share the results with the other modules
107
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 9. System Assessment Tool Web Application.
in the Workbench or other future applications. As mentioned
before, the SAT provides an easy and intuitive way for a
user to compare machines or production lines, in terms of
reliability, LCC, LCA, classifying each machine with a label,
based on a grading system. Figure 10 represents an overall
architecture of the SAT, which consists on four main groups
of metric parameters: 1) Reliability; 2) LCC; 3) LCA and 4)
Equipment Label. These groups will be further detailed in the
next sections.
Figure 10. System Assessment Tool Overall Architecture.
Regarding communication interfaces, the SAT can interact
directly with the Marketplace, as represented in Figure 11, or
it can interact with other applications, using a web API or
the available web interface. The SAT is prepared to receive
requests for performing analysis of equipment, using the
available metrics, where both equipment information and the
analysis results are imported/exported to an AML ﬁle or stored
locally into a database.
Available machines in the Marketplace can be compared
with machines available in the SAT scope. The user can
select from a list the machines to be compared and perform
the analysis. Figure 12 represents and example of the results
provided by a comparison analysis between two industrial
machines. In this case reliability metrics are shown. Each graph
shows the percentage of each equipment for each metric.
A. Reliability Metrics Functionality
Regarding reliability metrics of equipment operation, the
SAT [1] can calculate several parameters, namely the failure
Figure 11. SAT - Marketplace Connection.
Figure 12. Machine comparison - Reliability metrics.
rate, MTBF, MTTR, reliability, availability, performance, qual-
ity and OEE.
1) Failure rate: Failure rate, represented by Fr, can be
deﬁned as the frequency that an engineered system or compo-
nent fails. Fr is calculated by the ratio between the number
of failures F that occur and the operating time Ot of the
equipment, as shown in Equation (1).
Fr = F
Ot
(1)
108
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

2) Mean Time Between Failure: MTBF, represented by
MTBF, is deﬁned as the predicted elapsed time between
inherent failures of a system during operation. It is the inverse
of the Failure Rate and is thus calculated from the same
parameters, namely the number of failures F that occur during
the operating time Ot, as shown in Equation (2).
MTBF = Ot
F
(2)
3) Mean Time To Repair: MTTR, represented by MTTR,
is a basic measurement of the maintainability of repairable
items, which reﬂects both the severity of breakdowns and
the efﬁcacy of repair activities. It represents the average time
required to repair a failed component or device and depends on
the number of expected breakdown times Dt and the number
of failures F in a given period of time, as shown in Equation
(3).
MTTR =
N
X
n=1
Dtn
F
(3)
4) Reliability: Reliability, represented by R, is the prob-
ability that the equipment will ﬁnish successfully a task of
duration t without failures, as shown in Equation (4).
R = e−(F r×t)
(4)
5) Availability: Availability A represents the percentage of
scheduled time that the operation is available to operate. It is
deﬁned as the ratio between the actual operating time Ot and
the scheduled production time of an equipment Pt, as shown
in Equation (5).
A = Ot
Pt
(5)
The scheduled production time of an equipment Pt can
be calculated as the sum of the operating time Ot with the
expected down time Dt, as shown in Equation (6).
Pt = Ot + Dt
(6)
6) Performance: Performance P represents the speed at
which the equipment runs as a percentage of its designed
speed. It is the ratio between the actual number of units
produced Pt and the number of units that theoretically can be
produced, considering the rate of operation that the equipment
is designed for, represented by the ideal cycle time Ct, as
shown in Equation (7).
P = Pt × Ct
Ot
(7)
7) Quality: Quality Q represents the good units produced
as a percentage of the total units produced. It is the ratio
between the number of good units Pg and the total number of
units Pt that were produced, as shown in Equation (8).
Q = Pg
Pt
(8)
8) Overall Equipment Effectiveness: OEE, represented as
OEE, quantiﬁes how well a manufacturing unit performs
relative to its designed capacity, during the periods when it
is scheduled to run, which can be determined by the the
ratio between the theoretical maximum good output during
the production time and the actual good output. Equation
(9) represents a practical form to calculate the OEE, which
depends on the availability A, the performance P and the
quality Q.
OEE = A × P × Q
(9)
B. LCC Metrics Functionality
Regarding LCC metrics, the SAT performs calculations
regarding the Capital Cost Unit Over Service Life, the Capital
Annualized Cost Unit, the future and present values, Net
Present Cost and Net Present Value.
1) Capital Cost Unit Over Service Life: Capital Cost Unit
Over Service Life CC represents the cost of producing a unit
over the equipment expected service life. As shown in Equation
(10), this cost is calculated by the sum of all costs associated
with the equipment, namely: 1) acquisition and installation
TCi; 2) operation and maintenance TCm, considering also the
energy consumption (where ce is the default annual energy
consumption, re is electricity rate and Esl is the equipment
expected service life); and 3) disposal TCe.
CC = TCi + TCm + Esl × (ce × re) + TCe
(10)
Acquisitions and installation costs include hardware and
software acquisitions, service contracts, administrative, set up
installation and other initial costs. Operation and maintenance
costs include training maintenance support, material costs,
equipment upgrade and other maintenance operation. Oper-
ation and maintenance costs include the equipment energy
consumption, where the default annual energy consumption
ce can be calculated using the power consumption in active
Pwa and sleep mode Pws, and the time that the equipment
is turned off Toff and in standby Tsleep during workdays, as
shown in Equation (11).
ce = 365 × (Pwa + Pws) × 24 × (1 − (Toff + Tsleep)) (11)
2) Capital Annualized Cost Unit: Capital Annualized Cost
Unit CA is the cost of the equipment producing a unit per
year, which depends on the Capital Cost Unit Over Service
Life CC and the machine expected service life Esl, as shown
in Equation (12).
CA = CC
Esl
(12)
3) Future Value: FV, represented as FV in Equation (13),
is the economical value of an asset at a speciﬁed date in
the future, which is equivalent to the economical value of a
speciﬁc sum today. Based on the time value of money, the
value of an equipment today is not equal to the value of the
same equipment in a future time. In this case, FV grows
linearly, since it’s a linear function of the initial investment
Ci. Ci is based on the initial acquisitions and installation
109
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

costs, such as hardware and software acquisitions, service
contracts, administrative, set up installation and other initial
costs. FV also depends on the interest rate r and the time for
the equipment to be analyzed T.
FV =
N
X
n=1
Cin × (1 + r × T)
(13)
4) Present Value: PV, represented as PV in Equation (14),
is the economical value in the current day of an equipment that
will be received in a future date. Costs that occur at different
points in the equipment life cycle cannot be compared directly
because of the varying time value of money. They must be
discounted back to their present value through, e.g., Equation
(14), where PV depends on the value in the future FV , the
interest (discount) rate r and the time (number of years) for
the equipment to be analyzed T.
PV =
FV
(1 + r)T
(14)
5) Net Present Cost: NPC, represented as NPC in Equa-
tion (15), is the sum of all costs, such as capital investment,
non-fuel operation and maintenance costs, replacement costs,
energy costs, such as fuel costs and any other costs, such as
legal fees, etc, after taking into account the interest rate. If a
number of options are being considered, then the option with
the lowest NPC associated will be the most favorable ﬁnancial
option. NPC depends on the present value PV , the discount
rate r and the total cash ﬂow TCf over the reviewed period.
NPC = PV + r × TCf
(15)
6) Net Present Value: NPV is used to determine the prof-
itability of an investment that is calculated by subtracting the
present values of cash outﬂows from the present values of cash
inﬂows over a given period of time. The NPV may consider or
not the initial costs, which are represented as the Net Present
Value without Initial Costs NPVwo and Net Present Value
with Initial Costs NPVwi, shown in Equations (16) and (17)
respectively. They depend on the cash ﬂows Cf during the
reviewed period T, the discount rate r and, in the case of
NPVwi, it is considered the initial costs Ci.
NPVwo =
T
X
t=1
Cft
(1 + r)t
(16)
NPVwi =
T
X
t=1
Cft
(1 + r)t − Ci
(17)
C. LCA Metrics Functionality
The LCA is a “cradle-to-grave” approach for assessing
industrial systems. The realization of an LCA study is a
complex process that needs large amounts of different data,
which usually is not commonly available. For that reason, most
of the times, only simpler metrics related to the environmental
impacts and their characterization are considered, such as
global warming, stratospheric ozone depletion and human
health.
1) Global Warming:
Global Warming Potential, repre-
sented as GWP in Equation (18), is calculated over a speciﬁc
time interval, commonly 20, 100 or 500 years, and is expressed
as a factor of carbon dioxide [15]. To calculate this impact,
several types of ﬂows must be taken into account, such as
Carbon Dioxide CO2, Nitrogen Dioxide NO2, Methane CH4,
Chloroﬂuorocarbons (CFCs) like Sulfur Hexaﬂuoride SF6,
Hydrochloroﬂuorocarbons (HCFCs) like Nitrogen triﬂuoride
NF3 and Methyl Bromide CH3Br.
GWP = CO2 + 25 × CH4 + 5 × CH3Br + 298 × NO2
+ 22800 × SF6 + 17200 × NF3
(18)
2) Stratospheric
Ozone
Depletion:
Stratospheric
Ozone
Depletion,
represented
as
ODP
in
Equation
(19), is characterized by the Ozone Depleting Potential
[15].
ODP
of
a
chemical
compound
is
the
relative
amount of degradation to the ozone layer it can cause.
To
calculate
this
impact,
several
types
of
ﬂows
must
be
taking
into
account,
such
as
CFCs,
HCFCs
and
Halons.
CFCs
include
Dichlorodiﬂuoromethane
CCl2F,
Trichloroﬂuoromethane
CCl3F,
Trichlorotriﬂuoroethane
C2Cl3F3,
Dichlorotetraﬂuoroethane
C2F4Cl
and
Chloropentaﬂuoroethane
C2ClF5.
HCFCs
include
Chlorodiﬂuoromethane
CHClF2
and
Trichloroethane
CH3CCl3.
Halons
include
Bromotriﬂuoromethane
CF3Br,
Bromochlorodiﬂuoromethane
CF2BrCl
and
Tetrachloromethane CCl4.
ODP = CCl2F + CCl3F + 1.07 × C2Cl3F3
+ 0.8 × C2F4Cl + 0.5 × C2ClF5
+ 0.055 × CHClF2 + 0.12 × CH3CCl3
+ 16 × CF3Br + 4 × CF2BrCl + 1.08 × CCl4
(19)
3) Human Health: Human Health, represented as HH in
Equation (20), is characterized by the median lethal concen-
tration (LC50) and calculates the amount of toxic material
released [15]. To calculate this impact, several types of ﬂows
must be taking into account, such as Carbon Monoxide CO,
Nitrogen Oxide NOx and Sulfur Dioxide SO2.
HH = 0.012 × CO + 0.78 × NOx + 1.2 × SO2
(20)
Figure 13. Equipment Label Scale.
110
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE I. Metrics Weights Used in Simulations 1 and 2.
Metric
Type
Metric
Use /
Willing
(%)
Import.
WV 1
WV 2
WV 3
Reliability
F r
75%
55%
0.05
0.04
0.04
MT BF
100%
91%
0.09
0.09
0.09
MT T R
100%
91%
0.09
0.09
0.09
R
75%
48%
0.04
0.03
0.03
A
100%
90%
0.09
0.09
0.09
P
75%
93%
0.09
0.09
0.09
Q
100%
98%
0.10
0.20
0.23
OEE
100%
80%
0.08
0.07
0.07
LCC
CC
100%
83%
0.08
0.07
0.07
CA
75%
45%
0.04
0.03
0.03
NP Vwo
25%
33%
0.03
0.02
0.01
NP Vwi
25%
28%
0.02
0.01
0.01
NP C
50%
43%
0.04
0.03
0.03
F V
25%
18%
0.01
0.01
0.00
P V
25%
18%
0.01
0.01
0.00
LCA
Ec
100%
75%
0.08
0.07
0.07
Rm
75%
40%
0.04
0.03
0.03
Ic
50%
34%
0.02
0.02
0.02
Figure 14. Metrics Questionnaire Results Resume.
D. Equipment Label
The equipment Label is a form of equipment classiﬁcation,
based on the results of the metrics calculated in the SAT,
described in sections IV-A, IV-B and IV-C. The classiﬁcation
consists on assigning a grade from A to F to the considered
equipment, being A very dependable and F less dependable,
as represented in Figure 13, similar to the labeling of the
European Union energy [46]. Grades are determined by the
sum of the analysis metrics (Reliability, LCC, and LCA), after
attributing weights to each of the metrics.
Aguiar et al. [1] presented a simple grading system that is
represented in 21 to calculate the label L. This ﬁrst approach
used a few of the possible metrics (along with the corre-
sponding weights), such as reliability R, Overall Equipment
Effectiveness OEE, initial Ci, operational Cm and disposal
Ce costs, energy consumption Ec and percentage reusable Pr.
L = WR × R + WOEE × OEE +
Cm
W × (Ci + Ce)
+ WEc × Ec + WP r × Pr
(21)
V.
TESTS AND RESULTS
Although Aguiar et al. [1] presented good labeling results
based on the most commonly used metrics calculated by the
SAT, some industrial companies may have different priorities
regarding the metrics used for the analysis. For this reason, in
order to identify the importance of the metrics used, a survey
was carried out among the industrial partners of the ReBorn
Consortium. This survey consisted on a questionnaire, where
industrial partners specify the metrics that they usually use and
the importance of each metric. Figure 14 represents a resume
of the results gathered from the survey.
After inspection of the survey results, it is clear that some
metrics are more relevant that others. The most important
metric is Quality Q, with an importance of 98%, followed by
MTTR MTTR, MTBF MTBF and Availability A, which all
have an importance above the 90%.
Based on the information that resulted from the survey, a
new labeling system was devised, as shown in Equation (22).
In this case, Label L depends on several metrics and the cor-
responding weights, namely the Failure Rate Fr, Mean Time
Between Failures MTBF, Mean Time To Repair MTTR,
Reliability R, Availability A, Performance P, Quality Q,
Overall Equipment Effectiveness OEE, Capital Cost Unit
Over Service Life CC, Capital Annualized Cost Unit CA, Net
Present Value without Initial Costs NPVwo, Net Present Value
with Initial Costs NPVwi, Net Present Cost NPC, Default
Energy Consumption ce, percentage of recyclable material Rm
and the sum of the impact categories values Ic.
L = WF r × Fr + WMT BF × MTBF + WMT T R × MTTR
+ WR × R + WA × A + WP × P + WQ × Q
+ WOEE × OEE + WCC × CC + WCA × CA
+ WNP Vwo × NPVwo + WNP Vwi × NPVwi
+ WNP C × NPC + Wce × ce + WRm × Rm
+ WIc × Ic
(22)
In order to be widely accepted, the labeling system must
be simple, clear and generic enough to be used by different
industrial users, with different metric priorities. To validate the
effectiveness of the labeling system, represented in Equation
(22), three different simulations were performed in a Matlab
environment and are presented in the next sections.
All three simulations have the same principles. It was
assumed that the values for the metrics were normalized and
are expressed in percentage. The metrics values were assigned
based on a 1000 uniformly distributed random generated
numbers. For Simulation 1 and 2 the corresponding metrics
weights were generated in three different versions (WV 1, WV 2
andWV 3), which are presented in Table I. WV 1 was deﬁned
based on the importance given by each industrial partner of the
ReBorn Consortium. The other weight versions were deﬁned
by increasing the Quality value, because it is the metric with
higher importance, and decreasing the value of the metrics
111
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

with lower importance, keeping in mind that the sum of all
weights is equal to 1. For Simulation 3, the same philosophy
is applied, in terms of the weight calculation. The difference
between Simulation 3 and Simulation 1 and 2, is that the
weight calculation for the ﬁrst layer in Simulation 3 is done
in blocks (Reliability, LCC, and LCA).
To be able to compare all the simulations, the mean and
standard deviation are calculated for four different values: 1)
number of quality values lower than the Label; 2) number of
quality values lower than the Label by two or more grades; 3)
number of quality values higher than the Label; 4) number
of quality values higher than the Label by two or more
grades. Ideally, all the four values, as well as it’s mean and
standard deviation values, should be as small as possible.
Having small values for mean and standard deviation means
that the difference between the metrics used (e.g., Quality) and
the equipment Label is short, and the inﬂuence of such metrics
is very high regarding the Label being calculated.
A. Simulations 1 and 2
Regarding the simulations 1 and 2, the simulations consist
on calculating the equipment Label, based on the metrics
and the corresponding weights, as shown in Equation (22).
For Simulation 1, Figure 15 presents the relationship of the
Quality values and the equipment Label calculated for the
three versions of metrics weights. From the ﬁgure and after
observing the results, several equipment labels were identiﬁed,
where the most important metrics refereed previously had
values much lower or higher than the equipment label, that is,
with a difference of two or more grades between the equipment
Label and the most important metrics.
Figure 15. Simulation 1 - Quality values for the three metrics weights
versions.
In order to have a meaningful labeling system that is
truthfully usable by the industry, the label classiﬁcation must
reﬂect the most important metrics that are relevant for the
users. Based on the survey performed, Simulation 2 consisted
on calculating the equipment Label, considering the most im-
portant metrics that resulted from the survey, namely Quality,
MTBF, MTTR, and Availability.
In Simulation 2, the equipment Label was calculated using
Equation (22), the same way as used in Simulation 1. The
difference lays in the importance given for speciﬁc metrics.
For all the equipment Labels that differ from the Quality value,
the Label is recalculated using only the top four metrics, as
shown in Equation (23).
L = WMT BF × MTBF + WMT T R × MTTR
+ WA × A + WQ × Q
(23)
Figure 16. Simulation 2 - Quality values for the three metrics weights
versions.
The results of Simulation 2 are presented in Figure 16,
which consists on the relationship of the Quality values and the
equipment Label calculated for the three versions of metrics
weights.
The mean µ and standard deviation σ of the number of
equipments that have a Quality value higher or lower then
the Label, were calculated and are presented in Table II.
This allows for a better understanding and comparison of the
simulations results, and to evaluate if the equipment Label
calculated is more or less accurate when compared with the
Quality value of the equipment. The equipments considered
were those who present a Quality different from the calculated
equipment Label, and that the difference is higher than one
grade from the labeling system.
B. Simulation 3
Taking into account the results from the previous Simula-
tions 1 and 2, and based on the fact that the most important
metrics chosen from the industrial partners belong to the
Reliability metrics group, a different approach was taken
in Simulation 3, where the equipment Label calculation is
performed at two levels, as represented in Figure 17. First,
the equipment Label is calculated three times, one from each
metric group, namely Reliability, LCC and LCA metric groups.
These Label results will be used to calculate an overall
equipment Label. For each group, the equipment label only
considers the parameters that belong to that group of metrics.
Equation (24) is used to calculate the equipment label
regarding the Reliability group LRel, considering only the
112
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE II. Equipments with Quality different from the Label - Simulation 1.
Simulation 1
Simulation 2
WV 1
WV 2
WV 3
WV 1
WV 2
WV 3
Q < L
µ
390.50
375.50
372.00
370.5
351.50
347.50
σ
127.71
145.83
150.90
240.92
228.59
230.65
Q < L
(2 or more
grades)
µ
386.50
372.75
367.00
379.50
357.00
354.75
σ
131.50
148.33
153.26
246.21
236.02
235.75
Q > L
µ
378.50
368.00
362.75
368.75
345.00
343.75
σ
142.65
153.83
158.66
256.05
242.73
241.96
Q > L
(2 or more
grades)
µ
392.50
378.75
373.25
369.75
340.50
337.50
σ
126.75
142.41
148.66
256.92
244.63
245.94
Figure 17. Overall Label - two layer label calculation.
Failure Rate Fr, Mean Time Between Failure MTBF, Mean
Time to Repair MTTR, Reliability R, Availability A, Per-
formance P, Quality Q, and Overall Equipment Effectiveness
OEE, with the corresponding weights.
LRel = WF r × Fr + WMT BF × MTBF
+ WMT T R × MTTR + WR × R + WA × A
+ WP × P + WQ × Q + WOEE × OEE
(24)
Equation (25) is used to calculate the equipment label
regarding the LCC group LLCC, considering only the Capital
Cost Unit Over Service Life CC, Capital Annualized Cost
Unit CA, Net Present Value Without Initial Costs NPVwo,
Net Present Value With Initial Costs NPVwi, Net Present Cost
NPC, Future Value FV , and Present Value PV , with the
corresponding weights.
LLCC = WCC × CC + WCA × CA
+ WNP Vwo × NPVwo + WNP Vwi × NPVwi
+ WNP C × NPC
(25)
Equation (26) is used to calculate the equipment label
regarding the LCA group LLCA, considering only the Default
Energy Consumption ce, percentage of recyclable material
Rm, and the sum of the impact categories values Ic, with
the corresponding weights.
LLCA = Wce × ce + WRm × Rm + WIc × Ic
(26)
Based on the three equipment Label that were determined
for each metric group, namely the Reliability Label LRel, LCC
Label LLCC, and LCA Label LLCA, the equipment overall
Label can be calculated, as shown in Equation (27).
LOverall = WLRel × LRel + WLLCC × LLCC
+ WLLCA × LLCA
(27)
In this case, Step 1 consists on equipment Label calculation
for each metric group, using the same weights assigned in
Simulation 1 and 2 (WV 1, WV 2 ND WV 3). Step 2 consists on
the overall equipment Label calculation, considering the Labels
determined in Step 1 and assigning the corresponding weights,
namely WLRel, WLLCC and WLLCA. The weight generation
on Step 2 is deﬁned based on the importance of each metric
type and keeping the sum of all weights is equal to 1. Table
III resumes the weights used for the two layer approach in
Simulation 3.
The results of Simulation 3 are presented in Figure 18,
which presents on the relationship of the Quality values and
the equipment Label calculated for the three metrics weights
WLRel, WLLCC and WLLCA.
Figure 18. Quality values with the 3 different weight versions - Simulation 3.
As performed in Simulation 1 and 2, the mean µ and
standard deviation σ of the number of equipments that have a
Quality value higher or lower then the Label, were calculated
and are presented in Table IV.
C. Summary
As previously described, the equipment Label aims at
providing a simple and straightforward way of classifying and
comparing industrial equipments. The idea is to attribute a
grade to each equipment, A-F, where A is the best grade and
F the worst, based on several metrics than can be collected
from the equipment. Three simulations where executed in order
to gain a better understanding of how the grade should be
calculated and its usability. From the survey carried out among
the industrial partners in the ReBorn project, the metric Quality
is the most important metric, but there are others that are
also considered very important, such as MTTR, MTBF, and
Availability. Since Quality was the metric with the highest
importance value, it was used as a baseline for comparing the
grade calculated by the system.
113
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE III. Weights Used in Simulation 3.
Step 1 - Single Label
Step 2 - Overall Label
Metric
Type
Metric
WV 1
WV 2
WV 3
WLRel
WLLCC
WLLCA
Reliability
F r
0.09
0.07
0.06
0.61
0.70
0.75
MT BF
0.14
0.13
0.13
MT T R
0.14
0.13
0.13
R
0.07
0.05
0.04
A
0.14
0.13
0.13
P
0.14
0.13
0.13
Q
0.15
0.25
0.28
OEE
0.12
0.11
0.10
LCC
CC
0.31
0.35
0.38
0.25
0.20
0.18
CA
0.17
0.17
0.17
P VwoCi
0.12
0.11
0.11
P VwCi
0.10
0.09
0.09
NP C
0.16
0.16
0.15
F V
0.07
0.06
0.05
P V
0.07
0.06
0.05
LCA
Ec
0.50
0.60
0.65
0.14
0.10
0.07
Rm
0.27
0.22
0.20
Ic
0.23
0.18
0.15
TABLE IV. Equipments with Quality different from the Label - Simulation 3.
WLRel
WLLCC
WLLCA
WV 1
WV 2
WV 3
WV 1
WV 2
WV 3
WV 1
WV 2
WV 3
Q < L
µ
501.30
504.33
504.44
500.52
504.09
504.16
499.94
503.97
504.21
σ
14.55
14.49
14.31
14.80
14.29
14.33
14.72
14.53
14.49
Q < L
(2 or more
grades)
µ
301.85
305.51
305.69
301.79
305.22
305.34
301.34
305.08
305.37
σ
13.16
13.16
13.03
12.93
13.01
12.91
12.92
12.89
12.97
Q > L
µ
498.70
495.67
495.57
499.49
495.91
495.85
499.49
496.04
495.80
σ
14.55
14.49
14.31
14.80
14.29
14.33
14.80
14.53
14.49
Q > L
(2 or more
grades)
µ
299.78
296.61
296.77
300.85
296.52
296.61
301.25
296.66
297.03
σ
13.04
12.83
12.69
12.89
12.96
13.11
12.92
13.00
13.00
In Simulation 1, a high number of equipments where
identiﬁed where the grade calculated was two or more grades
higher or lower than the Quality value. In order to try to reduce
the number of equipments that have two or more grades of
difference to the Quality value, Simulation 2 was devised. In
this second simulation some values were improved, but the
results where not signiﬁcantly better. These results lead to the
design of Simulation 3, where a different approach was taken.
Simulation 3 uses a two step approach, as show in Figure 17.
With this approach there was a signiﬁcant improvement in the
results, as it can be seen in the Table V.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In the last ten years, there has been a growing desire
of industrial companies and equipment integrators, in several
domains, to achieve higher levels of equipment ﬂexibility to
be re-usable later in different environments. In order to infer if
a given equipment is suitable to be re-use in a different layout
to perform different tasks, the state of the equipment must be
evaluated ﬁrst. This evaluation usually consists on comparing
the considered equipment with others of the same family, using
Quality metrics.
This paper proposes a new approach to classify industrial
equipment called labeling system and compares it to the Qual-
ity metric, in order to conclude which one performs better at
TABLE V. Resume of the Results of Simulation 1,2 and 3.
Simulation 1
Simulation 2
Simulation 3
Reliability
Overall
Q < L
µ
373.00
347.00
496.65
497.08
σ
147.20
239.79
15.37
15.95
Q < L
(2 or more
grades)
µ
372.00
339.25
299.79
298.09
σ
147.81
243.48
14.76
15.16
Q > L
µ
376.50
344.50
503.36
502.92
σ
143.34
232.56
15.37
15.95
Q > L
(2 or more
grades)
µ
374.00
337.50
306.12
303.25
σ
146.16
239.81
15.35
14.66
classifying equipment. This approach was implemented in the
System Assessment Tool, which is a module of the Workbench,
for decision support and production planning, developed within
the ReBorn project.
As previously mentioned, the Workbench was developed
within the ReBorn project. This tool is composed of several
modules that can work together or independently. One of
these modules is the System Assessment Tool, which aims
at integrating reliability and life cycle status information in
114
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

one single tool and assigning a label to each equipment. This
labeling system is an dependability classiﬁcation system for
industrial equipment, which aims to be similar to the energy
efﬁciency system for appliances.
The labeling system allows the easy comparison of in-
dustrial equipment, taking into account several metrics, such
as Reliability, LCC and LCA. The assigned grade for each
equipment may vary from A to F. A ﬁrst approach of the
labeling system was presented by Aguiar et al. [1], which is
the work that originated this paper, after further research. This
ﬁrst approach by Aguiar was redeﬁned, based on the results
of a survey that was ﬁlled by the industrial partners in the
ReBorn Consortium, which stated the most important metrics
used by the partners.
Three different simulations were performed, in order to
experiment different approaches to calculate the equipment
Label and explore different results. In Simulation 1 and 2,
different weights were assigned to each metric, according to
the importance stated in the survey. Using this metric weights
resulted in an improvement in the metrics collected and in the
equipment Label calculation. However, this improvement was
not meaningful, since there were a large number of equipments
that were classiﬁed with a Label that was must lower or higher
than the Quality. Quality is the metric used for comparison and
evaluation of the labeling system, because it is the main metric
used in industry.
Simulation 3 was based on a different approach, in order
to improve the labeling system in comparison to the Quality
metric. This approach consisted on a two step labeling clas-
siﬁcation: 1) Calculate the equipment Label according to the
group of metrics considered, namely Reliability, LCC and LCA
Labels; 2) An overall equipment Label is calculated based on
the previously group labels.
Table V is a resume of the simulations results obtained in
the previous section, which presents the mean and standard de-
viation of the equipments that had the Quality metric different
form the calculated Label. There is a improvement from the
Simulation 1 to the Simulation 2, in a general way in terms
of the mean values. However the standard deviation values are
lower in the Simulation 1. In Simulation 3, two parameters are
presented, namely the Reliability calculated in the ﬁrst step and
the overall Label calculated in step.
When comparing Simulation 1 and 2 to Simulation 3,
there are two results that are very clear. The ﬁrst one is that
the standard deviation values are smaller in the Simulation
3, which indicates that the quality values are closer to the
equipment Label calculated. The second result is that although
there are more equipments with a Quality value lower or
higher than the Label, the number of these values that have
more than one grade of difference are smaller, in comparison
to the results in Simulation 1 and 2. This second result is
obviously supported by the standard deviation values. These
results validate the decision to use Equation (27), as tested in
Simulation 3, as the most suitable for industrial purposes, in
comparison to the highly important Quality metric.
As future work, the proposed labeling scheme must be
validated with real industrial scenarios, instead of simulated
data. Also, further interaction with industrial partners outside
the ReBorn Consortium must be taken, in order to validate the
usability and signiﬁcance of the labeling system.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was partially supported by the ReBorn
project (FoF.NMP.2013-2) - Innovative Reuse of modular
knowledge Based devices and technologies for Old, Renewed
and New factories - funded by the European Commission
under the Seventh Framework Program for Research and Tech-
nological Development. We would like to thank all partners for
their support and discussions that contributed to these results.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Aguiar, R. Pinto, J. Reis, and G. Gonc¸alves, “Life-cycle approach
to extend equipment re-use in ﬂexible manufacturing,” in INTELLI
2016, The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems and
Applications.
IARIA, 2016, pp. 148–153.
[2]
“ReBorn Project web site,” URL: http://www.reborn-eu-project.org/
[accessed: 2015-01-01].
[3]
R. Pinto, J. Gonc¸alves, H. L. Cardoso, E. Oliveira, G. Gonc¸alves, and
B. Carvalho, “A facility layout planner tool based on genetic algo-
rithms,” in 2016 IEEE Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence
(SSCI), Dec 2016, pp. 1–8.
[4]
“Automatica Fair,” URL: http://automatica-munich.com/ [accessed:
2016-07-01].
[5]
M. Oppelt, M. Barth, and L. Urbas, “The Role of Simulation within
the Life-Cycle of a Process Plant. Results of a global online survey,”
2014, URL: https://www.researchgate.net/ [accessed: 2016-06-01].
[6]
V. Cesarotti, A. Giuiusa, and V. Introna, Using Overall Equipment
Effectiveness for Manufacturing System Design.
INTECH Open
Access Publisher, 2013.
[7]
K. Muthiah and S. Huang, “Overall throughput effectiveness (ote) met-
ric for factory-level performance monitoring and bottleneck detection,”
International Journal of Production Research, vol. 45, no. 20, 2007, pp.
4753–4769.
[8]
“Standard practice for measuring life-cycle costs of buildings and build-
ing systems,” 2002, URL: https://www.astm.org/Standards/E917.htm
[accessed: 2016-06-01].
[9]
F. Bromilow and M. Pawsey, “Life cycle cost of university buildings,”
Construction Management and Economics, vol. 5, no. 4, 1987, pp. S3–
S22.
[10]
D. Elmakis and A. Lisnianski, “Life cycle cost analysis: actual problem
in industrial management,” Journal of Business Economics and Man-
agement, vol. 7, no. 1, 2006, pp. 5–8.
[11]
D.
Langdon,
“Literature
review
of
life
cycle
costing
(lcc)
and
life
cycle
assessment
(lca),”
2006,
URL:
http://www.tmb.org.tr/arastirma yayinlar/
LCC Literature Review Report.pdf [accessed: 2016-06-01].
[12]
“Life
cycle
costing
guideline,”
2004,
URL:
https://www.astm.org/Standards/E917.htm [accessed: 2016-06-01].
[13]
M. A. Curran, “Life cycle assessment: Principles and practice,” 2006,
URL: http://19-659-fall-2011.wiki.uml.edu/ [accessed: 2016-06-01].
[14]
G. Rebitzer, T. Ekvall, R. Frischknecht, D. Hunkeler, G. Norris, T. Ry-
dberg, W.-P. Schmidt, S. Suh, B. P. Weidema, and D. W. Pennington,
“Life cycle assessment: Part 1: Framework, goal and scope deﬁni-
tion, inventory analysis, and applications,” Environment international,
vol. 30, no. 5, 2004, pp. 701–720.
[15]
D. Pennington, J. Potting, G. Finnveden, E. Lindeijer, O. Jolliet,
T. Rydberg, and G. Rebitzer, “Life cycle assessment part 2: Current
impact assessment practice,” Environment international, vol. 30, no. 5,
2004, pp. 721–739.
[16]
R. A. Filleti, D. A. Silva, E. J. Silva, and A. R. Ometto, “Dynamic
system for life cycle inventory and impact assessment of manufacturing
processes,” Procedia CIRP, vol. 15, 2014, pp. 531–536.
[17]
J. Tao, Z. Chen, S. Yu, and Z. Liu, “Integration of life cycle assessment
with computer-aided product development by a feature-based approach,”
Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 143, 2017, pp. 1144–1164.
[18]
J.-P.
Sch¨oggl,
R.
J.
Baumgartner,
and
D.
Hofer,
“Improving
sustainability
performance
in
early
phases
of
product
design:
A
checklist
for
sustainable
product
development
tested
in
the
automotive
industry,”
Journal
of
Cleaner
Production,
vol.
115
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

140,
Part
3,
2017,
pp.
1602
–
1617.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959652616315360
[19]
R. Hoogmartens, S. Van Passel, K. Van Acker, and M. Dubois, “Bridg-
ing the gap between lca, lcc and cba as sustainability assessment tools,”
Environmental Impact Assessment Review, vol. 48, 2014, pp. 27–33.
[20]
R. Heijungs, G. Huppes, and J. B. Guin´ee, “Life cycle assessment and
sustainability analysis of products, materials and technologies. toward
a scientiﬁc framework for sustainability life cycle analysis,” Polymer
degradation and stability, vol. 95, no. 3, 2010, pp. 422–428.
[21]
B. Ness, E. Urbel-Piirsalu, S. Anderberg, and L. Olsson, “Categorising
tools for sustainability assessment,” Ecological economics, vol. 60,
no. 3, 2007, pp. 498–508.
[22]
D. Cerri, M. Taisch, and S. Terzi, “Proposal of a model for life cycle
optimization of industrial equipment,” Procedia CIRP, vol. 15, 2014,
pp. 479–483.
[23]
R. K. Singh, H. R. Murty, S. K. Gupta, and A. K. Dikshit, “An
overview of sustainability assessment methodologies,” Ecological in-
dicators, vol. 9, no. 2, 2009, pp. 189–212.
[24]
C. B¨ohringer and P. E. Jochem, “Measuring the immeasurable—a
survey of sustainability indices,” Ecological economics, vol. 63, no. 1,
2007, pp. 1–8.
[25]
I. T. Cameron and G. Ingram, “A survey of industrial process modelling
across the product and process lifecycle,” Computers & Chemical
Engineering, vol. 32, no. 3, 2008, pp. 420–438.
[26]
F. Cucinotta, E. Guglielmino, and F. Sfravara, “Life cycle assessment
in yacht industry: A case study of comparison between hand lay-up and
vacuum infusion,” Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 142, 2017, pp.
3822–3833.
[27]
F. Iraldo, C. Facheris, and B. Nucci, “Is product durability better for
environment and for economic efﬁciency? a comparative assessment
applying lca and lcc to two energy-intensive products,” Journal of
Cleaner Production, vol. 140, 2017, pp. 1353–1364.
[28]
J. Auer, N. Bey, and J.-M. Sch¨afer, “Combined life cycle assessment
and life cycle costing in the eco-care-matrix: A case study on the per-
formance of a modernized manufacturing system for glass containers,”
Journal of Cleaner Production, vol. 141, 2017, pp. 99–109.
[29]
S. H. Mousavi-Avval, S. Raﬁee, M. Shariﬁ, S. Hosseinpour, B. No-
tarnicola, G. Tassielli, and P. A. Renzulli, “Application of multi-
objective genetic algorithms for optimization of energy, economics and
environmental life cycle assessment in oilseed production,” Journal of
Cleaner Production, vol. 140, 2017, pp. 804–815.
[30]
J. I. Mart´ınez-Corona, T. Gibon, E. G. Hertwich, and R. Parra-Sald´ıvar,
“Hybrid life cycle assessment of a geothermal plant: From physical
to monetary inventory accounting,” Journal of Cleaner Production, vol.
142, 2017, pp. 2509–2523.
[31]
H. Smith, “Cumulative energy requirements for the production of
chemical intermediates and products,” in World Energy Conference,
1963.
[32]
J. Guin´ee and R. Heijungs, Introduction to life cycle assessment.
Springer, 2017.
[33]
R. G. Hunt, W. E. Franklin, and R. Hunt, “Lca—how it came about,”
The international journal of life cycle assessment, vol. 1, no. 1, 1996,
pp. 4–7.
[34]
“EU DG,” URL: http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/environment/ [accessed: 2016-
07-01].
[35]
“ISO 14000,” URL: http://www.iso.org/iso/iso14000 [accessed: 2016-
07-01].
[36]
B. W. Vigon, B. Vigon, and C. Harrison, “Life-cycle assessment:
inventory guidelines and principles,” 1993.
[37]
M. A. Ehlen, “Life-cycle costs of new construction materials,” Journal
of Infrastructure systems, vol. 3, no. 4, 1997, pp. 129–133.
[38]
“Economic Input-Output Life Cycle Assessment (EIO-LCA),” URL:
http://www.eiolca.net [accessed: 2016-06-01].
[39]
“EconomyMap,” URL: http://www.economymap.org/ [accessed: 2016-
06-01].
[40]
“CEDA
Comprehensive
Environmental
Data
Archive,”
URL:
http://iersweb.com/services/ceda/ [accessed: 2015-01-01].
[41]
“openLCA,” URL: http://www.openlca.org/ [accessed: 2016-06-01].
[42]
“Gabi6,” URL: http://www.gabi-software.com/index/ [accessed: 2016-
06-01].
[43]
“AutomationML,” URL: https://www.automationml.org/o.red.c/home.html
[accessed: 2016-06-01].
[44]
R. Fonseca, S. Aguiar, M. Peschl, and G. Gonc¸alves, “The reborn
marketplace: an application store for industrial smart components,”
in INTELLI 2016, The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent
Systems and Applications.
IARIA, 2016, pp. 136–141.
[45]
“CPLEX,”
URL:
http://www-03.ibm.com/software/products/
en/ibmilogcpleoptistud [accessed: 2016-06-01].
[46]
“Energy Efﬁcient,” URL: http://ec.europa.eu/energy/en/topics/energy-
efﬁciency/energy-efﬁcient-products [accessed: 2016-06-01].
116
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

