Hazard Notifications Around a Vehicle Using Seat Actuators 
Akimasa Suzuki, Kaoru Horie, Satoru Otobe 
 and Yoshitoshi Murata 
Department of Information Science, 
Iwate Prefectural University 
020-0693, Sugo, Japan 
suzuki_a@iwate-pu.ac.jp 
Shoma Fujimura 
Ad-Sol Nissin Corporation, 
Kawasaki-shi, 210-0804, 
Kanagawa, Japan 
oaurn85ns@outlook.jp 
Abstract—This paper examines the robustness of our proposed 
haptic notification system against the different types and layers 
used for driving seat cushions. While many car manufacturers 
provide useful side and rear collision warning systems with 
sound alarms or visual monitors, the addition of similar 
notifications can confuse a driver because they already need to 
be aware of many visual targets such as mirrors, monitors, and 
environmental sounds. Therefore, we have investigated a 
haptic notification system that uses the driver’s buttocks. The 
results show that drivers can correctly identify the directions 
of five vibrating motors, three intensity settings, and three 
obstacle types (i.e., pedestrians, vehicles, and motorcycles). In 
this paper, we investigate whether drivers can discriminate the 
direction, intensity of vibrations, and vibration patterns of the 
system through their buttocks to identify the obstacle direction, 
degree of risk, and the type of obstacle, even if the vibrations 
are attenuated by the seat cushion. The results indicate the 
high potential of the haptic sensation system to notify the 
driver of obstacles, especially those located in the blind spot. 
Keywords-Vibro-Tactile Notification; Type of Obstacle; 
Buttocks; Acoustic Haptic Actuators; Seat Cushion. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper is an extension of the work initially presented 
in the The Ninth International Conference on Advances in 
Vehicular Systems, Technologies and Applications [1]. 
There has been considerable research in investigating 
accident prevention systems for vehicles, particularly in 
relation to developing driving support systems that will 
transition to autonomous driving systems. However, to 
realize autonomous driving systems, we must overcome 
problems related to cyber-security measures and traffic laws 
(e.g., responsibility for accidents by autonomous cars [2]), 
which could take time. Additionally, as many people enjoy 
driving, the demand for manual driving as a hobby is 
unlikely to fade. Driving support systems will thus remain an 
important feature. Moreover, despite the high number of 
driving support systems used in Japan, many fatal vehicle 
accidents are caused by violations of safe driving practices, 
such as failing to keep eyes on the road, careless driving, and 
failing to make safety checks [3], thus highlighting the need 
to develop more techniques that support drivers.  
To develop a support system that helps drivers to avoid 
vehicle accidents, the system needs to quickly and accurately 
sense information and notify the driver so that he/she can 
make a rapid judgement. Most car manufacturers now install 
highly accurate sensor systems at the front and rear of their 
vehicles at a low cost. Support systems located at the front of 
a vehicle use vision [4] or radar [5] sensors to prevent 
careless driving and overcome a driver’s failure to make 
safety checks, while support systems located at the rear of a 
vehicle use sensors and notification systems to monitor a 
driver’s rear view and blind spot [6]. These systems use 
sound or visual images to alert drivers to potential hazards. 
Visual images can quickly notify a driver about many 
kinds of information using shapes and colors. As vision is 
the dominant human sense [7], many notifications rely on the 
driver’s vision, including the front view, mirror, tachometer, 
speedometer, navigation system, and indicators. There is a 
concern, therefore, that excessive visual information could 
affect a driver’s capacity to adhere to safe driving practices 
[3]. We thus consider that developing an additional visual 
notification may cause the driver to confuse it with 
conventional visual notifications. 
Many conventional systems also provide information to 
drivers in the form of sounds (e.g., alerts by horn; car audio, 
including radio; and alarms for reverse gear, pre-collision, 
and lane departure). Directions presented by a satellite 
navigation system are also expressed through the vehicle’s 
stereo system. To avoid confusing the driver, we considered 
creating different sounds, pitches, and patterns for each type 
of obstacle; however, these would not be intuitive. 
Additionally, notifying a driver using speech would be too 
slow to get communicate the message in time. It is also 
difficult to apply a system using sound on a late-night bus 
travelling long distances because sleeping passengers may 
get up by the alert. 
Therefore, we proposed a system that uses haptic 
sensations to quickly notify drivers of possible hazards or 
obstacles surrounding the vehicle [8]. Our proposed system 
has higher immediacy and directional resolution than 
notifications using sounds. As no driver notification system 
currently uses haptic sensations, we do not have to consider 
conflicts in this area. Our proposed notification system uses 
vibro-tactile haptic devices that remain in constant contact 
with the driver’s buttocks. We evaluated the system’s 
robustness against cushion type for determining the direction 
and intensity of vibrations and road conditions. A high 
intensity expresses the extent of the danger and the direction 
of the vibration indicates the location of the hazard. The 
system can also alert the driver to different types of obstacles, 
such as a pedestrian, car, or bike. The results indicated a high 
potential for notifying drivers of obstacles, especially those 
located in the blind spot. 
To support safe car driving, our proposed haptic 
notification system installing vibration alerts into a driving 
85
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

seat. This paper examines its robustness against different 
types and layers used for driving seat cushions. We also 
discussed vibrating waveforms by using a real 4-wheel 
vehicle, and illuminated higher accuracy on notification by 
using category-deformed and normalized waves between 
each actuator than real and certain vibration waves, 
respectively. Moreover, we discussed notifying accuracies of 
our system from an experiment combined with conventional 
notification system with a display and a sound speaker. From 
this experiment, we also discussed whether our system is 
obstructive or useful to driving. 
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. 
Section II discusses relevant studies, Section III describes the 
proposed system, Section IV describes the modulated 
waveforms generated for precise notification, Section V 
presents the experiments to test the robustness of the system, 
Section VI describes the system mounted on a real 4-wheel 
vehicle, Section VII describes normalization by using 
deformed waveform, Section VIII describes the discussion 
for combination with conventional visual and sound alert 
system, and Section IX presents our conclusions. 
II. 
RELEVANT STUDIES 
Many practical driving support systems apply image 
sensors [4], radar [5], and ultrasonic sensors [9] to detect 
pedestrians and other vehicles with high accuracy. Around-
view monitors are increasingly being used for automatic 
parking [10] and lane-detection systems are being applied 
using three-dimensional (3-D) laser imaging detection and 
ranging (LIDAR) [11]. Despite their weakness to other noise 
sound, ultrasonic sensors can now be installed in driving 
support systems for a low cost, while the cost of 3-D LIDAR 
is also dropping. These devices can be used to detect not 
only the presence of an obstacle, but also the type of obstacle 
(e.g., pedestrian, vehicle, or motorcycle). However, in this 
research, we focus on creating a notification method to alert 
drivers to the potential hazards, rather than the development 
of a sensor system. 
Previous research on evaluating seat comfort has 
demonstrated that buttocks are sensitive to tactile sensations 
[12]. Although not used in the driving seat, some studies 
have reported the effectiveness of vibro-tactile devices for 
notifying drivers of directions when using a wearable device 
such as a belt [13]. The directions of obstacles could be 
detected by using vibro-tactile devices on the seatback [14] 
because the back is more sensitive than the buttocks; 
however, as drivers need to lean against the backrest, the 
system might have a negative effect on the driver’s posture. 
A vehicle notification device using vibro-tactile devices on 
the buttocks was therefore developed [15], although the 
system was unable to indicate the direction of a hazard to the 
driver. 
In a gaming device, vibro-tactile devices are used to link a 
virtual object with reality [16]. Therefore, we consider 
applying a vibro-tactile device to notify the driver of 
essential information related to potential hazards based on 
the intensity and direction of vibrations. Tactile sensations 
can include rubbing, pain, pressure, and warmth. On the 
streets, tapping on the shoulder is a popular method for 
pedestrians to alert each other. To our knowledge, this study 
is the first to notify a driver of information such as the 
direction of a hazard in relation to the vehicle, the extent of 
the urgency based on the intensity of the vibration, and the 
type of hazard by the vibration pattern expressed using 
vibro-tactile devices located below the buttocks. 
III. 
VIBRO-TACTILE NOTIFICATION SYSTEM AROUND A 
VEHICLE USING SEAT ACTUATORS 
We will indicate our proposed vibro-tactile notification 
system in this section. 
A. System Architecture 
For our proposed system, we utilized a vibrating motor 
with an ACOUSTICHAPTICTM actuator developed by 
Foster Electric Company Limited. The acoustic haptic 
actuator is a kind of woofer that comes into direct contact 
with the driver’s buttocks. Fig. 1 shows the hardware layout 
for this system. The edited waves were played on a PC, and 
the five actuators vibrated on the seat, as shown in Fig. 1. 
These actuators contact with the back of the driver’s knees. 
We used the AP05 amplifier produced by Fostex. 
In this experiment, we administered four vibrating 
patterns of the same intensity, representing different obstacle 
types, to fifteen participants. The participants were asked to 
identify the type of obstacle from the vibration pattern. We 
conducted five trials in a random order for each participant. 
The vibrations included the sound of footsteps from leather 
shoes [17], the sound of a V6 engine revving up [18], the 
sound of a bus driving uphill [19], an idling sound [20] as 
obstacle types of pedestrian, small and large four-wheeled 
vehicles, and a motorcycle, respectively. We hypothesized 
that drivers would intuitively recognize the type from the 
vibration pattern of the real sound. 
As shown in Fig. 1, up to three layers of urethane cushions 
were placed over the actuator to evaluate the robustness. The 
thickness of each layer is 2 cm. We also define “layer 0” to 
mean that nothing is placed over the actuators. We utilize 
three types of urethane cushion, with specifications shown in 
Table I. We defined 20 ss, 35 s, and BZ-10 constructed by 
Toyo Quality One as soft, highly resilient, and less resilient 
cushions, respectively, as shown in Table I. 
We generated vibration waveforms from these sound data, 
to decreasing up to 2 kHz and increasing between 55 Hz and 
110 Hz, which are resonance frequencies of the 
ACOUSTICHAPTICTM 
actuator. 
Fig. 
2 
shows 
the 
waveforms of these four vibrating patterns, i.e., (a) a 
pedestrian, (b) a motorcycle, (c) a small 4-wheel vehicle, and 
 
Figure  1. Hardware layout of the notification system using an 
ACOUSTICHAPTICTM actuator. 
Wav. data
Actuator
0
1
2
3
layers
PC
5.1ch
Adaptor
FRONT
REAR
CENTER
Amp.
L
R
Amp.
L
R
Amp.
L
R
Actuator 1
Actuator 2
Actuator 3
Actuator 4
Actuator 5
Seat Cushion
86
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(d) a large 4-wheel vehicle. The horizontal and vertical axes 
indicate the time and amplitude, respectively. A waveform of 
the pulse vibration with a walking frequency of 0.4-s 
intervals was used for the pedestrian. We applied the 55-Hz 
and 110-Hz resonance frequencies to large and small four-
wheeled vehicles, respectively. The amplitude of the 
waveforms was normalized because we utilized the different 
amplitudes (i.e., the intensity of the vibration) to express the 
urgency of the degree of risk or the distance to the obstacles. 
B. Abilities of the Proposed Notification Systems 
 A study of our proposed conventional system proved it to 
be effective [8]. However, the vibrating motor used in our 
conventional system was unable to assign different vibration 
patterns to different obstacle types. Fig. 3 shows the correct 
answer rates for (a) the direction, (b) vibration intensity, and 
(c) both direction and intensity using the vibrating motor. 
When participants took longer than 5 s to respond, measured 
using a stopwatch, we considered it to be too slow and 
treated their answer as incorrect. In the correct answers 
shown in Fig. 3, the response times of all trials indicate that 
drivers could understand the information of the surrounding 
obstacles in less than 1 s. The correct answer rates for 
direction, intensity, and both direction and intensity in all 
route types were 84.4%, 72.6%, and 62.2%, respectively [8]. 
Fig. 3(a) shows that the drivers produced the highest 
number of correct answers when driving on the winding 
local road, followed by the arterials and the collector roads; 
however, as Fig. 3 (b) shows, the accuracy of the drivers’ 
responses for the intensity were in the reverse order. This 
difference is likely because the vehicle’s vibrations when 
travelling at low speeds could confuse the driver. The 
pressure between the vibrating motor and the buttocks could 
also change during the trials because the driver had to 
constantly control the accelerator and brake on the winding 
road. Nevertheless, the participants were able to determine 
the direction and intensity of over 50% of the vibrations 
when driving on the proposed seat. 
For determining obstacle types, we applied the 
ACOUSTICHAPTICTM actuator. Figs. 4 and 5 indicate the 
correct answer rates for the four types of obstacles. The 
graph also shows the rate for each trial by type. The vertical 
and horizontal axes in Figs. 4 and 5 show respectively the 
correct answer rate and vibration type of the waveforms 
shown in Fig. 2. Fig. 4 presents the correct answer rates 
based on the waveforms of the four obstacles types. As Fig. 
4 shows, the correct answer rates improved during the trial, 
except for those for the four-wheeled vehicle (small). All 
participants were able to identify the pedestrian and 
motorcycle vibrations; however, they could only identify 
 
Figure  2. Waveforms of the vibrations for the four obstacle types. 
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
               
(s)
(b)Motorcycle
(a)Pedestrian
(c)Small 4-wheel vehicle
(d)Large 4-wheel vehicle
 
Figure 3. Correct answer rates on local winding roads, arterials, and 
congested collectors. 
TABLE I. CUSHION MATERIALS FOR EVALUATION. 
 
Soft 
Highly 
Resilient 
Less 
Resilient 
Constructor 
Toyo 
Quality 
One 
Toyo 
Quality One 
Toyo 
Quality One 
Product name 
20 ss 
35 s 
BZ-10 
Density 
(kg/m%) 
20 ± 2 
55 ± 2 
35 ± 3 
Hardness (N) 
30 ± 15 
45 ± 15 
60 ± 15 
Tensile intensity 
(kPa) 
50 ≤ 
60 ≤ 
30 ≤ 
Elongation  
(%) 
200 ≤ 
100 ≤ 
80 ≤ 
Tensile intensity 
(N/cm) 
3.0 ≤ 
2.0 ≤ 
2.0 ≤ 
Compressive 
residual strain 
(%) 
10 ≥ 
12 ≥ 
15 ≥ 
 
0.0  
10.0  
20.0  
30.0  
40.0  
50.0  
60.0  
70.0  
80.0  
90.0  
100.0  
(a) Direction 
(b) Vibration Strength 
(c) Both 
Correct Answer Rate (%)
Local Winding Road 
Arterials 
Congested Collectors 
 
Figure 4. Correct answer rates for notification using haptic actuators. 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Pedestrian
Motorcycle
4-wheel
Vehicle
(Small)
4-wheel
Vehicle
(Large)
Correct Answer Rate (%)
Obstacle Type
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
87
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

50% of the other types of vibrations because the vibration 
patterns were too similar for them to sense the differences. 
However, after combining the large and small four-wheeled 
vehicles, the participants could detect the three patterns with 
high accuracy. Fig. 5 shows the results for three obstacle 
types, integrating the large and small four-wheeled vehicles. 
The correct answer rate reached over 90% at the fifth trial, as 
shown in Fig. 5. 
IV. 
MODULATION FOR PRECISE NOTIFICATION 
From the waveforms shown in Fig. 2, we generated 
modulated waves for precise notification. We determined the 
waves with a frequency an octave lower than the original 
wave as the modulated waves for more clearly feeling the 
differences of vibration. Figs. 6(a) and (b) show spectra of 
the original and modulated waves for large four-wheeled 
vehicles. The horizontal and vertical axes indicate the 
frequency and power spectrum, respectively. The spectra of 
the modulated waves consist of sine waves under 1 kHz. 
For the intensity expression, we utilized three intensity 
waves, as shown in Table II, which shows three vibrating 
volumes corresponding to three steps of intensity (e.g., small, 
medium, and large). We applied 8 dB intervals between the 
three steps, and we prepared the signals with the three steps 
of volume on each modulated waveform for the three 
obstacle types: pedestrians, motorcycles, and four-wheel 
vehicles. 
V. 
EXPERIMENTS FOR ROBUSTNESS AGAINST CUSHION 
TYPE  
We evaluated the robustness against cushion type in a 
near-practical environment. As shown in Fig. 1, we mounted 
a vibrating car seat on a test vehicle for evaluation by five 
test drivers with considerable driving experience. The test 
drivers reported the vibration intensity, direction, and 
obstacle type when they sensed the vibration. Before the 
evaluation, the test drivers felt nine types of vibrations (i.e., 
three intensities for the three obstacle types) at each actuator, 
shown as Actuator 1 to Actuator 5 in Fig. 1. The bold line in 
Fig. 7 indicates the experimental route, shown by Google 
Map [21]. The actuator is vibrated at random times while the 
test drivers drive on a circuit track, shown in Fig. 7, at speeds 
of less than 20 km/s. Answers were only considered valid 
when received within 5 s of the vibration. 
A. Experimental Results 
Fig. 8 shows the average ratings for comfort of each seat 
layer and material. The vertical and horizontal axes represent 
the average comfort rating and the cushion layer and material, 
respectively. The ratings were ranked according to the 
softness and resilience (high or low) of the seat cushion up to 
several layers. The test drivers tended to evaluate the seat 
based on whether they were conscious of the actuators. 
The experimental results indicate the importance of 
retaining a high notification ability in a thick cushion even 
though a synthetic judgment is required for other evaluations, 
 
Figure 6. Sound spectra for 4-wheeled vehicles (a) before and (b) after 
modulation. 
(a) Original Waves
Power Spectrum (dB)
Frequency(Hz)
(b)Modulated Wave (octave lower)
Frequency(Hz)
Power Spectrum(dB)
TABLE II. SOUND VOLUME CORRESPONDING TO THREE 
STEPS OF VIBRATION INTENSITY. 
 
Volume (dB) 
Small 
−16 
Medium 
−8 
Large 
0 
 
 
Figure 7. Route for the driving experiment. 
 
Figure 5. Correct answer rate for obstacle type notification on three 
obstacle types 
 
0
20
40
60
80
100
Pedestrian
Motorcycle
4-wheel Vehicle
Correct Answer Rate (%)
Obstacle Type
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
88
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

such as ease of driving. 
Figs. 9 to 12 show the results for robustness against 
cushion type and present the correct answer rates as relative 
values based on a correct answer rate for layer 0. The vertical 
and horizontal axes present the correct answer rate and 
cushion layer and material, respectively. Figs. 10 to 12 also 
present the standard deviations for all answers. 
Fig. 9 shows the differences between the correct answer 
rates for the intensity, direction, and obstacle types between 
layer 0 and the other layers. The results show that the correct 
answers for the highly resilient cushion decrease as the 
layers increase; however, the other cushion materials 
maintain robustness even with an increased cushion 
thickness.  
B. Intensity Expression 
Fig. 10 shows the average differences in the correct 
answer rates calculated from the answers relating to the 
intensity of the vibrations (e.g., small, medium, or large, as 
shown in Table II). The more layers the seat cushion has, the 
more the correct answer rates decrease, except for the less 
resilient cushion. A high standard deviation is obtained for 
the results of the less resilient cushion, although the trend of 
the correct answer rates for the layers is different. Therefore, 
it cannot be said that the number of correct answers will 
increase for more layers in the less resilient cushion.  
C. Direction Expression 
Fig. 11 shows the average differences in the correct 
answer rates, which are calculated from only the answers 
relating to direction (e.g., left corresponding to Actuator 1 
and right corresponding to Actuator 5, shown in Fig. 1). In 
this experiment, the test drivers gave the direction by stating 
“right”, “right back”, “back”, “left back”, or “left” when they 
noticed the vibration. The results shown in Fig. 11 confirm 
substantial differences between the different seat cushions. 
D. Obstacle Type Expression 
Fig. 12 shows the average differences in the correct 
answer rates calculated from the answers relating to the 
obstacle types (e.g., pedestrians, motorcycles, or four-
wheeled vehicles, shown in Fig. 5). The more layers there 
are, the more the correct answers decrease, except for the 
soft cushion. In the case of the soft type with 0 layers, it was 
difficult to judge when the actuators made direct contact with 
the buttocks based on the features of the waveform because 
the soft type of seat sank more easily than the other types. As 
a result, the correct answer rates on the soft cushion could be 
increased. 
Based on the results shown in Figs. 9 to 12, the total 
correct answer rates are strongly influenced by the intensity 
of the vibrations; thus, the robustness is demonstrated 
without to the intensity steps of the vibrations. 
VI. 
HAZARD NOTIFICATION SYSTEM MOUNTED ON A REAL 
VEHICLE 
We discussed the accuracy of our system using Nissan 
MARCH as a real vehicle by experiments shown in Fig. 13 
(a). Actuators are installed in a MARCH’s seat, shown in Fig. 
13 (b), based on conventional our experiments. Actuator 1 to 
5, shown in Fig. 13 (a), are mounted in 40mm depth to touch 
the surface on the actuators at driver’s buttock, and layout of 
each actuator is same as Fig. 1. Width between Actuator 1 
and Actuator 5, Actuator 2 and Actuator 4 are 20cm, 
 
Figure 9. Correct answer rates for each seat material. 
 
 
. Correct answer rates for each seat material 
-50 
-30 
-10 
10 
30 
50 
Soft 
Highly Resilient  
Less Resilient  
Correct Answer Rate (%) 
Seat Material  
1 rayer  
2 layers 
3 layers 
 
Figure 10. Correct answer rates for intensity for each seat material. 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
-50 
-30 
-10 
10 
30 
50 
Soft 
Highly Resilient  
Less Resilient  
Standard Deviation 
Correct Answer Rate (%) 
Seat Material  
1 layer  
2 layers  
3 layers  
Standard Deviation 
 
Figure 11. Correct answer rates for direction for each seat material. 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
-50 
-30 
-10 
10 
30 
50 
Soft 
Highly Resilient  
Less Resilient  
Standard Deviation 
Correct Answer Rate (%) 
Seat Material  
1 layer  
2 layers 
3 layers 
Standard Deviation 
 
Figure 12. Correct answer rates for obstacle type for each seat material. 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
-50 
-30 
-10 
10 
30 
50 
Soft 
Highly Resilient  
Less Resilient  
Standard Deviation 
Correct Answer Rate (%) 
Seat Material  
1 layer  
2 layers 
3 layers 
Standard Deviation 
 
Figure 8. Comfort ratings for each seat layer and material. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
0 layers 
1 layer 
2 layers 
3 layers 
0 layers 
1 layer 
2 layers 
3 layers 
0 layers 
1 layer 
2 layers 
3 layers 
Soft 
Highly Resilient  
Less Resilient  
Average Rating  
Seat Material 
89
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

respectively, because standard buttock is mounted on the 
actuators. The seat is covered by normal MARCH’s seat 
cover when we conduct experiments.  
VII. NORMALIZATION BY USING DEFORMED WAVEFORM 
To develop the correct answer rate, we considered 
sensitivity on each part of our buttock on each Actuator 1 to 
Actuator 5. Therefore, strength on each actuator was 
normalized by an experiment. Moreover, we changed to 
exaggerated waveform for more simply for easy to recognize. 
A. Deformed Waveform for Easy Understanding 
From the study written in Fig.5, higher correct answer rate 
on pedestrian was obtained than other obstacle types due to 
easier notification than other vibration waves. That is, we 
expect to develop accuracy on the obstacle types of 
Motorcycle and 4-wheel Vehicle if their waveforms are more 
different each other. Therefore, we utilize deformed waves 
for Motorcycle and 4-wheel Vehicle to develop the accuracy. 
Fig. 14 (a) (b) shows deformed waves from Fig. 2 (b) and 
(d), respectively. Motorcycle is expressed by intermittent 
waveform as deformed motorcycle waveform, such as Fig. 
14 (a), however interval is shorter than the waveform of the 
pedestrian as shown in Fig. 2 (a). In contrast, the waveform 
of 4-wheel vehicle is given by constant waveform to clearly 
express the deference between each other. The vibration 
waves are created by 55 Hz carrier waves of resonance 
frequency. 
B. Evaluation for Correct Answer Rate by Using Deformed 
Waves 
An experiment was conducted to evaluate accuracy of 
notification for obstacle types on moving vehicle. 9 drivers 
tested two types of vibration (e.g., conventional waves 
shown in Fig.2 and our proposed deformed waves shown in 
Fig. 14) in this experiment. Actuators’ strength was same as 
Table II. The participants drove the road shown in Fig.7 by 
the car shown in Fig. 13, and answer obstacle type from 
random vibrations within 3 obstacle types, 3 strength and 5 
directions. Vibration timing is not told to drivers. Drivers 
answered when they feel the vibration. We treated a result as 
incorrect in case drivers did not answer within 5 seconds 
from start vibration. 
Fig. 15 shows correct answer rate of conventional and the 
deformed waves on each obstacle type as the result of this 
experiment. A line in Fig. 15 shows the average of 3 
obstacles.  The correct answer rate was generally developed 
to over 90 % by using deformed waves. High notification 
ability for obstacle types was therefore confirmed by using 
proposed deformed waves from an experiment with real 
vehicle. 
C. Normalizing Method 
We evaluated accuracy on strength notification by using 
normalized strength. The strength was normalized based on 
conventional strength shown in Table II. The medium 
strength of -8dB shown in Table II is apply as medium 
decibel value between the large and the small decibel. We 
therefore also apply new medium strength of -5 dB, that is 
same magnification between large to medium and medium to 
small, and compare with conventional medium waves of -
8dB. 
We conduct the experiment for 9 drivers on the seat, 
shown in Fig.13, without driving. In this experiment, volume 
of the vibration waves for 4-wheel vehicles and Motorcycle 
are gradually decreased from conventional strength shown in 
Table II, after we gave the vibration on each strength for 
pedestrian by an actuator. Drivers answered the nearest 
strength of vibration for pedestrian from the decreased 
strength on other vibrations (i.e., 4-wheel vehicles and 
Motorcycle). 
D. Experimental Result by Normalized Waves 
Fig. 16 shows an experimental result for strength on each 
obstacle. Horizontal and vertical axis denotes categories on 
each strength we gave for the drivers and average strength 
that drivers answered as relative output level from the 
strength for pedestrian, respectively. We also removed 
outlier of the answer, which is over from 1.5 times to 
interquartile range.  
Fig. 16 obviously indicates the difference between the 
obstacle types especially 4-wheel vehicle against pedestrian. 
 
Figure 14. Deformed vibration waves for our system 
(b) 4-wheel Vehicle
(a) Motorcycle
 
Figure 15. Accuracy on category notification by using deformed waves 
 
Figure 13. Seat actuators mounted on a real vehicle 
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Conventional
Deformed
Correct Answer Rate on Category
Waveform
4-wheel Vehicle
Motorcycle
Pedestrian
Average
(a)A Vehicle for the experiment
(MARCH / NISSAN)
(b)Actuators mounted 
on real seat
20cm
20cm
16cm
16cm
28cm
Actuator 1
Actuator 2
Actuator 4
Actuator 3
Actuator 5
90
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

By the experiment, -4dB and -3dB strength on 4-wheel 
vehicle and Motorcycle are obtained as same as the large 
strength for pedestrian, respectively. -12dB and -9dB 
strength on 4-wheel vehicle and Motorcycle are obtained as 
same as the medium strength (based on -8dB) for pedestrian, 
respectively. On the other hand, -9dB and -7dB strength on 
4-wheel vehicle and Motorcycle are obtained in the case of 
the medium strength based on -5dB, respectively. Finally -
19dB and -17dB strength on 4-wheel vehicle and Motorcycle 
are also obtained as same as the small strength for pedestrian, 
respectively. We applied these strengths as normalized 
strength. 
E. Experiment for the Evaluation of the Normalization 
We conducted an experiment for evaluating accuracy of 
notification by using the normalized strength. Others 9 
drivers from previous experiments are participate with this 
experiment. The drivers answered which strength of large, 
medium, and small is vibrated from 45 pattern of vibration 
(i.e., combination of 3 strength, 5 directions, and 3 obstacle 
types) at random 
Experimental sequence is same as Fig 15. Fig. 17 shows 
correct answer rate of strength on each conventional setting 
(i.e., strength is the same between all waveform of obstacle) 
shown in Table II, normalized setting based on decibel value, 
and normalized setting based on magnification, as the 
experimental result. Each rate of large, medium, and small 
strength in Fig. 17 is the total result of vibration with any 
direction and obstacle types. A line on Fig. 17 indicates 
average on 3 correct answer rates on the strengths.  
Average of correct answer rate is under 80% in the case of 
conventional setting, however, by normalization, the average 
is increased. Focused on each strength, especially the 
strength of large and small is increased compared with 
medium strength. Correct answer rate of medium strength is 
smaller than other strength because driver answer incorrectly 
to both large and small. This tendency is almost same 
between any settings, and the correct answer rate is not 
improved. In the case of normalization based on 
magnification, the medium strength is nearer to large 
strength than the medium strength based on decibel value; 
therefore, the correct answer rate of large and small is 
decreased and increased respectively against normalization 
based on decibel value.  We could not confirm a relation 
between correct answer rate and direction of actuators. 
The notification with large strength is the most important 
to alert of all strength. We resulted normalization using 
medium decibel level is the most effective to realize high 
accuracy on notification because of the highest correct 
answer rate of large strength and average of all settings. 
VIII. COMBINATION WITH CONVENTIONAL VISUAL AND 
SOUND ALERT SYSTEM 
Although enough accurate alert system was realized, more 
accurate information for hazard will be expected in case of 
with conventional visual and sound alert system. We 
experimented for accuracy if conventional system is added to 
our proposed system. 
A. Experimental Visual and Sound Notification System 
Layout of experimental combination system is shown in 
Fig. 18. This system consists of PC for control alerts shown 
in Fig. 18(i), 3.5-inch monitor for indicating image shown in 
Fig. 18 (ii), a speaker for sound alert shown in Fig. 18 (iii), 
and our proposed system using ACHOSTIC HAPTIC 
Actuators shown in Fig. 18 (iv). Information of obstacle 
types, and distance and direction from the obstacle is sent 
from the PC to these media.  
We utilized 4-wheel vehicle, motorcycle, and pedestrian 
sign as shown in Fig. 18 (a), (b) and (c), respectively. 3 dots 
 
Figure 16. Sound volumes which research participants answer the strength 
as same as the strength of pedestrian 
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
Large(0dB)
Medium(-8dB)
Small(-16dB)
Medium(-5dB)
Relative Output  Level (dB)
Steps of Strength
4-weel Vehicle
Motorcycle
 
Figure 17. Correct answer rates on strength by normalized waves 
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Conventional
Normalized Based on
Decibel value
(Medium:-8dB)
Normalized Badsed
on Magnification
(Medium:-5dB)
Correct Answer Rate on Strength
Adjusted strength
Large
Medium
Small
Average
 
Figure 18. System layout for the combination system 
(i) 
(ii) 
PC 
Small Monitor 
Audio Speaker  
Motorcycle
Pedestrian
4-wheel vehicle





(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Small
Medium Large
Notification by Image 
(Horizontal Plan) 
Notification by 
Sound Alert 
Notification 
by Haptic 
Vibration on 
a Buttock 
(iii) 
Actuators
Front
Back





(iv) 
91
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

corresponding strength are displayed on each direction 
depending on Actuator 1 to Actuator 5, shown as ① to ⑤ 
in Fig. 18. Vibration waveform is the same as normalized 
waves based on decibel shown in Fig. 16. Sound alert is 
utilized as same as conventional practical systems. 
B. Evaluation for Combination Notification  
We experimented to evaluate effectiveness of the 
combination system by based on drivers’ subjective feelings. 
8 drivers, whose age is 18 to 22, ware participated with this 
experiment. The system alerts information simultaneously by 
3 medias when they drive a paved route shown in Fig. 7. 
Drivers answered not only strength, obstacle types, and 
directions, but also a questionnaire about priority between 
the alert medias to decision, and interference and necessity of 
our notification method using vibration. 
As a result, by using multimedia notification, correct 
answer rates of all strength, direction, and obstacle types 
increased near to 100% even if low correct answer rate was 
obtained by notification with only vibration. All driver 
answered when we gave alerts in this experiment.  
Fig. 19 shows order in which drivers noticed from 3 
medias. Horizontal and vertical axis shows a kind of medias 
on each situation and the number of drivers, respectively. 
The situation in the Fig. 19 (a) and (b) is normal driving 
situation with less risk for incidents and situation when a 
driver pay attention to other obstacles, signal, sign, or road 
condition, respectively. Most drivers ware firstly notified by 
sound and vibration in the case of normal and attention 
situation as shown in Fig. 19 (a) and Fig. 19 (b), respectively. 
In the case of Fig. 19 (b), drivers finally confirmed the alert 
by display because driver’s payed attention to others by eyes. 
Fig. 20 also shows the driver’s most decisive media 
between 3 medias on each first awareness, direction, strength, 
and obstacle types. Horizontal and vertical axis shows a kind 
of medias on each situation and the number of drivers, 
respectively. Most drivers firstly awared by sound of any 
situation. In the case of Fig. 20 (a), strength, direction and 
obstacle types are decided by image shown in display, 
however, in the case of Fig. 20 (b), drivers chosed as 
decisive media by vibration more than Fig. 20 (a). Driver is 
difficult to watch a display when drivers pay attention 
around own vehicle. In this experiment, drivers recomfirmed 
by display on normal situation shifted from the attention 
situation. Our proposed system using vibration can 
imediatelly alert the obstacle type, distance and direction 
from obstacle, therefore the “Vibration” shown in Fig. 20 (b) 
was increased. Therefore, multimedia notification including 
our proposed method is possibilly effective for emergent 
notification with an insident especially in the case of paying 
attention to others from this experiment.  
Fig. 21 and Fig. 22 indicate answer for a questionnaire by 
drivers. Fig. 21 shows subjective impressions for distinguish 
between notifications of strength, direction, and obstacle 
type. In the case of Fig.18 (a), 87% of driver can be notice 
with extremely distinguished by visual image. However, 
Fig.18 (b) shows 1 step-decreased result of distinguishes 
from Fig.18 (a). Fig. 22 also shows the result of 
questionnaire about recognition and interference by using 
multimedia. As shown in Fig. 22, 63 % of drivers answer 
that it is easier to recognised information by both vibration, 
visual images and sound alert than alert with only sound and 
visual images. 88 % of drivers answer that they can drive 
without interference even if both visual, sound and vibration 
is activated. Therefore, notification by using vibration is 
 
Figure 21. Subjective impression about distinguish for (a) visual image 
and (b) vibration 
87%
13%
0%
0%
(a) Notification with visual image
Extremely distinguished
Moderately distinguished
Slightly confused
Extremely confused
0%
87%
13%
0%
(b) Notification with vibration
Extremely distinguished
Moderately distinguished
Slightly confused
Extremely confused
 
Figure 19. Priority of notifying media for notification 
0
2
4
6
8
Vision
Sound Vibration
Vision
Sound Vibration
Number of Person 
(a)Normal
(b)Attention to Environments
1st
2nd
3rd
 
Figure 20. The most decisive media 
0
2
4
6
8
10
Vision
Sound
Vibration
Vision
Sound
Vibration
Number of Person
(a)Normal
(b)Attention to Environments
First awareness
Direction
Strength
Obstacle types
92
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

effective in the case of multimedia system. 
IX. 
CONCLUSION 
We examined the robustness of a vibro-tactile device by 
collaborating with a car manufacturer to install acoustic 
haptic actuators into the seat cushion of an actual automotive 
vehicle. 
We proposed a vibro-tactile notification system using 
vibrating motors to notify drivers of hazards around a vehicle, 
which were sensed using conventional sensors. The 
effectiveness of this method was evaluated from the 
viewpoint of resolution of intensity and direction and 
robustness against cushion type for determining the road 
conditions. The vibration pattern also enabled drivers to 
recognize the type of hazard, such as an approaching 
pedestrian or motorcycle. 
We conducted several experiments involving driving on 
public roads in a car with seven vibrating motors installed 
under the driver’s seat. By applying acoustic haptic actuators 
as a vibro-tactile device, test drivers could detect three types 
of vibrating patterns, indicating different types of obstacles: 
pedestrians, motorbikes, and four-wheeled vehicles. We also 
determined that drivers’ notification of the intensity, 
direction, and hazard type could be improved over time 
because they could learn from experiencing the vibration 
alerts. 
The results indicated the high potential of using a haptic 
sensation device to notify drivers of obstacles in their blind 
spots by creating a vibration against the buttocks. The 
experimental results, shown in Figs. 9 to 12, illuminated that 
the intensity of the vibration, which should indicate the level 
of the hazard, could not be considered in the robustness test. 
By reconfiguring the intensity, as shown in Table II, the 
robustness could be improved, which we will investigate in 
future work. 
We also evaluated our system by using real vehicle. We 
conduct experiments to evaluate for proposed deformed 
vibration waves and normalizing method between the 
waveform. From this experiment, an accuracy of our 
notification method is developed to over 80% by using 
normalized waves based on decibel value. 
In the case of applying for multimedia system with sound 
speaker and visual display, more accuracy of information for 
obstacle around own vehicle was obtained. Moreover, 
interference by using multimedia was not confirmed and 
multimedia notification including our proposed method is 
possibilly effective for emergent notification with an insident 
especially in the case of paying attention to others from this 
experiment.  
The proposed system is expected to reduce accidents by 
notifying drivers of other drivers and obstacles. In future 
works, we will conduct these experiments using more test 
drivers to compare elderly people with very young people or 
to observe its effectiveness with truck drivers and people 
with different levels of attention or tiredness. We will also 
evaluate the operational difficulties of the system in case of 
an emergency. We will also corroborate the visual and audio 
notifications of our system and examine the effectiveness 
for making quick driving decisions with intuitive 
notifications. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was supported by MEXT KAKENHI Grant 
Number JP 16723884 and Foster Electric Company, Limited. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
A. Suzuki, Y. Murata and S. Fujimura, "Robustness Against 
Hazard Notifications Around a Vehicle Using Seat 
Actuators," in The Eighth International Conference on 
Advances 
in 
Vehicular 
Systems, 
Technologies 
and 
Applications (VEHICULAR 2019), Rome, Italy, 2019. 
[2]  A. Hevelke and J. Nida-Rümelin, “Responsibility for crashes 
of autonomous vehicles: an ethical analysis,” Science and 
Engineering Ethics., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 619–630, June 2015.  
[3]  National Public Safety Commission and National Police 
Agency, “Traffic accidents situation (2017Oct.),” Dec. 2017. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.e-
stat.go.jp/SG1/estat/GL32020101.do?method=xlsDownload
&fileId=000008051596&releaseCount=1 2019.06.24 
[4]  Subaru of America, Inc., Dec. 2017. [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.subaru.com/engineering/eyesight.html 
2019.06.24 
[5]  Toyota Motor Sales, U.S.A., Inc., “SUZUKI GSX-S1000 
normal idling sound motorcycle,” Dec. 2017. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.toyota.com/safety-
sense/animation/pcs 2019.06.24 
[6]  Infineon Technologies AG, Dec. 2017. [Online]. Available 
 
Figure 22. Questionnaire for needs and interference 
0%
37%
63%
0%
Please select an applicable answer about recognization.
I recognized information by only
vibration.
I recognized information by only
visual images and sound alert.
It is more easy to recognised
information by both vibration,
visual images and sound alert.
I CANNOT recognized information
inspite of any information.
12%
0%
88%
0%
Please select an applicable answer about interfarence
Drive is available by only vibration
notification without interference
Drive is available by only
conventional method notification
without interference
Drive is available by both
conventional and vibration
notification without interference
Any notification could be
interfered.
93
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

from: 
https://www.infineon.com/cms/en/about-
infineon/press/market-news/2009/INFATV200905-
058.html?redirId=46231 2019.06.24 
[7]  I. Rock and J. Victor, “Vision and touch: an experimentally 
created conflict between the two senses,” Science, vol. 143, 
no. 3606, pp. 594–596, Feb. 1964. 
[8]  A. Suzuki, Y. Murata, and M. Hayashi, “Notification of 
hazards around a vehicle using seat actuators,” in 25th ITS 
World Congress, Copenhagen, Denmark, 17–21 Sep. 2018. 
[9]  L. Akonso, V. Milanés, C. Torre-Ferrero, J. Goboy, J. P. 
Oria, and T. de Pedro, “Ultrasonic sensors in urban traffic 
driving-aid systems,” Sensors, vol. 11, pp. 661–673, Sep. 
2011.  
[10]  J. K. Suhr and H. G. Jung, Fully-automatic Notification of 
Various Parking Slot Markings in Around View Monitor 
(AVM) 
Image 
Sequences, 
15th 
International 
IEEE 
Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), 
Anchorage, USA, 1244-1299, Sep. 2012.  
[11]  L. Qingquan, C. Long, L. Ming, S. Shih-Lung, and N. 
Andreas, “A sensor-fusion drivable-region and lane-
detection system for autonomous vehicle navigation in 
challenging road scenarios,” IEEE Vehicular Technology 
Society, vol. 63, no. 2, pp. 540–555, Feb. 2014.  
[12]  M. Tada, S. Sekiguchi, T. Nisimatsu, and E. Toba, 
“Measurement and evaluation of sitting comfort of 
automotive seat,” in Instrumentation and Measurement 
Technology Conference, 1998. IMTC/98. Conference 
Proceedings. IEEE, St. Paul, MN, USA, USA, 1998.  
[13]  A. Cassinelli, C. Reynolds, and M. Ishikawa, “Augmenting 
spatial awareness with the haptic radar,” i10th IEEE 
International Symposium on n Wearable Computers, 
Montreux, Switzerland, 2006.  
[14]  R. W. Lindeman, Y. Yanagida, J. L. Sibert, and R. Lavine, 
“Effective vibrotactile cueing in a visual search task,” IFIP 
TC13 International Conference on Human–Computer 
Interaction (INTERACT '03:), Zurich, Switzerland, 2003.  
[15]  C. C. Ltd., “Vehicle notification device, vehicle notification 
method 
and 
notification 
signal”. 
Japan 
Patent 
WO2017090355 A1, 1 6 2017. 
[16]  Alps Electric Co., Ltd., Dec, 2017. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.alps.com/prod/info/E/HTML/Haptic/ 2019.6.24 
[17]  M.-studio. official Channel, “Recommend sound effect, 
Footstep-Leather shoes 04 On-Jin” [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A5fGVbsHOfI 
2019.06.25. 
[18]  GYANTARO, 
“Vellfire 
V6 
3.5L 
0-138km/h 
Full 
Acceleration Test (Alphard 30 series),” [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WI4voS7YF6Y 
2019.06.25. 
[19]  TAKAPON CHANNEL, “Saihi tourist bus JAPAN” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EsJnG-E22ss 
2019.06.25.  
[20]  ahotakuro, “SUZUKI GSX-S1000 Normal Idling Sound 
Motorbike” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=c6pK2z9ANRk 
2019.06.25. 
[21]  Google, 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.google.com/maps/@39.7560755,141.1615498,
13.42z 2019.06.25. 
 
 
94
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

