Analysis of Impression in Exercise while Watching Avatar Movement
Taeko Tanaka and Hiroshi Hashimoto
Master Program of Innovation for Design and Engineering
Advanced Institute of Industrial Technology
Tokyo, JAPAN
Email:{b1315tt, hashimoto}@aiit.ac.jp
Sho Yokota
Department of Mechanical Engineering
Toyo University
Saitama, JAPAN
Email:s-yokota@toyo.jp
Abstract—This paper analyzes impression in an user exercise
while watching an avatar movement that performs interaction
where actions of human are imitated by using the skeleton model
obtained from Kinect sensor. In the interaction, the perception
of the level of delay, impression of delay and habituation to the
delayed movement of the avatar are investigated through some
exercising experiments where the human raises and lowers both
arms. For changing the level of delay, we prepare parameter sets
with ﬁve grades of ﬁlter of Kinect library, and also prepare the
“ precedent movement” and ”synchronic movement” to extract
the inherent impression for the delayed motion. From the results
of the questionnaire for subjects who experience the delayed
movement of the avatar, those visual impression are analyzed
by One-Way Repeated-Measures ANOVA. The novel habituation
based on a certain level in the experience was discussed as follows:
For the perception of the level of delay, it became clear that at
parameter 3 and above, about 40 % of subject sensed ”delayed
movement”. For the impression of delay, it came to light that the
subjects feel uncomfortable with the ”delayed movement”. For
the habituation to the delayed, we found that while the ”delayed
movement” gave a different impression than the ”synchronic
movement” and the ”precedent movement”, it cannot be said
that impression differed in the ”synchronic movement” and the
”precedent movement”
Keywords–avatar movement; visual impression; exercise; de-
layed movement; post hoc analysis; habituation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
This paper analyzes impression in an user exercise while
watching an avatar movement that imitates the user move-
ments, and is the extended version of the paper [1].
Avatar can be projected on a screen in real time by applying
humanoid Computer Graphics (CG) on the skeleton model
extracted from the human motion capture. By watching the
avatar, the user can evaluate one’s own motion in real time
while moving.
However, in the real-time display of the avatar, in fact,
time delay occurs during the process of extracting information
from body motion and information process of applying it to
humanoid CG. In other words, time delay occurs while the
movement of user is reﬂected and displayed in the avatar.
Time delay is known to affect the human psychology. Many
research works have been undertaken regarding this mainly
focusing on the interaction between humans and artifacts.
It was pointed out that the delay of the computer response
time adversely affects psychology [2][3][4]. The psychological
inﬂuence in the utterance delay was studied well [5][6] and
it was found that delay of one second or more has adverse
impact, and voice of the conversation tends to increase. The
effect of appearance of an artiﬁcial agent and utterance time
on psychology was studied [7][8][9] and it was shown that
higher is the delay, worse are the psychological changes. In the
conversation between humans and robots, it was investigated
the effect of starting time of utterance by Robot and timing of
nodding on the psychology, and revealed that delay gives bad
feelings [10][11][12][13][14].
In these studies, it is stated that in the interaction be-
tween humans and artifacts, delayed reaction of artifacts to
a stimulus from the outside world has a negative impact on
the psychology of humans. This impact pertains to usability
when a human uses the artifacts, and it must be treated as an
important problem. However, these studies consider the cases
while verbal communication is taking place, and they do not
discuss the effect of time delay in the body motion interaction
between humans and artifacts on the psychology.
In this paper, we will analyze impression of the delayed
motion of the avatar as an artifact that performs interaction
where actions of human are simulated. Motion considered in
this paper is swing movement often seen in exercising, where
the human raises and lowers both arms. We will have this
discussion about perception of the level of delay, impression of
delay, and habituation to delay. Here, the level of delay means
a quantitative expression of how much the delay a human feels.
We will explain the details of the experiment conducted in
this paper for psychological evaluation to analyze impression.
Recent software systems of artifacts can adjust the delayed
degree of movement with digital ﬁlter functions. In other
words, it is possible to adjust the delay time in the process
of displaying avatar with human motion capture.
Using this, in our experiment, we measured the stage from
when the human clearly recognizes it as delay when the delay
time is changed in a stepwise manner. Measuring this delayed
degree should be useful in offering guidance for improving
the avatar system. Here, we assumed that the impression for
the delayed motion may be similar to ones for precedent or
synchronic motion. So, we set up the both motion to extract
the inherent impression for the delayed movement.
Next, we administered a questionnaire survey about the
impression the subject got when seeing the avatar that moves
according to the movement of the subject. We studied the
impression the subject got when the he saw that movement
of the avatar is slower than him (hereinafter referred to as
the delayed movement) while the subject does the swing
movement.
In Section III, in order to obtain the characteristics of
this impression, we use different movements than the delayed
movement. These are two types of movements, namely, state
where movements of the subject and the avatar seem to be
213
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 1. Outline drawing of the experiment setup
matching (hereinafter referred to as the synchronic movement)
and the state where movement of the avatar seems to have pro-
gressed than that of the subject (hereinafter referred to as the
precedent movement). The reason why these two movements
are conducted is that the synchronic movement is used for the
bench mark and the precedent movement is used to highlight
the visual impression for the delay movement.
Then, we will compare impression evaluation and consider
habituation to delay. In Section IV, we discuss the results of
the comparison. In the last section, the paper is concluded.
II.
EXPERIMENTAL ENVIRONMENT AND METHOD
Hardware used in the experiment is comprised of ”Mi-
crosoft Kinect for Windows sensor” for measuring the move-
ment of the subject, PC that creates movement of the avatar
based on the movement of the subject, and projector and screen
for displaying the avatar to the subject.
Figure 1 shows the hardware conﬁguration for measure-
ment of the human motion and the avatar display system.
The subject stands in front of the screen and Kinect with
3000 mm distance so that Kinect can detect whole body of
the subject. As software, we used Kinect for windows SDK
[15] which is the library for obtaining the human motion from
the depth data photographed with Kinect and Microsoft XNA
Game studio 10 [16] for drawing the avatar. With Kinect for
Windows SDK, we can obtain the subject’s movement data,
and by transferring this data to Microsoft XNA, avatar can
display identical movement as the subject.
Figure 2 shows an image of the avatar displayed to the
subject during the experiment. The avatar moves to imitates
the movement of an user. There are some types of ﬁgures of
avatar, and we chose a man type as shown in Figure 2 because
it is not the most uncomfortable feeling in our preliminary
experiments. The skeleton model as shown in Figure 2 is to
help the user recognize the movement expressly.
Figure 3 shows the experiment in progress where the
subject is moving his body while watching the avatar. Strictly
speaking, movements of the avatar and the subject are not
synchronized. Rather, after measuring the movement of the
subject with Kinect, movement is created in the avatar and
after that the avatar will act. Therefore, irrespective of whether
the subject realizes or not, movement of the avatar starts
with delay. In Kinect, with the ﬁlter process, by delaying and
advancing the subsequent movement, it is possible to control
the delay time from the actual movement.
In this experiment, in the ﬁrst place, we will measure the
level of delay where the subject feels that delay has occurred
while gradually increasing the delayed degree of the movement
of the avatar. For implementing the delayed movement in
the avatar, in this paper, we adjust the parameters of digital
ﬁlter included in Kinect for Windows SDK v1.8. The ﬁlter
is based on the Holt Double Exponential Smoothing method
for joint position jitter. It is equipped with the smoothing and
correcting functions, and it is used for removing the errors in
the measurement data where such errors have occurred due to
disturbance of measurement conditions and the like in Kinect.
By changing the parameters of this ﬁlter, it is possible to
have smoothing and estimating effects and cause delay and
look ahead in the movement data of the subject obtained with
Kinect. Then, by implementing this movement data with delay
on the avatar, movement of the avatar will be delayed than the
actual movement of the subject.
A. Setting parameters
As the ﬁlter parameters, Prediction [≥ 0.0] and Smoothing
[0.0, 1.0] are available. Although SDK provides ”MaxDevi-
ationRadius” and ”JitterRadius”, these two parameters are
not adopted for changing avatar’s motion, because these two
parameters determine the region of compensation of jitter
and these dimension is [m]. ”Prediction” and ”Smoothing”
are adopted. The Value of Prediction is for estimating the
movement, and its value is the number of frames that predicts
the movement (Kinect’s frame rate is 30 [fps]). Its default value
is 0.0, and it tends to overshoot from around 0.5 (default value).
So, we used the values in the range of 0.4 and below for delay
movement. Value of Smoothing is the smoothing index. When
it is 0.0, there is no delay, and when it is 1.0, delay is at the
maximum. Default value is 0.5, and based on our experience,
we selected values equal to or higher than this value.
Table I shows the perceived level of delay in ﬁve stages
as the level of delay with respect to the delayed movement in
this experiment.
TABLE I. Perceived level with respect to delay
Parameter set #
Prediction, Smoothing
1 (minimum delay)
Prediction=0.4, Smoothing=0.5
2
Prediction=0.3, Smoothing=0.6
3
Prediction=0.2, Smoothing=0.7
4
Prediction=0.1, Smoothing=0.8
5 (maximum delay)
Prediction=0.0, Smoothing=0.9
We will now explain about the method of creating this
perceived level. During the course when the subject moves his
body while watching the avatar displayed on the screen, we
gradually changed the parameter value using the Smoothing
function of Kinect. When increasing the parameter of Smooth-
ing, the movement of the avatar will not be able to keep up
with the movement of the subject, and movement will become
sluggish. This state where the avatar hardly move is considered
214
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 2. Avatar (a man type) doing the swing movement and skeleton model (green colored), arm up (left ﬁgure) and arm down (right ﬁgure)
 
Figure 3. Experiment in progress
as maximum delay. Against this, the state where the movement
of avatar appears to be synchronous with the subject himself
is considered as minimum delay, and this interval was divided
into 5 stages.
Subject’s movement of raising and lowering arms while
watching the avatar was aligned to the metronome of 100
BPM (Beat Per Minute) = 1.67 Hz, because the movement of
subjects should be controlled in order to keep the frequency
of the subject’s movement, for the purpose of this paper. The
sound of a metronome, therefore, was adopted as the standard
sign for keeping the frequency of the movements.
Parameter set #1 through #5 shown in Table I was changed
every 5 seconds. The subject would move his body for every
parameter set. After that the subject was asked ”Do you think
that the avatar you just saw was delayed compared to your
movement?” Subject’s response was collected in Yes / No or
Possibly as shown in Table II. This was repeated 5 times, and
response data was collected and summarized.
TABLE II. Parameter set of percedence and synchronization
Parameter set
Precedent
Prediction=0.5, Smoothing=0.5
Synchronization
Prediction=0.5, Smoothing=0.5
For verifying impression evaluation with respect to delayed
movement, we thought that it is necessary to have another
comparison target. Based on this, we designed ”synchronic
movement” and ”precedent movement”. The former one syn-
chronizes with the movement of the subject, while the latter
one advances the phase of movement using differential oper-
ation. This was also implemented by using the parameters of
ﬁlter function of Kinect.
The parameters of ”synchronic movement” adopted ”Pre-
diction = 0.5” (default value of the SDK). On the other hand,
the parameters of ”precedent movement” were determined
by the preliminary experiment. ”precedent movement” is the
avatar’s motion which is lead movement to the subject. The
value of 1.0 is the highest prediction value and 0.5 is the
default value of synchro motion. Here, there is a question:
How step size of prediction parameter between maximum
prediction and default prediction value should be determined
and presented to subjects by being implemented to the avatar’s
motion? In this preliminary experiment, the value of 1.0 and
0.75 (the middle value between 1.0 and 0.5) were tentatively
selected, and were implemented to avatar’s motion to present
their motions to subjects. If the subjects do not feel difference
between two motions by two values, there is no need to
select both values as the parameter for forming ”precedent
movement”.
In order to verify this, we prepared two prediction values
as 0.75 and 1.0, and veriﬁed the differences of the avatar’s
motions driven by two values. Here, 14 subjects participated in,
and swung their arms with aligning to the metronome of 100
BPM while watching avatar’s motion with above mentioned
215
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

two values. Then they were asked ”Did you feel difference
between two avatar’s movement? ”.
As the results, 10 subject could not distinguish 0.75 from
1.0, and 1 subject distinguished the difference. Therefore, there
is no distinct difference between two values from the binomial
test: p = 0.012 < 0.05, null hypothesis which is human
impressions of two movements are different was rejected.
Thus we adopted 1.0 being the maximum value of predic-
tion for ”precedent movement”. These parameters are shown
in Table III.
TABLE III. Responses where the subjects felt that the movement is delayed
with respect to the parameter set in Table I
 
delay
possibly
delay
not delay
total
number
0
0
14
14
rate (%)
0.0
0.0
100.0
100
number
0
8
6
14
rate (%)
0.0
57.1
42.9
100
number
6
6
2
14
rate (%)
42.9
42.9
14.3
100
number
6
6
2
14
rate (%)
42.9
42.9
14.3
100
number
10
4
0
14
rate (%)
71.4
28.6
0.0
100
Parameter set 1
    Prediction=0.4,
    Smoothing=0.5
Parameter set 2
   Prediction=0.3,
   Smoothing=0.6
Parameter set 3
   Prediction=0.2,
   Smoothing=0.7
Parameter set 4
   Prediction=0.1,
   Smoothing=0.8
Parameter set 5
   Prediction=0.0,
   Smoothing=0.9
B. Experimental procedure
By using above mentioned parameters, we used three
movements, namely, ”delayed movement”, ”synchronic move-
ment” and ”precedent movement” in this experiment. The
”synchronic movement” is placed as a bench mark to measure
objectively, to compare, and to evaluate the difference of the
impression. The following experiment was carried out for
impression evaluation.
[Step 1]
In the ﬁrst place, in order to have the experi-
ence of the delayed movement of the avatar, while
watching the avatar moving as per the settings
of #3 in Table I, the subject moved his body
for about 5 seconds along with the sounds of
metronome and experienced the delayed move-
ment of the avatar. Similarly, the subject moved
his body for about 5 seconds for the precedent
movement (Precedence in Table II) and the syn-
chronic movement (Synchronization in Table II)
and experienced these movements.
[Step 2]
In order to ﬁnd out perception of the level
of delay, we changed the parameter set in Table I
from #1 to #5 at every 5 seconds. Every time when
changing the parameter, we asked the subject
whether the movement is delayed or not.
[Step 3]
Next, we ﬁnd out how the impression re-
garding delayed differs from synchronic move-
ment and precedent movement. For that, for each
Figure 4. Outline drawing of the experiment setup
subject, we run the delay movement using the
parameter sets in Table I for which the subjects
felt the delay, and we changed the movements of
avatar as per the following patterns.
[Pattern 1]
delayed movement (10 seconds) → syn-
chronic movement (10 seconds) → delayed move-
ment (10 seconds)
[Pattern 2]
synchronic movement (10 seconds) → syn-
chronic movement (10 seconds) → synchronic
movement (10 seconds)
[Pattern 3]
precedent movement (10 seconds) → syn-
chronic movement (10 seconds) → precedent
movement (10 seconds)
These patterns were created based on the concept of placing
the synchronic movement at the middle position, and placing
three types of movement patterns on both sides. Figure 4 shows
an experiment ﬂow.
In this experiment, there were 14 subjects, all males in their
20s. As for the sequence of the experiment, after completing
[Step 1], subjects went to [Step 2], and after that they went
to [Step 3]. [Step 1] is preparation for the experiment to be
conducted here onwards.
III.
ANALYSIS OF IMPRESSION EVALUATION
This section explains the analysis of the impression of the
subjects. First, the evaluation items are explained.
A. Evaluation items
Restating the explanation given in Section II, the following
are the evaluation items in impression evaluation.
P1:
From what stage does the subject sense ”delay”
in the movement of the avatar? This leads to
perceptual evaluation of the level of delay.
P2:
What kind of the impression the subject forms
regarding delayed movement of the avatar?
P3:
Look into impression of each movement of the
avatar, and see if there are any differences in the
evaluation of each pattern. This leads to ﬁnding
out habituation to delay.
For investigating P1, we conducted the experiment men-
tioned in [Step 2] in the preceding section. For investigating
216
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

P2 and P3, we conducted the experiment mentioned in [Step
3].
B. Analysis of P1
Response data for three perceptions, namely, the movement
of the avatar is ”delay”, ”possibly delay”, and ”not delay”, was
summarized for each parameter set. Table III shows the results
of this.
From the results in Table III, for parameter set #3 and
above, about 40% of the subjects responded that the movement
of the avatar is ”delayed”. For parameter set #2 and above,
about half of the subjects responded that the movement of the
avatar is ”possible delayed”. Smoothing of parameter set #2 is
set only slightly higher than the default value, and it resulted
in somewhat ambiguous perception.
In the case of parameter set #4 and #5, the subjects are
divided into two groups, namely, group that clearly recognized
that the movement is ”delayed” and the group that vaguely
sensed the delay. However, this excludes a small number of
subjects who responded that the movement is ”not delayed”.
In the case of parameter set #5, about 70% of the subjects rec-
ognized that the movement of the avatar is clearly ”delayed”.
Based on these results, it came to light that the subjects
sense the ”delayed movement” of the avatar from parameter
#3 onwards. At the stage of parameter set #2, the subjects may
not sense that the movement is delayed.
C. Analysis of P2
In P2, we administered a questionnaire survey to ﬁnd out
the kind of impression with respect to the ”delayed movement”
of the avatar. Simultaneously, apart from the ”delayed move-
ment”, we also studied the ”synchronic movement” and the
”precedent movement”.
The method of data collection which was taken up in
our questionnaire survey of experiment is ”Semantic Differ-
ential Method” (SD method) [17]. The SD method aims at
the evaluation of the object in the test that investigates the
impression of the panel. It is the method which uses the pair
of adjectives of the opposite meaning. In the SD method, the
pair of adjective often results in three factors such as good-bad
for evaluation, powerful-powerless for potency and fast-slow
for activity [18]. We referred to the previous studies [19][20]
related to impression evaluation of the movement of robot,
we made the pair of adjective which applied the three basic
factors of impressions (activity, potency, evaluation) deﬁned
for the SD method. Then we prepared 13 pairs of adjectives
shown in Table IV and we conducted evaluation in 7 stages.
The impression questionnaire for Table IV was applied for
three movements; delayed, synchronic and precedent.
The answers of the questionnaire were collected from 14
subjects. Next, we transformed the answeres by following
procedure.
1)
The seven stages of collected data for Table IV is
classiﬁed into three categories (1-3/4/5-7) which
are assigned to values of 1 or 0. For examples,
the item no.1 includes two adjectives ”fast” and
”slow”, they are assigned to values of 1 and 0
when the stages is within 1-3, respectively. The
both are assigned to values of 0 and 1 when the
TABLE IV. Impression questionnaire items for P2
No
factor
Evaluation Items
1
activity
fast
⇔
slow
2
activity
smooth
⇔
awkward
3
evaluation
like myself
⇔
like others
4
activity
anticipated
⇔
unanticipated
5
evaluation
comfortable
⇔
uncomfortable
6
potency
soft
⇔
rigid
7
potency
sudden
⇔
not sudden
8
evaluation
favorable
⇔
disagreeable
9
evaluation
interesting
⇔
boring
10
potency
rough
⇔
calm
11
activity
sensitive
⇔
insensitive
12
evaluation
friendly
⇔
unfriendly
13
potency
natural
⇔
unnatural
Figure 5. Illustrative example of classiﬁed result by operating with 1) for
Table IV , each cell takes a value of 1 or 0
stages be within 5-7. The both are 0 when the
stages be 4. Here, there are 26 adjectives in 13
items. An illustrative example of classiﬁed result
by this operating is shown in Figure 5.
2)
The total amount of counting up the values for
each adjective for three movements are used for
the correspondence analysis [21]
Here, the correspondence analysis is one of the methodolo-
gies that statistically analyze the frequency data. It is a useful
method for the analysis of the data in the questionnaire survey.
One of the goals of correspondence analysis is to describe the
relationships between two nominal variables in a correspon-
dence table in a low-dimensional space, while simultaneously
describing the relationships between the categories for each
variable. For each variable, the distances between category
points in a plot reﬂect the relationships between the categories
with similar categories plotted close to each other.
Figure 6 shows the results of the correspondence analysis.
The following can be concluded from the results shown in
Figure 6.
•
Our ﬁnding is that the impression formed for ”delayed
movement” is different from that for ”synchronic
movement” and ” precedent movement”.
•
On the other hand, it cannot be said that the impression
217
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 6. Results of correspondence analysis
differs between ”synchronic movement” and” prece-
dent movement”.
•
For the ”delayed movement”, the subjects formed the
impressions such as ”like other human”, ”unexpected”,
and ”unfriendly”, and other impressions such as ”fast
and slow” and ”moderate” based on the speed of
movement.
•
Figure 7 shows summary of ﬁndings by evaluation
items. In precedent movement, even if movement was
not synchronized, the result made a something good
impression. Subjects felt it was pleasant and inter-
esting. We found precedent movement made a better
impression than delayed movement. This ﬁnding is in
contrast with the impression of delayed movement.
•
For ”synchronic movement”, the subjects formed the
impressions such as ”smooth”, ”natural”, ”like one-
self”, ”enjoyable”, ”soft”, and ”comfortable”.
•
Subjects formed the impression that the ”precedent
movement” was ”hard” and ”intense”. However, some
of the subjects responded that they formed the im-
pressions such as ”interesting”, ”as expected”, and
”pleasant”.
•
As compared to the ”synchronic movement”, the sub-
jects clearly realized the difference in the movement
in the ”delayed movement”. The subjects felt uncom-
fortable that the movement of avatar did not match
with their movement.
•
There were some subjects who favorably treated the
”delayed movement” as smooth movement. However,
in terms of the overall trend, subjects had a negative
impression of the ”delayed movement”.
•
Impression became positive in the case of the ”syn-
chronic movement”.
Figure 7. Typical impression of 3 types of movements
•
In the ”precedent movement”, while there was neg-
ative impression, simultaneously, the subjects also
found it ”interesting” and ”pleasant”.
•
In the settings of the ”precedent movement”, in the
present Kinect, the avatar reacted acutely to the speed
of exercising in the subjects, which formed the im-
pression such as ”hard” and ”intense”. However, there
were opposite responses to this impression such as
”interesting”, ”as expected” and ”pleasant”.
•
We continuously examined whether there were any
signiﬁcant differences between the means of these
three movement groups.
D. Analysis of P3
In the subsection C, we mentioned that apart from ”hard”
and ”intense” that was the impression evaluation with respect
to the ”precedent movement”, subjects formed the impression
of ”interesting”, ”as expected” and ”pleasant” as in the case of
”synchronic movement”. Because it was found that the subjects
formed similar impression in these two movement patterns,
we will verify whether there are any differences in impres-
sion between the ”synchronic movement” and the ”precedent
movement”. From the point of view, P3 was designed.
The goal of this analysis was to compare means of the
variable for the combinations of the three movements. We
carried out impression evaluation for the experiment [Step
3] where three types of movements, namely, ”delayed move-
ment”, ”synchronic movement”, and ”precedent movement”
are combined. Here, data group for each of three types of
movements of avatar were named as data group of movements.
We set the hypothesis that ”there is no difference between
levels due to the data group of movement”, and we carried
out corresponding one-way analysis of variance (Repeated
measures ANOVA)[22],. ANOVA is a ”group comparison”
that determines whether a statistically signiﬁcant difference
exists somewhere among the groups studied. If a signiﬁcant
difference is indicated, ANOVA is usually followed by a
multiple comparison procedure that compares combinations of
groups to examine further any differences among them.
Table V was made to be given to ANOVA in the next
analysis and it shows the average value of response data
obtained from 14 subjects for three movements.
218
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE V. Impression evaluation results using the SD method
Evaluation 
Items 
Average Value of Response Data 
Delayed 
Synchronic 
Precedent 
1 
4.86 
3.57 
3.57 
2 
4.00 
3.14 
4.00 
3 
4.57 
3.43 
3.29 
4 
4.57 
4.00 
3.71 
5 
4.14 
3.00 
3.71 
6 
4.14 
3.71 
4.43 
7 
4.86 
4.14 
4.00 
8 
4.14 
3.29 
2.71 
9 
3.86 
3.29 
3.00 
10 
4.86 
3.71 
3.71 
11 
4.00 
4.14 
4.00 
12 
4.71 
3.43 
3.14 
13 
4.71 
3.43 
3.57 
Table VI shows the results of the one-way analysis of
variance (Repeated measures ANOVA) which is used to de-
termine whether there are any signiﬁcant differences between
the means of two or more groups.
Results in Table VI showed statistical signiﬁcant in the
group of movement from the signiﬁcance level (p < 0.05).
Accordingly, the hypothesis ”There is not difference between
the groups” was accepted, and it can be said that the impression
formed in the subjects for three movements of the avatar are
different. The effect of Evaluation items, by contrast, did not
reach conventional levels of statistical signiﬁcance.
Furthermore, in order to shed light on the difference
between movements of different phase, we used the Turky’s
method [23], and conducted multiple comparison. Table VII
shows the results of this comparison.
Based on these results, it is evident that in the movements
of the avatar, ”delayed movement” and ”synchronic move-
ment”, and ”delayed movement” and ”precedent movement”
are statistically signiﬁcant (p < 0.05). In other words, the
impression formed for ”delayed movement” is different from
that for ”synchronic movement” and ”precedent movement”.
On the other hand, it cannot be said that impression differs for
”synchronic movement” and ”precedent movement”. Figure IV
shows a plots with observed means of Data group in Table VI.
The two-way interaction between the Data group and the
Evaluation items in Table VI had a non-signiﬁcant effect, it
probably does not make sense to look at the results. However,
this is for amount of all adjective pairs, not for each adjective
pair. So we thought further investigation for each adjective is
needed.
We investigated the results in Table VI for each adjectives
and for three movements. Figure 9 shows the observed means
of the Evaluation items in Table VI. In this ﬁgure, a line shows
a mean data of a prepared Evaluation items, and 13 polygonal
lines corresponding to the adjective pair shows parallel each
other.
Investigating the results in Figure 9, the evaluation items
in Table VI were divided into two groups as shown in Table
TABLE VI. Test Results of Effect between Subjects
 
Type III Sum of
Squares
Degree of
freedom
Mean square
F value
Significance
level
Hypothesis
8138.579
1
8138.579 624.110
.000
Error
169.524
13
13.040a
Hypothesis
84.806
2
42.403
17.757
.000
Error
1179.619
494
2.388b
Hypothesis
42.183
12
3.515
1.472
.131
Error
1179.619
494
2.388b
Hypothesis
169.524
13
13.040
5.461
.000
Error
1179.619
494
2.388b
Hypothesis
41.289
24
1.720
.720
.832
Error
1179.619
494
2.388b
Data
group
Evaluation
items
Subject
No.
Data group *
Evaluation
items
a.  Mean square(id),   b.  Mean square (Error)
Dependent Variable: 
Source
Intercept
TABLE VII. Results of Multiple Comparison
Dependent Variable: Tukey HSD 
Movement 
Difference 
in average 
value 
(a)-(b) 
Standard 
error 
Significance 
level 
95% Confidence  
Interval 
(a) 
(b) 
Lower  
limit 
Upper 
limit 
Deleyed 
Syncronic 
.86* 
.162 
.000 
.48 
1.24 
Precedent 
.81* 
.162 
.000 
.43 
1.19 
Syncronic 
Deleyed 
-.86* 
.162 
.000 
-1.24 
-.48 
Precedent 
-.04 
.162 
0.960 
-.42 
.34 
Precedent 
Deleyed 
-.81* 
.162 
.000 
-1.19 
-.43 
Syncronic 
.04 
.162 
0.960 
-.34 
.42 
Based on observed average value.Error value is mean squqre(error)=2.388 
 The error term is Mean Square(Error) = 2.388. 
* Difference is averae value is significant at 0.05 level. 
VIII. Group 1 is an evaluation word directly connected with
a movement of the appearance and Group 2 is a stable
impression words because the experiment was repeated. The
chart was made using a mean of the data collected from our
experiment, we could see the change pattern of the evaluation
words.
Figure 8. Estimated Marginal Means of score of Movement
219
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 9. Estimated Marginal Means of score of Movement
TABLE VIII. Group of Evaluation Words
Group 1
Words of directly connected with
movement Evaluation Items
2
smooth
⇔
awkward
5
comfortable
⇔
uncomfortable
6
soft
⇔
rigid
Group 2
Words of stable impression Evalua-
tion Items
3
like myself
⇔
like others
4
anticipated
⇔
unanticipated
8
favorable
⇔
disagreeable
9
interesting
⇔
boring
12
friendly
⇔
unfriendly
13
natural
⇔
unnatural
Table VIII shows the group of evaluation words; ”soft -
rigid”, ”smoothly - awkward” and ”comfortable - uncomfort-
able” and these are shown as the line in Figure 9. It is found
that those shapes are forms as a V-shape and it is the same
reaction at ”delayed movement” and ”precedent movement”.
This group have the pair of adjectives of activity or potency
factor deﬁned by the SD method.
On the other hand, ”natural - unnatural ”,”anticipated -
unanticipated ”, ”interesting - boring” and ”like myself -
like other” these pair of adjectives it is the same reaction
at ”synchronic movement” and ”precedent movement”. This
group have almost the pair of adjectives of Evaluation factor;
for example, good-bad for evaluation, deﬁned by the SD
method.
IV.
DISCUSSION
In this section, we discuss the results obtained in the
experiments described in the previous section.
For the results of P1, the response data for three per-
ceptions, namely, the movement of the avatar is ”delayed”,
”possibly delayed”, and ”not delayed”, was summarized for
each parameter set. Table III shows the results of this. We
conducted experiment and quantitatively deﬁne the level of
delay where the subjects recognize that the movement of the
avatar is ”delayed” than their movement, and we ascertained
the stage of this level. As a result, it became clear that at
parameter set 3 and above, about 40% of subject sensed
”delayed movement” where the movement in the avatar was
delayed compared to the subjects’ movement.
For the result for P2, some features are described by
considering the results of the correspondence analysis in Figure
6. Figure 6 shows summary of ﬁndings by evaluation items. In
precedent movement, even if movement was not synchronized,
the result showed a something good impression. It is found that
the precedent movement made a better impression than delayed
movement. This ﬁnding is in contrast with the impression
of delayed movement. Furthermore, it came to light that the
subjects feel uncomfortable with the ”delayed movement”. In
the ”synchronic movement” experienced by the subjects after
the delayed movement, they formed the impressions such as
”natural”, ”like oneself”, and ”amiable”, and in the ”precedent
movement”, the subjects formed the impressions such as ”
hard” and ”intense”, as well as ”interesting”, ”as expected”,
and ”pleasant”.
In the experiments for P3, we veriﬁed by using the repeated
measures ANOVA whether there is any difference in the
impression evaluation of each of three types of movements
of the avatar conﬁrmed in P2, namely, ”delayed movement”,
”synchronic movement”, and ”precedent movement”. From the
results in Table VI and VII, it is evident that in the movements
of the avatar, ”delayed movement ”and ”synchronic move-
ment”, and ”delayed movement”and ”precedent movement”
are statistically signiﬁcant (p < 0.05). In other words, the
impression formed for ”delayed movement”is different from
that for ”synchronic movement”and ”precedent movement”.
Following these results and the results shown in Figure and
Figure 9, we execute post hoc analysis. Here, we found that
while the ”delayed movement” gave a different impression than
the ”synchronic movement” and the ”precedent movement”,
it cannot be said that impression differed in the ”synchronic
movement” and the ”precedent movement”. From our exper-
iments, it is found that there was an interaction partially, not
a whole of interaction. It is signiﬁcant to check the pattern of
data to judge whether there is an interaction.
As for the impression of the ”precedent movement”, the
impression evaluation was ”interesting”, ”as expected” and
”pleasant”, which was most likely because of habituation
[24][25][26] in perception in terms of mitigation of the sense
of discomfort to time delay and adverse psychological effect,
becoming insensitive. From the interviews to subjects, some
of them felt comfortable by watching the precedent movement
of the avatar. They tried to follow the precedent movement
at ﬁrst, then as watching the repeated movement they had an
illusion eventually as if the avatar would be a instructor and
teach them an exercise to shaking up and down the arms. It is
though that the reason why is some of peoples feel comfortable
by following a certain instruction from the instructor.
This habituation differs from simple stimulation mentioned
in the preceding studies [27][28][29][30] and reactive habitu-
ation [31][32][33][34] that occurs due to iterative presentation
of irritation. Habituation showed by these results are similar
to habituation explained by [35][36] in terms of order effect
where after experiencing the ”synchronic movement”, the
subjects become insensitive to the delay of the movement.
We think this effect based on the order is a new ﬁnding
220
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

that the order of movement patterns affects psychology. Now,
we have not considered the mechanism of the effect precedent
exactly, but we can say that the effect seems to be originated
in the“ Internal Clock ”[37] of human beings. It is said that
the Internal Clock sometimes varies caused by an extra distur-
bance such as the order effects and makes us misunderstand
that two distances between the ”delayed movement ” and
the ”synchronic movement ”, and between the ”synchronic
movement ”and the ”synchronic movement ”are same.
However, we have used only three patterns of order in this
experiment, and our next challenge is to study and discuss
changes in impression and habituation for different order of
movements. The aim of new experiment is to see whether the
impression of three patterns of exercise with avatar change by
another order under same conditions.
V.
CONCLUSION
This paper analyzed impression in an user exercise while
watching an avatar delayed movement that imitates the user
movements. In our experiments, the avatar moves to imitates
the movement of the subjects and the speed of the avatar’s
movement is changed by varying the parameters of the SDK
which conducts and controls the avatar movement. We con-
ducted the movement of the avatar as the ”delayed movement”,
the ”synchronic movement”and the ”precedent movement”
To deﬁne the speed, we shed light on the numerical value
of the level of delay based on the experiment where the subject
recognizes that the movement of the avatar is ”delayed” from
his movement, and we veriﬁed its stage. Next, we conducted
a survey about impression formed by the subject regarding the
avatar that moves out of synchronization with the subject.
We set some novel assumptions to be tested by using the
ordinary statistical methods, it is pointed out that the visual
impression for the delayed movement of the avatar shows
not only a usual situation but also varying situation under
the conditions which is the context with the ”precedent” and
”synchronic” movement.
To test the importance of this factor, the new work need to
be executed by some patterns with various orders. And in the
future work, the authors will strive to increase the number of
subject and the patterns with various movements to improve
the accuracy of the analysis.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was in part supported by JST RISTEX Service
Science, Solutions and Foundation Integrated Research Pro-
gram and by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Numbers 25280125 and
26730139.
REFERENCES
[1]
T. Tanaka, H. Hashimoto, and S. Yokota, ”Evaluation of Visual Impres-
sion of Delayed Movement of Avatar while Exercising,” International
Conference on Intelligent Systems and Appications, pp. 10-15, 2015.
[2]
J. Preece, Y. Rogers, H. Sharp, D. Beyon, S. Holland, and T. Carey,
”Human-Computer Interaction,” Addison-Wesley, New York, 1994.
[3]
R. W. Picard, ”Affective Computing,” MIT Press, Cambridge, MA., 1997.
[4]
J. Klein, Y. Moon, and R. W. Picard, ”This computer responds to user
frustration, Theory, design, and results,” Interacting with Computers,
ELSEVIER, vol. 14, Issue 2, pp. 119-140, 2002.
[5]
A. R. Pearson, T. V. West, J. F. Dovidio, S. R. Powers, R. Buck, and
R. Henning, ”The fragility of intergroup relations: Divergent effects of
delayed audiovisual feedback in intergroup and intragroup interaction,”
vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 1272-1279, 2008.
[6]
S. R. Powersa, C. Rauhb, R. A. Henningc, R. W. Buckc, and T. V.
Weste, ”The effect of video feedback delay on frustration and emotion
communication accuracy,” Computers in Human Behavior, ELSEVIER,
vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 1651-1657, 2011.
[7]
J. Klein, Y. Moon, and R. Picard, ”This computer responds to user
frustration: Theory, design, and results,” Interacting with Computers, vol.
14, pp. 119-140, 2002.
[8]
H. Prendinger, J. Mori, and M. Ishizuka, ”Recognizing, Modeling, and
Responding to Users’ Affective States,” User Modeling, Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, vol. 3538, pp. 60-69, 2005.
[9]
N. C. Kramer, N. Simons, and S. Kopp, ”The Effects of an Embodies
Conversational Agent’s Noverbal Behavior on User’s Evaluation and Be-
havioral Mimicry,” Intelligent Virtual Agents Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, vol. 4722, pp. 238-251, 2007.
[10]
Y. Yamamoto, Y. Kobayashi, Y. Muto, K. Takano, and Y. Miyake,
”Hierardchical Timing Structure of Utterance in Human Dialogue,” IEEE
International Conference on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, pp. 810-813,
2008.
[11]
T. Hashimoto, S. Hiramatsu, and H. Kobayashi, ”Development of face
robot for emotional communication between human and robot,” IEEE
International Conference on Mechatronics and Automation, pp. 25-30,
2006.
[12]
T. Hashimoto, S. Hiramatsu, T. Tusji, and H. Kobayashi, ”Realization
and evaluation of realistic nod with receptionist robot SAYA,” IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Robot and Human Interactive Communication,
pp. 326-331, 2007.
[13]
S. Takasugi, S. Yoshida, K. Okitsu, M. Yokoyama, T. Yamamoto, and
Y. Miyake, ”Inﬂuence of Pause Duration and Nod Response Timing in
Dialogue between Human and Communication Robot,” Transaction of
the Society of Instrument and Control Engineers, vol. 46, no. 1, pp.
72-81, 2011.
[14]
M. Yamamoto and T. Watanabe, ”Timing Control Effects of Utterance
to Communicative Actions on Embodied Interaction with a Robot and
CG Character,” International Journal of Human-Computer Interaction,
vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 87-107, 2008.
[15]
Kinect for windows SDK v1.8, https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/
download/details.aspx?id=40278, last accessed on May 20, 2016.
[16]
XNA
Game
Studio
4.0,
https://msdn.microsoft.com/ja-jp/library/
bb200104(v=xnagamestudio.40).aspx, last accessed on May 20, 2016.
[17]
C. E. Osgood, W. H. May, and M. S. Miron, ”Cross-cultural Universals
of Affective Meaning,” University of Illinois Press, 1975.
[18]
C. E. Osgood, ”Studies on the generality of affective meaning system,
”, American Psychologist, vol. 17, pp. 10-28, 1962.
[19]
Y. Suzukiy and R. Ohmuray, ”Impression Evaluation of Pointing
Prediction Based on Minimum-Jerk Model,” IPSJ Interaction 2013, pp.
249-254, 2013.
[20]
T. Kanda, H. Ishiguro, T. Ono, M. Imai, and R. Nakatsu, ”An evaluation
on interaction between humans and an autonomous robot Robovie,”
Journal of the Robotics Society of Japan, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 315-323,
2002.
[21]
M. J. Greenacre, ”Theory and Applications of Correspondence Analy-
sis,” Academic press, 1984.
[22]
A. Field, ”Repeated Measures ANOVA,” Research Method of Psychol-
ogy, 2008.
[23]
R. E. Kirk, ”Experimental Design: Procedures for the Behavioral
Sciences,” 3rd Edition. Brooks/Cole Publishing Company, 1995.
[24]
R. B. Zajonc, ”Attitudinal Effects of Mere Exposure,” Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, vol. 9 (2, Pt.2), pp. 1-27, 1968.
[25]
R. B. Zajonc, ”Mere Exposure: A Gateway to the Subliminal,” Current
Directions in Psychological Science, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 224-228, 2001.
[26]
X. Fang, S. Singh, and R. Ahluwalia, ”An Examination of Different
Explanations for the Mere Exposure Effect,” Journal of Consumer
Research, vol. 34, pp. 97-103, 2007.
[27]
R. L. Moreland and R. B. Zajonc, ”A Strong Test of Exposure Effects,”
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, vol. 12, pp. 170-179, 1976.
221
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[28]
A. Grimes and P. J. Kitchen, ”Researching mere exposure effects to
advertising: Theoretical foundations and methodological implications,”
International Journal of Market Research, vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 191-219,
2007.
[29]
G. Toma, C. Nelsona, T. Srzentica, and R. Kinga, ”Mere Exposure and
the Endowment Effect on Consumer Decision Making,” The Journal of
Psychology: Interdisciplinary and Applied, vol. 141, Issue 2, 2007.
[30]
A. Serenko and N. Bontils, ”What’s familiar is excellent: The impact
of exposure effect on perceived journal quality,” Journal of Informetrics,
ELSEVIER, vol.5, Issue 1, pp. 219-223, 2011.
[31]
E. H. Jones and J. J. B. Allen, ”The role of affect in the mere exposure
effect: Evidence from psychophysiological and individual differences
approaches,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, vol. 27, pp.
889-898, 2001.
[32]
C. H. Price, E. Burton, R. Hickinson, J. Inett, E. Moore, K. Salmon,
and P. Shiba, ”Picture book exposure elicits positive visual preferences
in toddlers,” Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, vol. 104, pp.
89-104, 2004.
[33]
D. B. Verrier, ”Evidence for the inﬂuence of the mere-exposure effect on
voting in the Eurovision Song Contest,” Judgment and Decision Making,
vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 639-643, 2012.
[34]
S. Delplanque, G. Coppin, L. Bloesch, I. Cayeux, and D. Sander, ”The
mere exposure effect depends on an odor’s initial pleasantness,” Frontiers
in Psychology, doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00920, 2015
[35]
H. Schuman and S. Presser, ”Questions & Answers in Attitude Surveys,”
Academic Press, 1981.
[36]
D. W. Moore, ”Measuring new types of question-order effects,” Public
Opinion Quarterly, no. 66, no. 1, pp. 80-91, 2002.
[37]
T. Michel, ”Temporal discrimination and the indifference interval, im-
plications for a model of the ’internal clock’,” Psychology Monographs,
vol. 77, no. 13, pp. 1-31, 1963.
222
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

