Blockchain in Recruitment – Greek Public Sector Analysis and the QualiChain 
Solution 
Panagiotis Zarafidis, Konstantinos Siassiakos, 
Dimitrios Strotos, Panayiotis Deriziotis 
ASEP 
Athens, Greece 
e-mails: {pzarafidis, k.siassiakos, d.strotos, 
pderizio}@asep.gr 
Dimitrios Askounis 
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
National Technical University of Athens 
Athens, Greece 
askous@epu.ntua.gr 
Abstract - A significant challenge for public sector human 
resources management in Greece is to optimize the civil 
personnel recruitment procedure regarding both process 
effectiveness 
and 
perspective 
employee 
quality 
while 
continuing to enforce, beyond any doubt, the principles of 
transparency, participation and accountability.  Blockchain, 
perceived as a disruptive technology by design, has evolved 
beyond traditional payment solutions in the finance sector and 
offers a potential for transforming many sectors including 
human resources and recruitment. This paper analyses gaps of 
the current process of Greek public sector recruitment and 
describes the expected benefits of utilizing blockchain through 
a pilot case of QualiChain project.  
Keywords – Blockchain; Public sector recruitment; 
Qualification; Verification; Evaluation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Public sector organizations are expected [1] over time to 
fulfill mandates revolving around objectives such as 
qualitative and cost-effective service delivery as well as 
accountability in the management of various types of 
resources. To achieve that, effective assessment in 
recruitment of the most qualified personnel is of the essence.  
Carrying out this complex procedure with the use of multiple 
assessment tools and information collected from diverse 
sources is expected to provide a more comprehensive 
approach of the candidates being assessed and to further add 
value to the recruitment system overall. Securing access to 
the candidates’ work and educational background as well as 
performance reviews in a credible way is argued that it will 
substantially improve the current recruitment process in view 
of the aforementioned mandates.  
Blockchain technology is regarded as a game-changer in 
several sectors including the domain of Human Resources 
(HR) and recruitment, mainly because of its inherent 
characteristics 
of 
decentralization, 
transparency 
and 
immutability. There are currently numerous business and 
research, private and public sector endeavors to explore both 
the theoretical and practical implications (technical, political, 
socio-economic, legal and cultural) of the blockchain 
technology. Extending the work in [1], the first purpose of 
this paper is to present some of these initiatives. 
The novel integration of technology and business flows 
that blockchains have brought, represents [2] both challenges 
and opportunities for enhancing digital services in civil 
service recruitment but, so far, Greek public sector has 
lagged behind other sectors in both research and exploration 
of this technology. So, this work further describes public 
sector recruitment in Greece, analyzing the current process 
and explaining the areas where blockchain could provide 
solutions through pilot cases of QualiChain project initiative 
for decentralizing academic and employment qualifications. 
In addition to that, QualiChain platform will implement other 
innovative features that could be deployed in the recruitment 
process, such as Multi Criteria Decision Methods (MCDM) 
and visualization tools, providing insight, flexibility and 
scientific foundation to existing evaluation procedures. 
This paper continues in Section II with an analysis of the 
need and the advantages of blockchain in recruitment. 
Section III elaborates on public sector recruitment in Greece 
describes the current process, the challenges and the areas of 
necessary improvement. Section IV analyses the QualiChain 
case. The acknowledgement and conclusions close the 
article. 
II. 
BLOCKCHAIN IN RECRUITMENT 
Despite Bitcoin being the most well-known applied 
paradigm, the blockchain technology has evolved beyond 
traditional payment solutions in the finance sector and offers 
a potential for transforming many sectors including the 
public sector. 
A 2018 OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development) Working Paper [3]  on Public Governance 
argues that blockchain technology has the potential to 
catalyze a major shift in public service delivery and internal 
government strategies and states that potential fields of 
application range from decentralized identity management to 
personally managed data storage for the health, insurance, 
and financial sectors, on to decentralized power on the basis 
of neighborhood energy trading solutions, and through to 
new voting procedures. 
Conceptually, the blockchain is [4] a distributed database 
containing records of transactions that are shared among 
participating members. Each transaction is confirmed by the 
consensus of a majority of the members, making fraudulent 
transactions unable to pass collective confirmation. Once a 
record is created and accepted by the blockchain, it can never 
be altered or disappear. 
A. The need 
One of the sectors that should consider the above benefits 
that this technology delivers – such as trustworthy 
239
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

verification of counterparties’ identity and documents 
without the involvement of a third-party – is [5] HR, by 
identifying problems and areas of inefficiency in existing 
operations that could be addressed through blockchain. The 
processes most appropriate for transformation through 
blockchain are likely to be those that are slow, labour-
intensive and expensive due to the need for significant data 
collection and third-party verification, such as recruitment.  
Moreover, repeatedly, in both research and grey 
literature, increasing amounts of fraud and corruption related 
to applicants’ credentials have been reported, shaking not 
only the trust in the education system [6][7] but also in the 
entire recruitment process, as well as in the employees 
themselves. Falsified information is often related to 
references, diplomas/degrees, previous salary, certifications 
or work experience. 
In a 2015 report (by Business Insider) 17 incidences were 
listed where high-level business people (even CEOs) lied 
about their credentials on their resume. A 2017 survey [8][9] 
claims that “over half of the curricula and job applications 
(53%) contain falsifications and over three quarters (78%) 
are misleading”. According to different articles (HireRight’s 
2017 employment screening benchmark report, 2017 
CareerBuilder US Survey), more that 75% of employers / 
HR managers have found a lie / misrepresentation on a 
resume or job application. It is also reported that 2 out of 5 
HR managers initially spend less than a minute looking at a 
resume, while 19% spend less than 30 seconds so, the case is 
that sometimes HR professionals do not even check a 
candidate’s qualifications so they do not take the necessary 
precautions to avoid a bad hire. 
The estimated cost of a bad hire to a business or 
organization can be significant but the cost can be more than 
just financial because of the reputation impact an 
underqualified recruit could have on their operations. 
Therefore, it is clear that one of the biggest gaps in the 
hiring process is verifying the applicant’s credentials (both 
academic and work history) and that is why, in the current 
work we focus on this cumbersome HR task, i.e., 
recruitment, where Blockchain could have a major impact on 
both sides of the employment relationship, from recruitment 
process for the potential employer to the ability for people to 
maintain – and control access to – a comprehensive, 
trustworthy blockchain-based record of their education, 
skills, training and workplace performance. 
The possible connection between applicants evaluation 
and blockchain has very recently been verified in a recent 
publication [10] where participants discussed their desire to 
utilize blockchain in checking performance appraisals of 
candidate employees to verify their performance potential 
and suitability for the advertised job stating that “it would be 
beneficial to know the employee’s performance appraisal 
and misconduct in his previous jobs from the blockchain…it 
will be useful in achieving transparency, planning and 
accessing trusted data that can help with allocating 
employees for internal vacancies” or “we have a problem 
since in spite of the well-written CVs presented by the 
candidates during the recruitment phase, when they join 
work, they show poor performance…so if we can verify 
performance appraisals from the blockchain, it will make a 
big difference”. 
In public sector the problem is even more intense because 
the formal procedures of verifying credentials integrity and 
authenticity are stricter and more bureaucratic due to the 
need for non-digital (required paper form etc.) or non-real-
time communication between public authorities. Moreover, 
when mistakes or oversights do happen in the selection, the 
administrative process of replacing the employee is 
definitely more time consuming than in private sector. 
It should be noted that the general problem of documents 
verification is not a new one and several existing 
technologies can be used to tackle some of the 
aforementioned issues. For example, the digitization of 
academic certificates in combination with digital signatures 
and Public-Key-Infrastructure is a partial solution but with 
drawbacks (centralized nature of necessary Certificate 
Authorities, national central authority still needed for 
academic certificates). Another alternative is the use of 
interoperability (web services technologies, e.g., WSDL, 
SOAP) but either bilateral agreement among issuers and 
recruiters or a trusted third party in both national and 
international level is necessary. Taking into consideration 
other factors that add to the complexity of the problem such 
as diversity (geographical, administrative, technological) of 
academic (or professional) institutions, cybersecurity, 
scalability, transparency it is clear that blockchain pillars of 
immutability, decentralization and transparency, by design, 
provide a common viable solution worth exploring as shown 
in the following paragraphs. 
B. Related Work 
On one hand there are research originated projects [6][8] 
addressing the problem of qualifications such as: 
• 
The combination of Blockcerts [11] with Open 
Badges [12] technologies. Open Badges are 
verifiable, portable, digital badges with embedded 
metadata about skills and achievements. Blockcerts 
consists of open-source libraries, tools, and mobile 
apps enabling a decentralised, standards-based, 
recipient-centric 
ecosystem, 
enabling 
trustless 
verification 
through 
Blockchain 
technology. 
Blockcerts uses Open Badges as certificates and 
Blockchain addresses as recipient identification.  
• 
The European Blockchain Services Infrastructure 
(EBSI) [13] is a joint initiative from the European 
Commission 
and 
the European 
Blockchain 
Partnership (EBP) to deliver EU-wide cross-border 
public services using blockchain technology. One of 
the four use cases that have been selected for 2019 
was centered on diplomas, aiming to give control 
back to citizens when managing their education 
credentials as well as significantly reducing 
verification costs and improving authenticity trust. 
• 
University of Nicosia [14] decided to store the 
academic certificates, for all the students who 
successfully completed the course “Introduction to 
Digital Currencies”, on the Bitcoin blockchain. 
240
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

• 
Rooksby and Kristiyan [15] that have implemented a 
blockchain system based on Ethereum for use by a 
university to store student grades. 
• 
EduCTX [16] proposed as a blockchain based global 
higher education credit platform based on the 
concept of the European Credit Transfer and 
Accumulation System (ECTS). It constitutes a 
globally trusted, decentralized higher education 
credit, and grading system that can offer a globally 
unified viewpoint for students and higher education 
institutions (HEIs), as well as for other potential 
stakeholders, such as companies, institutions, and 
organizations. The authors also present a prototype 
implementation of the environment, based on the 
open-source Ark Blockchain Platform as proof of 
concept. 
On the other hand, several companies and startups have 
been quick to recognize the potential in blockchain and are 
exploring ways to leverage the technology in HR systems: 
• 
APII is a career verification platform, putting 
employee 
background 
checks 
and 
resume 
verification on a secure blockchain. Their goal is to 
help speed up the background check process tagging 
the blockchain’s distributed ledger capabilities to 
make sure that employees have accomplished what 
they claim to.   
• 
Jobeum is using blockchain technology to create a 
‘LinkedIn-like recruitment tool’.  
• 
Peoplewave wants to revolutionize the recruitment 
and background checks with verifiable data on the 
blockchain. It implements Wavebase platform, 
which is a blockchain solution using smart contract 
to tackle the problems of authenticating an 
employee, their performance, their history and 
information across multiple companies, roles and 
managers. 
• 
Zinc is an automated reference checking tool, built 
with blockchain, where candidates are empowered to 
own and control their reference data that’s reusable 
throughout their career.  
• 
TrustLogicsTM is an award-winning technology 
solution, powered by distributed ledger technologies 
that enable professionals to build credible global 
profiles, facilitate pre-screening and allow private 
networking supported by artificial intelligence. 
Using blockchain, TrustLogic’s goal is to root out 
the usual suspects that increase the cost of hiring: 
phony resumes, incomplete information, not enough 
verifiable data, and so on. Job-seekers can get their 
credentials verified, and employers will know they 
are drawing from a legitimate candidate base for 
better matches in the hiring process. 
• 
Indorse leverages the blockchain to solve two 
persistent problems in HR: the lack of trust in skill 
verification, and users giving up their data for little 
or nothing in return. Techwise, Indorse.io is a Dapp 
built on Ethereum and is using the Inter Planetary 
File System (IPFS) as the storage mechanism.  
• 
Aversafe leverages the accuracy, security and 
transparency of the blockchain to offer decentralized 
credential issuance and verification services on a 
global scale. Aversafe’s digital certificates and 
verified work histories are recorded on the 
blockchain, a tamperproof distributed ledger, so that 
anyone can confirm their authenticity and origin.  
• 
HireVibes is a low-cost recruiting tool that increases 
employee and peer referrals from a global network 
of recruiters. It can be viewed as a collaboration 
platform being built for the global talent community. 
It's powered by a native digital currency called 
HireVibes Tokens (HVT), which are utility tokens 
based on the EOS.IO blockchain. HVT is held by 
over 200,000 accounts and can be used to vote on 
community funds and proposals, pay for hires and 
send peer-to-peer. 
• 
In 2019, a new consortium announced the building a 
global clearinghouse or database, called the Learning 
Credential Network (LCN) [17], which would use 
blockchain technology to store permanent, verifiable 
records of job seekers’ skills and academic 
qualifications.  
• 
In a more recent (2020) announcement by a 
cooperative non-profit entity, Velocity Foundation, 
the vision to harness distributed ledger technology to 
build the “Internet of Careers", is highlighted [18]. 
Velocity is a utility layer that globally connects 
career related data processors — HRIS (Human 
Resources 
Information 
Systems), 
contingent 
workforce 
management, 
freelancer 
platforms, 
student information systems and other vendors — 
and allows for interoperability, transparency and 
portability of trusted, verified data. 
Of course, the lists above are not all inclusive but it is 
interesting to note that many other cases have been reported 
in literature or press these last few years that have no online 
presence any more or remain as stale references. Besides, so 
far, to the extent of our knowledge, most initiatives are 
oriented to academic institutions or private sector while no 
HR public sector authorities have any related ongoing 
projects. 
III. 
PUBLIC SECTOR RECRUITMENT IN GREECE 
In this section, we elaborate on public sector recruitment 
in Greece describing the legal framework, the current 
process, as well as challenges and potential areas of 
improvement. 
A. Legal framework 
The Supreme Council for Civil Personnel Selection 
(ASEP) is an independent authority that acts as the 
institutional guardian for the principles of transparency, 
publicity, objectivity and meritocracy regarding civil service 
staff hiring, in Greece.  It is an independent body provided 
under the Greek constitution [19], entrusted with performing 
public administration recruitment processes for project 
241
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

agreements 
as 
well 
as 
fixed-term 
and 
short-term 
employment agreement positions at all levels.  
Under the current legal framework, ASEP is entrusted 
with performing public administration recruitment processes 
in Greece, apart from certain exceptions provided by law. 
More specifically, certain Greek public entities are 
empowered by the said legislation to proceed with 
recruitment of personnel, either supervised by ASEP or not.  
ASEP is supported by a high-end electronic information 
system managing the vast volume of applications, 
vacancies, news releases, results and most importantly 
candidates involved in ASEP selection processes records. 
Candidates are evaluated based on the score they achieve in 
written exams, the outcome of their interview and their 
qualifications overall.  Some of the tools missing from 
ASEP’s day-to-day business are functionalities that could 
relieve the public from the bureaucratic burden (such as 
achieving validation and confirmation of authenticity of 
university degrees) and further enhance qualitative and cost-
effective service delivery and accountability (by way of, 
amongst 
others, 
simplifying 
the 
already 
complex 
recruitment process of Highly Qualified Civil Personnel).  
B. Current Process 
Vacancies in the civil sector are made public by ASEP 
through newsletters, its official website (www.asep.gr) and 
the press, in a non-personalized way whatsoever. Citizens 
can make queries via its website about announced vacancies, 
looking for those that better match their qualifications. 
Following announcement, citizens sign in to the ASEP 
Registry where they fill in their qualifications and submit an 
e-application regarding the announced vacancies. The e-
application itself does not suffice as the candidates are 
further expected to print out their e-application and send it to 
ASEP along with the hardcopies of all supporting documents 
and certificates. Only recently, in 2020, a legislative 
modification attempts to alleviate the obligation for 
hardcopies, replacing them with digital/scanned documents, 
but its application is still in early stages and of course the full 
need for validation still exists. ASEP’s Central Committee 
then issues and publishes interim results in the form of tables 
containing all necessary information, which may be appealed 
by those with vested interest. ASEP’s Council Members in 
composition review the appeals and the interim results, issue 
and publish the final results.  
Vacancies in the public sector addressed to highly 
qualified candidates, although announced and handled 
similarly with the rest (online application process, interim 
and final results and so forth), are significantly more 
complex to the extent that some stages are added in the 
recruitment process, just before the issue of the interim 
results, as represented in Fig. 1. 
More specifically, in the first round of candidates’ 
evaluation, some are rejected based on legal requirements 
(fee, online submission etc). This stage is executed by the 
respective organization department. 
 
Figure 1.  Specific steps for HQP. 
 
Then, in the Second round of candidates’ evaluation, 
some are rejected based on both formal and informal 
qualifications, e.g., experience and postgraduate degree 
minimum requirements as well as pertinence to specific 
vacancy needs. This stage is executed by an Evaluation 
Committee comprised mainly by Council Members and 
University Professors where one member (as an industry 
expert) provides a preliminary assessment.  
In the Third round, an initial ranking, evaluating 
candidates' declared qualifications, is issued by ASEP’s 
Evaluation Committee (for internal use only). This is based 
on an assessment methodology that varies each time, as law 
leaves it to the Committee’s discretion to decide upon. The 
candidates ranking higher are then called for an interview. 
Candidate Interviews take place in Next stage. 
In the last round of candidates evaluation, the 
Committee, taking into account the interviews along with all 
previous stage results, issues and publishes interim results in 
the form of tables containing all necessary information (e.g., 
name, ID number, credits collected per qualification etc.). 
 Then the normal flow resumes where interim results may 
be appealed by those with vested interest. ASEP’s Council 
Members, in composition, review the appeals and the interim 
results, issue and publish the final results. 
Following the announcement of the final results in both 
scenarios as described herein above, the public entities who 
triggered the recruitment process proceed with hiring the 
prevailing candidates as per ASEP’s results and validating 
their qualifications. In case of fraud detection, public entities 
may submit, within three years from the final results 
publication, a request to ASEP for replacement.  
C. Current process challenges and areas of improvement 
Qualifications’ evaluation and validation by ASEP 
(initially by the Central Committee or the Evaluation 
Committee as per the case and later by the Members in 
composition) is a time-consuming process as it is performed 
in a non-automated way. 
242
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

In the case of education credentials, a challenge [6] that 
slows down the connection between academia and the labour 
market is the fact that they are largely resisting the pull of 
technology often requiring paper documentation and time 
consuming manual processes for their verification, mainly 
related to  
• 
the fact that higher education institutions (HEIs) 
keep student data in centralised databases and 
dedicated online systems  
• 
the fact that, although administratively all HEIs are 
under the supervision of a common authority 
(Ministry of Education), no single point of reference 
exists so far for student degrees. 
• 
the fact that while interoperability technology (i.e., 
web services) is mature enough to tackle the 
connection problem, only a small percentage for 
HEIs offer some kind of service and even then as 
isolated 
cases 
without 
achieving 
semantic 
interoperability neither among themselves nor with 
public labour market. 
As a result, Qualifications’ validation by the public 
entities who trigger the recruitment process and ultimately 
hire the prevailing candidates as per ASEP’s results is also 
performed in a non-automated, almost non-deterministic, 
way, requiring communication by telephone, exchange of 
letters and, in certain cases, circulation of hardcopies, with 
all the cost that the stakeholders at issue incur with regard to 
time and money. 
In fact, during formal and informal discussions with 
stakeholders 
in 
Greek 
public 
sector, 
it has been 
communicated that, the verification of authenticity and 
validity of a certificate, issued by a Greek HEI, has a time 
range of five to thirty days depending on the HEI’s 
responsiveness. In the case of certificates issued by non-
Greek HEIs where, sometimes the respective embassy 
intervention is necessary, the delay has, reportedly, been 
extended to five months in the past (although recently it has 
decreased down to three months). In the case of foreign 
language titles (i.e., issued by respective institutes) the 
estimated validation time is twenty days and may incur 
additional cost for the candidate. 
On top of that, when the validation fails for any reason, 
the replacement process itself is also time-consuming and 
linked with both direct and indirect costs. 
Regarding the evaluation of candidates, in the case of 
Highly Qualified Civil Personnel, as already described, every 
Evaluation Committee, before, during and after the interview 
process, may decide on different evaluation criteria and 
assessment methodology, for both formal and informal 
qualifications. Furthermore, coordination between different 
steps of this multi-stage procedure is through an excel based 
exchange of documents. However, as stated in the literature 
[20], personnel selection, depending on the recruiter’s 
specific targets, the availability of means and the individual 
preferences of the decision makers (DMs), is a highly 
complex problem, whose multi-criteria nature makes 
MCDM methods ideal to cope with, given that they consider 
many criteria at the same time, with various weights and 
thresholds, having the potential to reflect at a very 
satisfactory degree the preferences of the DMs. As a result, 
in the current process, there is no common scientific ground 
onto which the DMs’ assessment and the results from 
different evaluation processes can be based, compared and 
cross-evaluated even for vacancies with very similar 
requirements, even when the same applicants participate in 
more than one of these vacancies proclamations. 
These are the gaps on both validation and evaluation 
procedures that the current work aspires to bridge within the 
QualiChain research project as explained below. 
IV. 
THE QUALICHAIN CASE 
QualiChain is a EU funded research project that targets 
the creation, piloting and evaluation of a decentralised  
platform for storing, sharing and verifying education and 
employment qualifications and focuses on the assessment of 
the 
potential 
of 
blockchain 
technology, 
algorithmic 
techniques and computational intelligence for disrupting the 
domain of public education, as well as its interfaces with 
private education, the labour market, public sector 
administrative procedures and the wider socio-economic 
developments. 
A. Public Administration Recruitment Pilot and goals 
As shown in Fig. 2, out of the four distinct key areas that 
QualiChain is targeting [21] for exploring the impact of 
decentralisation (i.e., lifelong learning, smart curriculum 
design, staffing the public sector, providing HR consultancy 
and competency management services), the Greek pilot, is 
under the “Public Sector Staffing” use case. 
 
 
Figure 2.  QualiChain key areas and ASEP pilot target. 
 
Qualichain pilot goals in relation to public sector 
recruitment are the following: 
• 
Demonstrate 
the 
QualiChain 
concept 
and 
technological solution, by piloting the combination 
of disruptive technologies involved in the context of 
staffing the public sector. 
• 
Assess the impact, i.e., the benefits and risks of the 
QualiChain technological solution on the full 
spectrum of stakeholders towards which it is 
addressed in public administration. 
243
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

B. Stakeholders 
The stakeholders involved in the ASEP use case are the 
following: 
1) ASEP Council Members and Employees:  
As publishers, evaluators, validators, and decision 
makers with regard to the candidates’ qualifications and the 
entire selection process in general. 
2) Citizen/Candidate: 
As the main participant of a selection process and the 
owner of qualifications. 
3) Public Entity: 
As “customer” of ASEP selection process and the future 
employer of the candidate. 
4) Qualifications’ issuing/accrediting institutions and 
their personnel: 
As (indirect) providers of qualifications or on the 
receiving end of requests for verification, by public entities. 
 
C. Expectations 
The recruitment and competency management services of 
QualiChain will be exploited to enhance not just the check of 
the candidates’ declared qualifications, but also their 
screening leading to a short list of those to be interviewed 
and ultimately to the identification of the best possible 
applicant for the role. 
Specifically, 
this pilot has 
the following main 
expectations as illustrated in Fig. 3: 
• 
To provide personalised candidate notifications for 
job vacancies by matching individual profiles with 
available jobs in the civil sector. 
• 
To utilise the solution’s Blockchain based digital 
ledger in order to validate (i.e., confirmation of 
authenticity) formal academic qualifications of 
individual candidates, thus freeing the public sector 
from the relevant bureaucratic burden. Of course, 
this functionality may extend in the future to other 
qualifications (professional qualifications, informal 
academic ones, etc). In any case, the expected 
benefit against the current system (as reported in 
Section III) is significant since the delays are 
anticipated to be reduced by orders of magnitude, 
i.e., from days/months to minutes. 
• 
To improve efficiency of the selection process in 
terms of time, credibility and flexibility by utilizing 
value adding services provided by “Analytics and 
DSS” QualiChain component. To this end several 
multi-criteria decision making methods will be 
implemented, 
such 
as 
ELECTRE, 
TOPSIS, 
Promethee, so that appropriate qualitative (e.g., 
interview performance, cooperation/communication 
skills, experience pertinence) and quantitative 
criteria (e.g., months of experience, graduation 
degree) as well as other necessary parameters can 
been embedded in the form of a comprehensive 
evaluation management system. 
D. Use case flow 
The expectations above will be met through the 
execution of the Highly Qualified Civil Personnel 
recruitment process steps, in the context of the pilot, as 
illustrated in Fig. 4. The main steps are the following (note 
that the terms Citizen/Candidate are used interchangeably): 
1) The issuing organization issues a qualification 
component (either an academic qualification or a work 
experience certificate) for a citizen. 
2) The isssuing Organization, after obtaining the 
candidate’s consent, uploads the qualification component in 
QualiChain and notifies Citizen. 
3) Citizen signs up to QualiChain and fills in 
preferences for notification 
4) ASEP announces positions/vacancies and required 
qualifications on QualiChain. 
5) Citizen/Candidate gets notified of new vacancies via 
a Data Analytics Tool embedded in QualiChain. 
6) Candidate signs up to ASEP’s Registry (if not 
already registered), fills in his qualifications, uploads the 
relevant proof of qualifications declared (e.g., university 
degree) and applies for the vacancy he/she is interested in. 
7) ASEP confirms the validity of the proof of 
qualification declared and potentially its metadata (e.g., 
year of graduation) and updates ASEP backend (marking 
the qualification so that this process does not have to be 
repeated). 
8) ASEP uses QualiChain ´s MCDSS (Multi Criteria 
Decision Support System) to get an initial ranking of 
candidates. 
9) Based on this initial ranking, ASEP proceeds to the 
stage of interviews. 
10) ASEP uses QualiChain MCDSS to get the final 
ranking and ultimately the interim results. 
 
E. Pilot Challenges 
Several challenges have been identified from the 
beginning as follows: 
• 
Friendliness and usability of user interface provided 
by Qualichain, given that it will be, mainly, used by 
ASEP’S Members and employees, of no technical 
background whatsoever.  
• 
Pilot planning and integration with internal ASEP 
procedures.  
• 
Technical limitations of Blockchain technology 
related to performance and scalability, such as 
Quality of Service or throughput. However, the 
estimated impact for the pilot is expected to be 
minimal since the cornerstones of ASEP use case are 
transparency and immutability, both of which are 
among the pillars (and more popular characteristics) 
[22] of Blockchain. 
• 
Semantic interoperability between Greek terms used 
by ASEP information systems (e.g., institution 
244
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

names, qualifications, certifications, job descriptions 
and so forth) and QualiChain terminology.  
• 
Convincing field experts, committee members and 
ASEP decision makers that more precise, sufficient, 
detailed and complete justification of ASEP 
committees’ decisions can be achieved using 
QualiChain DSS features. 
• 
Compliance with Greek and EU regulation, e.g., 
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). 
Beyond the scope of the Greek pilot, it is interesting to 
see whether the current stiff legal framework safeguarding 
personal data in the EU will ultimately adapt to the 
blockchain’s nature, in order to make the most of the 
decentralization notion, as well as how interoperability and 
blockchain 
can 
co-exist 
or 
consolidate 
within 
an 
organization. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In order to achieve effective assessment in recruitment of 
the most qualified personnel in the public sector, methods 
and tools must be constantly developed and tested to educate 
and train everyone in line with new developments, in our 
case, with the blockchain technology, so that their benefits 
can be fully realized by all stakeholders.  
Several solutions / proposals aspire to promote the use of 
blockchain in recruitment but are still in the research / proof 
of concept phase or are mainly focused on private sector.  
By participating in QualiChain project, as a pilot for 
staffing the public sector, ASEP will have the opportunity to 
embed state of the art tools, not only to achieve validation 
(i.e., confirmation of authenticity), of university degrees,  
utilising blockchain technology to free the public sector from 
the relevant bureaucratic burden, but also to provide 
personalized information to citizens/potential candidates and 
explore ways to bring most value to the highly qualified 
personnel selected, enabling, effectively a breakthrough in 
contemporary recruitment processes in Greek civil service.  
In the future, ASEP aspires to extend the capabilities of 
QualiChain to other qualifications as well as explore other 
components / concepts totally foreign to public sector 
recruitment operations such as gamification or artificial 
intelligence. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has received funding from the European 
Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme 
under grant agreement No 822404 (QualiChain). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] K.Siassiakos, 
F.Bompoti, 
T.Papaioannou, 
K.Stagka, 
P.Zarafidis, and A.Pavli, “Exploring Blockchain for Public 
Sector Recruitment”, eLmL 2020, The Twelfth International 
Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning, 2020. 
Available 
at 
http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=
elml_2020_3_10_58001 2020.11.15 
[2] S.Ølnes 
and 
A.Jansen: 
 
Blockchain 
Technology 
as 
Infrastructure in Public Sector – an Analytical Framework 
(2018) 
[3] New OPSI (Observatory for Public Sector Innovation) guide 
to blockchain in the public sector - 26 June 2018, 
https://www.oecd.org/innovation/innovative-
government/oecd-guide-to-blockchain-technology-and-its-
use-in-the-public-sector.htm 2020.11.15 
[4] D.Efanov and P.Roschin, “The All-Pervasiveness of the 
Blockchain Technology”,  Procedia Computer Science, 
Volume 123, 2018, Pages 116-121 
[5] https://www.pwc.ch/en/insights/hr/how-blockchain-can-
impact-hr-and-the-world-of-work.html 2020.11.15 
[6] C.Kontzinos, 
O.Markaki, 
P.Kokkinakos, 
V.Karakolis, 
S.Skalidakis, and J.Psarras “University process optimisation 
through smart curriculum design and blockchain-based 
student accreditation”. Proceedings of 18th International 
Conference on WWW/Internet. 2019. 
[7] G.Mohamedbhai (2016): The Scourge of Fraud and 
Corruption in Higher Education. In IHE (84), p. 12. DOI: 
10.6017/ihe.2016.84.9111 
[8] D.Serranito, A.Vasconcelos, S.Guerreiro, and M.Correia, 
“Blockchain Ecosystem for Verifiable Qualifications”. eLmL 
2020, The Twelfth International Conference on Mobile, 
Hybrid, and On-line Learning, 2020. 
[9] StatisticBrain, 
“Resume 
Falsification 
Statistics” 
https://www.statisticbrain.com/resume-falsification-statistics 
2020.11.15 
[10] D. Salah et al., “Blockchain Applications in Human 
Resources Management - Opportunities and Challenges”, 
EASE 2020, April 15–17, 2020, Trondheim, Norway 
[11] Blockcerts 
consortium, 
“Blockcerts,” 
https://www.blockcerts.org/guide/, 2016-2019 2020.11.15 
[12] IMS Global, “OpenBadges v2.0,” https://openbadgespec.org/, 
2020 2020.11.15 
[13] European Blockchain Services Infrastructure, Available at 
https://ec.europa.eu/cefdigital/wiki/display/CEFDIGITAL/EB
SI 2020.11.15 
[14] University of Nicosia: Academic Certificates on the 
Blockchain, M.Sc. in Digital Currency - University of Nicosia 
(2014). 
http://digitalcurrency.unic.ac.cy/certificates 
2020.11.15 
[15] J.Rooksby and D.Kristiyan (2017): Trustless education? A 
blockchain system for university grades. In New Value 
Transactions: Understanding and Designing for Distributed 
Autonomous Organisations, Workshop at DIS 
[16] M.Turkanovic et al. (2018): "EduCTX. A Blockchain-Based 
Higher Education Credit Platform". In IEEE Access 6, pp. 
5112–5127. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2789929 
[17] https://hrexecutive.com/why-ibm-and-others-are-building-a-
global-database-for-employee-credentials/ 2020.11.15 
[18] https://www.velocitynetwork.foundation/wp-
content/uploads/2020/01/Velocity-Non-Technical-
Whitepaper-210119-V1.12-Published.pdf 2020.11.15 
[19] ASEP’s founding law 2190/1994 (Official Government 
Gazette nr. 28/B/1994) 
[20] A.Kelemenis and D.Askounis, "A new TOPSIS-based multi-
criteria approach to personnel selection", Expert Systems with 
Applications 37 (2010) 4999–5008, 2009 Elsevier 
[21] A.Mikroyannidis, “Blockchain Applications in Education: A 
Case Study in Lifelong Learning”. eLmL 2020, The Twelfth 
International Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line 
Learning, 2020. 
[22] M. Kouhizadeh and J. Sarkis, "Blockchain practices potentials 
and perspectives in greening supply chains", Sustainability, 
vol. 
10, 
no. 
10, 
pp. 
3652, 
Oct. 
2018
245
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
 
Educational 
Institute
Candidate
Greek Supreme Council Of 
Personnel Selection
Candidate Notification
Qualification Validation
QualiChain
Efficiency
Improve Selection Process
 
Figure 3.  Pilot expectations. 
246
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 4.  QualiChain ASEP pilot BPMN workflow. 
247
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

