Game-Based 3D Simulation of Life in the Middle Ages 
for the Edutainment in Cultural Heritage 
The reconstruction of medieval Otranto 
 
Lucio T. De Paolis, Giovanni Aloisio 
Department of Innovation Engineering 
Salento University 
Via Monteroni 
Lecce, Italy 
lucio.depaolis@unisalento.it 
giovanni.aloisio@unisalento.it 
Maria G. Celentano, Luigi Oliva, Pietro Vecchio 
Scuola Superiore ISUFI 
Salento University 
Via Monteroni 
Lecce, Italy 
mariagrazia.celentano@unisalento.it 
luigi.oliva@isufi.unile.it 
pietro.vecchio@unisalento.it  
 
 
Abstract—Virtual Reality applications on Cultural Heritage 
are increasing, according to a general trend towards virtual 
reproduction and interaction mediated by the computer 
system. The effects of this trend, both on education and 
research, are still far from being completely tested and defined. 
The aim of the MediaEvo Project is to develop a multi-channel 
and multi-sensory platform for the edutainment in Cultural 
Heritage, towards integration of human sciences and new data 
processing technologies, for the realization of a digital didactic 
game oriented to the knowledge of medieval history and 
society. The developing of the project has enhanced 
interactions among historical, pedagogical and ICT researches, 
morphological inquiries, data management systems, by means 
of the definition of a virtual immersive platform for playing 
and educating. The platform is also intended to collect 
feedback and validate hypothesis and findings coming from 
researchers. This essay introduces the questions related to the 
educative use of ICT and describes the steps of the 
reconstruction of the town of Otranto in the Middle Ages: data 
collection and integration, organization of work and software 
applications. 
Keywords- Simulation; Edutainment; Virtual Cultural 
Heritage; Urban History 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
There is a worldwide interest in for Virtual Reality (VR) 
technology in Cultural Heritage in order to recreate historical 
sites and events for such purposes as education, special 
project commissions and showcase features at visitor centers. 
The power of VR lies in its ability to open up places and 
to see things not normally accessible to people. VR also 
allows users to explore objects and to experience events that 
could not normally be explored without alterations of scale 
or time. The user can actively participate in creating new 
knowledge by doing and interacting with other users and 
objects in the virtual environment. 
The use of VR has defined new fields inside traditional 
research contexts. Today we consider virtual archaeology, 
virtual architecture or urbanism and so on as defined 
disciplines specialized in enhanced virtual representation or 
reconstruction as a distinctive methodology of approach. 
One of the best uses of virtual models is creating an 
environment to help students to learn about ancient cultures 
and to interact in a new way, using many possibilities for 
collaboration, in a shared social space. 
Recreating or simulating ancient cultures, virtual heritage 
applications create a bridge between historic characters and 
contemporary users. 
There are many experiences of historical environment 
reconstruction, the most successful are available on the web 
or have been presented in international conferences. Some of 
them relate to the elaboration of models or algorithms for 
better representing and reconstructing important sites, others 
explore Augmented Reality applications for Cultural 
Heritage, others test ontological systems for data managing 
and sharing. 
It is a widely held point of view that cultural heritage is 
diminishing continuously. While new treasures emerge from 
places previously unexplored or ignored, a larger number of 
buildings and sites are compromised by natural or human 
action. This process leads to the demise of important 
historical documents and artistic goods. 
The improvement of technological capabilities enriches 
the possibilities for research and protection and enhances 
the value of cultural heritage, thus halting their demise. 
Firstly, the increased speed of communication, data 
exchange and data processing offers to the research 
community the dimension of real-time interconnectivity. 
Secondly, the overall amount of information originating 
from both qualitative and quantitative exploration with the 
support of technologically advanced equipments, compared 
with that of a few decades ago, leads to the possibility of an 
extremely detailed description of reality. 
The systems for cataloguing and managing these data 
have been structured with complex and ontological 
categories (the term ontology refers to a “specification of a 
representational vocabulary for a shared domain of 
discourse - definitions of classes, relations, functions, and 
162
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

other object” [1]) that define common protocols for 
enhancing classification and comparison, even among 
distant users.  
Finally, the elements that constitute the overall sign of 
the times are the possibilities presented by the means for a 
realistic representation of everything that comes from 
research, from the hyper sensorial reproduction of reality to 
the reconstruction of different hypotheses and scenarios. 
The expansion of these means necessitates a contextual 
disciplinary revision of interest to all those in the field of 
humanistic studies. Historians cannot afford to buck the 
trend 
to 
a 
post-literary 
dimension 
of 
knowledge 
transmission or knowledge itself [2]. 
The new phase of contemporary civilization has been 
defined post-modern or, more correctly, post-historic [3], 
for 
the 
predominance 
of 
representation 
and 
hard 
virtualization of reality. 
Evolution in research methodology corresponds to a 
general debate on communication and education closely 
linked to the characteristics of a changing perception of 
teaching, oscillating between experimental impulses and 
conservative attitudes [4], [5], [6]. 
The approach to the historical city, in terms of research 
and understanding both academic and popular, has been 
enriched by new tools and thanks to the development and 
proliferation of advanced technologies. The speed with 
which the use of computers and electronic devices has 
grown by a very wide range of users demands constant 
progress in the ways in which information is gathered, 
managed and transmitted. 
On one hand the virtualization of space has reached such 
levels of mimesis as to influence the perceptual field and the 
capacity for evaluation of the experience. On the other hand, 
this factor, which is destabilizing for the whole field of 
investigation and understanding of reality – already 
predicted nearly half a century ago by various authors –, has 
completely 
changed 
the 
praxis 
and 
market 
for 
entertainment. Thus positively influencing the rate of 
contextual assimilation of the information but also 
negatively affecting concentration spans for its reception. 
The new post-historical and communicative research 
frontier that interprets these processes focuses on the 
possibility of increasing a multidisciplinary approach and 
interchange, reacting in an active way to the promotion of 
cultural heritage and safeguarding against the degenerative 
processes that undermine it.  
Communication and transfer of data nowadays occurs in 
real time, making an infinite amount of information 
available originating from quantitative and qualitative 
investigation. New systems for cataloguing and managing 
this data are organised according to structures of reference 
which are of a formal-ontological nature and ever more 
complex for which common protocols evolve facilitating the 
identification and comparison even of realities which are 
quite distinct from each other. 
Finally, the already immense possibilities for realistic 
representation of all that emerges from research are 
growing, from the information that is detected with extreme 
precision to the different reconstructive hypotheses.  
On this basis, the MediaEvo Project is aimed at creating a 
multichannel and multisensory edutainment platform for 
Cultural Heritage, through the integration of the human 
sciences and Information and Communication Technologies 
(ICT). 
The activities include the creation of an educational 
video game aimed at spreading knowledge of medieval 
society in the area of Salento through the reconstruction of 
the city of Otranto in the XIII century. 
II. 
RECONSTRUCTING HISTORICAL CONTEXTS 
The virtual reconstruction of a historical landscape can 
be divided in five levels [7]. 
1) The first level, Archaeological Landscape, regards all 
the information coming from physical measurement (we 
choose to call it, properly, Realscape). 
2) The second level is the Interpreted Landscape or 
Mapscape that is defined by the systematic organization of 
data. 
3) The third one is the hypothesis of a possible 
landscape in the past, Ancient Potential Landscape or 
Pastscape. 
4) The fourth level involves the experience of historical 
context through a process of immersion which defines 
contemporary perceptions. With the aid of the social 
sciences this leads to the definition of Perceived Landscape 
or Mindscape. 
5) The final level is the Webscape, the grid of outer 
relations and communication that is useful to test the 
process and collect the necessary feedback. 
In the academic world, the "historic vision" is usually 
limited to professors, scholars and researchers, who share 
the interpretation codes for extracting the ancient landscape 
from the actual one. In this new stream of experimentation, 
geared towards interaction and edutainment, the researcher 
finally becomes part of a system through which to study and 
interpret space.  
In a virtual interactive town, the possibilities of 
information exchange increase dramatically from the static 
reconstruction to the simulation. The simulation allows the 
construction of a platform that adds the definition of game 
rules and plots to interaction and immersion. This allows 
players to easily experience and recognize topographical 
and temporal coordinates of virtual space. In this way the 
past is actualized with real behaviors, producing at the same 
time, the vision of pastscape and mindscape in the virtual 
reality built on realscape and related to the mapscape. 
Studying a town and its historic landscape involves 
different 
methods 
of 
analysis, 
interpretation 
and 
communication using digital technologies. Geographical 
Information System (GIS), remote sensing, laser scanning, 
photogrammetry, computer vision, 3D modeling, Virtual 
Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality (AR) are instruments 
163
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

of 
a 
multidisciplinary 
system 
that 
links 
historical 
knowledge, structural recognition, geotopography, geology, 
sociology, urban and architectonic analysis, engineering and 
graphic skills. 
The ancient town, as an information unit, can be defined 
as a meme [8], a cultural unit code that locates and describes 
the process of territorialization of human society. It is the 
space-time relation between man and environment at a 
certain time [9]. 
III. 
RELATED WORK 
The methodological and disciplinary peculiarities 
concerning VR have opened up new possibilities within 
disciplines that have led on, in the space of only a few years, 
to develop distinct characters of their own. Now days, we 
speak of virtual archaeology, virtual architecture, virtual 
town planning and so on, indicating that part of the 
discipline which is closely linked to material contexts and 
specialized in the reconstruction or verification of classical 
assumptions or of new hypotheses. The pure humanistic 
disciplines (history, philosophy, etc.) are still some way 
from this point. Their contribution, however, is fundamental 
in order to validate all the work in this environment.  
Several VR applications in Cultural Heritage have been 
developed, but only very few of these with an edutainment 
aim. 
Song et al. [10] present the historical and cultural content 
of the reconstructed 3D VE to the general public in a 
pedagogical 
and 
entertaining 
way; 
they 
incorporate 
interactive storytelling techniques into a Digital Heritage 
application. Because they believe interactive storytelling 
techniques can enrich the process of exploring the VE since 
each visitor can walk away with a different virtual 
experience. 
Kiefer et al. [11] describe a subclass of location-based 
games, Geogames, which are characterized by a specific 
spatial-temporal structuring of the game events and assert 
that spatial-temporal structuring makes it easy to integrate 
educational content into the course of the game. 
Cutrì et al. [12] study the use of mobile technologies 
equipped with global positioning systems as an information 
aid for archaeological visits. They conclude that the use of 
this kind of technology is an effective tool to promote the 
archeo-geographical value of the site. 
Luyten et al. [13] present Archie, a mobile guide system 
that uses a social-constructionist approach to enhance the 
learning experience for museum visitors. They created a 
collaborative game for youngsters that is built on top of a 
generic mobile guide framework. The framework offers a set 
of services such as a rich interactive presentation, 
communication facilities among visitors and the possibility 
to personalize the interface according to the user group. 
In the work of reconstructing historical or archaeological 
landscapes, extensive experimentation takes place on the net 
or has been presented during the course of international 
conferences. These primarily concern the elaboration of 
algorithmic models in order to better comprehend and 
reconstruct the sites, technological applications for AR 
applied to cultural heritage and ontological systems and data 
management. 
An example of activity in the fields closest to the object 
of the present research is the work of the Institute for 
Architectural and Monumental Heritage [14] which has 
produced various reconstructions of the city of Metaponto 
(in the province of Matera) and of Muro Leccese (in the 
province of Lecce) and the monasteries of Santa Maria of 
Cerrate (province of Lecce) and Jure Vetere in the medieval 
age [15]. 
The reconstruction of the site of Faragola (province of 
Foggia) by the University of Foggia, undertaken as part of 
the Project Itinera [16]and known as Time Machine, fits 
within the trend of an experiential relationship within an 
archaeological context. 
Other applications facilitate access to and reading of the 
cultural patrimony both within the museum and online: 
Appia Antica Project [17], Virtual Rome Project [18], Muvi, 
a virtual museum dealing with daily life in the XX century 
[19], and Nu.M.E. Project, a virtual museum concerned with 
the city of Bologna [20], are all to be considered prominent 
examples of experience relating to the latter. 
On a strongly interactive level and related specifically to 
multichannel edutainment, examples of applications utilizing 
Virtual Collaborative Environments (CVEs) are found in the 
platform City Cluster [21] that permits the user to share in a 
virtual visit of various cities, Quest Atlantis Project [22] for 
teaching about archaeological contexts and Integrated 
Technologies of Robotics and Virtual Environment in 
Archaeology Project [23] that indicates a more professional 
use of VR interaction aimed not only at information 
dissemination but also scientific examination. 
IV. 
THE MEDIAEVO PROJECT 
The MediaEvo Project aims to develop a multi-channel 
and multi-sensorial platform in Cultural Heritage and to test 
new data processing technologies for the realization of a 
digital didactic game oriented to the knowledge of medieval 
history and society.  
The game is intended as a means to experience a loyal 
representation of the possible scenarios (environments, 
characters and social roles) in the historic-geographical 
context of Otranto during Swabian Age (XIII century).  
We chose Otranto as an example town; Otranto is 
located in the south of Italy. Due to its geographical position 
(in the extreme East of Italy), Otranto was like a bridge 
between East and West. 
The implementation of the edutainment platform is 
strongly influenced by the definition of the scenery that is 
the world in which the framework is placed with the related 
learning objects and learning path, the characters, the 
scene’s objects, the logic and so the rules of the game, the 
audio content, the texts and anything related to its use. 
The framework will have features of strategy games, in 
which the decision-making capacities of a user have a big 
164
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

impact on the result, which in our case is the achievement of 
a learning target. Nevertheless the strategy and tactics are in 
general opposed by unforeseeable factors (provided by the 
game) connected with the edutainment modules, in order to 
provide a higher level of participation, which is expressed in 
terms of the ease with which it is learnt. The idea is to 
provide a competition between the players, during the 
learning. 
The system, on the basis of a well defined learning target 
and eventually based on knowledge of the user, will 
continuously propose a learning path (learning path 
composed of a sequence of learning objects), in order to 
allow the achievement of particular learning results. 
V. 
MEDIEVAL OTRANTO AS A SCENERY 
The city of Otranto was identified as a unique and 
eloquent historical setting for the project. Although the 
specific field of research was focused on the late middle 
ages, the project is set in a site which has been densely 
inhabited since before the VII century BCE and which 
conserves the signs of the previous cultural stratifications. 
In figure 1 is shown a bird's eye perspective of the old 
town of Otranto [24]. 
The project leaves open the possibility for further work 
on other historical phases with the prospect of developing a 
complete ‘time machine’.  
Through its art, spatial relationships and landscape, 
Otranto provides evidence of the close contact between 
Mediterranean cultures, particularly those of western Roman 
Catholicism, Byzantium and Islam. The year considered 
representative for the medieval reconstruction is 1227 - the 
year in which Emperor Frederick II of Swabia and his court 
entered the city for the first time to embark for the Sixth 
Crusade. 
From the analysis of the monuments and documents, 
numerous useful points that facilitate the multicultural 
experience emerge to enrich the educative platform of 
immediate reference. 
Otranto was officially a bilingual city. Together with 
Latin, Byzantine Greek was officially spoken by the 
archbishop during religious celebrations and both languages 
were taught at San Nicola of Casole - one of the great 
centers of cultural conservation and diffusion known as the 
scriptoria.  
Being a maritime and mercantile city, the languages of 
the populace were many and varied. Throughout its history, 
Otranto has been settled by cultures that have influenced on 
the city on both an historical and artistic level [25], [26]. 
This cultural melting pot produced a particular mix of 
knowledge and traditions, still recognizable in some of the 
customs, handcrafts, and figurative art and in the articulation 
of space in Otranto. Interaction in a local context of this kind 
cannot but represent situations that resonate with the great 
themes of medieval civilization, in a sort of tiny virtual 
encyclopedia. 
 
Figure 1.  Bird's eye perspective of the old tonw of Otranto. 
VI. 
THE STEPS OF RECONSTRUCTION 
The ancient town of Otranto preserves relevant elements 
that witness Middle Ages culture but also the former and 
latter ones. This could increase the pedagogical purposes and 
place the project in a more complex, complete, "time 
machine" perspective. 
In 1227, when the Emperor Frederick II of Swabia, 
entered the town with his wife and court, Otranto was a 
cultural melting pot. Even if there were two official 
languages, latin and byzantine greek, walking in the town it 
wasn't uncommon to hear people talking in hebrew, 
armenian, vareg, french, provencal, german, arabic, etc. 
All those elements can be reflected in a big deal of 
situations that are useful for educational purposes. In other 
terms we could say that Otranto, as it is represented in the 
game, becomes a compact, interactive, little encyclopedia of 
Middle Ages civilization. 
A. Data acquisition 
The general information we first collect are actual Digital 
Terrain 
Models 
(DTM), 
thematic, 
technical, 
hydro-
geological, nautical charts. On local side, surveys and 
metering operations produced maps of street organization, 
urban limits and fortifications, monuments and materials, 
referenced to absolute coordinates (mapscape). 
Information coming from archaeology (published or 
available in archives) has been inserted in topographic 
charts, distinguishing the different historical period [27], 
[28]. 
The overall amount of data acquired and represented 
defines the actual state and conformation of the town 
(realscape) on which we are making a process of subtraction 
(reverse stratigraphy), in order to obtain the urban fabric on 
year 1227. 
Unfortunately, during the last centuries, there has been a 
substantial loss of historical documents. The survived ones 
are not enough to describe efficiently the town in Middle 
Ages. 
The first views of Otranto date to the end of XV century. 
They are more symbolic than realistic. Furthermore, 
historical maps and views have been collected and classified, 
together with relevant documents and plans. 
165
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

B. Data interpretation 
The numerous gaps regarding, above all, the urban structure 
and placement of notable building, monumental and 
functional contexts were filled in part by a historical-urban 
and architectonic analysis in order to establish the spatial 
hierarchy, the urban poles, the lot sizes and the typological 
distribution [29]. 
The material elements were compared with analogous 
situations relating to surrounding areas or cities and 
modulation grids on a typological-functional basis were 
used for the built environment, the objects, the clothes and 
activities. 
The possible scenarios for the era in question were 
added to the base consisting of the above-mentioned data 
(pastscape). This is updated in real time, little by little as the 
extent and detail of the research and representation is 
extended and enriched. 
C. The creation of the urban landscape 
The first phase of the reconstruction involved the use of 
GIS in order to model the georeferenced DTM, on the basis 
of the reconstruction of the hypothesized altitude and sea 
level of the time. On this, the extra-urban roadways were 
identified, defining the hierarchy of pathways and their 
structural characteristics (stone, pressed earth, rock, etc) and 
relating them to the presumed location of the port. 
Reasoning on the basis of vicinity and typology, the 
settlement maps for the various homogenous parts of the city 
were made, starting with the area around the Saint Peter’s 
church. 
The architectonic elements reconstructed were made 
using two modalities. The existing monumental buildings 
were modelled on the basis of a critical reconstructive survey 
which rendered them in their XIII century state, with what is 
supposed to have been lost at the hand of degrade, 
maintenance or restoration integrated into the reconstruction. 
The curtain walls and the residential units of different 
types were based on an analysis of the city and the metrics of 
the time [30], they were reproduced, catalogued and entered 
into a database. For every one of these a set of variations was 
foreseen (form, composition of levels, openings, mouldings, 
surfaces, materials, etc) to distinguish them and promote a 
realistic perception of the game. 
The historic scenario is however a static representation of 
a context. The final goal of interactive reconstruction is the 
definition of an immersive platform able to let players 
experience and feel the socio-cultural values of that period 
(mindscape). This is reached towards the creation of high 
representative interactive contexts: 
• 
defensive (fortifications, castle); 
• 
religious (the diocesan space: cathedral-tower bell-
square and the churches); 
• 
infrastructural (function and hierarchy of road axes, 
identification of the central distribution system and 
its links); 
• 
commercial (buildings and structure devoted to 
exchange, commerce, distribution and collection of 
goods); 
• 
intermodal (port, regional roads); 
• 
sub-urban (expansion areas, non urban functions: 
monasteries, docks, fields, etc.); 
• 
residential (neighborhood, social-economical-racial 
concentration and building types); 
• 
artisan (arts and crafts); 
• 
familiar. 
D. Analysis and findings 
1) The walls 
The defensive context, which includes the city walls, the 
castle, the internal and external garrisons for surveillance and 
responding to attacks, is to be considered the first context of 
reference for reasons of both a cultural and spatial nature.  
By definition in contemporary historiography: a city is an 
urban area surrounded by a ring of walls, inside which men 
of 
different 
families 
and 
occupations 
live 
without 
interruption [31]. 
Until the present day, the city has preserved its defensive 
structure that is the result of sudden, radical defensive 
reorganization after the Christian recapture of the city after 
their tragic expulsion by the Ottomans in 1480. 
The age and the impact of this intervention don’t allow 
us to effectively determine the original medieval image. A 
more circumstantial investigation is required. In relation to 
the historical documentation, the findings of archaeological 
campaigns and above all on the basis of the analysis of the 
urban fabric, some useful considerations relevant to the 
reconstruction can be expressed.  
The historical centre of Otranto is located on a strip of 
land between two watercourses. The natural elevation rises 
to an altitude of approximately 35metres above average sea 
level (in the area of the current cemetery) and falls to an 
average of 14 metres in the ancient city, fronting onto the sea 
at 12 metres.  
The coastline near the city centre is characterised by an 
inlet, which corresponds with the two outlets for the water 
channels and results in a double internal cove that the 
promontory of land constituting the residential centre 
overlooks.  
Between these, the larger of the two water basins, the 
Idro, is a fundamental element for the entire settlement (he 
probably gave the name to the town, according to someone) 
for the fact that it guarantees a minimal, continual supply of 
water in a region which is characterized by an intrinsic lack 
of surface water.  
In figure 2 is shown the definition of hydrographical, 
urban and defensive structures of the Otranto town. 
The geomorphology and hydrology of the site identify a 
natural system that contains within it and influences the 
characteristics of the residential centre both on a functional 
level, in terms of the infrastructure and – above all for the 
ancient and medieval eras – on a strategic-defensive level. 
The archaeological evidence reveals a substantial 
continuous settlement located on the shore of the sea, which 
dates to the Messapian era, made evident by the surviving 
fragments of city walls – often reinforced – brought to light 
in the course of archaeological excavations. 
166
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 2.  Definition of hydrographical, urban and defensive structures. 
Without going into too much detail regarding preceding 
eras, for the late Middle Ages one can certainly talk of a city 
well defended by parallel rings of walls on the inland side 
and guarded by a system of towers and curtain walls on the 
sea, organized according to the framework usual in the 
poliorcetics of that time (turres, cortinas et barbacanas 
[32]). 
Between the XI and XIII centuries the city did not 
undergo any traumatic events that influenced its form. This 
meant a structural continuity that substantially supported the 
demographic fluctuations and functional needs through 
constant adaptation [33]. We can suppose, then, from that 
period on, a certain saturation of the fabric within the inner 
circle. 
Because of the strategic role of the port, extra-urban 
development occurred in such a way as to assure different 
levels of defence of the settlement, in order to avoid 
exposing large parts of the city and its resources to sacking 
by assailants and to impede direct attack upon the city centre. 
The archaeological evidence which demonstrates the 
existence of an external wall built on the abutments of the 
ancient pre-Roman wall in medieval times supports the logic 
of “parallel rings” (according to a logic consistent with 
continuity and economic rationalism) which were built 
according to a byzantine model with round towers and 
curtain walls whose extension is still faintly visible today in 
the form of the development of the modern city. 
Another wall or system of towers, of which there is 
evidence in a number of pictures, was located along the 
internal coast of the bay, in order to monitor for and repel 
eventual disembarkation by assailants; from the Swabian 
age, the defence of the territory was based on a rational and 
well developed system which involved direct or indirect 
communication between positions, towers and castles [34]. 
2) The castle 
All this system had to have its fulcrum in the castle, the 
location of which during the Middle Ages is still uncertain. 
On the basis of descriptions of the access to the port from the 
sea made in the second half of the XIII century in Lo 
Compasso de navegare e la Puglia we know that the fort 
overlooked the sea [35]. 
The only descriptive reports that we have of the castrum 
in the first half of the 13th century refers to the necessity to 
leads us to imagine a fortification exposed to high tides, 
while at the same time, according to the Compasso intervene 
in order to repair two towers damaged by the sea (due turres 
ex maris percussione continua minantur ruinam [36]). 
The present day form of the area between the port and the 
city, upon that we can hypothesize the medieval castle, was 
probably heavily modified by the excavation of the moat in 
the modern era. From reading the contour lines, from the 
signs of the quarry and the Bastion of Pelasgi, it’s apparent 
that the original rock face was lowered by several metres, 
converting the original and naturally craggy slope, which 
was approximately 7-8 metres above sea level into the 
present day low lying plane which connects the 15th century 
moat with the sea [37], [38]. 
Further confirmation seems to come from the network of 
the urban roads (path matrix), which appears to be “oriented” 
towards what once must have been the ‘sea gate’ defence for 
the castle. 
The constructed masses were then enclosed within a 
system of curtain walls interspersed with towers which 
opened onto the bay where the port was situated; a vital 
place for the economic life of the city. The castle, with its 
functional and symbolic value, was the fulcrum of this 
landscape composition. 
3) The gates 
Questions connected with the closure and defence of the 
urban space are tied to aspects that concern the connection of 
the city with the outside and with the structures of exchange. 
We know from contemporary descriptions that the main 
gate of the city opened onto river Idro while the 
abovementioned seaward gate, opened towards the south 
[39]. Apart from the main gate, a small gate (porticella) 
connected part of the city with the surrounding countryside. 
4) The churches 
On the religious side, two ecclesiastical buildings are 
those best known from the archaeological investigations and 
studies: the cathedral [40] and the St. Peter’s church [41], for 
which functional continuity has been established since the 
Early Middle Ages. 
They can be considered the epicentres of well-defined 
sectors of the city for their importance to the cultural and 
iconological meme of Otranto. 
5) Connections and activities 
The image of the city from the land was mediated by a 
number of churches and monastic settlements outside the 
city walls, residential suburbs or facilities for warehousing 
goods or for the production of handcrafts and other goods. 
The public road that connected the city with Lecce and 
Brindisi to the north and with Castro and Leuca to the south 
skirted the external wall of the city, deviating around the city 
near the port. Along the basin of the river Idro, on the rocky 
banks, a series of caves that probably date back to the cave 
dwelling culture of late antiquity or the Paleochristian period 
167
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

opened up [42]. Based on the principle of continual function 
as seen with other structures, these were probably still in use 
by the lower levels of the population for housing, shelter for 
animals, craft making workshops or as deposits for 
agricultural tools. 
The city of the Late Middle Ages, in periods of political 
stability and before the Saracen raids, passed through a phase 
of consolidation of its economy of scale based on exchange 
and the port. Services and specialisation were developed 
supporting a well-developed social pyramid. This led to a 
marked diversification in the various types of housing, in 
large part erased by the modern walls and by more recent 
reconstruction. 
6) Housing 
The urban fabric within the walls presents obvious 
heterogeneity that is related to the peculiar stratified and 
paratactic condition of its formation. For the area 
overlooking the sea, located on a natural raised plane 
(acropolis), an ordinary, regular, geometric layout, based on 
the model of the classical Greek-Roman atrium-peristyle 
house which was widespread in byzantine town planning 
seems evident (for Otranto, upon an initial analysis of the 
ground floors, a base model of around 15.6x21.8 metres is 
revealed, corresponding to a unit measuring 50x70 byzantine 
feet of 31.2538 centimetres).  
The reading is complicated in the lower areas where 
overlapping fragments of structures that resemble the Roman 
insulae model are positioned in order to accommodate the 
matrix of paths and natural terraces defined by the natural 
contours. 
There are examples of building relating to different 
settlement logic. Such is the case near the cathedral and 
bishop’s palace which is laid out on a east-west axis in 
correspondence with the liturgical orientation, but equally 
obvious is a border area which saturates the area adjacent to 
the linear northern front of the medieval wall, on which the 
Romanesque bell tower sits, then enlarged when the walls of 
the 15th century were erected.  
From the XII century onwards some of these modules 
were replaced with terrace houses that were common in the 
commercial area. The basic type of structure in the medieval 
period, two rooms with vaulting on the ground floor and attic 
in wood on the upper floors [43], was based on the model of 
shop and residence and is found in the historical centre, in 
scattered agglomerations along the pathways. Other lots, 
originally atrium-peristyle houses were substituted in later 
ages (from the XVI century) to make way for the creation, in 
grouping or lines, of aristocratic residences. 
7) Services 
Structural reading based on the recognition of logical 
distribution or relative elementary modules is only one of the 
interpretive keys available. The city of Otranto in the Middle 
Ages was also characterized socially. The scene was brought 
to life by large or small family groups living according to a 
rigid subdivision and hierarchy of tasks: travellers who lived 
in the xenodochia; pilgrim beggars on their way to or from 
the east [44]; merchants and craftsmen; men of religion; 
milites and pedites. 
 
Figure 3.  Schematic plan of supposed medieval Otranto. 
The city itself was a machine designed for defence in 
case of attack, to facilitate or hinder certain categories of 
weapons: the windy road, narrow staircases, conferred an 
operational advantage on the citizens without horses who 
could, working from the land and their windows, fire long 
ranging arms) [45], etc. 
All these layers overlap to define and characterise the 
real object of the research that opens the field to the infinity 
of things that can be expressed by the virtual.  
In figure 3 is shown the schematic plan of supposed 
medieval Otranto showing the hierarchy and distribution of 
routes. In this figure are reported the ancient classic structure 
ante Middle Ages in magenta, the medieval ones according 
to contour lines in light green, the buildings (dwellings in 
orange, ecclesiastical in light grey, towers in brown), the 
spaces (courts in black, gardens and fields in olive green) 
and the fortifications (towers and gates in yellow, walls and 
castle in red). 
The scheme is drawn on the actual ground plan of the 
town (in background white on black) compared to the 19th 
Century plan (in blue). 
VII. 3D MODELING AND GAME ENGINE 
A Digital Terrain Model (DTM) that has been produced 
using ESRI ArcGIS, containing all historical information 
like sea level, rivers, etc. It has been saved in .dif format and 
imported in the game engine.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Digital Terrain Model of Otranto site. 
168
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 5.  Location of Otranto town in DTM. 
In figure 4 is shown the Digital Terrain Model (with a 
magnification of 5) of the Otranto site and in figure 5 the 
location of the town in this model. 
For building and street modelling, we first used 
AutoCAD, 3ds Max, Cinema 4D. Characters and animation 
are made using 3ds Max. 
Once defined a list of modular elementary residential 
unit, according to the local medieval unit system, we 
composed the urban landscape in which monuments, 
infrastructures and situations are located. 
In Figure 5 is shown the plane-volumetric reconstruction 
in CAD application and in Figure 6 is reported a 3D model 
of actual Otranto. 
VIII. BUILDING OF THE VIRTUAL ENVIRONMENT 
For the building of the virtual environment we used the 
Torque Constructor editor of GarageGames for creating 3D 
architectural contents for the Torque 3D engine.  
 
 
Figure 6.  3D model of buildings distribution. 
For the building of specific monuments, such as Saint 
Peter's Church, the Cathedral and the Castle, we used first a 
CAM in order to obtain a more accurate definition of the 
architectural structures and then we imported these models 
into the Torque 3D engine [46]. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Render view of actual old town of Otranto. 
The choice of the Torque Constructor was prompted by 
technical considerations regarding the ability of software to 
perform a direct mapping of the files “.map”, the 
compatibility level with the Torque Game Engine chosen to 
develop the game, the immediacy and the usability of 
internal tools. The application also includes all the converters 
needed to export file from ‘.map’ to ‘.dif’ compressed 
structure. 
The Torque Constructor has proved to be an efficient tool 
for the direct implementation of 3D graphics models. In 
particular, it has many geometrical tools for the graphic 
processing of the reality context and different controls to 
select the top of the structure or individual brush model.  
All units made in the Torque Constructor have been 
imported into the Torque Game Engine. The initial testing 
step revealed several problems of navigability of the objects. 
These problems were related to the incompatibility between 
the domains of collision associated with the objects imported 
into the three-dimensional environment and the avatar. 
Tests carried out have helped to identify and resolve 
these problems by setting the values associated to the 
collision domains and to the proportions between objects and 
avatars. At present all units are properly imported and 
successfully navigated. 
In Figure 4 a set of residential units are shown. 
In the context of the computer graphics for cultural 
heritage, a stable algorithm has been implemented to import 
CAD objects into the Torque Game Engine platform and to 
ensure navigation into each graphic structure. This technique 
together with an efficient system for exporting textures and 
paintings will be used to realize graphic complex 
environments for the 2D/3D reconstruction in cultural 
heritage.  
The first monument to be modelled has been St. Peter's 
Church, due both to its characteristic of modularity that is 
useful for testing the software and its historical relevance as 
unique byzantine building located in a medieval context. 
169
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

After drawing and importing the church with textures and 
lights we experienced problems with the non-convex objects 
produced by common modelling software that drove us to 
use only Torque dedicated applications like Torque 
Constructor.  
 
 
Figure 8.  A set of residential units 
In Figure 11 is shown the reconstruction of St. Peter’s 
Church and its surroundings; in particular, in 11(a) is 
reported the scheme of the reconstructed church with (in 
black) a chapel that existed in the Middle Ages and was 
afterwards destroyed. 
In Figure 12 is shown the reconstruction of Otranto 
Cathedral; in particular, in 12(a) is reported the mosaic of the 
internal floor of the church. 
IX. 
PLAYERS AND ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
Inside MediaEvo Project has been implemented a 
module to manage the interactions with Artificial 
Intelligence [47]. The artificial intelligence (AI) is necessary 
to establish relations among characters in the virtual game 
and to exchange multimedia information and by prompting 
commands real time. The ability to interact with AI 
characters is the principal key for retrieving knowledge and 
experiences from a virtual reality environment. 
In the MediaEvo Project, the component of Artificial 
Intelligence is based on a graphical interface, with the 
following specifications: the interface should allow the 
starting of the interaction by pushing a default button on the 
keyboard; the interface should provide a choice of 
applications to be given as instructions to the virtual 
character; the interface should display all workable 
interactions with a virtual character. For this purpose, a 
reconfigurable database of instructions has been generated. 
The configurable database has direct access to the AI 
Interactive module. The AI Interactive Module has been 
realized according to the guidelines of the scripts 
implemented in Torque Game Engine [47]. 
In figure 9 is reported the algorithm to manage the 
Artificial Intelligence. 
The AI Interactive algorithm can be divided into two 
main modules: AIT Server Management Code and AIT GUI 
Management Code. When the player selects an item of the 
AIT Queries database, the GUI interface establishes a 
communication between the player and a virtual AI 
character. The selected item contains the instruction that 
could be imparted to the AI character. The instruction is 
managed from the AIT GUI Management Code module that 
encapsulates the information into a single system call. 
Finally, the system call is routed to the AIT Server 
Management Code module and then it is interpreted to 
identify the corresponding action, into the AIT Actions 
database. 
The game has been designed for enabling multi-playing 
in order to provide a real-time interaction with other game 
sessions localized in the reconstructed virtual environment.  
Some multimedia elements are available in the MediaEvo 
platform for the context of edutainment in cultural heritage. 
The main ones are: 1. the availability of audio clips and 
sounds in the game; 2. the use of triggers to start up audio or 
video events when a player reaches some checkpoints or 
thresholds. 
In Figure 10 is shown the visualization of a video that 
pops up when a player gets close enough to the entrance of 
St. Peter’s church. In the same figure 10 is also shown a 
virtual radar, a mean to let players know their position in the 
town and the one of other players. 
X. 
THE ALGORITHM FOR THE AUDIO AND VOICEIP 
Inside the MediaEvo Project has been implemented a 
module to integrate voice and text interactions between the 
players and other characters located into the Torque virtual 
environment. 
The trigger between the vocal process and the Torque 
virtual environment is realized through a system call 
implemented and built into the kernel of the Torque Game 
Engine.  
 
 
Figure 9.  Artificial Intelligence. 
170
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 10.  The opening of a multimedia clip video. 
The insertion of the vocal connections can increase the 
interactions with characters and/or players in the virtual 
game and allow performing some input and output that 
normally are performed throughout keyboard, mouse, 
screen, and other input/output devices. 
The possibility to establish a vocal connection with other 
players is one of the best ways for retrieving knowledge and 
experiences during the virtual game. The vocal interaction 
contains some algorithms to realize text-to-speech systems. It 
is also possible to ask some actions directly to the players 
through the audio channel. 
In addition, in the audio module has been implemented a 
system to realize a VoiceIP connection between all players. 
The audio module is based on a simple graphical interface 
provided with a bar that indicates the microphone audio level 
during the vocal conversation and a flag that specifies if the 
audio module is working or not. 
The audio module has been integrated with some scripts 
inside the Torque Game Engine. All the audio conversations 
are transmitted through a protocol compatible with the 
Internet platform. 
The Speaky toolkit [48] has been provided by 
MediaVoice Company, partner of the MediaEvo Project, and 
is based on two modules: the Voice Platform and the Control 
Center Modules. 
The main task of the Voice Platform is to handle the 
voice interaction between the user and the applications. The 
Control Center helps the users to configure Speaky 
parameters.  
The Speaky platform supports Loquendo engine for 
Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) and Text To Speech 
(TTS) in Italian language. The MediaVoice Company is 
working for a multi-language version of the product. 
The vocal interactions are realized by using a specific 
remote command that can communicate with the Speaky 
Toolkit for imparting voice interactions.  
XI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The MediaEvo Project has led the researchers to consider 
some of the issues presented by the multidisciplinary nature 
of the project and the close correlation between technical and 
humanistic fields. In particular, conditions were created that 
implied history researchers to test model built using 
information coming from their work. 
In larger terms, the reconstruction of the medieval city 
of Otranto in the MediaEvo Project, determined the 
conditions for testing the overall functionality and systemic 
coherence through the real time production of environments, 
objects, situations, and virtual landscapes, thought up in 
order to represent the totality of knowledge of that times.  
The representation, intended for communicating and 
educating, was designed to open itself up to the interactive 
and multisensory dimension in such a way as to become 
simultaneously 
subject, 
object 
and 
context 
of 
the 
experience. Communication and representation are not 
limited to the pathway of a one-way guided narrative, but 
open up possibilities for more enjoyable elements of 
interaction and a multisensory mediation, in which can 
merge objects, subjects and the experiential context. 
Measured against the notable potential of a virtual 
scenario, a series of properties have been defined 
sufficiently to give the game platform an effective 
educational value [49]. 
By incorporating historical, technical and educational 
considerations the final product presents itself as a 
“complete-open-interactive” environment, with a good 
historical-philological 
validation, 
while 
allowing 
for 
continuous updating and testing. Since the Middle Ages are 
only partially explored, by these means an ideal extent of 
the knowledge of a context can be represented and 
experienced in its material totality.  
Already tested for other urban realities, by opening itself 
to exponential complexity, the Time Machine is definitively 
becoming a formidable tool for the acquisition of 
knowledge, the enhancement and safeguarding of cultural 
heritage. 
The MediaEvo Project evaluates the premises upon 
which the future development of an historical cyberspace is 
capable of contextualising past experience, in order to 
explore a range of parallel realities based on description and 
philological reconstructions. 
In the MediaEvo Project has also been tested the 
possibility to enjoy the virtual environments using the Apple 
IPhone mobile. The IPhone version of MediaEvo Project 
through the iTGE platform for IPhone Torque is still in 
progress. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors wish to thank Pierpaolo Limone of Foggia 
University for the advice in the pedagogical development of 
the game and Massimo Limoncelli for the building of the 3D 
model of the Otranto Cathedral. 
 
171
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

REFERENCES 
[1] 
T. R. Gruber, “A translation approach to portable ontology 
specifications”, in Knowledge Acquisition, vol. 5, issue 2. june1993, 
pp.199-220. 
[2] 
R. A.Rosenstone,. Revisioning History. Film and the Construction of 
a new Past, Princeton, USA: University Press, 1995. 
[3] 
J. Baudrillard, “Pataphysique de l'An 2000”, in: L'Illusion de la fin ou 
La grève des événements. Paris, France: Galilée, coll. L'Espace 
critique, 1992, pp. 11-22. 
[4] 
D. De Kerckhove, Brainframes: Technology, Mind and Business, 
Baarn, The Netherlands: Bosch & Keuning,. 1991 
[5] 
F. Morganti, G. Riva, Conoscenza comunicazione e tecnologia. 
Aspetti cognitivi della realtà virtuale, Milano, Italy: LED Edizioni 
Universitarie di Lettere Economia Diritto, 2006. 
[6] 
C. Borgatti, L. Calori, T. Diamanti, M. Felicori, A. Guidazzoli, M.C. 
Liguori, M.A. Mauri, S. Pescarin, and L. Valentini, “Databases and 
Virtual Environments: a Good Match for Communicating Complex 
Cultural Sites”, Proceedings of ACM SIGGRAPH 2004, Los 
Angeles, USA, 2004. 
[7] 
S. Pescarin, Reconstructing Ancient Landscape. Budapest, Hungary: 
Archaeolingua, 2009, pp. 21-23. 
[8] 
R. Dawkins, The selfish gene. Oxford, UK: University Press, 1976. 
[9] 
M. Forte, “Mindscape: ecological thinking, cyber-anthropology, and 
virtual archaeological landscapes” in M. Forte, & P.R.Williams 
(Eds.), The reconstruction of Archaeological Landscapes through 
Digital Technologies, Proceedings of the 1st Italy-United States 
Workshop 2001. Boston, USA, 2003, pp. 95-108. 
[10] M. Song, T. Elias, I. Martinovic, W. Mueller-Wittig and T. K.Y. 
Chan, “Digital heritage application as an edutainment tool”, 
Proceedings of the 2004 ACM SIGGRAPH International Conference 
on Virtual Reality Continuum and its Applications in Industry, 
Singapore, 2004, pp. 163–167. 
[11] P. Kiefer, S. Matyas and C. Schlieder, “Learning about Cultural 
Heritage by playing geogames”. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
Springer Berlin/Heidelberg, vol. 4161/2006, Book Entertainment 
Computing, 2006. 
[12] G. Cutrí , G. Naccarato  and E. Pantano, “Mobile Cultural Heritage: 
the case study of Locri”, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
Springer Berlin/Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 410-420. 
[13] K. Luyten, J. Schroyen, K. Robert, K. Gabriëls, D. Teunkens, K. 
Coninx, E. Flerackers and E. Manshoven, “Collaborative gaming in 
the Gallo-Roman museum to increase attractiveness of learning 
cultural heritage for youngsters”, Second Intern. Conference on Fun 
and Games 2008, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, October 20-21, 2008. 
[14] Istituto 
per 
i 
Beni 
Archeologici 
e 
Monumentali, 
http://www.ibam.cnr.it/ 
[15] C.D. Fonseca, D. Roubis, and F. Sogliani (Eds.), Jure Vetere. 
Ricerche archeologiche nella prima fondazione monastica di 
Gioacchino da Fiore (indagini 2001-2005). Cosenza, Italy, Rubettino, 
2007, pp. 87-132. 
[16] Project Itinera, http://www.itinera.puglia.it/ 
[17] M. Forte, S. Pescarin, E. Pietroni, “The Appia Antica Project”, 
Proceedings of the 2nd Italy-United States Workshop, Berkeley, 
USA, May 2005. 
[18] Virtual Rome Project, http://3d.cineca.it/storage/demo_vrome/htdocs/ 
[19] Muvi, http://muvi.cineca.it/ 
[20] F. Bocchi, “The city in four dimensions: the Nu.M.E. Project” Journal 
of Digital Information Management. Vol. 2, issue 4, 2004, pp. 161-
163. 
[21] City 
Cluster, 
http://www.fabricat.com/CITYCL_WEB2003/CITYCLUSTER.html 
[22] Quest Atlantis Project, http://atlantis.crlt.indiana.edu/ 
[23] Integrated Technologies of Robotics and Virtual Environment in 
Archaeology 
Project, 
Virtual 
Heritage 
Lab,  
http://www.vhlab.itabc.cnr.it/FIRB/Release/Home.html 
[24] T. Salmon, Lo stato presente di tutti i Paesi e Popoli del mondo 
naturale, politico e morale, vol. 23, Napoli, 1763. 
[25] H. Houben, Otranto nel Medioevo: tra Bisanzio e l’Occidente, 
Galatina (Lecce), Italy,  Congedo, 2007. 
[26] H. Houben, La conquista turca di Otranto (1480) tra storia e mito, 
Galatina (Lecce), Italy:, Congedo, 2008. 
[27] D. Michaelides, D. Wilkinson, Excavations at Otranto, The 
excavation, Vol. I, Galatina (Lecce), Italy, Congedo, 1992. 
[28] .D’Andria, D. Whitehouse, Excavations at Otranto. The Finds, Vol. 
II, Galatina (Lecce), Italy:, Congedo, 1992. 
[29] G. Caniggia, G. L. Maffei, Lettura dell'edilizia di base, Venezia: 
Marsilio, 1979. 
[30] S. Previtero, “Osservazioni sulla metrologia antica e medievale nel 
Salento”, in S. D’Avino, M. Salvatori, Eds., Metrologia e tecniche 
costruttive, Contributi, vol. 5, 1998, p. 97. 
[31] Y. Renouard, Le città italiane dal X al XIV secolo, Torino, Italy: 
BUR, vol. I, 1975, p. 16. 
[32] D. Vendola, Ed., Documenti tratti dai Registri Vaticani. Da 
Innocenzo III a Nicola IV, vol. I, Trani (Bari), Italy: Vecchi, 1940, n. 
336, p. 263. 
[33] Anonymus Barensis, Chronicon, edited by L. A. Muratori, in Rerum 
Italicarum Scriptores, vol. 5, Milano, Italy, 1724, p. 152. 
[34] R. Licinio, Castelli medievali. Puglia e Basilicata: dai normanni a 
Federico II e Carlo d’Angiò, Bari, Italy: Dedalo, 1994, pp. 117-130. 
[35] O. Baldacci, “Lo Compasso de navegare e la Puglia”, in Annali della 
Facoltà di Magistero dell’Università di Bari, Bari, Italy, vol. 2, 1960, 
pp. 200-201. 
[36] E. Sthamer, Ed., Dokumente zur Geschichte der Kastellbauten Kaiser 
Friedrichs II und Karls I von Anjou, 2: Apulien und Basilicata, 
Tübingen 1997, n. 1014, p. 155. 
[37] H. Goosse, O. Arzel, J. Luterbacher, M. E. Mann, H. Renssen, N. 
Riedwyl, A. Timmermann, E. Xoplaki, and H. Wanner, “The origin 
of the European Medieval Warm Period”, in Climate of the Past 
Discussions 2, vol. 3, 2006, pp. 285-314. 
[38] F. Ortolani, S. Pagliuca, “Evidenze geologiche di variazioni 
climatico-ambientali storiche nell’Area Mediterranea”, in Quaderni 
della Società Geologica Italiana, vol. 1, march 2007, pp. 13-17. 
[39] M. Amari, C. Schiaparelli, Eds., L'Italia descritta nel “Libro del Re 
Ruggero” compilato da Edrisi, Roma, Italy, 1883, p. 76. 
[40] S. Mola, R. Cassano, M. Pasculli Ferrara, “La cattedrale di Otranto”, 
in C.D. Fonseca, Ed., Cattedrali di Puglia. Una storia lunga duemila 
anni, Bari, italy: Adda, 2001, pp. 237-243. 
[41] L. Safran, S. Pietro at Otranto: Byzantine Art in South Italy, Roma, 
Italy: Rari Nantes, 1992. 
[42] G. Uggeri, “Otranto paleocristiana”, in Itinerari (contributions on the 
history of art in honour of Maria Luisa Ferrari), vol. I, Firenze, Italy: 
S.P.E.S, 1979, pp. 37-46. 
[43] G. Strappa, M. Ieva, M.A. Dimatteo, La città come organismo. 
Lettura di Trani alle diverse scale, Bari, Italy: Adda, 2003, pp. 69-71. 
[44] “Vita Beati Nicolai Peregrini (B.H.L. 6223) ”, in O. Limone, Santi 
monaci e santi eremiti. Alla ricerca di un modello di perfezione nella 
letteratura agiografica dell'Apulia normanna, Galatina (Lecce), Italy: 
Congedo, 1988, p. 143. 
[45] E. Guidoni, L'arte di progettare le città, Italia e Mediterraneo dal 
Medioevo al Settecento, Roma, Italy: Kappa, 1992. 
[46] K. C. Finney, Advanced 3D game programming all in one, Boston, 
USA: Thomson Course Technology, 2005. 
[47] K. C. Finney, 3D game programming all in one, Boston, USA: 
Thomson Course Technology, 2004. 
[48] Speaky toolkit, MediaVoice srl, http://www.mediavoice.it 
[49] Oliva L., De Paolis L.T., Aloisio G., “Otranto nel medioevo. Ricerca 
e ricostruzione urbana per l'edutainment”, in REM, Rivista ufficiale 
della SIREM, Società Italiana di Ricerca sull’Educazione Mediale, 
vol. 1, issue.2, december 2009, Trento, Italy: Erikson, pp. 199-212. 
172
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 11.  The reconstruction of St. Peter’s Church: (a) scheme of the reconstructed church with the later removed chapel in black; (b) virtual model made 
using a CAD software ; (c) the virtual reconstructed church; (d) the church in its surroundings. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 12.  The reconstruction of Otranto Cathedral. 12(a) facade, exterior view; 12(b) the famous medieval mosaic on the internal floor. 
173
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

