55
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Study of the Appropriation of Groupware 
in the Context of Remote Collaborative Design 
Aspectuality via time, occurrence and changes 
 
Samia Ben Rajeb 
Shima Shirkhodaei 
Pierre Leclercq 
 
Université Libre de Bruxelles 
University of Liege  
University of Liege 
 
Brussels, Belgium 
Liege, Belgium 
Liege, Belgium 
 
email: samia.ben.rajeb@ulb.ac.be 
shima.shirkhodaei@ulg.ac.be  
pierre.leclercq@ulg.ac.be 
 
 
Abstract— This article presents a methodology of analyzing the 
appropriation of groupware in the context of collaborative 
design via the idea of aspectuality (punctual, iterative, durable, 
inchoative, and terminative), well known in the field of 
Greimassien semiotics. This idea guides us in the definition and 
the categorization of the modes of appropriation of tools, as 
well as the passage from one tool to another during a 
collaborative activity. To do this, our research focuses on the 
study of an innovative device, associating two tools for remote 
synchronous collaborative design: HIS (Space Hybrid Ideation 
of Hybridlab), and SkeSha (Sketch system of sharing from 
LUCID-ULg). These two tools enable the annotation of 
graphical objects in real time. HIS enables immersion into the 
interior of a virtual representation of a designed space, the 
other (SketSha) enables the possibility to share and to act on 
the 2D documents. In our experiments, these two tools were 
associated to form a system enabling two groups of student 
designers to work together remotely and in real time. Two 
questions came up in this original experimental situation: the 
first concerns the singularity of each tool and the second 
touches on the degree of compatibility of the two devices 
making up a system for synchronous exchange and 
collaboration. To answer these questions, we will describe the 
experimental protocol put in place in the simultaneous use of 
these two tools. Then, we will present our methodology of 
analyzing the data based on self-analysis as well as the 
qualitative and quantitative treatment of the data put to work 
in the experiments. Finally, we explain in detail in which 
manner the two devices are complimentary and can be 
articulated in the preliminary phases of architectural design. 
Keywords-component; groupware; appropriation and tools 
uses; semiotcs; aspectuality; computer human interaction. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The rapid evolution of operating technologies in the field 
of collaborative design raises not only the question of the 
singular use of each tool, but also the influence of their 
association in this activity and during the action. In this 
context, we present here an analysis of the modes of 
appropriation of an innovative device, associating two tools 
to instrument distant and synchronic collaborative design. In 
this paper, we explore a previous study, presented in [1]. The 
two tools are the Hybrid Ideation Space (HIS), developed at 
the Hybridlab, a laboratory of University of Montreal [2, 3], 
and the Sketch Sharing system (SketSha), developed at 
LUCID, a laboratory of University of Liege [4, 5]. Both are 
based on the notation of graphic artifacts in real time. One 
(HIS) allows immersion in the interior of a virtual 
representation of a conceived space, the other (SketSha) 
makes it possible to share and act on 2D documents. In the 
experiment, these two tools were associated to allow two 
groups of student designers from University de Liege and 
School of Architecture of Nancy to collaborate, under the 
direction of the HybridLab team. Two questions emerge 
from this original experimental situation: the first concerns 
the singular implementation of each tool and the second 
concerns the degree of programmatic compatibility in the use 
of a device, which integrates various tools for exchange and 
synchronic collaboration. To answer these questions, Section 
II first describes the experimental protocol implemented in 
the simultaneous usage of these two tools. In Sections III and 
IV, we present the methodology of data analysis based on the 
notion 
of 
aspectuality 
(punctual, 
iterative, 
durative, 
inchoative and terminative), well known in the field of 
Greimasian Semiotics. This notion guides us to the definition 
of determining categories to explain the switching from one 
tool to the other during the collaborative activity.  
Our approach focuses on the methodological aspect to 
enable the analysis of complex collective activities involving 
new technologies. This is why our state of art only concerns 
the methods and shows why we have resorted to aspectuality 
to address this kind of problem (see Section III). 
Based on quantitative and qualitative analyses, Section V 
will show that the degree of familiarization of users with the 
new technologies is a determining factor to characterize the 
issues and the limits of this superposition of tools. Finally, 
we will also detail to what extent these two complementary 
devices can be articulated in order to support preliminary 
phases of architectural design. 
II. 
FRAMEWORK AND RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
This research is part of collaboration between the LUCID 
laboratory at the University of Liège and Hybridlab at the 
University of Montreal. Both HIS and SketSha devices, 
developed in in the universities of Liege (Belgium) and 
Montreal (Canada), were enabled to instrument collaborative 
design. 
SketSha software enables real-time sharing of drawings 
and annotations, via a digital tablet horizontally placed in 
front of the designer, drawn by using an electronic pen 

56
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
during a remote meeting. Images, PDF, DXF drawings or 
other documents can be imported and made available to all 
partners of the project. These documents are shared on the 
basis of a stack of semi-transparent tracing paper that users 
can annotate, store, superimpose or manipulate in real time.  
HIS is a device based on an immersive system for 
placing 
various 
remote 
users 
within 
their 
graphic 
representation, their sketched freehand drawings and three- 
dimensional models "on which they interact by manual and 
digital actions". This complex device mainly consists of two 
parts: (1) a digital tablet placed horizontally showing a 2D 
image of the project. The image is chosen by the designer 
and depicts the localization of the project intervention. This 
image allows drawing and annotation via an electronic pen; 
(2) a piece of canvas that is hung vertically to close the work 
space in which the designers act. The same image that is pre-
treated to provide users with a 360 ° view of the inside the 
project can be projected on its surface. This projection helps 
designers immerse themselves in real time in their sketches 
while drawings appear on the tablet in front of them.  
An experiment involving these two devices to design a 
project was set up (Figure 1). Two groups of designer 
(students of University of Liege and the School of 
Architecture of Nancy), who were geographically distant, 
worked for about 3 hours. The synchronous use of HIS and 
SketSha at this collaborative meeting involved two virtual 
work spaces that share a resembling feature, namely the 
sharing of graphic documents in real time on the digital table 
between the users taking part in the meeting from two 
geographically distant offices. However, these two devices 
are distinguished by the HIS-device’s immersive dimension. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Context of experiment. 
Therefore, our first research question relates to the 
activity of actors in each work space called (Work HIS and 
Work SketSha). Thus, we will study the "duration" and 
"occurrence" of the two main activities of actors were 
studied, namely designing and being able to look in both 
work spaces. Our second research question concerns the 
modes of switching from one work space to another. Our 
hypothesis is based on the existence of two types of 
switching used by the actors: (1) switching between Work 
HIS and Work SketSha, (2) switching between 2D and 3D.  
It should be noted that although the HIS requires physical 
precedence of some immersive space throughout the 
meeting, the mode of the presence of the immersive space 
for the meeting depended primarily on the activities of users 
and how they made this immersive space (from 2D to 3D) 
real. On the other hand, it was necessary to compare these 
remarks with collective operations involved in this 
collaborative architectural design. This parallelism enabled 
us to notice the specific particularity of time used for each 
tool during a collaborative session. Once we determined the 
decisive moments of the two types of switching, we noticed 
the specificity of these changeovers and then analyzed them 
from the point of view of the aspectualization defined in the 
field of linguistics and semiotics. 
III. 
METHODOLOGICAL POSITION 
The question that we pose is: how can the ideas related to 
the notion of aspectuality help us describe the complex 
collective activities and enable us to specify the methods of 
changing from one immersive work space to another work 
space? In fact, other scientific fields have taken an interest in 
the analysis of collective activities. For example, in 
sociology, the question has been asked in terms of the 
organization of actors’ roles in a team [6]; or in terms of 
recognition, personal satisfaction and confidence among the 
different members of a team [7]. In cognitive ergonomics, 
the questions are centered on the interactions between 
partners, on the synchronization of the collective activity of 
design and on the cognitive aspects [8]. When the activities 
involve new technologies, one finds oneself in the scientific 
fields of CSCW (computer supported cooperative work). 
Moreover there are different points of view to analyze this 
kind of complex activity [9, 10, 11]: 
1) the point of view of the physical aspects of the work: 
this point of view is only interested in the ergonomic and 
physical aspect of the space in which the designer works. We 
speak of the physical space with its acoustic and thermal 
properties, gestuality, movements, postures, etc. 
2) the point of view of the affect is concerned with the 
psychological or emotional aspects of the designers. This 
aspect measures the subjective feelings of the designers in 
relation to their surroundings and their collaborator. Thus, it 
deals with hierarchical relations and feelings of confidence 
that unite the different members of a team; 
3) The cognitive point of view looks at the cognitive 
aspects of the design process that are linked to the situation, 
the actors and the subject in question. In this case, the 
conscience of the group, the intermediary objects and the 
shared reference are parameters to be considered to study 
these situations;  
4) The organizational point of view’s objective is to 
define the modalities of assistance to the situations of group 
work or to help in managing group-design documents. 
Our paper proposes another point of view, which tackles 
the collaborative design activity involving new technologies: 
semiotics. The reference to the notion of aspectuality in 
linguistics and in Greimasian semiotics [12, 13] helps us to 
address the question of the appropriation of these two tools 
considering time, occurrence and switching. The definition 

57
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
of Holt [14], p. 6, is one of the first attempts to define aspect. 
According to Holt, aspect concerns "different ways of 
conceiving the flow of process". The nucleus of this 
definition remains unchanged. The notion of aspect is 
currently used in linguistics as a grammatical category that 
expresses the subject representation of a process denoted by 
a verb [15] p. 53. Thus, a verb, an adjective or a noun can be 
analyzed in terms of aspectualization. For example 
negotiation 
or 
decision-making 
are 
aspectualized 
substantives, insofar as the first is considered as an 
unfinished act and the second as an act already completed. 
For Bertrand [16], "aspect modulates the semantic content of 
the predicate, whether it is in past, present or future". Via this 
notion of aspectuality it is possible, for example, to address 
the issue of the progress of a process otherwise than by time. 
For example, if the aspect is taken in terms of time, it is 
called "punctual" or "durative". The aspect can be described 
as "terminative" when it is approached from the point of 
view of its completion and "inchoate" when it is intended to 
be the beginning. Here, the process is not only related to time 
but also concerning the state of its switching (see Section V). 
This specification in the synchronous use of two tools, 
supporting collaborative design in an architectural design 
project, led to the issue of proportion via the aspectuality 
relative to time, occurrence and switching.  
Our methodology is therefore based on this concept of 
aspectuality with the aim of analyzing quantitatively and 
qualitatively complementary data from this experiment. A 
coding scheme was defined for the transcription of a user's 
activities before the semiotic analysis of the processed data. 
In concrete terms, it is a matter of leaning of the three 
fundamental to elements of aspectuality (time, occurrence, 
and switching) to analyze the method of appropriation of the 
system and to evaluate more precisely the stakes, the limits 
and the perspectives of each single modality ("drawing" and 
"looking") and complex ("collective operations of design) 
during the use of these two tools. Thus an adjustment 
practice was put forward including speech, drawings and 
looks. The manners were specified in  the two tools have 
been appropriated by the different participants / designers. 
But before going directly to the presentation of the results, 
we propose to clarify the context and the protocol of this 
experiment. 
IV. 
EXPERIMETAL PROTOCOL 
A. Experimentation 
Our protocol is part of a defined framework, which 
involves the following parameters. 
• 
Role of the actors participating in the experiment: 
the participants are formed with a sponsor (Actor C 
is in Montreal and is also the moderator of the 
session) and 7 designers divided into 2 groups 
(group A is in Liège and group B is in Metz); 
• 
Hierarchical relations between the designers and 
their expertise related to the use of the tool: these 
designers are trained by experts (represented by 
teachers who are used to using the two tools) and 
novices (represented by students who have already 
used Sketsha several times but have worked with 
HIS only one time); 
• 
Training of the designers: Group A includes 3 actors 
of whom 2 are students in Master’s Engineer-
Architect and their teacher at the University of Liège 
(A1, A2, A3) while Group B includes 4 actors of 
whom 2 are architecture students, their teacher in 
architecture and another teacher specialized in 
ergonomic psychology (B1, B2,B3, B4): 
• 
Problem of design, pointed out by the sponsor, in 
relation to the rearrangement of a library: to solve 
this problem graphic elements (images of the interior 
space treated in 360° able to be projected on the HIS 
screen and some plans as well as simple pictures 
taken in the space can be used and annotated directly 
on SketSha) were made available to the designers 
and shared. 
All the actors were first invited to use the whole system 
(HIS and Sketsha simultaneously) at least one time. This 
experience 0 gave them the opportunity to take in hand the 
tool and to exercise in a completely different context before 
doing the experiment concerned by this study. 
All the geographically remote actors work in the same 
kind of environment that associate HIS and SketSha. The 
designers share the graphic annotations and exchange orally 
via the video conference in real time. The problem the 2 
teams must work on consists to more precisely rethink the 
library of the future starting from an existing site and a real 
context. The designers formed from groups A and B are led 
to think about the possible uses of current spaces of the 
library in order to propose a rearrangement of the space 
better adapted to contemporary uses and new TIC 
technologies. Their work is about graphic documents that 
already exist on SketSha and pictures taken in the library and 
prepared to be visualized in HIS. On SketSha, 3 documents 
are shared: (1) a plan of the present floor in consideration 
with the furniture; (2) a plan of the present floor in 
consideration without the furniture; (3) a view of the ground 
and the insertion of the building on the site. On HIS, 
different views in human scale are projected, annotated and 
manipulated. 
At the end of this experiment, 3 hours and 15 minutes of 
video recording had been taken by the Montreal team. To 
make the work of the researchers easier, this recording is 
made up of a juxtaposition of 4 views showing (Figure 2): a 
shot of all the traces made by SketSha (upper left), a view of 
the HIS environment in Montreal, appearing in the same way 
as on all the other sites (upper right), a view from the 
webcam in Metz (bottom left) and a view from the webcam 
in Liège (bottom right). 
Only 2 hours were treated in the framework of our study. 
The first quarter hour of set up was deleted and an hour and 
the end of the work seance during which the designers could 
no longer communicate because it was interrupted by 
recurring moments of bugs caused by the video-conference 
system. 
At the end of the experiment, we had a semi-open 
interview with the designers in order to get their spontaneous 
feedback. In the context of our study, only the designers 

58
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
from group A were questioned because we were 
geographically in the same place. We did not try to separate 
the designers during the interview because our research did 
not focus on the designers’ individual use. On the other hand, 
we were more interested in the appropriation of the system 
by a group of users participating in a collaborative activity. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Juxtaposition of 4 views: graphic elements produced by the 
designers and views from Montreal, Metz and Liège sites. 
B. Methods of data processing: from self-analysis to video 
processing 
In the logic of complementary data and inspired by the 
field of cognitive ergonomics, our methodology of data 
processing was divided into two steps. First, we applied the 
method of ergonomics with group A with the aim of getting 
their feelings (tiredness, concentration, stress, annoyance, 
discouragement, enthusiasm, etc.) and their feedback in 
relation to their use of the tool, but also in relation to their 
appropriation of the whole system. To do this, we used the 
semi-directed interviews made at the end of the experiment 
to construct our chart of self-analysis. Secondly, we 
processed the video by making cuts in relation to a coding 
scheme, which was specified by our state of the art, but also 
by that which was cleared and highlighted in the framework 
of the self-analysis with group A. 
 
1) Protocol of the self-analysis 
Lasting about 3 hours, several steps made up the self-
analysis done with group A in the context of our study: 
• 
we reminded the designers the context of the 
experiment and the main steps, which made up their 
design exercise; 
• 
then we explained the modalities of the self-analysis 
that consists of commenting on 10 short sequences 
of about 4 minutes from the video recorded during 
the experiment. These 10 sequences were selected in 
a way to cover the group of phases, which made up 
their design exercise; 
• 
in addition to the video placed on the table, we gave 
them a frame of reference made up based on the 
interview carried out with them following the 
experiment. This chart took into consideration the 
following points: 
 
- relationship between the actors, 
 
- evolution of the project over the time, 
 
- modalities of communication between the actors, 
 
- specific use of each tool, 
 
- appropriation of the system using the two tools 
 
 
when they were used simultaneously. 
An example of this frame was placed on a table 
in front of them, near the video (Figure 3). Opposite 
them, on the wall, were posted 10 examples of this 
chart representing each of the 10 sequences selected 
for this seance of self-analysis; 
 
 
Figure 3.  Self analysis set up. 
• 
after looking at each sequence, the chart was 
collectively filled in with the researcher using pens 
(with different color codes related to the feelings of 
each actor) but also post-its so they had the 
possibility to add something if they think that an 
example, an explanation or an argument should be 
added to one or another element than the chart 
offered. The designers also have the possibility to go 
back while looking at the video in order to verify 
something that was said or one of their feelings; 
• 
when all of the charts shown on the wall were filled 
in, the designers were asked to re-do a synthesis 

59
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
relative to their individual or collective or 
collaborative activity on the tool, or their collective 
activity or interaction with the other group. In other 
words, it means firstly, to spot their concrete actions 
on this or that tool and, secondly, the moments 
where they think they could have collaborated with 
group B. Then we asked them to also spot moments 
when each group isolated themselves on the side 
without 
the 
possibility 
of 
negotiation 
or 
collaboration between the two groups; 
• 
at the end of this exercise, a feedback on the use of 
HIS/SketSha was requested in relation to their 
experiment 0 by which they had learned for the first 
time to use the system. 
At the end of this self-analysis, the participants 
highlighted the contribution of this kind of method which, 
according to them, enabled them to " show the other aspects 
of what had happened… it was while watching the video that 
I realized the impact of the tools on our communication over 
distance and our group work...". 
2) Protocol of data processing via SketSha Replay 
The coding done here concerns the video of the 
experiment. It enabled us afterwards to quantitatively 
analyze the data in addition to that which had been caught 
qualitatively during the self-analysis. For this coding, the 
data were treated via SketSha replay. This software, designed 
and developed in the LUCID laboratory, enables the coding 
of a video recorded the coding of a collaborative seance 
according to exclusive criteria. In our case, these criteria 
were specified thanks to elements that were highlighted by 
the designers during the self-analysis. The coding criteria 
centered most precisely on the three following criteria: 
"drawing", "looking", and "doing together", the objective 
being to spot participants’ actions in the two work spaces, 
immersive and non-immersive, in relation to the use of HIS 
and SketSha. Out of the three main activities two types of 
categories emerged: simple and complex. The first takes into 
consideration the individual intervention of the users in the 
shared graphic space; the second was deduced from the 
collective activity of each of the two groups of collaborators 
(A and B). To do this, we first proceeded with a temporal 
cutting of the sequence (from 1 to 6) in relation to the 
different steps of the designing process. From this temporal 
cut, we then selected a sequence, which especially shows the 
switching from one tool to the other, as well as the use of the 
two. 
3) Division into sequences. 
This division remains nevertheless subjective even if it 
was validated during the self-analysis. It depends mostly on 
the objectives researched in the framework of this study. A 
sequence indicates, in our opinion, " a series of sequential 
choices forming a narrative unit that answers to a general 
problem by the actors during the designing process". Each 
sequence involves thus a beginning and an end marking the 
passage 
from 
one 
subject 
to 
another 
and/or 
the 
transformation from one state to another (and/or a proposal) 
but does not systematically end with a solution (and/or an 
answer to this proposition) [17], p.185. 
In this way the work seance being studied here is cut into 
six sequences (Figure 4): 
• 
Sequence 1 (45 minutes) – Understanding the 
request: this sequence is the longest in the design 
process. Now, the sponsor (C = commanditaire) 
explains his request and all the other actors try to 
undeerstand the objectives aimed at by the new 
project. The actors begin by visualizing on SketSha 
then on HIS all of the elements that they have been 
given. Then, they try to construct a common 
understanding of the plan that has been given to 
them by SketSha. After this, all of thee actors try to 
clarify the request in order to specify the new 
elements to be integrated in the project. 
• 
Sequence 2 (6 minutes) – Increasing the space 
dedicated to reading: after discussion, the 2 groups 
of designers decide to increase the space dedicated 
to reading estimating that it is the first priority for 
the arrangement the future library. 
• 
Sequence 3 (14 minutes) - Integrating the light: in 
negotiating the arrangement dedicated to reading, 
the designers decide to create two kinds of space 
(zones of conviviality and zones for reading) 
according to their proximity to openings. 
• 
Sequence 4 (18 minutes) – Integrating new 
technologies: by trying to optimise the space, the 
designers question certain existing functions and 
thus decide to integrate more adequate new 
technologies to the future library. 
• 
Sequence 5 (21 minutes) – Calling into question: 
the designers call into question the whole current 
program of the library and try to answer the 
question "What function to give to the future 
library"? 
• 
Sequence 6 (12 minutes) – The first attempt to 
rearrance: after the intervention of the sponsor, the 
designers decide to work immediately on one of the 
main spaces of the present library having good light 
quality and whose facade has an non-standard 
shape: that of a bite. 
In the context of this article, we have chosen a coding 
aimed at a particular segment in order to gather our 
quantitative data. 
4) Choosing the segment. 
To choose this segment, we first proceeded with a cut 
relating to the work spaces used by the actors during the 
design process. We based this on the verbalisation and the 
intention expressed by the actors when they asked to modify, 
explicitly, the work space to validate a point of view. We 
proposed this code for the entire length of the work meeting 
with the objective to tafe into account all the switches from 
one tool to another during the experiment, which is perfectly 
coherent with our objectives from the start. We also stressed 
the importance of the moments during which the designers 
did not work together: "Bug" moments caused by problems 
with the video conference and moments of "Logistic" 
management. Thus, this first cut was done according to the 
following criteria: 

60
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
• 
"HIS" work space: here, the actors used the HIS 
device (by drawing in 2D on the digital tablet placed 
in front of them and looking at their interventions 
projected on the screen with 3D printing) for 
synchronous 
sharing 
of 
the 
documents, 
the 
discussions and evaluation of their proposals. 
• 
"SketSha" work space: here, the actors used the 
SketSha software (by drawing in 2D on the digital 
tablet put in front of them) during the meeting. 
• 
"Logistics" moment: all the moments when the 
actors communicate in order to adjust the problems 
concerning the logistics are coded as belonging to 
the logistic. 
• 
"Bug" moment: it concerns technical and computing 
problems that caused the interruption of exchanges 
in the actors’ communications. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Progress in the design process 
and selection of the treated segment. 
This first cut then enabled us to focus our analysis on the 
segment centered on sequence 3 that was characteristic of 
marking several switches between the two tools. In order to 
assure the coding precision of this sequence and thus 
decrease errors of interpretation, we included in this segment 
a bit of the sequence that preceded it and a bit that followed. 
Thus, on the temporal axis of the observed meeting, the 
segment we dealt with according to our coding scheme 
began at 50 minutes and ended at 1h10. Nevertheless, only 
the data that concerned sequence 3 were analyzed 
quantitatively, in the context of this article, in order to not 
alter our specific results to changes made during the 
sequence. 
Thus, we proceeded with a second cut of this selected 
sequence in sub-sequences relating to the work space used, 
the objective being to more precisely observe the 
appropriation of each tool separately (SketSha / HIS), as well 
as the change from one to another (1 SketSha / 2 HIS / 3 
SketSha). Like the first cut, we emphasized the indications 
relevant to the verbalization marking this change from one 
work-space to another (Figure 5):  
- 
A2: "Is it important that one can switch on the 
HIS?" 
- 
B1: "Shall we switch to SketSha?". 
 
 
Figure 5.  Progress of sequence 3 according to the designers’ work spaces. 
5) Coding the sequence 3 with SketSha Replay 
Two types of codes were done for sequence 3 via 
SketSha Replay: the first (simple category) takes into count 
the individual intervention of each user in the shared graphic 
space ("Drawer" Category and "Watcher" category); the 
second, "Doing Together" comes from the collective activity 
of each of the two groups of collaborators (A and B). 
a) Simple Category: drawing and watching 
Drawing. This category involves three criteria (Figure 6): 
• 
drawing SketSha: actors draw on SketSha; 
• 
drawing HIS: either actors draw on the tablet (2D) or 
they draw on the immersive space (canvas gives a 
3D effect); 
• 
not drawing: the players do not draw. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Drawing SketSha, drawing HIS and no drawing actions. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Looking SketSha, Visio, Unidentified looking, lookinh HIS 2D, 
HIS 3D and looking at another in situ actions. 
Looking. This category involves six criteria (Figure 7): 
• 
looking SketSha: actors look at and follow the 
documents on SketSha; 
• 
looking HIS 2D: actors look at documents on HIS 
2D; 
• 
looking HIS 3D: actors look at the documents on the 
HIS in the immersive space; 
• 
looking Visio: the actors make contact with their 
partners 
in 
inter-teams 
by 
looking 
at 
the 
videoconference; 
• 
looking at the other in situ: actors see their partners 
in the same team; 
• 
Unidentified looking: looks are not identified (e.g., 
out of sight for observer). 
b) Category complex: collective operations of design 
Processing of this category is to detect the different 
operations carried out by each of the actors working together. 
To do this, the analyses were based on the plots and words 
exchanged between the designers (Figure 2). We have 
identified nine types of action [18]: 
• 
listening: this operation involves taking information 
from a program or other participants; 

61
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
• 
informing/sharing: 
this 
operation 
enables 
the 
designer to inform others and/or share their 
references, details of program or context; 
• 
declaring intentions or choices/raising a question: the 
designer suggests and/or declares a new intention or 
question without trying to represent or to formalize 
it; 
• 
taking action on a subject: by this action, the 
designer formalizes his/her intention or ideas by 
graphic representation; 
• 
discussing/evaluating/questioning: this operation is 
reflected in the fact that an actor checks and/or 
discusses the proposals of another; 
• 
validating/collective decision-making: to confirm or 
exclude an entire proposal related to the designed 
object; 
• 
isolating: this process occurs when a group is 
isolated from the other group, either by choice or by 
the bugs, and cuts the Internet; 
• 
coordinating/constructing the strategies of group: for 
this operation, the group is organized and/or sets up 
the meeting and / or tasks in order to work together, 
to validate group work strategies and/or to resolve 
disagreements between designers; 
• 
intent break: this operation is involved when one 
actor interrupts the discussion to say something, for 
example, to tell a joke. 
C. Methods of Data analysis: from a generalized analysis 
to the specification of sequence 3. 
To approach the idea of appropriation of different tools in 
relation to time, the occurrence and switching, we based our 
studies on ideas presented above in the state of art (Section 
III). This is where lies the originality of our method based on 
complementary data: being the middlemen between two 
fields, that of cognitive ergonomics and semiotics, between 
qualitative data on the whole experiment and specific 
quantitative data about one particular sequence.  
We relied on these three elements (time, occurrence and 
switches) to analyze the mode of appropriation of the system 
and to evaluate more precisely the stakes, the limits and the 
perspectives of each modality when the two tools are used. 
To do this, we used a visualization tool to process our 
data. Called COMMON Tools, it is a web platform initiated 
in the framework of the ARC COMMON project and 
developed by LUCID of the University of Liège [19]. The 
tool is made available to researchers enabling them to 
transform data from the coding frame (in our case SketSha 
Replay after the coding of the data) into consolidated data 
then quantified and translated according to different choices 
of visual formalism (pie, stacked columns, time line, 
crossing, clouds, etc.). A range of graphics is thus proposed 
for the analysis of the collective design activity. It enables 
the formalization of quantitative data, but also to cross them 
(Figure 8) in relation to time, occurences, and the specificity 
of each actor involved in the collective design process, which 
corresponds totally to what we want to analyze in the context 
of this article. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Example of crossing data: "Drawing" x "Operation". 
V. 
INVOVEMENT OF THE SYSTEM IN THE PROCESS OF 
NEGOTIATION AND DISCUSSION-MAKING 
The results emphasized in this section come from the 
qualitative analysis of the entire work meeting. 
Here, we investigate the involvement of the two tools on 
the way the actors are brought to work together. It means 
questioning their collaboration from the point of view of 
leadership and the transmission of each one’s ideas. To what 
extent can the Groupware encourage or not the collaboration 
or the idea of leadership? What does the synchronous use of 
the two tools imply the way the actors will manage a 
collaborative 
meeting? 
What 
are 
the 
risks 
of 
instrumentation? Does it mean destabilization or the fixing of 
ideas?  
To answer these questions, we crossed two determining 
axes in the tooled communication activity: (1) updating 
through its use and (2) the contextualization. The updating 
through use corresponds to the way in which the potentials 
of the association of the two tools have been exploited. The 
contextualization includes the essential environmental 
parameters from the user’s point of view. 
A. The idea of leadership in leading interactions 
The interactions between group A (with 2 student 
participants from Liège A1 and A2) and group B(that was 
mainly co-directed by the two teachers from Metz: B1 and 
B2) were not along the same line during all of the work 
meetings, between the first to the last sequence. 
In fact, the hierarchical relation between the designers 
and their expertise relating to the tool, the training of 
different actors and the problem of designing experience 
exposed by the sponsor played an important role in the 
appearance of the leaders during the designing process. 
In the first phase of the process (that lasted 45 minutes), 
groups A and B focused on understanding the order and the 
graphic elements at their disposal (phase of pooling of 
assets). Nevertheless, 2 types of leadership began to appear. 
The first that could be called "organizational leader", is the 
teacher specialized in ergonomic psychology (B2) who 
proposed a team work plan and who took charge of 
switching from one work space (HIS) to another (SketSha). 
It was also him who made several jokes to lighten the 
atmosphere or re-motivate the two groups. He was used to 

62
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
using these two work environments and had already 
manipulated them in several experiments being a researcher 
himself. The second that could be qualified as the ‘decision -
leader" is the architecture teacher (B1). Being himself in 
practice and being the one who is the best master in the use 
of SketSha (tool regularly used in the teaching context) he 
kept the pen almost all the time in group B. He was the one 
who drew the most and who made the choices ("in fact, 
listen… what needs to be done is..."). The actors in group A, 
with whom we did the self-analysis, claimed that 2 
parameters should be taken into account in the B1’s stand as 
the 
decision 
leader. 
The 
first 
is 
linked 
to 
the 
contextualization relating to actor B1, as much as by his 
knowledge of the tools as by his architectural experience. It 
means that a hierarchy is created by experience in the use of 
the device as well as in the actual design experience. When it 
means proposing an idea that is convergent to that of the 
experienced user, there should be, according to them, much 
more certitude and much more energy to transmit the idea. 
But does the active use of the device decrease the risk of an 
imbalance caused by the recurrence of interventions of an 
experienced member instead of users who have less 
experience? 
This is where the second parameter comes into play, 
linked to the actualization by the use of the video-
conference, by its location as well as the tone of the sound 
that it emits. In fact, the video-conference being completely 
on the right side of the screen, the actors in group A do not 
have direct contact with the other collaborators as was the 
case on SketSha (where the designers were put face to face 
via the vertical and centered projection of the webcam on the 
screen). According to them, "we lose a space of eye contact". 
In addition, the video-conference passes all the sounds with 
the same tone that makes the idea of proximity or distance 
lost in relation to the camera: "as if we listen to the radio … 
there was no question as to what they proposed… we had the 
impression that certain choices were imposed or that they did 
not listen to us...". These two phenomena due to the use of 
the video-conference privileged, in their opinion, the gap and 
the hierarchy between the actors. 
The first proposal for intervention on the plan (related to 
the increase of reading space) came up in the 2nd phase, via 
some annotations on the SketSha work space. Here, also, the 
relationship between novices and experts was felt very 
strongly between Liège and Metz as much by the asides that 
were imposed by group B (group A did not hear anymore 
what was said between them) as the inter-group B or B1 kept 
the pen in hand during the whole phase. The actors of group 
A also insisted on their ‘impression of rejection". 
Furthermore, HIS enables one to illustrate a localized and 
selected point of view that depends on what is chosen and 
that decides to put it common. The B1 and B2 leaders, being 
more used to using HIS, chose their opinions, which 
reinforced their positions as leaders. 
In the third phase, group A tried to propose a new 
method of work centered on the definition of the program of 
their future library. But this proposal was rejected by B1, 
followed the entire group B. A bug in the video-conference 
system created a feeling of being abandoned in group A. The 
two groups thus continued to work on the furniture to put in 
the library. According to them, until that point, there had not 
been effective collaboration since the lead in decisions had 
been kept by B1. 
But this hierarchy was called into question in phases 4 
and 5. Group A tried to show their disagreement as to the 
method of design that was chosen, which was supported by 
the organizational leader B2 who intervened in order to build 
consensus between the two groups: "let’s go back to the 
objectives in the beginning… otherwise everyone will have 
the idea that we are not making progress". According to 
group A, his intervention gave back some legitimacy to their 
proposal, which also helped in re-balancing the statutes 
between the actors, especially in phase 6. 
B. The transmission of ideas and the risk of destabilization 
During the self-analysis, the members of group A noticed 
that in the first phase of the work, they had nearly forgotten 
the very existence of the two specific interfaces of each of 
the tools. The information exposed in one helped to better 
understand what was projected in the other. In fact, HIS 
enabled a life-size view of the interior spaces of the library 
giving a feeling of the kind of atmosphere, the quality of the 
present arrangements, the luminosity, etc. The view of the 
plan on SketSha enabled, on the other hand, to situate these 
views and to understand the project as a whole, with practice 
in interpretation and continual recognition between the view 
offered by HIS and that of SketSha. This observation 
highlights (1) the flexibility of changing from one to the 
other and (2) the complimentarity of the views offered by the 
two tools. 
Gradually, as the project continues, the users referred in a 
casual way to each of the two tools. When an arrangement 
was drawn on the plan via SketSha, it was redrawn in 3D and 
simulated in the immersive HIS space ("this enabled us to 
reinforce the idea not to put little armchairs in this double-
high zone… isn’t there another way is to consult the book"?). 
The users then went back to SketSha to increase their 
knowledge and realize the idea in a more global scale. HIS 
did not enable them to get a view of the whole, it showed a 
localized viewpoint selected in the space. Going back to the 
plan each time thus seemed necessary in this phase of the 
designing process. 
Furthermore, by putting this experiment in parallel with 
their first experiment 0 using HIS and SketSha, group A 
explained that the way the program had been first formulated 
interfered a lot in their way of appropriating the tool. In fact, 
in the first experiment they referred to the immersive space 
(HIS) to decide on very precise questions whose answers 
demanded verification and simulation of the proposals made 
on the life-size plan with the help of HIS. In this case, the 
use of HIS was optimal, even if A1 and A2 did not master it 
very well. It was not the same in this experiment where the 
problem demanded thinking first about the program and the 
general objectives of the project before even rearranging the 
spaces. Through the association of the collaborative tools, 
going deeper, even if the added value of SketSha remained, 
the rapid zoning of the spaces and the common 
understanding of the whole building and organization, the 

63
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
added value of HIS concerned more the simulation and 
evaluation of the shared ideas in order to make them evolve. 
If, with SketSha, they had to try to better define the project 
and clear up certain ideas, with HIS, they could visualize in a 
virtual way, their hypothesis on the arrangement of spaces 
taking into account the scale and the double-height. In other 
words, they estimated that the targeted use of HIS during the 
entire collaboration was advantageous in the process of 
collective design. 
Furthermore, another question was about the necessity 
for short chosen private discussions (and not imposed by a 
system bug) between the members of a team during a 
collaborative meeting. Did it seem to be an advantage in the 
eyes of the group A designers to isolate themselves to 
discuss together and come to an agreement before 
communicating their choices to the other group? In fact, 
during the first phase when the designers had to understand 
the demand and appropriate the graphic elements that they 
had been given, the aside, in this case, was beneficial. This 
moment enabled them more felt by group A, who remained 
passive, to agree on the feeling between them before 
beginning to work with group B that was geographically 
separated. Nevertheless, these moments must remain, in their 
opinion, very short to not destabilize the communication and 
cause a de-synchonisation in the joining of choices. This 
phenomenon was felt more strongly by group A, who 
remained passive, during phase 2 when group B, acting 
directly on the tool, went aside and worked without trying to 
interact with the others. Two types of use of the tool are to be 
distinguished: passive and active. From the moment of this 
observation, a hypothesis needed to be developed according 
to which a correlation is established between the two 
elements of time and interaction that we reformulate in the 
following diagram. The farther we go in the project, the more 
the users get involved in a collective effort of collaborative 
design. According to the users, a collective effort of mutual 
understanding is indispensable to assure the balance in the 
interaction and avoid destabilization of the interaction. 
As for the instrumentation of the collaborative activity, 
the diagram shows us that the transmission of an idea can 
only be done through the active use of the tool once the 
actors are engaged in collective designing. 
Consequently, it is important to reduce as far as possible 
the inter-team asides to succeed in transmitting one’s ideas 
during all of the collaboration. Even if, during phase 6, this 
aside served the project. In fact, group A began to work on 
the plan and to propose a new arrangement relating to what 
group B was drawing on HIS. Here, the complementarity of 
the two tools directly served the design because two 
drawings emerged in parallel from two different viewpoints. 
One served the creation by simulation in 3D (via HIS), the 
other served the validation by putting the arrangements back 
on the 2D plan and checking that what was proposed in 3D 
does not contradict with the general organisation of the space 
in 2D (via SketSha). In the same way, group A emphasized 
the importance of not only synchronous, but perhaps 
simultaneous use of the two tools via two connected tablets: 
one for SketSha, the other for the space of HIS drawing. 
VI. 
AN ADJUSTMENT PRACTICE 
The results in this section focus more on the quantitative 
analysis of the sequence we selected for the study of the 
switchover from one tool to another. 
Each of these sub-sequences was analyzed by using the 
proposed categories ("looking", "drawing" and "working 
together") with respect to the concept of "aspectuality." This 
concept allows a more accurate assessment of the issues, 
limitations and perspectives of each mode during the use of 
these two tools. 
The time enables the measurement of duration of the act 
of looking, drawing and working together for each actor in 
his/her workspace. For example, depending on the relative 
length of the action, we distinguish two categories. The first 
is called "Punctual" when the designers decide to go from 
one tool to another. The second is related to actions that last 
such as when the designers discuss a problem related to the 
project being designed. This action is thus called "Durative". 
The occurrence allows us to measure how often an action 
took place during the design process. In reference to 
semiotics, if an action is repeated (in relation to another) in a 
rhythmic manner and more or less orderly in a specific 
workspace (Sketsha or HIS), the aspectuality of this action is 
qualified as "Repetitive". For example, if each time an actor 
draws on the Sketsha tablet, the other actors look at the HIS 
canvas, there is repetition. If this repetition does not seem to 
correspond to a rule or logic, it will be qualified as being 
"iterative". For example, it is not systematic if an actor picks 
up his pen and draws to discuss an idea or to suggest a 
solution. 
There were also cases in which the action happens only 
once in a specific workspace. This occurrence that denotes 
"single" seems significant because it can highlight the 
manner that a user, with regard to the tools, can appropriate 
his/ her work environment. 
Finally, switching enabled the analysis of the data 
qualitatively according to the time of passage from one 
workspace to another (SketSha > HIS / HIS > SketSha). 
With reference to semiotics, aspectuality of the action is 
described as "Inchoate" if the action is at the beginning of a 
workspace. But, the action is called "Terminative" if it takes 
place around the end of the workspace. So, we rely on the 
three elements (time, occurrence and switching) to analyze 
the mode of appropriation of these tools. 
A. Appropriation of "duplicate" and "distinctive" practices 
according to the time and occurrence 
In this part, we distinguish duplicate practices from 
distinctive practices in the concept of appropriation. 
According to a common functionality permitted by SketSha 
as well as by HIS (synchronous sharing and remote graphical 
annotations via a tablet), actors can work together by passing 
from a 2D representation to an immersive representation in 
order to collectively design the architectural project. 
The duplicate practice corresponds to the use of this 
common functionality between two tools. But, the distinctive 
practice is the use of an additional functionality. For 
example, the HIS also allows the use of immersive space via 

64
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the 360° projector on the canvas surrounding the actors. But 
this immersion function is not permitted via Sketsha.  
The appropriation of the use of a device combining these 
two systems presupposes an adjustive practice, which is 
halfway between duplicate practice and distinctive practice. 
To better understand the implications of this adjustive 
practice, our concern extends to the drawings, looks and 
words, as well as to collective operations involved in the 
context of architectural design activity. It must be 
remembered that in this experiment the actors are all invited 
to design a futuristic library where the need of improvement 
and increase of space is raised. 
B. Word exchanging, drawing and looking 
Since there is only one pen for each team, actors in the 
same team cannot draw at the same time on the same 
workspace. However, the partner who does not have a pen 
can "show" items on the shared tablet, he/she can "look" and 
comment on the projected images on immersive space and 
can "discuss" with all the others. As the action of "drawing" 
can be combined with other actions such as "looking", 
"showing" and "discussing", it cannot be involved except (1) 
in the HIS work space, (2) in the Sketsha work space. The 
actors can never draw simultaneously in both HIS and 
Sketsha workspaces. From the perspective of occurrence, the 
act of drawing is considered single in a workspace. But it is 
important to note that throughout the process, the act of 
drawing in Sketsha (about 10 %) is double compared to that 
performed on the HIS (about 5 %). The rest (85%) of the 
actions, which are considered as "not drawing", 1/6 of the 
design process in this sequence is dedicated to words and 
discussions between participants that are not represented 
graphically. Nevertheless, it becomes iterative at the end of 
process because when more designers advance in their 
choices, the percentage that is dedicated to drawing increases 
too. 
From the point of view of time, drawing in a punctual 
manner corresponds to the plans' zoning. This enables actors 
to show zones that relate to the discussion about the project. 
By this action, they focus their discussions on shared 
graphics and make sure that all participants share the same 
"common ground" [20]. The act of drawing is durational 
when it comes to act on the subject or to discuss and evaluate 
potential opportunities and eventual choices for the project. 
By sharing this chart, they shape their discussions and 
synchronize cognitively the proposals of each other [21].  
Therefore, drawing is done by punctual actions as well as 
by durative actions in both HIS and Sketsha workspaces. The 
punctual drawings play a demonstrative role while durative 
designs play an explanatory and / or argumentative role.  
On the other hand, in the sequence studied, an adjustive 
practice specific to words, drawing and looking drew our 
attention. Certainly, realization of ideas happens mainly 
through statement and discussion between the actors because 
the words are meaningful, insofar as they provide elements 
to specify how actors contribute to the progress of the 
collective design. However, by comparing the action of 
"speaking" with "drawing", considering the time, "drawing" 
becomes 
a 
punctual 
adjustive 
practice 
during 
the 
conversations in order to clarify and explain an idea. 
Furthermore, aspectuality of action (durative for speaking 
and punctual for drawing) could be significant when 
combined with the activity and the space in which it 
operates.  
Indeed, it is necessary to understand how the use of a 
functionality of a specific tool seems relevant or not at a 
specific time of collective design. The proof is the example 
of a designer who asked first to switch from SketSha to HIS 
(immersive space) because of a disagreement about the 
quality of light on shelves. This was then followed by a new 
switching when another designer requested to switch back to 
SketSha in order to graphically show a point that needed to 
be developed. 
"Looking" is considered as punctual action in some cases 
and durative in other ones. In both work spaces, watching 
videoconference and looking the other participants in situ are 
relatively punctual actions (considering the time) but also 
repetitive (considering the occurrence). In HIS, we found 
fewer 
effects 
of 
going 
back 
and 
forth 
between 
videoconferencing and the image projected on the canvas 
(3D) or the one that is produced on HIS 2D tablet.  
It seems that actors focus more on their annotations and 
graphical elements shared and produced on tablet rather than 
expressions of their remote partners in video conferencing or 
in immersive space. In occurrence, more than 3/4 of looks 
are directed to the workspace for the annotation in 2D. For 
example, "watching a videoconference" only makes 
participants sure about the presence of the other or about the 
interest of the others in conversation or the reactions of 
others to what has been proposed. In this case "looking at the 
other one who is in situ" is significant. The actors look at the 
others in a punctual manner (in time) but repetitive (in 
occurrence). " When I look at the other one, it puts my mind 
at rest and then I go back to my job," said one participant.  
Furthermore, the action of "looking" becomes durative 
when one of the designers acts on the subject by using the 
system of SketSha for annotation. In this case, all 
participants look continually in the direction of the tablet. 
Some also look at the picture projected on the canvas.  
However, when actors use only the HIS system, the one 
who is drawing looks rarely at the canvas (HIS 3D). He/she 
focuses mostly on the tablet (HIS 2D). At the same time, 
other users look only at the canvas on which the produced 
sketch is projected in 360 degrees. 
 "Looking at the immersive space" is involved in a 
punctual manner (when it comes to check punctually the 
validity of a choice of 2D in 3D space) and in a durative 
manner (when it comes to test a choice in 3D space).  
In terms of occurrence, this involvement is nevertheless 
iterative and non-repetitive as designers look at the 
immersive space according to their needs and the project's 
progress without any apparent or pre-decided logic. 
C. Specificity of collective design 
"Evaluating", "validating", "informing" and "declaring" 
appear to be punctually involved in the process, while other 
operations (such as "listening", "discussing" and "acting on 
the subject") are rather durative.  

65
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Furthermore, it is important to note that the actors never 
tried to isolate themselves deliberately. Sometimes punctual 
and sometimes durative, this operation is more related to 
bugs caused by a network outage or disconnection of 
videoconferencing. However, almost all of these bugs were 
consistently tracked by re-questioning (via the "discussing" 
operation). Sometimes, they caused conflict, which, 
according to the users, would not have existed if the 
communication had been continued. Indeed, the actor 
interrupted by a bug is obliged to re-state what has been said 
before, and this sometimes causes tensions between groups.  
"Isolating", "pausing" and "coordinating" operations are 
durative (considering the time) and iterative (considering the 
occurrence). They are involved here as part of the group's 
organization and work on several subjects for designing.  
"Informing" is a punctual action whose occurrence is 
single in the third division in workspace (3. SketSha) while it 
operates iteratively in the first two divisions (1. SketSha and 
2.HIS). This may be related to the project development and 
the mastery of problem by designers when the need for 
information sharing becomes less and less necessary but the 
action on the subject gains more importance at the end of 
process.  
"Acting on the subject" is not only a durative operation, 
but also iterative because it does not follow any rule and can 
occur several times during the discussion. 
 "Validating" is punctual and repetitive because it is 
preceded every time by a discussion.  
"Discussing" is a durative operation (by time) and 
iterative (by occurrence). If the operation involves a 
disagreement, it usually induces the request for switching 
from a workspace to another. 
D. Appropriation relative to the time and the occurrence of 
the proces 
Based on quantitative data from codings, we correlated, 
in entire process, the specificity of time and occurrence of 
three categories: "looking" (in Figure 9), "drawing" (in 
Figure 10) and "working together" (in Figure 11). These 
three schemes summarize the correlations for the whole 
process. This correlation can chart the actions and operations 
using both types of aspectuality; one relating to the time and 
the other to the occurrence. 
Returning to the aspectuality of actions of each of the 
three sub- sequences in each workspace (see Appropriation 
of a "duplicate" and "distinctive" practice according to the 
time and occurrence) we deduced identical results. 
The parallelism between these results and those put 
forward by charts shows that the actors appropriately 
duplicate practice in the same way in HIS and SketSha. 
However, this parallelism is not easy concerning the 
distinctive practice. Indeed, we note that aspectuality is not 
the same from one workspace to another. If the actors refer 
in a punctual manner to the immersive space when they act 
in SketSha, they look for a long time at immersive space 
when switching their work to HIS.  
Looking the other in situ!
(1.59, 9.13)!
Visio!
(4.11, 14.44)!
HIS 3D!
(7.86, 13.38)!
HIS 2D!
(13.08, 17.83)!
SketSha!
(30.07, 26.75)!
Iterative!
Ponctual!
 !
Durative!
 !
Duration (%)!
Occurrence  (%)!
OK!
 
Figure 9.  Correlation time/occurrence for " looking " (%). 
Iterative!
Ponctual!
 !
Durative!
 !
Duration (%)!
Occurrence  (%)!
OK!
SketSha!
(9.71, 19.69)!
HIS!
(5.22, 22.05)!
 
Figure 10.  Correlation time/occurrence for " drawing " (%). 
Iterative!
Ponctual!
 !
Durative!
 !
Duration (%)!
Occurrence  (%)!
OK!
Validating 
(0.66, 3.29)!
Declaring 
(1.75, 5.26)!
Coordinating!
(4.16, 9.87)!
Tacking 
action on 
subject!
(5.25, 7.24)!
Intent break 
(5.31, 7.89) !
 !
Discussing!
(6.66, 7.24)!
 !
Listening!
(65.61, 42.76)!
 !
Isolating!
(9.21, 11.18) !
 !
Informing 
(1.39, 5,26)!
 
Validating
Informing
Declaring
Coordi-
nating
Taking 
action
Intent 
break
Discussing
Isolating
Listening
% Duration
0,66
1,39
1,75
4,16
5,25
5,3
6,66
9,21
65,61
% Occurence
3,29
5,26
5,26
9,87
7,24
7,89
7,24
11,18
42,76  
Figure 11.  Correlation time/occurrence 
for " Collective operation for design " (%). 

66
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
This contrast can be explained by the degree of 
conformity between the functions basically provided by each 
tool (during their development) and uses that designers make 
(after combination of two tools in this experiment). The 
actors seem to adopt an adjustive practice (a practice 
between duplicate and distinctive) that seems to be in 
accordance with the potential of the tool and the manner it is 
set up by the user. 
E. Appropriation of a collective practice of switching from 
one tool to another 
To better understand the modes of switching from one 
workspace to another, we refer to the aspectuality called 
inchoate or terminative in this context (see Figure 3).  
Qualitative analysis shows that the terminative aspect is 
related here to the discussion. In fact whenever there is: (1) 
Either a disagreement between actors about a proposal by 
one of them (2) Or uncertain understanding of participants 
about a new choice announced, designers suggest switching 
to another work space (from SketSha to HIS and HIS to 
SketSha). In this experimental context, the terminative 
element is imprecision and disagreement. As long as 
switching from HIS to SketSha is a way to check what was 
decided in the immersive space, actors have the opportunity 
to look at the same time at the canvas where annotations 
previously made in 3D by HIS are projected and at the tablet 
exposing documents and new annotations made on SketSha. 
So, actors can easily compare their choices for workspace. In 
this case, the designers are in a distinctive practice. The 
converse is not correct because during the switching from 
SketSha to HIS, the workspace for the first one disappears 
from the display on the tablet, and leaves the interface to the 
HIS workspace. The designer draws on the tablet (HIS 2D) 
while the other participants look at the annotation performed 
in the immersive space of the canvas (HIS 3D). In this 
second switching, designers are in a duplicate practice.  
Therefore, considering the operations of "challenging" 
the actions performed on the object and "statement" of new 
proposals as terminative elements in the process of switching 
from one work space to another, the validation becomes an 
inchoate element in the process. This element marks the 
beginning of each switching in the use of a tool. This 
operation is then followed by several operations that enable 
the users to act on the object to be designed.  
An iterative process between questioning, validation and 
acting on the object continues throughout the work of 
designers while the use of a particular tool plays a 
predominant role in making decisions. Indeed, even if two 
systems originally offer the same function for real-time and 
remote sharing of graphical annotations, their specificity 
(immersive space / non-immersive space) suggest another 
perspective on the object to be designed. This specificity 
provides a new workspace, negotiation and consensus- 
building between participants and allows them to test and 
validate their choices. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
Contribution. Our research concerned the modes of 
appropriation of an innovative collaborative platform, to 
instrument distant and synchronic design by associating two 
tools, which support artifact annotation in real time.  
This work allowed us to develop an analytical method 
that uses concepts related to semiotics in order to observe 
systemically the collective activity of design using various 
tools at the same time. In fact, through our data analysis and 
by using this method at the border of the fields of cognitive 
ergonomics and semiotics, we could clearly identify the use 
of 2D, the use of 3D and switching from one to another. In 
other words, what makes an actor switch from one to 
another? The observation of this practice that is at once 
"duplicate" and "distinctive" showed that look, drawing, and 
word (representing "working together") play an important 
role. 
It is obviously possible to draw in a tool and look 
simultaneously at another workspace, and this was observed 
during the use of SketSha (2D plans on tablet produced 
parallel to the interior image of library, which was projected 
in the immersive space. In this case, it was not a switching 
from one tool to the other but an oversizing of the 
workspace. The activity was not just in 2D or 3D, but it was 
oversized to offer two different perspectives simultaneously 
for a single area of the designed object. Even when actors 
worked in space dedicated to SketSha, they occasionally 
referred to the immersive space. However, in the context of 
use of the HIS device, the interface of HIS 2D appearing on 
the tablet involves systematically the disappearance of the 
SketSha workspace. A definite switching from one activity 
on a tool to a new activity on another tool is marked.  
Moreover, aspectuality related to switching of certain 
collective operations shows the effectiveness of the 
combination of two tools in order to validate the collective 
choice in the collective and remote design of a project. In 
both cases of switching (1) from SketSha to the HIS and (2) 
from HIS to SketSha, appropriation of a tool's specific 
functionality allows designers to better understand the ideas 
expressed, to build a common ground and to move forward 
together in a preliminary design phase. Nevertheless, the 
recurrent problem of bugs and sound dropping during the 
videoconferencing due to network disconnection did not help 
to build awareness among participants. This even caused 
some conflict between them. Both findings highlight the 
notions of completion and accomplishment throughout a 
permanent evaluation of ideas in the process. If all the 
operations that we have emphasized are essential in these 
early stages, it would still be considered a privileged place 
for punctual operations such as "informing", "declaring" or 
"validating together", which require good functionality of the 
tool.  
Limitations. Focusing on the modes of simultaneous 
appropriation of these two tools for collaborative design, this 
research is certainly not intended to be generalizable to other 
cases of tool and device combination. Nevertheless, the 
method implemented for processing and analysis of this type 
of combination is still interesting because it combines 
quantitative and qualitative data in a systematic, repeatable 
and disciplined approach. To further this approach and prove 
its validity, it is necessary to confront other contexts of using 

67
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
combined tools by exploiting the concepts from the field of 
semiotics.  
In addition, semi-structured interviews were conducted as 
part of this experiment, but these data were only used 
partially in our analysis.  
The in-depth processing of designers' feedback will 
enable the issue of aspectuality to be addressed in greater 
detail from the users’ perspective by reference to how they 
describe their experiences of appropriation of combined 
tools.  
Prospects. We plan to apply our approach (1) on one 
hand in longitudinal observations to analyze the evolution of 
this appropriation process in time and (2) on the other hand, 
to observe new collective activities such as participative 
production of a same artwork from distance. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Ben Rajeb, S. Shirkhodaei, and P. Leclercq, "Time, 
Occurence and Switching, Appropriation of two tools in 
collaborative design Point of view of aspectualization", 
proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on 
Advanced 
Collaborative 
Networks, 
Systems 
and 
Applications, COLLA'17, Nice, France, 2017. 
[2] T. Dorta, Y. Kalay, A. Lesage, and P. Pérez, "Design 
conversations in the interconnected HIS", in Carrara G., 
Fioravanti A., Trento A. (eds.), Connecting Brains Shaping 
the World: Collaborative Design Spaces, EuropIA 13, Rome, 
pp. 83-94, 2011. 
[3] http://www.hybridlab.umontreal.ca/his.php?l=fr, last access in 
April 2017. 
[4] S. Ben Rajeb and P. Leclercq, "Using Spatial Augmented 
Reality in Synchronous Collaborative Design", Yuhua Luo 
éd., In Lecture Notes in Computer Sciences, Springer, vol 
8091, pp. 1-10, 2013. 
[5] http://www.sketsha.be/F11_Innovation.html, last access in 
May 2017. 
[6] J. G. Breslin, "Social Semantic Information Spaces", in 
Semantic Digital Libraries, pp. 55-70, 2008. 
[7] M. Lourel, S. Abdellaoui, S. Chevaleyre, M. Paltrier, and K. 
Gana. "Relationships between psychological job demands, job 
control and burnout among Firefighters", in North American 
Journal of Psychology, 10(3), 489-496, 2008.  
[8] F. Darses, M. Wolff. "How do designers represent to 
themselves the users' needs?", in Applied Ergonomics, 37 (6), 
pp. 757-764, 2006.  
[9] J. F. Boujut, P. Laureillard, "A co-operation framework for 
product process integration in engineering design", in Design 
Studies, 23 (5), pp. 497-513, 2002. 
[10] P. Carlile, "Transferring, translating and transforming: an 
integrative framework for managing knowledge across 
boundaries", in Organization Science, 15, pp. 555-568, 2004. 
[11] J. M. Carroll, D. C. Neale, P. L. Isenhour, M. B. Rosson, and 
D. 
S. 
McCrickard, 
"Notification 
and 
awareness: 
synchronizing 
task-oriented 
collaborative 
activity", 
in 
International Journal Of Human-Computer Studies, 58, pp. 
605-632, 2003. 
[12] A. J. Greimas and J. Courtés, Sémiotique. Dictionnaire 
raisonné de la théorie du langage, (translated by "Semiotic. 
Dictionary of the Language Theory"), Paris, Hachette, 1993. 
[13] J. Fontanille, Le discours aspectualisé, PULIM, Limoges, 
1991. 
[14] J. Holt, Etude d’aspect. (translated by "Aspect studies"), Acte 
Julandicia. 15: 2 Copenhague, 1942.  
[15] J. Dubois, M.  Giacomo, L. Guespin, Ch. Marcellesi, J.B., 
Marcellesi, 
and 
J.P. 
Mével, 
Grand 
Dictionnaire 
de 
linguistique et des sciences du langage, (translated by 
"Dictionary of Linguistics and Language Science"), Paris, 
Larousse, 2007. 
[16] D. Bertrand, Précis de sémiotique littéraire (translated by 
"Literary semiotics"), Paris, HER, 2000. 
[17] S. Ben Rajeb, "Modélisation de la collaboration distante dans 
les pratiques de conception architecturale: Caractérisation des 
opérations 
cognitives 
en 
conception 
collaborative 
instrumentée". PhD thesis in architecture. Laboratoire 
Modélisations pour l’Assistance à l’Activité Cognitive de la 
Conception (MAP-MAACC de UMR MAP CNRS 3495), 
Université Paris-Est et Ecole Nationale d'Architecture de 
Paris La Villette, Paris, France, 2012.  
[18] S. Ben Rajeb, "Conception collaborative distante: étude 
architecturologique pour la caractérisation des opérations 
cognitives" (translated by "Remote collaborative design: 
architecturology analysis to specify cognitives design 
operations"), V. Angenot, S. Safin, M.G. Dondero & P. 
Leclercq éd., In Interfaces numériques: Collaborer à distance, 
enjeux et impacts des interfaces numériques dans les pratiques 
collaboratives synchrone, Lavoisier, 2 – n°3, pp. 509-530, 
2013. 
[19] S. Ben Rajeb and P. Leclercq, "Instrumented analysis method 
for collaboration activities", proceedings of the Fifth 
International 
Conference 
on 
Advanced 
Collaborative 
Networks, Systems and Applications, COLLA'15, San Julian, 
Malta, 2015. 
[20] J. Beers Pieter, H. P. Boshuizen, P. A. Kirschner, and W. H. 
Gijselaers, "The analysis of negotiation of common ground in 
CSCL ". Learning and instruction, vol. 17, n°4, p. 427-435, 
2007. 
[21] F. Darses, A. Mayeur, C. Elsen, C., and P. Leclercq, "Is there 
anything to expect from 3D views in sketching support 
tools?". Gero, J., Goel, A. (eds.) in Design Computing and 
Cognition 2008, proceedings of the Third International 
Conference on Design Computing and Cognition, Atlanta, 
USA, pp. 283–302. Springer, 2008. 

