Analysis of Collaborative Design through Action Research: 
Methodology and Tools 
Samia Ben Rajeb 
LUCID - University of Liège 
Belgium 
samia.benrajeb@ulg.ac.be 
Pierre Leclercq 
LUCID - University of Liège 
Belgium 
pierre.leclercq@ulg.ac.be
 
 
Abstract- Analysing collective design activities is a complex 
task, especially in a context that involves the remote 
collaboration and/or multidisciplinarity. To support such an 
analysis, 
this 
article 
describes 
a 
dedicated 
process, 
instrumented by tools that can facilitate the data acquisition 
and visualization, and implemented in various contexts of 
higher education. The method presented here enables to cross-
reference the two aspects of a collective activity: the process 
and the content treated by a group. The method offers the 
possibility to analyse different types of collective work 
configurations with a high level of flexibility that leaves the 
possibility to the researcher to update his/her analysis criteria 
even during the observed activity. 
Keywords- collaborative design; methodologies and tools for 
collaborative activity analysis; visualization of collaborative 
processes; collaborative action-research project. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Design and construction projects result from a complex 
collective activity involving several skills, starting at the 
earliest stages of the process [1]. These skills emerge from 
the fields of architecture and engineering, naturally, but also 
from the fields of ecology, sociology, and ergonomics, to 
name a few [2]. If all these skills need to be united, it is in 
response to strong competition, increasingly coercive 
qualitative and regulatory requirements, and short deadlines 
[3]. To address these real market conditions, design agencies 
and construction companies are looking for skills elsewhere, 
and adapt themselves as well as possible to this new context, 
without necessarily being prepared or equipped beforehand. 
This is why, today, it is important to fundamentally rethink 
training for careers in design (architecture, engineering, 
industrial design, etc.) to prepare future designers for this 
complex collective activity [1,4]. 
Indeed, this training is conducted, usually, over 3 to 5 
years and is founded on project-based learning. This project-
based learning is of course complemented by theoretical 
coursework that allows students to approach a range of areas 
necessary to master design. When these students work in 
teams, they need to manage their activity as a group, define 
each person’s duties, coordinate, build agreements, and 
negotiate [5] Managing their project turns out to be complex 
to handle for novice designers as they continue to evolve in 
the context of ongoing learning and in one following an 
exploratory process. In this process, which is difficult to 
break down, they must specify both the functioning of the 
object to be designed and the means to be implemented. 
Faced with the difficulties of students working together, 
understanding a complex exploratory process, changing 
assumptions, and gaining perspective on their own design 
and collaboration activities, we ask ourselves the following 
question: could design be teachable in a format other than 
"project workshops"? 
Without questioning the relevance of project-based 
learning, which is perfectly adequate for understanding 
design, we aim, in this article, to put forward a new training 
style created for design. Our approach, designed to be 
analytical and co-constructed, is to rethink collective activity 
in design and thus help the learner, whether Master’s 
students or professionals, to gain perspective on their own 
activity in expression with others’. 
In the aim of defining our own pedagogical approach, 
this article will first present a state of the art of commonly 
implemented approaches, to comprehend collective design 
activities. Then we will discuss our own approach in more 
detail and its general methods through the description of a 
training framework, called "workshop +". We follow by 
defining the four stages that this comprises, as well as the 
various methodological, theoretical and analytical tools put 
into play. We will subsequently list its assorted integrated 
applications, implemented for varied advanced design 
training 
sessions. 
Finally, 
experience 
feedback, 
contributions, limitations and perspectives of this teaching 
approach will be discussed, drawing conclusions from four 
years of its implementation in both academic and 
professional contexts. 
II. 
BACKGROUND TO THE APPROACH 
Group activities have been the subject of much research 
in psychology, ergonomics and cognitive science, for the 
purposes of modeling such activities [6]. These models are 
based on two synchronization modes: cognitive, referring to 
the construction of a context of shared knowledge; and 
operational, referring to the distribution of tasks among 
collaborators. These synchronizations are designed to build 
awareness that allows collaborators to interact with their 
environment and with the group of participants [7]. The role 
of common ground is crucial here because it enables each 
person to share their particular skills and to acquire new 
skills, to be able work with others [8]. Various studies have 
also highlighted the complexity of these activities, which 
varies according to the number of participants [9], the subject 
199
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

of the activity [10] or the time and space in which such 
interactions take place [11]). 
Given this variety of configurations involving multiple 
participants, diverse methods of technical support have been 
proposed, which may target particular tool features as well as 
the organization of assigned workgroups. These forms of 
technical support come under the scientific framework of 
CSCW, "Computer Supported Cooperative Work" [12] and 
more 
specifically 
CSCD, 
"Computer 
Support 
for 
Cooperative Design”, which focuses specifically on 
collective design activities [13]. 
Our alternative education proposal resides in this 
scientific field, focusing on instances when different present 
or remote participants work together around the same design 
subject. This phase is one of emerging ideas, choices and 
negotiations that ensue through interactions and artifacts 
shared among participants; it is even more difficult to 
understand, 
observe 
and 
analyze 
as 
it 
involves 
multidisciplinary skills. The original approach that we 
present in this article is driven by this perspective gained 
from stepping back from a complex collaborative activity. 
Let us begin by contextualizing our approach in relation 
to others already destined for teaching design, then we will 
define the type of protocol that we have chosen and the 
analytical point of view that it is built upon. 
A. Selecting an approach  
Dedicated to advanced end-of-degree learners (second-
year 
Master’s 
or 
Research 
Master’s 
students) 
or 
professionals questioning their collaborative design activity 
[14], the approach proposed here is complementary to that of 
the conventional workshop. It was elaborated to be 
collective, with the goal of focusing the attention of the 
learners on the process rather than on the object to be 
designed, leading them to a "meta" reflection on their own 
design process and collaboration. 
Involving the active participation of learners in the 
specification of self-analysis activity, our approach lies in the 
scientific fields of participatory approaches. 
Participatory approaches to research are multiple but 
strive for the same goal, that is, to associate an experience, 
an action, practice and analysis [15]. "Action research" is one 
such approach that breaks away from conventional scientific 
approaches, which systematically separate action from its 
analysis, 
collective 
practices 
from 
their 
theoretical 
elaboration [16]. Its main target is to manage the concerns of 
participants faced with a situation, by the intervention of 
research aimed at developing a shared understanding of the 
situation [17]. It is deemed "collaborative" when all 
participants (researchers and practitioners, observers and 
designers) attempt to co-construct new meaning relative to 
their activity [18]. This co-construction is created through 
the synergy of their views, but also through a reflection on 
one’s own action with respect to others’ [19]. According to 
Desgagné [20], this approach is based on a reciprocal 
relationship of self/co-reflection, self/co-criticism and, 
therefore, self/co-training, with oneself and with other 
collaborators. The implementation of "participatory action 
research" is mostly seen in the professional training of 
teachers, child welfare, specialized coaching, or territorial 
development but is still rarely used in the design field [21]. 
Integrating 
this 
into 
our 
approach 
encompasses 
a 
participatory 
protocol 
involving 
several 
participating 
designers, observers, and researchers. Its educational purpose 
is not to assess the value of the design project itself (as is the 
case for project workshops), but rather to describe the 
process that brought it about. It does not impose a method of 
design; instead, it investigates how it is possible to observe, 
analyze, or break the process down, in order to better 
perceive the collaborative activity and the complexity of 
interactions involved. 
Our premise on design activity considers it to be one that 
is complex and difficult to break down, and one whose 
outcome is first contemplated, negotiated, valued, challenged 
and co-constructed before even coming into existence. 
Two questions arise: How should we speak about the 
design process? Plus, how it is negotiated and co-deliberated 
by the group? To answer these questions, original tools have 
been created to query design and collaboration. They have 
been defined so that all designer/observer/researcher 
participants co-construct integrated meaning and decide all 
actions which result from it [22, p. 83]. They propose data 
harvesting protocols, processing and analysis of the 
observation data most appropriate to this analysis approach 
and help to collectively understand the complexity of the 
components of a collaborative design activity. 
B. Defining the protocol 
Since the 1990s, many studies have endeavoured to 
promote and assist collective activity. To summarize, we 
distinguish them as follows: 
• 
those seeking to categorize and define collective 
activity [23]; 
• 
those focusing on the technical aspects of this 
activity [24]; 
• 
those concentrating on its social aspects [25]; 
• 
those concerned with developing human-machine 
interfaces, others with human-human interfaces, to 
assist collaboration [26]; 
• 
those developing methods and tools for the analysis 
of this complex activity in their real context or in a 
laboratory [27]. 
Focusing on the latter aspect to comprehend collective 
activity, one of the main data collection and processing 
methods for the analysis of collaborative situations is 
protocol analysis [28], which is generally intended for 
comments in controlled environments. This protocol analysis 
is based on two data collection methods: retrospective 
protocols and concurrent protocols. Each method can 
produce similar results for a coherent understanding of the 
problem-solving process, but they can also complete each 
other, according to research objectives [29]. 
Retrospective protocols. This protocol consists in 
asking the participant under observation, after (s)he has 
completed the activity, to choose elements representative of 
their activity, and then to describe them in order to better 
identify the specific features of their work, alone or in a 
group. It relates, therefore, to the study of design objects and 
200
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

their components as distinct from the situations in which the 
former evolve [28, 30]. This approach aids, we believe, in 
changing the point of view of the designers regarding their 
design object by asking them to conceptualize their activity 
and to utilize their memory. It has been shown elsewhere 
that, although the stored information may rely on short-term 
memory, this cumulative data can provide relevant details for 
the research question [27] and the origins of the decisions for 
the resolution of various problems [31]. Self-confrontation 
may also be another approach for analyzing an already 
completed task [32]. This consists in requesting a participant 
to perform a self-assessment of his or her own work 
processes (alone and/or with others) from footage of their 
activity [33]. However, we find this other method requires 
too substantial an investment by the participant in terms of 
time and research involvement. 
Concurrent protocols. This protocol consists in asking 
the participant to verbalize his or her thoughts out loud while 
working on a specific task (“thinking aloud” [34]). These 
thoughts are then transcribed, coded and analyzed by the 
researcher. This approach rests on the assumption that the 
verbalization of thoughts during the problem-solving process 
does not affect the process [28]. Other researchers do not 
agree with this assumption, however, and consider 
"retrospective protocols" to be less intrusive in the process, 
as the protocol is put into practice following the completion 
of activity [35]. Yet, as part of a collective activity, the 
interlocutors are naturally found obliged to communicate and 
verbalize their thoughts to work together. 
Thus, we consider that the "concurrent protocol" is 
meaningful since it better approaches real conditions of the 
activity and its context. Taking the activity’s real context into 
account reinforces the ecological validity of our advanced 
training and does not exclude the social processes, teamwork 
and communication that constitute the reality of daily work. 
C. Application to a twofold analytical approach 
Analytical approaches are varied and may result in 
qualitative or quantitative results. As taking a step back seeks 
to be constructive and objectifiable for the learner, it is 
necessary to achieve a certain degree of precision in the 
processing and analysis of data observed. Analytical 
methods known in the literature are generally based on a 
segmentation system which, according to Nguyen et al. [31], 
can be oriented according to the process or content. 
Process-oriented segmentation. This approach makes it 
possible to break the process down into several sequences 
related to the participants’ intentions and to identify the time 
spent on each of these sequences, as well as the correlation 
between them. As proposed by Gronier [36], the COMET 
method [5] is used to describe the main phases of 
identification and argumentation of a problem. The coding 
grid, developed for the specific analysis of viewpoint 
confrontation processes in concurrent engineering [37], 
allows researchers in turn to draw up a tree of proposals and 
verbal interactions between collaborators’ work. The 
analysis carried out by ALCESTE word processing software 
[38] also makes it possible to structure the information 
involved and shared by participants to solve a problem. 
Although all these methods complement each other, this 
"process-oriented segmentation" approach has nevertheless 
been criticized in some studies because it does not focus 
enough on content, i.e., on the problem addressed, on 
documents or even on annotations produced by the 
participants during the activity under observation (39). 
Content-oriented segmentation. This approach makes it 
possible to complete the one above since it is specifically 
concerned with artifacts (e.g., pictures, notes, references, and 
models) and enables us to examine the cognitive interaction 
between designer and artifacts [40]. One of the best-known 
methods among these is that of Gero [41], which offers an 
encoding principle, named FBS, dependent on the 
functionality of the object ("Function"), the behaviour of 
participants ("Behaviour") and the collaborative structure 
("Structure"). The author there considers design to be a series 
of transformations of the model’s functions. Brassac and 
Gregori [42] proposed, for their part, a clinical approach 
which focuses on real activity and its various interactions by 
studying 
discursive 
productions, 
gestures, 
graphical 
representations and conversational sequences. This approach, 
according to their research [42], allows not only speech acts 
to be classified, by breaking them down into sequences and 
sub-sequences, but also the conversational dynamic between 
collaborators to be illustrated. In a similar vein, through the 
use of ethnographic studies, Boujut and Laureillard [43] 
immersed themselves directly into a real industrial 
environment and proposed a method of "action research", 
analyzing the framework and introducing new tools to aid in 
collaboration. 
III. 
DEFINITION OF ADVANCED TRAINING: WORKSHOP+ 
Relative to the state of the art examined above, our 
approach lies clearly in "participatory action research". In the 
workshop proposed here, we group together supervising 
researchers and learners playing either the role of designer or 
of observer. All participants involved in this process are thus 
"engaged in a critical, dynamic reflection upon a situation 
that appeals to them" [22, p. 78]. So they are all active 
participants in the experiment. They participate together in 
data collection as well as in its processing and analysis by 
the co-construction of shared meaning around a collaborative 
design activity. In this context, the approach chosen was that 
of "concurrent protocols", focusing on the process and its 
evolution over time ("process-oriented segmentation") as 
well as on the design draft examined and on the interactions 
involved in building it ("Content-oriented segmentation"). 
By taking an interest in advanced university courses as 
well as in professional training, the challenge of our 
approach lies in the context concerned with our workshop+. 
It can take place either 1) in an educational context of project 
execution, possibly with large amounts of onerous data to be 
analyzed, or 2) in a professional context that, for privacy 
reasons, does not allow audio and/or video data to be 
recorded to process and analyze later, data being based on 
verbalization and transcription. This consists in confronting 
the participants with their (oral and graphic) interactions with 
the goal of self/co-analyzing and self/co-understanding 
negotiation and collective decision-making processes. This 
201
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

description is carried out qualitatively, in our approach, and 
also relies on quantitative data visualizations questioning 
various criteria involved in the specification of collective 
activity. It is therefore crucial to avoid the possible 
dichotomy often found in conventional research practices 
where researchers collect data by themselves, reframe their 
observations, analyze and then present them to the subject 
observed, once the entirety has been handled. 
Rather, this co-construction of meaning regarding the 
activity and this moment of taking a step back to reflect are, 
as a result, performed here with the designer, not on the 
designer. While a traditional approach could ensure greater 
objectivity faced with the situation under observation, in the 
training contexts involved in this study, cross-feedback from 
that step back is given particular preference in our 
workshop+. Yet this does not prevent a scientific approach 
from being taken, so as to objectify some of the hindsight on 
the design and collaborative activity, both by designers and 
observers. Thus, thanks to specific methods of observation, 
note-taking, implementing a common coding grid, scientific 
analysis methods in the humanities, and analytical tools for 
data processing, our workshop+ seeks several objectives 
regarding the participants: 
• 
to co-construct a reflection on their collaborative 
design activity, 
• 
to develop their critical thinking by dealing with 
differing points of view, 
• 
to structure and enrich mastery of their know-how 
and to support their conceptual strategy, and 
• 
to start to take a step back thanks to an introduction 
to research practices in design. 
The pedagogical approach proposed here in workshop+ 
is likewise divided into 4 stages: 
• 
Step 1: experimentation via role-playing games, 
involving designers and observers with predefined 
missions and note-taking grids; 
• 
Step 2: the transcription through the co-breakdown 
of the process and co-reporting of the actions 
observed and experienced by observers and 
designers; 
• 
Step 3: data coding and processing via the co-
construction of meaning for actions’ specification; 
• 
Step 4: analyzing and weighing up results through 
stepping 
back 
and 
co-defining 
negotiated 
knowledge, resulting in a co-modification of the 
action through mutual feedback. 
For each of these steps, we will examine below the 
implementations and the targeted objectives, and will 
describe the different tools implemented to allow participants 
to begin reflecting upon their activity. 
IV. 
FOUR STEPS OF WORKSHOP+ 
After a brief introduction regarding our training’s 
objectives and motivations, the training begins immediately 
with experimentation, which consists of a two-hour 
collaborative design situation. 
A. Step1 - Experimentation 
Implementation. Learners apply an experimental 
protocol defined in advance according to a method dictated 
by the context (short vs long integration). The definition of 
this protocol is essential to ensuring the smooth running of 
the workshop+ and to guaranteeing its integration into a 
collaborative action research approach. Hence, each 
participant belonging to the same workgroup is given a role 
that he will keep throughout the workshop+: either as a 
designer (3 designers minimum per group), or as an observer 
(number defined by number of participants in the 
workshop+). Designers are arranged in a predetermined 
seating arrangement and face the design brief given to them. 
Observers take notes “on the fly,” with respect to a common 
time reference given by a shared stopwatch. Each observer 
has a mission, precisely defined by a card dealt before the 
start of the experiment (Figure 1). This task may involve one 
of the following: 
• 
a general observation, where the observation criteria 
are not dictated by the experimenter: the objective is 
to build a qualitative observation that takes into 
account the specificity of the situation observed; 
• 
a detailed observation, structured according to a grid 
predefined by the experimenter: the aim here is to 
systematize their observations to make their data 
more explicit and more easily quantifiable. 
The mission of each participant is only known by other 
observers after a minimum training time to overcome the 
main limitation of "concurrent protocols." This is why it is 
important that observers be perfectly well-prepared, capable 
and motivated, and that designers gradually forget their 
presence. To do so, the experiment was divided into 2 
phases. During the first half hour, observers respond 
individually to specific missions, ignoring others’ missions. 
After 30 minutes, the session is suspended: all observers are 
gathered in a room away from the observation site, to learn 
about each other’s missions and to confront their difficulties 
in observing. This phase allows them to stabilize and 
coordinate their note-taking strategies to resume thereafter in 
a more coherent manner, adapted to the context observed. 
Then follows the second phase of the experiment, during 
which the observers continue their note-taking, whether 
general or specific. Designers, for their part, still do not 
know what the observers are scrutinizing. It is indeed 
essential that designers not know what observers are 
watching for. Otherwise, the risk of influence on the 
designers’ working practices would increase and could make 
the observation meaningless. 
Objectives. Enforcing the protocol makes it possible to 
set certain variables in advance, such as the seating of the 
designers around the table, reference documents given, the 
tools at their disposal, etc. This imposed setup also allows 
participants to better gauge, afterwards, the influence of the 
situation and the context of the design process and 
collaboration between designers (namely in that designers 
are not made aware of what must be notified by the 
observers, so as to keep influence on their work to a 
minimum). 
202
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Methodological tools. The protocol is proposed so as to 
describe the collective design activity. Thus, note-taking 
grids adapted to multi-collaborator interactions were defined 
according to 4 observatory themes identified through mission 
maps:  
• 
Theme 1. Observe collaboration: each designer is 
assigned an observer whose mission is to focus on 
their actions while working (or not) with other 
designers. With respect to a single time, the observer 
describes the interactions of the designer under 
observation vis-à-vis others and the space in which 
the designer is working (RIN 2012). The observer 
also notes the documents used by "his/her" designer, 
and the types of performances used by the individual 
during the process; 
• 
Theme 2. Observe design: one of the observers is 
specifically assigned to monitor the design process 
and artifacts that are created therein and/or shared by 
all designers. He or she must specify, among other 
things, part(s) of the project concerned by the 
designers’ action (e.g., the building entrance) and the 
documents used and/or created to work on the 
project; 
• 
Theme 3. Observe trends: one observer is assigned 
to list and describe the different analogies, specific 
manifestations of emotion, occasional use of tools, 
etc., implemented by the designers during the project 
design;  
• 
Theme 4. Observe freely: this observer's mission is 
to meta-analyze collaborative activity overall in the 
design process observed, relative to key moments 
that seem important to him or her to emphasize.  
Theoretical tools. The workshop+ is introduced by an 
introductory course regarding the scientific approach, 
supplemented by a course sensitizing the learner to "how to 
do" rather than simply "doing". Once the designers have 
been informed of the program for the project to be designed, 
observers 
privately 
undergo 
training 
on 
note-taking 
techniques and on the relevance of complying with the 
protocol in the context of a scientific approach.  
Analytical tools. At this stage in the workshop+, no 
analytical tool, outside the note-taking grids, is given to 
observers yet (Figure 1). Everything is taken down “on the 
fly” using a stopwatch made available to them and displayed 
to all participants as the one and only reference, easily 
recognizable by observers, and which will subsequently 
allow them to synchronize their observations. 
B. Step 2 - Transcription 
Implementation. During the transcription phase, the 
time marker has a significant impact. All collected data is 
first synchronized according to the predefined criteria in the 
note-taking grids.  
During this data synchronization step, designers and 
observers come together to discuss their views and 
chronologically transcribe their experiences and observations 
into a single account. This mutual account of the 
collaborative process is thus built, in the form of actions, 
through a consensus among the various participants. By 
putting every action into words, observers break down the 
activity into moments of interaction; they then transcribe 
these into distinct categories describing the collaborative  
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Protocol, design product, mission card and note-taking grid 
 
Figure 2.  Notes taken converted to coded data 
203
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

design process. The joint transcription process in words is 
already a first look back at the activity that took place. This 
transcript is carried out via a frame segmenting activity 
vertically according to a temporal reference to describe the 
process ("process-oriented segmentation"); and horizontally 
according to predefined criteria describing the content and 
specificity of each action ("content-oriented segmentation"): 
typology of action, workspace concerned, documents used, 
representations created, analogies observed, degree of object 
handling, degree of object abstraction, emotions expressed, 
etc. Each action is a testament to the design operations and 
collaboration implemented by each participant according to 
his or her viewpoint, relevancy and references. This action 
list is then segmented to split the process into several 
sequences. A sequence is thus a series of decisions, starting 
with the explicit expression of intent or of a problem that 
does not necessarily end with its resolution; rather, it may 
lead to the beginning of a new sequence that may or may not 
be directly dependent on the previous one. A sequence is 
composed of a succession of moments, these being 
composed of actions, representations and points of view 
(e.g., general layout > layout of ground-floor > layout of 1st 
floor > entry plan > etc.). 
Objectives. This transcription step makes it possible to 
synchronize note taking and to set observers’ viewpoints 
against designers’ experience in a joint time description of 
the collaborative design activity (under the supervision of the 
researcher). In this step, each participant enters into dialogue 
with himself and with others so as to organize and specify 
the course of action for the activity observed. By setting each 
action into words, the participants negotiate and attempt to 
understand each other. This implies "leaving behind the 
implicit for the explicit", which sometimes involves a 
deconstruction/reconstruction 
of 
representations 
that 
participants had prior to their activity [44]. The transcript 
grid was defined well in advance by the researchers in order 
to provide a framework that will allow them, by a consensus, 
to collectively stop the main actions to be studied. It serves 
as a discussion framework for researchers/supervisors, for 
questioning certain defining criteria for the activity. This 
transcript grid later became a grid for reading and analyzing 
data for the whole group (designers/observers/researchers).  
Methodological tools. The transcript grid (provided to 
observers with a structured observation mission) is 
composed of several categories (Figure 2). These categories 
are themselves divided into several exclusive criteria, as 
follows:  
• 
description of the interaction between designers; 
• 
identification of documents used or created by each 
participant; 
• 
observation of trends: if an analogy, tool handling 
and/or a particular emotion was observed, for each 
participant; 
• 
types of representation expressed by each participant 
(e.g., oral communication, notes, diagram, 2D 
drawing, 3D geometry, etc.); 
• 
specification of workspaces for each designer: each 
designer 
working 
individually 
(I-space), 
two 
working apart (Space-between), or three working 
together in the same I-space (We-space). 
Theoretical tools. A methodological manual is made 
available, defining all categories and criteria that make up 
the transcript grid. 
Analytical tools. Automated formulas are inserted into 
the transcription file (.xls), helping participants to rapidly 
detect certain transcription errors. 
C. Step 3 - Coding and data processing 
Implementation. After synchronization, data is then 
transcribed collectively, to enable more accurate description 
of the evolution of the design project, the collective activity, 
and to enable increased accuracy of different analogies set 
forth by the designers. These criteria and categories stem 
from research and state-of-the-art presentations to students in 
theoretical courses associated with this workshop+ (see 
hereunder "Methodological tools"). Once encoded, the data 
is then processed by a tool called Common Tools (CT). CT 
is a web application initiated in the ARC COMMON 
research project [45] and developed by LUCID at the 
University of Liège. It allows all the encoded data to be 
viewed with respect to time, occurrences and specificities of 
each participant involved in the collective design process [1]. 
Visualizations proposed here concern the process as much as 
the content, by describing the temporal evolution of the 
participants’ interactions and their implications on the 
mutual design object (Figure 3). 
 
 
Figure 3.  Example of visualization (timeline of workspaces) 
proposed by COMMON Tools 
Objectives. This stage of coding and processing 
transcripts, by combining designers and observers, allows 
them to understand how to link their own observations with 
theoretical models, given in courses related to the description 
of collaborative design process. This approach therefore 
offers a second opportunity to step back and consider the 
process. Setting their acquired knowledge against what they 
observed during the experiment also gives learners the 
opportunity to challenge the transcription and coding grids 
provided by the supervising researcher. Learners can in fact 
redefine certain criteria or add new ones thanks to the 
flexibility of the grid and to the visualization facilitated by 
CT. 
Methodological tools. For this third stage, new 
encodings complete the transcript grid: with respect to the 
design object (according to its degree of handling and of 
abstraction), to collective actions, and to types of analogies 
put into practice. Each encoding is divided into several 
criteria to detail the collaborative design activity more 
precisely. A methodological manual is provided, allowing 
learners to have the exact definition of each criterion.  
204
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Prise de 
notes
Vidéos
Prise de 
notes
Vidéos
Video
coding
Videos
Data
Base
Statistics
Retrans-
cription
Data
collecting
Data
synchronisation
Data
visualisation
Data
consolidation
Hand
notes
Script
coding
Coding
Synchro-
nisation
Elan,
Observer XT, 
SketSha Replay
XL, ...
XL, ...
Final Cut,
Movie Maker, 
Premiere
SQL
CVS
Observation
Data analysis
COMMON Tools
Analysis
Interpretation
Crossed
statistics
Timeline,
cloud, pie, ...
Timeline,
cloud, pie, ...
Selected
visual formalisms
 
Figure 4.  From data collection to processing by COMMON Tools for analysis purposes. 
Theoretical tools. Based on this predefined experimental 
protocol, theoretical concepts to be called upon are 
introduced via course modules spread over the workshop+. 
Backed up by references from scientific design & cognition 
and CSCW communities, these modules present learners 
with the main concepts used in the workshop+: (1) design 
process models; (2) group activity specificities; and (3) the 
use of analogy in design.  
Analytical tools. Provided to participants, the Common 
Tools platform performs data processing from the code 
frame (in .csv formats), transforming it into consolidated, 
quantified data (Figure 4). It then allows the user to view that 
data under an assortment of graphical representations (e.g, 
pie chart, stacked columns, timeline, crossing, clouds, etc.). 
This tool thus provides quantitative data visualization 
functions for different categories in the form of a panel of 
graphs (over 4000 graphs proposed by analysis). Each piece 
of data can be displayed by chart type, but also by participant 
or for all participants, by sequence or for all sequences, in 
occurrences or in duration. Trends, in turn, take the shape of 
dots in the timeline, to mark events occurring singly in the 
collective design process. The tool also allows two 
categories to be compared for advanced analysis of the 
complex collaborative design activity. 
D. 4.4 Step 4 - Analysis and key results  
Implementation. This final step marks the transition 
from description to interpretation. Here, all participants 
scrutinize the quantified data and choose the appropriate type 
of chart to affirm or reject comments made during the first 
instance of stepping back from the project. It allows them to 
integrate quantitative data, displayed via Common Tools, the 
relevant descriptive dimensions already having been 
identified 
qualitatively 
during 
transcription 
(e.g., 
communication strategies, types of sequences, forms of 
collaboration, body language, or interpersonal development).  
Objectives. The objective of this stage is the mutual 
definition of the research questions specific to each 
experiment by observers and by designers, jointly. Here, all 
the participants also negotiate choosing the right graph style 
to give meaning to quantified results and to respond to 
questions. This step invites the group to query each other: 
what are our research questions? What do we want to put 
forward in relation to the collective activity and the design 
process we observed? How can we appraise our results? 
What can we take away with respect to what has been 
experienced/observed in the role of designer as well as of an 
observer? This step thus marks the third opportunity to step 
back, where the participants no longer focus solely on design 
analysis and collaboration, but also raise the question of the 
influence of the protocol on the functioning of the activity. 
This “metatheatrical” analysis concerns seating assignments 
designated by the protocol, the note taking grids and 
predefined analysis categories, as much as the approach itself 
to collaborative action research. In addition to the question, 
“How do designers collaborate and negotiate the project?” 
they examine, firstly, the negotiation process between 
observers for synchronizing their views and, secondly, their 
collaboration with the designers to set their observations 
against experiences within the same experiment. 
Methodological tools. Introduced to the scientific 
process, learners apply social science analysis methods and 
learn to adapt the description of the facts to the interpretation 
of results, which they highlight by selecting relevant visual 
formalisms (graph styles) as visual data interpretation aids.  
Theoretical tools. An additional course module presents 
learners with the typology of visual formalisms for the 
enhancement of scientific results (e.g., which to choose; how 
to read, describe and interpret them). 
V. 
IMPLEMENTATION  
Our approach was implemented in several advanced 
pedagogical frameworks for the analysis of and hindsight 
into design meetings in the form of workshop+. As discussed 
in the introduction, it acts as a complement to conventional 
project-based learning or to doctoral or professional training 
for teachers and/or design collaborators specifically 
interested in group activities.  
205
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE I.  
CONTEXT OF IMPLEMENTATION 
 
Application context 
Steps and analysis tools 
Educational objectives 
 
Short integration 
 
from 6 hours to 2 days 
• 
2nd Master in architecture, 
University of Liège 
• 
1st Master Design, High School, 
Liège 
• 
International Design Research 
Workshop, Liège 
• 
mission cards 
• 
qualitative analysis from note-
taking 
• 
crossing observations and 
synthesis with pre-requisite 
knowledge 
• 
construction of an experimental 
protocol  
• 
step back and on collective activity 
in design 
 
Long integration 
 
from 4 to 8 days 
• 
2nd Master Architecture & 
Engineering, University of Liège 
• 
2nd Master Architecture, 
University of Brussels 
• 
2nd Master Architecture, 
University Ibn Khaldoun, Tunis 
• 
Master Research, in Ergonomics, 
University Paris 8 
• 
Master Research in Design, High 
School, Tunis 
 
• 
mission cards 
• 
qualitative analysis from freehand 
notes 
• 
crossing observations through a 
coding grid (xls file) 
• 
quantitative analysis and visual 
formalism with COMMON Tools 
• 
synthesis including theoretical 
coursework followed during the 
workshop 
• 
introduction to scientific research 
• 
learning methods of collecting, 
processing and analyzing data 
• 
step back and on collective activity 
in design  
• 
considering the involvement of 
context in collaborative design 
activity 
 
The 
fields 
of 
application 
involve 
architecture, 
engineering, design, ergonomics and project management. 
Two workshop+ styles were proposed. These styles take 
into account the time allotted in the workshop+ depending on 
the context in which it is situated. Both styles were designed 
to train people to carry out a reflective, shared analysis of 
their design and collaboration process. However, they ranged 
from 4 hours to 8 days. Table I summarizes the 
characteristics of each, presenting their operational focus 
(regarding the time available for the workshop+), their 
pedagogical focus (regarding the learning objective targeted 
by teachers inviting us to employ this approach) and their 
theoretical, 
analytical 
and 
methodological 
tools, 
all 
complementary to each other. 
At the end of each workshop+ each participant was asked 
to assess (anonymously) the activity’s proceedings, its 
content and its interest relative to their academic and/or 
professional background. This assessment consisted of a 
questionnaire and 3 open questions. The questionnaire 
(imposing a scale of 1 to 5 on a criterion-based grid) 
included 12 questions concerning the modalities of the 
workshop, its relevance and the methodological, theoretical 
and analytical tools employed. The open comments were, in 
turn, related to the major contributions of the workshop+, the 
shortcomings raised and additional suggestions to consider. 
The following discussion will therefore be based on that 
assessment in addition to our qualitative observations made 
after four years’ experience in implementing this activity. 
VI. 
ADAPTABILITY OF THE COLLABORATIVE ACTION 
RESEARCH APPROACH  
As outlined by G. Monceau [46, p.21], "not all 
participation 
in 
action 
research 
necessarily 
means 
collaboration, i.e., 'working together'." The approach 
proposed here was introduced to encourage progressive 
thinking, self-confronted, co-evaluated and co-constructed at 
the same time. Indeed, steps 2, 3 and 4 invite all of the 
participants 
(designers, 
observers, 
and 
supervising 
researchers) to describe their actions, through the transcript, 
collaborative encoding and analysis via imposed criteria. 
Trying to objectify all the activity into words by the 
interaction of various epistemological reflections, designers, 
researchers and observers converse, debate, look for 
evidence and challenge preconceptions. This progressive, 
fluid strategy maintains the co-construction of meaning as an 
active process, ensuring this triangulation between coding, 
analysis and interpretation of data. Although at first glance, 
these steps seem perfectly distinct (relative to the scientific 
approach described in the Section VII), they interfere with 
each other and also allow backtracking and a shared 
awareness of their activity’s complexity. The keystone of 
collaborative action research is the participation of all 
collaborators (observers, designers and researchers) at every 
stage of the protocol: from the precise definition of the 
research question, to the collection, processing and analysis 
of data, up through the exploitation of results. Moreover, 
after having been implemented multiple times, the value of 
this type of approach is evident in a university curriculum for 
students learning their craft (Figure 5). More than 85% of 
them assigned a value greater than or equal to 4/5 for this 
criterion (1 = least important / 5 = most important). 
According to them, this work was not only the opportunity to 
study the activity of collaboration and design among 
multiple participants, but also to work together (as 
researchers, designers and collaborators) to find common 
ground on different concerted actions: "The challenge was at 
the time, above all, to agree on a single scenario at the start 
of transcription, to find compromises in order to construct a 
single reflection from many voices. Only this group 
reflection, based on consensus and the search for a common 
construction of what we could observe, has enabled us to 
comprehend and to be able to advance in our research." Thus 
emerges a dynamic way of thinking that promotes co-
206
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

construction of meaning in relation to both the situation 
studied and the activity examined. 
However, to ensure such "thinking together", it is 
necessary up-front to query the purpose of this type of 
approach and its objectives for each participant. To begin 
with, participants’ interests may diverge: the learners’ 
primary goal is to question their practice, while for 
supervisors/researchers, the scientific investigation at hand is 
their core interest. Yet it is through the active relationship 
between learners and teachers, and the strong link with the 
world of practice, that the whole point of this type of 
approach emerges. One fosters the other through the 
development of a multi-referential framework. Indeed, all of 
the significance of this approach lies in this “metareflective” 
setting or mise en abyme ("observe a group activity to gain 
perspective on one’s own activities" and "observe a group 
stepping back to co-construct meaning"). The product of 
stepping back from the activity here becomes co-constructed, 
without necessarily seeking to transform any one person’s 
action, because it is not about differentiating identities or 
roles. Rather, it is necessary that the identities and roles of 
the participants remain distinct with a collective reflexivity 
and (new) knowledge and expertise that are co-shared/co-
constructed 
in 
the 
work/research 
group. 
However, 
methodologically adopting a position on the border between 
"seeing the other as an object of study" (to maintain one’s 
objectivity) and "identifying with the other" (to take into 
account the other’s motivation) does not come easily to all. 
Additionally, this point raises an ethical question, 
specifically in relation to the analysis and degree of validity. 
The description of the activity as actions, based on dialogue 
between researchers, observers and designers, can be 
questioned and its objectification challenged. Indeed, the 
collaborative nature of this action research promotes the 
establishment of a groupthink, capable of inducing an 
illusion of unanimous rationality and collective censorship 
(of oneself and others). This effect slows the emergence of 
collective intelligence and of a real step back from the 
activity. 
This is why the role of the researcher and their 
supervising 
function 
are 
paramount 
here. 
Between 
"controlled 
activities" 
and 
"concerted 
actions", 
the 
supervisors/researchers must be fully aware of not only the 
contributions, but also the issues and limitations of this 
approach. They help to problematize the issue of 
"knowledge" and "expertise", to objectify it through the 
appropriate scientific approach and also to contextualize it in 
relation to a state of the art and theoretical courses prepared 
in advance. They not only serve the role of providing 
expertise in the analysis of complex activities; they also act 
as a partner, guiding reflection throughout the workshop. 
They strive to ensure that questioning should remain 
continuous and that hindsight be supported by co-defining 
questions and concerted actions. The researcher steps in here 
as a participant who cultivates self-learning and, by his or 
her point of view, enriches reflective, fluid thinking on the 
part of the whole group. Over 80% of participants also 
stressed the importance of this support in the group work 
mode, involving participants with different roles and courses 
alternating with well-equipped debriefing sessions. 
However, this context creates an uncomfortable situation 
for the supervisor/researcher because they must develop their 
ability to support a group and to let go (as opposed to the 
test-tube effect of the laboratory, where the setting is 
completely under control), while taking into account both 
their theoretical and methodological expertise. As a result, 
the workshop+ serves to train both the professional 
researcher and the learner; consequently, it aids in rethinking 
what is typically a hierarchically-determined relationship, 
between learners in search of knowledge and teachers in 
possession of that knowledge. This hierarchical relationship 
has indeed proved its limitations in an advanced training 
context, where – from an educational perspective – 
reexamination, a forum for questioning and active thinking 
are favored, rather than mute listening and passive 
absorption of knowledge. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Value of workshop+ in the learner’s overall education. 
VII. INTEGRATION OF A SCIENTIFIC APPROACH INTO A 
"PROFESSIONALIZING" COURSE OF STUDY  
• 
The primary interest of the workshop+ lies in 
heightening the awareness of a scientific approach in 
a professionalizing course. Indeed, the 4 steps that 
make up the workshop+ are highlighted in Figure 6 
with respect to the main stages of a scientific 
approach. This figure illustrates the appropriateness 
of these steps with the demands expected of a classic 
scientific 
approach, 
while 
allowing 
different 
participants (researchers, designers and observers) to 
begin to step back to reflect and question 
prerequisites and theoretical courses taken, thanks to 
the following; 
• 
the contemplation of similar studies that aim to 
model the complex activity of collective design: the 
research (supplemented data in the form of scientific 
articles) forms a theoretical reference frame that 
partially constitutes learners’ state of the art; 
• 
compliance with an objectified, rigorous and 
appropriate experimental protocol, based on the 
definition of operational working hypotheses and on 
the description of the facts in concerted actions (step 
1, Figure 6): this first requirement makes it possible 
to see the impact of the situation and the context 
more clearly in the design and collaboration process 
among designers. Thanks to mission maps and note-
taking grids, the student effectively takes in the 
207
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

context under observation, but is also made aware of 
the complexity and difficulty in breaking it down in 
order to analyze and understand it; 
• 
objectified description of actions, put together via a 
pre-constructed transcription and coding grid and 
(re)defined according to the theory and the state of 
the art given (step 2, Figure 6): by its synergetic 
nature, this second requirement allows participants’ 
observations, knowledge and know-how to be 
weighed 
objectively, 
producing 
a 
cross-
understanding and a common meaning, combining 
individual reflections with those of the group; 
• 
the comparison of qualitative / quantitative analyses 
of the activity (step 3, Figure 6): this requirement 
ensures complementarity of the data analyzed, 
thereby facilitating the act of taking a step back; 
• 
jointly highlighting the results (step 4, Figure 6): co-
constructing 
(new) 
collectively 
negotiated 
knowledge aids in the emergence of a shared culture, 
which firstly concerns the problem defined, studied 
and questioned by the group; secondly, this concerns 
the approach that directly or indirectly affects how 
they act in their own activity and with respect to 
others. We believe that this type of irreversibility 
promotes hybridization of the perspective and the 
dialogue between the worlds of research and 
practice, often quite distinct from one another in 
university and/or "professionalizing" courses. 
Even though collaborative action research may encounter 
some resistance, we find this approach to be scientific, albeit 
one which has unique qualities.  
Its first singularity is of an epistemological nature. 
Indeed, it requires managing a dichotomy between data 
collection (which can only be achieved by the observers) and 
an action-research approach, which aims to be collaborative 
through the involvement of designers in the overall reflection 
(with these observers) on their design and collaboration 
activities. To avoid this dichotomy while respecting 
collaborative action research approaches, the workshop+ 
proposed puts forth several methodological, theoretical and 
analytical tools for the joint collection, processing and 
analysis of data harvested. These tools are defined so that, 
once the "experimental" phase has ended, all participants 
work together on the reflection phases. This approach seems 
to deviate from the classical conceptions of scientific work. 
Nevertheless, if the approach proposed here is paralleled 
with a conventional scientific approach, it is possible to show 
that one approach furthers the other, and that they do not 
contradict one another (Figure 6). 
Its second singularity lies in its flexibility to adapt to the 
context being studied, i.e., its ability to take into account the 
specificity of each advanced training into which it is inserted 
(engineering, architecture, design, ergonomics, etc.). To do 
so, the protocol proposed enables course modules to be 
integrated, 
which 
provide 
the 
necessary 
theoretical 
knowledge, contextualized to fit the observed activity. Then, 
the protocol makes it possible to set the two aspects of the 
complex collective activity against one another: the process 
and the content addressed by the group. The focus of the 
research is as much to do with the specificity of each 
participant, as their workspace, documents, and interactions 
with other collaborators. The method of direct observation, 
without having recourse to recording video data, also serves 
to streamline the process of taking notes “on the fly.” This 
process is less cumbersome than processing verbalization, 
but it does not exclusively produce qualitative observations. 
With COMMON Tools, the researcher also has rapid, easy 
access to graphs during the analysis phase with a variety of 
graph styles available, among which (s)he can choose those 
deemed most appropriate with respect to the research 
question at hand. 
The ability to renew, to question and/or to add criteria 
and categories during transcription and coding is favoured by 
the flexibility of this approach, thereby making it possible to: 
• 
analyze 
a 
corpus 
resulting 
from 
various 
configurations of collective activities involving 
multiple participants; 
• 
leave the researcher free to update his/her grid and 
thus avoid preconceptions established prior to the 
activity, without any possibility of challenging them; 
but in addition, 
• 
prevent the “hardening” of some concepts that might 
gradually stray from their initial purpose and 
context. 
Within this dynamic position, between theoretical 
knowledge and practical knowledge, lies the third singularity 
of our collaborative action-research approach. Before 
examining this, a difficulty occurring at the data processing 
step should be highlighted (cf. Section IV.B). This problem 
concerns the analyst’s choice of different criteria when 
coding for each action to be processed. It is sometimes 
difficult to categorize every action exclusively and 
definitively. However, the grid can split proposed actions 
(vertically, with respect to time) into sub-actions and also 
offers the analyst the possibility to cross two categories 
(horizontally encoded) and, therefore, to clearly specify the 
links between one test and another. This flexibility and 
crossover must be preserved so as not to place the data solely 
according to the prior interpretation of the analyst, who may 
quickly develop shortcuts or overly direct coding according 
to his or her own preconceptions. Questioning "given 
theoretical knowledge" thanks to "observed practice", 
collectively and objectively through a scientific approach, 
represents the second interest of workshop+, i.e., adopting a 
collaborative action-research project mirrored against what a 
scientific approach constitutes. 
 
208
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Compréhension
croisée d' une 
activité complexe
Questions 
and 
hypotheses
Data
collecting
Data
coding
Knowledge
and
know-how
Scientiﬁque
approach
Steps
of workshop
Proposed
tools
Analysis
1. Experimentation
Mission
cards
Note-taking
grid
Pre-deﬁned
protocol
2. Retranscription
Transcript
grid
Methodo-
logical 
manual
3. Data coding
Theoretical
courseswork
Coding
grid
4. Analysis
and results
Visual 
formalisms
Common 
Tools
Results
State
of the art
Quantitative
inter-
prétation
Retrans-
cription
Qualitative
inter-
prétation
Qualitative
inter-
prétation
New speciﬁcation and questionning
Step-back
Guided actions
researchers // designers // observers
Concerted actions
researchers + designers + observers
Pre-requisit
Sensibilisation to 
context
Educational
contributions
Reaching
a consensus
Building
a common sense
Step-back
over activity
 
 
Figure 6.  Scientific approach in the workshop+
209
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

VIII. INSTRUMENTATION OF TAKING A STEP BACK 
In the notion of taking a step back and questioning 
activity, it is not a matter of tinkering with, adjusting or 
accommodating methodological, theoretical and analytical 
tools available to learners (Figure 7). It is more a question of 
degree of adaptability and taking into account the context 
studied. Accordingly, 85% of participants stressed the 
complementarity of support tools available to them in 
ensuring the establishment of a common reflective space and 
the construction of this constantly evolving collective 
intelligence. 
The implementation of these tools was defined to address 
the activity, both qualitatively and quantitatively, promoting 
continuous distancing and joint interpretation of results 
highlighted, at every step of the workshop+. Via its 
predefined criteria, the grid (steps 2 and 3, Figure 4) tends to 
bring practice closer to experience, observation and analysis. 
By the quantitative illustration of data laid out according to 
various chosen criteria, Common Tools lets the user 
highlight the observed peculiarities of the design and 
collaboration process. It requires learners to rank the 
processed data and choose the appropriate visual formalism 
(step 4, Figure 4). This step encourages them to redefine 
their objectives and co-construct their research questions, as 
well as to identify what should be valued and highlighted in 
their results. The mediation offered by the tool allows them 
to step back, uncover points of view and shift meaning 
thanks to rapid access to graph styles helping to objectify and 
co-construct the interpretation. Over 70% of students 
highlighted the relevance of such a tool for interpreting data 
from coding grids. Some learners confirmed even that 
"perceiving my design and collaborative activity in a 
different way from this experience generates a step back and 
an awareness that lead us to question our actions and regulate 
them." In this way, they capture the complexity, as well as 
the involvement of the context, of participants’ roles, of 
communication strategies used and of the design process 
itself in the way they work together. 
However, the proliferation of graphs provided by 
COMMON Tools renders the work of analysis and 
interpretation of processed data difficult, especially for 
learners involved for the first time in a scientific approach. 
Indeed, so as not to make the tool too limiting, it is important 
to keep this flexibility in the choice of graph as well as in 
terms of the variety of criteria to represent. Nevertheless, it is 
contradictory 
to 
think 
that 
mere 
statistics 
alone, 
automatically performed by a tool, could construct meaning. 
The method put forward in this article, based on COMMON 
Tools, serves primarily to build a preliminary quantitative 
structuring of observations to navigate through the 
qualitative analysis of a complex collective activity. It does 
not then claim to attain condensed, definitive interpretations 
of the activity directly through a set of quantitative data. 
Subsequent interpretive work is needed, which would allow 
the researcher/analyst to quantitatively confirm or reject 
hypotheses proposed during observations and highlighted 
qualitatively in the corpus addressed. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Use of workshop+ in taking a step back 
from design and collaborative activities 
IX. 
CONCLUSION 
What does such a workshop serve to do in an advanced 
design training course in a professionalizing context? This 
article seeks to shed light on this very question.  
Indeed, comprehending ongoing design processes and 
providing new insights into collaboration by "doing-and-
watching" rather than by simply "doing" (classic workshop 
approach) or "watching" (classical research approach) are the 
focuses when implementing collaborative action research. 
The approach we have chosen to adopt here attempts to bring 
the world of practice and the world of research. Applied to 
training during the final year of study in the field of design 
(i.e., in the Master’s or the second year in a Research 
Master’s) or in professional contexts, our goal is to promote 
the sharing of epistemological and educational space: 
• 
for teachers, this enables them to tailor training on 
design in order to teach perspective; 
• 
for learners, this offers tools to (1) co-construct a 
reflection on expertise (designing), (2) structure and 
enrich 
their 
mastery 
of 
this 
expertise, 
(3) 
communicate and work on communicating design, 
and (4) develop a critical mind by confronting points 
of view so as to start taking a step back, thanks to 
research practices in design; 
• 
for researchers: it helps to explain the design and 
collaboration processes in various fields and to apply 
the approach to advance research in design. 
Yet sharing points of view is not sufficient to produce 
knowledge. That is why this analytical approach introduces 
multiple (methodological, theoretical and analytical) tools 
promoting the act of taking a step back and questioning by 
the objectified co-construction of meaning (between 
researchers/supervisors, designers and observers) with a 
view to democratization of knowledge. But to what extent is 
this type of knowledge likely to be accepted, recognized 
and/or taken into account, both in the scientific and 
professional communities? 
To promote this acceptance, it is necessary to develop an 
epistemological framework in line with the scientific 
requirements and the professional reality in which the 
collaborative action-research approach is placed. The aim 
here is to ensure a coherent, ethical and participatory 
partnership environment, where knowledge acquired from 
the academic world has no predominance on the knowledge 
gained from practice. Still, they must not ignore the 
theoretical production either, mirroring with other models 
210
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

constructed in advance, or processing in general. The 
conditions for co-construction of knowledge and meaning 
must be clarified well in advance. 
Therefore, the definition of grids and criteria must be 
described thoroughly and put forward from theoretical 
research carried out by peers. The students’ feedback shows 
that these grids help in characterization, precision, 
confrontation and distinction among different viewpoints. In 
this way, they participate in the process of objectification, 
continuous reflection and taking a step back, necessary to 
comprehend collaborative activity in design. Thus, coding 
concerted actions and comparing points of view promote 
deconstruction of know-how by the re-construction and co-
construction of knowledge. One limitation of this tool, 
however, is the time spent transcribing (the result of reaching 
a consensus among all participants, which can consume a 
great deal of time). Nevertheless, this investment earns a 
quick return by the automated processing of data via 
Common Tools, the second major tool for this process. 
The Common Tools web platform supports quantitative 
and graphical data processing. However, managing and 
interpreting a substantial number of graphs produced by 
Common Tools from co-encoded data remains difficult to 
handle. Over 10,000 potential graphs are provided by 
experience and little time is available for interpreting them. 
This complex analysis generally intimidates learners. 
Therefore, all participants are invited to (1) re-examine the 
whole issue on "the analysis of a collaborative design 
activity" by splitting it into co-defined sub-questions, (2) 
perform a preliminary qualitative, synthetic analysis on the 
whole activity and, (3) foster awareness of the relevance of a 
particular visual formalism in answering a particular 
question and/or promoting a particular hypothesis. 
The result of such an approach should not be simplified 
or seen as the sum of participants’ interests or interpretations, 
but rather as a dialogue co-constructed iteratively and 
continuously throughout the constituent stages of the 
workshop+. Moreover, the outcome may not match initial 
expectations, observations and preconceptions. 
As already mentioned, the work of implementing this 
type of approach is feasible in the framework of a 
professional setting. What is more, we have participated in 
its initiation in several specialized architectural and 
engineering firms. Still, we have been faced with a certain 
reluctance brought about by several concerns. The first stems 
from the dreaded “pillage” of participants’/designers’ 
expertise by researchers collaborating with them. The second 
concern relates to publishing results that are "discussed and, 
thus, valued far from the field where the data was collected 
and the first analyses performed" [46, p.28]. Added to this is 
the fact that publishing and communicating such results to 
other scientists outside of their own field does not seem to be 
a priority for practitioners. The real (but nonetheless 
legitimate) gap between the practitioner’s priorities and those 
of the researcher can be a real barrier in the collaborative 
action research, especially in that "publishing", for a 
researcher, is a real need in his or her scientific practice. We 
believe that this fact should not hamper the application of 
this type of approach in a professional context, but must, on 
the contrary, find inspiration in aspects of real experiences. 
Its appraisal, both among scientific communities and 
practitioners, will encourage the production of academic 
knowledge in continuous connection with the reality on the 
ground: it requires cross-referencing "knowledge in support 
of know-how" and in return, "know-how in support of 
knowledge." 
It is towards this action, alongside practitioners and in the 
field, that we aim to follow up this work. More than being 
merely interventionist, this entails driving and managing 
change in constant motion, which strives to be well-suited to 
its context and to all the participants involved in this type of 
activity. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is financed thanks to the grant Research 
Concerted Actions (ARC COMMON 2011-2015), the 
Scientific Research Direction of Education, French and 
Belgian Community, granted by the Wallonie-Europe 
Academy.  
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Ben Rajeb and P. Leclercq, “Instrumented analysis method 
for collaboration activities,” Proceedings of COLLA 2015: 
Fifth International Conference on Advanced Collaborative 
Networks, Systems and Applications, IARIA, Lisbon, pp. 10-
16, 2015. 
[2] 
J. C. Hubers, “Collaborative Architectural Design In Virtual 
Reality,” in PhD. diss. Delft University of Technology, 
Publikatiebureau Faculty of Architecture, Delft, 2008. 
[3] L. L. Bucciarelli, “Between Thought and Object in 
Engineering Design,” in Design studies, vol. 23(3), pp. 219-
231, 2002. 
[4] S. Ben Rajeb and P. Leclercq, “Co-construction of meaning 
via a collaborative action research approach,” in Lecture 
Notes in Computer Sciences, Springer, LNCS 9320, pp. 205-
215, 2015. 
[5] F. Darses, P. Falzon, and C. Mondutéguy, “Paradigmes et 
modèles pour l’analyse cognitive des activités finalisées,” in 
Ergonomie, Presses Universitaires de France, Paris, pp. 191- 
212, 2004.  
[6] P. Chinowsky and J. E. Taylor, “Networks in Engineering: An 
Emerging Approach to Project Organization Studies,” in 
Engineering Project Organization Journal, vol. 2(1-2), pp. 15-
26, 2012. 
[7] J. M. Carroll, D. C. Neale, P.L. Isenhour, M. B. Rosson, and 
D.S. McCrickard, “Notification and awareness: synchronizing 
task-oriented collaborative activity,” in International Journal 
Of Human-Computer Studies, 58, pp. 605-632, 2003.  
[8] C. Carmel-Gilfilen and M. Portillo, “Where what’s in 
common mediates disciplinary diversity in design students: A 
shared pathway of intellectual development,” in Design 
Studies, vol. 33(3), pp. 237-260, 2012. 
[9] H. Demirkan and Y. Afacan, “Assessing creativity in design 
education: Analysis of creativity factors in the first-year 
design studio,” in Design Studies, vol. 33(3), pp. 262-278, 
2012. 
[10] F. Détienne, G. Martin, and E. Lavigne, “Viewpoints in co- 
design: a field study in concurrent engineering,” in Design 
Studies, 26, pp. 215-241, 2005.  
[11] S. Ben Rajeb and P. Leclercq, “Using Spatial Augmented 
Reality in Synchronous Collaborative Design,” in Lecture 
Notes in Computer Sciences, Springer, vol. 8091, pp. 6-15, 
2013.  
211
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[12] S. Willaert, R. de Graaf, and S. Minderhoud, “Collaborative 
engineering: a case study of concurrent engineering in a wider 
context,” in Journal of Engineering and Technology 
Management, vol. 15 (1), pp.87-109, 1998. 
[13] S. A. R Scrivener, D. Harris, S. M. Clark, T. Rockoff, and M. 
Smyth, “Designing at a Distance via Real-time Designer-to-
Designer Interaction,” in S. Greenberg, S. Hayne & R. Rada 
(eds): Groupware for Real-time Drawing: A Designer Guide. 
London, UK, McGraw-Hill, pp. 6-23, 1995. 
[14] S. Ben Rajeb and P. Leclercq, “ Spatial augmented reality in 
collaborative design training: articulation between I-space, 
We-space and Space-between,” in Lecture Notes in Computer 
Sciences, Springer, LNCS 8526, vol 2, pp. 343-353, 2015.  
[15] P. Reason and H. Bradbury, Sage Handbook of Action 
Research: Participative inquiry and practice, London, Sage 
Publications, 2008. 
[16] D. Greenwood and M. Levin, “Pragmatic action research and 
the 
struggle 
to 
transform 
universities 
into 
learning 
communities,” in P. Reason & H. Bradbury (Eds.), Handbook 
of action research, London, Sage, pp. 103 -113, 2001. 
[17] J. Bell, G. Cheney, C. Hoots, E. Kohrman, J. Schubert, L. 
Stidham, and S. Traynor, “Comparative similarities and 
differences between action research, participative research, 
and 
participatory 
action 
research,” 
in  
http://www.arlecchino.org/ildottore/mwsd/group2final-
comparison.pdf, 2004. 
[18] S. Kemmis, “Exploring the relevance of critical theory for 
action research: Emancipatory action research in the footsteps 
of Jürgen Habermas,” in Peter Reason & Hilary Bradbury 
(Eds.), Handbook of action research: Participative inquiry and 
practice, London, Sage, pp.91-102, 2001. 
[19] C. Couture, N. Bednarz and S. Barry, “Multiples regards sur 
la recherche participative, une lecture transversale,” in 
Anadòn, M., Savoie-Zajc, L. (eds.) La recherche participative. 
Multiples regards, pp. 205–221, PUQ, Québec, 2007.   
[20] S. Desgagné, “Le défi de co production de «savoir» en 
recherche 
collaborative, 
analyse 
d’une 
démarche 
de 
reconstruction et d’analyse de récits de pratique enseignante,” 
in Anadòn, M., Savoie-Zajc, L. (eds.) La recherche 
participative: Multiples regards, PUQ, Québec, pp. 89–121, 
2007.   
[21] H. Bradbury-Huang, “What is good action research? Why the 
resurgent interest ?,” in Action Research, vol. 8(1), pp. 93-
109, 2010. 
[22] M. Bourassa, R. Philion, and L. Chevalier, “L’analyse de 
construits, une co-construction de groupe,” in Education et 
Francophonie, vol. 35(2), pp. 78–117, 2007.   
[23] P. Dillenbourg, “The socio-cognitive functions of community 
mirrors,” in Proceedings of the 4th International Conference 
on New Educational Environments, Lugano, 2002.  
[24] Y. E. Kalay, “Architecture's New Media. Principles, Theories, 
and Methods of Computer-Aided Design,” in The MIT Press: 
Communication, MIT Press, Cambridge, pp. 83-198, 2004.   
[25] E. L. Deci, J. P. Connell, and R. M. Ryan, “Self-
determination in a work organization,” in Journal of Applied 
Psychology, vol. 74(4), pp. 580-590, 1989. 
[26] P. Leclercq, “Going collaborative,” in Proceedings of 5th 
International 
conference 
CDVE 
Computer 
Aided 
 Architectural Design: Experience Insight and Challenges, 
Calvià, Mallorca, 2008.  
[27] J. S. Gero and H. H. Tang, “The differences between 
retrospective and concurrent protocols in revealing the 
process-oriented aspecs of the design process,” in Design 
Studies, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 283-95, 2001.  
[28] K. A. Ericsson and H. A. Simon, “Protocol analysis: Verbal 
reports as data,” in MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1993.  
[29] H. Kuusela and P. Pallab, “A comparison of concurrent and 
retrospective verbal protocol analysis,” in American Journal 
of Psychology, vol. 113, no. 3, pp. 387-404, 2000.  
[30] S. C. Stumpf, and J. T. McDonnell, “Talking about team 
framing: Using argumentation to analyse and support 
experiential learning in early design episodes,” in Design 
Studies, vol. 23, pp. 5-23, 2002. 
[31] L. Nguyen and G. Shanks, “A framework for understanding 
creativity in requirements engineering,” in Information and 
Software Technology 51, pp. 655–662, 2009.  
[32] M. Suwa, T. Purcell, and J. Gero, “Macroscopic analysis of 
design processes based on a scheme for coding designers' 
cognitive actions,” in Design Studies, vol. 19 pp. 455-83, 
1998.  
[33] V. Mollo and P. Falzon, “Auto-and allo-confrontation as tools 
for reflective activities,” in Applied Ergonomics, vol. 35 (6), 
pp. 531-540, 2004. 
[34] C. H. Lewis, “Using the "Thinking Aloud" Method In 
Cognitive Interface Design,” in Technical report, IBM. RC- 
9265, 1982.  
[35] P. Lloyd, B. Lawson, and P. Scott, “Can concurrent 
verbalisation reveal design cognition?,” in Design Studies, 
vol. 16, pp. 237-59, 1995.  
[36] G. Gronier, “Méthodes d’analyse des communications 
fonctionnelles en situation de travail collectif,” in Recherches 
Qualitatives, 9, pp. 153-171, 2010.  
[37] F. Détienne, G. Martin, and E. Lavigne, “Viewpoints in co- 
design: a field study in concurrent engineering,” in Design 
Studies, 26, pp. 215-241, 2005.  
[38] M. Reinert, “Alceste, une méthode statistique et sémiotique 
d’analyse de discours; application aux Rêveries du promeneur 
solitaire,” in La Revue française de psychiatrie et de 
psychologie médicale, 49(5), pp. 32-46, 2001.  
[39] K. Dorst and J. Dijkhuis, “Comparing paradigms for 
describing design activity,” in Design Studies 16, pp. 261- 
274, 1995.  
[40] L. Mondada, “Participants' online analysis and multimodal 
practices: projecting the end of the turn and the closing of the 
sequence,” in Discourse Studies, vol. 8(1), pp. 117–129, 
2006. 
[41] J. S. Gero and T. M. Neill, “An approach to the analysis of 
design protocols,” in Design Studies, vol. 19, pp. 21-61, 1998.  
[42] C. Brassac and N. Gregori, “Co-construction de sens en 
situation de conception d’un outil didactique,” in Studia 
Romanic Posnaniensia, no 25/26, pp. 55-66, 2000.  
[43] J. F. Boujut and P. Laureillard, “A co-operation framework 
for product–process integration in engineering design,” in 
Design Studies 23 (6), pp. 497–513, 2002.  
[44] R. Legendre, Dictionnaire actuel de l’éducation, Montréal, 
Guérin, 2005. 
[45] www.lucid.ulg.ac.be/www/research/common 
[retrieved: May, 2016].  
[46] G. Monceau, "La recherche-action en France: histoire récente 
et usages actuels," in Les recherches-actions collaboratives, 
Presses de l'EHESP, pp 21-31, 2015. 
 
212
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

