437
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Improving Energy Awareness Integrating Persuasive Game, Feedback, and Social 
Interaction into the Novel Ener-SCAPE Application 
Diego Arnone, Alessandro Rossi 
Research and Development Laboratory 
Engineering I.I. S.p.A. 
Palermo, Italy 
email: diego.arnone@eng.it, alessandro.rossi@eng.it  
 
Enrico Gabriele Melodia 
Pidiemme Consulting S.r.l. 
Bagheria, Italy 
email: e.melodia@pdm-c.it 
 
Marzia Mammina 
DemetriX S.r.l. 
Palermo, Italy 
email: marzia.mammina@demetrix.it 
  
Sandra Elizabeth Jenkins 
Engineering Systems Division, Technology and Policy 
Program ‘14 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology  
Cambridge, MA, USA 
email: sandjenkins@gmail.com  
 
 
Abstract— Ener-SCAPE is a novel work in progress software 
framework made up of a persuasive game, a graphical 
interface to monitor energy usage and a tool for social 
interaction, which aims to improve the energy consumption 
awareness of its users at home as well as in the workplace. The 
game uses a common “escape room” game approach, tailoring 
the game archetype to focus on energy efficiency and energy 
consumption awareness. The monitoring interface allows the 
users to monitor some predefined energy efficiency indexes. 
The tool for social integration helps users to build social 
awareness.  Users play the game by trying to exit from a 
virtual home or office by solving energy puzzles, working to 
improve their energy savings in their real environment, and 
sharing their acquired knowledge and experiences. Ener-
SCAPE implements a unique feedback mechanism based on 
real energy consumption that leads consumers to apply what 
they have learned from the virtual reality of the game into 
their daily real lives. An important aspect of this work is that it 
merges different elements, which emerged as successful in 
achieving 
improved 
energy 
awareness, 
i.e., 
feedback 
mechanisms, serious games and social interaction. 
Keywords-energy awareness; serious game; educational 
game; 
escape 
room game; 
energy 
efficiency; 
feedback 
mechanism; social network interaction. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
This work is the extension of a study [1] that presents the 
design of a novel application and related underlying software 
framework whose main aim is to decrease the energy 
consumption levels both at home and in the office by 
increasing the consumption awareness of energy users. With 
respect to the previous study, this work presents an expanded 
literature review, the software framework is described in 
depth, the business model for the possible development of 
Ener-SCAPE as a product to market is showed, and 
suggestions for future works are presented. The main target 
of both works is reducing energy consumption caused 
through or careless energy use.  
Energy consumption is steadily increasing worldwide, 
despite mitigation efforts, particularly in those countries that 
are experiencing a great economic growth. This is a global 
issue for environmental protection, as well as an economic 
and political issue, for countries that depend on foreign 
energy suppliers. 
Many solutions are being proposed and implemented in 
order to address increasing energy consumption, such as 
incentives for renewable energy sources, new technologies 
for highly efficient buildings, new technologies for more 
efficient appliances, and more sustainable transportation.  
People consume energy every day, not only for their 
basic needs, but also for making their lives more enjoyable, 
comfortable and improving their standard of living. Thus, if 
people are not driven to save energy and encouraged to 
improve their energy consumption behaviour in their 
everyday lives, lifestyle choices may frustrate savings 
coming 
from 
aforementioned 
engineering 
solutions 
[1][2][3]. Despite efforts to improve energy efficiency, the 
aggregate 
energy 
consumption 
behaviour 
in 
the 
transportation and residential sectors is responsible for a 
significant percentage of the overall energy consumption 
worldwide. Studies conducted in various countries have 
concluded that 26% to 36% of residential energy 
consumption is a result of household behaviour [2]. For 
example, behavioural change in the use of standby 
equipment can lead to energy saving up to 35% [4]. For this 
reason, the energy policy adopted by many countries is 
focused on Energy Consumption Awareness (ECA). The 
main factors that may influence energy consumption 
behaviours of citizens are environmental education, real 
time control of energy consumption, involvement of young 
people, and overall greater energy consumption awareness. 
Thus, ECA policies can be strategic for energy consumption 
reductions. 
With the growing number of products and devices in 
homes and offices, keeping up-to-date with energy efficiency 
measures may be a difficult task. However, as more devices 

438
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
are able to communicate with each other, consumers will be 
able to look for more innovative and accessible ways to 
manage and learn about energy efficiency. Nevertheless, this 
kind of knowledge is a necessary but not sufficient condition 
for energy saving [5]. Indeed, studies generally demonstrate 
that information can increase knowledge, but has minimal 
effects on behaviour [6]. In order to reach significant 
savings, knowledge must be associated with energy 
awareness, motivational factors (such as curiosity), cost 
considerations, and willingness [7]. As a consequence, 
citizens should be "energy aware" in order to change their 
behaviour and save energy. 
Behaviours improving energy efficiency are generally 
seen as factors reducing comfort. Actually, this is a 
misconception and people do not have to give up activities 
or their standard of living to save energy. On the contrary, 
new technologies and more effective behaviour will allow 
citizens to do more: improving their living conditions 
without compromising their standards. Furthermore, energy 
efficiency improvement can also  lead to lower costs and 
greater 
sustainability, 
which 
is 
another 
important 
opportunity to stimulate economic growth. 
This work aims to complement and build upon current 
initiatives. The goal of the novel proposed application is to 
improve the energy consumption awareness of people both 
at home and in the office, by employing three features: (i) a 
well-known and successful game model, (ii) a real-time 
intuitive feedback on consumption and (iii) a close 
collaboration with other players/consumers. 
In Section II, the state of the art on feedback impacts, 
persuasive games, and social interaction on energy 
awareness is reported. In Section III, the different Ener-
SCAPE applications are fully described. In Section IV, the 
scheduled experimentation plan is described. In Section V, 
the business model is explained. In Section VI, the 
conclusion and details of future works are given.  
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
In the last few years several institutions, including the 
European Union (EU), have become increasingly committed 
to promoting a higher awareness of energy consumption. For 
this purpose, the EU has launched several initiatives and 
published several documents, especially directed at children 
and adolescents. Both in the EU and in the United States, 
labels reporting the energy consumption of household 
appliances have been introduced to inform consumers in a 
simple and direct way about energy efficiency of products 
[8][9]. In addition, information campaigns for raising 
awareness in energy consumption have spread. These actions  
produce long-term results, in particular, those focused on 
children [10]. 
But in order to obtain immediate results, feedback on 
consumption is frequently adopted to improve energy 
awareness. In the few last years, several studies have 
analysed the effectiveness of feedback as a tool for 
promoting energy savings at home. They generally report 
savings in a wide range (from 1.1% to over 20%) but usual 
savings are between 5% and 12% [11][12]. Fischer [11] lists 
the relevant features of feedback that may determine its 
effectiveness: frequency, duration, content, breakdown, 
medium and way of presentation, comparison, and 
combination with other instruments. The study shows that 
the most successful results come from feedback that is given 
frequently over a long period of time, provides an appliance-
specific breakdown, is presented in a clear and appealing 
way, and uses computerised and interactive tools [11]. In 
order to promote energy savings, the consumers should first 
be made aware of the amount of energy they are consuming, 
so that they can then learn how they can improve their 
behaviour. Users should identify potential savings in their 
environment, by knowing how and where energy is actually 
used: this requires users to be aware not only of the overall 
energy consumption reported in their bills, but also at the 
appliance level. Reinhart et al. [13] have designed a system, 
called Ubiquitous Smart Energy Management (USEM), 
which is not only a simple automated solution to reduce 
electricity usage, but also provides detailed energy 
consumption information and incorporates mobile tools to 
assist and encourage users at improving their energy 
consumption behaviour. Some research projects, e.g., 
BeAware [14], or commercial products, e.g., Ecosphere [15], 
aim at motivating users to be more responsible in their use of 
electric appliances by showing real-time energy consumption 
feedback through intuitive user interfaces. Recent studies 
prove that this kind of feedback is enough, by itself, to 
reduce consumption by 15% [16]. Feedback can stimulate 
energy conservation only with the presence of motivational 
factors, cost considerations and altruistic or environmental 
concerns [12]. Some studies in the literature [17][18] show 
that the custom and real-time feedback on energy 
consumption is effective in consumption reduction. 
Persuasive technologies have proven useful in modifying 
behaviours related to energy usage. A potential way to drive 
awareness is through the so called “serious games”, i.e., 
interactive virtual simulations whose main purpose is the 
development of user abilities and skills in a simulated 
environment with the aim of  apply them in the real world. 
Recent studies suggest that the effectiveness of learning 
increases when it is active, experiential, situated, problem-
based, and provides immediate feedback [19]. Indeed, 
literature proves that serious games can influence people 
change behaviours and attitudes in the areas of health, public 
policy, education and training [20], and notably for our 
purposes, 
energy 
[21]. 
Additionally, 
environmental 
awareness and attitudes toward environmental preservation 
can be promoted by simulation games [22]. Finally, 
simulation games can efficiently guide players with 
improving their environmental knowledge, attitudes, and 
behaviour [7]. 
Many serious games have been developed with the aim 
to increase knowledge and awareness about ecological and 
energy issues. Ecoville [23] is an interactive game, where the 
mission is to build a sustainable energy community  
constrained by resource, pollution and budget limits, by 
handling the energy balance, CO2 emissions, garbage 
disposal, etc. EnerCities [24]  further develops the concept: 
in this game, based on the Theory of Planned Behaviour 
[25], players have to balance three variables: population, 

439
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
planet, and profit. Power Agent [26] and Power Explorer 
[27] are two “pervasive games” that put family members in 
competition to reduce the domestic consumption as 
measured by sensors, pointing out the difference between 
player and non-player behaviours through an avatar helping 
to convey best practices in energy efficiency. 
Even though there have been relatively good results, 
serious games still remain a “niche” field. The main limits to 
their popularity are their target audience (scholars and 
families, often very different from the average users and far 
from the gaming community), as well as the perception that 
educational games are boring, and also the lack of 
entertainment features that characterize traditional games. 
Moreover, the majority of serious games produced so far 
come from research projects, thus, there is not a large library 
of commercial games on the market, and the genre has not 
generated significant results in terms of revenue and profits.  
In the recent years, some projects combining feedback 
mechanism and serious gaming have been developed with 
the purpose of promoting behavioural changes in energy 
consumption at home. As part of the EU funded project 
SOFIA [28], a product implementing game elements was 
designed for families with children with the aim of 
improving 
environmentally 
responsible 
behaviour 
in 
domestic energy consumption. Furthermore, Yang et al. [7] 
have developed a system called Energy COnservation PET 
(ECOPET): using a game-based learning strategy, with the 
help of a pet avatar, players are encouraged to use home-
energy efficiently. The main distinctive feature of these last 
two products is the in-game implementation of a feedback 
mechanism, which helps learners to use electric appliances 
properly [7][28]. 
Finally, it is worth highlighting the social nature of this 
topic. 
Recent 
studies 
have 
showed 
that 
“energy 
consumption is a social and collective process rather than 
individual” [29]. A social debate, for example, by way of 
social network, can make people build common awareness. 
People, initially reluctant to change their behaviour, can be 
motivated to act in a more responsible way by interaction 
with other people. Several years ago, Mankoff et al. [30] 
already demonstrated a motivational effect for saving 
energy by integrating energy usage feedback to the 
MySpace social network. Similarly, Foster et al. [31], by 
means of a novel Facebook application, have demonstrated 
that energy consumption can be reduced through social 
encouragement 
and 
competition. 
Obviously, 
only 
exchanging ideas or opinions is not enough to raise 
awareness and change people behaviours. Real consumption 
measurements play a fundamental role in allowing people to 
change their behaviour in a more conscious way [29]. 
Petkov et al. [32] have expanded the idea of social 
comparison with their social application EnergyWiz, which 
allows users to compare their energy usage with their own 
history and the history of other users.  
The goal of this work is to exploit the potentiality 
supplied by feedback, serious games, and social interaction 
in a novel software framework, named Ener-SCAPE, which 
integrates all these aspects to improve the ECA of its users.  
III. 
ENER-SCAPE 
Ener-SCAPE is a software framework composed of a 
persuasive game, a monitoring tool for energy consumption 
that processes and shows data coming from a sensing 
infrastructure, and a tool for social interaction. It mainly 
aims at improving the awareness of energy consumers both 
in their homes and in buildings where they usually work.  
The core of Ener-SCAPE is the game. The name itself 
recalls the game genre since it is based on: the “room 
escape”, or “escape games” [33], which is a subgenre of the 
well-known point-and-click adventure games. In the game, 
players are tasked with escaping from an apartment or an 
office by solving rebus puzzles, through the use of specific 
information and the implementation of strategies. The escape 
game paradigm has been chosen because it allows the game 
to be located in a place similar to the one where people 
should put into practice what they have learned. Moreover, 
making users explore the house while trying to escape allows 
them to face realistic situations. Most of the suggestions for a 
better ECA are related to common energy loads from devices 
that can be found in most houses and offices. Additionally, 
working with virtual environments allows game designers to 
make the game experience more exciting, emotionally 
compelling and to provide new elements. In this way, 
information and sensations experienced are remembered and 
allow the player to sharpen their perception, attention and 
memory by promoting behavioural changes through 
“learning by doing” [34]. 
 
A. Framework Architecture 
The logical architecture is subdivided into four layers: the 
Security 
Layer, 
Business 
Layer, 
Data 
Layer, 
and 
Presentation Layer. A graphical representation is provided in 
Figure 1. 
The Security Layer implements all checks needed to 
authenticate users and authorise access to resources. The 
application is accessible both from personal computers (PC) 
and mobile devices (tablets, smartphones), after user 
authentication. The OAuth v2.0 [35] protocol has been 
chosen to securely share user data with the Ener-SCAPE 
applications: monitoring data are exchanged anonymously 
with a token identifying the user.  
The Business Layer implements the business logic of the 
whole system and the data processing that leads to the results 
that will be provided to the users through the dashboard. The 
logical components of the Business Layer are grouped by 
their functions: 
 
Notification Management, whose purpose is to provide a 
service for the exchange of real-time notifications 
between the various architectural components, according 
to the Publish/Subscribe pattern; 
 
User Management, which represents the logical group of 
software components in charge of managing the basic 
user information (creation, editing, profiling), as well as 
the interaction with the Social Community; 

440
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Energy Management, which comprises the components 
that acquire data from sensors and the components that 
retrieve consumption data from a remote database for all 
requests from users through the monitoring dashboard; 
 
Game Management, which manages the logic of the 
Ener-SCAPE game and provides all the functional 
components, from loading the assets of the game, to the 
client-side components at Presentation Layer; 
 
Smart Advice Management, which groups all the 
infrastructure components that are responsible for the 
production of Smart Advice, i.e., personalised pieces of 
advice aiming at reducing energy consumption; 
 
CEP Management, which comprises the components 
that deal with the Complex Event Processing (CEP) in 
real-time, to increase the situation awareness of the 
users and to support their decisions. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Ener-SCAPE high level architecture. 
The Data Layer is the layer where interactions with the 
data storage are performed.  
Finally, the Presentation Layer represents the application 
user interfaces (game, dashboard for monitoring energy 
performance, interface to interact with social networks). 
All the taxonomic and non-taxonomic relationships 
between entities within the Ener-SCAPE application domain 
have been modelled in the Ener-SCAPE Ontology. This 
ontology is also at the basis of the feedback system to the 
end users aimed at increasing, in a personalised way, 
awareness of the impact of energy consumption actions. 
Feedback is made available to users on the monitoring 
dashboard in form of contextualised hints, or Smart Advice. 
The identification of the more appropriate piece of advice to 
be made available to the user is based on the real-time 
identification of contextual information: the advice is 
presented as one or more “hints” depending on user-specific 
factors, such as the type of dwelling and the consumption of 
electrical energy, as well as on environmental factors, such 
as climatic conditions during the period under observation. 
For example, in a region where the weather is warmer than 
expected, a user whose energy consumption during summer 
is higher than what has been forecasted, could be informed 
that the increase in consumption is probably because of the 
increased use of air conditioning in their home. In addition, a 
suggestion may be offered for improving the use of the air 
conditioning in order to reduce energy consumption. The 
production of personalised recommendations is done through 
semantic technologies. Circumstances relevant to users are 
described through Ontology Web Language (OWL) 
assertions. The different contexts that can be adapted to the 
user are logically organised according to a tree and each 
context is identified by a set of characteristics, such as type 
of dwelling where the user lives and the number of people 
living in the same house. The tips are then associated with 
one or more nodes in the tree. The task of determining what 
recommendations are appropriate for a given user is 
delegated to an ontological reasoner [18]. Hints proposed to 
the user have been gathered by seeking suggestions aiming at 
energy saving and efficiency on websites of institutions, 
government agencies, and consumer groups, as suggested in 
[3].  
The CEP is a technology that enables processing and 
combining events from multiple sources to detect 
occurrences of special events that require a response from a 
system or from a human operator [36]. CEP is, therefore, a 
useful tool to increase the Situation Awareness, i.e., the 
awareness of the context. The use of CEP techniques in 
Ener-SCAPE, applied to consumption data and to the user 
profile, is a crucial step for the Energy Consumption 
Awareness. The CEP in Ener-SCAPE arises also as a 
valuable tool to report to end users (consumers, energy 
manager) criticalities and malfunctioning. Figure 2 shows the 
CEP architecture in Ener-SCAPE.  
  
Figure 2. CEP architecture in Ener-SCAPE. 
Two versions of the software framework are being 
developed: one related to a home environment and the other 
related to a building/campus environment. Both versions 
include and integrate the applications mentioned before: a 
dashboard for monitoring real energy consumption, which 
shows performance indicators and hints to improve 
performance; the escape game with two different approaches 
that will be described later; and the tool for integration with 
social networks (Facebook/Twitter/Google+) to allow 
collaboration between players/consumers.  
The innovative aspect of the proposed approach is a 
simple but effective mechanism to integrate the three 
applications with the aim of converting existing successful 

441
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
models to an “edutainment” (education and entertainment) 
function.  
 
 
Figure 3. Ener-SCAPE approach to energy consumption awareness (home 
environment). 
The cornerstone of the Ener-SCAPE game, as previously 
introduced, is essentially to escape from a house (or a 
building in the second version of the game) as in any escape 
room game. Escaping can only be achieved by solving a 
sequence of rebus puzzles (find items, combine them, use 
them, look for clues, piece together clues, gather 
information, find combinations, compose puzzles, solve 
riddles, etc.). The main feature of the game lies in the themes 
of each action: eco-sustainability, savings, efficiency, and 
energy-awareness. Moreover, effectiveness in acquiring 
ECA is given by the feedback from the real world. The game 
is integrated with a very simple and intuitive monitoring tool, 
which processes the data collected through a sensing 
infrastructure and allows consumers to see their real energy 
performance. The application allows the users to compare 
their current energy consumption with historical average 
values.  
While playing, users acquire information (gained from 
the game or the social networks where they get useful tips 
for solving puzzles) that can also be used in the real world. 
The ultimate aim of the game is impacting consumer 
behaviour in their real lives. The monitoring dashboard 
provides a means to measure performance improvement, 
which is then translated into virtual currency that can be 
spent in the game to ease the escape. In order to facilitate the 
solution of a rebus puzzle, the users can utilise the virtual 
currency obtained from social network interactions. Indeed, 
users can cooperate with other consumers in specific social 
network groups: each consumer builds his or her own 
reputation by cooperating with the community in solving the 
escape room rebuses as well as in achieving better energy 
performance in the real world. A domain expert rewards the 
acquired reputation by assigning virtual currency to be spent 
in the game.  
In this way, users at home will strive to improve their 
behaviour by trying to reach the optimal values of real 
performance indexes. Before addressing the optimal 
performance, the system proposes intermediate targets and 
rewards their achievements by assigning virtual currency to 
be spent in the game. In order to measure real performance, 
the user must install “off-the-shelf” sensors; solutions based 
on Non-Intrusive Appliance Load Monitoring (NIALM) are 
being taken into account as possible alternatives. Therefore, 
as can be seen in Figure 3, Ener-SCAPE implements a 
virtuous cycle that allows the consumer to learn how to 
efficiently use energy simply by playing the game. At home, 
the user can save or waste energy. Then, the dashboard 
graphically represents the real performances based on data 
coming from a sensing infrastructure installed in the home. 
The transition from the physical world to the virtual one 
corresponds to the translation of the real results into virtual 
currency, which in turn affects the consumer’s ability to 
solve the rebuses in the virtual escape room. Finally, the 
beneficial cycle results in simulated solutions, information 
the user collects, applied hints, cooperation with other 
players, monitoring virtual performance, and sharing ideas 
inside a community. In this way, players may become 
consumers with increased energy consumption awareness 
that can help them to detect inefficiencies and improve their 
energy behaviour. 
The game environment has been designed to be as 
graphically attractive as possible. In order to reach a good 
quality in architectural rendering, the free interior design 
software application Sweet Home 3D has been used [37].  
Finally, the application was designed to be used on both 
PC and mobile devices, such as smartphones and tablets, in 
order to meet the requirements of usability and to avoid 
limiting the game to a single kind of device. Figure 4 shows 
a mock-up of the game in the tablet version in the home 
environment. On the right, there is a basket where discovered 
items are collected; at the bottom, there are some widgets 
where players can view their virtual and real performances, 
as well as their scores and hints. Figure 5. Mock-up of the 
dashboard (tablet version) in the home environment. 
Figure 5 shows a mock-up of the dashboard in the tablet 
version in the home environment. The monitoring interface 
includes diagrams that give the users a representation of their 
consumption and performance. The user can select the time 
horizon, which can be daily, weekly, monthly or annually: 
the data will be temporally aggregated based on the selected 
time horizon. The user can also select the unit of energy 
consumption: kilowatt hours (kWh), EUR (€), grams of CO2 
(g CO2), tonnes of oil equivalent (TOE). Users can compare 
their 
current 
consumption 
with 
the 
ideal 
average 
consumption for similar classes of consumers, previously 
profiled, and can check any possible abnormalities in their 
consumption caused by inefficiencies (see Figure 5). In the 
current version of the service platform, users are profiled on 
the basis of static information: e.g., in the home 
environment, size and type of the house, number, age and 
educational 
qualification 
of 
occupants, 
etc. 
This 
classification is probably not enough to catch the living style 
of users. Therefore, we are investigating how to model some 
aspects of the lifestyle that can be used as parameters, 

442
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
deduced dynamically from historical measurements, for user 
clustering. 
 
Figure 4. Mock-up of the game (tablet version) in the home environment. 
 
 
Figure 5. Mock-up of the dashboard (tablet version) in the home 
environment. 
 
Figure 6. Energy consumption diagrams (smartphone version). 
The access to energy consumption and performance 
values is enabled in multiple ways: by selecting household 
appliances in the star structure that represents the set of 
monitored devices (Figure 5), or by selecting a consumption 
category (e.g., heating, lighting, appliances, sockets, etc.).  
Ener-SCAPE includes a feedback system to the end 
users, both in the home and in the building/campus contexts, 
in a personalised way to increase the awareness of the impact 
of their energy consumption actions. This approach is used 
in several ways and in a dedicated manner for the different 
actors in the system, e.g., suggesting: 
• in the home environment, which appliance the user is 
using or has just used, and which device has exceeded a 
fixed threshold; 
• inside the building/campus, the ineffective use of 
heating systems in relation to the outside temperature.  
The feedback is made available to users on the dashboard 
in the form of “hints” (see Figure 5).  
The monitoring dashboard shows the consumption 
trends, both cumulatively and per device. Users can also 
compare their current consumption with their historical 
consumption, as showed in Figure 6 and Figure 7 that depict 
the dashboard for smartphones. 
The game version for an office environment (see Figure 8 
for a mock-up of the PC version) has only one significant 
difference from the one for the home environment: it is an 
escape game played in teams. Thus, we had the chance to 
exploit the potentiality of collaborative learning in serious 
games [38]. Moreover, teams play against one another. In 
this way, we had also the chance to take advantage from 
recent studies results: Cagiltay et al. [39] have showed that 
creating a competition environment in a serious game makes 
motivation of learners improve significantly. 
 
Figure 7. Energy consumption variation diagrams (smartphone version). 
 

443
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 8. Mock-up of the game (PC version) in the building environment. 
So, when motivation increases, learners tend to be more 
involved with the issue [40]. 
The basic idea of the game is identical to the one 
proposed for the home environment, but with the inclusion 
of other actors besides the previous single user/player: the 
energy 
manager 
(responsible 
for 
the 
coordination, 
management and efficient use of energy resources in the 
building/campus) and other users/players who live in the 
same environment and are energy consumers. In this case, as 
previously said, a mechanism for collaboration (among users 
belonging to the same team) and competition (with the other 
groups/teams of users) has been implemented. Members of 
the same team can exchange tips, information, and objects in 
the virtual world where they move. Every player can 
constantly see not only the results of his/her team but also 
the results of other teams. In order to improve the energy 
performance in the building(s), the energy manager will 
oversee the progress of the game, suggesting changes in 
behaviour, 
recommending 
precautions, 
or 
imposing 
guidelines. Furthermore, as in the home environment case, 
the user may take advantage of social networks as an 
important resource to acquire information and to earn virtual 
currency.  
The beneficial cycle previously described for the office 
environment is represented in Figure 9.  
Ener-SCAPE is currently in development but a complete 
and working prototype is already available for testers. Figure 
10, Figure 11, Figure 12, and Figure 13 show some 
snapshots of the game and the monitoring tool for the PC 
version of Ener-SCAPE.  
Figure 14 represents the Domain Expert interface: by 
accessing the application, a Domain Expert can interact with 
the Community through the major social networks (Twitter, 
Facebook, and Google+). When some members of the 
Community emerge by merit, for having provided useful 
pieces of advice and/or effective solutions, either for the 
game or for improving the performance in the real world, the 
Domain Expert can assign virtual currency to them. 
 
 
Figure 9. Ener-SCAPE approach to energy consumption awareness 
(building environment). 
 
Figure 10. Snapshot of the game in the home environment for PC version 
 
Figure 11. Snapshot of the game in the building environment for PC 
version. 
 

444
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 12. Snapshot of the monitoring dashboard for PC version. 
 
 
Figure 13. Energy consumption graphics in the version for PC. 
 
 
 
Figure 14. Domain Expert interface (PC version). 
 
Figure 15. Player interface to redeem reward codes and to interact with the 
Community. 
 
 
Figure 16. Energy Manager interface (PC version). 
With this aim, the system generates the corresponding 
Reward Code (a string that is sent to the user through 
channels external to the application, e.g., via email, through 
the systems of internal chat on Facebook or Google+) for 
cashing in the virtual currency. 
Figure 15 depicts the interface for the players to redeem 
the Reward Codes and to interact with the Community. 
As the consumer user, the Energy Manager is provided 
with an interface that displays information to monitor 
consumption, cumulative or per device, from which he can 
deduce actions to induce improvements in energy efficiency, 
savings and economic sustainability (Figure 16). 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTATION PLAN  
In the light of a scientific validation of Ener-SCAPE, we 
intend to proceed with an experimentation phase aiming at 
gathering real data to evaluate the effectiveness of Ener-
SCAPE. During the experimentation phase, we intend to 
evaluate both the home and the office version, adequately 
tailoring an experimentation plan. The home experimentation 
plan foresees the distribution of Ener-SCAPE and the 
sensing system to 20 users, chosen among the ones who will 

445
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
join the Ener-SCAPE public site and fill out the intention 
form for participating in the experimentation, including 
profiling data. The received applications will be then 
analysed and the users will be selected so as to have a 
statistical sample as diverse as possible. The office 
experimentation plan will be carried out at Engineering 
Ingegneria Informatica S.p.A. premises in Palermo, Italy. 
In order to evaluate the results of this experimentation 
phase, a set of metrics has been identified and divided into 
quantitative metrics and qualitative metrics. 
Quantitative metrics measure the effects of greater 
energy awareness. No preliminary consumption baseline is 
provided for the evaluation of the performance: users are 
clustered on the basis of a set of parameters (age, job, 
education, skills, etc.) provided during the preliminary 
registration phase. Their performance, both in home and in 
building/campus environment, are evaluated at a well-
defined set of time slots (hour, day, week, month, etc.) and 
compared to their own past average values (starting from the 
beginning of the experimentation) or to the values of users 
belonging to the same cluster (e.g., the best user, the average 
one or the worst one). In order to have a greater persistence 
of the results, a massive amount of information must be 
acquired and assimilated slowly, so as to have a significant 
impact on the lifestyle of the consumer, rather than only on 
the performance recorded during the experimental period. 
The impact of Ener-SCAPE is expected to increase slowly 
with time, so that the comparison to the average 
performance, in the first part of the use of the application, 
can be considered as the comparison to the baseline. 
TABLE I. 
INDIRECT QUALITATIVE METRICS  
Application 
Metrics 
Feedback (monitoring) 
Response to interaction 
Real-time perception 
Dashboard reliability 
Usefulness of shown information  
Completeness of shown information 
User-friendliness 
Game (the escape room) 
Conpliance to the Escape Room paradigm 
Perception of the entertaining aspect 
Appreciation of the entertaining aspect 
Perception of the educational aspect 
Appreciation of the educational aspect 
Appreciation of the graphical aspect 
Appreciation of the team based Escape Room 
Appreciation of the competition mechanism  
Appreciation of the collaborative mechanism  
Social (community) 
Usefulness of support to the community 
Reliability of information from the community 
Fairness of ranking mechanism 
 
Qualitative metrics are subdivided into indirect metrics, 
aimed at assessing the user perception of the Ener-SCAPE 
application, and direct metrics, aimed at evaluating the 
effectiveness of Ener-SCAPE by evaluating the sensitivity 
acquired by the user in the field of eco-sustainability. In both 
cases, it has been decided to proceed by administering 
questionnaires to the users. In TABLE I, a list of indirect 
metrics are provided; specific metrics pertaining only to the 
business/campus case are reported in italic. 
At the end of the experimentation phase, all the data 
collected will be analysed to evaluate the impact of Ener-
SCAPE on the energy awareness. 
V. 
BUSINESS MODEL 
In recent years, big companies such as Google Inc. and 
Microsoft Corp. developed their own energy management 
tools. Both the initiatives have failed and their projects were 
closed after few years [41][42]. One reason can be found in 
the early stage of the market when the products were 
launched (2009). Indeed, very few smart meters and smart 
grid networks had been installed in those years. 
Additionally, Google and Microsoft probably did not follow 
the 
right 
distribution 
strategy, 
building 
only 
few 
partnerships with strategic partners. Starting from these two 
cases, and considering a possible launch of Ener-SCAPE 
into the market, we had the chance to develop new business 
models to avoid past mistakes.  
Following the Business Model Canvas [43], we can 
analyse the possible development of Ener-SCAPE as a 
product to market. To do so, we have to consider separately 
the two versions of the software framework. The home 
version has individual users interested in energy and 
environmental issues, or interested in escape room games, as 
possible customers. Indeed, the game can be the driver to 
spread ECA even among people not directly interested in it. 
As a value proposition, Ener-SCAPE can increase ECA in an 
appealing and fresh way. Increasing the energy efficiency at 
home, users can save their money and respect the 
environment. We have identified two distribution channels: 
online selling in a dedicated web site or by partnership with a 
specialised third party as producers/sellers of energy sensing 
systems, energy retailers, energy service companies, 
consumers’ associations, etc. We think that revenue could be 
produced after a year of software engineering and testing, 
during which the following resources will be utilised: 
software engineers, relational resources and technical 
resources. After this first phase, the promotion activity and a 
constant maintenance will be crucial. We have identified the 
following cost items: product realisation, promotion, 
maintenance, direct and indirect selling.  
We have also done a business model of the 
building/campus version of Ener-SCAPE. Medium or large 
companies interested in their energy saving are possible 
customers of the product. The value proposition is the chance 
to save money consuming less energy. Distribution channels 
could include a direct sales force or selling by 
distributors/partners. The revenue plan is substantially the 
same as the plan seen for the Ener-SCAPE home version. 
Indeed, key resources, activities and cost structure are shared 
for both versions of the product. In the end, we can 
summarise that starting with relatively small investments, 
mostly concentrated in the first year, two marketable 
products may be obtained with good chance to generate 
incomes. 
Finally, the reference market of Ener-SCAPE is in energy 
management software. Today, energy monitoring systems 
are offered by many big multinational companies such as 

446
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
IBM Corporation, CISCO Systems, Inc., and the General 
Electric Company. However, this market is constantly 
developing, primarily due to the birth of the “Internet of 
Things” [44] and automation systems [45], and secondarily 
due to the great attention this market is calling. Despite the 
large amount of players, today there is no evidence that a 
product like Ener-SCAPE is already on the market. The 
distinctive feature is the simultaneous presence of a 
persuasive game in the form of an escape room game, a 
monitoring interface for the electric consumption and a tool 
for the integration with social networks. As a matter of fact, 
Ener-SCAPE strength lies in the cooperation of these three 
elements, to reach the same goal: providing the users with a 
greater ECA to get a better energy efficiency, save money 
and natural resources, and improve their lives. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This work proposes a pervasive and multi-platform 
application to improve energy consumption awareness. 
Following the results of a number of previous works found 
in the literature and analysed in depth, Ener-SCAPE has 
designed and developed an energy-aware application 
integrating successful elements for achieving energy 
consumption awareness: serious games, real time and 
detailed feedback on energy consumption and motivational 
factors coming from the social interaction in a community.  
In order to pave the way for possibly launching the 
application into the market, an experimentation phase has 
been scheduled inside the business plan. Corroborated by the 
use of elements that individually have been proven effective 
in increasing ECA, which have emerged as well known and 
widely utilized, we are confident on the effectiveness of this 
ongoing work.  
Besides what is already planned, the monitoring tool can 
be extended and improved. Citizens consume not just 
electricity at their homes but also gas, water, and heat. Thus, 
the Ener-SCAPE monitoring interface could be enriched to 
evaluate all of these additional areas of consumption. In 
regards to the game, other exploratory works could be done 
with information and visualisation techniques. As an 
example, the home version could be expanded from a single 
player into a multiplayer game, by taking into consideration 
other households. The single user approach could be 
changed into a team-based one; trying to increase the ECA 
in all the household with a collaborative (and not only 
competitive) version of the game. This enhancement is 
supported by recent studies demonstrating that family 
relationships and dynamics have a lot of influence on ECA 
improvement [15]. Moreover, the age of the users and the 
contingent presence of children at home have been 
demonstrated as affecting the levels knowledge in energy 
related issues inside families [46]. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is part of “ENERGETIC – Tecnologie per 
l’Energia e l’Efficienza Energetica” project, co-funded by 
MIUR (Italian Ministry for Education, University and 
Research) by means of the national Program PON R&C 
2007-2013, project, PON02_00_355_3391233C. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Arnone, A. Rossi, E. G. Melodia, M. Mammina, and S. E. 
Jenkins, “Ener-SCAPE: A Novel Persuasive Game to 
Improve the Energy Consumption Awareness,” The Fifth 
International 
Conference 
on 
Smart 
Grids, 
Green 
Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies (Energy 
2015), IARIA, May 2015, pp. 24-28, ISSN: 2308-412X. 
[2] L. Adua, “To cool a sweltering earth: does energy efficiency 
improvement offset the climate impacts of lifestyle?” Energy 
Policy, Vol. 38 (10), pp. 5719–5732, Oct. 2010, doi: 
10.1016/j.enpol.2010.05.021. 
[3] C. Wilson, “Evaluating communication to optimise consumer-
directed energy efficiency interventions,” Energy Policy, Vol. 
74, 
pp. 
300–310, 
Sep. 
2014, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.enpol.2014.08.025. 
[4] T. Dietz, G. T. Gardner, J. Gilligan, P. C. Stern, and M. P. 
Vandenbergh, “Household actions can provide a behavioural 
wedge to rapidly reduce US carbon emissions,” Proc. Nat. 
Acad. Sci. USA, Vol. 106 (44), pp. 18452–18456, Oct. 2009, 
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0908738106. 
[5] G. T. Gardner and P. C. Stern, “Environmental problems and 
human behaviour,” (2nd ed.). Boston, 2002, MA: Pearson 
Custom. 
[6] P. C. Stern, “Contributions of psychology to limiting climate 
change,” Am. Psychol.,  Vol. 66 (4), pp. 303–314, Jun. 2011, 
doi: 10.1037/a0023235. 
[7] J. C. Yang, K. H. Chien, and T. C. Liu, “A digital game-based 
learning 
system 
for 
energy 
education: 
an 
Energy 
COnservation PET,” Turkish Online Journal of Educational 
Technology, Vol.  11 (2), pp. 27-37, Apr. 2012, Online ISSN: 
1303-6521.  
[8] New EU Energy Label, “Home page,” [Online]. Available: 
http://www.newenergylabel.com/index.php/start/ 
[retrieved: 
July, 2015]. 
[9] Energy 
Star, 
“Home 
page,” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.energystar.gov/ [retrieved: July, 2015]. 
[10] EUROPEAN COUNCIL - 25/26 MARCH 2010 - Europe 
2020: a New European Strategy for Jobs and Growth. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://register.consilium.europa.eu/pdf/en/10/st00/st00007.en1
0.pdf [retrieved: July, 2015]. 
[11] C. Fischer, “Feedback on household electricity consumption: 
a tool for saving energy?,” Energ. Effic., Vol. 1 (1), pp. 79-
104, Feb. 2008, doi: 10.1007/s12053-008-9009-7. 
[12] A. Nilsson, C. Jakobsson Bergstad, L. Thuvander, D. 
Andersson, K. Andersson, and P. Meiling, “Effects of 
continuous feedback on households’ electricity consumption: 
potentials and barriers,” Appl. Energ., Vol. 122, pp. 17–23, 
Feb. 2014, doi: 10.1016/j.apenergy.2014.01.060. 
[13] F. Reinhart, K. Schlieper, M. Kugler, E. Andre, M. 
Masoodian, and B. Rogers, “Fostering Energy Awareness in 
Residential Homes Using Mobile Devices ,” The Fourth 
International 
Conference 
on 
Smart 
Grids, 
Green 
Communications and IT Energy-aware Technologies (Energy 
2014), IARIA, Apr. 2014, pp. 35-43, ISSN: 2308-412X. 
[14] BeAware, 
“Home 
page,” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.energyawareness.eu/beaware/ 
[retrieved: 
July, 
2015]. 
[15] S. Snow, D. Vyas, and M. Brereton, “When an eco-feedback 
system joins the family,“ Pers. Ubiquit. Comput., Online 
ISSN 1617-4917, Feb. 2015, doi: 10.1007/s00779-015-0839-
y. 

447
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[16] S. D’Oca, S. P. Corgnati, and T. Buso, “Smart meters and 
energy savings in Italy: determining the effectiveness of 
persuasive communication in dwellings,” Energy Res. Soc. 
Sci., 
Vol. 
3, 
pp. 
131–142, 
Sept. 
2014, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.erss.2014.07.015. 
[17] S. Darby, “The effectiveness of feedback on energy 
consumption. A review for DEFRA of the literature on 
metering, billing and direct displays,“ Environmental Change 
Institute, University of Oxford, Apr. 2006, [Online]. 
Available:   http://www.eci.ox.ac.uk/research/energy/electric-
metering.php. 
[18] P. Chaussecourte, B. Glimm, I. Horrocks, B. Motik, and L. 
Pierre, “The Energy Management Adviser at EDF,“ Proc. 
12th International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC 2013), 
Oct. 2013, pp. 49-64, doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-41338-4_4. 
[19] E. A. Boyle, T. M. Connolly, and T. Hainey, “The role of 
psychology in understanding the impact of computer games,” 
Entertain. Comput., Vol. 2 (2), pp. 69–74. Jan. 2011, doi: 
10.1016/j.entcom.2010.12.002. 
[20] T. M. Connolly, E. A. Boyle, E. MacArthur, T. Hainey, and J. 
M. Boyle, “A systematic literature review of empirical 
evidence on computer games and serious games,” Comput. 
Educ., 
Vol. 
59, 
pp. 
661–686, 
Sept. 
2012, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.compedu.2012.03.004. 
[21] U. Dorji, P. Panjaburee, and N. Srisawasdi, “A learning cycle 
approach to developing educational computer game for 
improving students’ learning and awareness in electric energy 
consumption and conservation,” J. Educ. Techno. Soc., Vol. 
18 (1), pp. 91–105, Jan. 2015, Online ISSN: 1436-4522. 
[22] M. Torres and J. Macedo, “Learning sustainable development 
with a new simulation game,” Simulat. Gaming, Vol. 31 (1), 
pp. 119-126, Mar. 2000, doi: 10.1177/104687810003100112. 
[23] Ecoville, [Online]. Available: http://www.ecovillelejeu.com  
[retrieved: July, 2015]. 
[24] EnerCities, 
“Home 
page," 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.enercities.eu [retrieved: July, 2015]. 
[25] I. Ajzen, “The theory of planned behavior,” Organ. Behav. 
Hum. Dec. Proc., vol. 50 (2), pp. 179–211, Oct. 1991, doi: 
10.1016/0749-5978(91)90020. 
[26] A. Gustafsson, M. Bång, and C. Katzeff, “Evaluation of a 
Pervasive Game for Domestic Energy Engagement Among 
Teenagers,” ACM CIE, vol. 7 (4), art. 54, Dec. 2009, doi: 
10.1145/1658866.1658873. 
[27] A. Gustafsson, M. Bång, and M. Svahn, “Power Explorer – a 
casual game style for encouraging long term behavior change 
among teenagers,” Proc. The International Conference on 
Advances in Computer Enterntainment Technology (ACE 
‘09), pp. 182-189, Oct. 2009, doi: 10.1145/1690388.1690419. 
[28] W. Willemsen, J. Hu, G. Niezen, and B. van der Vlist, “Using 
game elements to motivate environmentally responsible 
behaviour,” Game and Entertainment Technologies (GET 
2011), IADIS. 
[29] L. S. G. Piccolo, C. Baranauskas, M. Fernandez, H. Alani, 
and A. De Liddo, “Energy consumption awareness in the 
workplace: technical artefacts and practices,” XIII Brazilian 
Symposium on Human Factors in Computer Systems (IHC 
14), pp. 27-31, Oct. 2014. 
[30] J. Mankoff, D. Matthews, S. R. Fussell, and M. Johnson, 
“Leveraging social networks to motivate individuals to reduce 
their ecological footprints,” Proc. The 40th Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS 2007), 
pp. 87–96, Jan. 2007. 
[31] D. Foster, S. Lawson, M. Blythe, and P.Cairns, “Wattsup?: 
Motivating reductions in domestic energy consumption using 
social networks,” Proc. The 6th Nordic Conference on 
Human-Computer 
Interaction: 
Extending 
Boundaries 
(NordiCHI ’10), pp. 178–187, Oct. 2010. 
[32] P. Petkov, F. K̈ obler, M. Foth, and H. Krcmar, “Motivating 
domestic 
energy 
conservation 
through 
comparative, 
community-based feedback in mobile and social media,” 
Proc. The 5th International Conference on   Communities and 
Technologies (C&T ’11), pp. 21–30, June 2011. 
[33] H. T. Hou and Y. S. Chou, “Exploring the technology 
acceptance and flow state of a chamber escape game - Escape 
the Lab© for learning electromagnet concept,” Proc. The 20th 
International Conference on Computer in Education (ICCE 
2012), Asia-Pacific Society for Computers in Education, Nov. 
2012, pp. 38-41.  
[34] R. C. Schank, T. R. Berman, and K. A. Macpherson. 
“Learning 
by 
doing” Instructional-design 
theories 
and 
models: A new paradigm of instructional theory 2, 1999, pp. 
161-181. 
[35] OAuth 2.0, “About OAuth 2.0 page”, [Online]. Available: 
http://oauth.net/2/ [retrieved: July, 2015]. 
[36] O. Etzion and P. Niblett, “Event Processing In Action,” 
Manning Publications Co. Greenwich, CT, USA 2010,  
ISBN: 1935182218 9781935182214. 
[37] Sweet Home 3D, “Home Page,” [Online]. Available: 
http://www.sweethome3d.com/ [retrieved: July, 2015]. 
[38] J. Sánchez and R. Olivares, “Problem solving and 
collaboration using mobile serious games,” Comput. Educ., 
Vol. 
57, 
pp. 
1943–1952, 
Apr. 
2011, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.compedu.2011.04.012. 
[39] N. E. Cagiltay, E. Ozcelik, and N. S. Ozcelik, “The effect of 
competition on learning in games,” Comput. Educ., Vol.  87, 
pp. 35-41, Apr. 2015, doi: 10.1016/j.compedu.2015.04.001. 
[40] E. Ozcelik, N. E. Cagiltay, and N. S. Ozcelik, “The effect of 
uncertainty on learning in game-like environments,” Comput. 
Educ., 
Vol. 
67, 
pp. 
12-20, 
Sept. 
2013, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.compedu.2013.02.009. 
[41] C. Nuttall, “Google’s mission falters on health, energy,” The 
Financial Times, Financial Times Tech Blog, 25 Jun. 2011 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://blogs.ft.com/tech-
blog/2011/06/googles-mission-falters-on-health-energy/ 
[retrieved: July, 2015]. 
[42] C. Nuttall, “Microsoft shutters Hohm,” The Financial Times, 
Financial Times Tech Blog, 30 Jun. 2011 [Online]. Available: 
http://blogs.ft.com/tech-blog/2011/06/microsoft-shutters-
hohm/? [retrieved: July, 2015]. 
[43] A. Osterwalder and Y. Pigneur, “Business model generation: 
a handbook for visionaries, game changers and challengers,” 
John Wiley & Sons, Jul. 2010. 
[44] J. Gubbia, R. Buyyab, S. Marusica, and M. Palaniswamia, 
“Internet of Things (IoT): A vision, architectural elements, 
and future directions,” Future Gener. Comp. Sy., Vol. 29 (7), 
Sept. 
2013, 
pp. 
1645–1660, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.future.2013.01.010. 
[45] A. Alkar and U. Buhur, "An internet based wireless home 
automation system for multifunctional devices," IEEE Trans. 
Consumer Electronics, Vol. 51 (4), pp. 1169–1174, Nov. 
2005, doi: 10.1109/TCE.2005.1561840. 
[46] I. Vassileva and J. Campillo, “Increasing energy efficiency in 
low-income households through targeting awareness and 
behavioral change,” Renew. Energ., Vol. 67, pp. 59-63, Dec. 
2013, doi: 10.1016/j.renene.2013.11.046. 
 

