Managing Process Change and Standardisation in ERP Projects:  
An Assessment of the SAP Template Approach
 
Markus Grube 
 
 
Barum, Germany 
e-mail: research@markus-grube.de  
 
Martin Wynn 
School of Computing and Engineering 
University of Gloucestershire 
Cheltenham, UK 
e-mail: MWynn@glos.ac.uk
 
Abstract — The use of templates for process alignment in ERP 
projects is an established practice and many companies have 
used this approach when implementing the SAP ERP software 
system. This research paper deals with the question of how 
companies use a template in a business process management 
environment and, more specifically, what happens when there 
are requests for changes to the template. Based on a literature 
review and personal interviews, this article assesses the 
commitments that manufacturing companies make regarding 
template implementation within SAP business process 
management. It suggests that "Defend the template!" may be an 
appropriate overarching goal. 
Keywords — SAP; ERP; Enterprise Resource Planning; 
BPM; Business Process Management; Template; Process change; 
Process standardisation; People capabilities. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
This article builds upon previously published research 
[1][2] which describe that Enterprise Resource Planning 
(ERP) software packages have been widely deployed since 
their emergence in the late 1980s, and on the role of Business 
Process Management (BPM) maturity models and ERP 
systems highlighted the significance and value of templates in 
aligning or remodelling business processes in such projects. 
Foth [3] defines a template as a unified set-up containing the 
necessary 
documentation 
and 
programmes 
for 
the 
construction of a new system. In addition to facilitating 
improved business processes, the use of a template offers 
numerous other potential advantages, including a reduction in 
implementation costs and required manpower, and an 
increased level of data consistency. This article examines how 
templates can be used to manage and improve business 
processes, and also assesses the importance of people skills 
and competencies in ERP systems projects. Following this 
introductory section, Section II discusses the relevant 
literature and develops the research questions for this paper. 
Section III then describes the research methodology and 
Section IV provides a summary of the research findings. 
Section V addresses the research questions and, finally, 
Section VI presents the conclusion and suggestions for 
possible future research. 
II. LITERATURE REVIEW 
An ERP system is generally seen as a software package 
which automates and integrates business processes, shares 
common data, and produces and accesses information in a 
real-time 
environment. 
ERP 
software 
can 
also 
be 
implemented in stages and therefore, be used to connect 
previously isolated IT systems and functional departments 
within a company. ERP is also viewed by some researchers 
[4][5][6] as a fundamental method for achieving best practice 
within business operations – the implementation of the ERP 
package requiring the application of certain disciplines within 
main business processes. According to Turban et al. [7], ERP 
not only provides business discipline, but it also allows the 
alignment of IT deployment with overall business strategy and 
business goals. Implementing ERP may thus also require a 
change in core processes, often termed business process 
reengineering or "BPR" [8]. The globalisation of business 
activities has reinforced the need to structure and standardise 
business processes across the enterprise and to adhere to 
corporate rules and procedures. 
In general, "the main goal of process standardisation is the 
development of one standard or best-practice process to be 
used as a template for all instances of the process" [9]. Gavidia 
[10] asserts that it is common practice to develop a template 
as the base configuration for all areas and locations of a 
company to increase compliance and data consistency. This 
new template will then have a consistent set of reports and will 
be adapted to the existing business processes within the 
company. 
There are a number of third party products that focus on 
process design and management. Metastorm, for example, 
uses a "BPM Designer" by which "you design the actual 
process, define business rules, set roles and associate forms. 
The main components of the process are where you start from, 
the steps or 'stages' that will be traversed, and the endpoints" 
[11]. ERP products like SAP usually offer "best-practice" 
templates for BPM in different industries and business 
processes. However, for various reasons, the suggested best 
practice is often found not to work well, and thus many 
companies define their own BPM templates to meet their 
specific needs [12]. In addition, it may be necessary to 
distinguish between a global template and local requirements 
and to define mechanisms that address such differences [13].  
Some companies do not adopt a template approach at all, 
preferring instead to map, document, analyse and improve 
their processes using in-house methods, even when 
implementing ERP systems. This is particularly the case in 
small and medium-sized enterprises (SME), where processes 
may have developed and been customised over many years to 
meet specific ways of working or customer requirements and 
48
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
the template approach is thus difficult to implement [14]. This 
point is illustrated by a recent study by Rezaeian and Wynn 
[15] of ERP systems implementations in three Iranian 
manufacturing SMEs. The mapping of company processes 
provided the basis for selecting the best-fit ERP product 
available, but the modification of existing processes to fit the 
software was limited. Nevertheless, as the packages were 
implemented (sometimes module by module), small scale ad 
hoc process change allied to limited customisation of the 
software provided reasonably successful outcomes, notably at 
the Isfahan Bus Company (Figure 1). As Pajk and Kovačič 
[16] note, "these days ERP systems need to offer a lot of 
functionality in order to cope with a large number of business 
requirements. This functionality needs to be aligned with the 
business in order to create value for the organisation, 
confronting the organisation with the options of either 
configuring the enterprise system, the organisation, or a 
combination of both". 
From an Information Technology (IT) perspective, it 
makes sense to standardise business processes and associated 
procedures and transactions. Costs are reduced if the 
organisation can adopt the business models inherent in an ERP 
system, rather than vice versa [17]. However, this approach is 
criticised in the literature. For example, Gavidia [10] reports 
that blanket implementation of a uniform template reflects a  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
failure of management and risks damaging existing customer 
relationships. A process template can only be effective if it 
takes into account the operational and information 
requirements of all areas of a company.  
Heeks [18] identifies the key aspects of change that 
provide a frame of reference for effecting the organisational 
transition associated with and required by, the implementation 
of an ERP system, and this adds an interesting perspective 
regarding the value of process templates. Heeks suggests that 
there are four aspects of an organisation that must change as 
it adopts major new information systems like an ERP product.  
 
  
Figure 2. Design - Actuality Gap Model [18]. 
Figure 1. Implementation of the BEHKO ERP systems at the Isfahan Bus Company [15]. 
 
49
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
He sees these as constituting a "Design-Actuality" gap – 
i.e., a gap between where an organisation may currently be, 
and where it needs to be to successfully adopt major new 
systems. One of these four elements does indeed focus on 
Process, but the other three are of equal importance - People, 
Structure, and Technology (Figure 2). In similar vein, recently 
published research on technology transfer by Wynn [19][20] 
included a number of ERP projects in which a range of change 
factors were identified for successful implementation. These 
were grouped into three main dimensions of change, 
encompassing technology, process and people factors (Figure 
3).  
  
 
Figure 4. Earl’s model of Information Systems strategy formulation [21]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Michael Earl’s classic model of IS strategy formulation 
and implementation (Figure 4) is also of relevance to the 
debate regarding process templates. Earl’s "three-pronged" 
model remains one of the standards in the analysis of 
information systems delivery. Although many see his three 
possible strategies as alternatives, Earl, in fact, argued that all 
three can be used in combination and that different strategies 
suit different business contexts. This depends on a number of 
factors including the nature of the basic IT infrastructure, the 
structure of the organisation and the level of development of 
the organisation’s main business systems.  
The "top-down" approach is driven by a formal attempt to 
match IS investment with business needs. It identifies the 
business plans and goals and then applies an analytical 
approach to identify information systems requirements. 
Critical Success Factors (CSFs) can be used to establish 
information and systems needs. It ensures business managers 
are involved in IS strategy formulation, which is thus seen as 
"top-down". The "bottom-up" approach is an evaluation of the 
capabilities of information systems currently in place. Earl 
notes that "IS strategies are rarely developed from a green 
field site, but have to recognise the strengths and weaknesses 
of the current applications portfolio" [21]. This may establish 
that some of the existing systems could be better exploited for 
strategic advantage or be improved upon to produce 
"significant added value". The "inside-out" approach attempts 
to "identify opportunities afforded by IT/IS which may yield 
competitive advantage or may create strategic options" [21]. 
An IS strategy based on deployment of an ERP package is 
likely to "top-down" at the outset, based on a strategic vision 
for the company and a preparedness to change business 
 
Figure 3. Change factors in the Dowty Propellers ERP implementation [20].
50
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

processes in pursuit of a more efficient company utilising a 
state of the art software system. However, as such projects 
progress, this may be complemented by a "bottom-up" 
approach, which may lead to the retention of some pre-
existing software and challenge adherence to the ERP 
vendor’s process templates.  
With these considerations in mind, this article addresses 
two research questions (RQs): 
RQ1: To what extent should the process template be 
adhered to in ERP implementations (with a focus on SAP 
templates)? 
RQ2: What measures need to be taken to ensure People 
Process and Technology elements are kept in balance when 
using a strict template approach to process and systems 
management? 
III. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
The research on which this article is based takes a post-
positivist position and is based on the perspectives of Ryan 
[22] and Guba [23]. The goal of research from the post-
positivist perspective is to generate new knowledge that other 
people can learn from, and on which they can base their own 
decisions [24]. Semi-structured and in-depth interviews were 
used to gather practical experience of companies that use 
SAP templates and BPM. These interviews were followed by 
an analysis of the interview material and here an abductive 
approach [25] was adopted. This is an explanatory study, as 
defined by Collis and Hussey [26], which uses interviews 
with experts who have already gained practical experience in 
the areas of BPM in ERP projects and the use of SAP 
templates. It is quite possible that the involvement of other 
experts would lead to slightly different results, but this is in 
accordance with the post-positivist research position, which 
accepts that the world is more complex than that which the 
opinions of some experts may suggest. 
To address the research questions, this research combined 
two research methods with the aim of achieving a greater 
depth of understanding of the complex environment being 
studied [27]. Following a literature search and review, semi-
structured interviews were conducted with experts in their 
field. Figure 5 depicts the overall research strategy. The time 
horizon for this research is a cross-sectional snapshot study 
[28]. The research analyses the current practical situation and 
evaluates the state of affairs at the time of the study [29]. 
In the context of the semi-structured interviews, an expert 
had to have experience in the areas of SAP and BPM. Practical 
experience of ten years or more in the mentioned areas was 
expected. Due to the small number of interviews, this research 
did not differentiate between which modules of SAP these 
experts used or were familiar with, or within which industrial 
sector they had worked, or currently did work. Respondents 
were selected with the aim of gaining as much expert 
knowledge as possible from practice. Using semi-structured 
interviews provided flexibility to scrutinise the understanding 
and explanation of the experts’ opinions [30]. 
The qualitative data analysis and the comparison of the 
transcribed interviews were supported by using the software 
tool MAXQDA.  
 
Figure 5. Research Strategy for the Template Study. 
 
The coding functionality of the MAXQDA tool was used 
to analyse the experts’ answers. The software was used to 
manually encode the qualitative data within the interviews and 
to obtain an overview of all the experts’ answers based on the 
encodings. Due to the small number of interviews, the aim is 
not to reach an overall and general conclusion for all 
industries, organisations or SAP modules. However, the 
findings may well provide a platform and theoretical 
grounding for further research in this field of study.  
Sixty-four people were identified as potential experts in 
the business process and SAP environment, drawn from the 
authors’ personal and business contacts in Germany, Austria, 
and Switzerland. These people were then invited for an 
interview. Many of those asked for an interview declined, 
citing their reluctance to pass on internal and confidential 
company data. Therefore, from this initial pool, eleven people 
confirmed that they were willing to be interviewed. The 
findings from these face-to-face interviews are discussed 
below. All statements and insights described here are the 
personal opinions of the experts. The total duration of the 
interviews was in excess of 14 hours in total and only excerpts 
are presented here. 
IV. FINDINGS  
This section reviews the experts’ perspectives on the SAP 
templates and business processes. It discusses the nature of 
templates, the implications of “localization” of processes, the 
trade offs between flexibility and standardization, the role of 
human factors, and the need for cross-company buy-in to 
process change.  
Interview feedback suggested that the SAP ERP system 
offers a variety of "out-of-the-box" business processes for the 
general SAP system, as well as those for special business 
sectors, such as for the real estate or the pharmaceutical 
industries. With the basic process templates, a company can 
cover almost all of its standard processes, which can provide 
a solid basis for assessing the (possibly more idiosyncratic) 
daily business activities. This can help a company to 
standardise its processes and rapidly implement changes 
accordingly. For example, sales processes are similar in 
different companies and across different industries. It is 
helpful to use a standard SAP template for the best-practice 
approach as a starting point that provides a step-by-step 
51
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

illustration of the best-practice process sequence. In summary, 
these SAP templates can show and illustrate process details 
for general valid standard processes.  
In such a standard SAP process template is embodied 
considerable industry expertise that has been accumulated 
from various industries and many projects. However, this does 
not mean that this template is optimal for any particular 
company, nor that the company’s own process steps, which 
were developed and implemented in-house – and may deviate 
from the corresponding SAP process specifications - are not 
appropriate for that company. The experts pointed out that an 
approach that slavishly follows the given SAP processes is 
usually only used if a company has no existing processes or 
IT infrastructure. The interviewees pointed out that a single 
process initially has nothing to do with IT, but IT does support 
the later execution of the processes. As noted above, SAP 
offers the "out of the box" or "best-practice" processes which 
illustrate how IT supports business process behaviour. 
Normally, a company has already established its own 
process flows, based on its perceived business needs and past 
experience. In these circumstances, such a company would 
not fully use the SAP "best-practice" standard template, but 
rather develop its own process template based on the SAP 
standard. This template must then have a certain degree of 
flexibility. A tax-paying process in Germany is different from 
one in, for example, Brazil or India. The basic process 
templates must be flexible enough to be used globally in 
different business and cultural environments, where there will 
be a certain amount of local variation in rules, regulations and 
working practices. Local adaptation must only be set up where 
a process, or a process step, is genuinely local and cannot be 
supported by a global SAP template. However, this means that 
the development of a company’s own solution is divergent 
from the global template, creating a "shadow" process, which 
is only used for local requirements. The disadvantage of this 
route is that process change then becomes more difficult 
because the adaptation is known only locally, on the level of 
one company or business unit. 
In light of the above, the experts emphasised that process 
templates should be as flexible as possible from the beginning 
of the set-up. They should be scalable and applicable to 
specific local needs. In the interviews, the experts identified 
this as the biggest challenge for a process template. A key 
point for consideration is whether new requirements that 
emerge can still be incorporated into the applied process 
template, and how quickly subsequent changes can be 
implemented company-wide. A process template must allow 
for a certain amount of agility to obviate the need for shadow 
process development. 
In addition to the previous statements, the interviewees 
also reported that a process change is often triggered by 
humans and their adaptation needs. The problems linked to the 
introduction of such a process change and the subsequent use 
of process templates are often related to human behaviours. 
The human being is, therefore, a big driver but also a big 
preventer. Nearly every employee must be confident that such 
a template implementation really supports the company's 
needs and requirements. Some employees will always come 
up with reasons why their company is absolutely special and 
cannot use the standard template, and thus needs to keep with 
their own processes and IT programming. It is thus possible 
that another significant problem within implementing a 
process template is the human factor and the fact that some 
template descriptions and statements could be misinterpreted. 
As discussed by Hall [31], people can play an active role in 
the decoding and interpretation of a template. Each employee 
applies a template in the manner in which this use makes sense 
to him or her personally, even if this differs somewhat from 
the original intention of the template designer.  
One of the experts emphasised the importance of the 
human factor in template implementation. This encompasses 
not only the prior knowledge of each employee but also the 
interpersonal behaviour between departments or among team 
members. It may thus be appropriate for the human resources 
department to be involved in process change and template 
introductions to oversee human relationship issues and 
potential conflicts. Not only must the technical aspects of 
template introduction be addressed, but personal relationships 
may also need to be clarified. 
Regarding the use of standard processes, one expert raised 
the issue that business consultancies, when advising client 
companies, frequently use standard SAP templates without 
adequate assessment of the individual processes within the 
client company. This means that standard templates are 
established without optimising them to "best-fit" existing 
processes and special behaviours of each company. On the 
other hand, there are clear benefits in process standardisation 
through the introduction of a process template. This means, 
for example, that in a multi-site manufacturing company, each 
site would not be allowed to conduct its business according to 
a business process it wants and likes, but that a company-wide 
standard is set up and must be followed. The more complex 
and individualised the established processes are, the harder it 
is to run the business on one new company-wide process 
template. Uniform processes can create synergies and clarity, 
and a process template should help to minimise fragmentation 
and process variations in the company. The experts also 
maintained that there is a need for every company to analyse 
their processes individually, in order to uncover improvement 
potential. However, an organisation must also realise that non-
individualised solutions can also be effective. Some of the 
experts suggested that nearly 80% of processes are very 
similar in industrial companies, and only a very few processes 
need an individual solution.  
One expert gave the view that localisation of processes is 
a challenge because it can only be developed in collaboration 
with the local business departments. He highlighted the fact 
that the business must then maintain and update such localised 
processes, their templates and documentation because only 
the local team know how they really work. That said, another 
expert opined that the overall aim is to provide a standardised 
process template that is not subject to localisation and could 
be protected against further variation and customisation. 
In this context, one interviewee mentioned the saying 
"Defend the Template", which is apparently current in some 
consultancy circles. The implication here is that a business 
should think very carefully about the repercussions of 
changing processes away from the template guidelines. 
52
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Another expert also declared that a template should be a 
"leader" for all processes, with functional processes 
introduced via a company-wide, valid template. The question 
is then no longer how the individual divisions or business units 
within an organisation carry out a task; instead, one "valid" 
process is established throughout the whole company. A 
process in the enterprise can then only be arranged based on 
these template specifications; nevertheless, there exist   
different variations, which are offered by a catalogue structure 
within the template. The potential benefit of minimising 
process diversity is that this may result in a significant 
reduction of costs and overheads. The goal of a process 
template must be to offer stable and mature process solutions 
for a company. A general default template must be defended 
against any further fragmentation or diversification within an 
organisation. The experts observed that it requires a lot of time 
and money to realise individual solutions, and define and 
develop unique processes involving specific coding.  
These processes are then rolled out company-wide, and it 
is ideal to undertake a process without local on-site adaptation 
because these local adaptations cost in term of time, money, 
and manpower. A hurdle to avoid is being too detailed in the 
description of a process template. The more detailed the 
description of a process, the more likely it is to be a description 
of localised or specific particularities. The objective must be 
to develop an enterprise-wide process template that works 
equally well in a five-person facility as it does in a business 
unit with 800 employees in another country. 
One of the interviewees stated that the use of SAP 
processes can be the catalyst for the introduction and 
assessment of standard business processes. Overall the 
findings from the interviews suggested there are then two 
ways forward. On the one hand, these standard processes can  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
be increasingly embedded in company operations in a 
specific, individualised manner. On the other hand, companies 
may come to realise that not every process has to be 
individualised and that specific and individualised processes 
are rarely the best solution for a company overall. If a large 
ERP system like SAP has to be adapted, this means that 
human IT support will always be required. A system like SAP 
is so complex that changes in the SAP system cannot be 
adopted by everyone. Most of the time, a company relies on 
experts for these changes. The consequent additional time and 
cost must be taken into account when pursuing this option.  
Using fewer individualised solutions and more standard 
process templates means that process changes can be 
implemented more quickly. This can also result in lower costs. 
Every process change, every system upgrade and change 
release - all carry the possibility of failure, and the risk of 
serious operational implications is reduced if there are fewer 
variations in the template catalogue that need to be taken into 
account. "Defend the template" aims to encourage the optimal 
use of process templates. With the resultant harmonisation of 
processes and operational activities, businesses should and 
can be convinced that the use of standard processes is not a 
negative approach. 
But even if a standard template is to be adhered to, there 
must be scope to amend it or customise it when necessary; 
however, such a change should never be decided by one 
business unit alone. Such decisions should be taken by a cross-
company body with overall process responsibility, consisting 
of, for example, process owners and process managers. Such 
a cross-organisational body can best assess the wider XXX 
implications and decide whether, and to what extent, 
processes can be changed or whether a business unit may use 
a local adaptation.XXX 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. A simple model for process change and defence of the template.
53
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

V. ANALYSIS 
A combination of evidence from both the literature review 
and the expert interviews provides the basis for addressing 
both RQs.  
RQ1: To what extent should the process template be 
adhered to in ERP implementations? 
On balance, both the literature review and the interviews 
suggested that a lack of standardisation in the use of process 
templates should be avoided it at all possible, as this will lead 
to too much diversification to the detriment of the organisation 
overall. This manifests itself in the sub-optimal integration of 
processes and in unnecessary overheads in effecting future 
system changes and upgrades. 
In the specific context of the SAP system, companies need 
to be aware that harmonising and optimising global business 
processes in, for example, a large multi-national company is 
an extensive project that can last for years. If variations have 
been introduced into a template, it will be more difficult and 
time-consuming to maintain this template and to manage 
every future change process within it. Companies should 
search for the lowest common denominator and defend the 
existing template as far as they can.  
Business process management tools can be used to capture 
and document processes, allowing a company to visualise, 
sort and structure its processes and their management. This 
may lead to a degree of structural change and reorganisation 
(as noted in Heeks’ model [18]); it often becomes evident that 
processes in different business units are similar. A process 
template must be built from these documented and structured 
processes, including all recognised process, flow, and, if 
appropriate, excluding certain process features and declaring 
them invalid.  
For the practical introduction and implementation of the 
newly developed processes, the process team then has the task 
of establishing and defending these process templates and 
processes, even if they encounter resistance. Just because a 
process has been carried out in a company for years in a 
particular way, does not mean that this approach was the 
optimal solution for the business. However, when such a 
traditional and established process is changed, it is important 
to clarify why the new solution is a more effective approach 
and to present its benefits to all parties involved. Especially in 
such a case, the new process template must be defended, even 
if there may be strong resistance to it.  
With such an extensive application of process 
implementation and the use of a template, this implementation 
has a lot to do with the human factor. It is important to address 
those involved team members directly and to integrate them 
into the template introduction process. Participants need to 
understand why a template is to be introduced and how it will 
be used. 
As discussed above, some experts reported that business 
consultants like to introduce an SAP template without 
carrying out an individual process examination of the 
company. This kind of process template usage is to be avoided 
and every template introduction in the company must be 
checked for its usability before it is used.  
The "defend the template" principle can be viewed as the 
essential starting point in a procedure for investigating process 
change requests. The difficulty is estimating the extent to 
which a template should be defended, as there can be 
legitimate doubts that a particular process template is an 
optimal solution for a company. In this case, a process owner 
or a process organisation must decide either to change the 
process or to make a local adjustment. Decisions in such 
exceptional cases should not be made by a business unit itself, 
but by a superior process organisation, which is responsible 
for the process and thus has to approve a change or local 
adaptation. 
Customization of standard processes is sometimes 
unavoidable because an identical, single global process can 
never be appropriate for all scenarios - for example, when 
country-specific legislation has to be adhered to. This then 
contradicts the "defend the template" approach. In these cases, 
the challenge is to introduce country-specific modifications 
but to use the standard processes as much as possible. 
From an analysis of the literature and the expert 
interviews, a procedure for changing a process template has 
been developed to provide an easy-to-use model to defend 
possible process changes. Such a procedure could consist of 
the steps shown in Figure 6. This figure contains two 
important gateways for a process change. First, the process 
organisation must be informed about the desired process 
change. If the process organisation already knows about the 
desired process change and has opted for another solution, 
then this alternative solution must be defended. The same 
applies to the second gateway. If the central process 
organisation does not accept a new change request, this 
decision must be defended by the process organisation against 
any resistance that may arise. 
The process steps depicted in Figure 6 demonstrate that a 
template can be defended in several different locations within 
a process change. The advantage of this rigorous approach is 
that an escalation in local adaptions and shadow processes can 
be avoided.  
In the context of the model previously put forward by Grube 
[1], care should be taken to use standard out-of-the-box 
process templates wherever possible, and to keep process 
extensions simple. Diversification from standard process 
functionality 
will 
create 
increased 
effort 
later 
on. 
Nevertheless, customer-specific process development must 
always be explicitly analysed when system changes are made. 
 
54
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

  
Figure 7. Continuous, balanced improvement in People, Process and Technology dimensions for ERP projects. 
RQ2: What measures need to be taken to ensure people 
aspects are given appropriate focus when using a process 
template approach in an ERP implementation?  
In addition to significant changes to processes, an ERP 
implementation may well require a balanced introduction of 
new staff skills and technology capabilities, as well as changes 
to organisational structure (Figure 7). For successful template 
implementation, all employees and appropriate departmental 
functions must be included. Only then can productive 
implementation be carried out successfully, with employees 
understanding the benefits and accepting the changes. A 
company should also consider that a template rollout requires 
a long-term implementation phase, which can take 2–5 years, 
and may require a budget of $10 million or more in a large 
international company [13]. 
The enforcement of a template is a practical difficulty in 
the process rollout. Often, this causes implementation delays 
and project and business goals can be impacted. A global 
template must be approved and accepted by all affected 
business units and employees, with appropriate briefings, 
workshops and training programmes. This requires discipline 
from all employees involved in the implementation of the 
template, because things may be repeated during the rollout, 
or there may be resistance against the implementation [32]. 
When implementing a new process template or defending 
a template, the responsible process department should not be 
afraid to bring the human resources department into the 
process. When implementing and defending process 
standards, HR departments can offer communicative support 
that an IT professional might have mediated differently. In the 
event of significant change, the people affected by the change 
must be considered. It is known from various sources that 
most people dislike any form of change. In this context, a 
well-known quote from an unknown author is: "The only 
person who doesn't resist change is a baby with a wet diaper" 
[33]. As the experts confirmed, it is imperative that people 
implement changes; but to do this successfully, the people 
involved must be convinced of the value of template 
application. A literature search would yield a large number of 
articles about the successful implementation of change. The 
three-step change model of Lewin is of relevance here as an 
illustrative example. This model represents a simple approach 
to change management and divides the change process into 
the three steps or phases - unfreezing, changing and refreezing 
[34]. The first phase helps to introduce and prepare employees 
because many people are against changes. Everyone involved 
in a change must first be prepared for this change. Lewin calls 
this phase unfreezing. The second phase is where the step-
change is carried out and people learn the new behaviour. The 
final phase involves the refreezing step in which the change is 
stabilised and embedded (Figure 8).  
Implementing ERP systems may entail significant changes 
to job briefs and roles, often involving new working practices. 
Employees will be required to change, and, more importantly, 
they should feel involved in that change. It is therefore crucial 
that employees understand the rationale for the new ERP 
system, the process changes required and the significance and 
value of the process template, and feel shared ownership of 
the new system, the new processes and the project as a whole. 
There are a number of tools and methods for charting the 
change in the people capabilities as an ERP system is 
implemented. For example, the People Capability Maturity 
Model (PCMM) may be of value in monitoring changes in 
workforce skills and capabilities. This model consists of five 
55
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

maturity levels - Initial, Managed, Defined, Predictable and 
Optimising – that can be applied at the process level to help 
gauge advances in people skills and coordinate them with 
related process and technology change. This can lead to a 
program of continuous workforce development within which 
training programmes can be embedded and cross-referenced 
with process improvement and technology deployment [35]. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
The findings from the literature review and the expert 
interviews suggest that a suitable compromise must be found 
between standardisation, (i.e., adherence to the template) and 
flexibility to adapt to local requirements. The practical 
experience of the experts interviewed in this research 
demonstrates that the "defend the template" principle can act 
as a useful starting point for process management and 
alignment. Processes of all units within a business should be 
considered before a process template is created. Despite this 
preliminary work, a process template may have to be adapted 
later, but this adaptation must be coordinated by the process 
organisation, and must not be decided locally by a single 
business unit. If a suggested adaptation is not supported by the 
process organisation, the "defend the template" principle 
applies, as depicted in Figure 6. 
The coordination of process change and technology 
deployment with people skills enhancement, new capabilities 
and appropriate training programmes are of paramount 
importance. These three dimensions of change should be 
managed in unison (Figure 7), and thus the "defend the 
template" principle could usefully be amended to "defend the 
template – but don’t forget the people". In terms of Earl’s 
model, a "bottom-up" approach can become of equal 
importance in implementation as a "top down" approach may 
have been in determining the systems strategy itself. Even as 
we move into an era of increased use of robotics, chatbots and 
artificial intelligence in many aspects of business life, people 
skills and capabilities remain a vital element of major systems 
projects. 
This research clearly has its limitations. Only a few experts 
were interviewed, and it is quite possible that the inclusion of 
other experts, different industries or other ERP products 
would have led to different or additional results. Future 
research should closely examine the arguments put forward in 
this article, with a view to encompassing different business 
environments and ERP products. In addition, further research 
with more participants could significantly increase responses 
and lead to more diverse outcomes and analysis. This could, 
for example, include an online questionnaire to validate the 
steps shown in Figure 6, allowing the collection of a larger 
amount of data from more participants from different business 
and consultancy backgrounds and with different knowledge 
and experience of ERP systems and BPM products and 
practices. 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Lewin’s three-step model for change management [36].
56
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. Grube, "Defend the Template – Supporting the 
Standardisation and Harmonisation of Process Change 
Programmes with SAP template", eKNOW, The Eleventh 
International Conference on Information, Process and 
Knowledge Management, February 2019, pp 20-25. ISSN: 
2308-4375. 
ISBN: 
978-1-61208-690-3. 
Available 
at: 
http://thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=ekno
w_2019_2_10_60034.  
[2] 
M. Grube and M. Wynn, "The Impact of SAP on the Utilisation 
of Business Process Management (BPM) Maturity Models in 
ERP projects", eKNOW 2018, The Tenth International 
Conference on Information, Process, and Knowledge 
Management, March 25-29, 2018, Rome, Italy. Available at: 
http://eprints.glos.ac.uk/5478/3/The%20Impact%20of%20SA
P%20on%20the%20Utilisation%20of%20Business%20Proce
ss%20Management.pdf 
[3] 
E. Foth, "Excellent business processes with SAP: Practice of 
use in business groups", (Exzellente Geschäftsprozesse mit 
SAP: Praxis des Einsatzes in Unternehmensgruppen), Springer 
Verlag, Berlin, Germany, 2010. 
[4] 
C. Soh and S. Sia, "An institutional perspective on sources of 
ERP package organization misalignments", J. Strategic 
Information Systems, Vol.13, No. 4, pp. 375-397, 2004. 
[5] 
K. Boersma and S. Kingma, "Developing a cultural perspective 
on ERP", J. Process Management, Vol. 11, No, 2, pp.123- 136, 
2005. 
[6] 
M. Arif, D. Kulonda, J. Jones, and M. Proctor, "Enterprise 
information systems: technology first or process first? " J. 
Business Process Management, Vol. 11, No.1, pp. 5-21, 2005. 
[7] 
E. Turban, E. McLean, J. Wetherbe, N. Bolloju, and R. 
Davison, "Information Technology for Management – 
Transforming Business in the Digital Economy", 3rd edition, 
John Wiley & Sons, New York, 2002. 
[8] 
M. Hammer and J. Champny, "Re-engineering the 
Corporation: A Manifesto for Business Revolution", Harper 
Business, New York, 1993. 
[9]  H. Romero, R. Dijkman, P. Grefen, and A. van Weele, "A 
literature review in process harmonization: a conceptual 
framework", Beta Working Paper series 379, Eindhoven, 2012. 
[10] J. V. Gavidia, "Impact of parent-subsidiary conflict on ERP 
implementation", 
Journal 
of 
Enterprise 
Information 
Management, Vol. 29, No. 1, pp. 97-117, 2016. 
[11] Process Mapping Pty Ltd, "Introduction to Metastorm" BPM, 
2011. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.processmapping.com.au/articles/introductiontome
tastormbpm/ArchitectureandConfiguration.html.  
[12] T. Kobayashi, S. Onoda, and N. Komoda, "Workflow Business 
Template for Application Processes in Administration 
Department", Information Technology and Management, vol. 
3, no. 43, DOI: 10.1023/A: 1013160725421, 2002. 
[13] SAP Blogs, "Overview of Global SAP Template Rollout 
Programs", 
 Available 
at: 
https://blogs.sap.com/2011/12/11/overview-of-global-sap-
template-rollout-programs/, 2020.05.24, 2011. 
[14] M. Wynn and M. Rezaeian, "ERP implementation in 
manufacturing SMEs: Lessons from the Knowledge Transfer 
Partnership scheme", In Impact: The Journal of Innovation 
Impact, 
Vol. 
8 
No.1, 
2015. 
Available 
at: 
http://eprints.glos.ac.uk/2930/1/ERP%20implementation%20i
n%20manufacturing%20SMEs.pdf 
 
[15] M. Rezaeian and M. Wynn, "The implementation of ERP 
systems in Iranian manufacturing SMEs", International Journal 
On Advances in Intelligent Systems, Vol. 9, Nos. 3&4, 2016, 
pp.600 – 614, ISSN: 1942-2679. 
[16] D. Pajk and A. Kovačič, "Fit Gap Analysis - the role of 
Business Process Reference Models", Economic and Business 
Review, Vol. 15, No. 4, 2013, pp. 319-338. 
[17] A. 
Richen, 
and 
A. 
Steinhorst, 
"Standardization 
or 
Harmonization? 
You 
need 
both", 
available 
from: 
https://www.bptrends.com/publicationfiles/11-05-ART-
StandardizationorHarmonizationv-RickenSteinhorst.pdf, 
2020.05.24, 2005. 
[18] R. Heeks, "Information Systems and Developing Countries: 
Failure, Success and Local Improvisation", The Information 
Society, Vol. 18, pp. 101-112, 2002. 
[19] M. Wynn, "Technology Transfer Projects in the UK: An 
Analysis of University-Industry Collaboration", International 
Journal of Knowledge Management Vol. 14, Issue 2, 2018, pp. 
52-72. ISSN 1548-0666. 
[20] M. Wynn, "University-Industry Technology Transfer in the 
UK: Emerging Research and Future Opportunities". Advances 
in Knowledge Acquisition, Transfer, and Management 
(AKATM) IGI-Global, Hershey, USA, 2018. 
[21] M. 
Earl, 
"Management 
Strategies 
for 
Information 
Technology", Prentice Hall, Hemel Hempstead, 1989 
[22] A. B. Ryan, "Post-Positivist Approaches to Research 
Researching and Writing your thesis: a guide for postgraduate 
students"; MACE, Maynooth Adult and Community 
Education, pp. 12-26, 2006. 
[23] E. G. Guba, "The Paradigm Dialog"; Newbury Park, CA, Sage 
Publications, 1990. 
[24] Z. O'Leary, "The Social Science Jargon Buster", London, UK, 
SAGE Publications Ltd, 2007. 
[25] G. Thomas, "How to Do Your Case Study: A Guide for 
Students and Researchers", London, UK SAGE Publications, 
2011. 
[26] J. Collis and R. Hussey, "Business research: A practical guide 
for undergraduate & postgraduate students"; Basingstoke, UK, 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2009. 
[27] R. K. Yin, "Case Study Research: Design and Methods", 
London, UK, SAGE Publications, 2009. 
[28] M. Saunders, P. Lewis, and A. Thornhill, "Research methods 
for business students", New York NY, Prentice-Hall, 2009. 
[29] R. Kumar, "Research Methodology: A Step-by-Step Guide for 
Beginners", London, UK, SAGE Publications, 2011. 
[30] A. Bryman and E. Bell, "Business research methods", Oxford, 
UK, Oxford University Press, 2007. 
[31] S. Hall, "Encoding and Decoding in the Television Discourse," 
University 
of 
Birmingham, 
1973, 
Available 
at: 
https://www.birmingham.ac.uk/Documents/college-
artslaw/history/cccs/stencilled-occasional-
papers/1to8and11to24and38to48/SOP07.pdf, 2020.05.24. 
[32] E-3 Magazin, "Template-based SAP rollouts", Available from: 
https://www.cbs- 
consulting.com/files/pdf/information/Templatebasierte-SAP- 
Rollouts_E3_092011.pdf, 2020.05.24, September 2011. 
[33] Anonymous, New Castle (PA) News, "Fox endorses 
amendments," pg. 25, col. 8, 8 May 1967. 
[34] K. Lewin, "Frontier in Group Dynamics: Concept, Method and 
Reality in Social Science; Social Equilibria and Social 
Change". In: Human Relations. Vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 5 – 41, ISSN 
1573-9716, DOI:10.1177/001872674700100103, 1947. 
57
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[35] B. Curtis, W. Hefley, W. E. and S. Miller, A. People, 
"Capability Maturity Model (PCMM)", Version 2, Software 
Engineering Institute, 2001. 
[36] Mind Tools Ltd, "Lewin's Change Management Model - 
Understanding the Three Stages of Change". Available at: 
https://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/newPPM_94.htm, 
2020.05.24, 2016. 
 
 
58
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

