 
 
Perceptual and Reproductive Learning for Line Drawing Strokes 
Using Active Wheel-Based Finger Tactile Interface 
 
Yoshihiko Nomura, Shinichi Inagaki, Norihiko Kato 
Graduate School of Engineering 
Mie University 
Tsu, Japan 
e-mails: {nomura, inagaki-s} @ int.mach.mie-u.ac.jp  
nori @ robot.mach.mie-u.ac.jp 
Tokuhiro Sugiura 
Center for Information Technologies and Networks 
Mie University 
Tsu, Japan 
e-mail: sugiura @ cc.mie-u.ac.jp 
 
Abstract—The goal of this paper is to establish an intensive 
training procedure for improving subjects’ tactile-motor 
performance for an active wheel-based finger tactile  interface. 
The methodology for achieving the goal is  to propose a training 
procedure, and to show perceptual learning characteristic 
improvements as a result of the intensive training. Concretely, 
subjects repeated a tactile-motor learning trial composed of a 
slippage perception and a stroke reproduction. That is, a 
learning trial is constituted of four steps: (1) a target hand-
stroke, i.e., a uniform motion, is presented as a slippage by the 
active-wheel-based finger-tactile interface, (2) a subject 
reproduces the slippage as a hand-stroke, (3) accepting the 
slippage corresponding to the subject-reproduced stroke, the 
subject improves their slippage sensitivity, (3) accepting the 
initial slippage corresponding to the target hand-stroke, the 
subject furthermore improves their slippage sensitivity.  The 
training had been conducted for eight days, three sessions a day, 
16 learning trial a session. As a result of a psychophysical 
experiment with eight subjects involving an intensive eight-day 
training, the subjects significantly improved their slippage-
perception and stroke-reproduction ability. The 1st day training 
doubled the perceptual sensitivities: the sensitivities were 
defined by a ratio of an estimated slope to the standard error 
with respect to the reproduced stroke speed, by another ratio 
with respect to the time-duration, and by the standard 
deviations with respect to the reproduced stroke angular error. 
Furthermore, the intensive eight-day training made the speed-
perceptual sensitivity two-times better than that after the 1st 
day training. Thus, a learning effect was significantly observed, 
and, consequently, the effectiveness  of the proposed training 
procedure was confirmed. 
Keywords—slippage 
perception; 
tactile 
interface; 
stroke 
reproduction; training and learning; dominant and non-dominat 
hand assignment. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the previous paper by Nomura et al. [1],  a line drawing 
perceptual characteristic using an active-wheel mouse 
(AWM) was presented on the relationship to the number of 
strokes: the AWM was a mouse interface to which active 
wheel-based finger tactile (AWFT) interface was attached. [2] 
[3] [4] [5] [6].  This paper is an extended version of the 
previous paper. In this paper, the AWFT interface was not 
attached to a mouse, but was used in a stand-alone as a static 
interface. Moreover, an intensive training protocol for 
perceptual learning with the AWFT interface was proposed. 
Once we lose our vision, we shall suffer inconveniences in 
daily life. Visually impaired persons utilize their sensations 
other than the vision such as skin-sensations and 
proprioceptive sensations. Similarly, many assistive devices 
have been developed as an alternative for vision.  
Some handy-and-portable tactile devices have also been 
proposed for character presentation and walking route 
guidance. For instructing arm motions, Tsuda et al. [7] and 
Causo et al. [8] proposed a vibrotactile device. Norman et al. 
[9] proposed a skin-stretch device. Gleeson et al. [10] 
proposed a skin stretch-based tactile display in conjunction 
of a joystick-based force feedback, and Koslover et al. [11] 
combined a skin stretch-based tactile display with 
vibrotactile and voice guidance. Ion et al. [12] proposed a 
tactile display to drag a physical tactor across the skin for 
instructing geometrical shapes. Tsagarakis et al. [13] 
proposed a slippage display to rotate two cones for instructing 
2D directions. Moscatelli et al. [14] proposed another 
slippage display to rotate a ball for instructing 2D slippages.  
They provided motion information with tactors. However, 
they could not solve the following problems: ① the number 
of physical properties to be presented was restricted in such 
way that only a motion direction can be presented, ②the 
operating range was restricted in several millimeters. As a 
solution for the problems, the authors have presented the 
AWFT interface [4] [5]” and an “After-Recognition Go 
(ARG)” presentation strategy [2] [3].  
Recently, based on the ARG presentation strategy, the 
reproduction performances, i.e., the accuracies in the speed, 
time-duration, and direction of the reproduced strokes, were 
compared between four kinds of hand assignments on 
perception-and-reproduction task. That is, while the AWFT 
interface presented slippages to an index finger pad of either 
a dominant or non-dominant hand, users perceived the 
slippages and recognized them as strokes. Next, the users 
reproduced the recognized strokes with either a dominant or 
non-dominant hand. As a result, a hand-assignment by the 
220
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
non-dominant for perception and dominant for reproduction 
(NDP&DR hand-assignment) was found to be superior to the 
other three hand assignments because the proportional 
coefficient of the reproduced stroke speed against the 
presented stroke speed by the NDP&DR hand-assignment 
was nearest to the ideal value of one than the other three hand-
assignments as shown in Figure 1—in the NDP&DR hand-
assignment, users perceived the slippages by their index 
finger pad of their non-dominant hand, and reproduced the 
recognized strokes by their dominant hand.  
In this experiment, the NDP&DR hand-assignment and the 
ARG presentation-strategy were employed as elementary 
procedures that are repeated in an intensive learning protocol. 
Some studies on perceptual learning were carried out as 
follows. Wong et al. reported a learning effect with respect to 
a tactile interface that presents square-wave gratings as 
horizontal or vertical stimuli on a small area of fingerpad and 
lip [15]. They confirmed a tactile experience-based 
hypothesis that blind participants who have a lot of tactile 
experience would outperform the sighted participants on the 
fingers, and that Braille reading would correlate with the 
tactile acuity. Using the same apparatus, they furthermore, 
conducted an experiment involving an intensive training 
where participants completed 1900 training trials (38 blocks 
×50 trials) during four days [16]. As a result, they concluded 
a hypothesis that tactile perceptual learning is limited by 
finger size. That is, participants’ tactile spatial acuity 
improved toward a theoretical optimum value defined by 
their finger size: participants with worse initial performance 
relative to that corresponding to their finger size improved 
more with training, and post training performance was better 
correlated than pre-training performance. Harrar et al. 
reported an interesting result on the so-called transfer 
learning regarding the extent to which tactile perceptual 
learning was generalized across fingers [17]. They measured 
tactile orientation discrimination abilities in each of the four 
fingers (index and middle fingers of both hands) before and 
after a training procedure. In the training procedure, 4 tactile 
gratings were chosen, based on the threshold calculated from 
the first testing session, and based on performance in the 
previous training sessions (Sessions 2 through 4) thereafter. 
Participants completed 576 trials (4 day-sessions × 12 blocks 
(4 gratings widths × 3 block repetitions) × 12 trials). As a 
result, following training, performance was improved not 
only for the trained fingers, but also for its adjacent and 
homologous fingers. These findings gave us a motivation of 
taking up to confirm the learning effect on improving 
perceptual sensitivities with an intensive training for the 
author-developed AWFT interface as in this paper. 
   The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. 
Section II outlines a brief mechanical design of our developed 
AWFT interface and some methodologies for the interface, 
i.e., the ARG presentation-strategy and the NDP&DR hand-
assignment. Section III introduces a protocol for perceptual 
learning with the AWFT interface. Next, in Section IV, an 
experiment follows the system descriptions. The paper closes 
with a conclusion and remarks for further developments. 
 
(a) Four kinds of assignments of either dominant or non-dominant hand to  
perception and reproduction task. 
 
(b) The nondominant×contralateral assignment, i.e., non-dominant-for-
perception and dominant-for-reproduction, shown by the yellowish green-
colored broken line was concluded to be best in the four assignments, 
achieving the highest slope of the reproduced speed to the presented one.  
Figure 1. Characteristics of reproduced speed for the four kinds of 
perception×reproduction assignments [6]  
II. ACTIVE WHEEL-BASED FINGER TACTILE INTERFACE 
In this section, a brief mechanical design of the AWFT 
interface is first described. Nest, methodologies for utilizing 
the interface, i.e., the ARG presentation-strategy and the 
NDP&DR hand-assignment, are introduced. 
A. Apparatus 
We have previously presented an AWFT interface [5]: a 
specific tactile interface as shown in Figure 2. A wheel is 
embedded in the tactile interface, and the diameter and 
thickness of the wheel are 20 mm and 6 mm, respectively (see 
Figure 3). Raised dots are formed on the wheel peripheral 
surface to enhance slippage perception: the height of the 
raised dots is 0.5 mm, and the diameter of the bottom circle 
is 1.7 mm. The dot interval was 10.5 mm so that the dots 
appear one by one on the fingerpad because one-by-one 
221
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
appearance made the slippage perception easier as in Nomura 
et al. [18][19]. The tactile interface rotates a wheel around the 
wheel central axis in any horizontal direction by two stepping 
motors (M15SP-2N and M25SP-6NK (Mitsumi Electric Co., 
LTD., Tokyo, Japan) (see Figure 4). Installed in a wheel 
rotating part, the former stepping motor rotates the wheel, 
while the latter stepping motor swivels the wheel rotating part. 
The rotation and swivel result in a velocity and direction of 
wheel slippage on fingerpad, respectively. The velocity 
together with the time duration decides slippage length.   
B. ARG Line-Drawing-Stroke Presenting Strategy 
The ARG presentation-strategy for presenting line-
drawing strokes was employed as in the following [3].  
[Step 1] Subjects put the wrist of their non-dominant hand on 
a resting stage —as was recommended by the result that 
a NDP&DR hand-assignment was superior to the other 
hand-assignments [6]: users perceived the slippages by 
their index finger-pad of their non-dominant hand, and 
reproduced the recognized strokes by their dominant 
hand.  Since all the subjects were right-handers in this 
experiment, the non-dominant and dominant hand 
correspond to the left and right hand. 
[Step 2] The AWFT interface swivels the swiveling unit in a 
given direction.  
[Step 3]  The subjects touch their index finger-pad of their 
non-dominant hand on the wheel periphery. 
[Step 4] The AWFT interface rotates the wheel with a 
uniform angular velocity and in a time-duration. While 
accepting the slippage stimulus induced by the rotation 
(see Figure 5 (a)), the subjects recognize the stimulus as 
a stroke with a uniform-velocity straight-line motion. In 
particular, the subjects focus their attention to the speed, 
time-duration, and angle of the presented slippage. Here, 
note that the circumference of the wheel is circular, and 
the actual locus of the slippage is an arc. Yet, since it is 
not easy for us to perceive the arc-shaped slippages, 
users were instructed not to perceive the slippage as an 
arc segment, but as a straight-line segment. 
[Step 5]  Just after the wheel rotation finished, the subjects 
draw a straight line on a touch panel display (TPD) 
using a stylus pen held by the dominant hand (see 
Figures 5 (b) and (c)). 
 
  
(a) AWFT tactile interface. (b) Swiveling unit (Wheel-rotating part). 
Figure 2. General view of AWFT interface  
 
Figure 3. Wheel configuration: raised dots are formed on wheel periphery. 
Figure 4. Stepping motor and gear-chain units for rotation and for swivel. 
 
 
(a) Accepting wheel rotation, a subject creates a mental image of a 
presented slippage. 
 
(b) Subject puts down a stylus pen 
on a TPD screen. 
(c) Subject traces the mental 
image on the TPD with the stylus 
pen. 
Figure 5. ARG presentation-strategy for line drawing stroke learning. 
 
III. 
PROTOCOL FOR PERCEPTUAL-AND-REPRODUCTIVE 
LEARNING WITH AWFT INTERFACE  
A representative application of the slippage presentation 
by the AWFT interface is to instruct users on line-drawing 
strokes. In making line-drawing strokes, there are two 
processes: one  is a slippage-perceiving process and the other 
is a handstroke-making process based on the perceived 
slippages. Therefore, in order to improve the performance of 
making line-drawing strokes, the sensitivity of slippage 
perception and stroke reproduction is to be enhanced in a 
combined form.  
222
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
The perceptual-and-reproductive learning with the AWFT 
interface was carried out in eight days as shown in Figure 6: 
the eight days are concentrated, but consecutive, and a few 
days of breaks were involved in a schedule being different 
from subject to subject. In order to make the learning effect 
explicit, the period of eight days was designed, based on a 
preliminary experiment employing three subjects other than 
the subjects in this paper.   
In the first day, before learning, the experimenter 
explained the task to the participants. Then, the participants 
were asked to repeat the task until they understood the 
procedure, and considered themselves to be familialized with 
the slippage-perception using the NDP&DR hand-assignment.  
Next, in each of the training days, three training sessions 
were consecutively iterated, accompanied by a pre-test and 
post-test session. The sessions are constituted of 16 trials, and 
each trial is given by Steps 1 to 4 in training, while that is 
given by Steps 1 and 2 in testing, as shown in Figure 7.  
 
[Step 1] Aiming at a target hand-stroke, an AWFT-interface 
presents a slippage, called a first slippage. Since the 
subject does not know of the true value of the first 
slippage, the learning for the slippage sensitivity can be 
regarded as an unsupervised learning. While perceiving 
the initial slippage, a subject memorizes it as a 
translational motion, called a first mental motion where 
a slippage perceptual error is involved. The slippage 
perceptual error is to be reduced after perceptual learning. 
[Step 2] While recollecting the first mental motion, the 
subject reproduces the mental motion as a hand-stroke 
on a TPD with a stylus. In this process, proprioceptive 
error is involved, which would be much smaller than the 
slippage-perceptual error, and is not considered. 
[Step 3] The AWFT-interface presents a second slippage 
corresponding to the subject-reproduced hand-stroke. 
The subject perceives the second slippage and 
recognizes as a second mental motion, where another 
slippage perceptual error is involved. Next, comparing 
the second mental motion to the first one, the subject 
modifies their slippage perceptual sensitivity so as to 
match them. Since the second slippage corresponds to 
the hand-stroke reproduced by the subjects themselves, 
the sensitivity learning can be regarded as a supervised. 
[Step 4] The AWFT interface again presents the first slippage. 
Based on the modified sensitivity, the subject again 
perceives the first slippage, and recognizes it as a third 
mental motion. Next, comparing the third mental motion 
to the second one, the subject furthermore modifies their 
slippage perceptual sensitivity so as to match the second 
to the third mental motion. Since the subject can 
compare the third with second mental motion, the 
sensitivity learning can be regarded as another 
supervised learning. 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
Figure 6. Protocol of an eight-day sensitivity training of slippage 
perception and stroke reproduction for a single straight line-drawing-stroke. 
 
 
Figure 7. Protocol of a sensitivity-training trial constituted of Steps1 to 4 
and that of the pre/post test trial constituted of Steps 1 and 2. 
Day1
Day2
Pre-test
Post-test
Pre-test
Post-test
Training
Training
Session1
Session2
Session3
S1 S2 S3
16 trials
16 trials
16 trials
16 trials
16 trials
16
tri
16
tri
16
tri
16
tri
16
tri
Familiarization
Day3
Day4
Day5
Day6
Pre-test
Post-test Pre-test
Post-test Pre-test
Post-test Pre-test
Post-test
Training
Training
Training
Training
S1 S2 S3
S1 S2 S3
S1 S2 S3
S1 S2 S3
16
tri
16
tri
16
tri
16
tri
16
tri
16
tri
16
tri
16
tri
16
tri
16
tri
16
tri
16
tri
16
tri
16
tri
16
tri
16
tri
16
tri
16
tri
16
tri
16
tri
Day7
Day8
Pre-test
Post-test
Pre-test
Post-test
Training
Training
S1 S2 S3
S1
S2
S3
16
tri
16
tri
16
tri
16
tri
16
tri
16 trials
16 trials
16 trials
16 trials
16 trials
Device-presented motion and subject-performed action
Step 1
Slippage
Aiming at a target hand-stroke, a device, i.e., the
AWFT interface presents a 1st slippage.
perception
on target
handstroke
While perceiving the 1st slippage, a subject
memorizes it as a translational motion (1st mental
motion). ☜ Slippage perceptual error will be involved.
[Note]　Since the subject does not know of the true
slippage, the sensitivity learning can be regarded as
an unsupervised learning.
Step 2
Handstroke
repdodution
of perceived
stroke
While recollecting the 1st mental motion, the subject
reproduces it as a handstroke on a touch panel
display (TPD) with a stylus.
Step 3
Slippage
AWFT interface presents a 2nd slippage
corresponding to the subject-reproduced handstroke.
perception
on self-
reproduced
handstroke
The subject perceives the 2nd slippage, and
recognizes it as a 2nd mental motion. Next,  the
subject modifies their slippage perceptual sensitivity so
as to match the 2nd to the 1st  mental motion.
[Note]　Since the 2nd slippage corresponds to the
handstroke reproduced by subjects themselves, the
sensitivity learning can be regarded as a
supervised learning.
Step 4
AWFT interface again presents the 1st slippage.
Slippage
perception
on target
handstroke
Based on the last modified sensitivity, the subject
perceives the 1st slippage for the second time, and
recognizes it as a 3rd mental motion. Next,  the
subject again modifies their slippage perceptual
sensitivity so as to match the 2nd to the 3rd mental
motion.
[Note]　Since the subject knows both the 2nd and
3rd mental motion, the sensitivity learning can be
regarded as another supervised learning.
For training
For testing
223
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
IV. 
EXPERIMENT 
In this section, an experimental method to confirm an 
effectiveness of the sensitivity training is first explained, and, 
then, experimental results of the sensitivity training are 
described. 
A. Experimental Method 
1) 
Experimental conditions 
Eight healthy right handed males in their 20s (20~25, 
mean=21.8,  standard deviation (SD) =1.5) participated in the 
experiment. All the participants gave signed consent and 
received monetary compensation. All procedures were 
approved by Research Ethics Committee of Graduate School 
of Engineering, the Mie University. 
The three training sessions and the pre- and post-test 
session consist of 16 trials. In the 16 trials, 16 different 
slippages that represent different single straight-strokes were  
presented with the AWFT interface:  the levels of the speed, 
time-duration and angle factor were given by an orthogonal 
array of n = 128 (4 factors of 5 levels and 1 factor of 8 levels) 
where the subject was also assigned to the eight-level factor 
in the orthogonal array. The 16 slippage patterns were 
different between testing and training, and between the 
subjects, while, for each subject, the 16 slippage pattern was 
identical throughput the training sessions, i.e., from the 1st 
training session in the 1st day to the final 3rd training session 
in the 8-th day. Similarly, the 16 slippage pattern was 
identical from the pre/post-test session in the 1st day to the 
post/post-test session in the 8-th day. 
The elapsed time for one day training was approximately 
60 min, and no subjects reported that they did not feel to be 
tired to an extent that they suffered any ill effects in their 
performance. Practically, considering the subjects’ response, 
the one-day training schedule composed of three-training and 
two-testing sessions was designed. 
TABLE I. FACTORS AND FACTOR LEVELS EMPLOYED IN EXPERIMENT. 
Factor 
Factor level 
Presentation strategy 
After-recognition go strategy 
Hand assignment 
Slippage-perception with a non-dominant hand 
and stroke reproduction with a dominant hand 
(NDP&DR hand-assignment) 
Presented line drawing 
stroke 
Single stroke by uniform motion 
Time duration [s] 
4 levels: 1.0, 1.7, 2.9, 5.0 
Speed [mm/s] 
4 levels: 10, 17, 29, 50 
Direction [deg]  
16 levels: 0, 22.5, 45,, 315, 337.5 
 
2) 
Evaluation values 
The presented stroke length, lpresented, and time-duration, 
τpresented, are related to the presented speed vpresented by 
 
vpresented = lpresented / τpresented  
 
 
(1) 
 
On the other hand, we obtained a secant from a subject-
reproduced stroke―the word “secant” represents the line 
segment connected from a start to an end. Next, for the secant 
of the reproduced stroke, we measured the length lreproduced 
and angle θreproduced. In addition, a time-duration τreproduced of 
the reproduced stroke was obtained from a time record. Then, 
using lreproduced and τreproduced, the speed of the reproduced 
stroke vreproduced is given by 
 
vreproduced = lreproduced / τreproduced     
 
(2) 
 
Then, taking an example of velocity, a procedure of 
modelling is explained with respect to the reproduced strokes. 
That is, by applying a linear least-squares method to the pairs 
of vreproduced and vpresented, a linearly modelled value of the 
reproduced stroke speed, vmodelled, is given by 
 
vmodelled   = sv vpresented + iv   
 
 
(3) 
 
where sv and iv are a slope and an intercept of the modelled 
speed, respectively. The slope, sv, together with the standard 
error, σsv, is estimated by the least squares method from 
sample data for each of the eight pre/post tests, which 
comprise of pairs of vreproduced and vpresented. Similarly to the 
speed, the time-duration is modelled by  
 
τmodelled   = sτ τpresented + iτ 
 
 
(4) 
 
The slope, sτ together with the standard error, σsτ, are also 
estimated by the least squares method from sample data, 
which comprise of pairs of τreproduced and τpresented. 
A slope is a representative measure of sensitivity from the 
viewpoint of systematic error: the larger the slope is, the 
higher the sensitivity is. The difference of the slope from the 
ideal value of 1 can be regarded as a systematic-error measure. 
On the other hand, a random error measure can be defined by 
the standard error of the estimated slope, σsv and σsτ.  In order 
to comprehensively combine both the systematic and random 
error, a secondary evaluation measure is, then, introduced, 
that is, a ratio of the estimated slope to the standard error, 
sv/σsv and sτ/σsτ: they are a kind of signal-to-noise ratios (SN 
ratios) and follow a t-distribution. 
As for the angles, there is no significantly large systematic 
error in the reproduced angles although a little periodical 
error may be involved. Consequently, we did not examine the 
systematic error of the angular perception. While, for the 
random error, the difference between reproduced and the 
presented angle, θpresented, were evaluated as shown in Figure 
8. That is, 
 
Δθ = θsecant  – θpresented    
 
 
(5) 
 
Then, the standard deviation of Δθ, σΔθ, is employed as a 
random-error measure on angular perceptual sensitivity. 
These values sv/σsv, sτ/σsτ, andσΔθ were evaluated for all the 
pre-training sessions and the post-training sessions for each 
of the 1st to 8th training days. 
224
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
Figure 8. The secant of actual trajectory and the presented target trajectory 
were evaluated. 
B. Experimental Results 
1) 
Relationships between reproduced and presented 
speeds, time-durations, and angles 
Some relationship of the measured and estimated values 
of the speeds, time-durations, and angles of the reproduced 
stroke to the presented values are shown in Figures 9, 10, and 
11, respectively. In each of these figures, detailed results are 
shown in (a) the 1st-day pre-training session (b) the 1st-day 
post- training session (c) the 8th-day post- training session. 
From these figures, we can see the followings. 
  
i. The reproduced speed, time-duration, and angle, were, as 
expected, almost proportional to the presented ones.  
ii. The slopes of the speed and the time-duration, and the 
means in the angles represents systematic errors,  and the 
dispersions represents the random errors. The slopes and 
the dispersion show much improvement after the 1st day 
training, and, also, another improvement throughout the 
eight-day training. That is, as for the reproduced speed and 
time-duration, the intercepts go to approach zero and the 
slopes become larger.  As for the reproduced angles, mean 
errors for each of the presented angles 0 to 337.5 also go to 
approach zero.  The dispersions for all  the physical values, 
i.e., the speeds, the time-durations, and the angles, become 
narrow. 
 
 
 
         (a) 1st-day pre-training             (b) 1st-day post- training  
 
(c) 8th-day post- training 
Figure 9. Some of the reproduced and modelled speeds. 
 
 
 
(a) 1st-day pre-training (b) 1st-day post- training 
 
 
(c) 8th-day post- training 
Figure 10. Some the reproduced and modelled time-durations. 
225
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
(a) 1st-day pre-training (b) 1st-day post- training 
 
 
 
(c) 8th-day post- training 
Figure 11. Some of the reproduced angle errors and their means. 
 
2) 
Speed slope, time-duration slope, and angular error 
mean 
The results of the slopes, sv and sτ, and the angular error 
mean, Δθ, are shown in Figures 12, 13, and 14, respectively. 
In these figures, the estimated slopes, sv and sτ, are shown in 
Figures 12 (a) and 13 (a), and their standard errors, σsv and σsτ. 
are shown in Figures 12 (b) and 13 (b). Furthermore, the ratio 
of the estimated slope to the standard error, sv/σsv and sτ/σsτ 
are shown in Figures 12(c) and 13 (c). While, the means of 
Δθ are shown in Figure 14 (a), and their standard deviations 
are shown in Figure 14 (b). 
 
 
(a) Modelled slope              (b) Standard error of the modelled slope 
 
 
(c) Ratio of the modelled slope to its standard error 
Figure 12. Evaluation values for the reproduced speeds. 
 
 
(a) Modelled slope              (b) Standard error of the modelled slope 
 
 
(c) Ratio of the modelled slope to its standard error 
Figure 13. Evaluation values for the reproduced time-durations. 
 
        
 
(a) Mean and standard deviation     (b) Standard deviation 
Figure 14. Evaluation values for the reproduced angles. 
 
The three physical properties, i.e., sv, sτ, and Δθ, were 
evaluated from the following two viewpoints.  
 
i. Initial learning effect: the post-training test at the 1st 
training day (Post-1st) was compared to the pre-training 
test at the same 1st training day (Pre-1st). The 
comprehensive 
evaluation 
values 
were 
markedly 
improved for all the three physical properties. That is, 
sv/σsv was improved from 6.04 (Pre-1st) to 14.4 (Post-1st), 
sτ/σsτ was 8.29 (Pre-1st) to 15.5 (Post-1st). Although each 
of sv/σsv and sv/σsv follows the t-distribution, the degree of 
freedom (DOF) for both, 79, are large enough to 
approximate the t-distribution by the standardized normal 
distribution. Then, we can approximate the distributions 
of the difference between sv/σsv and sv/σsv by the normal 
distribution (mean=0, variance=2). As a result, the 
differences of sv/σsv and sτ/σsτ between Post-1st and Pre-1st 
were concluded significantly large with practically null 
significant probability. In addition, the standard deviation 
226
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
of Δθ was also improved from 48.6 to 24.1. Since the ratio 
of two variances follows the F-distribution (DOF: 79, 79), 
the value of 4.07 = (48.6/ 24.1)2 concludes that the two 
variances were not equivalent at all. In short, the 
sensitivity of speed, time-duration, and angle after an 
initial learning were approximately two-times better than 
before. 
ii. Overall learning effect: the post-training test at the final 
8th training day (Post 8th) was compared to initial post-
training test at the 1st training day (Post-1st). The 
comprehensive evaluation values were also markedly 
improved for all the three physical properties. That is, 
sv/σsv was improved from 14.4 (Pre-1st) to 29.4 (Post-8th), 
sτ/σsτ was 15.5 (Post-1st) to 19 (Post-8th).  Similarly to the 
initial learning effect, the differences of sv/σsv and sτ/σsτ 
between 
Post-1st 
and 
Post-8th 
were 
concluded 
significantly large with practically null significant 
probability. In addition, the standard deviation of Δθ was 
also improved from 24.1 to 22.0. It confirms that the two 
variances were not equivalent. As a result, from the 
viewpoint of post-training test, it is confirmed that the 
sensitivity of speed, time-duration, and angle by Post-8th 
were also much better than those by Post-1st. 
 
V. 
PRACTICAL EXPERIMENT 
In this section, another perception-and-reproduction 
experiment on sime line-drawings composed of multiple 
strokes is described in order to show an effect in a practical 
application by exemplifying an improvement between 
before/after learning. 
A. Experimental Method: Conditions and Procedures 
As a practical experiment, the number of strokes was 
increased to seven or eight strokes including motions in the 
air: speeds and time-durations were selected from the 
experimental conditions are shown in Table II. The five 
subjects were the ones included in the eight subjects who had 
gone through the training. 
The procedure was the same as that for testing described 
in Section III: Steps 1 and 2 were only once conducted for 
each stroke in a multi-stroke pattern, and no repetition was 
allowed.  
TABLE II. FACTORS AND LEVELS IN PRACTICAL EXPERIMENT. 
Factor 
Level 
Presentation strategy 
After-recognition go strategy 
Hand assignment 
Slippage-perception with a non-dominant hand 
and stroke reproduction with a dominant hand 
(NDP&DR hand-assignment) 
Presented line drawing 
stroke 
Seven or eight strokes by uniform motion. The 
stroke patterns are not failliar to the subjects. 
Speed [mm/s] × 
Time duration [s] 
Pattern i  and ii 
 4 levels: 10, 17, 29, 50 mm/s ×2.9 sec 
 
Pattern iii 
 4 levels: 29 mm/s ×2.1, 2.4, 2.9, 4.3, 4.8 sec 
B. Experimental Results 
Experimental results are shown in Figure 15. Although it 
leaves a little to be improved, the reproduced patterns after 
learning did much better than those before learning. Yet this 
is just an example, it clearly suggests a potential of the 
proposed learning protocol. 
 
 
Figure 15. Experimental results of multi-stroke line drawing 
perception/reproduction before/after 8-day learning. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
A learning protocol for a finger tactile interface, i.e., an 
active-wheel-based finger-tactile (AWFT) interface was 
proposed. That is, 
[Step 1] Aiming at a target hand-stroke, an AWFT-interface 
presents an initial slippage. While perceiving the initial 
slippage, a subject memorizes it as a translational motion, 
called an initial mental motion. 
[Step 2] Recollecting the initial mental motion, the subject 
reproduces it as a hand-stroke.  
[Step 3] The AWFT-interface presents a 2nd slippage 
corresponding to the subject-reproduced hand-stroke. 
Since the slippage is given by the motion made by 
subject's own self, the subject can improve their slippage 
sensitivity. 
[Step 4] The AWFT interface again presents the initial 
slippage. Making sure of their initial mental motion, the 
subject can furthermore improve their slippage 
sensitivity. 
 
As a result of a psychophysical experiment involving an 
intensive eight-day training on perceptual learning, users 
significantly 
improved 
their 
stroke 
perception-and-
reproduction ability. The 1st day training doubled the 
perceptual sensitivities: the sensitivities with respect to the 
stroke speeds and time-durations were defined by the ratio of 
the estimated slope to its standard error―the slopes represent 
the proportional coefficient between the reproduced and 
presented speed and time-duration. While, the sensitivity 
227
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
with respect to the stroke angles was defined by the standard 
deviations of the angular errors.  
Furthermore, the intensive eight-day training made the 
perceptual sensitivities significantly better than those after 
the 1st day training.  In particular, the speed sensitivity was 
improved by two-times.  
Thus, significant learning effects were confirmed from 
the viewpoint of the 1st day training and eight-day intensive 
training. 
In the future, applicable area is expected to be extended 
for such strokes as curved and variable velocity strokes. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was partly supported by KAKENHI (Grant-in-
Aid for Scientific Research (B) 15H02929 from Japan 
Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS). The authors 
wish to thank K. Katsuta (Ms. Eng.) for his contribution to the 
experiment. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Y. Nomura, Y. Kashino, K. Katsuta, and T. Sugiura, “Line drawing 
perceptual characteristics for the number of strokes using an active-
wheel mouse,” Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on 
Advances in Computer-Human Interactions, pp. 199-203, Greece, 
March 2018. ISSN: 2308-4138, ISBN: 978-1-61208-616-3.  
[2] Y. Nomura, Y. Kashino, and T. Sugiura, “Line-drawing presentation 
strategies with an active-wheel mouse,” Proceedings of the 11th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Advances 
in 
Computer-Human 
Interactions, pp. 199-203, Rome, March 2018. ISSN: 2308-4138, 
ISBN: 978-1-61208-616-3. 
[3] Y. Nomura, Y. Kashino, and T. Sugiura, “Line-drawing presentation 
strategies with an active-wheel mouse,” The International Journal on 
Advances in Intelligent Systems is Published by IARIA. vol. 11, no. 
311. pp. 290-298, 2018. ISSN: 1942-2679.  
[4] Y. Nomura and S. Oike, “Active-wheel mouse for human-computer 
interface: 
slippage-perception 
characteristics 
on 
fingerpad,” 
Proceedings of the 10th International Conference, UAHCI 2016, Part 
of HCI International 2016, part II, pp. 54-61, 2016. 
[5]  Y. Nomura, Y. Kashino, and S. Oike, “Proposal of active-wheel-based 
finger-tactile interface and its slippage-presenting functions,” 
Transactions of the JSME, vol. 83, no. 852, pp. 1-17, 2017 (in 
Japanese). 
[6] K. Katsuta, Y. Nomura, N. Kato, and S. Inagaki, “Comparison between 
Four Assignments of slip-perception and stroke-reproduction task to 
dominant/nondominant hand,” Transactions of the JSME, vol. 85, no. 
876, pp. 1-14, 2018 (in Japanese). 
[7] N. Tsuda, N. Kato, and Y. Nomura, “Instruction of arm motion for 
calligraphy using vibrotactile stimulations,” Proceedings of the 2011 
IEEE/ASME International Conference on Advanced Intelligent 
Mechatronics, pp. 677-682, 2011. 
[8] A. Causo, S. H. Yeo, and I. M. Chen, “Vibrotactile motors on 
stationary arm as directional feedback to correct arm posture,” 
Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE/ASME International Conference on 
Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics, pp. 202-207, 2012. 
[9] S. L. Norman, A. J. Doxon, B. T. Gleeson, and W. R. Provancher, 
“Planar hand motion guidance using fingertip skin-stretch feedback,” 
IEEE Transactions on Haptics, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 121-130, 2014. 
[10] B. T. Gleeson, S. K. Horschel, and W. R. Provancher, “Perception of 
direction for applied tangential skin displacement: effects of speed, 
displacement, and repetition,” IEEE Transactions on Haptics, vol. 3, 
no. 3, pp. 177-188, 2010. 
[11] R. L. Koslover, B. T. Gleeson, J. T. De Bever, and W. R. Provancher, 
“Mobile navigation using haptic, audio, and visual direction cues with 
a handheld test platform,” IEEE Transactions on Haptics, vol. 5, no. 1, 
pp. 33-38, 2012. 
[12] A. Ion, E. J. Wang, and P. Baudisch, “Skin drag displays: dragging a 
physical tactor across the user's skin produces a stronger tactile 
stimulus than vibrotactile,” Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 2501-2504, 
2015. 
[13] N. G. Tsagarakis, T. Horne, and D. G. Caldwell, “Slip aestheasis: A 
portable 2d slip/skin stretch display for the fingertip,” Eurohaptics 
Conference, 2005 and Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for Virtual 
Environment and Teleoperator Systems, pp. 214-219, 2005. 
[14] A. Moscatelli, A. Naceri, and M. Ernst, “Navigation in the fingertip,” 
Proceedings of the IEEE World Haptics Conference, pp. 519-523, 2013. 
[15] M. Wong, V. Gnanakumaran and D.Goldreich, “Tactile spatial acuity 
enhancement in blindness: evidence for experience-dependent 
mechanisms,” Journal of Neuroscience, vol.31, no.19, pp.7028-7037, 
2011. 
[16] M. Wong, R.M. Peters and D. Goldreich, “A physical constraint on 
perceptual learning: tactile spatial acuity improves with training to a 
limit set by finger size,” Journal of Neuroscience, vol.33, no.22, 
pp.9345-9352. 2013. 
[17] V. Harrar, C. Spence, and T.R. Makin, “Topographic generalization of 
tactile perceptual learning,” Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
Human Perception and Performance, vol.40, no.1, p.15-23. 2014. 
[18] Y. Nomura and K. Iwabu, “Length perceptual characteristics on raised-
dot slippages,” Human-Computer Interfaces and Interactivity: 
Emergent Research and Applications, IGI Global, pp. 286-308, 2014. 
[19] Y. Nomura and H. Kato, “Raised-dot slippage perception on fingerpad 
using active wheel device,” Recent Advances on Using Virtual Reality 
Technologies for Rehabilitation, Nova Science Publishers, Inc., New 
York, pp. 165-172, 2015. 
 
228
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

