Data Mining: a Potential Research Approach for Information System Research  
A Case Study in Business Intelligence and Corporate Performance Management Research
Karin Hartl, Olaf Jacob 
Department of Information Management 
University of Applied Sciences Neu-Ulm (HNU) 
Neu-Ulm, Germany 
karin.hartl@hs-neu-ulm.de, olaf.jacob@hs-neu-ulm.de 
 
Abstract—This paper investigates the opportunities of Data 
Mining applications for Information System research. Data 
Mining is a data driven statistical approach for knowledge 
discovery. Hypotheses and models do not have to be developed 
at the beginning of the research, which allows the detection of 
new and otherwise undiscovered patterns in a given dataset. 
Consequently, current challenges in Information System 
research can be investigated from a different angle. The Data 
Mining results may provide additional, surprising and detailed 
insights to an Information System problem. To prove these 
assumptions, this study applies Association Rule Discovery and 
cluster analysis to a questionnaire based data set. This data set 
has been collected to investigate the relationship between 
Business 
Intelligence 
and 
Corporate 
Performance 
Management. Even though this relationship has been explored 
at several stages in the Information System research literature, 
the results are often short on detail. This paper explores, if Data 
Mining methods can provide additional information to the 
subject. Both of the applied Data Mining methods provide 
promising results. Association rules and clusters have been 
identified, providing a different view on the connection between 
Business 
Intelligence 
and 
Corporate 
Performance 
Management. Therefore, Data Mining techniques offer an 
option to reuse questionnaire-based data and to gain new 
insights in Information System research.  
Keywords-Information Systems; Data Mining; Association 
Rule Discovery; Cluster Analysis; Business Intelligence. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
This research discusses the potentials of explorative Data 
Mining techniques for Information System (IS) related 
research and is the extended version of the previously 
published work of Hartl and Jacob [1] at the Data Analytics 
Conference 2016 in Venice.  
In IS research, Explanatory Factor Analysis (EFA) and 
Structural Equation Modelling (SEM) are the commonly used 
research approaches. Before conducting any analysis, 
research assumptions and hypotheses are developed and 
afterwards confirmed with data collected for this specific 
research purpose. This approach has one major limitation, its 
reliance on human imagination for generating research 
theories and assumptions [2]. The theories and assumptions 
are typically based on findings and research results already 
accomplished in the field. To prove the pre-defined research 
assumptions, data sets are collected. These data sets may hold 
even more information regarding a research subject than 
anticipated 
and 
analysed. 
Nevertheless, 
non-logical 
connections are generally not investigated.   
With Data Mining methods, interesting information and 
patterns can be discovered from various data types [3]. Instead 
of testing previously defined hypotheses, Data Mining 
applications are working up from the data [4]. This opens the 
opportunity to detect non-anticipated connections and hidden 
information in a given data set.  
This research is a first approach in exploring the potentials 
of Data Mining methods for Information System research 
subjects [1]. Two descriptive Data Mining techniques are 
applied to a questionnaire-based data set, exploring the impact 
of Business Intelligence (BI) on Corporate Performance 
Management (CPM) [5]. Aim of the questionnaire was to 
make the business value of BI tangible. CPM is a suitable 
concept to explore the business value of BI, since a successful 
CPM requires data and up-to-the-minute information 
[1][5][6]. In recent researches, the business value of BI for 
CPM has been explored by extracting assumed connections 
from the literature and a subsequent testing of these 
connections with data collected from industry. Several pre-
defined connections and interdependencies between BI and 
CPM have been proven. However, these results are often 
generic and lack detail.  
As a result, the above mentioned research subject presents 
an interesting case study to investigate, if Data Mining 
techniques provide more insights to IS research subjects.  
Association Rule Discovery and cluster analysis are 
renowned Data Mining methods and therefore have been 
identified as a suitable first approach in exploring the value 
Data Mining has for IS research. Association Rule Discovery 
searches for structural connections in a data set, formulates If-
Then-Statements and can consider all available research 
criteria. For the presented case study, the results of the 
association analysis could allow conclusions on the specific 
BI capabilities accounting for a successful CPM. This may 
allow researchers and practitioners to focus on the most 
important BI features in order to improve CPM.  
Cluster analysis explores the similarities between cases in 
a data set.  The case study results could facilitate a better 
understanding of the connection between BI and CPM. 
Besides analysing the research variables – e.g., BI and CPM 
characteristics – cluster analysis facilitates the consideration 
of descriptive items - e.g., annual turnover, company size. 
This makes conclusions on the actual development of BI and 
CPM in German companies possible. Furthermore, the results 
59
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

could reveal whether companies with a well-established BI 
solution likewise have a well-functioning CPM. In addition, 
the findings may allow conclusions on the impact, the 
successful use and implementation of BI systems has on a 
company’s CPM.  
The paper is structured as follows. Section II discusses the 
motivation for this research. It points out, why IS research can 
profit from Data Mining applications. In Section III, the 
research approach is discussed. Section IV describes the case 
study. First, the research background is introduced. The terms 
BI and CPM are described and the relationship between these 
two areas is discussed. An investigation of the subject related 
research highlights the opportunities of the Data Mining 
approach. Second, the data selection and pre-procession is 
described for both Data Mining analysis – FP-Growth and k-
means clustering. Third, the analysis process is described, 
before the results are presented. Section IV closes with a 
discussion on the case study results and on how they can be 
useful in practice. In Section V, it is discussed if Data Mining 
presents itself as a suitable research method for IS research 
topics. Section VI points out the next steps and future research 
opportunities.  
II. 
MOTIVATION FOR THE DATA MINING APPROACH 
In the IS research field regarding the connection between 
BI and CPM first EFA and second PLS-SEM are the 
commonly used approaches. The starting point of these two 
analysis is always an empirically provable theory, which is 
developed based on assumptions [7]. Afterwards, hypotheses 
and a theoretical model are developed. To empirical 
investigate the proposed research model, typically, a 
questionnaire is developed and real-life data collected. 
Subsequent, these data are organized by an EFA analysis. The 
EFA groups correlating items and joins them together in a  
factor [8]. Data can be structured and reduced this way.  
Next, the structured data are analysed with the PLS-SEM 
method by seeking the optimal predictive linear relationship 
to assess the previously defined causal relationship [1][9][10]. 
The characteristics (items) evaluated in the questionnaire built 
the measurement construct of the PLS model [10]. Mainly 
reflective PLS models are used in IS research. This means that 
the measurement model, also called the outer model, is caused 
by the construct [11]. The measurement items are then 
interchangeable and generally, a further investigation of the 
connections between the separate items is missing.  
The creation of factors for compacting information might 
be the right approach for many research subjects, but it must 
not be the only correct approach to explore connections in IS 
research. It is assumed that Data Mining can highly contribute 
to the subject. Data Mining methods can include all available 
research criteria and has no need for compacting questionnaire 
data. This may lead to research result that are more detailed. 
Data Mining can be understood as an extension of 
statistical data analysis and statistical approaches [12]. Both 
approaches aim to discover structure in data, but Data Mining 
methods are generally robust to non-linear data, complex 
relationships and non-normal distributions [13]. Data Mining 
is a data driven approach and supports the discovery of new 
and sometimes unexpected knowledge [2]. Instead of only 
testing assumed hypotheses, with Data Mining otherwise 
undiscovered data attributes, trends and patterns can be 
explored [14]. Especially with explanatory Data Mining 
techniques, a good understanding of connections in the data 
set can be achieved [15].  
Although Data Mining is often only considered suitable 
for large data sets, Natek and Zwilling [16] illustrate in their 
research that small data sets are not limiting the use of the tool. 
They even applied a predictive Data Mining model to a 
relatively small data set. Prediction needs the division of the 
data set into a training set and a testing set. For exploratory 
Data Mining methods, this division is not necessary. All 
available data cases can be part of the analysis. Therefore, 
exploratory Data Mining methods should be applicable to 
small data sets.  
III. 
RESEARCH APPROACH 
The Data Mining literature describes various approaches 
to Data Mining problems [3][15]. The Cross Industry 
Standard Process for Data Mining (CRISP-DM) is a well-
known procedure and the methodology chosen for this 
research [17]. As the data set is comparatively small, no 
selection of the appropriate data set was considered necessary. 
Therefore, the starting point for the data analysis was the pre-
processing of the data. Fig. 1 shows the steps followed in the 
case study.  
Each Data Mining analysis is conducted to answer a 
specific research question. This research question is then the 
basis for the chosen data and analysis method. In general, this 
research asks for the information gain in IS research through 
the application of Data Mining methods. 
Exploratory Data Mining methods analyse given data and 
extract information and patterns from this data. In particular, 
association analysis allows to take all available items of a data 
set into account and to identify co-occurrence relationships on 
item basis. Cluster analysis groups the cases in the data set 
according to their similarity. The results identify structures in 
the data, which allow conclusions on dependencies. 
In the data selection phase, the questionnaire data has been 
evaluated and missing values identified.  Afterwards, the data 
has been pre-processed by calculating the missing values and 
addressing conflicting values. Han et al. [3] and Cleve and 
Lämmel [15] suggest alternatives for dealing with missing 
values, depending on the data structure. The important items 
of the questionnaire used for the case study are formatted as 
Likert scale items and can be interpreted as metric data. Metric 
data can be pre-processed by replacing the missing values in 
the sample by the mean value of all item-based compiled 
answers. Alternatively, the mean values can be stated by 
contemplating the data case closest to the data case with the 
missing value. This idea follows the k-nearest neighbours 
(kNN) approach. Joenssen and Müllerleite [18] assess the 
kNN approach as practicable imputation method for missing 
Likert scale values in small data sets. Therefore, the missing 
values in the data set were imputed using the kNN approach.  
After dealing with the missing values, the data needs to be 
transformed in the required format for the applicable Data 
Mining technique. The applied Association Rule Discovery 
algorithm - FP-Growth - needs binary data [15]. 
60
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Consequently, the Likert scale items have been transformed 
into binary variables. This has been directly done in the 
RapidMiner Data Mining tool. The information loss created 
by transforming the data into binary variables has been 
accepted at this point of the research. The goal was to apply 
Data Mining techniques to a questionnaire based data set for 
the first time in IS research. A wide range of IS researchers 
should understand the results. Therefore, the results ought to 
be elementary and understandable.  
The results are then evaluated and interpreted. As in every 
research, not all findings are valuable and of real-life meaning. 
Accordingly, interpretation and evaluation presuppose a 
subject knowledge background to ensure that only sensible 
research results are discussed and interpreted. 
 
Data Selection
Data Pre-
processing
Data Mining
Evaluation and 
Interpretation
Definition of 
Data Mining 
problem
 
Figure 1. Research Approach (based on CRISP-DM) [17]. 
IV. 
CASE STUDY 
The case study focuses on a currend IS research topic 
which investigates the relationship between BI and CPM. The 
aim of the initial research was to investigate how the business 
value of BI can be made tangible [5]. Therefore, a context 
model has been identified by conducting a in-depth literature 
study. To pove the context model, data has been collected 
with the help of a questionairre. This data set and this research 
study background are used as the basis for the following case 
study. 
A. The Relationship Between BI and CPM 
Nowadays, companies have to face a more challenging 
and 
continuously 
changing 
environment 
each 
day. 
Especially, globalization intensifies the competition and the 
struggle for success and existence. Additionally, the 
digitalization confronts companies with immense amounts of 
data. Transforming these data into information and using 
these information for the management of a company are 
assumed to retain a company’s survival in these challenging 
times. BI is a process including applications for storing data 
and systems as well as methods for analysing these data and 
the business environment. The usage of BI promises 
companies support in their decision making process by 
acquiring, analysing and disseminating information from 
data significant to the business activities [4][19][20]. 
Consequently, BI is a source for data of high quality and 
actionable information. This indicates that the proper use and 
application of BI systems supports the successful 
management of companies [5].  
IT investments are necessary, but since there are 
increasing continuously their return on investment is 
evaluated critically in companies. Therefore, BI projects and 
implementations need to be justified. Accordingly, the 
measurement of the BI business value is an important topic 
[21]. But capturing the business value of BI is a strategic 
challenge, due to the diverse nature of BI [22]. Generally, BI 
systems are not strictly amortized by saving costs after 
implementation. Instead, the main BI benefits are of an 
intangible nature and therefore hard to measure [21]. Williams 
and Williams [22] see the BI business value in the usage of 
the system and the contained data within the management 
processes of a company. Miranda [23] then put BI and CPM 
into context and identified CPM as the appropriate framework 
to prove the value proposition and benefits of BI.  
CPM is defined by the Gartner Group as “an umbrella term 
that describes all processes, methodologies, metrics and 
systems needed to measure and manage the performance of an 
organization” [24]. Therefore, CPM presents the strategic 
deployment of the BI solutions and is born out of a company’s 
need to proactively manage business performance [1][25]. 
Inferentially, CPM needs BI to work effectively on accurate, 
timely and high quality data and BI needs CPM for a 
purposeful commitment [1][24]. As a consequence, it is 
expected that the effectiveness of CPM increases with the 
effectiveness of the BI solution and therefore the company 
success improves as well [1][6].  
B. Subject Related Research 
The relationship between performance management and 
BI has been investigated in several studies during the last 
couple of years.  
Williams and Williams [22] are one of the first to expose 
the necessity to investigate the usage of BI within a company, 
for the purpose of exploring and measuring the business value 
of BI. The authors show that the value created through the 
implementation and usage of BI is to be found particularly 
within the management processes of a company, which affect 
the operational processes. Additionally, the research suggest 
that the return on BI investment can be measured on the 
increased revenues and reduced costs within a company 
[1][22]. However, the value created through successful BI 
solutions is more than just monetary benefits. BI is a complex 
process and the quest to make the business value of BI 
tangible needs an in-depth evaluation of the connection 
between BI and a company’s management processes. 
Miranda [23] suggested that CPM is an appropriate 
framework for BI applications. The authors describe the 
concept of CPM as a business management approach using 
business analysis to support the success and management of a 
company. Accordingly, CPM presents itself as a suitable 
framework to explore the business value of BI. Although, the 
research of Miranda [23] does not provide an empirical 
investigation of the subject, the article can be considered as 
the foundation for more detailed research in the field, 
including the following.  
The connection between BI and CPM has been of research 
interest and empirically investigated mainly within the past 10 
years. The differences and similarities between BI and CPM 
have been discussed by Aho [19] in form of a literature study 
and an action oriented research. The results support the 
conclusions of Miranda [23] and point out once more that BI 
and CPM need to be connected for an effective and efficient 
application. However, the empirical background does not 
deliver details on the configuration of the relationship between 
BI and CPM. 
61
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Yogev et al. [26] explore the business value gained 
through BI using a process-oriented approach. In the research 
model, key BI resources and capabilities are identified, which 
can explain the value created through the implementation and 
usage of a BI system. A hypotheses based theoretical model 
has been formulated and tested by the authors using EFA and 
SEM. The results demonstrate positive effects of BI on the 
strategic and the operational company level. Nevertheless, the 
empiricism does not provide any details about the BI related 
resources creating this positive effect.  
Saed [27] investigates the relationship between BI and 
business success using regression and correlation analysis. 
First, hypotheses have been developed based on a literature 
review. Second, data has been collected and descriptively 
evaluated before correlation and regression analysis have been 
applied for hypotheses evaluation. Some of the hypotheses 
could be confirmed, but while these statistical techniques 
provide room for detailed results, only casual explanations 
have been provided [1]. 
Richards et al. [6] explore the connection between BI and 
CPM using EFA and PLS-SEM. Literature based hypotheses 
and a research framework have been developed. The 
framework supposes that BI directly influences and supports 
measurement, planning and analytics. The effectiveness of 
planning, measurement and analytics, again, influences the 
effectiveness of the company’s processes. Through a large-
scale survey, sample data has been collected. The number of 
variables in the questionnaire has then been reduces by 
applying an EFA. Afterwards, the factors have been converted 
into latent variables. The connections between these variables 
have then been evaluated with a Confirmatory Factor Analysis 
(CFA) using SmartPLS. Three of the seven hypotheses have 
been confirmed. Consequently, the research identifies a 
direction on how BI influences CPM, but the specific 
mechanisms who do so are not discussed or defined.  
Hartl et al. [5] also developed a hypotheses based research 
framework. The framework assumed detailed relationships 
between BI and CPM. They expected that data quality and 
provision as well as pre-defined data analysis on the BI side 
of a company have a positive impact on the existence of 
closed-loop business processes on the CPM side of a 
company. Furthermore, technical data and method integration 
on the BI side of a firm is believed to have a positive impact 
on organizational alignment within the CPM.  Eventually, the 
usage of extended collaborative and analytical functions is 
positively influencing CPM process effectiveness and process 
efficiency. All of these hypotheses have been confirmed, 
using an EFA first and a PLS-SEM analysis with SmartPLS 
second. Nevertheless, the detailed characteristics collected in 
the questionnaire regarding the development of BI and CPM 
in a company have only been used as the measurement 
construct of the PLS model. More detailed information 
contained in the data is not investigated. 
This research project complements the subject related 
work and uses the questionnaire based data of Hartl et al. [5]. 
Instead of proving a pre-defined construct and compacting 
information from the collected data, this research considers all 
the research criteria. The aim is to get detailed insights on the 
relationship between BI and CPM on questionnaire item basis. 
This allows the identification of specific BI characteristics, 
which support a successful CPM. A first approach has been 
presented in the research of Hartl and Jacob [1]. The authors 
present an association rule analysis, which is extended in this 
research.  
The aim of this case study is once more, to identify 
detailed information on the connection between BI and CPM. 
Exploratory Data Mining techniques are the used approach. 
As an alternative to SEM and grouping the questionnaire 
characteristics and measurement items describing BI and 
CPM together, all items are considered separately. It is 
supposed that this identifies patterns and structures that can 
explain the relationship between BI and CPM in more detail.  
C. Defintion of the Data Mining Problem 
Two main problems have been identified regarding the 
research project. Challenge number one is to identify the BI 
characteristics, which have a strong influence on CPM. Vice 
versa, it would be interesting to identify the CPM 
characteristics, which are strongly connected to BI.  
The second challenge is to identify if companies with a 
high BI development also have a high CPM development. 
Additionally, it would be interesting to identify extra factors – 
e.g., company size, BI provider used –, which influence the 
development of CPM and/or BI in German companies. 
Therefore, the following two research questions are 
defined: 
 
Research question 1: Which specific BI characteristics are 
most influential on CPM and which specific CPM 
characteristics are most affected by BI? 
 
Research question 2: Is a high development of BI related 
to a high development of CPM and are their certain 
characteristics that support a high development in both? 
 
According to the defined research questions, two Data 
Mining methods have been identified for analyses – 
Association Rule Discovery and cluster analysis. 
D. Data Selection 
This research is based on the findings of Hartl et al. [5], 
where a set of criteria that is seen as suitable to represent CPM 
on one hand, and BI on the other hand, has been identified 
(Table I). A study has been conducted in Germany, to bring 
the criteria of both fields together and to clarify the 
relationship between BI and CPM. Therefore, the identified 
criteria have been transformed into questionnaire items, which 
had to be answered on a five-point Likert scale. The anchor 
points at the ends of the scale have been “does not apply” and 
“fully applies” and an additional definition “applies half and 
half” for the mid stage has been defined. The data collection 
has taken place from December 2014 until March 2015 using 
telephone interviews and an online questionnaire. Subjects 
were German companies who use BI for supporting their 
performance management. For this reason, decision makers 
from management, controlling and IT were addressed. In total 
169 questionnaires were completed resulting in a response rate 
of 11.3%. The participating companies are mainly mid-sized 
62
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

to large German firms belonging to the manufacturing 
industry [5]. 
E. Data Pre-processing and Data Mining 
Before applying the analysis, the data has been screened 
for outliers and missing values. In total, the proportion of 
missing values is at 12%. As the dataset contains of many 
items and the missing values are balanced across the data set, 
it was decided to impute the missing values using the kNN 
approach. The procedure described in Section 3 has directly 
been implemented in RapidMiner. Additionally, no severe 
outliers have been detected and all cases in the data set could 
be included in the analysis. 
1) Association 
Analysis 
[1]: 
Association 
Rule 
Discovery is a popular pattern discovery method [2]. With 
association rules, co-occurrence relationships between data 
items can be discovered, taking into account as many research 
items as needed and available [15]. This indeed can lead on 
the upside to results that are more detailed and on the 
downside to an enormous amount of discovered association 
rules. Unmanageable amounts of association rules easily can 
be organized by instating measures to evaluate and select rules 
based on their potential interestingness for the researcher [2]. 
These interestingness measures include Lift, Support and 
Confidence [15][28].  
To generate association rules, many algorithms are 
available. The FP-Growth algorithm is the classic procedure 
used in RapidMiner. The algorithm works in two main steps 
[3]. In the first step, an FP-tree is generated. The FP-tree has 
a root node, which is usually marked by Null. Then, a separate 
node is built for each item. The algorithm calculates the 
relative frequency of the occurrence of the items in the data 
set. Afterwards, all cases are viewed and the items are ordered  
BI items 
CPM items 
BI1_1: Clear roles and responsibilities for operating the BI systems 
CPM1_1: Business management processes are transparent and traceable for 
managers 
BI1_2: Data consistency (“Single Version of the Truth”) 
CPM1_2: Business management process are documented throughout the 
company 
BI1_3: 24/7 operation of the BI systems 
CPM1_3: Business management processes are communicated throughout 
the company 
BI1_4: Only compulsory BI tools are used 
CPM2_1: Business management processes base on a common database 
BI1_5: Data integrity during simultaneous use 
CPM2_2: Management methods are fully automated and linked without 
manual support 
BI1_6: Clear roles and responsibilities for the BI-development between the 
company’s departments and the IT throughout the whole enterprise 
CPM2_3: Data in business management processes are complete 
BI1_7: BI-architecture is documented 
CPM2_4: Decision makers manual expenditure to edit reports is marginal  
BI1_8: Master data changes are traceable 
CPM3_1: Data in business management processes are relevant 
BI1_9: BI relevant master data can be saved in various versions 
CPM3_2: Data in business management processes are current  
BI2_1: Use of feature set for predictive forecasting 
CPM3_3: Effective use of external data (market data) 
BI2_2: Use of feature set for describing data analysis 
CPM4_1: Alignment of business management processes across all business 
functions 
BI2_3: Use of feature set for information visualization 
CPM4_2: Alignment of business management processes across all business 
units 
BI3_1: Use of applications for scenario modelling 
CPM4_3: Alignment of strategic and operational planning 
BI3_2: Use of applications for statistical analysis 
CPM5_1: Use of measurable indicators in all business functions 
BI4_1: Each BI project is carried out using a standardized procedure model 
CPM5_2: Use of measurable indicators in all business units 
BI4_2: Each BI project bases on a standardized design method 
CPM5_3: Use of measurable indicators in all operational business 
processes 
BI4_3: Documentation standards for BI projects are clearly defined 
CPM5_4: Use of measurable indicators in all strategic business processes 
BI4_4: BI projects use agility 
CPM6_1: Existence of feedback loops in operational business processes 
(e.g., complaint management) 
BI5_1: Use of applications for adding describing comments 
CPM6_2: Existence of feedback loops in strategy development (adjustment 
of vision, mission and the company’s strategy to environmental changes) 
BI5_2: Use of applications for sharing comments throughout the enterprise 
CPM6_3: Existence of feedback loops in strategic planning processes 
BI5_3: Use of applications for automatic text processing and Text Mining 
 
BI6_1: Denotations and spellings are standardized in the BI databases 
 
BI6_2: BI tools for strategic business management are interoperable 
 
BI6_3: Manual expenditures for ensuring standardized spelling and 
denotations are marginal 
 
BI7_1: Applications for mobile usage of the BI Systems are available 
 
BI7_2: Applications for the mobile usage of the BI Systems are used 
 
BI8_1: Use of BI applications for implementing alerts linked to automated 
workflow data  in operational business processes 
 
BI8_2: Use of BI applications for implementing alerts linked to automated 
workflow data in strategic business processes 
 
TABLE I:  
OVERVIEW OF THE BI AND CPM ITEMS [5] 
63
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

in a tree structure. In the second step, frequent item sets are 
directly extracted from the FP-tree. For each item a separate 
FP-tree is generated, which is evaluated from the leaves 
towards the tree root. Only items meeting the previously 
defined minimum Support are then recapped as a rule (please 
refer to Han et al. [3], pp. 257 for a detailed graphical 
description of the FP-Growth algorithm). After generating the 
frequent item set, association rules can be generated through 
a Rapid Miner operator. The overall rule interestingness is 
measured through the Confidence measure [15]. 
The FP-Growth algorithm needs binary data. Therefore, 
the data has to be transformed into binary variables. 
RapidMiner can do this transformation directly. The 
questionnaire characteristics “does not apply” to “applies half 
and half” (1-3) have been transformed to does not apply and 
“does apply” and “fully applies” (4-5) to does apply. 
 Furthermore, the minimum levels for the interestingness 
measures have been defined. Only association rules (X→Y) 
with a minimum Support≥0.6 have been considered as 
interesting. This means that in at least 60% of all the cases in 
the data set the rule has to show [28]. The confidence level has 
been set at Confidence≥0.7. This determines that in at least 
70% of the cases in the data set where the first part of the rule 
(X) is shown, the second part of the rule (Y) has to show as 
well [16]. The measure Lift needs to be Lift>1 to indicate a 
positive correlation between the items of a rule [3]. Regarding 
the minimum settings of the measures, 103 association rules 
have been discovered.  
Association rules do not imply causality. They find items 
that imply the presence of other items [2]. As the research 
focus is on the benefits of BI for CPM, the attention lies on 
association rules beginning with BI items, leaving 52 
association rules for evaluation. The association rules with the 
highest Support are shown in Table II. 
It is conspicuous that especially the CPM items Data in 
business management processes are relevant and Data in 
business management processes are current apply in a 
company, if specific BI items apply too. In more detail, these 
two CPM items most likely apply in a company, if in addition 
to the items in Table II the following BI items apply as well: 
 
Data consistency (“Single Version of the Truth”), 
 
Only compulsory BI tools are used, 
 
Master data changes are traceable, 
 
Clear roles and responsibilities for the BI-
development between the company’s departments and 
the IT throughout the whole enterprise. 
In addition, the BI item Use of applications for automatic 
text processing and Text Mining is found in combination rules 
with the item Clear roles and responsibilities for operating 
with the BI system and Data integrity during simultaneous use 
(Table III). Different from these two, Use of applications for 
automatic text processing and Text Mining has the 
characteristic does not apply. Still, the CPM items Data in 
business management processes are relevant and Data in 
business management processes are current apply, indicating 
that data currency and relevance is not influences by the usage 
of Text Mining and context processing tools.  
Furthermore, the association rules illustrate that: 
 
Use of BI applications for implementing alerts linked 
to automated workflow data in strategic business 
processes does not apply, 
 
Use of applications for sharing comments throughout 
the enterprise does not apply, 
 
Use of applications for adding describing comments 
does not apply, 
 
Use of applications for automatic text processing and 
Text Mining does not apply 
BI items 
 
CPM items 
Interestingness 
Data integrity during simultaneous use=applies 
→ 
Data in business management processes are 
relevant=applies 
Support=0.83 
Confidence=0.92 
Clear roles and responsibilities for operating the BI systems=applies 
→ 
Data in business management processes are 
relevant=applies 
Support=0.80 
Confidence=0.93 
Data integrity during simultaneous use=applies 
→ 
Data in business management processes are 
current=applies 
Support=0.78 
Confidence=0.86 
Data integrity during simultaneous use=applies  
AND 
Clear roles and responsibilities for operating the BI systems=applies 
→ 
Data in business management processes are 
relevant=applies 
Support=0.76 
Confidence=0.93 
Data integrity during simultaneous use=applies 
→ 
Data in business management processes are 
relevant=applies  
AND 
Data in business management processes are current 
=applies 
Support=0.74 
Confidence=0.83 
Clear roles and responsibilities for operating the BI systems=applies 
→ 
Data in business management processes are 
current=applies 
Support=0.74 
Confidence=0.86 
Clear roles and responsibilities for operating the BI systems=applies 
→ 
Data in business management processes are 
relevant=applies  
AND 
Data in business management processes are current 
=applies 
Support=0.73 
Confidence=0.84 
24/7 operation of the BI systems=applies 
→ 
Data in business management processes are 
relevant=applies 
Support=0.70 
Confidence=0.91 
TABLE II:  
STRONGEST ASSOCIATION RULES (RULE BODY CONTAINS OF BI ITEMS ONLY) [1] 
64
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the CPM item Management methods are fully automated and 
linked without manual support does not apply as well (Table 
III). 
2) 
Cluster Analysis: Clustering attempts to find 
patterns and groups in research criteria [2]. The data are 
organized without previous knowledge of potential groups 
and are arranged by means of their similarity [15]. The objects 
belonging to one group are as much as possible homogenous 
[15]. The groups, however, are as heterogeneous as possible 
[15]. In clustering, all attributes available can be used in 
parallel. This offers a detailed view of the cluster features and 
enables a thorough view on the relations between BI and 
CPM. Clustering can be done by defining a similarity and 
distance measure, which is also known as proximity measure. 
Interesting results regarding the research data are believed to 
be accomplished by using the k-means algorithm as it is a 
well-known partitioning algorithm [29]. The algorithm works 
in 5 main steps [3][30]. 
1. From a data set k ojects are identified as the centre 
of k clusters. Each k object is one data case (k is the 
number of clusters to be estracted from a data set). 
2. Every other data case from the dataset is then 
assigned to the k object - also calles cluster centre - 
it is most similar to. This can be measured based on 
the Euclidean distance between the data case and the 
cluster mean (for further details on the Eucledian 
Distance or alternative proximity measures, please 
refer to Han et al. [3] or Cleve and Lämmel [15]). 
3.  After assigning each data case to one cluster, a new 
cluster centre is calculated.  
4. All data cases are then reassignes to one of the new 
cluster centres and new clusters are built.  
5. The above process is continued until there are no 
more changes in the cluster centres and the 
compilation of the clusters. 
The number of clusters k is to be chosen beforehand by 
the researcher.  
In the case study, the k-means algorithm has been applied 
using k=2, k=3 and k=4, resulting in the most interesting 
output using k=3. Regarding, the data set has been divided 
into 3 clusters – Cluster 1, Cluster 2 and Cluster 3. An extract 
of the results is visually displayed in Fig. 2. The horizontal 
axes of the graph shows the items evaluated in the 
questionnaire. The vertical axes shows the encoded answers 
to these questions. For the Likert scale formatted BI and CPM 
items, number 1 is encoded as “does not apply”, 3 as “applies 
half and half” and 5 as “totally applies”. The numbers in 
between stand for middle stages. For the supporting 
questions, each number encodes an answering option. Table 
IV explains the codes and their meaning in detail. 
Cluster 1 contains of 43 cases. The status and 
development in CPM and BI is assessed as mainly positive. 
Besides the characteristic Management methods are fully 
automated and linked without manual support (CPM2_2) 
CPM is weighed as continuously well developed and only the 
BI areas 
Second Set of Association Rules 
BI items 
 
CPM items 
Interestingness 
Use of BI applications for implementing alerts linked to automated 
workflow data in strategic business processes=does not apply 
→ 
Management methods are fully automated and 
linked without manual support=does not apply 
Support=0.64 
Confidence=0.85 
Use of applications for sharing comments throughout the 
enterprise=does not apply 
→ 
Management methods are fully automated and 
linked without manual support=does not apply 
Support=0.63 
Confidence=0.85 
Use of applications for adding describing comments=does not apply 
→ 
Management methods are fully automated and 
linked without manual support=does not apply 
Support=0.60 
Confidence=0.85 
Use of applications for aromatic text processing and Text 
Mining=does not apply  
AND 
Use of applications for sharing comments throughout the 
enterprise=does not apply 
→ 
Management methods are fully automated and 
linked without manual support=does not apply 
Support=0.60 
Confidence=0.86 
Third Set of Association Rules 
BI items 
 
CPM items 
Interestingness 
Clear roles and responsibilities operating the BI system=applies  
AND 
Use of applications for automated text processing and Text 
Mining=does not apply 
→ 
Data in business management processes are 
relevant=applies 
Support=0.68 
Confidence=0.92 
Clear roles and responsibilities for operating the BI systems=applies 
AND  
Data integrity during simultaneous use =applied  
AND 
Use of applications for automated text processing and Text 
Mining=does not apply 
→ 
Data in business management processes are 
relevant=applies 
Support=0.64 
Confidence=0.92 
Clear roles and responsibilities operating the BI system=applies  
AND 
Use of applications for automated text processing and Text 
Mining=does not apply 
→ 
Data in business management processes are 
relevant=applies  
AND 
Data in business management processes are current 
=applies 
Support=0.61 
Confidence=0.82 
TABLE III:  
SECOND AND THIRS SET OF STRONG ASSOCIATION RULES (RULE BODY CONTAINS OF BI ITEMS ONLY) 
65
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Use of applications for adding describing comments 
(BI5_1), 
 
Use 
of 
applications 
for 
sharing 
comments 
throughout the enterprise (BI5_2) and 
 
Use of applications for automatic text processing 
and Text Mining (BI5_3) 
are evaluated with a critical tendency. Over 55% of the 
TABLE IV:      CODING OF THE SUPPORTING VARIABLES 
Pos  
Position in the 
company 
1 – Management 
2 – Middle Management 
3 – Lower Management 
Ber 
Area of work in the 
company 
1 – Company Management 
2 – Managerial Accounting 
3 – Financial Accounting 
4 – Sales and Distribution 
5 – Information Technology 
Um  
Company revenue 
1 – Below 10 million € 
2 – Between 10 and 50 million € 
3 – Between 50 and 125 million € 
4 – Between 125 and 500 million € 
5 – Above 500 million € 
Ma 
Number of full-
time Employees 
1 – Below 50 Employees 
2 – Between 50 and 250 Employees 
3 – Between 250 and 1000 Employees 
4 – Between 1000 and 5000 Employees 
5 – Above 5000 Employees 
ERP 
Throughout the 
company, ERP 
software from the 
same provider 
1 – Yes 
2 – No 
BI 
Throughout the 
company, BI 
software from the 
same provider 
1 – Yes 
2 - No 
 
questioned companies in the cluster stated to have above 
1000 full-time employees. Almost half of these 55% even 
have above 5000 full-time employees. The annual turnover is 
exceeding 125 million Euro. The ERP and BI software used 
in the companies is primarily from the same producer and 
over 70% of the cases only use BI software from the same 
producer across the whole enterprise.  
Cluster 2 can be described as the least developed in both BI 
and CPM. It contains of 36 cases. The CPM items Data in 
business management processes are current (CPM3_1) and 
Data in business management processes are relevant 
(CPM3_2) have a positive tendency in their development. 
The other CPM items are rather not distinctive. The same can 
be found in regards to the BI items. Only the items Clear 
roles and responsibilities in operating with the BI Systems 
(BI1_1), 24/7 operation of the BI Systems (BI1_3) and Data 
integrity during simultaneous use (BI1_5) are positively 
distinctive in the sample. The cases of this cluster comprise 
companies of all sizes. The same can be said for the annual 
revenue:  
 
22% of the cases have an annual revenue below 
125 million Euros,  
 
33% of the cases have an annual turnover between 
125 million - 500 million Euro, 
 
33% have an annual revenue above 500 million 
Euro and  
 
11% did not specify their annual turnover. 
Predominantly, this cluster shows non-uniform BI software 
throughout the company. The ERP and BI software used 
throughout the company are mainly from different producers 
as well. 
Cluster 3 consists of 90 cases. The situation and 
development of BI and CPM in the companies is assessed 
more critically than in Cluster 1 but more positively than in 
Cluster 2 (Figure 2). The items are continuously ranked as 
medium developed, but with a positive tendency. Especially 
the first couple of BI items (item BI1_1 until BI1_9), which 
can be grouped under the topic Data Quality and Provision 
1
1,5
2
2,5
3
3,5
4
4,5
5
CPM1_1
CPM1_2
CPM1_3
CPM2_1
CPM2_2
CPM2_3
CPM2_4
CPM3_1
CPM3_2
CPM3_3
CPM4_1
CPM4_2
CPM4_3
CPM5_1
CPM5_2
Cpm5_3
CPM5_4
CPM6_1
CPM6_2
CPM6_3
BI1_1
BI1_2
BI1_3
BI1_4
BI1_5
BI1_6
BI1_7
BI1_8
BI1_9
BI2_1
BI2_2
BI2_3
BI3_1
BI3_2
BI3_1
BI4_2
BI4_3
BI4_4
BI5_1
BI5_2
BI5_3
BI6_1
BI6_2
BI6_3
BI7_1
BI7_2
BI8_1
BI8_2
Pos
Ber
Um
MA
ERP
BI
Cluster1
Cluster2
Cluster3
Figure 2.  3-Cluster solution using k-means clustring in RapidMiner 
66
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

have an obvious positive tendency in their distinction. The BI 
items measuring  
 
Flexible Modelling and Analysis (items BI3_1 and 
BI3_2),  
 
Rule-based implementation of BI-projects (items 
BI4_1 to BI4_4),  
 
Information enrichment through unstructured Data 
(item BI5_1 till item BI5_3) and  
 
Event-driven flow of Information (items BI8_1 and 
BI8_2)  
are weighted below applies half and half. They can be 
identified as the BI problem areas in Cluster 3. In CPM, an 
obvious problem area is the item Management methods are 
fully automated and linked without manual support 
(CPM2_2). The cluster concentrates together medium-sized 
and big companies, with more than 70% of them having 
between 500 and 5000 employees. The enterprises in the 
cluster mainly use the same BI software throughout the 
company, but almost 65% specified that their ERP systems 
and their BI systems are not from the same producer.  
F. Result Evaluation and Interpretation 
CPM is a management strategy for decision support [31]. 
This support is achieved by using measures and Key 
Performance Indicators (KPI’s) from data. Decision makers 
and managers use the information gained from data to 
monitor the companies target achievements. If necessary, the 
strategy, the processes and the goals are adjusted to ensure 
the company’s survival and success. 
1) Association Analysis [1]: Data is the quintessence in 
CPM but only useful if provided when needed and of high 
quality. The association rules show that if BI items related to 
the subject of data quality and data provision (e.g., Data 
consistency, Data integrity during simultaneous use) are well 
established in a company the Data in the business 
management processes are relevant and current. The rules 
illustrate the connection between data and the business 
management processes and therefore the connection between 
BI and CPM. Supported with high quality data, decision 
makers can act and rely on actionable information to manage 
the enterprise. The rules underline the function of BI as a 
decision support tool needed for a successful CPM. The 
concentration on business management processes as the CPM 
part of the rule highlights the understanding of CPM as a 
multiplicity of business management processes connected 
and integrated into each other [30]. If the processes in a 
company are managed, based on needed high quality data, it 
is the initial point for an overall effective CPM.  
Nevertheless, a CPM strategy is not implemented in one 
run. The implementation is a slow process carried out in sub-
steps [31]. The focus of the association rules on Data in 
business management processes is relevant and current 
supports this. The rules indicate that initially the attention has 
to lie on each management processes separately. Once a 
company is working on high quality data when needed, a 
good connection of the management processes throughout 
the enterprise is possible. The lack of association rules 
containing further CPM items might be an indicator for 
companies in Germany still working on implementing a 
thorough performance management.  
The second set of association rules discovered that if no 
opportunity to use and share comments within an enterprise 
and no opportunities to use unstructured data are given, a full 
automation and linkage of the company’s management 
methods without manual support is not given either. 
Management 
methods 
are 
ideally accepted 
process 
descriptions for dealing with certain issues (e.g., Balanced 
Scorecard) [31]. These methods can only be successful if 
goal-oriented, understood and used continuously [31]. 
Consequently, management methods need defined measures 
and data analysis. For all measures to be useful, a reference 
magnitude is needed, which can be supplied by adding and 
sharing comments. Furthermore, the association rules imply 
that fully automated management and planning methods are 
dependent on the use of comments for ensuring transparency 
as well. Only if supported by describing comments, 
automated management processes and planning methods are 
understandable throughout a company and the need for 
manual support is minimalized.  
Text Mining enables knowledge discovery from semi-
structured or unstructured data. This is a rather advanced 
analysis method of BI and the rules indicate that if there is no 
or not much usage of automatic text processing and Text 
Mining, Data in business management processes are still 
relevant and current but the Management methods are not 
fully automated or linked without manual support. Text 
Mining is an advanced research method used to gain new 
information from texts. The association rules suggest that this 
feature of BI is not important for data currency and relevance 
in business management processes. Therefore, it might to be 
ignored in the establishment process of CPM. However, it 
seems to be interesting once an automation of management 
methods without manual support wants to be achieved.  
The association rules discovered only comprise 3 
different CPM related items Data in business management 
processes are current, Data in business management 
processes are relevant and Management methods are fully 
automated and linked without manual support. This awakes 
the awareness that BI is not the only information-
technological support in companies. Enterprise Resource 
Planning Systems (ERP), Customer Relationship Systems 
(CRM) and Supply-Chain-Management System (SCM) also 
play an important role for a successful performance 
management. Before focusing on implementing a BI 
solution, the predominant step might be to focus on existing 
software first and afterwards built an effective BI solution on 
top. 
2) Cluster Analysis: The cluster analysis divided the 
data set into 3 clusters. Cluster 1 contains the companies, 
which show a high development in both BI and CPM. The 
companies in this group mainly have above 1000 full-time 
67
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

employees and are considered as big. The BI systems 
throughout the company are primarily uniform.  
Cluster 3 incorporates medium-sized to big companies, 
but generally with less employees then the ones in Cluster 1. 
The BI and CPM development is mediocre. The BI systems 
are uniform but ERP and BI software are mostly from 
different manufacturers.  
Cluster 2 comprises of a mixture of all company sizes but 
mainly medium-sized enterprises. They have by trend a less 
developed BI and CPM in common. BI and ERP software as 
well as the BI software generally are not uniform within the 
company.  
The results imply a connection between BI and CPM. 
Clusters with a bad development in one discipline also show 
a low distinction in the other discipline and vice versa. It 
seems that long established big companies are further in 
implementing both CPM and BI. Usually, companies with 
more resources invest earlier in new technologies than other 
enterprises. As well, they can employ experts to help them 
implement and use new technologies. This might be an 
explanation for the high development in both BI and CPM in 
Cluster 1.  
The results further show that medium-sized companies 
are generally not as experienced in BI. BI characteristics 
dealing with data quality and data provision are well 
developed as well, but the medium to low distinction of 
characteristics including supportive BI techniques and tools 
indicate no current usage. This is reflected on the CPM side 
with a low development of the overall connection between 
the business management processes. 
In addition, the patterns in the data set also indicate that 
in Germany, there are companies of all sizes who struggle 
with CPM and BI. All clusters discovered differ in the 
handling of BI and ERP software, which could be a reason 
for the struggle. Companies in Cluster 2 use different 
software from various manufacturers for BI and CPM. 
Additionally, the majority of the cases in this cluster declared 
that they are not using uniform BI software throughout the 
company (more than 76%). Instead, the majority of 
companies in Cluster 1 claimed to use ERP and BI software 
from the same brand as well as uniform BI software across 
the whole enterprise. Uniform BI software reduces 
unnecessary interfaces and ensures that throughout the 
company the same data and numbers are used for decision 
support. Inferentially, this facilitates advantages for CPM by 
providing transparency, which supports the formation of 
feedback loops in operational and strategic processes. 
The results of the Data Mining analysis answer the 
research questions and can support practitioners in building a 
successful BI solution. The identified association rules point 
out the BI characteristics, which are most related to a high 
development of certain CPM characteristics. The cluster 
analysis identified three different clusters with a different 
distinction of BI and CPM development. Therefore, a clear 
connection between BI and CPM can be recognized as well 
as additional items influencing a high development of both – 
BI and CPM.  
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The main goal of the previously published research by 
Hartl and Jacob [1] and this extended version has been to 
explore if Data Mining techniques can provide more detailed 
insights to IS research subjects. Association Rule Discovery 
and cluster analysis have been applied to the questionnaire 
based data set collected by Hartl et al. [5]. The aim was to 
explore, if these Data Mining procedures can extract even 
more information from the given data set.   
In fact, information that is more detailed has been 
extracted from the data set. While in a PLS analysis all 
research items seem to matter equally, the association rule 
analysis showed that there are a handful of characteristics on 
BI and CPM side, which seem to be most related. For 
example, the business management processes do profit 
especially from a well-functioning BI - in detail, the existence 
of clear roles and responsibilities for operating the BI system 
and data integrity during simultaneous use. With this 
background, companies can analyze and improve their 
regarding 
BI 
development 
to 
ideally 
support 
the 
organizational alignment of their business processes. The 
results indicate that this is one of the first steps to a well-
functioning CPM supported through BI. 
In addition, the cluster analysis offered interesting results 
contained in the data set. Besides the BI and CPM related 
characteristics, 
the 
questionnaire 
contained 
general 
information about the company too (e.g., company size, 
software difference and similarities between ERP and BI 
systems used throughout the company). With cluster 
analysis, this information can be put into context with the 
CPM and BI characteristics evaluated. The results showed 
that a good development in BI and CPM is rather given, if the 
BI and ERP tools used within a company are from the same 
software developer. 
In comparison to the subject related research, the results 
of the Data Mining approach show different and more 
detailed information about the connection of BI and CPM. 
Besides simply proving a positive relationship, the research 
outcomes allow conclusions on a path of action for 
practitioners. Although these inferences still need further 
investigation in practice, it has been possible to identify the 
BI and CPM items with the strongest connection. 
Furthermore, an already collected data set has been re-used 
and more insights could be gained about a previously 
investigated subject.  
The Data Mining approach presents itself as a suitable 
addition to exploring the connection between BI and CPM. 
Inferentially, the results support the assumption that Data 
Mining methods are in general suitable for IS research 
subjects. In addition to reanalyze previously collected 
questionnaire data, Data Mining could support IS research 
without collecting data especially for the research purpose. 
68
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Data Mining methods like Text Mining and Web Mining 
might allow a totally different approach to IS research topics. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
The Data Mining approach to the research area of BI and 
CPM has been successful. Nevertheless, this research still 
presents an early attempt in exploring the usage of Data 
Mining in IS research. It might be possible, that different 
clustering and/or association algorithms are a better fit to 
explore data in a Likert scale format. Hence, future research 
should evaluate and compare the results of different 
algorithms when applying Data Mining to questionnaire 
based data sets. Additionally, this research only applies 
Association Rule Discovery and cluster analysis to a 
relatively small data set. Due to the nature of Data Mining it 
is well possible that even slightly bigger data sets (200 and 
more cases) could lead to improved and even more results.  
A next step in continuation of this research will be the 
application of Data Mining to other IS related research topics. 
It will be interesting to see, if similar results can be obtained. 
Therefore, given data sets will be evaluated using similar 
Data Mining applications. If indeed more information can be 
extracted from each given data sets, many existing researches 
can benefit.  
Another interesting future research will be the application 
of Data Mining applications as a first approach towards an IS 
research topic. Text Mining and Web Mining offer the 
extraction of information from existing sources. In Text 
Mining the goal is to extract high quality data from texts [3]. 
In the IS research field the major part of information is 
available in text form, for example in the form of articles, 
digital libraries and books. The use of Text Mining could help 
to gain an overview of a research topic, structure information 
and detect new research fields. With Web Mining techniques, 
structured as well as unstructured online data can be analyzed 
[3]. Existing websites, media data and web usage data can be 
explored. Both applications offer IS researchers a huge 
opportunity by providing insights to IS related subjects 
without relying on test persons and questionnaires. 
Therefore, Text Mining and Web Mining applications should 
be tested to search for answers regarding current research 
questions. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
K. Hartl and O. Jacob, "Using Data Mining Techniques for 
Information System Research Purposes - An Exemplary 
Application in the Field of Business Intelligence and 
Corporate Performance Management," The Fith Conference 
on Data Analytics (Data Analytics 2016) IARIA, Oct. 2016. 
[2] 
K.-M. Osei-Bryson and O. Ngwenyama, eds. Advances in 
Research Methods for Information Systems Research. 
Springer-Verlag: New York, 2014. 
[3] 
J. Han, M. Kamber, and J. Pei, Data Mining: Concepts and 
Techniques. vol. 3. Waltham, USA: Morgan Kaufmann 
Publishers, 2012. 
[4] 
S. Rouhani, A. Ashrafi, A. Z. Ravasan, and S. Afshari, "The 
Impact Model of Business Intelligence on Decision Support 
and 
Organizational 
Benefits," 
Enterprise 
Information 
Management, vol. 29(1), pp. 19-50, 2016.  
[5] 
K. Hartl, O. Jacob, F.H. Lien Mbep, A. Budree, and L. Fourie, 
"The Impact of Business Intelligence on Corporate 
Performance Management," The 49th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Science (HICSS 2016), Jan. 2016, pp. 
5041-5051. 
[6] 
G. Richards, W. Yeoh, A.Y.L. Chong, and A. Popovič, "An 
Empirical Study of Business Intelligence Impact on Corporate 
Performance Management," The Pacific Asia Conference on 
Information Systems (PACIS 2014), 2014, Paper 341. 
[7] 
R. Weiber and D. Mühlhaus, Structural Equation Modelling. 
2nd ed., Berlin Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2014. 
[8] 
K. Backhaus, B. Erichson, W. Plinke, and R. Weiber, 
Multivariate Analysis Methods. An Application-oriented 
Introduction. vol. 13. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag. 
2011. 
[9] 
N. Urbach and F. Ahlemann, "Structural Equation Modeling 
in Information Systems Research Using Partial Least 
Squares," Journal of Information Technology Theory and 
Application, vol. 11(2), Article 2, 2010.  
[10] E. Vinzi, W. W. Chin, J. Henseler and H. Wang, eds.  
Handbook of Partial Least Squares: Concepts, Methods and 
Applications. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 2010. 
[11] J. F. Hair, M. Sarstedt, L. Hopkins, and V.G. Kuppelwieser, 
"Partial leats squares structurl equation modeling (PLS-
SEM)," European Business Review, vol. 26(2), 2014. 
[12] J. Jackson, "Data Mining: A Conceptual Overview," 
Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 
vol. 8,  2002. 8: pp. 267-296. 
[13] A. J. Stolzer and C. Harlford, "Data Mining Methods Applied 
to Flight Operations Quality Assurance Data: A Comparison 
to 
Standard 
Statistical 
Methods," 
Journal 
of 
Air 
Transportation, vol. 12(1), pp. 6-24, 2007.  
[14] M. L. Gargano and B.G. Raggad, "Data mining ‐ a powerful 
information creating tool," OCLC Systems & Services: 
International digital library perspectives, vol. 15(2), pp. 81-90, 
1999. 
[15] J. Cleve and U. Lämmel, Data Mining. vol. 2. Berlin: Walter 
de Gruyter GmbH, 2016. 
[16] S. Natek and M. Zwilling, "Data Mining for Small Student 
Data Set – Knowledge Management Sytem for Higher 
Education Teachers," The International Conference for 
Management, Learning and Knowledge, Jun. 2013, pp. 1379-
1398. 
[17] P. Chapman, J. Clinton, R. Kerber, T. Khabaza, T. Reinartz, 
C. Shearer, et al., "CRISP-DM 1.0," SPSS Inc., 2000, 
Available 
from: 
https://www.the-modeling-
agency.com/crisp-dm.pdf. 
[18] D. W. Joenssen and T. Müllerleile, "Missing Data in Data 
Mining," HMD Praxis der Wirtschaftsinformatik, vol. 51(4), 
pp. 458-468, 2014. 
[19] M. Aho, "The Distinction between Business Intelligence and 
Corporate Performance Management - A Literature Study 
Combined with Empirical Findings," The Mini Conference on 
Scientific Publishing (MCSP 2010), 2010. 
[20] M. Hannula and V. Pirttimäki, "Business Intelligence: 
Empirical Study on Top 50 Finnish Companies," Journal of 
American Academy of Business, vol. 2(2), pp. 593-599, 2003. 
[21] S. Negash, "Business Intelligence," Communications of the 
Association for Information Systems, vol. 13(1), pp. 177 - 
195, 2004. 
69
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[22] S. Williams and N. Williams, "The Business Value of 
Business Intelligence," Business Intelligence Journal, vol. 8, 
pp. 30-39, 2003. 
[23] S. Miranda, "Beyond BI: Benefiting from CPM Solutions," 
Financial Executive, vol. 20(2),  2004.  
[24] J. Becker, D. Maßing, and C. Janiesch, "An evolutionary 
process model for introducing Corporate Performance 
Management Systems," Data Warehousing, pp. 247-276 
2006. 
[25] F. H. Lien Mbep, O. Jacob, and L. Fourie, "Critical Success 
Factors of Corporate Performance Management (CPM): 
Literature Study and Empirical Findings," The Sixth 
International 
Conference 
on 
Business 
Intelligence and Technology (BUSTECH 2015), March 2015. 
[26] N. Yogev, L. Fink, and A. Even, "How Business Intelligence 
Creates Value," The European Conference on Information 
Sytems (ECIS 2012), Paper 84, 2012. 
[27] R. A. Saed, "The Relationship between Business Intelligence 
and Business Success: An Investigation in Firms in Sharjah 
Emirate," American Journal of Business and Management, 
vol. 2(4), pp. 332-339, 2013. 
[28] R. M. Müller and H.-J. Lenz, Business Intelligence. Berlin 
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2013. 
[29] B. Liu, Web Data Mining: Exploring Hyperlinks, Contents, 
and Usage Data. vol. 2. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 
2011. 
[30] M. Lang, ed. Handbook of Business Intelligence: Potentials, 
Strategies, Best Practices. vol. 1. Düsseldorf: Symposium, 
2015. 
[31] K. Oehler, Corporate Performance Management with 
Business Intelligence Tools. Carl Hanser Verlag: München, 
2006. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
70
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 1 & 2, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

