Situated Abilities within Universal Design – A Theoretical Exploration 
The Case of the T-ABLE – A Robotic Wooden Table 
 
Diana, Saplacan, Jo Herstad 
Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
{dianasa; johe}@ifi.uio.no 
Trenton Schulz 
Department of Applied Research in Technology 
Norwegian Computing Center 
Oslo, Norway 
trenton@nr.no
 
 
Abstract—This paper investigates Universal Design through the 
idea of designing for situated abilities, rather than focusing on 
designing for disabled users. This shift in perspective from dis-
abilities to abilities is explored by designing a domestic robot 
that familiarly integrates into our homes. We explore the con-
cept of designing for situated abilities through a proof-of-concept 
robotic wooden table, the T-ABLE, as an alternative design for 
domestic robots. Finally, the paper identifies four dimensions of 
situated abilities. 
Keywords-robotic wooden table; design; Universal Design; situ-
ated ability; elderly. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper reports further on our previous work [1][2][3] 
on investigating the use of robots in the homes of the elderly. 
It presents a proof-of-concept robot design, illustrating design 
for situated abilities. The design and the embedded concept of 
situated abilities represent an alternative way of thinking 
about, discussing, and designing with a focus on human be-
ings’ abilities in terms of everyday situations, rather than fo-
cusing on their disabilities.  
Specifically, this study investigates an alternative design 
for domestic robots, such as wood-based designed robots, for 
better integration in the home environment. Thus, we present 
a proof-of-concept robotic wooden table called the T-ABLE. 
The name of the robotic table originates from the terms “table” 
and “able” or “abilities.” The design of the prototype itself is 
grounded in the original definition of Universal Design (UD), 
which addresses design that is suitable for as many individuals 
as possible. In this paper, we move beyond the idea of UD 
associated with disabilities and propose a shift in perspective 
to a new dimension of UD, namely one focusing on designing 
for situated abilities. We argue that individuals' abilities are 
strongly connected with the context and situations they find 
themselves in. At the same time, familiar things can represent 
a good point of departure for designing for abilities rather than 
disabilities.  
Thus, the research question in this paper is: How can we 
shift perspective from disabilities to abilities when talking 
about Universal Design? This research question can be ex-
plored in many ways. One approach is to explore how we can 
design domestic robots that fit humans' abilities and integrate 
into individuals’ homes in a familiar way. 
The paper continues in Section II by presenting the back-
ground of this work. Section III includes a presentation of re-
lated work where the current research on abilities in design is 
discussed. Section IV focuses on the theoretical grounding for 
situated abilities. Section V presents our work in detail as it 
impacts the elderly in terms of the Multimodal Elderly Care 
Systems (MECS) project, leading to this study’s proof-of-con-
cept. Section VI provides a discussion around the initial stated 
research question, the proof-of-concept design, and situated 
abilities. Section VII includes the conclusion and further work 
to close the article.  
II. 
BACKGROUND 
This section presents the current state-of-the-art regarding 
the use of robots in the home. We continue thereafter by de-
fining Universal Design (UD) and explaining the lack of a 
legal framework for UD for robots to be used in the public 
sector, such as healthcare or homecare services. We end the 
section by stating the motivation for the study before pro-
ceeding further with related work.  
A. State-of-the-Art 
Several studies have developed theoretical frameworks 
used in studying robots in the home, such as the product ecol-
ogy framework [4][5], the Domestic Robot Ecology [6], the 
facilitation framework [7], and the automation of work tasks 
framework [8]. We have learned from these studies investi-
gating domestic robots’ use that individuals will often carry 
out changes inside their homes to fit a robotic product.  
At the same time, Dautenhahn [9] argues that the Human-
Robot Interaction (HRI) community’s current focus should be 
on user studies, along with HRI design, theory, and methods. 
She argues that the HRI community has moved forward from 
the classification of robots and “variation” in robots. She says 
that the HRI communities should focus instead on long-term 
interaction with robots in “real-world environments” with 
“real people” (p. 4:2). She says that this shift in focus from the 
use of robots in the labs or living labs to the use of robots in 
real environments with real people move also focus from stud-
ies on investigating short-term interactions to long-term inter-
action between the human and the robot. She argues that re-
searchers should study and learn from real people’s use and 
engagement in real situations. 
278
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Moreover, we have also learned from the previous studies 
that the studies focus on using the product, rather than on the 
human, or the user using the product and its abilities to handle 
the situation at hand [5]. Compared to these previous studies, 
our study proposes looking at the interaction between individ-
uals and the robotic product from a socio-relational perspec-
tive [10]. Our study also focuses on the individual’s experi-
enced abilities and the design of a domestic robot in the 
context of the abilities of the elderly (not their disabilities!) as 
the point of departure for our design. 
Earlier studies show that once moving devices are intro-
duced in the home, such as a robot vacuum cleaner, several 
fundamental changes need to be made in terms of the structure 
and infrastructure of the home [2][5][6]. If the design of a ro-
botic product is good enough, however, the human should not 
have to adapt to the product itself: the robot should integrate 
itself into the home environment. However, just a few of the 
current designs of domestic robots fit the home environment 
and integrate well within existing home environments. For in-
stance, some studies have explored the idea that aesthetics, 
functionality, and robot design should fit in with the human 
context. Such an example is PARO, a robot with a seal ap-
pearance used for older adults [11][12][13]. PARO seems to 
integrate well in home environments for the elderly, such as 
those who have Alzheimer’s, giving them feelings of calm 
with its plush appearance. Since an animal’s company has 
been shown to have beneficial psychological effects for relax-
ation, positive physiological effects, such as improving vital 
signs, and social effects among the elderly, PARO is proven 
in research to be a robotic example that fulfills these criteria 
[12]. It is recommended that elderly people with Alzheimer’s 
have pets around, but the people with Alzheimer’s are often 
unable to take care of a pet or even themselves. PARO is a 
good example of a robot fulfilling this need.  
In addition, other previous studies focus on humanoid ro-
bots, such as Nao and Pepper. Although these robots have a 
humanoid look, they also have a plastic appearance. Beyond 
cost and other physical properties, one reason for going with 
a plastic look could be to avoid a user’s feeling of uneasiness 
from the uncanny valley [14]. Studies have also shown that 
people assume different abilities and assign different attrib-
utes to robots depending on their appearance [14][15]. Others 
have suggested that a focus on the robot’s movement can turn 
people’s attention more to the movement than the robot’s ap-
pearance [17] even if the motion has the potential to make the 
uncanny valley effect more pronounced. 
B. Universal Design and Design of Robots 
UD is described as “the design of products and environ-
ments to be usable by all people, to the greatest extent possi-
ble, without the need for adaptation or specialized design” 
[18]. UD is based on seven core principles. These are indi-
cated and exemplified in TABLE .  
Many people often associate UD with people with disabil-
ities. Historically indeed, UD was often related to people with 
disabilities along with The Americans with Disability Act 
(ADA) [19]. These movements have greatly impacted the fo-
cus of UD on designing products and services that can be used 
by as many people as possible. According to the Norwegian 
Digitalization Agency, however, UD is about designing sur-
roundings that consider “variation in the functional ability of 
inhabitants, including people with disabilities” [20]. A univer-
sally designed solution aims to reach out to as many people as 
possible without the need for adapted solutions [20].  
Further, certain aspects of robotics, such as Socially As-
sistive Robotics (SAR), aim to help people with different con-
ditions such as Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD), dementia, 
and also in the area of care for the elderly [21], but this refers 
specifically to assistive technology for these particular groups. 
Aside from suggestions for incorporating UD as a way of 
making a robot work better in a home environment [22][23], 
UD is an underexplored area in Human-Robot Interaction 
(HRI) literature. Indeed, given the limits on a robot’s pro-
cessing capability, poor sensors, and limited movement, ro-
bots themselves might benefit from UD’s perspective. 
TABLE I. Universal Design Principles. 
# 
UD Principle 
Example objects in everyday use 
1 
Equitable use 
Use of a ramp for getting into a bus: it provides 
equal ability to step onto a bus for both people 
in a wheelchair and without a wheelchair, such 
as a woman with a stroller 
2 
Flexibility in 
use 
The use of a table with an adjustable height is 
good for both abled people, people with back 
problems, people sitting in wheelchairs, or 
children 
3 
Simple and 
intuitive use 
An iconic example is the iPhone design with its 
buttons in the same place in different versions.   
4 
Perceptible 
information 
Consistency in using symbols for volume or 
radio buttons, send- or save icons on buttons  
5 
Tolerance for 
error 
The undo button provides reliable feedback. 
Another example is the oven lock button for 
children’s safety. 
6 
Low physical 
effort 
The height of ATMs provides easy access and 
low physical effort for people of different 
heights, including children and people sitting in 
a wheelchair 
7 
Size and space 
for approach 
and use 
 The gates of a metro-station or security control 
at the airport should be large enough to 
accommodate individuals of different sizes, or 
people sitting in a wheelchair 
On the other hand, much of UD’s focus in ICT has been 
on making information accessible by applying the Web Con-
tent and Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) [24] when build-
ing web sites and mobile applications. Typically, a robot is not 
presenting information the same way that a computer or mo-
bile device would. Therefore, there is no straightforward way 
to apply the WCAG to a robot. For instance, Norwegian laws 
and regulations regarding UD in Norway [25] include aspects 
of the design of ATMs, payment terminals, and digital learn-
ing environments in education and training, including Higher 
Education. Norwegian Law, however, does not include regu-
lations regarding the design of – and interaction with – robots, 
nor does it cover robots to be used, for instance, in healthcare 
or home care services in the public sector. In other words, the 
Norwegian laws and regulations relating to the Universal De-
sign of these technologies are lacking, while the adoption of 
robots in health- and homecare seems to be ongoing.  
At the same time, the elderly population (those over 65 
years old) is increasing. The elderly population in Norway, is 
279
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
predicted to increase from 16.5% in 2016 to 17.5% in 2020, 
to 20.2% in 2030, and 27%, in 2070 [26] (p. 360). Moreover, 
expectancy is also expected to increase in Norway by 0.2% 
(around two years) by 2070 [26]. In addition, the number of 
expected care recipients in Norway will increase from 
367 000 in 2016 to 387 000 in 2020, to 485 000 in 2030, 
reaching 815 000 in 2070 [26, p. 362]. Out of this population, 
the number of home care recipients will increase from 
200 000 in 2016, to 212 000 in 2020, to 263 000 in 2030, 
reaching 420 000 by 2070 [26]. These numbers are the highest 
amongst a reference scenario composed of recipients of insti-
tutional care, home care, and cash benefits (compared to insti-
tutional care that will increase from 45 000 in 2016 to 131 000 
in 2070, and to cash benefits that will increase from 121 000 
in 2016 to 264 000 in 2070) [26].  
Moreover, the aging population seems to be the key driver 
in developing and adopting robots [27]. New forms of ICTs, 
such as robots, are being introduced into the home of the el-
derly to prolong their independent living [27][27][28]. The in-
tegration of robots into the homes of the elderly is argued for 
by the statistics regarding the aging population, but also by 
longer life spans accompanied by corresponding disabilities 
due to age, by difficulties in Activities of Daily Living (ADL) 
experienced by the elderly, and even increased costs and a 
lack of (human) resources for supporting the elderly through 
home care services [30]. 
In addition, policies and political agendas are being intro-
duced concerning integrating robots in home care services. 
These usually focus on studying robots in terms of how they 
meet societal needs. EU Active Assistive Living (AAL) and 
the EU Horizon 2020 Robotics Roadmap are two of these 
agendas [30]. 
If such robots are to be adopted in the public sector, in-
cluding the health- and homecare sectors, these robots need to 
be designed in such a way that several users, including medi-
cal staff, care recipients (elderly or patients), informal care-
givers (family members if the robots are to be used in the 
home), as well as technical staff, can use them. This also 
means that robots need to comply with specific standards and 
requirements to suit several types of users and/or actors (indi-
viduals, organizations, and settings). Thus, this implies that 
the robots need to be universally designed, i.e., a minimum of 
requirements or standards must be fulfilled by the robot design 
for it to be used by diverse users. Many of these potential fu-
ture categories of users of health- or homecare robot services 
are not disabled people from a medical point of view. They 
also often lack digital or “robot” literacy.  
C. Motivation 
Although similar studies have analyzed robot performance 
in homes [31][32][33], there are still many robot forms and 
services to explore. The elderly people in our previous studies 
were keen to have robots that they could understand, could 
manage easily, and were meaningful for the elderly [1]. In 
other words, robots must be designed to meet the requirements 
of comprehensibility, manageability, and meaningfulness, fin 
line with Sense-Of-Coherence (SOC) theory [34].  
Thus, a table robot that can move around, and is made of 
wood, may feel more familiar to elderly people with a design 
that can eventually meet these requirements. Some similar at-
tempts have been made previously in other contexts, such as 
in studies investigating skeuomorphic design [35], or design-
ing for simplicity and prolonged elderly’s mastery of technol-
ogy, as shown in [36][37][38][39]. Many of these studies, 
however, have a focus on static technology, i.e., the technol-
ogy that does not move semi-autonomously in the home. Its 
design is based on the original definition of UD and its seven 
principles.  
III. 
RELATED WORK: ON ABILITIES IN DESIGN 
This section presents the related work on abilities in de-
sign. The section starts by presenting the concept of abilities 
in design viewed from a general UD perspective. Thereafter 
we continue by briefly presenting the Ability Based Design 
(ABD) perspective. 
A. Abilities in Design 
UD is studied at the micro-, mezzo- or macro-level [40]. 
At the micro-level, there are often studies examining individ-
uals or groups in UD to understand human characteristics. 
Specifically, studies at the micro-level focus on human factors 
and psychology. These are usually studies in Human-Com-
puter Interaction (HCI). At the mezzo-level, there are often 
studies on computer science for engineering that investigate 
the use of technology as a mechanism of participation. Specif-
ically, these studies are within the fields of informatics and 
computer science. These are usually carried out at an organi-
zational level. Studies at the macro-level focus on the social 
and legal aspects of an issue. Such studies include using ICTs 
or digital learning environments in Higher Education and in-
vestigating laws, regulations, and legal frameworks [41]. Mi-
cro-, mezzo- or macro-level studies may include investiga-
tions on inclusion and accessibility [41][42] or diversity issues 
[44]. However, many of these studies focus on the dichotomic 
pair of abilities-disabilities. This is, indirectly, a pathogenic 
view since disabilities are a focus. A pathogenic view refers to 
seeing the individual in terms of what is wrong with them and 
regarding the disabilities as needing to be corrected.  
Further, others do not enter the polemics of UD; however, 
they address people’s abilities or capabilities from a Participa-
tory Design (PD) perspective. For instance, Joshi [36] wrote 
his Ph.D. thesis on the topic of designing for capabilities. He 
has co-authored several papers on designing for experienced 
simplicity [37] and prolonged mastery among the elderly [45]. 
Furthermore, Frauenberger [46] has elevated the idea of 
designing for abilities by talking about “designing for differ-
ent abilities.” However, his work focuses on designing for 
medically-diagnosed individuals, such as designing for the 
abilities of autistic children [46][47]. Thus, the dichotomy of 
abilities-disabilities is indirectly present when indirectly 
adopting a pathogenic perspective.  
However, a few have adopted a salutogenic view in terms 
of designing for abilities; this view begins from the perspec-
tive that there is nothing wrong with the individual, but rather 
with the environment surrounding him. Within this saluto-
genic approach, some talk about Ability-Centered Design 
(ACD) [49], whereas others talk about Ability Based Design 
(ABD) [50]. Although there are nuances in these two design 
280
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
types, they have the same common goal: putting the individ-
ual’s abilities into focus. To illustrate the idea, the concept of 
ABD is presented in more detail below.  
 
Figure 1. The ability continuum  [51]. 
B. Ability Based Design (ABD) 
Wobbrock [49][50][51] introduced the idea of ABD. It re-
fers to designing for the abilities of people, rather than their 
disabilities. He and his colleagues argue that one cannot have 
disabilities in the same way that one cannot have “dis-height” 
or “dis-money” [50] (p. 91). The ABD concept is described 
according to a set of principles supported by examples [50]. 
Specifically, ABD systems focus on the individual’s abilities, 
on what an individual can do, where the system has some kind 
of awareness about the user’s abilities, such that it can adapt 
and accommodate their abilities [50]. 
According to the authors, the challenge with ABD systems 
is that there is a high variation in the abilities of users. How-
ever, ABD systems can be regarded as ideals, where the sys-
tems themselves are able to adapt and be reconfigured to us-
ers’ abilities. This implies that the responsibility for being able 
to interact with an ABD system shifts to the designer and not 
the other way around, to the users [53]. This idea is similar to 
the one presented in this paper, which focuses on designing 
for situated abilities, where the individual user can interact 
with any system at any given time. This would require a 
Global Public Inclusive Infrastructure [52][53]. Finally, ABD 
design is centered around a disabling environment and situa-
tions, rather than around an individual’s disabilities [53].  
IV. 
THEORETICAL GROUNDING: ON SITUATED ABILITIES 
This section presents first the origins of the concept of “sit-
uated abilities” and its development. It continues thereafter 
with some examples of possible experiences of situated abili-
ties by the user in different situations. 
The term “situated abilities” was first mentioned in the 
work of Wobbrock and colleagues [53]. However, it was 
never defined, framed, explored, or further anchored. Sap-
lacan [51] has attempted to revitalize the concept. The framing 
of situated abilities was inspired by the work of Antonovsky’s 
[34] and his salutogenic perspective on the health and 
ease/dis-ease continuum. His work was grounded on the idea 
that we should study what makes people healthy, e.g., “at 
ease,” not what gives them “dis-ease.” Along the same lines, 
the author [51] framed situated abilities as a point of departure 
for the individuals’ abilities rather than his disabilities. Thus, 
the author framed situated abilities as the human being’s abil-
ity to comprehend, manage, or find meaning in an interaction 
with a system or technology [51]. Further, the author [51] ex-
plains that ability, if viewed on an ability continuum (Figure 
1), can be understood in terms of a lesser- or greater scale, 
depending on how the individual, as a human being, experi-
ences a situation where she interacts or uses a digital system 
or technology. 
We present some examples of situated abilities below:  
 
Example 1 on robots. The human needs to install, un-
derstand the technicalities and feedback from “auton-
omous things,” facilitate and adapt to them and divide 
and share their work tasks with them [3]. Examples 
illustrating this type of situated abilities can be found 
in studies on the use of a semi-autonomous robot, 
such as a vacuum cleaner robot [2][3] or a robot 
lawnmower [8]. These studies illustrate situations 
where the human’s abilities are situated, i.e., they 
have lower or higher abilities to interact with the ro-
bot, depending on their familiarity with the respective 
robot. However, in many of the situations presented, 
humans need to adapt to the robot’s work to make it 
work, not the other way around.  
 
Example 2 on Digital Learning Environments used in 
Higher Education. Although there is a regulation in 
Norwegian law in The Discrimination and Disability 
Act, Chapter 3, on universal design [56], the law ad-
dresses UD only from the single-use of individual 
websites. This, however, does not cover the user’s ex-
perience as a whole when, for instance, using several 
websites or platforms, such as in the case of the cross-
use of digital learning environments [57]. Examples 
of such situations have been illustrated in several 
studies [54][56]. 
 
Example 3 on chatbots. An example of experienced 
situated ability is when the human user interacts with 
a chatbot, but the chatbot does not understand what 
the user wants even though the user knows what the 
user needs help with. This situation often occurs not 
because of the chatbot design itself and not because 
of the user’s disabilities. The user would solve the 
problem much more quickly by talking directly to a 
human instead of using the chatbot. However, the use 
of the chatbot lowers the situated abilities of the hu-
man user in that situation. Several studies on chatbot 
design have been undertaken with people without any 
disabilities and people with disabilities (see for in-
stance [57][58]). 
 
Example 4 on using a different operating system: An-
other example is when a Microsoft user is asked to use 
a Mac computer. The human user will encounter 
lower situated abilities when using Apple’s operating 
system, but higher situated abilities when using Mi-
crosoft’s operating system.  
 
Example 5 on ordering a book via the e-library sys-
tem. Another example is when an old person without 
ICT literacy is asked to order a book via the e-library 
281
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
system. The person will encounter lower situated abil-
ities in the interaction and use of the e-library system, 
whereas they will experience higher situated abilities 
if they place an order at the library’s desk. This exam-
ple was also presented in [51]. 
These examples indicate that the situated abilities are con-
tingent and highly specific to both the person using the tech-
nology and the situation in which it is used. 
V. 
CASE AND PROOF-OF-CONCEPT DESIGN 
This section starts with the case brief. Thereafter, it con-
tinues by presenting the initial findings from the research pro-
ject that led us to propose the current design for T-ABLE. The 
design of the T-ABLE is then presented, followed by our ini-
tial tests. 
A. Case brief 
The study is part of the Multimodal Elderly Care Systems 
(MECS) Research Project. MECS investigates the require-
ments, specifications, and design of a safety alarm robot for 
elderly people living independently in specially designed ac-
commodation facilities dedicated to the elderly (≥ 65 years 
old).  
B. Initial Findings 
From 2016-2019, the authors conducted a series of studies 
with the elderly on domestic robots to be used in their homes. 
Through workshops, user studies, individual interviews, and 
group interviews [1][3][59], we learned that a robot’s func-
tionality is the most important aspect for the elderly, although 
appearance and aesthetics are also important, especially for 
female users.  
Throughout our investigation, we were interested in devel-
oping knowledge about the preferences of elderly people in 
terms of a safety alarm robot, how the safety alarm robot 
should be designed, and what functionalities it should have. 
Although the research interest was in a safety alarm robot 
which ultimately had mounted sensors and perhaps an RGB 
or an infrared camera that could detect and track the health 
state of the elderly user, it was soon noticed that the elderly 
were not familiar with this kind of advanced technology. Alt-
hough we tried to talk about safety alarm robots with the el-
derly, the elderly indicated that they were more in need of as-
sistive or servant robots. They explained that they needed a 
robot that could help them move things around in the home, a 
robot that could bring them objects, or a robot that could help 
them with household activities. Simultaneously, the elderly 
people wished for a robot that did not occupy too much space 
since their apartments were generally limited in size, usually 
composed of a kitchen space joined to a living room, and a 
bedroom, a bathroom, and a small entrance hall. Many of the 
home spaces were cluttered with furniture, personal items, art 
objects, books, rollators, or wheelchairs that occupied much 
space. In 2018, vacuum cleaner robots were placed in the 
homes of the elderly, and participants were given a notebook 
and a pen and asked to write down notes each time they ran 
the robot, in the form of diary notes, inspired by Gaver et al.’s 
[61] idea on probes. During this phase of the study, we found 
that many elderly participants encountered challenges with in-
teracting with the robot. For instance, the technical feedback 
which displayed errors as digits were often indecipherable 
even for the non-elderly participants. One participant com-
plained about an error message that she received when she 
used the app to control the robot, which said that it “cannot 
connect to the cloud services” –  she did not understand what 
the “cloud” was [60]. This is a specific situation where human 
beings’ abilities cannot handle the design of a technology: ei-
ther because of the English language or because of the tech-
nical language the device used for giving informative feed-
back.  
During our initial investigations for the MECS project 
[3][7][60][62][63][64][65][66], several challenges and re-
quirements were encountered relating to what a robot being 
used in the home should look like, how it should behave, what 
size it should be, or what it should do. However, one particular 
participant posed the question: “What if a table could be called 
upon and bring me the telephone and carry a cup of tea? What 
if it could keep the telephone always charged and in reach?”. 
The robotic wooden table was created in response to this re-
quest. We took up this challenge and are currently designing, 
making, engineering, evaluating such a table and listening and 
talking to home dwellers, and observing their use of the table. 
To illustrate the use of the T-ABLE, a persona and a scenario 
have been developed together with elderly participants. This 
is illustrated in Figure 2.  
C. Design of T-ABLE 
The design of the T-ABLE was inspired by the modular 
design of a stool (krakk in Norwegian). The stool is a versatile 
object; it is a jack-of-all-trades of homes and can be used as a 
chair, side table, telephone table, footrest – and to reach the 
top of the shelf by standing on it. The stool has proved useful 
for all age groups, genders, and people with varied abilities, in 
different stages of life and a variety of situations. In contrast 
to other specialized objects, such as chairs, dining tables, and 
ladders, the stool, with its smaller size, is flexible and adapta-
ble to more users and use situations. The stool design is ver-
satile and, as such, it may fit many different uses and situa-
tions. Inspired by the design of a stool, similarly to the 
mechanical ottoman from Sirkin et al. [67], the T-ABLE, the 
robotic wooden table, is designed to hold small items and 
transport them around the home, as a servant robot would do. 
It can also re-configure the home on the fly, keeping the same 
natural look of the home, with its wooden appearance: like the 
old TV-sets, in wood, that was part of a home’s furniture. The 
T-ABLE has a horizontal, flat top surface. It is made in three 
iterations, illustrated in Figure 3. All the prototypes are made 
from various types of wood, wheels, and control mechanisms. 
The top surface is 40×40 cm, and the height is about 40 cm. It 
is ruggedly made so that it is also possible to sit on top of it 
(maximum weight 200 kg).  
The T-ABLE prototypes have three or four wheels where 
two of the wheels are hub motor wheels (Electric Wheel Hub 
Motor).  The wheels’ diameter is 12 cm, which makes it pos-
sible for the table to travel over carpets and uneven surfaces.  
Furthermore, the wheel and the way they are fastened to the 
table is rugged, so that it is possible to, for example, sit on top 
282
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
of the table (maximum 150 kg).  An on-board LiPro battery 
powers the wheels’ motors and the ECR (Electronic Speed 
Control). The speed of the two wheels is regulated with an RF 
(radio frequency remote control) directly, and in one proto-
type with an Arduino box between the RF and the ECR.  The 
two hub motors wheels make skid steering possible for the ta-
ble, and hence it can be controlled to move accurately around 
at the command of the person with the RF. The maximum 
speed is set to 1.3 m/s in order to keep it safe. A prototype is 
given in Figure 3 (a–d). The prototype was fitted with a spe-
cific point for charging the telephone. The T-ABLE is 
equipped with a battery that powers the engines for driving the 
table and charges the phone on top. The battery is then charged 
when the T-ABLE is connected to the home’s central power 
system at the charging station, for example, at one of the loca-
tions where it sits for a reasonably long period. One version of 
the prototype was modular, with an extra tabletop that could 
be removed. This gives double the table space and can work 
as a scriptorium. 
Further development is needed to work both on the ways 
in which the control and steering of the table are achieved. 
Technically, the motor system controllers are both interfaced 
with an RF remote control with Arduino hardware. Plans are 
in place to run the Robot Operating System (ROS) via a PC. 
This would allow the user to interact with the table in various 
ways (voice, buttons, gestures); additionally, fitting sensors to 
the table would allow for input to the navigation, wayfinding, 
and obstacle detection functions of the table.  
D. Initial Tests 
Instead of the table having to be lifted or pushed to the 
preferred position in the room, this can be done by way of 
command in a remote-control fashion – or it can be pro-
grammed to move based on input from the environment, for 
example, the time of day, following the person when the per-
son gives that command, or in other ways. 
The proof-of-concept was tested through the Wizard of Oz 
(WoZ) techniques, similar to the tests carried out by Sirkin 
and colleagues with their mechanical ottoman [see 67]. Both 
voice and the use of a bell-button were used to give commands 
and steer the T-ABLE.  The person operating the RF control-
ler, the Wizard, listened to the voice commands and recog-
nized the user’s key presses.  Based on the commands such as 
come here, follow me, go there, she steered the T-ABLE in 
the correct direction and position. During these WoZ tests, an 
external button to T-ABLE acted as the command button that 
executed different commands at the user’s request. Four mo-
tion design commands were simulated through WoZ: 
COME_HERE,  FOLLOW_ME, DOCK, and UNDOCK. 
Specifically, if the user pressed the button once, the T-ABLE 
performed the COME_HERE task. If the user pressed the but-
ton twice; consequently, the T-ABLE will perform the 
FOLLOW_ME task. The DOCK and UNDOCK command 
accompanied the other commands. Another simulated order 
was fetching a cup of coffee or dishes.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Scenario designed together with the elderly 
 
 
Eve 
 
 
Eve is 92 years old (born in November 1928), in good 
spirits, and able to walk when she uses a walker for 
support. She is living independently at home.  
 
Eve has had a fixed telephone from 1960 to 2009 at 
home. The fixed telephone was previously placed in 
the hall, fixed to the wall with a cable and placed on 
a telephone table.  That is, the telephone table was 
stationary, always in the same place, albeit with a 
long cord so it could be used in the region near the 
hall. 
 
In 1999 she got a mobile phone. After ten years of us-
ing the mobile phone, she ended the subscription for 
the fixed telephone, and at the same time, reconfig-
ured the hall by removing the telephone set.  That is, 
Eve currently owns only a mobile phone, and does 
not have the fixed telephone anymore. 
 
Issues such as: “where is the phone?” or “is the 
phone charged?” did not previously pose any prob-
lem for Eve, since the fixed phone was situated in its 
permanent position, in the hallway.   
 
In 2012, Eve got a safety alarm from her children, a 
wristband device with a red emergency button. She 
wears it when her son is visiting, otherwise it is 
placed in the bathroom.  The mobile phone is indeed 
vital for safety for Eve. It can be and is used for con-
tacting family, friends and others in case there is a 
problem.  However, the problem of finding the 
phone and making sure it is charged are challenging. 
 
She imagines the use of the T-ABLE. The mobile 
phone now has a telephone table to rest on, and is 
always charged there. The way Eve imagines using 
the t-able is to let it sit by her bedside during the 
night, and then have it set up to move to the hall dur-
ing the day.  If she needs assistance, the t-able will 
move to where she is and assist her. 
283
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
The current prototype has been tested only in two homes 
so far. The tests were performed in one home with one senior 
adult (≥65 years old) and another home with two adults, two 
children, and one cat. The tests were documented through 
photos and videos. However, no systematic testing or evalua-
tion has been done so far, but informal sessions have been 
conducted where joy and excitement were expressed when the 
robotic T-ABLE was moving around in the home. There are 
two reasons why systematic testing has not occurred yet. First, 
The COVID-19 pandemic does not allow easy access in the 
homes of the elderly and non-elderly people and has limited 
further testing. Second, this paper focuses mainly on the 
proof-of-concept design of robots for everyday domestic use 
regarding their UD dimensions. Therefore, this is outside of 
the scope of this paper.  
However, the initial tests have demonstrated that our par-
ticipants are positive about the domestic table robot. Figure 4 
(a, b, c) shows an illustration from our early tests with partic-
ipants.  
Further, the initial testing showed that the users needed to 
understand the T-ABLE world to be able to negotiate with it 
and feel comfortable with it.  Three themes emerged. First, the 
participants wished to know what information was sensed by 
the T-ABLE or what kind of input it gets. The second theme 
was related to the movement of the T-ABLE itself. The par-
ticipants wondered how they could best attempt to move the 
table along – in a “follow-me” fashion, or how the T-ABLE 
moves while they are sitting still themselves. The third emerg-
ing theme was about the relationship a user, as a human being, 
may develop with such an object and how this relationship 
could potentially inform the UD and a diversity of uses and 
individuals in their everyday life. 
In this paper, the discussion and reflection upon the last 
theme that emerged are of particular interest since it aligns 
with our theoretical approach. 
VI. 
A THEORETICAL EXPLORATION OF EVERYDAY 
SITUATED ABILITIES  
The MECS research project’s original idea was to create a 
safety alarm robot for elderly people (≥65 years old) living 
independently. This was an attempt at a pathogenic design 
(designing for their disabilities). That is, the idea of having a 
safety alarm robot in the home was in line with a medical 
model’s premise that older people at home need a device to 
track and detect them so that they can get help when some-
thing bad happens, such as if they fall. This approach ne-
glected, however, their situated abilities. It seems they needed 
or wanted something that could help them at home, e.g., a 
servant robot to help them with household chores or a robot 
that could bring or carry things, or keep the phone in a stand-
ard place and always charged. This is in line with a salutogenic 
approach, where the robot’s design is in line with what the 
user, as a human being with his abilities, can do or a need the 
user has.  
 
a)
b)
  
c)  
 
 
 
d)  
Figure 3. a) Iteration 1 – T-ABLE drawing by Nicholas Ibicheta; b) T-
ABLE with telephone and charger; c) T-ABLE with an extra tabletop 
extending the horizontal surface; d) version of the T-ABLE with a place for 
depositing items. 
Thus, to understand the human experience, a phenomeno-
logical approach was adopted, and the focus was on the first-
person experience [68]. That is, the human experience in a sit-
uation with a vacuum cleaner robot based on our earlier work 
was taken into account, as well as some insights from the hu-
man experience with the T-ABLE robot. At the same time, the 
T-ABLE was designed with UD in mind. To understand and 
go beyond the T-ABLE design as a robotic wooden table, the 
discussion around UD and the T-ABLE design is elevated to 
a theoretical level in the next three sections, where the initial 
stated research question is answered.  
A. T-ABLE from a Universal Design Perspective 
The T-ABLE design considers situated abilities and attempts 
to blend in with the home environment. For instance, the T-
ABLE was designed to fulfill Eve’s situated abilities, but it 
can also fit other users. The T-ABLE fulfills at least some of 
the UD principles. We explain how below. 
1. Equitable use. The robotic wooden table can be used by 
young and old users, children, or people sitting in wheel-
chairs. 
2. Flexibility in use. The robotic wooden table has a modular 
design and can be used for multiple purposes: for carrying 
items, for charging the mobile phone, or for depositing 
things. 
3. Simple and intuitive use. The robotic T-ABLE has the 
familiar look of a piece of furniture – a wooden table. 
4. Perceptible information. The form of the robotic wooden 
table indicates how it is to be used. 
284
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
a) 
 
b) 
 
c) 
 
Figure 4. a) and b) Prototype of T-ABLE transporting things in the home 
c) Prototype of T-ABLE where an elderly participant uses it to bring the 
home fixed phone and the mobile phone closer to her   
5. Tolerance for error. It does not have buttons or interfaces 
that display error messages that may confuse the user. In-
stead, the robotic T-ABLE is based on the use of habitu-
ated objects such as a table. 
6. Low physical effort. The height and size of the T-ABLE 
provide easy access and low physical effort for people of 
different heights, including children and people sitting in a 
wheelchair. 
7. Size and space for approach and use. The T-ABLE 
blends in with the home environment with its natural ma-
terial-look. It fits better than, for instance, other robots that 
have a plastic appearance.  
While creating a prototype for the safety alarm robot is still 
being worked on, the T-ABLE has already generated joy for 
those who have experienced it and are interested in seeing 
what a future investigation can turn up. 
B. Shifting Perspective from Disabilities to Situated 
Abilities  
The research question addressed was: How can we shift 
the perspective from disabilities to abilities when talking 
about Universal Design? 
UD is about making technology accessible, understanda-
ble, useful, and usable for as many people as possible. Ideally, 
UD includes people of all ages, sizes, and abilities. UD is in-
creasingly vital for the HCI community in more and more eve-
ryday life areas and involves the use of digital technology. UD 
is about social equity on the macro-level [40]; it is about hu-
man diversity, accessibility, and usability of things and the en-
vironment, and it is about a participatory process – acknowl-
edging and respecting human autonomy, its dignity, and 
integrity. According to Lazar [69], deaf people who use sign 
language do not see themselves as disabled people, but rather 
as people who use sign language. This reminds us that we hu-
mans, as users, wish to keep our dignity and integrity – we do 
not want to see ourselves or for others to see us as disabled. 
For instance, we as researchers of design or designers often 
forget that some users lack digital literacy or do not know how 
to interact with advanced technologies, such as robots, alt-
hough they are not medically diagnosed as disabled.  
Human diversity as a starting point for developing tech-
nologies that include all users is often a challenge. According 
to Trevanius, there is an optimization process in which the 
edges, extremes, and diversity are lost [70]. Along the same 
lines, several UD models are known that address the (dis)abil-
ities of people from different perspectives. Amongst these UD 
models are the medical-, social-, relational-, expert-, empow-
ering-, charity- and economic models. However, many of 
these models are strongly connected to disability studies, alt-
hough UD, at its core, does not focus on disabilities but on 
designing for as many people as possible.  
If we shift focus from disabilities to abilities, albeit using 
some of these existing UD models, situated abilities could be 
discussed as having several dimensions. Thus, situated abili-
ties can be identified as being at the cross point of several of 
these models, however focusing on abilities instead of disabil-
ities. Four dimensions of situated abilities have been identified 
through the T-ABLE proof-of-concept design. 
a) A social dimension – the user can place the 
technology within his understanding of the environment 
surrounding him 
285
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
The social dimension refers to the fact that the environ-
ment must be corrected because it disables and oppresses the 
individual [9][70]. For instance, in the T-ABLE design, the 
social dimension is represented through the design of the T-
ABLE itself: the robotic wooden table is designed to fit into 
the home environment of elderly people, rather than being de-
signed with a robotic zoomorphic or anthropomorphic look. 
Thus, the T-ABLE fits into the users’ home environment in 
the way it is designed, most notably in that it is a piece of fur-
niture designed in wood. In other words, the user can place the 
technology in his understanding of the environment surround-
ing him.  
b) A relational dimension – the user can relate to the 
design of the technology through its embedded familiar 
elements  
The relational dimension is inherited from the Scandina-
vian or GAP model [71]. This dimension focuses on the rela-
tionship between humans and the environment. The Scandi-
navian or GAP model is against humans’ categorization 
between abled and disabled individuals, acknowledging hu-
man diversity and individual experiences [71]. Thus, situated 
abilities look at individuals as abled individuals who may have 
lower or higher situated abilities in their everyday interaction 
and use of digital technologies or systems. In addition, the idea 
of designing for situated abilities is incorporated in the T-
ABLE design through the familiar elements of a table, with a 
natural look. The users, including elderly people, are more 
used to having tables in their homes than navigating robots. In 
this way, their relationship with the T-ABLE is assumed to be 
more familiar than with robots that do not necessarily have a 
natural look. That is, the user can relate to the design of the 
technology through its embedded familiar elements. 
c) A socio-relational dimension – the user sees the 
technology as a habituated object 
The socio-relational dimension assumes that the abilities 
are theorized, subscribing to the socio-relational model. The 
socio-relational model talks about disabling mechanisms as 
part of the environment that can be avoided or removed 
through different measures, including physical ones (Carol 
Thomas, 1999 in [10]). This dimension indicates both a social 
and a relational dimension, namely that the individual experi-
ences the abilities as an embodied experience in the environ-
ment the individual is part of. Thus, the T-ABLE design’s so-
cio-relational dimension refers to removing some of the 
physically “disabling” mechanisms, such as interacting with 
an unfamiliar robot, through buttons, displays, or interfaces. 
The T-ABLE design itself as a robot removes some of these 
barriers since the majority of users can interact with tables and 
are familiar with this kind of habituated object [72].  
d) An empowering dimension – the user feels in control 
of his or her abilities to interact with the technology 
The empowering dimension focuses on the individual’s 
abilities by empowering the individual through the design of 
technology. This dimension subscribes to the UD empowering 
model that trusts the individuals’ autonomy, decision-making 
power, and control, and the professionals are regarded only as 
advisors rather than experts [73]. The model instead assumes 
the individual as the expert on his own body [73]. This implies 
that the design of the technology respects the user’s autonomy, 
dignity, and integrity. The user knows how to interact with an 
object. In the case of the T-ABLE, this dimension was taken 
into account by the inquiry of one elderly participant who 
posed the original question: “What if a table could be called 
upon and bring me the telephone and carry a cup of tea? What 
if it could keep the telephone always charged and in reach?”  
C. The T-ABLE from a Phenomenological Perspective 
anchored in Heidegger’s work 
At the start of the paper, one of the authors’ consideration 
was how to design domestic robots that fit humans’ abilities 
and integrate into individuals’ homes in a familiar way, rather 
than designing robots for their disabilities. This statement re-
gards the human being as an abled individual in terms of what 
she can do, rather than what she cannot do. Similarly, humans’ 
everyday life that Heidegger examined and described had ta-
bles, chairs, writing equipment, radios, hammers, rooms, and 
many other examples of human-made things and nature and 
trees. The relationship between Heidegger’s Dasein (human 
being) and this equipment is best understood through the use 
of and engagement with the “in-order-to” as Heidegger de-
scribes it, in addition to what such items are used for. There 
are different levels of this in-order-to towards a final cause, 
the for-the-sake-of-which. Heidegger’s central premise was 
that the human-made things, primordially, are not understood 
as detached, isolated objects for use in everyday life. Further-
more, there is no such thing as “equipment” (Zeug), but a to-
tality of equipment and equipment nexus. A table does not pri-
mordially exist in everyday life as an isolated object, but 
together with chairs, table-legs, a tablecloth – all of these rep-
resent in one form or another an equipmental nexus. 
Further, in the lectures before Being and Time [73], 
Heidegger did a phenomenological analysis of how the home 
dwellers were oriented to and around the table and how the 
table was oriented in the room. The way they placed the table 
in the room, the way they oriented themselves towards the ta-
ble, and how the table was part of the daily life at home with 
his family and friends were used to flesh out the central role 
that objects and equipment played, and the reciprocity be-
tween the table and the dwellers. Only later was a well-known 
example of various ways relating to the hammer-in-use was 
employed. 
Thus, T-ABLE is an example of familiar technology. In 
the German language of Heidegger, the familiar is described 
as vertraut or bekannt, that which we are used to or that which 
we know. Heidegger’s early writing is not concerned with in-
clusive design or UD speciﬁcally, but it addresses the question 
of being-here. Heidegger claims that the basis for understand-
ing “being-in-the-world” lies in the everyday lives that we all 
live and understand our familiarity with it. Our behavior in 
our everyday life activities with each other and the equipment 
surrounding us give insight into everyday living with familiar 
things. Familiarity is, hence, about what is well-known, what 
is familiar to us. This knowledge is not primordially theoreti-
cal but essentially a skill related to our situated ability to act, 
do something, or interact with a robotic device. Furthermore, 
involvement or engagement is a condition for the possibility 
286
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
of being familiar with something. Interacting or engaging with 
a robotic product is conditioned on the design of the product 
itself, first and foremost, and the skills of the individual user.  
 
D. Discussion through the lenses of the existing HRI 
literature 
Designing for situated abilities seems to be strongly linked 
to designing with familiarity in mind. Our findings are con-
firmed and supported by several earlier studies. We start the 
discussion in this sub-section by first presenting a few other 
examples of robotic furniture, such as the mechanical ottoman 
[67], the Roombots [75], and the PEIS robotic table [76]. 
Thereafter, we continue with reflections and discussion on 
long-term interaction with robots in the home by bringing for- 
and contrasting arguments for the T-ABLE study. 
For instance, a robot similar to T-ABLE was first devel-
oped by Sirkin and colleagues [67], namely the mechanical 
ottoman. The mechanical ottoman is a robotic footstool where 
the participants engage with the robot by placing their feet on 
the footstool or taking them off. The robot is also able to adjust 
its cushion and to navigate the plane environment. However, 
it does not have an anthropomorphic look; thus, the partici-
pants are encouraged to engage with the robotic footstool 
through a joint, at times, negotiated action between the human 
and the robot.  
A second example is given by the study from Sproewits et 
al. (2009) [75] on Roombots.  Roombots are described as self-
reconfiguring modular robots acting as adaptive furniture 
[75]. The Roombots are a combination of Information Tech-
nology (IT), roomware, and robotics. They started from the 
idea that humans and technology will co-habit future working 
and living environments seamlessly [75] (p. 4259). Their 
building blocks are made of attachable/detachable simple ro-
botic modules with connectors in-between these. 
A third similar proposal to T-ABLE is the PEIS robotic 
table [76]. The PEIS robotic table is designed as a robotic ser-
vice table used in domestic settings as part of a smart home 
environment. Like the T-ABLE, the PEIS table is envisioned 
to be a robot butler that can move around the home, carry ob-
jects on top of it, bring objects at the command, and be able to 
dock/undock itself [76]. The authors’ vision is that many such 
autonomous robots as PEIS may orchestrate their actions and 
ecologically fulfill the users’ requirements – this view is rather 
opposed to having one robot “doing it all.” The study argues 
that besides the robots’ functionality, the robot should adopt a 
furniture-like design [76]. According to the authors [76], the 
design of such artifacts will not be perceived as “foreign bod-
ies” by the human, “but rather as a natural extension of their 
usual, familiar environment” (p. 245). The authors also argue 
for the familiarity of movement that should both be perceived 
as safe and safe for the human user, with a high predictability 
rate of the robot’s behavior [76]. This robotic motion is also 
explored in previous research: the current literature includes 
studies on how a relation to moving things in the home can be 
classified based on the type of movement the human or robot 
is doing [25]. The current research also suggests ways of find-
ing familiar movement relationships that contribute to the de-
sign of robot motion. A such example is the more recent re-
search on natural-looking motion, using the idea of slow in-
slow out from Schulz et al. [64][65].  
Further, current studies also argue for the robot’s non-in-
vasive wooden appearance to increase its ecological familiar-
ity-look similar to a piece of furniture [76].  
However, a contrasting study to ours and the ones de-
scribed above on furniture robots is the study from [78]. Alt-
hough the study from [78] does not talk about robotic furniture 
to be used in the home, but rather about robots to be used in 
public spaces, such as museums, the study’s arguments still 
support our study. The main argument is that robots, in gen-
eral, are designed to either be used in the lab, living labs, or 
non-real world environments, or they are designed to be used 
in public spaces, with a short-term interaction in mind  [9]. A 
few examples of such robots are receptionist robots in hotels, 
greeting robots in shopping centers, or robots in a museum [9]. 
Minerva and Rhino [78] are examples of such robots used in 
museums as tour-guides. They are service robots that assist 
people in everyday life; however, they are designed for short-
term and spontaneous interactions, where people spend only a 
limited amount of time with the robot, e.g., around 15 minutes. 
They were designed with some humanoid features, such as av-
atars displaying different moods, e.g., happy, serious, sad; 
however, they are not considered humanoid robots.  
One essential aspect of their design is that this avatar 
moods feature was chosen to enable a representation of human 
emotions that the people would easily recognize. This, in its 
turn, enables the humans to easier relate to already familiar 
social aspects to them, according to [78]. In addition, the phys-
ical features, such as legs and arms, were not emulated as hu-
mans specific characteristics, i.e., these were not designed as 
real human legs, arms, heads, or faces. However, this kept the 
robot design simplified, still giving familiar physical aspects 
that are easily recognizable by human users. Further, the au-
thors [78] argue that incorporating familiar features in robot 
design, however, without anthro- or zoomorphizing the ro-
bots, is essential to enabling smooth interaction between the 
human and the robot and a higher acceptance of the robot 
amongst the human users. This is also in line with our view 
and arguments in this paper, confirming that familiar features 
embedded in the design of robot facilitate the integration of 
robots in domestic settings, and may support long-term inter-
action.  
Compared to the authors investigating Minerva and Rhino 
robots [78], the authors of the study on Roombots design [75] 
focused on the robots’ function rather than their appearance. 
The authors envision that such robots can be useful when they 
autonomously can orchestrate themselves into different types 
of static or dynamic structures, such as into different pieces of 
furniture, i.e., from stools and chairs to sofas and tables, and 
from robotic arms picking up objects to servants robots trans-
porting the objects, depending on the users’ needs and require-
ments [75].  
Further, the authors insist [67] that long-term interaction 
with such robots, to be used in the home, is needed. The au-
thors also argue that such work has not been done so far. In-
stead, the focus on human-robot joint action was so far on task 
handover, similar to when robotic vacuum cleaners are used 
287
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
in the home or when a robot is part of a distributed system, 
such as a smart home ecology, e.g., see the study from [76]. 
They also confirm that people tend to usually show more ac-
ceptance of robotic furniture and their use in their homes. Sim-
ilarly, Sirkin and colleagues [67] argue that it would be great 
if robotic vacuum cleaners, such as Roomba, would have a 
humble look of the furniture, such as a stool. This look chal-
lenges the HRI community to shift the focus from mechanical-
, anthropomorphized-, zoomorphized- or biologically inspired 
robots’ appearances to furniture-like robots. 
Moreover, several studies on familiarity focus on the ap-
propriation of technology by making their design familiar to 
the user [75][78]–[81]. At the same time, an extensive body 
of research exploring UD and familiarity is available [81]–
[85]; however, none of these explore familiarity and UD in 
robot design.  
All in all, although the studies from [78] on Minerva and 
Rhino, the study from [75] on Roombots, and the study from 
[76] on the PEIS table are very contrasting, all studies agree 
that incorporating familiar features in the robots to enable 
long-term interaction. Thus, this confirms our theoretical find-
ings and discussions on this initial study on T-ABLE. How-
ever, none of these studies focus on how the robotic piece of 
furniture can be designed with UD in mind to enable as many 
users as possible to use. This aspect both argues for our own 
positioning of this study, as well as catalyzes further our mo-
tivation for continuing this investigation in more rich empiri-
cal settings.   
Thus, the authors inspired by the work of Heidegger, ar-
gue that familiarity might be used as a concept when working 
with inclusion and UD. Hence, we have illustrated the idea of 
designing for situated abilities through a domestic robot’s de-
sign. The T-ABLE prototype incorporates some familiar ele-
ments. First, the robot is designed with a table’s look, rather 
than having a humanoid appearance that may lead to the un-
canny valley phenomenon [14]. Second, the domestic robot’s 
wooden appearance is a design that fits better in the existing 
home environment, appropriating its design to the existent fur-
niture in the home, rather than the appearance of a machine 
with a plastic look. Last, the design of the robotic T-ABLE is 
modular, allowing for multiples uses. 
Finally, designing for situated abilities is not only about 
UD. It goes beyond the design of a product or service. It is an 
abstract concept, a theoretical approach that begins with the 
abilities of the human being. UD is rather focused on service 
products that serve the human. In other words, designing for 
situated abilities to increase the individual’s abilities on the 
ability continuum in a given context or situation involves in-
corporating familiar elements in the design of the product (or 
service).  
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This study proposes the idea of designing for situated abil-
ities, rather than disabilities, adopting a salutogenic, e.g., a 
positive-laden approach, to design. The initially stated re-
search questions were answered by presenting an alternative 
design to domestic robots, wooden-based robots that fit natu-
rally into our home environments and are based on a theoreti-
cal elevation of everyday situated abilities. The idea of situ-
ated abilities anchored in a UD approach was then introduced; 
however, it was different from existing UD studies, which 
have emerged from disability studies. The idea proposed in 
this paper is the idea of designing for abilities rather than dis-
abilities. The definition of situated abilities as indicated in 
Saplacan [51] was used: “Situated ability is the ability to com-
prehend, manage, or find the meaning in the interaction with 
a digital system.” (p. 9). However, this design approach is 
close to the relational models, such as the Scandinavian or 
GAP models [72], with a twist on the disability perspective – 
focusing instead on abilities and enabling environments. In 
other words, the disabled environment or a disabling design is 
recognized as being part of the problem. These arguments 
were based on our previous research, as described in the Back-
ground Section of the paper. Further, it was argued that a good 
design for a product, be it a domestic robotic product or an-
other type of product, is good if the product fits the individu-
als’ environment AND the individuals’ abilities and needs, ra-
ther than the individual fitting the product. Thus, four 
dimensions of designing for situated abilities were identified: 
1) a social one, 2) a relational one, 3) a socio-relational one, 
and 4) an empowering one.  
This work could be further explored in the context of the 
HCI/HRI debate in several ways, including responsible robot-
ics, AI, and new paradigms of HCI and HRI. 
For instance, Boden et al. discuss the importance of re-
sponsible robotics, especially now when more and more ro-
bots leave the research lab [86]. In this sense, the authors have 
developed a set of principles that regulate robots in the real 
world. Amongst the designed principles, they describe princi-
ple 2, saying that the robots should comply with the existing 
law, including privacy. Principle 4 says that robots should not 
include the “illusion of emotion and intent” and be used with 
vulnerable users (p. 127). Further, principle 5 refers to being 
able to identify who is responsible for any robot. 
Further, aging and the need to create a global infrastruc-
ture that involves inclusion- and ability-based design have 
been on the UD agenda for a while [52][53]. This could be 
explored further. Moreover, indirectly through this paper, a 
debate on the ethics and responsibilities of design is intro-
duced, along with the relationship between humans and (digi-
tal) things seen from the UD perspective, specifically in terms 
of the idea of designing for situated abilities, and the idea that 
our abilities are situated on an ability continuum. This per-
spective fits well with the ideas discussed in Frauenberger 
[87] and those discussed in his earlier work [46] on designing 
for different abilities rather than designing for different disa-
bilities. Finally, this work can catalyze discussions in the de-
bate explored in Ashby et al. [88] on the fourth HCI wave, on 
value ethics and activism for positive change within HCI.  
Other possible open research questions aligned with the 
future directions to be explored are:  
 
a) How can the challenges posed by the design of robots 
concerning UD, i.e., robots designed to be usable by a 
diversity of users (care recipients, informal and formal 
caregivers, medical staff, and technical staff), be addressed?  
288
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
b) What legal implications does this have concerning the 
UD of products used in the public sector, including the 
healthcare sector?  
 
b) How can UD set an ethical regulatory framework to 
ensure adequate development of AI in robots?  
 
c) What are the technical benefits and challenges set by 
a UD framework when developing robots to be used in 
healthcare or the public sector? 
 
It is hoped that our approach to designing for situated abil-
ities may help to result in a shift in the perspectives of current 
UD studies focusing on disabilities, though the importance of 
such studies is acknowledged. Finally, we argue that a saluto-
genic approach to design, such as designing for situated abili-
ties rather than disabilities, can be beneficial in finding new 
alternative designs.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We wish to thank the Research Council of Norway (RCN) 
IKTPLUSS Program for funding this project (Project Grant 
Agreement no. 247697), to colleagues, and the participants. 
Finally, our thanks go to the reviewers and editors for taking 
their time to read drafts of the paper and give constructive 
comments and advice on how to improve it. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Saplacan, J. Herstad, and Z. Pajalic, “An analysis of inde-
pendent living elderly’s views on robots - A descriptive study 
from the Norwegian context,” Proceedings of The  Interna-
tional Conference on Advances in Computer-Human Interac-
tions (ACHI). IARIA Conferences, Valencia, Spain, 2020. 
[2] D. Saplacan and J. Herstad, “An Explorative Study on Motion 
as Feedback: Using Semi-Autonomous Robots in Domestic 
Settings:,” Int. J. Adv. Softw., vol. 12, no. 1 & 2, p. 23, Jun. 
2019. 
[3] D. Saplacan, J. Herstad, J. Tørresen, and Z. Pajalic, “A Frame-
work on Division of Work Tasks between Humans and Robots 
in the Home,” Multimodal Technol. Interact., vol. 4, no. 3, Art. 
no. 3, Sep. 2020, doi: 10.3390/mti4030044. 
[4] J. Forlizzi, “How Robotic Products Become Social Products: 
An Ethnographic Study of Cleaning in the Home,” in Proceed-
ings of the ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-
robot Interaction, New York, NY, USA, 2007, pp. 129–136, 
doi: 10.1145/1228716.1228734. 
[5] J. Forlizzi, “Product Ecologies: Understanding the Context of 
Use Surrounding Products,” Doctoral Thesis, Carnegie Mellon 
University, School og Computer Science, U.S., 2007. 
[6] J. Sung, R. E. Grinter, and H. I. Christensen, “Domestic Robot 
Ecology,” Int. J. Soc. Robot., vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 417–429, Dec. 
2010, doi: 10.1007/s12369-010-0065-8. 
[7] R. Soma, V. Dønnem Søyseth, M. Søyland, and T. Schulz, “Fa-
cilitating Robots at Home: A Framework for Understanding 
Robot Facilitation,” Mar. 2018, pp. 1–6, Accessed: Mar. 24, 
2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.thinkmind.org/in-
dex.php?view=article&articleid=achi_2018_1_10_20085. 
[8] G. B. Verne, “Adapting to a Robot: Adapting Gardening and 
the Garden to fit a Robot Lawn Mower,” in Companion of the 
2020 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot 
Interaction, Cambridge, United Kingdom, Mar. 2020, pp. 34–
42, doi: 10.1145/3371382.3380738. 
[9] K. Dautenhahn, “Some Brief Thoughts on the Past and Future 
of Human-Robot Interaction,” ACM Trans. Hum.-Robot Inter-
act., vol. 7, no. 1, p. 4:1–4:3, May 2018, doi: 10.1145/3209769. 
[10] I. M. Lid, “Universal Design and disability: an interdisciplinary 
perspective,” Disabil. Rehabil., vol. 36, no. 16, pp. 1344–1349, 
Aug. 2014, doi: 10.3109/09638288.2014.931472. 
[11] S. A. McGlynn, S. Kemple, T. L. Mitzner, C.-H. A. King, and 
W. A. Rogers, “Understanding the potential of PARO for 
healthy older adults,” Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Stud., vol. 100, pp. 
33–47, Apr. 2017, doi: 10.1016/j.ijhcs.2016.12.004. 
[12] K. Wada and T. Shibata, “Robot Therapy in a Care House - 
Change of Relationship among the Residents and Seal Robot 
during a 2-month Long Study,” in RO-MAN 2007 - The 16th 
IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interac-
tive Communication, Aug. 2007, pp. 107–112, doi: 
10.1109/ROMAN.2007.4415062. 
[13] T. Shibata, K. Wada, K. Tanie, W. K. Chung, and Y. Youm, 
“Subjective evaluation of seal robot in Gyeonju, Korea,” in 
30th Annual Conference of IEEE Industrial Electronics Soci-
ety, 2004. IECON 2004, Nov. 2004, vol. 1, pp. 140-145 Vol. 1, 
doi: 10.1109/IECON.2004.1433299. 
[14] M. Mori, “The Uncanny Valley: The Original Essay by Masa-
hiro Mori,” IEEE Spectrum: Technology, Engineering, and 
Science News, Jun. 12, 2012. https://spectrum.ieee.org/autom-
aton/robotics/humanoids/the-uncanny-valley (accessed Mar. 
19, 2018). 
[15] B. R. Duffy, “Anthropomorphism and the social robot,” Robot. 
Auton. Syst., vol. 42, no. 3–4, pp. 177–190, Mar. 2003, doi: 
10.1016/S0921-8890(02)00374-3. 
[16] T. Nomura et al., “What people assume about humanoid and 
animal-type robots: cross-cultural analysis between japan, ko-
rea, and the united states,” Int. J. Humanoid Robot., vol. 05, no. 
01, pp. 25–46, Mar. 2008, doi: 10.1142/S0219843608001297. 
[17] G. Hoffman and W. Ju, “Designing Robots With Movement in 
Mind,” J. Hum.-Robot Interact., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 89–122, Mar. 
2014, doi: 10.5898/JHRI.3.1.Hoffman. 
[18] Center for Universal Design, North Carolina State University, 
“Center for Universal Design NCSU - About the Center - 
Ronald 
L. 
Mace,” 
2008. 
https://projects.ncsu.edu/de-
sign/cud/about_us/usronmace.htm (accessed Apr. 20, 2018). 
[19] U. S. Government, “Americans with Disability Act,” 2020. 
https://www.ada.gov/ (accessed Sep. 01, 2020). 
[20] Direktorat for førvaltning og IKT, “Tilgjengelighet (universell 
utforming) | Difi.no,” Dec. 13, 2016. https://www.difi.no/artik-
kel/2015/10/tilgjengelighet-universell-utforming 
(accessed 
Dec. 13, 2016). 
[21] M. J. Matarić and B. Scassellati, “Socially Assistive Robotics,” 
in Springer Handbook of Robotics, B. Siciliano and O. Khatib, 
Eds. Springer International Publishing, 2016, pp. 1973–1994. 
[22] N. Matsuhira, J. Hirokawa, H. Ogawa, and Tatsuya Wada, 
“Universal Design with Robots for the wide use of robots - 
Core concept for interaction design between robots and envi-
ronment -,” in 2009 ICCAS-SICE, Aug. 2009, pp. 1654–1657. 
[23] N. Matsuhira, J. Hirokawa, H. Ogawa, and T. Wada, “Univer-
sal Design with Robots Toward the Wide Use of Robots in 
Daily Life Environment,” 2008, doi: 10.5772/5941. 
[24] World Wide Web Consortium, “Web Content Accessibility 
Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0,” Web Content Accessibility Guide-
lines 
(WCAG) 
2.0, 
Nov. 
12, 
2008. 
https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/ (accessed Feb. 15, 2018). 
[25] Kommunal- og moderniseringsdepartementet, “Forskrift om 
endring i forskrift om universell utforming av informasjons- og 
kommunikasjonsteknologiske (IKT)-løsninger - Lovdata,” 
289
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Sep. 
20, 
2017. 
https://lovdata.no/doku-
ment/LTI/forskrift/2017-09-13-1417 (accessed Apr. 20, 2018). 
[26] European Union, “The 2018 Ageing Report: Policy challenges 
for ageing societies,” Institutional Report 079, May 2018. Ac-
cessed: Dec. 10, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://ec.eu-
ropa.eu/info/news/economy-finance/policy-implications-age-
ing-examined-new-report-2018-may-25_en. 
[27] K. Doelling, J. Shin, and D. O. Popa, “Service Robotics for the 
Home: A State of the Art Review,” in Proceedings of the 7th 
International Conference on PErvasive Technologies Related 
to Assistive Environments, New York, NY, USA, 2014, p. 
35:1–35:8, doi: 10.1145/2674396.2674459. 
[28] S. Bedaf and L. de Witte, “Robots for Elderly Care: Their Level 
of Social Interactions and the Targeted End User,” Stud. Health 
Technol. Inform., vol. 242, pp. 472–478, 2017. 
[29] S. Bedaf, H. Draper, G.-J. Gelderblom, T. Sorell, and L. de 
Witte, “Can a Service Robot Which Supports Independent Liv-
ing of Older People Disobey a Command? The Views of Older 
People, Informal Carers and Professional Caregivers on the 
Acceptability of Robots,” Int. J. Soc. Robot., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 
409–420, Jun. 2016, doi: 10.1007/s12369-016-0336-0. 
[30] H. Petrie and J. Darzentas, “Older People and Robotic Tech-
nologies in the Home: Perspectives from Recent Research Lit-
erature,” in Proceedings of the 10th International Conference 
on PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments, 
New 
York, 
NY, 
USA, 
2017, 
pp. 
29–36, 
doi: 
10.1145/3056540.3056553. 
[31] J.-Y. Sung, L. Guo, R. E. Grinter, and H. I. Christensen, “‘My 
Roomba is Rambo’: Intimate Home Appliances,” in Proceed-
ings of the 9th International Conference on Ubiquitous Com-
puting, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007, pp. 145–162, Accessed: Jul. 
25, 
2017. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://dl.acm.org/cita-
tion.cfm?id=1771592.1771601. 
[32] J. Forlizzi and C. DiSalvo, “Service Robots in the Domestic 
Environment: A Study of the Roomba Vacuum in the Home,” 
in Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGCHI/SIGART Conference 
on Human-robot Interaction, New York, NY, USA, 2006, pp. 
258–265, doi: 10.1145/1121241.1121286. 
[33] J. Fink, V. Bauwens, F. Kaplan, and P. Dillenbourg, “Living 
with a Vacuum Cleaning Robot: A 6-month Ethnographic 
Study,” Int. J. Soc. Robot., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 389–408, Aug. 
2013, doi: 10.1007/s12369-013-0190-2. 
[34] A. Antonovsky, “The salutogenic model as a theory to guide 
health promotion,” Health Promotion International, vol. 1, 11 
vols. Oxford University Press, Great Britain, pp. 11–18, 1996. 
[35] N. Backhaus, A. K. Trapp, and M. Thüring, “Skeuomorph Ver-
sus Flat Design: User Experience and Age-Related Prefer-
ences,” in Design, User Experience, and Usability: Designing 
Interactions, 2018, pp. 527–542. 
[36] S. G. Joshi, “Designing for Capabilities: A Phenomenological 
Approach to the Design of Enabling Technologies for Older 
Adults,” 2017, Accessed: Nov. 02, 2017. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.duo.uio.no/handle/10852/58738. 
[37] S. G. Joshi, “Designing for Experienced Simplicity. Why An-
alytic and Imagined Simplicity Fail in Design of Assistive 
Technology,” Int. J. Adv. Intell. Syst., vol. 8, no. 3 and 4, pp. 
324–338, Dec. 2015, Accessed: Jul. 28, 2017. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&ar-
ticleid=intsys_v8_n34_2015_9. 
[38] S. G. Joshi and H. Bråthen, “Supporting new interactions with 
past experiences anchored in materials,” IADIS International 
Journal on Computer Science and Information Systems, vol. 2, 
11 vols. pp. 74–89, 2016, Accessed: Jul. 28, 2017. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.iadisportal.org/ijcsis/pa-
pers/2016190206.pdf. 
[39] S. G. Joshi and T. Bratteteig, “Designing for Prolonged Mas-
tery. On involving old people in Participatory Design,” Scand. 
J. Inf. Syst., vol. 28, no. 1, Jul. 2016, [Online]. Available: 
http://aisel.aisnet.org/sjis/vol28/iss1/1. 
[40] G. A. Giannoumis, “Framing the Universal Design of Infor-
mation and Communication Technology: An Interdisciplinary 
Model for Research and Practice,” Stud. Health Technol. In-
form., vol. 229, pp. 492–505, 2016. 
[41] M. E. N. Begnum, “Facilitating and Advancing Universal De-
sign of ICT,” PhD Thesis, NTNU, Gjövik, Norway, 2019. 
[42] G. Berget and F. E. Sandnes, “Do autocomplete functions re-
duce the impact of dyslexia on information-searching behav-
ior? The case of Google,” J. Assoc. Inf. Sci. Technol., vol. 67, 
no. 10, pp. 2320–2328, Oct. 2016, doi: 10.1002/asi.23572. 
[43] G. Berget, J. Herstad, and F. E. Sandnes, “Search, Read and 
Write: An Inquiry into Web Accessibility for People with Dys-
lexia,” Stud. Health Technol. Inform., vol. 229, pp. 450–460, 
2016. 
[44] K. S. Fuglerud, “Inclusive design of ICT: The challenge of di-
versity,” Universitet i Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 2014. 
[45] S. G. Joshi and T. Bratteteig, “Designing for Prolonged Mas-
tery. On involving old people in Participatory Design,” Scand. 
J. Inf. Syst., vol. 28, no. 1, 2016, Accessed: May 15, 2020. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.duo.uio.no/han-
dle/10852/58736. 
[46] C. Frauenberger, “Session details: Designing for different abil-
ities,” Trondheim, Norway, Jun. 2018, doi: 10.1145/3247767. 
[47] C. Frauenberger, “Rethinking autism and technology,” Inter-
actions, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 57–59, Feb. 2015, doi: 
10.1145/2728604. 
[48] C. Frauenberger, “Ears ))): a methodological framework for au-
ditory display design,” in CHI ’07 Extended Abstracts on Hu-
man Factors in Computing Systems, San Jose, CA, USA, Apr. 
2007, pp. 1641–1644, doi: 10.1145/1240866.1240872. 
[49] S. Evenson, J. Rheinfrank, and H. Dubberly, “Ability-centered 
design: from static to adaptive worlds,” Interactions, vol. 17, 
no. 6, pp. 75–79, Nov. 2010, doi: 10.1145/1865245.1865263. 
[50] J. O. Wobbrock, S. K. Kane, K. Z. Gajos, S. Harada, and J. 
Froehlich, “Ability-Based Design: Concept, Principles and Ex-
amples,” ACM Trans. Access. Comput. TACCESS, vol. 3, no. 
3, p. 9:1–9:27, Apr. 2011, doi: 10.1145/1952383.1952384. 
[51] D. Saplacan, “Situated ability:  A case from Higher Education 
on digital learning environments,” in Lecture Notes in Com-
puter Science, Springer, Ch. 19, vol. HCII 2020, M. Antona 
and C. Stephanidis, Eds. Springer Nature Switzerland, 2020, 
pp. 1–19. 
[52] J. O. Wobbrock, “SIGCHI Social Impact Award Talk – Abil-
ity-Based Design: Elevating Ability over Disability in Acces-
sible Computing,” in Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference 
Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
New 
York, 
NY, 
USA, 
2017, 
pp. 
5–7, 
doi: 
10.1145/3027063.3058588. 
[53] J. O. Wobbrock, K. Z. Gajos, S. K. Kane, and G. C. Vanderhei-
den, “Ability-based design,” Commun. ACM, vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 
62–71, May 2018, doi: 10.1145/3148051. 
[54] G. Vanderheiden and J. Treviranus, “Creating a Global Public 
Inclusive Infrastructure,” in Universal Access in Human-Com-
puter Interaction. Design for All and eInclusion, Berlin, Hei-
delberg, 2011, pp. 517–526, doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-21672-
5_57. 
[55] G. C. Vanderheiden, J. Treviranus, M. Ortega-Moral, M. Peiss-
ner, and E. de Lera, “Creating a Global Public Inclusive Infra-
structure (GPII),” in Universal Access in Human-Computer In-
teraction. Design for All and Accessibility Practice, Cham, 
2014, pp. 506–515, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-07509-9_48. 
[56] Lovdata, “Lov om likestilling og forbud mot diskriminering (li-
kestillings- og diskrimineringsloven) - Lovdata,” Jun. 16, 
2017. 
https://lovdata.no/dokument/NL/lov/2017-06-16-
51?q=diskriminering (accessed Aug. 12, 2020). 
290
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
[57] D. Saplacan, “Cross-Use of Digital Learning Environments in 
Higher Education: A Conceptual Analysis Grounded in Com-
mon Information Spaces,” in Proceedings of the The Thirteenth 
International Conference on Advances in Computer-Human 
Interactions ACHI 2020, Valencia, Spain, 2020, p. 10. 
[58] A. Lilleby and S. Marstein, “«Chatbot for alle?» En kvalitativ 
studie av dyslektikeres opplevelse med chatbot,” Master The-
sis, University of Oslo, Department of Informatics, Faculty of 
Mathematics and Natural Sciences, Oslo, Norway, 2020. 
[59] A. Følstad, C. B. Nordheim, and C. A. Bjørkli, “What Makes 
Users Trust a Chatbot for Customer Service? An Exploratory 
Interview Study,” Lect. Notes Comput. Sci., vol. 11193, pp. 
194–208, 2018, doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-01437-7_16. 
[60] D. Saplacan and J. Herstad, “An Explorative Study on Motion 
as Feedback: Using Semi-Autonomous Robots in Domestic 
Settings:,” Int. J. Adv. Softw., vol. 12, no. 1 & 2, p. 23, Jun. 
2019. 
[61] B. Gaver, T. Dunne, and E. Pacenti, “Design: Cultural Probes,” 
interactions, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 21–29, Jan. 1999, doi: 
10.1145/291224.291235. 
[62] D. Saplacan and J. Herstad, “Fear, Feedback, Familiarity... 
How are These Connected? - Can familiarity as a design con-
cept applied to digital feedback reduce fear?,” Proceedings of 
The Eleventh International Conference on Advances in Com-
puter-Human Interactions (ACHI). Mar. 2018. 
[63] D. Saplacan and J. Herstad, “Understanding robot motion in 
domestic settings,” Proceedings of the 9th Joint IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Development and Learning and on Epi-
genetic Robotics. IEEE XPlore, Oslo, Norway, 2019, [Online]. 
Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8850695. 
[64] T. Schulz, J. Herstad, and J. Torresen, “Moving with Style: 
Classifying Human and Robot Movement at Home,” Mar. 
2018, pp. 188–193, Accessed: Mar. 24, 2018. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&ar-
ticleid=achi_2018_10_20_20053. 
[65] T. Schulz, J. Herstad, and J. Torresen, “Classifying Human and 
Robot Movement at Home and Implementing Robot Move-
ment Using the Slow In, Slow Out Animation Principle,” Int. 
J. Adv. Intell. Syst., vol. 11, no. 3 and 4, pp. 234–244, Dec. 
2018, Accessed: Feb. 20, 2020. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&arti-
cleid=intsys_v11_n34_2018_10. 
[66] T. Schulz, J. Herstad, and H. Holone, “Privacy at Home: An 
Inquiry into Sensors and Robots for the Stay at Home Elderly,” 
in Human Aspects of IT for the Aged Population. Applications 
in Health, Assistance, and Entertainment, Jul. 2018, pp. 377–
394, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-92037-5_28. 
[67] D. Sirkin, B. Mok, S. Yang, and W. Ju, “Mechanical Ottoman: 
How Robotic Furniture Offers and Withdraws Support,” in 
Proceedings of the Tenth Annual ACM/IEEE International 
Conference on Human-Robot Interaction, New York, NY, 
USA, Mar. 2015, pp. 11–18, doi: 10.1145/2696454.2696461. 
[68] S. Gallagher, “What Is Phenomenology?,” in Phenomenology, 
S. Gallagher, Ed. London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, 2012, pp. 
7–18. 
[69] J. Lazar, Research methods in human computer interaction, 
2nd edition. Cambridge, MA: Elsevier, 2017. 
[70] J. Treviranus, “Life-long learning on the inclusive web,” in 
Proceedings of the 13th Web for All Conference, 2016, p. 1. 
[71] I. M. Lid, “Developing the theoretical content in Universal De-
sign,” Scand. J. Disabil. Res., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 203–215, Sep. 
2013, doi: 10.1080/15017419.2012.724445. 
[72] M. Brereton, “Habituated objects: everyday tangibles that fos-
ter the independent living of an elderly woman,” Interactions, 
vol. 
20, 
no. 
4, 
pp. 
20–24, 
Jul. 
2013, 
doi: 
10.1145/2486227.2486233. 
[73] M. E. N. Begnum, “VIEWS ON UNIVERSAL DESIGN AND 
DISABILITIES AMONG NORWEGIAN EXPERTS ON 
UNIVERSAL DESIGN OF ICT,” Paper presented at 
NOKOBIT 2016 28-30 November, vol. 24 no. 1. NOKOBIT, 
Bibsys Open Journal Systems, Bergen, Norway, 2016. 
[74] M. Heidegger, Being and time. Albany: State University of 
New York Press, 2010. 
[75] A. Sproewitz, A. Billard, P. Dillenbourg, and A. J. Ijspeert, 
“Roombots-mechanical design of self-reconfiguring modular 
robots for adaptive furniture,” 2009, pp. 4259–4264, doi: 
10.1109/ROBOT.2009.5152613. 
[76] E. Di Lello and A. Saffiotti, “The PEIS table: an autonomous 
robotic table for domestic environments,” Automatika, vol. 52, 
no. 3, 2011, Accessed: Nov. 17, 2020. [Online]. Available: 
http://urn.kb.se/resolve?urn=urn:nbn:se:oru:diva-23775. 
[77] T. Schulz, P. Holthaus, F. Amirabdollahian, and K. L. Koay, 
“Humans’ Perception of a Robot Moving Using a Slow in and 
Slow Out Velocity Profile,” in 2019 14th ACM/IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), Mar. 
2019, pp. 594–595, doi: 10.1109/HRI.2019.8673239. 
[78] S. Thrun, J. Schulte, and C. Rosenberg, “Interaction With Mo-
bile Robots in Public Places,” IEEE Intell. Syst., pp. 7–11, 
2000. 
[79] P. Turner, “Towards an account of intuitiveness,” Behav. Inf. 
Technol., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 475–482, Nov. 2008, doi: 
10.1080/01449290701292330. 
[80] P. Turner, “The Anatomy of Engagement,” in Proceedings of 
the 28th Annual European Conference on Cognitive Ergonom-
ics, New York, NY, USA, 2010, pp. 59–66, doi: 
10.1145/1962300.1962315. 
[81] P. Turner, “Everyday Coping: The Appropriation of Technol-
ogy,” in Proceedings of the 29th Annual European Conference 
on Cognitive Ergonomics, New York, NY, USA, 2011, pp. 
127–133, doi: 10.1145/2074712.2074738. 
[82] P. Turner, “Being-with: A study of familiarity,” Interact. Com-
put., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 447–454, Sep. 2008, doi: 
10.1016/j.intcom.2008.04.002. 
[83] P. Turner, How We Cope with Digital Technology. San Rafael: 
Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 2013. 
[84] P. Turner and G. van de Walle, “Familairity as a basis for Uni-
versal Deisgn,” vol. 5, No 3. Gerontechnology Journal, pp. 
150–159, 
2006, 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://tei-
lab.tamu.edu/quek/Classes/Aware+EmbodiedInteraction/Em-
bodiedInteractionPAPERS/TurV06_Familiarity_as_a_ba-
sis_for_universal_design.pdf. 
[85] G. Van de Walle, P. Turner, and E. Davenport, “A study of 
familiarity,” in Human-Computer Interaction-INTERACT, 
2003, vol. 3, pp. 463–70, Accessed: Nov. 24, 2015. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.idemployee.id.tue.nl/g.w.m.rauter-
berg/conferences/interact2003/INTERACT2003-p463.pdf. 
[86] M. Boden et al., “Principles of robotics: regulating robots in 
the real world,” Connect. Sci., vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 124–129, Apr. 
2017, doi: 10.1080/09540091.2016.1271400. 
[87] C. Frauenberger, “Entanglement HCI The Next Wave?,” ACM 
Trans. Comput.-Hum. Interact., vol. 27, no. 1, p. 2:1–2:27, 
Nov. 2019, doi: 10.1145/3364998. 
[88] S. Ashby, J. Hanna, S. Matos, C. Nash, and A. Faria, “Fourth-
Wave HCI Meets the 21st Century Manifesto,” in Proceedings 
of the Halfway to the Future Symposium 2019, Nottingham, 
United 
Kingdom, 
Nov. 
2019, 
pp. 
1–11, 
doi: 
10.1145/3363384.3363467. 
 
 
291
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

