Integrating Web-Enabled Energy-Aware Smart
Homes to the Smart Grid
Andreas Kamilaris∗, Yiannis Toﬁs†, Chakib Bekara‡, Andreas Pitsillides∗ and Elias Kyriakides†
∗ Department of Computer Science
Networks Research Laboratory
University of Cyprus
P.O. Box 20537, Nicosia, CY 1678, Cyprus
Email: kami@cs.ucy.ac.cy, andreas.pitsillides@ucy.ac.cy
†KIOS Center for Intelligent Systems and Networks
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Cyprus
P.O. Box 20537, Nicosia, CY 1678, Cyprus
Email: toﬁs.n.yiannis@ucy.ac.cy, elias@ucy.ac.cy
‡ Fraunhofer FOKUS Institute
Kaiserin-Augusta-Allee 31, D-10589
Berlin, Germany
Email: chakib.bekara@fokus-extern.fraunhofer.de
Abstract—Energy conservation is a global issue with great
implications. High energy demands and environmental concerns
force the transformation of electricity grids into smart grids,
towards more rational utilization of energy.
Embedded computing and smart metering transform houses
into energy-aware environments, allowing residents to make
informed choices about electricity. Web technologies are success-
fully used for managing heterogeneous home devices, facilitating
the remote management of the house through Web APIs. Hence,
the Web, as an ubiquitous and scalable platform, is suitable for
interconnecting energy-aware smart homes and the smart grid.
In this paper, we investigate the possibilities created when
energy-aware smart homes communicate in near real-time with
the smart grid and we propose an architecture for their ﬂex-
ible integration to the grid, through the Web. A proof of
concept deployment is performed and general security aspects
are discussed. The potential of this Web-based architecture is
demonstrated by developing two applications that exploit these
new capabilities of smart homes, towards an intelligent grid.
Demand response is harnessed to schedule electricity-related
tasks for future execution and load shedding is employed to
reduce the total load for avoiding outages. Finally, issues such
as peak leveling, fault tolerance, billing and a market for energy
are brieﬂy discussed.
Keywords-Smart Home; Smart Grid; Web; Web of Things;
REST; Smart Power Outlets; Demand Response; Load Shedding;
Security.
I. INTRODUCTION
Increasing energy demands, depletion of natural resources
and rising costs make energy conservation a universal problem
with tremendous environmental, political and social implica-
tions. Predictions denote that by the year 2030, the global
energy demand will double, rising up the energy-related green
gas emissions by 55% [2].
This high energy demand cannot be accommodated by
current electricity grids. Most of the electricity grids around
the world have been built many decades ago, to meet the
energy requirements of the society at that time. They are
being incrementally upgraded, but these upgrades may not
be completely adequate for the future grid, in addition to the
green concerns.
Increasing demand and environmental concerns inﬂuenced
initiatives towards a more rational utilization of electrical
energy. This goal can be best achieved when the electric
utilities are fully aware in real-time about the electrical
consumption and the demands of their customers. The grid
becomes intelligent when it manages to deliver electricity
from suppliers to consumers, supported by two-way digital
communications and a smart metering system, in a fault-
tolerant, secure and more reliable manner. This vision is
believed to convert traditional electricity grids into modern
smart grids. A smart grid1 is a network of networks that has
come to describe the future electricity grid, enhanced with
Information and Communication Technology (ICT), applied
to generation, delivery and consumption of electric power.
Electricity smart metering involves measuring the consump-
tion of electrical energy in frequent intervals and commu-
nicating that information at least daily back to the utility
for monitoring and billing purposes. Smart metering does
not only affect the future development of the smart grid,
but also motivates the rational management of the electrical
consumption in houses and buildings. Buildings consume a
large proportion of the world’s total electrical energy [3]. This
fact has a signiﬁcant environmental impact, as more than 30%
of all greenhouse gas emissions is attributed to buildings.
Lately, residential smart meters have been introduced in our
lives as sensor devices that measure in small time intervals
1http://smartgrid.ieee.org/ieee-smart-grid
15
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the energy consumption of a house. In the near future, smart
appliances would take advantage of the smart grid’s function-
ality to synchronize their operations with its current state. For
example, they may respond to pricing signals and decide when
it is most economical to operate. An intermediate step before
utilizing smart appliances could be the use of smart power
outlets, which are devices that measure the consumption of
electrical appliances and control their operation in real-time. In
general, the practice of equipping home area networks (HAN)
with smart meters, smart appliances and smart power outlets,
enables the development of energy-aware smart homes.
Undoubtedly, these new technological advancements of
HAN offer new possibilities for effective energy management
and conservation. The capabilities of being informed about the
domestic electrical consumption in (near) real-time and being
able to control the electrical appliances of a house remotely,
enable novel applications to be developed for saving energy.
Especially, when combined with the operations of the smart
grid, these capabilities could offer great potential towards a
coordinated, large-scale plan for energy efﬁciency.
Nowadays, smart home solutions are vendor-speciﬁc and
heterogeneous, employing various hardware and software tech-
nologies to achieve home automation. This trend is expected to
continue in the future. Hence, in order to enable the smart grid
vision, a common ground needs to be speciﬁed, a common
language understood by all HAN, facilitating in-home and
home-to-grid communication. We anticipate that the Web,
as a highly scalable, pervasive and ﬂexible platform, is an
appropriate solution for such a wide-scale interconnection.
Reusing well-accepted and understood Web principles to
interconnect heterogeneous embedded devices, built into ev-
eryday smart things, is the vision of the Web of Things (WoT)
[4], [5]. It is about using the Web as a standard, to assure
interoperability in resource-constrained, pervasive spaces. The
concepts of the WoT have also penetrated in smart home
environments, in which the performance of Web-enabled home
devices is considered acceptable [6], [7].
The main contribution of this paper is to provide the
architecture for the integration of energy-aware smart homes to
the smart grid via the Web, emphasizing on the smart home
environment, and also to demonstrate potential applications
based on the proposed platform. An energy-aware smart
home is deployed using smart power outlets and its remote
management is enabled through the Web. The emulation of
a smart grid scenario allows the (near) real-time Web-based
communication between the HAN and the grid. As security
is a crucial topic in this initiative, a section is dedicated on
explaining in general how the whole system can be secured.
Through this proof of concept deployment, some interesting
applications related to the smart grid are investigated, from an
energy-aware smart home perspective. More speciﬁcally, the
dynamic pricing program of the grid is exploited to sched-
ule electricity-related tasks for the future and load shedding
is studied, as a technique to reduce total consumption for
avoiding outages. Furthermore, other possible applications
such as peak leveling, fault tolerance, automatic billing and
a distributed electricity market are discussed.
We note that in this paper the focus is on the ICT infras-
tructure that could be used for enabling ﬂexible, reliable and
efﬁcient integration of smart homes to the grid. The proposed
architecture targets the non-critical systems of the power grid.
It is recommended that the Supervisory Control and Data
Acquisition (SCADA) system of the smart grid should be
on a separate architecture/network. A SCADA system is an
industrial control system used to monitor and control electrical
power transmission and distribution.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
presents related work concerning mainly projects dealing with
the integration of smart homes to the smart grid, along with
background information about the smart grid and energy-aware
smart homes. After, Section III explains the reasoning why the
Web could constitute a suitable platform for this integration.
Then, in Section IV the development of an energy-aware smart
home using Web techniques is described and in Section V our
approach for connecting HAN to the smart grid through the
Web is discussed. Afterwards, Section VI considers end-to-end
security in the whole Web-based infrastructure while Sections
VII and VIII investigate potential applications that can be
developed when enabling (near) real-time interaction between
smart homes and the grid. Finally, Section IX concludes the
paper and deﬁnes future work directions.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, the state of the art is presented regarding
projects that aim to interconnect energy-aware smart homes
and the smart grid. In addition, some background information
is provided about the smart grid and energy-aware smart
homes in general.
A. Building the Smart Grid
The smart grid is expected to modernize current electricity
grids by providing advanced functionalities such as advanced
management and control, high power quality, immediate fail-
ure alarms, fault localization and response to disturbance (self-
healing), reliability, security, resilience to natural disasters and
improved customer service.
An important characteristic of the smart grid is timely
pricing, which is a smart energy pricing scheme that is set for
a speciﬁc time period on an advance basis, and may change
according to load demands or price changes in the market.
Prices paid for electricity consumed during these periods are
known to consumers a priori, based on a short-term demand
forecasting, allowing them to vary their energy use in response
to these prices and manage their energy costs by shifting the
operation of some electrical appliances to a lower tariff period.
This mechanism is mainly known as demand response (DR).
Numerous pilot projects that implement the smart grid
in an experimental basis, taking into account the domestic
environment, have appeared lately. We list below some of these
projects, emphasizing on aspects that concern the interaction
of the grid with energy-aware smart homes.
16
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A popular project is the SmartGridCity2, performed by
Xcel Energy utility supplier in the area of Boulder, Colorado.
During this project, Xcel Energy has installed approximately
23,000 smart electric meters at the customer premises, man-
aging to collect energy usage data wirelessly and inform
the customers in 15-minute intervals about their electrical
consumption.
Masdar City3 aims to be the world’s ﬁrst zero-carbon city,
powered entirely by renewable energy sources. Pilot residences
are equipped with smart meters, DR-enabled smart appli-
ances and building management systems. By means of this
infrastructure, an integrated citywide distributed management
system would be created, which manages the electrical load
on the grid. As an example, smart appliances are expected to
customize their operation by signals received from the grid,
in order to reduce the total grid’s energy demand. Currently,
Masdar City operates with six buildings. The city is expected
to have 40,000 residents and 50,000 commuters by 2025.
BeyWatch4 is a European project aiming to design, develop
and evaluate an energy-aware, ﬂexible and user-centric smart
home solution, able to provide interactive energy monitoring
for white goods, intelligent control and power demand bal-
ancing at home, block and neighbour level. ZigBee-enabled
smart plugs are used for communication between home agents
and the home appliances. A home agent is a middleware,
implemented using OSGi service bundles, which allows seam-
less device/service discovery and is used mainly for energy
monitoring and device control.
The Smart-A project5 intends to consider to what extent
it is possible for smart appliances to adapt their operation
to variations in the energy supply. The focus is on common
household appliances and, for each appliance, its operation
and energy demand are modeled and its options for load
shifting are analyzed. In this way, the impact on appliance
design and potential service is assessed. This project offers
useful results that may be used for more analytic approaches
regarding operations of the smart grid such as load shedding.
The work in [8] presents various security and privacy issues
arising from a smart home/smart grid interaction, the vulnera-
bilities of the advanced metering infrastructure (AMI) and the
employed ontologies (sensors, smart meters, telecommunica-
tion protocols) as well as requirements and potential solutions
to the underlined challenges. This work discusses security
issues in general, while the security aspects we consider in
Section VI focus mainly on a Web-based environment.
Finally, the SmartHouse/SmartGrid project6 focuses on the
interconnection of smart homes and the smart grid, propos-
ing an Internet-based interconnection by means of big Web
services (WS-*) [9]. It is suggested that service-oriented
architectures (SOA) are suited for integrating smart houses
to the grid [10]. The role and architecture of smart meters as
2http://smartgridcity.xcelenergy.com/
3http://www.masdarcity.ae/en/
4http://www.beywatch.eu
5http://www.smart-a.org
6http://www.smarthouse-smartgrid.eu
well as their security and business implications are additionally
discussed [11].
Similarly to [10], we argue that Web services are suit-
able for this integration and we move one step further by
developing an experimental energy-aware smart home that is
synchronized with the smart grid through the Web. We believe
that REST [12] constitutes a more appropriate technique in
embedded computing and for smart home solutions [13], and
it is nowadays mature enough, also to be employed for the
communication needs with the smart grid.
Our work differs from related work by proposing a REST-
ful, truly Web-based architecture for integrating smart homes
to the smart grid. Our proof of concept smart home deploy-
ment, using smart power outlets and a reliable application
framework for smart homes, along with the development
of two energy-related applications, demonstrate the potential
of interconnecting smart homes and the grid through the
Web. The proposed architecture offers advanced ﬂexibility and
interoperability among heterogeneous smart home solutions,
respects the privacy of customers by giving them the opportu-
nity to actively participate in the smart grid operations while
security aspects may be effectively addressed by using the Web
as a platform.
B. Towards Enabling Energy-Aware Smart Homes
Residential smart metering has the potential to transform
home environments into energy-aware smart spaces. There
exist two broad categories for household energy monitoring
and control: whole-home and device-speciﬁc.
Whole-home approaches place residential smart meters
where the home connects to the power grid. Such products
include Wattson7 and Current Cost8. Numerous efforts tried
to analyze smart metering data to identify the energy con-
sumption of household appliances. As an example, Marchiori
et al. [14] used circuit-level power measurements to separate
aggregated data into device-level estimates, with an accuracy
of more than 90%. Additionally, ViridiScope [15] placed
inexpensive sensors near electrical appliances to estimate their
power consumption with less than 10% error.
Traditional smart meters offer a house-level granularity,
where only the whole-home energy consumption can be vi-
sualized. As the technology advances, monitoring the energy
consumption of each electrical appliance and controlling its
operation becomes possible. Device-speciﬁc techniques plug
smart power outlets in individual electrical appliances. Some
power outlets even offer wireless networking capabilities,
extending the residential smart metering infrastructure into a
robust wireless network.
ACme [16] is a high-ﬁdelity AC metering network that uses
wireless sensor nodes, equipped with digital energy meters to
provide accurate energy measurements of single devices. En-
ergie Visible9 visualizes in real-time the energy consumption
of electrical appliances in a Web-based interface. In the Energy
7http://www.diykyoto.com/uk
8http://www.currentcost.com/
9http://www.webofthings.com/energievisible/
17
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Aware Smart Home [17], users can use their mobile phones
as ”magic lenses” to view the energy consumption of their
appliances, just by pointing on them with the phone’s camera.
A big challenge for energy-aware smart homes, taking into
account the existence of the smart grid, is to provide to the
home environment visibility of grid conditions and dynamic
prices, to take local decisions and intelligently control the use
of household electrical appliances, in order to save energy and
money [1]. Towards this direction, an appliance scheduling
approach to allow appliances to coordinate power use so that
the total demand for the home is kept below a target value is
investigated in [18]. In addition, an optimization technique to
reduce the share of the appliances in the energy bills and to
reduce their contribution to the peak load is presented in [19].
In this paper, an experimental energy-aware smart home is
enabled, using smart power outlets to manage the operation
of the domestic electrical appliances. Our work differs from
related approaches by employing a RESTful, Web-based appli-
cation framework for smart homes [6], [7], which guarantees
the reliable and efﬁcient performance of the power outlets,
offering even support for prioritized requests (e.g., from the
smart grid). The smart power outlets become enabled to the
Web through the framework and multiple family members may
interact with them in real-time.
III. USING THE WEB AS AN INTEGRATION PLATFORM
The Web could constitute a suitable platform for bridging
energy-aware smart homes and the smart grid. Through the
Web, smart homes can be fully synchronized to the grid.
The Web is highly ubiquitous, ﬂexible and it scales par-
ticularly well. A Web-based approach would guarantee high
interoperability between heterogeneous smart grid technolo-
gies and components, and also between different smart home
solutions and embedded sensor and actuation devices.
Most houses offer Internet connectivity nowadays, while
technological advancements in mobile telecommunications
such as LTE, 3G and WiMAX, permit the Internet to penetrate
almost everywhere.
A. Web-based Smart Homes
Designing smart homes based on the Web principles is
a recent practice. Web-based smart homes build upon the
notion of the WoT [4], [5], which is about employing well-
accepted Web practices to interconnect the quickly expanding
ecosystem of sensors, actuators and smart physical devices.
Web-based
interaction
with
household
appliances
is
achieved
following
the
REpresentational
State
Transfer
(REST) [12], which is a lightweight architectural style that
deﬁnes how to use HTTP as an application protocol. REST
advocates in providing Web services modeled as resources.
Resources may be manipulated by the methods speciﬁed in
the HTTP standard (e.g., GET, PUT, POST, DELETE), under
a uniform interface. REST guarantees interoperability and a
smooth transition from the Web to home environments.
REST can be appropriate for enabling a Web-based smart
home, as it is a ﬂexible, loose-coupled approach that pro-
motes using the Web as the actual application layer of the
system. Besides, it can be easily applied for enabling resource-
constrained devices such as smart appliances and smart power
outlets to the Web.
An alternative design would be by employing WS-*, as
proposed in [20]. WS-* [9] are a set of complex standards and
speciﬁcations for enterprise application integration. They are
more standardized and they could provide enhanced security.
However, since they use technologies such as SOAP/XML,
they are not very efﬁcient in home environments, especially
in terms of response time and energy consumption [21]. A
comparison between REST and WS-* is provided in [13].
Web integration of embedded devices can be performed
either through embedding Web servers directly on them or
by employing gateways. Directly embedding Web servers on
physical devices is a recent development [22], [23]. Web-
enabled embedded devices expose their services under a
RESTful application programming interface (API), while com-
munication is based on HTTP calls.
Enabling home devices to the Web, permits the extension of
Web mashups into physical mashups [24]. Physical mashups
take advantage of real-world services offered by physical
devices and combine them using the same tools and techniques
of classic Web mashups. In this way, physical devices can be
blended with Web content and services, without much effort.
To demonstrate the ﬂexibility obtained by using physical
mashups, we list below a PHP script that implements a
physical mashup in only six lines of code, combining electrical
appliances and RESTful Web services provided by an electric
utility. We assume in this example that the utility exposes,
as a Web API, information about its current tariffs. Offering
real-time information is not infeasible for electric utilities.
Recently, three utilities in California announced that they
allowed their consumers to access their utility data through
the Web. This initiative was called the Green Button [25].
This script checks the current hometariff and starts charging
automatically a plug-in hybrid electric vehicle (PHEV) as soon
as the tariff falls below the deﬁned LOW TARIFF limit.
<?php
$tariff=http_get("UtilityAddr/hometariff/");
if($tariff <= LOW_TARIFF){
$req=new HttpRequest("HomeAddr/PHEV/Switch/");
$req->setOptions(array(state=>"ON"));
$req->send();
$response = $http_req->getResponseBody();
}
?>
As a more general example, a reliable Web-based weather
forecast service can be combined with smart appliances, e.g.,
to turn off the electric heating automatically, in case the
temperature is about to increase in the next few hours.
Through the Web, residents may pull easily the data they
need from an open API offered by their electric utility, and use
them right away in their own applications, in any programming
language that supports HTTP. Similarly, the smart home could
offer its functionality as a Web API, allowing the utility to
interact with it almost in real-time, for exchanging information
18
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

and remote administration and control. These simple exam-
ples indicate that advanced home automation, high ﬂexibility,
seamless integration to the smart grid and energy conservation
may be achieved, when using the Web as a platform.
B. The Web and the Smart Grid
Using the Web as the ICT platform for various smart
grid operations offers numerous beneﬁts also to the power
grid. These beneﬁts concern not only the communication with
energy-aware smart homes but also some internal, non-critical,
ICT-related functionalities of the grid.
A smart grid implementation that exploits cloud computing,
using infrastructure as a service (IaaS) from the cloud, con-
stitutes a cost-efﬁcient practice for enhancing the functional-
ities of the grid incrementally as energy demands arise. The
ﬂexibility of cloud computing enables new capabilities to be
implemented on the Web, in parallel to existing operations and
systems, minimizing the impact of ongoing operations.
Existing systems can be securely integrated with new com-
ponents and further be connected to users and customers, by
means of the Web (see Section VI). The Web constitutes a
pervasive and scalable platform for incorporating third-party
and partner techniques.
Furthermore, utilization of the Web would promote the
Web service model, minimizing expenses for additional in-
frastructure and overall implementation time. Web services are
core parts of cloud computing, providing a wealth of proven
methods for systems integration.
Most importantly, a future cloud-based smart grid strategy
using Web services would allow the seamless integration of
Web-based, energy-aware smart homes to the grid. RESTful
Web server may interconnect smart homes and the grid in
a ﬂexible, loose-coupled, interoperable manner. Since REST
is a lightweight protocol, it could be used for efﬁcient and
scalable, near real-time interaction with hundreds or even
millions of houses. As the Internet offers only best-effort
services, real-time guarantees can not be provided. However,
the current Internet infrastructure may support interactions
through REST/HTTP close to real-time.
We note that WS-* could be well applied to achieve this
interconnection [10]. Even though it constitutes a heavy proto-
col, it offers better security features, enables service contracts
through WSDL and is more suitable for business applications.
It is a matter of the electric utility to select the scheme it
would adopt, or even if both should be offered. We argue that
REST is becoming mature enough to be effectively utilized.
IV. CREATING A WEB-BASED ENERGY-AWARE
SMART HOME
A lightweight, Web-oriented application framework for
smart homes, providing uniform access to heterogeneous em-
bedded devices via standard HTTP calls, was developed in [6],
[7]. Central principles of the modern Web architecture were
used to integrate home devices to the Web, in order to build
an interoperable smart home that supports multiple home res-
idents concurrently. By using the Web as the application layer
at the home environment, following REST principles, ﬂexible
applications on top of heterogeneous embedded devices can be
built with a few lines of code, facilitating home automation.
In this work, this application framework was extended to
support interaction with smart power outlets. Thus, by means
of the power outlets, remote control of the electrical appliances
of a house could be achieved, through the Web.
Ploggs10 were utilized as the smart outlets of our exper-
imental smart home. Ploggs are ZigBee-based devices that
incorporate wireless transceivers, based on the IEEE802.15.411
standard, forming a wireless smart metering network inside the
smart home. Since Ploggs are programmed with a ﬁrmware
that can not be easily changed, they can not be enabled directly
to the Web. Thus, they are enabled indirectly through the
application framework, by means of Java drivers that allow
the communication with them through a RESTful interface.
Each Plogg is associated with some speciﬁc electrical ap-
pliance, for monitoring its electricity footprint and control its
operation. To derive the house’s total electrical consumption, a
Plogg equipped with an external current transformer for loads
up to 100 A was attached to the mains meter of the house.
Figure 1 depicts the general architecture of the extended
smart home application framework. It follows a layered model
and is composed of three principal layers: Device Layer, which
is responsible for the management and control of the smart
power outlets, Control Layer, which is the central processing
unit of the system and Presentation Layer, which represents
the access point to the framework from the Web, enabling the
uniform interaction with the electrical appliances of the smart
home over a RESTful interface.
Each time a new smart outlet is discovered, a new thread
dedicated to the corresponding electrical appliance is created.
A Resource Registry maintains the services offered by the
power outlet, as well as information how to properly invoke
them. A Request Queue is attached to each thread, to enqueue
concurrent requests to it. Requests are stored in a FIFO manner
and are transmitted sequentially to the device. Whenever a
transmission failure occurs, the failed request is retrieved from
the request queue and retransmitted. In this way, transmission
failures are masked effectively and reliability is assured.
Driver module holds the technology-speciﬁc drivers for
enabling communication with the smart power outlets, by
sending/receiving requests to/from them. A Web Server allows
Web-based interaction between users and the home devices. A
REST Engine, implemented by means of Restlet12, ensures a
RESTful system behaviour.
In Figure 2, a typical deployment of Ploggs inside an
energy-aware smart home is shown. These smart meters use
their multi-hop communication abilities to inform the residents
about the electricity footprint of each appliance. In the ﬁgure,
ﬁve hops are needed from the meter that acts as the base
station to reach the meter which monitors and controls the
10Energy Optimizers Ltd has stopped producing Ploggs.
11http://www.ieee802.org/15/pub/TG4.html
12http://www.restlet.org/
19
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 1.
The general architecture of the application framework including smart power outlets.
Fig. 2. A deployment of smart power outlets in an energy-aware smart home.
television. Plogg discovery is automatic, based on the ZigBee
speciﬁcations. The application framework queries the wireless
network of Ploggs for new devices in frequent intervals.
As shown in Figure 2, the framework has been installed on
some computing device of the smart home and communicates
with the Ploggs by means of a Telegesis USB stick. We must
note that the framework could have been installed on the main
smart meter of the house, which communicates directly with
the electric utility (in a smart grid scenario) through AMI.
Probably this could be the case in the near future, when main
smart meters would be powerful enough to support also smart
home applications and embedded Web servers.
Moreover, the functionality of the application framework
was exposed as a RESTful interface and a client application
was developed in JavaScript, using the Google Web Toolkit
(GWT). This client application offers a Web-based, interactive
graphical user interface (GUI), in order to help residents to
visualize their energy consumption and fully manage their
electrical appliances through the Web. Detailed, real-time
consumption data from each electrical appliance and the ag-
gregation of historical data about energy into graphs, facilitate
the extraction of informed knowledge about the home’s energy
performance, encouraging the habitant towards a more rational
use of electricity. Some psychological studies indicate that
timely electrical consumption feedback is believed to assist
in reducing electrical consumption by 5-20% [26], [27].
A typical snapshot of the client application can be observed
in Figure 3, in which the electricity footprint of household
electrical appliances is provided on a daily basis for the current
week. Through detailed energy monitoring, electricity-wasting
actions may be avoided and energy-inefﬁcient devices can be
managed better or be replaced.
Through the Web, each appliance can be individually con-
trolled. For example, residents may switch off the television
remotely from work, in case they forgot it on, when they
hastily left the house. Residents can associate the energy
consumption of their electrical appliances to the actual tariffs
from their electric utility, translating kilowatt hours (kWh) into
money. Based on these tariffs, the electricity cost consumed
by each appliance is automatically calculated.
V. CONNECTING SMART HOMES TO THE SMART GRID
Connecting energy-aware smart homes to the smart grid cre-
ates a new potential for saving energy and money. Household
appliances account for 50-90% of the residential consumption
and their rational management is crucial for any energy
conservation initiative.
The Web-based interaction between smart homes and the
smart grid could be facilitated by utilizing intermediary de-
vices called smart grid controllers. Each controller would be
responsible for some houses or neighborhoods. More powerful
20
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 3.
Detailed electrical consumption of the electrical appliances of the
energy-aware smart home.
grid controllers could manage larger areas such as villages
and small towns. Smart grid controllers could maintain a
hierarchical structure for fault tolerance and scalability. For
example, controllers at higher levels (i.e., closer to the smart
grid system) could be used for administering controllers at
lower levels (i.e., closer to the customer premises). Low-level
controllers would be able to communicate in a timely manner
with each house while high-level controllers could interact
with the main grid through a SCADA system. The overall
system architecture is depicted in Figure 4.
We need to note that these smart grid controllers represent
domestic controllers and should be separated from the main
electricity infrastructure. It is also important to note that our
focus is on integrating energy-aware smart homes to the smart
grid, enabling ﬂexible interaction patterns between them, and
not on the operation of the smart grid and its controllers. The
controllers could have specialized software for performing the
grid’s operations. An example implementation of a smart grid
controller for emulating the behaviour of the smart grid in a
scenario involving load shedding is described in Section VII-B.
As mentioned in Section III-A, the functionality of a smart
home would be exposed as a Web API. Therefore, controllers
can only interact with the house through the functions speciﬁed
by this API. A simple Web API for Web-based smart homes,
targeted to enable remote management and control by electric
utilities is presented in Table I.
This API would allow the utility to get informed about the
total electrical consumption of the house (GET electricity),
ask the smart home to reduce its consumption because an
outage is possible (POST reduceconsumption) or allow the
house to increase its consumption when the total load is
in safe margins (POST increaseconsumption). The targeted
quantity of reduced consumption is speciﬁed by the parameter
reduction and it is deﬁned in Watts. Similarly, the maximum
allowed quantity of (increased) consumption is speciﬁed by
the parameter maxincrease and it is also deﬁned in Watts.
The responses from these HTTP requests are in standardized
formats. The POST requests for reducing/increasing consump-
tion are satisﬁed through a plain-text response, indicating a
ACK/NACK, while the GET request triggers a JSON response,
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Waiting Time (ms)
Request Queue Load
Normal-Priority Requests
Low-Priority Requests
High-Priority Requests
Fig. 5.
The priority mechanism at the smart home application framework,
showing the waiting times for requests with different priorities and heap load
conditions.
including information such as consumption in kWh, instant
consumption in Watt and a timestamp.
It is crucial for the healthy operation of the smart grid
to be assured that all the HTTP calls to the energy-aware
smart homes would be executed reliably and on time. Our
smart home application framework guarantees the successful
execution of all Web requests by using a request queue for
each smart power outlet and a fast retransmission mechanism,
triggered in case some transmission failure occurs in the smart
home environment.
To ensure the urgent execution of the requests that are
made by the smart grid, a priority mechanism may be easily
included to the framework by transforming the request queues
into priority heaps. Hence, requests coming from the smart
grid could be labeled as ”high-priority requests”, obtaining
a prioritized execution, regardless of the current load at the
heaps of the smart power outlets. The waiting times for
requests with different priorities in varied load conditions are
displayed in Figure 5, for a typical operation of the priority
mechanism in increased trafﬁc. According to the ﬁgure, high-
priority requests are executed ﬁrst, with average waiting times
less than a second, reaching two seconds only when the heap
has a size equal or more than seven (i.e., seven or more
requests waited already at the heap when the high-priority
request arrived).
The functionalities of the application framework regarding
mainly the fast retransmission mechanism and the support for
prioritized requests are described in [28].
Respecting the privacy of the consumers, the smart home
may act as a ”black box”, allowing the smart grid to make
requests to assure its proper operation but, at the same time,
leaving the full control and responsibility on how to satisfy
these requests to the residents, aiming to maintain a high
comfort level at a reasonable expense. In such a way, people’s
privacy and the healthy operation of the grid can be balanced.
The important question then becomes how to handle a
request from the utility for reducing the overall electrical
consumption. The most obvious approach would be to rely
on the residents to assign priorities to their electrical devices.
21
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 4.
System architecture for integrating energy-aware smart homes to the smart grid through the Web.
No.
Resource URL
REST Verb
MIME (Return) Type
Parameter (Type)
1
HouseName/electricity
GET
JSON
-
2
HouseName/reduceconsumption
POST
text/plain
reduction (Integer)
3
HouseName/increaseconsumption
POST
text/plain
maxincrease (Integer)
TABLE I
WEB API OF A WEB-BASED SMART HOME FOR INTERACTION WITH THE SMART GRID.
However, this may become inﬂexible and would complicate
the whole procedure for the customers, who may have chang-
ing priorities and may not be willing to participate in such
smart grid programs. An alternative approach would be to
categorize devices according to their use patterns. Hence,
we separate household devices into three broad categories.
Permanent devices, which should never be turned off such
as a fridge, on-demand devices, which are utilized by home
residents spontaneously, in order to accomplish a momentary
task such as a toaster and schedulable devices, which are
devices that are supposed to accomplish some speciﬁc task, but
their operation is not momentarily urgent and can be postponed
for a future time such as a dishwasher.
We focus mainly on schedulable devices since their op-
eration can be postponed for low-demand and respectively
low-tariff periods of the day. These appliances could be
immediately turned off, in case there is a prompt call from the
utility to reduce urgently the domestic energy consumption.
Thus, customers are just required to identify which of
their home devices are considered schedulable. Then, the
application framework targets this device category to postpone
use, in case there is a necessity. In the scenario when no
schedulable devices consume energy and there is an urgent
need for reduction, then on-demand devices would be selected.
It is trivial for the application framework to consider which
devices are used on-demand, by observing their consumption
patterns. Concerning permanent devices, the fridge is a special
case as it could be turned off for some minutes without a
problem. In addition, air conditioners and the electric heater
could be special cases of on-demand devices whose operation
may be postponed for some minutes.
In a complete smart grid scenario, different policies could
have effect concerning the remote management of smart homes
from the grid. Service-level agreements (SLA) could be used
for assuring smooth supply of electricity and different cus-
tomer pricing schemes could be applied. For example, ”gold
customers” could pay a small extra fee for avoiding possible
reduction of electrical supply in peak periods.
VI. ASSURING SECURITY IN SMART GRID-ENABLED
SMART HOMES
The bidirectional Web-based communication between the
smart grid and each smart home requires a trustworthy com-
munication environment, where each party trusts the other
communicating party, as well as the correctness, integrity and
freshness of the received data. For instance, upon reception of
pricing messages from the utility, the smart home application
framework is assumed to take some actions (e.g., to charge
an electric vehicle). If the pricing messages were changed on-
route, the application will possibly take wrong actions. This
could cause ﬁnancial losses for the consumers, and even lead
to a power outage (e.g., by sending fake low-cost tariffs during
peak-periods).
Moreover, since the operation of smart appliances/smart
power outlets must be managed by an energy-aware smart
home application (e.g., to turn on energy-consuming electrical
appliances during off-peak periods), it needs to be ensured
that these smart devices are managed by the appropriate home
application and not the application running on a neighboring
home or by an attacker.
To provide secure communications for smart grid-enabled
smart homes, the following basic security services need to be
guaranteed:
• Authentication. Ensure the identity that another party
claims to be. For instance, the smart home framework
22
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

needs to be sure that it gets pricing information only from
the utility.
• Integrity. Ensure that stored or received data were not
modiﬁed on-route. For instance, the utility needs to
ensure the integrity of metering data received from smart
homes.
• Authorization. This service allows one party to verify
that another authenticated party has the right to do some
actions or access some resources. For instance, the smart
home framework needs to be sure that a tenant requiring
access to some electrical appliance has the necessary
rights to do that.
• Conﬁdentiality. Ensure that data are illegible to non-
authorized parties. For instance, energy consumption sent
by the smart home to the utility needs to be encrypted,
such as only the utility is able to access it.
• Non-repudiation. This service prevents one party to deny
sending a message or doing some action. For example.
assuming that the utility sends a pricing message with a
low price Y but applies a high price Z, it could not deny
the fact that the low-price message was really sent by it.
Furthermore, the utility needs to be sure that a consumer
could not contest a bill by denying the sending of the
corresponding energy consumption measurement.
• Freshness. This service protects from replay attacks,
where a valid message sent at time t, is also sent in
the future by the attacker. For instance, an attacker could
replay low-tariff pricing messages during peak-periods.
Unfortunately, the Web (HTTP) does not provide a trusted
communication environment, since it offers poor built-in secu-
rity mechanisms and, as a consequence, needs to rely on some
extra mechanisms to provide stronger security. For instance,
HTTP is target to several attacks that could harm the proposed
Web-based architecture, such as:
• Man-In-The-Middle (MITM) attack: An attacker suc-
cessfully impersonates each communicating party (e.g.,
smart home framework and smart grid controller) to the
other party, and injects, modiﬁes or drops packets. This
attack could target functionalities of the smart grid such
as demand response, load shedding and billing, causing
ﬁnancial losses to both parties, and even leading to power
outages.
• Man-In-The-Browser (MITB) attack: This attach involves
a malicious program (e.g., a Trojan) that infects a Web
browser and takes control of data entered by the user or
data retrieved from the Web server and displayed by the
browser. This attack could harm the user by displaying
false statistics about his consumption, and not the real
statistics provided by the actual smart meter of the house.
• Denial of Service (DoS) Attack on HTTP: This kind
of attack aims to make a service or resource (e.g., a
Web server) unavailable. For instance, this attack could
target making a real-time tariff service unavailable, thus
forcing the DR functionality to stop. A similar attack
could be launched against the smart home framework,
making grid-related operations unavailable at the victim
smart homes.
A. Securing the Smart Home-Smart Grid Interaction
Securing this interaction is mandatory for making the Web-
based integration of energy-aware smart homes to the smart
grid in a secure, feasible and acceptable way, both for the
utility and the consumers. This interaction includes exposing
the functionalities/services offered by smart homes (see Table
I) as Web resources, accessed and utilized by the utility. In
addition, the utility exposes a set of information (e.g., energy
tariffs) as resources, accessed by smart homes via the Web.
By leveraging the existing Web security mechanisms, sev-
eral security issues inherent to the smart home-smart grid
interaction can be addressed. Using HTTP Secure (HTTPS)
[29] is one way of protecting the communications between
the two parties of our architecture. HTTPS is HTTP layered
over the Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol.
The TLS protocol [30] ﬁts between the application and the
transport layer (mainly TCP), and provides a plenty of security
services over the Internet, such as cryptographic key-exchange
and per-session key establishment, mutual authentication, in-
tegrity, conﬁdentiality, non-repudiation and freshness. TLS
allows the establishment of a secure communication channel
between a TLS-enabled client and a TLS-enabled server, in
which the server is ﬁrst authenticated through a certiﬁcate
(optionally also the client), and then secret session keys are
established using some key management protocol. Once the
communication channel is established, HTTP request/response
messages may be securely sent between the smart home ap-
plication framework and the (low-level) smart grid controller.
In the context of a smart grid scenario, since the smart
home framework and the grid controller play both the role
of HTTP client/server, mutual authentication through public-
key certiﬁcate is mandatory for TLS use. Each smart home
obtains a pair of certiﬁed private/public keys from a trusted
Certiﬁcate Authority (CA), with a strong advice to keep the
private key on a smart card, onto which all public-key crypto-
graphic operations are done, in order to avoid the private key
disclosure. For reinforcing smart home security, the equipment
on which the smart home framework is running should not be
visible or directly accessible from the outside. Furthermore,
smart homes should be protected by a separate ﬁrewall. In
this way, the ﬁrewall will be the ﬁrst line of defense for
the smart home, while the access to the resources provided
by the application framework could be easily done through
redirection rules implemented at the ﬁrewall.
Finally, the smart grid controllers also obtain certiﬁed
private/public keys, and securely disseminate their certiﬁcates
to the respective smart homes. Similar to the smart home case,
in order to protect the non-critical smart grid controllers and
also the critical SCADA systems, at least a ﬁrewall protection
should be employed. Nevertheless, we suggest that SCADA
systems are interconnected through their own dedicated net-
work, connected to the remaining smart grid network through
23
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

gateways (integrated to or separated from the ﬁrewalls). In this
way, DoS attacks may be prevented.
Since the smart home framework and the grid controllers
are assumed to be hosted in powerful machines, the overheads
induced by the TLS protocol (e.g., computation, transmission)
could be affordable. However, if the home framework is
running on the smart meter of the house, assuming that smart
meters are currently resource-constrained devices, then the
implementation of the whole TLS protocol could not be very
efﬁcient, because of increased memory demands and expensive
TLS cryptographic operations, especially during the hand-
shake phase for key-establishment.
B. Security Inside the Smart Home
Assuming all the in-home interactions are done through
the Web, resource-constrained devices such as smart power
outlets and smart appliances shall run an embedded Web
server, in order to expose their capabilities as Web resources,
accessible by the smart home application framework. The main
challenge here is how to secure this Web-based interaction
against attacks, in such a resource-constrained environment.
Generally, porting the IP stack on embedded devices is
a recent achievement [31], [32]. Furthermore, Web-enabled
sensor network systems in which sensor devices offer their
functionalities as RESTful Web services have recently ap-
peared [7], [22], [23]. Although these recent achievements,
the WoT is not yet very common in embedded systems
and constrained devices. Additionally, using standard security
protocols, such as TLS or IPsec [33], does not yet constitute
a popular practice in embedded computing, due to the heavy
induced costs on the device operation. However, some efforts
have been made recently to make these security protocols
feasible for resource-constrained devices.
For instance, the Constrained Application Protocol (CoAP)
[34] is a lightweight protocol for Web transfer in resource-
constrained networks, sharing several similarities with HTTP.
CoAP security is based on the use of Datagram TLS (DTLS)
[35] or IPsec for securing the communications between the
client (e.g., the smart home framework) and server (e.g., the
home devices), at the transport and network layers respectively
[36]. DTLS is a variant of TLS which operates over UPD (TLS
operates over TCP), and which allows the establishment of a
secure communication channel over which CoAP messages
could transit. Due to the constrained environment of physical
devices, only a subset of encryption and hash functions is
assumed, in addition to the use of Elliptic Curve Cryptography
(ECC) [37] instead of classical public-key cryptography (e.g.,
RSA, DSA), due to its low overhead in computation, storage
and bandwidth.
While DTLS protects end-to-end communication (i.e.,
CoAP client and CoAP server), a hop-to-hop protection is
also required inside the smart home, since requests and re-
sponses will probably travel through several hops to reach
their destination. Since the majority of smart devices inside
the home environment typically use IEEE 802.15.4 at the
PHY and MAC layers, they could use the cryptographic
facilities provided by the MAC layer, and in particular the
AES algorithm to provide both encryption and data integrity.
However, the key provisioning and key management is still an
open issue, and needs to be determined at higher layers.
An additional requirement for inside-home security is the
pairing. We need to guarantee that communications involve
only authorized smart meters, smart power outlets and smart
appliances belonging to a smart home A, and not those of
a neighboring Smart Home B. In addition, smart devices
of home A must be managed solely by the smart home
application deployed at smart home A. Also, we need to
guarantee that the smart home framework in home A controls
only the home smart devices, and not those of a neighboring
home B. The pairing will deﬁnitely require some level of
user interaction, depending on the I/O and computational
capabilities of the paired devices.
To sum up, the communication inside the smart home
environment may be performed through CoAP and secured by
DTLS. The CoAP request/response messages are exchanged
in a way similar to HTTP, in addition to an application-level
acknowledgment, since TCP is not used at the transport level
for reliable data transfer. Unfortunately, as the smart power
outlets included in our experimental smart home (Ploggs)
were programmed with a closed ﬁrmware, they could not be
enhanced with CoAP and its security mechanism. However,
we strongly recommended that future real-life deployments
of energy-aware smart homes need to consider protocols that
provide secure communications, such as CoAP.
Finally, we need to note that we only covered some general
aspects regarding assuring security in Web-based smart homes
that are enabled to the smart grid. A full study, which is beyond
the scope of the current paper, is required to study in detail
all security issues that result in our proposed architecture.
VII. APPLICATIONS OF SMART GRID-ENABLED
SMART HOMES
Here we outline some interesting applications that may be
enabled when energy-aware smart homes are connected to
the smart grid, through the Web. Our objective through these
applications is to demonstrate the potential beneﬁts of enabling
smart homes to the grid, using the Web as the interconnection
platform. Many more applications may occur in the future,
exploiting more effectively the capabilities of the smart grid.
This is a matter of further research.
A. Exploiting Demand Response
A signiﬁcant feature of the grid is demand response. DR
would assist in offering dynamic tariffs, according to sup-
ply conditions. Dynamic tariffs can be received almost in
real-time, when utilities provide Web APIs to automatically
disseminate them to the homes of the consumers. The DR
capability would allow users to cut their energy bills by telling
low priority devices to harness energy only when it is cheapest.
A DR-based task scheduler may also have a psychological
factor. Energy-aware smart homes and the introduction of the
smart grid in the residents’ daily lives could engage them in
24
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
01:00
05:00
09:00
13:00
17:00
21:00
Time of Day
Total Demand (MW)
Daily Demand
Average Demand
Morning
Late Night
Afternoon
Early Night
Fig. 6.
Total electricity demand in a typical winter day.
more sustainable lifestyles and energy-efﬁcient practices [38].
The potential for saving energy and money can cultivate in-
formed, actively involved, environmentally-aware consumers.
To demonstrate DR in energy-aware smart homes, a simula-
tion of an electric utility offering timely tariffs was developed,
interacting with a task scheduling mechanism, which was
created to exploit the DR capability of electric utilities. The
implementation efforts and a proof of concept evaluation
procedure are described in the following subsections.
1) Implementation: We enhanced the client application,
built on top of the application framework, with a task schedul-
ing mechanism adapted to DR from electric utilities, following
the physical mashup paradigm. The residents are able to
program actions to be executed automatically in low-tariff
hours. A low tariff is speciﬁed as a lower percentage from
the basic tariff, which is offered by the utility. As an example,
the resident can program the electric water heater to heat water
for a shower, when the tariff is 10% less than normally.
The residents are able to further adjust the task scheduling
procedure, according to their own preferences. They can deﬁne
a maximum amount of waiting time, in case tariff does not fall
below the speciﬁed limit in that time window. In this case, the
task can start right after. The residents can also specify the
execution of a task to be performed in the morning, afternoon
or night. Finally, they can set the duration of each task, forcing
the application to switch the corresponding electrical appliance
off, as soon as the task completes.
We developed a Web server that simulates a (low-level)
smart grid controller, supporting DR functionality for the
Electricity Authority of Cyprus (EAC), which is the only
utility in Cyprus. A RESTful Web service informs customers
about the utility’s current tariffs using RSS Web feeds.
These tariffs, although simulated, aim to reﬂect the actual
energy loads and demands in our country. Figure 6 presents
the total electricity demand in Cyprus, at a typical winter day.
We assume that the power plants of EAC are able to operate
in four different modes for generating electric power. These
modes reﬂect the average electricity demands when dividing a
winter day into morning, afternoon, early night and late night.
15
17
19
21
23
25
01:00
05:00
09:00
13:00
17:00
21:00
Time of Day
Tariff (cents/kWh)
Dynamic Tariff
Basic Tariff
8%
8%
5%
15%
Fig. 7.
Real-time tariffs based on electricity demand.
These four modes can be observed in the ﬁgure.
To produce dynamic tariffs, correlated to electricity demand
patterns, we used the simple equation shown in (1):
Tariff = α · BasicTariff · ( InstantDemand
AverageDemand)
(1)
where α is a coefﬁcient used to weight the prices according
to differences in demands. Using this equation with α = 1,
dynamic tariffs are produced that give incentives to consumers
to utilize their electrical appliances not in peak hours. These
tariffs ﬂuctuate around the basic home tariff, as shown in
Figure 7.
2) Evaluation: To test the performance of our system, we
considered a typical real-life scenario. Most washing machines
allow a user to deﬁne a preferred operation mode and start
the washing in a future time. We programmed such a washing
machine through the task scheduling mechanism, to start the
washing when the tariff from the electric utility is 5% less than
its normal price. According to Figure 7, this would happen at
4:00, 7:00, 14:00 and 23:00 in a typical winter day. We also
set some parameters such as the duration of the task to be
one hour and 30 minutes and the maximum waiting time to
be eight hours. We measured the execution times of this task,
placing the washing machine and its corresponding Plogg, in
different hops from the application framework (base station).
Figure 8 illustrates the results of this experiment. In all
ﬁve multi-hop scenarios, we created the task at 12:00, it
started executing exactly at 14:00 and it ﬁnished execution
at 15:30. Less than two seconds are needed, from the time
the application is informed about the tariff change, until the
washing machine starts working, even in ﬁve-hop distance.
Switching off the device needs a bit longer, approximately 1-
3 seconds. This difference is due to the speciﬁc operation of
the Ploggs’ ﬁrmware.
In this experiment, we utilized Ploggs with ﬁrmware version
2.00. Comparing with the same experiment, performed in
[1], where we employed Ploggs with ﬁrmware version 1.67,
response time in this experiment is reduced signiﬁcantly,
especially for switching off some electrical appliance. This
25
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
1
2
3
4
5
Time (seconds)
Washing Machine Distance (Hops)
Plogg Switch-On Service
Plogg Switch-Off Service
Fig. 8.
Task scheduling performance.
difference occurs because data is transmitted in binary instead
of ASCII form in the new version of the ﬁrmware.
Since the task scheduling mechanism will operate for con-
trol scenarios with low workload, the results in regard to task
execution times are considered satisfactory.
A small-scale, telephone-based survey was performed in [1]
to identify schedulable electrical appliances and their usage
patterns by housewives in Cyprus. After performing some
basic calculations for money savings, taking into account
the average energy consumption of these appliances and the
typical home tariff offered by EAC (20,07 cent/kWh), it was
considered that monthly savings can be summed around e 6
in 10% tariff reduction and up to e 19 in case of 30%
reduction. Considering the fact that the average monthly cost
for electricity in houses around Cyprus is e 175, possible
saving of e 19 gives 10,85% reduction at the bill of a typical
home, when our task scheduling mechanism is applied for all
schedulable electrical devices. This is deﬁnitely a signiﬁcant
saving amount.
Finally, since many schedulable devices are used only
sometimes per month or some hours per day, it is not necessary
to buy a smart power outlet for each different device. By
purchasing 5-10 power outlets, it may be enough to cover the
daily needs of the family and schedule the operations of the
schedulable devices through the task scheduling mechanism in
low-tariff hours of the day. In this way, this application would
constitute a low-cost investment.
B. Load Shedding
Load shedding [39] is an action taken to prevent frequency
abnormal operation and is the last resort to maintain frequency
stability (i.e., it retains frequency within the operational
and statutory limits), in case of contingency scenarios or
autonomous-islanded operation. Such a scenario could include
the non-scheduled outage of a generation unit or a main
transformer. In this case, the non-served load previously served
by the generator that currently experiences an outage will
be allocated to other online units, given that their loading
can be extended, remaining within the limits indicated by the
manufacturer.
However, there are two unfortunate cases that might happen.
First, the online generators may not be able to accommo-
date/undertake the extra load because they are already highly
loaded. Secondly, online generation units might be able to
accommodate the extra load (because they are not fully loaded)
but, depending on the magnitude of the loss of generation, the
response rate of their prime movers will not be in position to
accommodate such a sudden increase in load, within the time
slot indicated in transmission system regulations.
In such cases, in order to avoid an under-frequency ab-
normal operation of the power system, the operator will
be forced to apply a low frequency demand control action,
removing intentionally loads from service in order to prevent
the total collapse of the system due to cascading events. This
procedure is the deﬁnition of load shedding and it lasts until
the frequency magnitude recovers at the desired levels, when
the rest of the online units are able to fully compensate the
non-served load.
Load shedding is a procedure undertaken from the electric
utility or the power system operator in a centralized way. The
approach followed in this work is to exploit the proposed
architecture and the functionalities provided by the Web APIs
of Web-enabled energy-aware smart homes (see Table I), to
achieve selective load shedding that can be performed in a
distributed manner, providing to the grid the capability of di-
rectly controlling domestic loads. This is a major characteristic
of the future grid not yet standardized and its implementation
has not yet been decided.
1) Implementation: The architecture described in Section
V illustrates the path of the control messages and how the
control objective will be achieved, i.e., the frequency stability
of the power system. Concretely, the electric utility monitors
the frequency of the power system almost in real time. In
the case of a critical variation based on the frequency value
and its rate of change, control messages are issued from the
utility control center to the high-level smart grid controllers,
which order the low-level grid controllers to reduce the power
consumption of the area that they are responsible for (i.e.,
a neighborhood). Then, the low-level controllers use the Web
API of smart homes in a best-effort manner, asking the houses
to reduce their consumption based on their current electricity
demand and the condition of the grid.
Harnessing a smart home for these purposes has not yet
been thoroughly explored by researchers and it is expected to
revolutionize the future grid’s structure and control. To demon-
strate this potential application of the smart grid, an emulated
scenario of selective load shedding has been implemented,
employing three residential units in which our Web-based ap-
plication framework for smart homes (see Section IV) has been
deployed, along with 4-5 Ploggs at each house, associated with
various electrical appliances of the house, mostly schedulable
devices. The experimental setup is displayed in Figure 9.
In the scenario under consideration, it is assumed that the
residential untis are located in an islanded power system. A
set of generators are committed and serve the total load of the
system. Without loss of generality, the system is modeled with
26
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 9.
The experimental setup used in the scenario of load shedding.
a generator, a transmission line and a variable load. The aim
is to monitor the frequency stability of the system.
Virtual Phasor Measurement Units (PMUs) [40] have been
used, which are capable of measuring both the frequency and
its ﬁrst derivative online in real-time.
System parameters were identiﬁed by applying the Lya-
punov Synthesis Method [41], based on a simple linear second-
order system frequency response (SFR) model [42]. Lyapunov
Synthesis Method enables to identify the parameters of the
plant by employing a suitable Lyapunov function, in terms
of state variables and time, forcing this function to be at least
negative semi-deﬁnite in order to obtain the desirable stability.
Further, a (low-level) smart grid controller was simulated
on Simulink13, and its main task was to maintain the stability
of the system by determining the optimal (per unit) amount of
electric load that should be shed to achieve frequency stability.
The basic parameters of the simulation are listed in Table II.
Parameter
Value
Simulator Time Step
0.27424 msec
Total Simulation time
150 sec
Sampling Rate for Domestic Consumption
350 msec
Total Number of HTTP requests
428
TABLE II
PARAMETERS AT THE SIMULATION OF A SMART GRID CONTROLLER.
At the scenario under discussion, the grid experiences a
sudden, non-scheduled increase in load. This increase has been
modeled as a step function change in demand. As a result, the
frequency of the power system starts to decline continuously.
Three different cases are considered:
13http://www.mathworks.com/products/simulink/
I. No load shedding takes place.
II. Load shedding is performed following the conventional
practice that is applied by the vast majority of power
system operators worldwide.
III. An intelligent selective/soft load shedding is performed,
exploiting the proposed system architecture.
In the ﬁrst case, the frequency decline is just monitored
without taking any action. In the second case, circuit breakers
are activated, shedding load based on an approximate rule of
thumb, which indicates that the connected load magnitude
should be decreased linearly in relation to the frequency
decline. For example, if the frequency decreases by 1%, then
load magnitude would be decreased by 2% [43]. Thus, when
frequency declines 1% becoming 49.5 Hz, 2% of the load is
shed. At the frequency level of 49Hz, a 4% of the initial load
is shed and so on.
Finally, in the third case, the proposed algorithm was
applied to determine when load shedding should be performed
and the amount of load that should be shed. The current
consumption is monitored in near real-time by the operator
of the grid through the relevant smart grid controller, which
is responsible to aggregate the consumption of the houses
it controls. The grid controller obtains the current consump-
tion by issuing an HTTP GET electricity command to each
smart home, in regular time intervals of 100 ms. The total
consumption, input to the simulated power system as a load,
has been derived from the current consumption of the three
domestic units, multiplied by a factor of 10,000. In this way,
the emulation scenario has been scaled to an islanded grid.
Based on the total consumption, the current value of the
grid’s electrical frequency and its rate of change, the operator
27
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

asks from the grid controller to shed the required amount
of load. Then, the controller asks from each house to shed
a speciﬁc amount of load by issuing an HTTP POST re-
duceconsumption command. The targeted amount of load to
be shed at each home depends on its current consumption.
After, the application framework decides which device(s)
should be switched off based on the policy employed (e.g.,
according to device category and its current consumption). In
this implementation, schedulable devices whose consumptions
were closest to the targeted reduction were preferred to be
switched off.
This is an iterative conversational procedure that takes place
until the targeted total amount of load is shed. As soon as
the command is successfully executed (i.e., an ACK has been
received and the corresponding devices have been switched
off), the simulator is fed with the scaled amount of shed load.
Finally, when the grid is in a ”safe” condition again (i.e.,
the frequency has recovered in normal/desired limits), the
controller starts progressively to issue HTTP POST increasec-
onsumption commands to the smart homes, to gradually add
the load that has been previously curtailed, allowing a maxi-
mum restoration in load at each house. Hence, the application
framework switches on the schedulable devices that had been
previously switched off, allowing them to ﬁnish their task.
The three different phases of the proposed algorithm can
be observed in Figure 9. In this speciﬁc scenario, the grid
controller monitors the electrical consumption of all the three
houses and, at some time, needs to perform load shedding in
order to maintain frequency stability of the system. Hence,
it decides to issue HTTP POST commands to smart homes
B and C to reduce their instant consumption by 500 and
800 Watts respectively. Smart Home B responds to this com-
mand by switching off the dishwasher and smart home C by
switching off the electric iron. These are schedulable devices
whose operation may be postponed for a future time. Then,
when the system is stabilized again, the grid controller issues
another POST command to smart homes B and C, allowing
them to increase their consumption by 600 and 1000 Watts
respectively.
2) Evaluation: Figure 10 depicts the performance of the
three different schemes in regard to the time response of the
frequency variation. When no load shedding is applied, the
frequency declines exceeding the permitted limits (of +/- 3
Hz), causing under-frequency abnormal operation. In this case,
the power grid will experience instability and cascading events
will possibly follow, causing a total blackout. Furthermore,
devices such as induction motors can be damaged or even
burned out at low/under-frequency operation.
In the second case, when conventional practices regarding
load shedding are performed, the frequency exceeds the de-
sired levels for four seconds and needs 35 seconds in total
in order to ”absorb” the disturbance. After this critical time,
frequency oscillations still exist, being reduced with a small
step. In this case, a set of customers would experience a total
outage causing major discomfort to them.
Finally, when our intelligent selective load shedding algo-
rithm is applied, the frequency remains at the desired levels
during the whole emulation time. It recovers fast in the ﬁrst 35
seconds of the emulation and totally absorbs the disturbance
after 50 seconds.
Moreover, because the intelligent algorithm is sensitive even
at small frequency variations and acts proactively, based on
the frequency rate of change, it ﬁnally achieves a minimum
total amount of load to be shed. This is in contrast to the
conventional practice in which a larger amount of load needs
to be shed in order to achieve the same control objective, i.e.,
maintaining the system frequency in the desired levels.
In addition, load restoration can be applied smoothly as soon
as the frequency experiences an upward trend, exceeding a
certain threshold with certain momentum (i.e., certain rise rate
given by the positive time derivative of the frequency). In this
way, the maximum load is restored in minimal time.
Our ﬁndings indicate that this application contributes to a
more robust power grid that controls frequency oscillations in
a more effective and efﬁcient way, preventing power system
instabilities and total outages of utility services. At the same
time, it minimizes unexpected outages and customer discom-
fort by minimizing the load to be shed and by restoring it
faster than the conventional practices do.
VIII. OTHER POTENTIAL APPLICATIONS
In the following subsections, some other potential appli-
cations that could be enabled using the proposed architecture
are brieﬂy described. These applications include peak leveling,
fault tolerance, billing and a distributed market.
A. Peak Leveling/Shaving
Peak leveling/shaving is a process that aims to eliminate
the demand in peak hours and to shift it in non-peak demand
periods. In this way, the demand curve is leveled, providing
maximum exploitation of the current utility infrastructure
while the need for excessive spinning reserves is reduced.
For example, in the case of an expected peak hour (e.g.,
a world cup ﬁnal), expensive generators are supposed to be
employed that are able to switch on fast and follow the load
changes quickly. However, this is very costly for the utility,
both in operations and expenses.
The proposed end-to-end smart grid architecture will miti-
gate this situation by applying peak shaving, shifting the low-
priority and reschedulable domestic loads to non-peak demand
hours, in the way of distributing evenly the produced energy
throughout the day.
The approach described in Section VII-B for load shedding
could also be employed for peak shaving. In addition, demand
response programs could be utilized (see Section VII-A), using
special tariffs to inﬂuence consumer behavior.
B. Fault Tolerance
An important characteristic of the smart grid is the timely
detection and localization of faults. The proposed architecture
has been designed in order to facilitate this task through the
hierarchical, distributed structure of the controllers.
28
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Fig. 10.
Load shedding using different practices.
The established end-to-end connections between the smart
grid controller and each of the smart home application frame-
works provide in (near) real-time the customers’ consumption.
In addition, the HTTP POST requests issued by the controller,
destined to the customer premises, reveal information about
the status of the house, i.e., if a command has been success-
fully executed concerning shedding some amount of load.
In this way, the controllers can identify any abnormal
behavior of the customers’ consumption patterns and ﬁnd out
quickly which customers experience malfunctions or outages.
Further, if the smart home framework does not respond to
the issued commands multiple times (the customer-speciﬁc
commands are re-sent until an ACK is received), this implies
that the speciﬁc user experiences a failure or violates the SLA
contracted with the operator of the grid.
In such cases, the smart grid controller may send some
additional requests to the home framework in order to get
informed about the status of the house and increase its aware-
ness about the situation. Hence, the customers who experience
unavailability of some or all services will be automatically
detected and will be associated with the faulty feeders. Then,
the utility crews will locate the fault and rush in immediately,
reducing the duration of service unavailability (outage).
Their fast response would increase the reliability index of
the company and generally improve its severity-based indices.
Indices including expected unserved demand per year and
expected unserved energy per year would be improved because
of the faster faults restoration and the early actions taken as a
result of the enhanced situational awareness of the grid.
Of course, there exist situations that could complicate
fault localization. For example, a massive DoS attack on
the customer premises and the smart grid controllers could
hinder any efforts for fault identiﬁcation and solving. Security
countermeasures such as ﬁrewalls (see Section VI-A) could be
employed to prevent such attacks. Nonetheless, since the pro-
posed architecture relies on the Internet/Web, fault tolerance
can not be guaranteed in general.
C. Billing
Billing is a major source of expenses by electric utilities
since dedicated personnel must be employed for reading the
home meters manually, requiring the physical presence of an
employee at each house. The smart grid can provide long-
term savings to the electric utility by providing automated
meter reading via frequent interactions with energy-aware
smart homes, through the Web.
Considering the Web API offered by the smart home as
provided in Table I, it could be enough for the utility to
issue GET requests in frequent intervals (in magnitude of
seconds/minutes), to get informed about the instant domestic
electrical consumption. However, this pull-based technique
would not scale for millions of houses. Therefore, a Web-
based push technique, such as the RESTful Message System
(RMS) [44], would be more appropriate as it is based on a
publish/subscribe model.
Availability of timely billing information would help resi-
dents to become more aware about their electricity footprint,
giving them ﬁnancial incentives to reduce their consumption.
D. A Market for Generation/Consumption of Electricity
The use of domestic renewable electricity generators could
become a trend in the future. These generators would form
decentralized energetic islands or microgrids. A microgrid
consists of many small, distributed energy resources, located
near each other in the low-voltage distribution system, con-
nected to each other through some network.
Through this decentralized network architecture, smart
homes may be capable of trading energy for money by
means of market agents. These agents would represent electric
devices, either generators (e.g., photovoltaics, wind turbines),
or loads (e.g., television, fridge).
Hence, real-time auctions about electricity could be devel-
oped among energy-aware smart homes and the smart grid.
According to the current generation and demand, smart homes
would sell/buy electrical energy in competing prices.
The proposed architecture deﬁned in Section V could be
employed for enabling a real-time market for energy. The
Web could become the platform for handling the message
exchange between houses and the grid. More speciﬁcally, the
Web API offered by smart homes, as shown in Table I, could
be extended to support also market-related functionalities. For
example, assuming that a smart home needs energy in some
sunny day, its home market agent could query another smart
home that generates electricity from photovoltaics, asking
29
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

about the price of produced energy. This could be achieved
by issuing a GET energyprice request. In case a deal is
accomplished, this home agent could issue a POST energy-
demand command declaring the needed amount of power.
Of course, this is only a simple example, since a complete
solution would require money transactions between the two
parties, intelligent algorithms for automating the purchase of
energy in competing prices and an infrastructure for offering
the distributed generated electricity to other houses.
IX. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we examined the interconnection possibilities
of energy-aware smart homes with the forth-coming smart
grid of electricity, using the Web as the application protocol.
A Web-based architecture is suggested for bridging the gap
between home environments and the smart electricity grid.
The Web is considered suitable for this interconnection, as
it can address the heterogeneity of smart home technologies
and smart grid components. Hence, advanced ﬂexibility and
interoperability is achieved by using the Web as the actual
platform for the smart home-smart grid communication.
A Web-based application framework for smart homes was
adapted to support smart power outlets, for monitoring and
controlling the electrical appliances of the smart home. Us-
ing these smart outlets, an energy-aware smart home was
deployed, allowing the remote management of home devices
almost in real-time, through the Web. Reliability and prior-
itized requests coming from the smart grid were supported
by employing request queues and priority heaps, for better
handling the in-house communication with the power outlets.
Moreover, a smart grid scenario was emulated, allowing the
near real-time Web-based communication of the grid with
smart homes by means of smart grid controllers.
The practice of connecting smart homes to the grid through
the Web allows the ﬂexible creation of various energy-related
applications that target the healthy, efﬁcient and effective
operation of the grid. We demonstrated two such applications:
the demand response program of the grid, for scheduling
electricity-related tasks for the future, when the price for elec-
trical energy will be cheaper; and load shedding, as a technique
to reduce total consumption when danger for outages exists.
Of course, there still exist many issues that need to be
addressed, before using massively the Web for this purpose.
Technical issues include Web applications for smart homes
that operate behind ﬁrewalls and home IP addresses that are
rapidly changing. Smart home applications must conform to
the Web API speciﬁcations, deﬁned by the electric utilities.
Reliability, especially inside the HAN, must be ensured. Our
deployment using Ploggs showed that smart home hardware
technologies are not yet mature to be used in such large-scale
scenarios. We experienced regularly temporary device failures
and service unavailability. These reliability issues would not
be acceptable in a smart grid integration of the smart home.
Respecting the privacy of the customers is a crucial pa-
rameter for enabling a smart grid that is fully synchronized
with energy-aware smart homes. Customer privacy in his home
environment is reinforced through our proposed architecture
by offering only a Web API to the grid, restricting the
control of smart homes to the functionalities offered by this
API. Considering our Web-based architecture, solely the smart
home application framework can take the appropriate actions
to handle grid commands, maintaining the comfort of the
residents. The residents just need to specify which of their
electrical appliances are considered schedulable, permitting the
postponement of their operation for future time.
Security is another important factor that must be carefully
considered. A satisfactory trustworthy Web-based communica-
tion environment between the smart grid and the smart homes
can be assured by employing HTTPS. However, inside the
home environment in which resource-constrained devices are
involved, compromises need to be made to balance between
acceptable performance and security. DTLS is a candidate
technology for ensuring in-home security.
Our current proposal of a Web-based, RESTful architecture
ensures only syntactic interoperability between heterogeneous
smart home technologies and the smart grid. However, the
semantic meaning of the exchanged messages is not effectively
addressed by the current system. To obtain also semantic
interoperability, semantic Web services may be the solution.
Semantic Web services [45] are built around universal stan-
dards for the interchange of semantic data between machines.
They can address issues such as advanced interoperability,
automatic reasoning and knowledge inference on the smart
home-smart grid ecosystem.
For future work, we plan to examine other potential appli-
cations that could be enabled when energy-aware smart homes
connect to the smart grid. We also wish to validate the ﬁndings
of our current applications through more detailed evaluations,
including a larger number of houses and smart power outlets.
Finally, in collaboration with EAC, we plan to emulate
the operation of the smart grid in a small neighborhood of
energy-aware smart homes, involving also the local residents,
to consider the feasibility of our proposed approach in real
life and measure the actual impact of the system on the grid.
Feedback from residents would be important to assess if the
proposed architecture and technologies are suitable to them.
Few people predicted the revolutionary advancements the
Internet has brought to the world. Even fewer have predicted
that the Web would affect so many aspects of our lives.
Energy-aware smart homes and smart grid controllers may
represent the extension of this trend to power consumption.
X. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by the Electricity Author-
ity of Cyprus (EAC). We would like to thank Mr Antonis
Valanides, the director of the IT Department of EAC, for his
valuable remarks and advice.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Kamilaris and A. Pitsillides.
Exploiting Demand Response in
Web-based Energy-aware Smart Homes.
In the First International
Conference on Smart Grids, Green Communications and IT Energy-
aware Technologies (Energy 2011), Venice, Italy, May 2011.
30
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[2] International Energy Agency. World Energy Outlook 2007. 2007.
[3] Europa Press Release. Communication from the European Commission.
Energy Efﬁciency: Delivering the 20% target. November 2008.
[4] E. Wilde.
Putting things to REST.
Technical Report UCB iSchool
Report 2007-015, School of Information, UC Berkeley, 2007.
[5] Dominique Guinard, Vlad Trifa, and Erik Wilde.
Architecting a
Mashable Open World Wide Web of Things.
Technical Report No.
663, Dept. of Computer Science, ETH Zurich, February 2010.
[6] A. Kamilaris, V. Trifa, and A. Pitsillides.
The Smart Home meets
the Web of Things. International Journal of Ad Hoc and Ubiquitous
Computing (IJAHUC), Special issue on The Smart Digital Home,
7(3):145–154, 2011.
[7] A. Kamilaris, V. Trifa, and A. Pitsillides. HomeWeb: An Application
Framework for Web-based Smart Homes.
In Proceedings of the
18th International Conference on Telecommunications (ICT 2011), Ayia
Napa, Cyprus, May 2011.
[8] Himanshu Khurana, Mark Hadley, Ning Lu, and Deborah A. Frincke.
Smart-Grid Security Issues. IEEE Security and Privacy, pages 81–85,
2010.
[9] G. Alonso, F. Casati, H. Kuno, and V. Machiraju.
Web Services:
Concepts, Architectures. Springer, 2004.
[10] C. Warmer, K. Kok, S. Karnouskos, A. Weidlich, D. Nestle, P. Selzam,
J. Ringelstein, A. Dimeas, and S. Drenkard. Web services for integration
of smart houses in the smart grid. In Proceedings of the Grid-Interop
Conference, Denver, USA, November 2009.
[11] Stamatis Karnouskos, Orestis Terzidis, and Panagiotis Karnouskos. An
Advanced Metering Infrastructure for Future Energy Networks.
In
IFIP/IEEE ﬁrst International Conference on New Technologies, Mobility
and Security (NTMS 2007), Paris, France, pages 597–606, May 2007.
[12] R. T. Fielding. Architectural Styles and the Design of Network-based
Software Architectures.
PhD thesis, University of California, Irvine,
California, 2000.
[13] D. Guinard, I. Ion, and S. Mayer. In Search of an Internet of Things
Service Architecture: REST or WS-*? A Developers Perspective. In
Proceedings of the 8th International ICST Conference on Mobile and
Ubiquitous Systems (Mobiquitous), Copenhagen, Denmark, December
2011.
[14] A. Marchiori and Q. Han. Using Circuit-Level Power Measurements
in Household Energy Management Systems. In First ACM Workshop
On Embedded Sensing Systems For Energy-Efﬁciency In Buildings
(BuildSys), pages 7–12, Berkeley, California, November 2009.
[15] Y. Kim, T. Schmid, Z. M. Charbiwala, and M. B. Srivastava. ViridiS-
cope: design and implementation of a ﬁne grained power monitoring
system for homes. In Proceedings of the 11th International Conference
on Ubiquitous computing (Ubicomp), pages 245–254, Orlando, Florida,
USA, 2009.
[16] X. Jiang, S. Dawson-Haggerty, P. Dutta, and D. Culler.
Design and
implementation of a high-ﬁdelity AC metering network. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Information Processing in Sensor
Networks (IPSN), pages 253–264, Washington, DC, USA, April 2009.
[17] M. Jahn, M. Jentsch, C. R. Prause, F. Pramudianto, A. Al-Akkad,
and R. Reiners.
The Energy Aware Smart Home.
In Proceedings
of the 5th International Conference on Future Information Technology
(FutureTech), pages 1–8, Busan, Korea, May 2010.
[18] G. Xiong, C. Chen, S. Kishore, and A. Yener. Smart (in-home) power
scheduling for demand response on the smart grid.
In IEEE PES
Innovative Smart Grid Technologies (ISGT), pages 1–7, Manchester, UK,
January 2011.
[19] M. Erol-Kantarci and H.T. Mouftah.
Wireless Sensor Networks for
Cost-Efﬁcient Residential Energy Management in the Smart Grid. IEEE
Transactions on Smart Grid, 2(2), June 2011.
[20] N. B. Priyantha, A. Kansal, M. Goraczko, and F. Zhao.
Tiny web
services: design and implementation of interoperable and evolvable
sensor networks.
In Proceedings of the 6th ACM Conference on
Embedded Network Sensor Systems (SenSys), pages 253–266, Raleigh,
USA, 2008.
[21] C. Groba and S. Clarke.
Web services on embedded systems - a
performance study. In IEEE Workshop on the Web of Things, in Proc.
of Pervasive Conference, pages 726–731, Mannheim, Germany, March
2010.
[22] L. Schor, P. Sommer, and R. Wattenhofer. Towards a Zero-Conﬁguration
Wireless Sensor Network Architecture for Smart Buildings.
In First
ACM Workshop On Embedded Sensing Systems For Energy-Efﬁciency
In Buildings (BuildSys), Berkeley, California, November 2009.
[23] D. Yazar and A. Dunkels. Efﬁcient Application Integration in IP-based
Sensor Networks. In First ACM Workshop On Embedded Sensing Sys-
tems For Energy-Efﬁciency In Buildings (BuildSys), Berkeley, California,
November 2009.
[24] D. Guinard and V. Trifa. Towards the Web of Things: Web Mashups
for Embedded Devices. In Workshop on Mashups, Enterprise Mashups
and Lightweight Composition on the Web, in Proc. of WWW Conference,
Madrid, Spain, April 2009.
[25] The
White
House.
Ofﬁce
of
Science
and
Technology
Policy.
Empowering
Customers
With
a
Green
Button.
Online
at:
http://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/2011/11/21/empowering-customers-
green-button.
[26] S. Darby.
The effectiveness of feedback on energy consumption
A
review for defra of the literature on metering, billing and direct displays.
Environmental Change Institute, University of Oxford, 2006.
[27] G. Wood and M. Newborough. Dynamic energy-consumption indicators
for domestic appliances: environment, behaviour and design. Energy and
Buildings, 35(8):821–841, 2003.
[28] Andreas
Kamilaris
and
Andreas
Pitsillides.
A
Restful
Architecture
for
Web-based
Smart
Homes
using
Request
Queues.
Technical
Report
No.
TR-12-5,
Dept.
of
Computer
Science,
University
of
Cyprus,
June
2012.
Online
at:
http://www.cs.ucy.ac.cy/ResearchLabs/netrl/papers/ﬁles/kamilaris-
TR-12-5.pdf.
[29] E. Rescorla. HTTP over TLS. RFC 2818.
[30] T. Dierks and E. Rescorla. The Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol
Version 1.2. RFC 5246.
[31] A. Dunkels, T. Voigt, and J. Alonso. Making TCP/IP Viable for Wireless
Sensor Networks. In Proceedings of the ﬁrst European Workshop for
Wireless Sensor Networks (EWSN), Berlin, Germany, January 2004.
[32] J. W. Hui and D. E. Culler. IP is dead, long live IP for wireless sensor
networks. In Proceedings of the 6th ACM Conference on Embedded
Network Sensor Systems (SenSys), pages 15–28, Raleigh, USA, 2008.
[33] K. Kent and K. Seo. Security Architecture for the Internet Protocol.
RFC 4301.
[34] Zach Shelby, Klaus Hartke, Carsten Bormann, and Brian Frank. Con-
strained Application Protocol (CoAP), March 2012. IETF Draft, draft-
ietf-core-coap-09.
[35] E. Rescorla and N. Modadug. Datagram Transport Layer Security. RFC
4347.
[36] J. Arko and A. Keranen. CoAP Security Architecture, July 2011. IETF
Draft, draft-arkko-core-security-arch-00.
[37] Darrel Hankerson, Alfred J. Menezes, and Scott Vanstone. Guide to
Elliptic Curve Cryptography. Springer-Verlag, Secaucus, USA, 2003.
[38] W. F. Van Raaij and T. M. M. Verhallen.
A behavioral model of
residential energy use. Journal of Economic Psychology, 3(1):39–63,
1983.
[39] D. Craciun, S. Ichim, and Y. Besanger.
A new soft load shedding:
Power system stability with contribution from consumers. In IEEE PES
PowerTech, pages 1–6, Bucharest, Romania, July 2009.
[40] A.G. Phadke and B. Kasztenny. Synchronized Phasor and Frequency
Measurement Under Transient Conditions. IEEE Transactions on Power
Delivery, 24(1):89–95, January 2009.
[41] J. Farrell and M. Polycarpou.
Adaptive approximation based con-
trol: unifying neural, fuzzy and traditional adaptive approximation
approaches.
Adaptive and learning systems for signal processing,
communications, and control. Wiley-Interscience, 2006.
[42] P.M. Anderson and M. Mirheydar.
A low-order system frequency
response model. IEEE Transactions on Power Systems, 5(3):720–729,
aug 1990.
[43] P.M. Anderson, A.A.A. Fouad, Institute of Electrical, and Electronics
Engineers.
Power system control and stability.
IEEE Press power
engineering. 2003.
[44] V. Trifa, D. Guinard, V. Davidovski, A. Kamilaris, and I. Delchev. Web
messaging for open and scalable distributed sensing applications.
In
Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Web engineering
(ICWE), pages 129–143, Vienna, Austria, July 2010.
[45] Jorge Cardoso and Amit P. Sheth. Semantic Web Services, Processes
and Applications, volume 3 of Semantic Web And Beyond Computing
for Human Experience. Springer, 2006.
[46] J. Franks, P. Hallam-Baker, J. Hostetler, S. Lawrence, P. Leach, A. Lu-
otonen, and L. Stewart. HTTP Authentication: Basic and Digest Access
Authentication. RFC 2617.
31
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

