567
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Concepts and Mechanics for Educational Mini-Games  
A Human-Centred Conceptual Design Approach involving Adolescent Learners and Domain Experts 
 
Bieke Zaman, Yorick Poels, Nicky Sulmon, Jan-
Henk Annema, Mathijs Verstraete, Dirk De Grooff 
Centre for User Experience Research (CUO| Social 
Spaces, KU Leuven / iMinds)  
Parkstraat 45 Bus 3605 
3000 Leuven, Belgium 
{bieke.zaman, yorick.poels, nicky.sulmon, 
janhenk.annema, mathijs.verstraete, 
dirk.degrooff}@soc.kuleuven.be 
Frederik Cornillie, Piet Desmet 
Interdisciplinary Research on Technology, Education & 
Communication (ITEC) 
KU Leuven / iMinds Future Health Department 
Etienne Sabbelaan 53  
8500 Kortrijk, Belgium 
{frederik.cornillie, piet.desmet}@kuleuven-kortrijk.be
 
 
Abstract — This article reports on two conceptual design 
sessions in which concepts for educational mini-games were 
generated through a human-centred approach. First, co-
creation sessions were held with 14 adolescents between 14 and 
16 years old in order to gain insight into their preferences for 
educational games for language learning. During these 
sessions, 11 game concepts were generated, revealing a 
classification of concepts for games oriented towards, on the 
one hand, formal language learning and, on the other hand, 
more informal communication with other players or in-game 
characters. Second, brainstorm sessions were organized with 
six domain experts in order to reveal which mechanics are 
most appropriate for the design of mini-games for a variety of 
educational programmes. These sessions resulted in 28 ideas 
reflecting three game mechanics particularly suited for 
educational mini-games tailored to adolescent learners. 
Keywords – mini-games; serious games; human-centred; 
conceptual design 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, video games are no longer designed solely 
for entertainment purposes. The continuously increasing 
interest in serious games and gamification has shown that 
many areas can benefit from the engaging experience that 
video games offer. For instance, video games have been 
designed to help people in various therapeutic contexts [22], 
[56], as well as for educational purposes [47], [50], [54]. In 
the field of Computer-Assisted Language Learning (CALL), 
particularly, games have long been developed specifically for 
language instruction [26], [28], [45], and games have, to a 
more limited extent and much more recently [11], been 
subjected to empirical research on issues related to language 
development [13], [37], [42], [52].  
One reason why games may be particularly suited for 
educational purposes is that many aspects of video games, 
for instance problem/puzzle solving and assessment, are also 
present in formal educational settings. Besides the potential 
of serious games to provide engaging learning experiences, 
previous work has shown that it is hard to bring this into 
practice.  
More particularly, on the one hand, it has been 
recognized that it is challenging to ensure the effectiveness 
of serious games, e.g., in terms of knowledge acquisition, 
increased motivation or improved attitudes [41], [58]. On 
the other hand, many serious games have been criticized for 
being unable to provide compelling game experiences, 
thereby failing in achieving their entertaining goals [15], 
[29], [39].  
From the perspective of the player, certainly if playing 
voluntary, gaming is an end in itself rather than a vehicle to 
learn (e.g., learn a new language) or achieve goals outside 
the game (e.g., live healthier) [25]. Arguably the player is 
ideally intrinsically motivated to play a serious game, 
instead of using a game to obtain an extrinsic serious goal.  
Although many researchers have analysed game players’ 
intrinsic motivations [3], [35], [36], [48], [49], [59], [61] 
and the design aspects that deliver engaging game 
experiences [21], [24], [30], [31], [32], there is still a gap in 
research on the design concepts and methods needed to 
reconcile the seemingly contradictory design goals of 
serious games [58].  
This article addresses the challenge of how one can 
design serious games that are both fun and effective. In 
particular, the conceptual design of educational mini-games 
as a complementary means to the instruction in class is 
focused upon. Overall, mini-games are defined as small, 
self-contained games that usually take a short amount of 
time to complete and focus on a specific topic; mini-games 
are ubiquitous, and have been developed for several 
purposes, including education [17].  
In this article, the typical human-centred design 
approach is first described in order to frame the activities of 
our study. Then, the research goals are specified. Further, 
the method and results of two conceptual design sessions 
are elaborated upon; this includes, firstly, the co-creation 
session with end-users and secondly, the brainstorm session 
with domain experts. Then, the results of both sessions are 
discussed. This article ends by summarizing the scientific 
contribution and delineating areas for further work.  
 

568
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The International Standardization Organization (ISO) 
has defined five major steps in the human-centred design 
process of interactive systems, in which continuous iteration 
is encouraged between phases of understanding and 
specification 
of 
the 
context 
of 
use 
(predesign), 
understanding 
and 
definition 
of 
user 
requirements 
(conceptual design), the production of design solutions that 
meet the defined requirements (design and development) 
and an evaluation of these designs against the requirements 
(evaluation) [27]. This process has been referred to as the 
“ISO9241-210 standard of Ergonomics of human-system 
interaction; Human-centred design for interactive systems” 
[27]. It relies on four basic principles, i.e., 1) active 
involvement of users and a good understanding of the needs 
of users and tasks, 2) adaptation of technology to the user, 
3) iterative design, and 4) a multi-disciplinary design team. 
In digital game development, human-centred design has 
mainly been advocated as involving players in play tests 
from the very moment that the first prototypes have been 
created [38], [43], [58]. Although this type of play testing 
does involve players in the evaluation phases of the (late) 
design process, players and stakeholders are rarely offered 
the opportunity to participate in predesign and (conceptual) 
design phases.  
In excluding the eventual players from bringing in input 
in the early concept and design phases, game designers are 
likely to end up with a self-referential design, one that is 
oriented towards the needs and preferences of the designers 
rather than being tailored to the particular target group. Such 
an ‘I’-methodology should be avoided, especially when the 
target 
audience 
of 
the 
game 
differs 
from 
the 
developers/designers. Besides, the game design process not 
only benefits from input provided by target users, but also 
from input given by domain experts, especially when the 
ambition is to reconcile entertainment and serious goals 
[57].  
This article focuses upon a study that followed a human-
centred game design process. More particularly, the results 
of two conceptual design sessions are reported upon. The 
overall research goal of the sessions was geared towards a 
first understanding and specification of the context of use 
and the definition of user requirements for educational mini-
games tailored to adolescent learners. These research goals 
corresponded with the conceptual design phases of ISO’s 
human-centred design process, as described earlier in the 
article.  
As for the first conceptual design session, target users 
were actively involved in the idea generation of mini-game 
concepts for second language learning. There are several 
ways in which end-users can be involved in the initial 
phases of the design process [4], [16], [18], [34], [60]. In 
our study, generative techniques for idea generation were 
focused upon. These techniques typically rely on the 
creation of artefacts together with end-users, an approach 
that in literature is referred to as co-design or co-creation.  
The central notion is that the people destined to use the 
product play a critical role in conceptualizing and designing 
the product [46].  
Co-creation is based upon the premise that human 
beings’ knowledge, feelings and dreams are hard to uncover 
as this information may not readily be expressed in words, 
or cannot be observed as it might, for instance, be about 
latent needs. Generative techniques or ‘make-tools’ are 
needed then to facilitate the expression and communication 
of thoughts, feelings, and dreams. The act of physically 
laying out words, images and constructing representations 
of ideas enables the participants to articulate their ideas 
more thoroughly than they are able to in a typical interview 
or conversation. Consequently, the reflexivity through the 
act of creation then serves as an explanatory vehicle for 
their needs and ideas, not as a concrete visualization of the 
final design specifications [23], [44].  
Although the method and the results of this first 
conceptual design session have been described in a previous 
publication, presented at the ACHI 2012 conference [1], this 
article provides an extended reflection by the inclusion of 
new empirical data that were gathered during a second 
conceptual design study. Conceptual design typically 
follows an incremental process, and hence it benefits from 
alternation of idea generation phases, especially when 
several multidisciplinary views and a variety of stakeholders 
are brought together.  
Therefore, during the second session, domain experts -
including both game designers/developers and educational 
experts- were asked to brainstorm and reflect upon mini-
game concepts that would be transferable to a variety of 
domains 
other 
than 
language 
learning, 
including 
mathematics, history and geography. The development of 
educational games poses real challenges in terms of the 
return on investment. That is why the conceptualization of 
more generic mini-game concepts was considered to be very 
important because it allows mini-game concepts to be re-
used for several educational domains with relatively little 
effort and cost.  
The brainstorm session with domain experts was 
organized according to the evolutionary approach towards 
design thinking, in which phases of diverging (i.e., creating 
choices) and converging (making choices) are typically 
separated and alternated [8]. In particular, the creation of 
ideas in multidisciplinary teams was stimulated in order to 
broaden the space of possibilities.  
To facilitate the idea generation process, several 
recombination and mutation rules and techniques were 
relied upon. For instance, domain experts were encouraged 
to express themselves visually and come up with wild ideas 
[53]. Additionally, the participants were encouraged to 
produce many ideas in order to get as many ideas from the 
workshop as possible. This was important because it has 
been found that discussing multiple brainstorming outcomes 
is more effective than considering a single artefact when it 
comes to avoiding fixation [19], richer design outcomes, 
better idea exploration, sharing, and group rapport [14]. 

569
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
III. 
CO-CREATION WITH END-USERS 
In the following paragraphs, the first conceptual design 
session, the co-creation with end-users, is described in 
detail, including the participants and procedure, and 
followed by a discussion of the results.  
A. Method 
1) Participants 
A total of fourteen adolescents participated in the co-
creation session. The group was divided into two subgroups; 
each subgroup participated in one co-creation workshop. 
The first workshop was organized with eight adolescents in 
the morning; the other workshop, consisting of six 
adolescents, took place in the afternoon.  
All participants were between 14 and 16 years of age, 
only one of the 14 participants was a girl. Twelve were in 
general secondary education, two participants were from 
technical secondary education. The eight participants of the 
first workshop played on average 41 minutes a day; the six 
participants of the second workshop played on average 1 
hour 35 minutes. The participants were recruited through 
online forums, electronic newsletters, paper flyers and 
posters. Although the aim was to recruit a group of 
adolescents that was evenly divided in terms of gender, 
education 
and 
game 
preferences, 
there 
was 
an 
overrepresentation 
of 
boys 
from 
general 
secondary 
education who play games on a regular basis.  
2) Procedure 
The morning and afternoon workshop lasted each 
approximately three hours. Each workshop consisted of an 
introduction, group discussion, game design round, and a 
final group discussion. By following these steps, we aimed 
to follow the typical cognitive process of creativity closely. 
This process is typically divided into four or five stages, 
including the sensitization of the problem space, incubation, 
inspiration and transformation stage [5], [9], [12]. These 
stages will be referred to in more detail below. 
Introductory round: Using a slideshow presentation, the 
topic at hand and the co-creation methodology were 
explained. 
Then, 
results 
from 
previous 
co-creation 
workshops were presented. These examples were taken 
from domains other than language learning, in order to 
prevent possible bias in the creative thinking of the 
participants. The introduction took around 15 minutes. 
Group discussion: After the introduction, the group was 
split into smaller subgroups. Two researchers joined each 
subgroup and started a short, moderated group discussion. 
The aim was to better understand the envisioned context of 
use and the end-users, which is necessary to define 
requirements for the design of new products [27]. More 
particularly, the participants’ current language learning 
practices -both formal and informal- and their general 
experience with learning through games were addressed. 
Additionally, this group discussion was also intended as a 
‘sensitizing activity’, which is a typical first stage in a 
creative process of idea generation [5], [51]. This group 
discussion lasted approximately 20 minutes. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Co-creation session in which low-fidelity prototypes of video 
games were created. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Prototype presentation and group discussion. 
 
Game design round: Given the time of about one hour, 
each subgroup was asked to come up with game concepts 
and create low-fidelity paper prototypes of these concepts 
using the available materials (see Figure 1).  
The creation of at least three prototype artefacts was 
encouraged as it has been found that creating multiple 
prototypes is more effective than creating a single prototype 
when it comes to the design outcomes, exploration, sharing, 
and group rapport [14].  
Note that the prototypes by no means had to be complete 
designs, but rather served as vehicles to express and discuss 
ideas, needs and preferences. Further, the participants were 
not constrained in the creation and conceptualization to 
mini-games only; they were given the opportunity to think 
freely about a variety of game concepts for language 
learning instead. Only when a group of participants had 
come up with two concepts that were clearly regular video 
games instead of mini-games, the researchers encouraged 
the participants to think of their next game concept as a 
mini-game.  
 

570
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
When looking at the different stages of the creative 
process of idea generation and design thinking, the game 
design round resembled the third stage, inspiration [44]. In 
this stage, possible solutions or new insights typically occur. 
The incubation stage was not present in our study due to 
practical concerns, as the workshops were scheduled on one 
day. Such an incubation stage typically occurs after 
sensitization of the problem stage and before inspiration, 
and allows the participants to set the problems aside for a 
time.  
Final group discussion: After the game design round, 
participants presented their prototypes to each other and the 
researchers (see Figure 2). Participants could ask questions, 
comment on the prototypes and ideas, and judge the 
appropriateness and potential of the presented concepts. The 
researchers moderated this discussion, probed for more 
clarification with respect to certain design choices, as well 
as regarding a number of pre-defined topics, questioning for 
instance the user-oriented and personal goals of the game 
concepts, the role of the teacher, or the envisioned context-
of-use.  
Note that the group discussion was considered as an 
activity that represents the final stage in the creative 
process, i.e., transformation [9]. This stage foresees in an 
evaluation of the value of ideas (e.g., group discussions) and 
decision (e.g., via rating) with regard to the idea selection. 
In our study, this transformation phase lasted about an hour. 
B. Results 
The co-creation workshops with end-users resulted in a 
total of 11 game concepts. Four of the eleven games had a 
multiplayer mode. Six of the games incorporated a social 
component, like the ability to share high scores with friends, 
and communicate via voice chat. The choice of the platform 
(computer, console, mobile) was not specified for most 
game concepts. Some games were thought to be more suited 
for a specific platform than others, with game concepts 
ranging from a traditional mini-game on a desktop 
computer, to an augmented reality game on a mobile phone. 
Further, the results revealed a wide range of reward 
mechanisms, from simple scoring systems such as 
traditional high scores to more complex rewarding 
mechanisms, whereby the player gains experience points on 
different levels. The participants also indicated that in-game 
feedback mechanisms were of considerable importance. The 
participants agreed that the mini-games for foreign language 
learning should provide some kind of feedback mechanism 
that helps players when they are stuck, such as for instance, 
a built-in translator to an in-game character that aided the 
player as an interpreter for foreign languages. 
Overall, the results revealed two main categories of game 
concepts for language learning, including games for formal 
learning on the one hand, and games in which language 
serves as a means of communication on the other hand. In 
what follows, a more detailed overview of these two 
categories is given. 
 
1) Games for formal language learning 
The co-creation sessions revealed three game concepts 
that were aimed towards formal language learning. These 
games shared a focus on vocabulary, were similar in terms 
of immediate feedback, required limited time to play, and 
contained little or no narrative. The latter characteristics will 
be outlined based on one game concept that was developed 
during the co-creation workshops, namely the cannon-
versus-monsters game (see Figure 3).  
In this game, the player has to translate a word as quick 
as possible in order to prevent monsters, descending on a 
narrow path, to reach the player. The number of bullets a 
player receives depends on the length of the assigned word. 
For instance, a four-letter word that is correctly translated 
gives the player four bullets to eliminate the approaching 
monsters. The difficulty level of the game gradually rises 
with each stage, offering the player not only more 
challenging words to translate, but also more bullets and 
useful power-ups -any item that temporarily gives a 
character new abilities, new powers, or a statistical bonus.  
Feedback in the cannons-versus-monsters game is 
provided immediately. Every time the player fails to translate 
a word, the monsters come closer to the player’s home, 
eventually destroying it when the monsters come near 
enough. The player should thus try to translate as many 
words as possible in a correct way. When the player fails to 
translate a word, the consequences are instantly visible as the 
monsters further approach the onscreen character of the 
player.   
The cannon-versus-monster game revolves around the 
relatively simple goal of keeping the monster away. By 
translating words correctly ammunition is earned that can be 
used to shoot the monsters. No further narrative or plot was 
provided as context for the game. The cannon-versus-
monsters game concept concerned a simple and short game; 
it did not require a lot of time to complete. Therefore, the 
participants argued that the game could be played in 
situations in which little time is available, e.g., at home for 
schoolwork or even at school as part of language learning 
classes. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Drawing of the cannon-versus-monsters game concept. 
 

571
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 4.  Creation of the adventure game. 
 
2) Games and language as communication 
The majority of ideas could be characterized as presenting a 
game concept in which language is used as communication. 
In total, six game concepts could be characterized by their 
focus on language as a means to communicate in the game. 
Players needed to communicate to progress through the 
game. When compared to the three game concepts that 
focused on vocabulary, these concepts were characterized as 
being more complex, containing an elaborate narrative, 
providing less immediate feedback, and being more time 
consuming. In what follows, the characteristics of the latter 
category of game concepts will be explained by looking at 
one of the six game concepts, an adventure game, in more 
detail (see Figure 4).  
The adventure game starts from a story in which the 
player has to get from Paris, France, to Los Angeles, USA, 
to visit his or her sick mother. To achieve this, the player 
has to communicate with other game characters or other 
non-player characters. Thus, language is the means to get to 
the end goal. Through dialogues and creative use of 
language (e.g., asking for a lift, lure opponents into traps, 
persuasion, deceiving, etc.) the game character progresses 
through the game.  
Overall, the results showed that the game concepts that 
focused on communication were more elaborate than the 
game concepts that focused more explicitly on linguistic sub-
domains, such as vocabulary. The narrative was very 
important and much richer in the games focusing on 
communication. Consequently, feedback was thought of in a 
less immediate way than in the games that focused on 
vocabulary.  
For instance, while in the cannon-versus-monsters game, 
the player immediately receives bullets to keep the monsters 
away, or sees the monsters approaching further after each 
mistake; 
the 
progress 
in 
the 
games 
focusing 
on 
communication was less immediately visible. Although the 
end goal was clear, the player was only considered to slowly 
approach the goal; and in this process the rewards were more 
high level. 
Finally, compared to the games focusing on vocabulary, 
the game concepts with a focus on communication were 
relatively complex and therefore required more time to play. 
To engage in the game concepts, players would need a 
period of uninterrupted time available to play. This would 
make these games, according to our participants, more suited 
for playing at home, and less suited for class use.  
IV. 
BRAINSTORM WITH DOMAIN EXPERTS 
In the next paragraphs, the participants and procedure of 
the brainstorm session with domain experts is described, 
followed by a discussion of the results. 
A. Method 
1) Participants 
Three game designers/developers and three educational 
experts were invited to participate in the brainstorm session. 
These domain experts were divided in three subgroups of 
two people, one game expert and one educational expert. 
Figure 5 shows an impression of the brainstorm session in 
small subgroups.  
2) Materials 
The domain experts were provided with three kinds of 
materials as input for the workshop in order to facilitate the 
brainstorming process; they were not forced to use these 
materials. 
Firstly, each subgroup received five random cards from 
the Game Seeds© card deck [55] (see Figure 6). These cards 
visually represent game mechanics as well as some playful 
rules that can be used to turn a brainstorming exercise into a 
playful activity. Even though the participants did not have to 
engage in the entire Game Seeds© brainstorming game, the 
visual presentation of game mechanics on the cards was 
considered to impose additional constraints that could 
increase creative thinking.  
Secondly, to encourage domain experts to generate game 
concepts for a wide range of educational purposes, sheets 
with written topics that typically constitute the subject 
matter of adolescent-oriented class courses on geography, 
history, mathematics and language learning were handed 
over. Again, these sheets were shown for inspiration 
purposes only; domain experts did not need to rely on this 
information.  
Thirdly, personas were given as input to the brainstorm 
in order to further improve the idea generation process. 
Personas represent fictive characters that are based on 
factual information. In human-centered design, personas are 
utilized to present a reflection of the (hypothetical) 
archetypal user. Additionally, personas are also considered 
useful as a method to make a design team empathise with 
the product’s end-users thanks to a deeper understanding of 
their likes and dislikes, and their capabilities [2], [10], [40].  

572
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 5.  Brainstorming session with domain experts. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Game Seeds© cards, used as input for the brainstorming method. 
The visual representation of concrete game mechanics presented 
constraints that were deliberately imposed to increase the likelihood of 
creative design thinking. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Extreme persona (Dutch), used as input for the brainstorm 
session with domain experts, as a means to create empathy with the end 
users and stimulate creativity during the idea generation process. 
 
In our study, the personas resulted from the insights 
gained in a diary study that preceded the brainstorming 
session. In the diary study, eight households with 
adolescents were selected to report on their behaviour and 
experiences with Monkey Tales©, an educational game for 
training mathematics [33], for a period of two to three 
weeks. The results were summarized in ‘extreme’ personas 
that enlarged the players’ general characteristics and 
reported in an exaggerated way their likes and dislikes, the 
media rules of the household, their game preferences and 
experiences. For an example of such an extreme personas 
(in Dutch), we refer to Figure 7.  
The advantages of brainstorming with extreme inputs 
that are based on evidence-based personas are twofold. 
First, personas have been found to provide a powerful 
means to communicate relevant user characteristics to help a 
product design team to empathize more with the envisioned 
end-users [2], [10], [40].  Secondly, the power of the 
reflection on extreme stimuli has been recognized as 
showing great promise to increase the creativity during idea 
generation phases in user-centred design [6], [7], [19]. 
3) Procedure 
The 
procedure 
consisted 
of 
three 
rounds 
of 
brainstorming in pairs followed by evaluative, plenary 
discussions of the value of the ideas. After each 
brainstorming and discussion round, new pairs were formed 
and a new round of brainstorming and evaluative discussion 
was started. In each round, the dyads received a new 
combination of input materials, including a persona, five 
randomly assigned game mechanics and a new educational 
topic.  
In total, the brainstorm lasted approximately two hours 
and 30 minutes.  
B. Results  
The brainstorm session with domain experts generated 
28 ideas that reflected three different types of educational 
mini-game concepts. The first category concerned the 
‘Matchers’, characterized as those mini-game concepts in 
which players are challenged to combine several related 
things such as words, numbers, images or topics. The 
majority of the game concepts generated during the 
brainstorm session could be classified as a Matcher. The 
second category encompassed the “Sorters”. These concepts 
shared the common idea that things can be ordered on a 
timeline or map. The third main category of game concepts 
revolved around Multiple Choice (questions). It should be 
noted, though, that some game concepts could not be 
classified into one of these three aforementioned game 
categories. In sum, the analysis of the game concepts 
revealed the following classification: a) Matchers, b) 
Sorters, c) Multiple Choice and d) Others. 
The constraints of this article do not allow us to 
elaborate upon each single idea that was generated during 
the brainstorm. Consequently, we will select one game 
concept for each category and discuss it in more detail. 
 

573
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
1) Matchers 
In total, the brainstorm session resulted in 16 Matcher 
game concepts. To exemplify this, we will report upon the 
‘Snowlines’ concept. Figure 8 shows the concept drawing as 
it was sketched and presented during the brainstorm session. 
The 
idea 
of 
‘Snowlines’ 
is 
that 
by 
snowboarding/skating/skiing through the gates the player 
needs to select the words or items that are related to each 
other. There are several routes that are allowed/correct; 
some are more optimal than others and by choosing or 
combining the right gates, more or less points can be 
collected. The learning concept relies on the ability to group 
similar words, items, topics, verb conjunctions etc. The 
underlying game mechanic is based on selection and 
grouping. For this concept, one might think of additional 
features to enhance the playability, such as doing tricks in 
between two gates.  
2) Sorter 
Four Sorter game concepts were generated. One of these 
Sorters was the ‘Character-Map Exploration’ game, 
depicted in Figure 9. In this game concept, players would 
receive an inventory of characters, of which some are 
locked, and some are not. The players would then need to 
interview these characters to get to know them. Based on the 
information revealed by the characters, players would be 
able to place the characters on the correct spot on the map. 
According to the domain experts, linking characters and 
their items with the corresponding country and locating this 
country, the players might eventually learn about historical 
people, their stories and locations. 
3) Multiple Choice 
The brainstorm session resulted in two multiple Choice 
game concepts. Figure 10 shows the concept sketch of one 
of these, namely the ‘Save the Princess’ game. The game 
concept resolved around the challenge of saving a princess 
and finding your way through a labyrinth. By choosing the 
right door/way, the player would select the correct answer. 
Behind the wrong doors/answers, there is the risk to be 
confronted with deadly monsters. Everywhere in the 
labyrinth the player might engage in finding clues and hints 
to help find the correct way.  
4) Others 
Six concepts could not be classified in one of the 
categories above. Examples were the ‘Search the 7 
Mistakes’ in which players had to select things that are 
wrong in an image, and the ‘Draw and Guess’ game concept 
in which players would have to guess the specific word 
from his or her teammates’ drawings. These two game 
concepts are represented in Figure 11.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Concept sketch ‘Snowlines’, a Matcher game concept. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Concept sketch ‘Character-Map Exploration’, a Sorter game. 
 
 
 
Figure 10.  Concept sketch ‘Save the Princess’, a Multiple Choice game. 
 
 
Figure 11.  Concept sketches ‘Search the 7 mistakes’ (left) and ‘Draw and 
Guess’ (right). 
 
 

574
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
V. 
DISCUSSION 
A variety of ideas were generated during the 
brainstorming session with domain experts and during the 
co-creation workshops with end-users, showing considerable 
promise on the basis of which both fun and effective 
educational mini-games can be designed.  
The results of the co-creation with end-users point 
towards two directions that can be chosen in the design phase 
of educational games for language learning. On the one 
hand, the participants considered the potential of games for 
formal language learning that resembled the definition of a 
mini-game. It should hereby be noted that these formal 
language-learning exercises were related to learning 
vocabulary; none of these game concepts dealt with 
grammar. It is unclear, however, whether this is the result of 
a lack of interest or the adolescent participants’ lack of 
capability to consider grammar-related game concepts. On 
the 
other 
hand, 
when 
it 
comes 
to 
language 
as 
communication, the participants preferred more complex 
games with a narrative, which confirms that games can be 
used as a medium to create a need for the language learner to 
accomplish objectives that lie outside the language itself. 
Nevertheless, many of this type of game concepts resembled 
existing games. It is not clear whether this fixation upon 
existing game concepts resulted from methodological 
decisions, the participants’ characteristics, or from the 
combination of both aspects. In order to potentially be able 
to answer this question, we would advise future research to 
link the participants' gaming history and pre-existing 
preferences to the creation of game concepts in co-creation 
sessions and experiment with a wider variety of idea 
generation techniques. 
Secondly, when it comes to the ideation of mini-game 
concepts that can be used for several exercises in a variety of 
instructional domains other than language learning only, the 
results suggested that Matchers, Sorters and Multiple Choice 
game mechanics are most promising to be included in 
educational mini-games. We are convinced that the generic 
character of these game concepts may bring an important 
advantage for game developers or publishers who want to 
wisely invest in educational mini-games.  
There are some issues that remain unsolved, though. For 
instance, it is not clear why the brainstorm session mainly 
revealed Matcher concepts. At this point, it is unclear 
whether this is due to a lack of a better classification, or 
whether it is just easier to generate ideas about Matcher 
game concepts; or if there are even other reasons involved. 
Moreover, it should be noted, that the categorization of 
Matchers, Sorters and Multiple Choice educational game 
mechanics does not differ that much from the classical e-
learning approaches that also typically rely on matching, 
multiple choice and sorting. In this context, our results 
clearly indicated that the ‘packaging’ of the exercises 
provided the mini-games with an additional layer of fantasy 
that increased the game experience (e.g., story, characters 
and missions. 
 
Another issue with respect to the brainstorm session with 
domain experts concerns the usefulness of the input 
materials, i.e., the personas, the Game Seeds© and the 
instructional examples. To our knowledge, there is no 
previous work in which the combination of these input 
materials have been employed. Consequently, it is unclear 
what the effect is of the methodological decisions upon the 
brainstorm outcome.  
The last issue of our discussion is relevant for both the 
co-creation and brainstorming session. It should be stressed 
once more that the results were not intended to represent 
finished game concepts or concrete design guidelines. The 
results provide the design team with more insights into the 
users and their preferences, information that should be 
complemented with for instance the insights revealed 
through contextual observations. When the design team 
understands the users and the context of use, inspiration can 
be drawn from the created artefacts (co-creation workshops) 
and presented sketches (brainstorm session) in the further 
development from low-fidelity to high-fidelity prototypes. 
As the ISO 9241-210 human-centred design process 
prescribes, phases of development and human-based 
evaluations should sufficiently iterate in order to optimize 
the end product. Hence, the designers can put their own 
expertise in developing the designs, being inspired but at the 
same time not limited by the artefacts that were created 
during the brainstorm and co-creation sessions. The design 
team should hereby acknowledge that the products have to 
be re-evaluated in several iterations by directly involving the 
stakeholders, i.e., the end-users in the first place.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This article reported upon two conceptual design sessions 
in which a human-centred approach was followed to gather 
requirements and inspiration for the design of mini-games 
with educational purposes tailored to adolescent learners. 
Firstly, 
co-creation 
workshops 
were 
held 
with 
adolescents in order to reveal their ideas, needs and 
preferences with regard to video games for language 
learning. The results showed a divide between the concepts 
for mini-games that were oriented towards formal language 
learning (e.g., exercises on vocabulary) on the one hand and 
video games that were based on communication with others 
(players or in-game characters) on the other.  
Secondly, brainstorm sessions were held with domain 
experts, 
including 
game 
designers/developers 
and 
educational 
experts, 
to 
generate 
ideas 
and 
gather 
requirements for the design of mini-game concepts with 
educational goals. The results revealed a categorization of 
educational mini-game concepts with sufficient potential to 
be both fun and efficient, including Matchers, Sorters and 
Multiple-Choice concepts. The Matchers seemed most 
promising, not only did this category generate most ideas, it 
also turned out to be most promising to be applied in a 
variety of educational programs ranging from mathematics to 
language learning, geography and history.  
 
 

575
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
To conclude, the two conceptual design sessions 
described in this article resulted in a divergence and 
multitude of rich ideas. Nevertheless, more design iterations 
are needed to evaluate these ideas by making choices in 
terms of the most promising ideas. By no means are the 
conceptual design sessions imposing final solutions. As 
described by the ISO’s human-centred design process, more 
iterations and empirical evaluations are needed in the 
subsequent detailed design and development phases. 
Consequently, future work should focus on the next human-
centred design steps and report which design decisions are to 
be taken to realize successful educational mini-games that 
are tailored to adolescent learners; mini-games that reconcile 
both entertaining and educational goals.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The first study (co-creation sessions) was conducted as 
part of the iMinds-MiGaMe (Mini Games for Maximum 
efficiency) project. The second study (the brainstorm 
sessions with domain experts) was performed in the context 
of the iMinds-G@S (Games at School) project. These 
projects are cofounded by iMinds (Interdisciplinary Institute 
for Technology), a research institute founded by the Flemish 
Government. The leading companies involved in the 
iMinds-G@S project are Larian and die Keure, with project 
support of IWT. We are grateful to all participants of the 
co-creation and brainstorming sessions for their enthusiasm 
to generate cool ideas.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Poels, Y., Annema, J.-H., Zaman, B., and Cornillie, F. 
“Developing User-Centered Video Game Concepts for 
Language Learning,” ACHI conference, 2012, pp. 11–16. 
[2] Antle, A.N. Child-personas: fact or fiction?“ Proceedings of 
the 6th conference on Designing Interactive systems (DIS 06), 
ACM, 2006, pp. 22–30. 
[3] Bartle, R. “Hearts, Clubs, Diamonds, Spades: Players Who 
Suit MUDS,” 1996, http://www.mud.co.uk/richard/hcds.htm 
[last accessed Dec 2012]. 
[4] Beyer, H. and Holtzblatt, K. “Contextual Design: Defining 
Customer-centered 
Systems,” 
Morgan 
Kaufmann, 
San 
Francisco, CA, 1998. 
[5] Boden, M.A. “Creative Mind: Myths and Mechanisms,” 
Routledge, New York, NY, 2003. 
[6] Bowen, S. “Getting it Right: Lessons Learned in Applying a 
Critical Artefact Approach,” In: Undisciplined! Design 
Research Society Conference 2008, Sheffield Hallam 
University, Sheffield, UK, 2009. 
[7] Bowen, S.J. “Crazy ideas or creative probes?: presenting 
critical artefacts to stakeholders to develop innovative product 
ideas,” Proceedings of EAD07: Dancing with Disorder: 
Design, Discourse and Disaster, Izmir, Turkey, 2007. 
[8] Brown, T. “Change by Design: How Design Thinking 
Transforms 
Organizations 
and 
Inspires 
Innovation,” 
HarperBusiness, 2009. 
[9] Bullinger, 
H.-J., 
Müller-Spahn, 
F., 
and 
Rössler, 
A. 
“Encouraging Creativity - Support of Mental Processes by 
Virtual Experience,” Conference Virtual Reality World, 1996. 
[10] Cooper, A. and Reimann, R.M. “About Face 2.0: The 
Essentials of Interaction Design,” Wiley, 2003. 
[11] Cornillie, F., Thorne, S.L., and Desmet, P. “Editorial. Digital 
games for language learning: from hype to insight?” ReCALL 
vol. 24(3), 2012, pp. 243–256. 
[12] Csikszentmihalyi, M. “Creativity: Flow and the Psychology 
of Discovery and Invention,“ Harper Perennial, 1997. 
[13] deHaan, J., Reed, W.M., and Kuwada, K. “The effect of 
interactivity with a music video game on second language 
vocabulary recall,” Language Learning & Technology vol. 
14(2), 2010, pp. 74–94. 
[14] Dow, S., Fortuna, J., Schwartz, D., Altringer, B., Schwartz, 
D., and Klemmer, S. “Prototyping dynamics: sharing multiple 
designs improves exploration, group rapport, and results,“ 
Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on Human factors 
in computing systems, (CHI2011), ACM, 2011, pp. 2807–
2816. 
[15] Egenfeldt-Nielsen, S. “Beyond Edutainment:  Exploring the 
Educational Potential of Computer Games.” PhD Dissertation, 
online 
http://www.learninginvideogames.com/research-and-
papers/beyond-edutainment-a-dissertation-by-simon-
egenfeldt-nielsen/ [last accessed December 2012], 2005. 
[16] Ermi, L. and Mäyrä, F. “Player-Centred Game Design: 
Experiences in Using Scenario Study to Inform Mobile Game 
Design,” Game Studies: The International Journal of 
Computer Game Research vol. 5(1), 2005. 
[17] Frazer, A., Argles, D., and Wills, G. “Assessing The 
Usefulness Of Mini-games As Educational Resources,” ALT-
C 2007: Beyond Control, 2007. 
[18] Gaver, B., Dunne, T., and Pacenti, E. “Design: Cultural 
probes,” Interactions vol. 6(1), 1999, pp. 21–29. 
[19] Gaver, B. and Martin, H. “Alternatives: exploring information 
appliances through conceptual design proposals,” Proceedings 
of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing 
systems (CHI2000), 2000, pp. 209–216. 
[20] Gaver, W.W., Beaver, J., and Benford, S. “Ambiguity as a 
resource for design,” Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference 
on Human factors in computing systems (CHI2003), ACM, 
2003, pp. 233–240. 
[21] Greenberg, B.S., Sherry, J., Lachlan, K., Lucas, K., and 
Holmstrom, A. “Orientations to Video Games Among Gender 
and Age Groups, “Simulation & Gaming vol. 41(2), 2010, pp. 
238–259. 
[22] Griffiths, M. “The therapeutic use of videogames in childhood 
and adolescence, “Clinical child psychology and psychiatry 
vol. 8(4), 2003, p.547. 
[23] Hackos, J.A. and Redish, J.C. “User and Task Analysis for 
Interface Design, “John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1998. 
[24] Hartmann, T. and Klimmt, C. “Gender and Computer Games: 
Exploring Females’ Dislikes,” Journal of Computer-Mediated 
Communication vol. 11(4), 2006, pp. 910–931. 
[25] Hubbard, P. “Evaluating Computer Games for Language 
Learning,” Simulation & Gaming vol. 22(2), 1991, pp. 220 –
223. 
[26] Hubbard, P. “Interactive Participatory Dramas for Language 
Learning,” Simulation & Gaming vol. 33(2), 2002, pp. 210 –
216. 
[27] ISO. “ISO 9241-210:2010 - Ergonomics of human-system 
interaction -- Part 210: Human-centred design for interactive 
systems,” 
http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=5207
5 [last accessed September 2012], 2010. 
[28] Johnson, W.L. “Serious Use of a Serious Game for Language 
Learning,” Proceeding of the 2007 conference on Artificial 
Intelligence in Education: Building Technology Rich 
Learning Contexts That Work, IOS Press 2007, pp. 67–74. 
[29] Kirriemuir, J. and McFarlane, A. “Literature review in games 
and learning,” Futurelab, 2004. 
[30] Klimmt, C., Hartmann, T., and Frey, A. “Effectance and 
control as determinants of video game enjoyment,” 
Cyberpsychology & Behavior vol. 10(6), 2007, pp. 845–847. 
[31] Klimmt, C., Rizzo, A., Vorderer, P., Koch, J., and Fischer, T. 
“Experimental Evidence for Suspense as Determinant of 
Video Game Enjoyment.” Cyberpsychology & Behavior vol. 
12(1), 2009, pp. 29–31. 

576
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 3 & 4, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[32] Klimmt, C., Schmid, H., and Orthmann, J. “Exploring the 
Enjoyment of Playing Browser Games.” Cyberpsychology & 
Behavior vol. 12(2), 2009, pp. 231–234. 
[33] Larian Studios and Die Keure. “Monkey Tales Games - 
Educational 
math 
games.” 
http://www.monkeytalesgames.com [last accessed: September 
2012], 2011. 
[34] Laurel, B. and Lunenfeld, P. “Design Research: Methods and 
Perspectives,” The MIT Press, 2003 . 
[35] Lazzaro, N. “Why We Play Games: Four Keys to More 
Emotion Without Story,” Game Developers Conference, 
2004. 
[36] Malone, T.W. and Lepper, M.R. “Making learning fun: A 
taxonomy of intrinsic motivations for learning,” Aptitude, 
learning, and instruction vol. 3, 1987, pp. 223–253. 
[37] Miller, M. and Hegelheimer, V. “The SIMs meet ESL. 
Incorporating authentic computer simulation games into the 
language classroom ” Interactive Technology and Smart 
Education vol. 3(4), 2006, pp. 311–328. 
[38] Pagulayan, R.J., Keeker, K., Wixon, D., Romero, R.L., and 
Fuller, T. “User-centered design in games,” In J.A. Jacko and 
A. Sears, eds. The Human-Computer Interaction Handbook. 
Fundamentals, 
Evolving 
Technologies 
and 
Emerging 
Applications. L. Erlbaum Associates Inc., Hillsdale, NJ, USA, 
2003, pp. 883–906. 
[39] Papert, S. “Does Easy Do It? Children, Games, and Learning 
” Game Developer, 1998, pp. 87–88. 
[40] Pruitt, J. and Grudin, J. “Personas: practice and theory”. 
Proceedings of the 2003 conference on Designing for user 
experiences (DUX ’03), ACM 2003, pp. 1–15. 
[41] Purushotma, R., Thorne, S.L., and Wheatley, J. “10 Key 
Principles for Designing Video Games for Foreign Language 
Learning,” 2008. http://knol.google.com/k/10-key-principles-
for-designing-video-games-for-foreign-language-learning# 
[last accessed May 2011]. 
[42] Ranalli, J. “Learning English with The Sims: exploiting 
authentic computer simulation games for L2 learning,” 
Computer Assisted Language Learnin, vol.21(5), 2008, pp. 
441–455. 
[43] Salen, K. and Zimmerman, E. “Rules of Play: Game Design 
Fundamentals,“ MIT Press, 2003. 
[44] Sanders, E.B.N. “From user-centered to participatory design 
approaches,” Design and the social sciences: making 
connections vol. 2, 2002, p. 1. 
[45] Sanders, R.H. and Sanders, A.F. “History of an AI spy game: 
Spion,”  In Thirty years of computer assisted language 
instruction. CALICO, 1995, pp. 114–127. 
[46] Schuler, D. and Namioka, A. “Ethnographic Field Methods 
and Their Relation to Design,” In Participatory Design: 
Principles and Practices. Routledge, 1993. 
[47] Serious Games Interactive. “Global Conflicts: Palestine,” 
Gamers Gate, Manifesto Games & Macgamestore, 2007. 
[48] Sherry, J.L., Lucas, K., Greenberg, B.S., and Lachlan, K. 
“Video game uses and gratifications as predictors of use and 
game preference,” In Playing video games: Motives, 
responses, and consequences, Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 
2006, pp. 213–224. 
[49] Sherry, P., Lucas, K., Greenberg, B., and Lachlan, K. 
“Playing video games: motives, responses, and consequences, 
“Routledge, 2006. 
[50] Spongelab Interactive. “Genomics Digital Lab - History of 
biology,” Spongelab Interactive, 2009. 
[51] Sulmon, N., Derboven, J., Montero Perez, M., and Zaman, B. 
“Creativity as a process: a participatory design approach to 
gather 
mobile 
language 
learning 
user 
requirements,” 
Proceedings of the IADIS international conference e-learning 
2011, 2011, pp. 429–437. 
[52] Sykes, J.M. “Learner requests in Spanish: Examining the 
potential of multiuser virtual environments for L2 pragmatic 
acquisition,” In L. Lomicka and G. Lord, eds. The Next 
Generation: Social Networking and Online Collaboration in 
Foreign Language Learning. Computer Assisted Language 
Instruction Consortium, Durham, 2009. 
[53] Thoring, K. and Müller, R.M. “Understanding the creative 
mechanisms of design thinking: an evolutionary approach, “ 
Proceedings of the Second Conference on Creativity and 
Innovation in Design (DESIRE’11), ACM, 2011, pp. 137–
147. 
[54] United Nations World Food Programme. “Food Force: The 
First Humanitarian Video Game,“ World Food Programme, 
2005. 
[55] Utrecht School of the Arts, Monobanda, and Metagama. 
“GAME SEEDS” 2012. http://www.gameseeds.net/ [last 
accessed September 2012]. 
[56] Vanden Abeele, V., Geurts, L., Husson, J., Windey, F., 
Annema, J., Verstrate, M., and Desmet, S. “Designing Slow 
Fun! Physical Therapy Games to Remedy the Negative 
Consequences of Spasticity,” Proceedings of the 3rd 
International Conference on Fun and Games (FnG 2010), 
ACM Press, 2010. 
[57] Vanden Abeele, V. and De Schutter, B. “Designing 
intergenerational play via Enactive Interaction,” Competition 
and Acceleration. Journal of Personal and Ubiquitous 
Computing: Special Issue on Design for Social Interaction 
through Physical Play, 2009. 
[58] Vanden Abeele, V., Schutter, B., Geurts, L., Desmet, S., 
Wauters, J., Husson, J., Van Audenaeren, L., Broeckhoven, 
F., Annema, J.,and  Geerts, D. “P-III: A Player-Centered, 
Iterative, Interdisciplinary and Integrated Framework for 
Serious 
Game 
Design 
and 
Development,” 
In 
S. 
Wannemacker, S. Vandercruysse and G. Clarebout, eds., 
Serious Games: The Challenge. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
2012, pp. 82–86. 
[59] Vorderer, P. and Bryant, J. “Playing Video Games: Motives, 
Responses, 
and 
Consequences,” 
Lawrence 
Erlbaum 
Associates, 2006. 
[60] Winograd, T. and Kuhn, S. “Participatory Design,”In 
Bringing Design to Software. Addison-Wesley, 1996. 
[61] Yee, N. “Motivations for Play in Online Games.” 
CyberPsychology & Behavior vol. 9(6), 2006, pp. 772–775. 
 

