141
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Linked Open Data in the GIOCOnDa LOD Platform 
Lorenzo Sommaruga, Nadia Catenazzi, Davide Bertacco, Riccardo Mazza  
Department of Innovative Technologies   
University of Applied Sciences and Arts of Southern Switzerland (SUPSI) 
CH-6962 Lugano, Switzerland 
e-mail: lorenzo.sommaruga@supsi.ch 
nadia.catenazzi@supsi.ch  
davide.bertacco@supsi.ch 
riccardo.mazza@supsi.ch 
 
 
 
Abstract – The GIOCOnDa LOD platform, developed in the 
context of a project funded by the EU programme Interreg, aims 
to make Linked Open Data (LOD) available in an easy and 
convenient way, without the need of any software programming. 
This paper illustrates the implemented platform that, starting 
from a common Open Data repository, can automate the 
production and publishing of Linked Open Data. The platform is 
configurable and extensible as it enables to define mapping 
configurations for new datasets hiding the complexity of the 
ontology in the mapping process. The paper also presents some 
examples 
of 
data 
consuming 
applications, 
using 
some 
GIOCOnDa LOD datasets. 
Keywords - Linked Open Data (LOD); GIOCOnDa; LOD 
publishing; LOD consuming; OntoPia. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The work described in this paper, firstly introduced in [1], 
was developed in the context of the EU Interreg GIOCOnDa 
project (“Integrated and holistic management of the open data 
life cycle”, March 2019 – April 2021), funded by the Interreg 
V-A Italy-Switzerland Programme, which aims to create value 
by developing information products based on the re-use of 
public Open Data [2]. The project focuses on data that are 
relevant for the touristic sector, coming from the Insubric area, 
a cross-border territory across Italy and Switzerland. They 
include data about museums, accommodation facilities, and 
environment. The main data sources currently used are: 
Regione Lombardia open data portal [3], and ARPA (Regional 
Agency for the Protection of the Environment) [4] for Italian 
data; Wikidata, Ticino Turismo [5], and OASI [6] for Swiss 
data. 
One of the main results of the project is the creation of a 
platform for the publication of LOD (Linked Open Data) by 
public administrations. In the GIOCOnDa LOD platform, 
open data, coming from various sources and in different 
formats, are converted into homogeneous Linked Open Data, 
based on standard ontologies, and published together with 
their metadata. The platform enables conversion of existing 3* 
Open Data to 5* Open Data, according to the well-known 5-
star deployment scheme [7]: data are formalized in RDF, 
identified by URI and linked to other datasets. For this 
purpose, a specific interlinking module was developed and 
integrated into the platform. 
This work answers an emerging need for generic and 
usable tools to produce linked open data. While the value of 
linked open data is widely recognized in the literature [8], their 
publication is still challenging. 
Different works and platforms have been developed to 
support this process. One of the first significant projects is 
Lucero and the resulting Tabloid toolkit, which aims to help 
institutions and developers to publish and consume linked data 
[9]. Another interesting work, which supports US open 
government data production and consumption, is the TWC 
LOGD portal [10]. Here a workflow for linked open data 
deployment is defined, consisting of different stages, where the 
conversion process is automated by using the csv2rdf4lod tool. 
A more recent initiative is represented by the Italian cultural 
heritage platform “dati.beniculturali.it”, promoted by the 
Italian Ministry of Culture, which collects and publishes 
standardized and interoperable LOD heterogeneous datasets 
[11]. 
An extensive survey of methods, tools, and techniques for 
generating and publishing linked open data reveals that the 
proposed approaches to produce linked data are often specific 
to a use case and usually concern a specific domain, such as, 
media, library, finance, education, and healthcare. These 
approaches can hardly be adapted to other use-cases and 
domains [12]. 
The main innovative aspect of the approach adopted in the 
GIOCOnDa platform is that it is generic and supports different 
source types and formats. In addition, it does not require 
programming skills or a deep knowledge of the RDF and OWL 
formalisms. 
 
This paper describes the publishing process from Open 
Data to Linked Open Data in the GIOCOnDa platform and 
presents some examples of applications that consume LOD 
produced using the platform. It is structured as follows: Section 
II presents the methodology adopted to publish LOD data; 
Section III focuses on the process of conversion of Open Data 
to LOD, one of the main steps of this methodology; Section IV 
presents the main functionalities of the GIOCOnDa LOD 
platform, in particular the LOD catalogue, and the input and 
output mapping, two processes that enable to convert data from 
different input data sources to the final LOD format; Section V 
explains how the interlinking module works and is integrated 
into the platform; Section VI presents possible use cases of 

142
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
publishing a new dataset in the GIOCOnDa LOD platform; 
finally, Section VII proposes some examples of applications 
that exploit Linked Open Data to support users in their needs. 
 
II. 
METHODOLOGY TO PUBLISH LINKED OPEN DATA 
From a methodological point of view, a number of best 
practices, recommendations and guidelines have been defined. 
For example, Bauer and Kaltenböck [13] provide a step-by-
step model, highlighting the most important issues that need to 
be considered in LOD publishing; W3C [14] presents best 
practices designed to facilitate LOD development and delivery; 
the “Agenzia per l’Italia Digitale” (AGID) [15] proposes a 
general methodological approach for the interoperable opening 
of public data through the LODs. This methodology basically 
consists of the following steps: selection of dataset, data 
cleaning, 
analysis 
and 
RDF 
modelling, 
enrichment, 
interlinking, validation, and publication. 
The approach adopted in GIOCOnDa is in line with the 
above best practices and guidelines and, in particular, with 
those proposed by AGID. The selection of datasets was made 
on the basis of the results of a previous need analysis phase 
carried out with a number of stakeholders during the project. 
As a starting point, data about museums, accommodation 
facilities, and environment of the Insubric region are selected. 
Concerning data cleaning, it is assumed that the selected 
datasets are already published as clean and accurate open data, 
where a quality check is already accomplished. 
Once selected, datasets are deeply analysed to understand 
their structure; then appropriate ontologies and vocabularies 
are identified to model them. 
In particular, the adopted ontologies are taken from the 
OntoPia network [16], also presented in [17]. They include, for 
instance, the Cultural-ON ontology for museums and the 
ACCO ontology for accommodations. In the GIOCOnDa LOD 
platform, data are imported from different sources and 
converted into the RDF format, according to these standard 
ontologies. The conversion process is detailed in the next 
section. 
As additional steps, datasets are enriched with metadata and 
interlinked to other datasets. Metadata are added to the single 
datasets following the DCAT-AP standard. Interlinks to other 
datasets are created by identifying alignments and similarities 
between different datasets. For instance, a museum from the 
“Regione Lombardia” dataset can be declared “the same as” a 
museum described in Wikidata. The identification of interlinks 
is mainly carried out using the Silk software libraries [18], as 
explained in Section 5. 
Finally, datasets are published using Openlink Virtuoso 
Universal Server [19], where they can be queried through a 
SPARQL endpoint. 
 
III. 
THE CONVERSION PROCESS FROM OPEN DATA TO LOD 
IN THE GIOCONDA PLATFORM 
The core of the system lies in the mapping functionality of 
heterogeneous data into Linked Open Data, according to 
standard ontologies. 
This conversion is a complex process that depends on the 
initial format and on the final standard RDF format. From a 
literature study it emerges that the most frequently adopted 
approach is the implementation of ad-hoc middleware. For 
example, to convert a relational database to LOD, a typical 
solution is to use declarative languages, such as D2R [20] or 
R2RML [21] that require ontological and programming skills.  
In the GIOCOnDa LOD platform, the complexity of the 
conversion process is simplified by defining a converter, 
facilitated by a graphical user interface that an expert can use 
to configure the conversion. This process can be explained 
through a simple example: we would like to convert two 
different datasets about museums into a common interoperable 
format. The first dataset concerns Lombard museums retrieved 
from the Regione Lombardia portal in JSON format by means 
of REST APIs [21]. The second is represented by Tessin 
Canton museums retrieved from Wikidata through SPARQL 
queries. 
Figure 1 shows an excerpt from the Lombard museums 
visualized on the Regione Lombardia portal [22], while Figure 
2 shows an example of a Swiss museum in Wikidata [23]. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Lombard museums from the Regione Lombardia Open Data 
portal. 
 
Figure 2.  The Swiss Vela Museum in Wikidata. 
To be able to configure the mapping from the original to 
LOD format, the structure of the two museum data sources has 
to be analysed by an expert and an appropriate ontology 
selected. In this phase it is important to find the most 
appropriate ontology to model the domain. Cultural-ON [24] 

143
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
and its connected ontologies were chosen because they are 
representative of the museum domain and can be exploited to 
support transnational interoperability. 
The next step consists of analysing the different descriptive 
fields of the museum datasets: for instance, each Lombard 
museum is described in terms of 79 fields, such as 
denominazione museo (name), telefono (telephone), codice 
sede (site code) as shown in Figure 1. 
For each field, the objective is to find a match with the 
ontology classes and properties. For example, a museum could 
be represented as an instance of the cis:Museum class of the 
Cultural-ON ontology, where cis is the prefix of the ontology 
namespace; the telephone field can be mapped into a property 
of a smapit:OnlineContactPoint instance of the Social Media / 
Contact and Internet ontology [25]. 
 
Figures 3 and 4 present some details of the conversion 
result of a Lombard and a Tessin canton museum, respectively, 
into RDF Turtle, according to Cultural-ON and its connected 
ontologies. In particular, in the excerpts, the light blue border 
highlights the hasSite relation to the Site instance, and the 
orange one highlights the hasOnlineContactPoint relation to 
the ContactPoint instance with their respective properties. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Excerpt from the Lombard Museum of Science and Technology 
converted in RDF Turtle. 
 
 
Figure 4.   Excerpt from The Swiss Vela museum converted in RFD Turtle. 
It should be noted that the two museums, initially 
formalised in different ways on their original portal, are finally 
described in a common interoperable RDF format. This 
translation process leads, in this case, to information loss 
because there is not a full match between the initial format and 
the ontological one. The ontology is not expressive enough to 
represent all fields of the original data sources, although it 
contains more classes and properties than the original file 
format. For instance, the number of visitors is not included in 
the Cultural-ON ontology. 
In the conversion process, the mapping from the initial 
input data format to the final RDF format would need to be 
configured for each data source. This requires knowing the 
OWL syntax and understanding the classes and properties of 
the selected ontologies. 
To simplify the conversion process, an internal vocabulary 
was created to describe in a homogeneous and simple way data 
coming from different sources, without knowing the details of 
the ontology and further separate the input from the output. 
The main advantage of having this vocabulary is to hide the 
complexity of the ontology in the mapping process. The 
internal vocabulary is organized in categories, that represent 
contexts or ontologies; each category contains classes; each 
class has a number of fields. For instance, to describe museums 
we have defined the museum Cultural-ON category; this 
category contains classes, such as museum and discipline, and 
fields, such as geographical coordinates. 
Thanks to the internal vocabulary, the conversion process is 
divided in two steps (see Figure 5): 
• 
the conversion from the input data format to the internal 
vocabulary (input mapping) 
• 
the conversion from the internal vocabulary to the 
ontological LOD format (output mapping). 
 
 
Figure 5.  Two step conversion process: the museum data example. 

144
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Going back to the museum example, the two datasets, 
originally described in different formats and with different 
descriptive fields, are translated by means of the input mapping 
specifications into a common format, which is described by the 
internal vocabulary (defined in the output mapping). The 
resulting datasets are then converted to the LOD format, 
according to standard ontologies, by means of the output 
mapping specification. This guarantees standardization and 
semantic interoperability. 
 
While it is necessary to configure the input mapping of 
each imported dataset towards the internal vocabulary, the 
output mapping of a specific category (e.g., museum) to the 
corresponding LOD format has to be configured only once. 
The first step can be accomplished by a user who knows the 
input format, the domain, and the internal vocabulary; the 
second step requires a wide knowledge of the ontologies and of 
the OWL language. 
This mechanism that converts Open Data into Linked Open 
Data based on two independent and configurable steps is the 
peculiar feature of GIOCOnDa. With respect to other LOD 
frameworks, we introduced a novel flexible and dynamically 
configurable system that simplifies the conversion and 
production of LOD. 
 
It is worth noting that the conversion process may require a 
certain amount of time to produce LOD, which may vary from 
seconds to minutes according to the complexity of the data 
sources and the mapping specifications. This makes the LOD 
dataset not appropriate for real-time applications, although 
dataset updates can take place at regular intervals. 
 
IV. 
GIOCONDA LOD PLATFORM 
The GIOCOnDa LOD platform [26] is mainly oriented to 
domain and ontology experts, who operate using their own user 
accounts to create and modify datasets. Public administrations 
can submit new datasets for conversion into LOD. The LOD 
datasets are also made accessible through a public portal 
without registration. 
The platform, implemented as a Java-based web 
application, provides different functionalities that enable the 
publication of LOD datasets starting from open datasets, and 
their visualization in a catalogue or in a map.  
The web app presents a menu consisting of different items: 
dataset catalogue, input mapping, and output mapping. 
 
A. LOD Datasets 
The catalogue shows the list of the existing datasets, as 
shown in Figure 6, and enables the creation of a new LOD 
dataset by converting an existing open dataset on the basis of 
the input and output mapping configuration. The system 
supports dataset updates at regular intervals (e.g., for air quality 
measurements) and propagates the changes to the RDF 
representation. 
 
 
Figure 6.  LOD datasets catalogue. 
 
By clicking on the “map view” button, it is possible to 
visualize data on the map, whenever they have geographical 
coordinates, as shown in Figure 7. 
 
 
Figure 7.  LOD Datasets visualized in the map. 
Approximately 
25 
datasets 
about 
accommodation, 
museums, and air quality were boosted to LOD through the 
GIOCOnDa platform. Concerning validation, the output 
mapping process guarantees by design and implementation that 
the produced datasets are accurately serialized in RDF format 
conforming to the selected ontologies. A further manual 
checking was accomplished on some resources of each 
typology. 
 
From the LOD datasets page (shown in Figure 6), it is 
possible to add a new dataset by clicking on the corresponding 
button. This action activates the conversion process, driven by 
the input and output mapping on the specific data sources. The 
“Add new dataset” function was used to generate the single 
datasets shown in Figure 6, but it could also be used to 
combine more sources to produce a unified dataset (see Figure 
8). For instance, to create the “Insubric museum” dataset, it is 
possible to select the Italian and Swiss museums as data 
sources, “IT musei” and “TI musei” respectively. 
 
 

145
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
Figure 8.  New dataset creation. 
 
B. Input Mapping 
The Input mapping concerns the configuration of the 
conversion from the input format to the internal vocabulary. 
Together with the output mapping, it enables to configure the 
conversion from different input data sources to the final LOD 
format. 
The system accepts input data retrieved from sources in 
different formats, such as JSON, CSV, and XML, and using 
different import modes, such as Rest APIs, SOAP APIs, and 
SPARQL Queries. For each input format and import mode the 
conversion towards the internal vocabulary is configured 
through the input mapping. 
Figure 9 clarifies how the mapping mechanism works: the 
first column shows the fields of the original data source; the 
second and third columns concern the internal vocabulary, 
where in particular the second identifies the category, and the 
third the field.  
Categories and fields of the internal vocabulary are 
predetermined and selected from a drop-down menu, while the 
source fields must be entered by hand, according to the data 
structure in use, as explained later. 
In the example shown in Figure 9, fields of the “Cultural-
ON museums” category are used; the “email_sede” field of the 
initial source, representing the email of the museum site, for 
example, is mapped into the “email” field of the “museum 
Cultural-ON” category of the internal vocabulary. In some 
cases, it is possible to group multiple fields of the data source 
into a single field of the internal vocabulary; for example, to 
compose the field “full_address”, more fields of the input 
source are used. 
 
In this mapping, particular attention is dedicated to how 
geospatial data are represented [27]. This is essential to 
guarantee interoperability and efficient sharing of information 
across different regions and national standards. The Cultural-
ON ontology assumes, by default, that spatial data are 
represented in the geocentric Datum WGS84 and that the 
coordinates are expressed in terms of latitude and longitude. 
Therefore, data are transformed into this system when they are 
imported into the GIOCOnDA platform and appropriate 
metadata are added to make the Coordinate Reference System 
(CRS) explicit. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Input mapping. 
 
The input mapping mechanism is the same for the different 
import modes, which only differ for the way the original data 
structure is imported. 
For instance, Figure 10 shows an example of configuration 
of a JSON data source imported through Rest APIs. 
 
 
Figure 10.  Rest API configuration. 
 
On this page the data source is first defined through a 
name, a URL, and the licence, followed by a testing section 
and the input mapping section as presented in Figure 9. In the 
“Source testing” section there is a “run request” button, which 
is used to verify the proper functioning of the specified REST 
call; this button visualizes all the returned fields of the input 
source together with their values. This call is also useful to 
examine the field names to be used as input sources in the 
configuration of the input mapping. 

146
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
C. Output Mapping 
From the output mapping page, it is possible to create, 
modify and extend the internal vocabulary, and define its 
mapping to the ontology. This process requires a deep 
knowledge of ontological concepts and existing reference 
ontologies. Nevertheless, this mapping has to be done only 
once for each category by an expert. 
As already said, the internal vocabulary consists of several 
categories, similar to contexts or ontologies; each category 
contains classes, with a number of associated fields. Examples 
of categories include museums, addresses, accommodations, 
etc. 
As shown in Figure 11, the output mapping defines the 
match between internal vocabulary classes and ontology 
classes, and between fields of the internal vocabulary and 
object and datatype properties of the ontology; this is visible by 
activating the “Show fields” button. 
 
 
Figure 11.  Output mapping: class and field match. 
 
It is worth noting that only categories and fields of the 
internal vocabulary defined in the output mapping can be used 
in the input mapping (but not classes), providing in this way a 
simplified version of the data structure for non-expert users. 
Another action that takes place in the output mapping is the 
interlinking configuration. For this purpose, a specific 
interlinking module was developed and integrated into the 
GIOCOnDa LOD platform. The next section describes how the 
interlinking process works. 
 
V. 
THE INTERLINKING MODULE 
In order to boost a dataset to 5* level, it is necessary to 
enrich the RDF file with connections towards external sources. 
The rules to create cross-reference links towards external 
datasets, such as Wikidata, are defined in specific files, 
generated using the Silk Link Specification Language, 
serialized as .xml using the Linkage Rule Editor. 
Once the Silk files are generated, it is necessary to 
configure the interlinking and then activate it. 
The configuration is accomplished in the output mapping 
page, where one or more interlinking files can be associated to 
each category of the internal vocabulary (e.g., museum). This 
association is called “interlinking configuration”. 
The activation takes place on the datasets page, where it is 
possible to enable or disable interlinking on a specific dataset.  
The rest of this section describes the Linkage Rule Editor, 
the interlinking configuration, and the interlinking activation in 
more detail. 
 
A. The Linkage Rule Editor 
The Linkage Rule Editor is part of the Silk Linked Data 
Integration Framework [18]. This open-source framework for 
integrating heterogeneous data sources was selected for the 
easiness to be adapted and integrated into the GIOCOnDa 
LOD platform. In general, the primary use cases of Silk 
include: generating links between different data sources and 
applying transformations to data from structured data sources; 
Linked Data editors can use Silk to set up RDF links from their 
data sources to other data sources on the web. Silk is 
powerfully based on the Linked Data paradigm, where, on the 
one hand, RDF provides an expressive data model for the 
representation of structured information; on the other hand, 
RDF links are set up between entities in different data sources. 
The rules to create cross-reference links towards external 
datasets are defined in the Linkage Rule Editor page (Figure 
12). 
Link specifications can be created using the graphical 
interface or manually in XML. Using the Silk Link 
Specification Language (Silk-LSL) declarative language, 
developers can specify which types of RDF links must be 
detected between data sources, as well as the conditions that 
data elements must meet to be interconnected. These link 
conditions can combine various similarity metrics and can take 
into account the graph around a data element (entity), which is 
identified using the RDF path language.  
Silk accesses the data sources via the SPARQL query 
language, supporting the use of local and remote SPARQL 
endpoints. 
Figure 12 shows the creation of the owl:sameAs link 
between different entities based on the comparison of their 
geo-location coordinates. In particular, the first sourcePath and 
targetPath take the latitudes, while the latter two take the 
longitudes both from instances of a museum of the GIOCOnDa 
LOD dataset and of Wikidata. We use the following criteria to 
match entities from the two data sources: if two entities of the 
same type (e.g., one museum from the GIOCOnDa LOD 
dataset, another from Wikidata) are located within 10 meters 
each other, then they are considered as the same entity. 
The process corresponding to the rules defined in the 
example of Figure 12 is the following. First, the coordinates 
are obtained via the corresponding SPARQL queries; then a 
numerical comparison (numericEquality) is performed both 
between the latitudes and between the longitudes, with a 
precision up to the 4th decimal place and a maximum threshold 
of 0.0001. This is equivalent to about ten meters in the physical 
world. If both pass the equality comparison (min represents a 
logical “and” aggregation), the interconnecting link is created 
by declaring an owl:sameAs relationship. In simple words, two 
museums are considered the same if their distance is below ten 
meters. 

147
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
Figure 12.  Example of the Linkage Rule Editor use.
B. Interlinking configuration 
Figure 13 shows an example of the interlinking 
configuration within the Output mapping page for a specific 
category. On this page it is possible to upload a rule set from an 
external file, remove an existing set, create a new rule set, or 
modify an existing one, by opening the Linkage Rule Editor 
page (see also Figure 12). 
It is worth noting that the Linkage Rule editor is a page 
fully integrated into the GIOCOnDa LOD platform, after 
adaptation of the Silk original editor page. 
 
C. Interlinking activation 
The interlinking activation takes place on the configuration 
page of a dataset, where, through selection, it is possible to 
activate or deactivate one or more configuration files on the 
current dataset (Figure 14).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 13.  Example of interlinking configuration for a category in the output 
mapping configuration page. 

148
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
The ability to simultaneously use multiple configurations 
allows interlinking between the generated RDF dataset and 
multiple data sources to be performed; for example, 
interlinking with the Wikidata endpoint with one configuration 
file, while interlinking with Open Street Map with a second 
one. 
 
 
Figure 14.   Example of interlinking activation. 
 
VI. 
LOD PUBLISHING PROCESS: USE CASES 
To better understand how the process of publishing a new 
dataset works, three different use cases can be distinguished:  
 
• 
request for publication of a dataset with the same 
structure of an existing one (for example, a new dataset 
structured as the Lombard museums). Since the mapping 
from the input format to the internal vocabulary of that 
category is already configured, the conversion will simply 
take place by duplicating the existing input mapping 
configuration; the output mapping is already configured; 
 
• 
request for publication of a dataset with a new initial 
structure that can be mapped into the existing internal 
vocabulary (for example, a new dataset about museums, 
structured in a different way compared to the existing 
datasets). In this case it will be necessary to configure the 
input mapping from the input format to the internal 
vocabulary of that category; the output mapping is 
already configured; 
 
• 
request for publication of a dataset with a new initial 
structure that cannot be mapped into the existing 
internal vocabulary (for example, a new dataset relating 
to bike sharing, for which a vocabulary has not been 
defined yet). In this case it will be necessary: to look for 
an ontology that models the domain; to extend the 
internal vocabulary by adding the category “bike 
sharing”; to define the correspondence between the 
internal vocabulary and the domain ontology (output 
mapping); to configure the matching between the initial 
format and internal vocabulary (input mapping). 
 
In summary, in the first case, there is no need to configure 
input and output mapping, since they already exist; in the 
second case, a new input mapping configuration is required; in 
the third one both the input and the output mapping need to be 
configured. 
 
In all cases, once the two configurations of input and output 
mapping have been defined, it is possible to proceed with the 
creation of the new dataset. 
 
 
VII. CONSUMING GIOCONDA OPEN DATA 
  
Linked Open Data is useless if it cannot be extracted in a 
format convenient for processing and exploiting the enrichment 
and interlinking of LOD.  
To this end, the GIOCOnDa platform provides a SPARQL 
endpoint that can be queried to extract LOD data from the RDF 
data sources stored in the Virtuoso server, providing ontology-
based data access. The endpoint is available at the URL: 
https://gioconda.supsi.ch:8890/sparql. Thanks to this endpoint, 
anyone can fetch homogeneous data to implement new 
applications that can exploit the enrichment and interlinking of 
LOD, with a limited knowledge of the complex notions of 
ontologies and RDF. 
As case studies, two applications that provide new 
visualizations of the data are illustrated. The first provides an 
overview of the museums in Tessin and Lombardy, whose data 
have been already described in the previous section. The 
second application provides a list of holiday accommodations 
in Tessin and Lombardy.  
 
A. Overview of museums in Tessin and Lombardy 
As first example, we implemented an application that 
provides an overview of museums in Tessin and Lombardy. 
The application is interactive and allows zooming and focusing 
on a particular museum to access its main information: name of 
the museum, type of museum, geographical location, address, 
and a picture. These attributes are collected from public 
sources based on Linked Open Data (namely: Regione 
Lombardia portal and Wikidata), converted and interlinked in 
the GIOCOnDa platform. 
 
The purpose of the application is to allow people to explore 
and have an overview of the distribution of various types of 
museums in the two regions. People who have to take 
important decisions related to the presence of museums in a 
certain area, such as opening a new museum or establishing a 
new partnership among different museums covering the same 
subjects, may use this application. 
 
To implement the application, the visual analytics tool 
Tableau [28] was used. Tableau allows the integration of a 
large number of data sources, but unfortunately it does not 
allow the direct integration of SPARQL endpoints. To 
overcome this problem, the data.world platform [29] was used 
as a bridge to connect the GIOCOnDa SPARQL endpoint with 
the Tableau platform. Data.world is a cloud-based service that 
allows the creation of a repository of data that can be integrated 
with dozens of applications for analytics and visualization. In 
that way, we can produce visual representations of data 
accessing data directly from the GIOCOnDa platform (see 
Figure 15). 
 

149
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
Figure 15.  Structure of integration of GIOCOnDa, Data.word, and Tableau. 
 
With this architecture, the dashboard illustrated in Figure 
16 was implemented in Tableau. This dashboard consists of 4 
coordinated views. On the top left there is a bar chart that 
shows the quantity of the different types of museums in the two 
regions. 
The user can filter out specific elements to see only data 
related to a particular region (Lombardy/Tessin) or location 
(city). A detailed view on the right provides a picture of the 
museum (if existing) and its details (name, location, type, and 
number of visitors per year). On the bottom left, the largest 
area is dedicated to a dot representation of museums on a map, 
and a tabular list of them on the right. Hovering the cursor of 
the mouse over a particular dot opens a new window with the 
details of the museum. Using this dashboard, the viewer can 
graphically represent LOD data extracted from GIOCOnDa 
datasets to make sense of the various types of museums and 
their spatial distribution in the two regions. 
 
B. Overview of accommodations in Tessin and Lombardy 
The second case study provides a list of holiday 
accommodations in Tessin and Lombardy. Like in the previous 
application, the purpose is to explore the different types of 
accommodations across the two regions in a uniform way. For 
this new application the source data are taken from Wikidata 
(that provides a list of Italian accommodations) and Ticino 
Turismo (for the Swiss data). GIOCOnDa regularly fetches 
data from these data sources, in order to keep data regularly 
updated, and store these open data in its internal data 
structures. 
To extract the data from the GIOCOnDa platform, the same 
infrastructure described in the previous case study was used. In 
this case, new SPARQL queries had to be written and a new 
visual interface to extract and visualize data relevant to this 
new goal was implemented. 
 
Figure 17 shows the dashboard implemented for this 
purpose. As in the previous application, we kept the approach 
of using a dot map to represent locations of accommodations. 
The 
circle 
colours 
encode 
the 
different 
types 
of 
accommodations (hotel, hostel, B&B, ...). A bar chart at the top 
shows the percentages of each type of accommodation in the 
two regions. A possible scenario for usage of this visualization 
is the following. An entrepreneur wants to invest in opening a 
new hospitality structure in Ticino. He/she may check this 
visualization and see that Agriturismo (farmhouses) and B&B 
are largely underrepresented in Tessin with respect to 
Lombardy, so he/she decides to open one or more structures of 
this typology. This could be an example of a decision driven by 
data and supported by this application. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 16.  Overview of museums in Ticino and Lombardy. 

150
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 17.  Overview of holiday accommodations in Ticino and Lombardy. 
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
This paper has presented a platform that facilitates the 
process of conversion of open data to Linked Open Data and 
some examples of applications that consume LOD to reveal 
information that cannot be captured in a different way. 
The GIOCOnDa LOD platform contains a number of 
conversion configurations that are already available to 
translate different data sources to LOD in various domains. 
The complexity of mapping existing data to standard 
ontologies is one of the major issues preventing a larger 
diffusion of LOD. The GIOCOnDa platform reduces the 
complexity of this process that would require deep 
knowledge of ontologies and programming skills. 
If we analyse the conversion process in further detail, it is 
possible to distinguish different use cases and complexity 
levels, according to the initial structure of the dataset to be 
converted. 
If the dataset has the same structure of an existing one 
(for example, a new dataset structured as the Lombard 
museums), the conversion is very simple, since the input 
mapping is similar to an existing one (it just needs to be 
duplicated) and the output mapping is already defined. 
However, the platform is also flexible and extensible, and 
enables to import and convert other datasets: for example, 
the conversion to LOD of a new dataset about museums, 
with a structure that can be mappable into the existing 
internal vocabulary, only requires the configuration of the 
input mapping from the initial format to the internal 
vocabulary, because the output mapping is already 
configured. More labour-intensive but still possible is to 
convert a dataset with a new structure, not mappable into the 
existing internal vocabulary; for example, a new dataset 
about bike sharing. 
In addition to the conversion of structured open data to 
standard RDF open data, another important step of the 
adopted methodology to produce LOD is the identification 
and creation of interlinks between datasets. A specific 
interlinking module was developed to configure and activate 
the process of identification of cross-reference links towards 
external datasets. The integration of the interlinking module 

151
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
in the GIOCOnDa LOD platform enables lifting datasets to 
5* level, creating added value through an Extract-Transform-
Load (ETL) pipeline. This is demonstrated, for instance, in a 
showcase that presents data about museums of the Insubric 
region taken both from the GIOCOnDa LOD datasets and 
from Wikidata. 
Despite the benefits offered by the platform to publish 
LOD 
datasets 
(visual 
interface, 
configurability, 
extensibility), it also presents some limitations: the main one 
is the possibility of information loss during the conversion to 
LOD if there are fields not represented in the selected 
ontology. A possible solution would be the extension of the 
selected ontologies with additional fields and the publication 
of the new version with appropriate documentation. 
 
By using the platform functionalities, a consistent 
number of datasets were created and will be produced in the 
future. However, it can be difficult to interpret data in a 
tabular way; data gain more value when they are visualized. 
By means of visualization tools it is possible to communicate 
data findings and identify critical information to pull 
insights. 
 
To demonstrate the potential of Linked Open Data some 
applications were developed concerning museums and 
accommodations. In both cases the applications provide an 
overview of the distributions of these entities in the Insubric 
area, supporting decision making in these domains. Once the 
number of datasets increase, new opportunities will be 
available to develop consuming applications. 
 
In conclusion, it is possible to state that the GIOCOnDa 
project has reached its objectives thanks to the LOD platform 
and the connected applications: a consistent number of LOD 
datasets were published and examples of data consuming 
applications were implemented to show the LOD potential. 
 
In the future the platform will be further developed, 
completing and improving some parts, such as increasing the 
internal vocabulary to publish new LOD datasets, 
simplifying the user interface and refining the interlinking 
rule definition. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We acknowledge the European Regional Development 
Fund, the Tessin Canton and the Swiss Confederation for the 
financial support provided to the project. We also 
acknowledge all the partners involved in the project for their 
contribution to the different project activities. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Sommaruga, N. Catenazzi, D. Bertacco, and R. Mazza, 
“From Open Data to Linked Open Data - The GIOCOnDa 
LOD platform”, ALLDATA 2021 (The Seventh International 
Conference on Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open 
Data), April 18, 2021 to April 22, 2021 - Porto, Portugal. 
[2] GIOCOnDa, Integrated and holistic management of the Open 
Data life cycle (Gestione integrata e olistica del ciclo di vita 
degli 
Open 
Data) 
https://progetti.interreg-
italiasvizzera.eu/it/b/78/gestioneintegrataeolisticadelciclodivit
adegliopendata [retrieved: 2021.11.30]. 
[3] Open Data, Regione Lombardia, https://dati.lombardia.it 
[retrieved: 2021.11.30]. 
[4] Arpa Lombardia, https://www.arpalombardia.it/ [retrieved: 
2021.11.30]. 
[5] Ticino 
Turismo, 
https://www.ticino.ch 
[retrieved: 
2021.11.30]. 
[6] OASI, Osservatorio Ambientale della Svizzera italiana, 
https://www.oasi.ti.ch [retrieved: 2021.11.30]. 
[7] T. 
Berners-Lee, 
“Linked 
Data”, 
http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html, 
2009 
[retrieved: 2021.11.30]. 
[8] T. Heath and C. Bizer, Linked Data, “Evolving the Web into a 
Global Data Space”, Synthesis Lectures on the Semantic 
Web: Theory and Technology, Morgan & Claypool 
Publishers, 2011. 
[9] The Lucero Project, https://lucero-project.kmi.open.ac.uk/ 
[retrieved: 2021.11.30]. 
[10] L. Ding, T. Lebo, J. S. Erickson, D. DiFranzo, G. T. 
Williams, X. Li, J. Michaelis, A. Graves, J. G. Zheng, Z. 
Shangguan, J. Flores, D. L. McGuinness, and J. A. Hendler, 
“TWC LOGD: A portal for linked open government data 
ecosystems”, Journal of Web Semantics, vol. 9(3), pp. 325-
333, Sep. 2011, doi: 10.1016/j.websem.2011.06.002. 
[11] Open Data e Linked Data, https://www.beniculturali.it/open-
data-e-linked-data [retrieved: 2021.11.30]. 
[12] A. Meherhera, I. Mekideche, L. Zemmouchi-Ghomari, and A. 
Réda Ghomari, “A Survey of Current Approaches for 
Transforming Open Data to Linked Data”. 4th Edition of the 
National Study Days on Research on Computer Sciences, 
JERI’2020, Jun 2020, Saida, Algeria. hal-03211592, 
https://hal.archives-ouvertes.fr/hal-03211592/document 
[retrieved: 2021.11.30]. 
[13] F. Bauer and M. Kaltenböck, Linked Open Data: The 
Essentials - A Quick Start Guide for Decision Makers. Edition 
mono/monochrom, Vienna, Austria, 2012, ISBN: 978-3-
902796-05-9, https://www.reeep.org/LOD-the-Essentials.pdf 
[retrieved: 2021.11.30]. 
[14] W3C, “Best Practices for Publishing Linked Data”, W3C 
Working 
Group 
Note 
09 
January 
2014, 
https://www.w3.org/TR/ld-bp/ [retrieved: 2021.11.30]. 
[15] Agenzia per Italia Digitale, Guidelines for semantic 
interoperability through Linked Open Data (“Linee Guida per 
Interoperabilità semantica attraverso i Linked Open Data”), 
http://www.agid.gov.it/sites/default/files/documentazione_tras
parenza/cdc-spc-gdl6-
interoperabilitasemopendata_v2.0_0.pdf 
2012 
[retrieved: 
2021.11.30]. 
[16] Ontologie 
e 
Vocabolari 
Controllati, 
https://github.com/italia/daf-ontologie-vocabolari-controllati 
[retrieved: 2021.11.30]. 
[17] G. Lodi, “OntoPiA –The network of ontologies and controlled 
vocabularies for public admistration (OntoPIA - La rete di 
ontologie 
e 
vocabolari 
controllati 
per 
la 
pubblica 
amministrazione)”, Open Data Sicilia – raduno annuale, 9/10 
novembre 
2018, 
http://ods2018.opendatasicilia.it/presentazioni/Lodi-
OntoPiA.pdf, 2018 [retrieved: 2021.11.30]. 
[18] Silk, 
The 
Linked 
Data 
Integration 
Framework. 
http://silkframework.org/ [retrieved: 2021.11.30]. 
[19] Open 
Link 
Virtuoso, 
https://virtuoso.openlinksw.com 
[retrieved: 2021.11.30]. 
[20] C. Bizer and R. Cyganiak, “D2R Server - Publishing 
Relational Databases on the Semantic Web”, 5th International 
Semantic Web Conference (ISWC 2006), Athens, USA, 

152
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
November 2006, http://richard.cyganiak.de/2008/papers/d2r-
server-iswc2006.pdf, 2006 [retrieved: 2021.11.30]. 
[21] R2ML: 
RDB 
to 
RDF 
Mapping 
Language 
https://www.w3.org/TR/r2rml [retrieved: 2021.11.30]. 
[22] Musei 
riconosciuti 
da 
Regione 
Lombardia 
https://www.dati.lombardia.it/Cultura/Musei-riconosciuti-da-
Regione-Lombardia/3syc-54zf [retrieved: 2021.11.30]. 
[23] Museo 
Vela 
https://www.wikidata.org/wiki/Q3867651 
[retrieved: 2021.11.30]. 
[24] Cultural-ON (Cultural ONtology): Cultural Institute/Site and 
Cultural Event Ontology, https://w3id.org/italia/onto/Cultural-
ON [retrieved: 2021.11.30]. 
[25] Social Media / Contact and Internet ontology - Italian 
Application Profile https://w3id.org/italia/onto/SM [retrieved: 
2021.11.30]. 
[26] GIOCOnDa 
LOD 
platform 
https://gioconda.supsi.ch/ 
[retrieved: 2021.11.30]. 
[27] J. F. Toro Herrera, D. Carrion, M. A. Brovelli, N. Catenazzi, 
L. 
Sommaruga, 
and 
D. 
Bertacco 
“Geospatial 
Data 
dissemination in the GIOCOnDA project”, extended abstract, 
ASITA (Federazione delle Associazioni Scientifiche per le 
Informazioni 
Territoriali 
e 
Ambientali, 
http://atti.asita.it/ASITA2021/Pdf/039.pdf) 
July 
2021, 
[retrieved: 2021.11.30]. 
[28] Tableau: Business Intelligence and Analytics Software 
https://www.tableau.com/, [retrieved: 2021.11.30]. 
[29] “The 
catalog 
for 
metadata 
and 
data 
management”, 
https://data.world, [retrieved: 2021.11.30]. 
 

