85
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
A Decision-making Support System for Land Use Estimation Based on a New 
Anthropentropy Predictive Model for Environmental Preservation  
Theory, Model, and Web–based Implementation 
 
Maria Grazia Albanesi 
 Dept. of Electrical, Computer and Biomedical Engineering 
 University of Pavia 
Pavia, Italy 
mariagrazia.albanesi@unipv.it 
 Roberto Albanesi 
Thea s.r.l. 
Pavia, Italy 
ufficiostampa@albanesi.it
 
 
Abstract—This paper describes a new decision-making 
support system, which is able to estimate the future impact 
on the environment of new planned (but not yet built) urban 
settlements and/or communication roads. The challenging  
addressed problem is to decide if, according to a quantitative 
indicator, the creation of new human anthropic areas is 
compatible with a sustainable land use control, for an 
efficient environment preservation. The core of the system is 
a predictive model, which is initially  trained by selected  
worst stressing cases. Some modifications to classical 
computer vision morphological operators are proposed and 
applied to standard Google Earth satellite maps, according 
to the User Generated Content paradigm. The model 
updates the previously defined indicator of Anthropentropy 
Factor, by producing a novel indicator of higher level 
(indicator of type C, or performance indicator, according to 
European Environmental Agency classification). The paper 
describes this important theoretical improvement, the model 
architecture, the new customized computer vision functions, 
and the prototype of a web-based implementation of the 
decision-making support system, with visual and numerical 
results of some significant cases.  
Keywords-Land use, urban sprawl, anthropentropy factor, 
decision-making 
support 
system, 
predictive 
model, 
morphological operators, web-based system, UGC. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper describes the continuation and the extension 
of the  ACI project [1]: both theory and implementation 
have been improved to meet more complex problems. The 
challenging task is the same: to give computer-based 
algorithms and methodologies to help the environmental 
preservation, specifically in the field of land use limitation 
against the threat of an inappropriate, out of control, urban 
sprawl. Land use is just one of the aspects of 
environmental protection, but surprisingly it is the one 
where few results have been reached: since 2006, 
European Environment Agency pointed out this fact,  by 
calling urban sprawl “the ignored challenge” [2]. Even if 
the problem is well known, solutions are far from being 
proposed, accepted and adopted. Data are self-explaining: 
annual land take in 36 European countries was 111,788 
ha/year in the period 2000-2006  [3], with sensible 
differences among countries: in the worst cases, annual 
land take increased by 9 %. In Italy, the situation is 
particularly evident, with an increment of land use of 
6.3%, for the period 1956-2006 [4]. Recently, these data 
about Italian territory have been updated [5], with an 
esteemed growth of land take of 70 h a day.  The most 
relevant consequence of land use is soil sealing: soil is 
modified, for the presence of asphalt, concrete and other 
human artifacts, and this fact prejudices some vital 
functions of the ecosystems, causes territory fragmentation 
and it is a serious threat to biodiversity. For this reason, the 
European Environment Agency classified the land use and 
biodiversity in the same policy target and objective [6], the 
last one, called “Biodiversity and land use”. One of the 
more challenging task of computer science community is 
to give instruments to help governments and citizens to 
pay more attention to land use impact on environment and 
quality of life. The main effort of researchers is twofold: to 
define indicators for land use computation and to describe 
the current situation of the territory. These two problems 
have been addressed in the previous research [1], but this 
is not sufficient for a long-term policy of land use control, 
as pointed out in the middle term policy targets of 2030 
[6]. In fact, the most challenging problem is to prevent 
land take, i.e., to give tools and methodology to predict the 
future anthropic expansion. The instant land take is 
dramatic in Italy  [5]: every second, 8 square meters of 
green land are engulfed by new human settlements, 
industries, roads, intensive farming or touristic resorts. For 
this reason, starting from the indicator Anthropentropy 
Factor [1],  a new decision-making support system is here 
proposed and described: the distinctive idea is to model the 
expansion of existing and future planned (but not yet built) 
anthropic places in a given territory. The model defines 
different classes of anthropic places and, for each of them, 
estimates the growth of their areas on the basis of initial 
assumptions and parameters fixed in the training phase. 
The model is dynamic, as the expansion is a function of 

86
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
time, with a time frame until 2050. For this reason, we 
called the model Dynamic ANTHropentropy Expansion 
model (i.e., DANTHE model), while we refer to the entire 
project as the DANTHE project. At the end of the 
expansion, the decision-making support system determines 
if the planned settlement is sustainable or not, according to 
a new metric of environmental preservation. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 
II describes the addressed problem and related work in 
literature. Section III describes the theoretical innovations 
introduced by the DANTHE project and the new dynamic 
indicator of land use. Section IV addresses the architecture 
and functions of the system. Section V describes the 
predictive model, and gives details on the new proposed 
morphological operators. Section VI describes the 
applications of the assumptions of the predictive model on 
some significant case studies and  present the result on a 
real case on the Italian territory. Conclusion and 
considerations about future work close the article.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The challenge is to compute, in an automatic or 
semiautomatic way, the land use, according to some 
indicator which represents numerically this concept. 
Before discussing about related work in literature, a brief 
summary of the terminology and definitions can be useful 
(in italics, the basic terms and their meaning adopted in the 
project). 
 
A. Terminology 
Land use can be calculated in different ways, and also 
its significance is often a source of misunderstanding. In 
its wider, and correct sense, land use is the classification, 
within a limited territory, of the areas of anthropic places, 
i.e., places occupied by humans (for their life, economic 
and productive activities), and of the areas of wild nature. 
A simplified list of anthropic places can be the following: 
buildings, such as housing, workplaces, schools, hospitals, 
paved roads, railways, and places of intensive agriculture. 
In all these anthropic places, the human presence is fairly 
continuous, and has effectively ousted the wild.  
A correlated term is land take, which expresses the 
variation of the land use over time, generally referred to a 
specific time period (e.g., one year for annual land take).   
Another term, whose meaning is often confused with 
that of land use, is urban sprawl. European Environment 
Agency defines the term urban sprawl as the physical 
pattern of low-density expansion of large urban areas [6]. 
In their expansion, the urban areas penetrate and destroy 
the surrounding agricultural areas. Sprawl is the leading 
edge of urban growth and this phenomenon usually 
implies little planning control. This consideration is 
particularly relevant and has become the starting point of 
the DANTHE project: increasing control over urban 
sprawl is mandatory for a policy of biodiversity 
preservation. If we had a tool to decide if a future 
configuration of an urban area will be sustainable over 
time and compatible with an intelligent policy of 
environmental preservation, this tool could be used in a 
simulation to study future urban expansions in a scenario 
of What if?. This could help local government in planning 
the annual Territory Government Plan, where new urban 
expansions are decided. This is exactly the goal of the 
decision-making support system DANTHE: to avoid the 
expansion of urban areas in the form of patchy, scattered 
development, with a high  tendency for discontinuity. The 
consequences of discontinuity of urban sprawl will be 
further analyzed later in this section, when the problem of 
fragmentation will be discussed. 
 Unfortunately, urban sprawl is not the only 
accountable for land take: in fact, intensive farming and 
tourism, especially for coastlines, contribute to a relevant 
decrease of wild nature. Coasts are being urbanized at high 
rate, and are becoming twist together with the hinterland 
and more dependent on tourism and secondary homes. 
Economic 
changes 
support 
this 
evolution: 
as 
a 
consequence, also rural and coastline little villages are 
being growing according to an unplanned incremental 
urban 
development, 
exactly 
as 
big 
cities. 
This 
phenomenon has been confirmed also by the previous 
results of the ACI project [1], where land exploitations 
reaches worrying results also in coastline and rural regions 
(see Section II.B for new updated results of the ACI 
project regarding coastline regions.) For all these reasons, 
we are interested to every kind of anthropic places, not 
only urban settlements, but also communication lines 
(roads, airports, stations), areas for services, productive 
activities and recreational purpose settlements. While in 
the ACI project [1] we considered only four classes of 
anthropic places, in  the DANTHE project the number of 
classes rises to 12; they are listed in Table I. The reasons 
of this new classification will be clear after the discussion 
of the basic assumptions and parameters of the model 
(Section V). 
 
B. Indicators for land use: state of the art 
In literature, few contributions refer to the problem of 
defining meaningful indicators to express the concept of 
land use. Several studies try to investigate the relationship 
among land use and other aspects of environmental 
degradation, for example water and air pollution. Land 
quality indicators [7] are currently under study, but their 
attention focuses not only on soil, but also on the complex 
intermingled relationship among terrain, water and biotic 
resources that provide the basis for land use. Land quality 
indicators always relate to agricultural areas and forestry, 
because they are more interested in the effects of land 
degradation over social and economic aspects of food 
production [8]. Therefore, these indicators express only a 
limited part of the general problem of land use. 
Other approaches, such as bio indicators (populations 
of ants [9] and bryophytes [10]), are not able to decorrelate 
the land use from other aspects of environmental 
preservation, such as agro-biodiversity, water and soil 
contamination and pollution. Until now, it seems that the 
more interesting indicators for land use are the ones related 

87
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE I.  
CLASSES OF ANTHROPIC PLACES, ACCORDING TO THE 
DANTHE MODEL. 
Class 
Number 
Classes of Anthropic Places 
Class Name 
Some Examples 
1 
Slow-growing settlements 
 
schools, 
hotels, 
cemeteries, recreational 
small settlements, small 
shopping 
centers, 
including small parking 
lots 
2 
Fast-growing settlements 
 
Houses (villas, cottages, 
mansions, 
possibly 
including small parking 
lots) 
3 
Commercial centers 
 
Medium-large shopping 
centers, trade centers, 
malls 
4 
Industrial areas 
 
Factories, 
industrial 
warehouses, 
logistics 
centers 
5 
Slow-growing areas of service 
production, venues for sport 
and health. 
 
Business hubs, sports, 
recreational and health 
centers, waste treatment 
sites, energy production 
plants 
6 
Fast-growing areas of service 
production, venues for sport 
and health. 
Stadiums, sports arenas, 
zoos, 
campuses, 
touristic resorts. 
7 
Airports and heliports 
 
8 
Exhibition grounds 
 
 
Venues for shows and 
trade fairs 
9 
Fast-growing roads 
 
Highways or provincial 
roads 
10 
Slow-growing roads  
 
Ring 
roads, 
railway 
lines, underground 
11 
Highways 
 
  
12 
Stations 
 
Bus, train stations 
 
to area extensions: if we consider the definition of land 
use, the simplest indicator is the ratio between the area of 
all the anthropic places and the area of the territory under 
analysis. Unfortunately, this indicator, even if it is widely 
adopted [2-5], is not able to understand some crucial 
aspects for environment and biodiversity preservation. In 
particular, the simple numerical ratio cannot express the 
problem of fragmentation of wild areas. Fragmentation is 
caused by the disordered expansion of anthropic places, 
where the incremental areas (due to new human 
settlements) are distributed in the territory in such a way 
that new areas are not contiguous to existing ones. This is 
potentially a great drawback, because it increases 
fragmentation. The shape of wild land areas is important to 
assure a proper habitat for wild animal species: the 
fragmentation of the territory contributes greatly to limit a 
fundamental environmental aspect: biodiversity. In fact, 
the UN Convention on Biological Diversity [11] considers 
fragmentation as a major threat to habitats and species 
survival, because it causes insuperable barriers to the 
wandering and spreading of animals. We tried to 
overcome this problem by proposing a new indicator [1], 
called Antropentropy Factor (in the following, AF). Here, 
we recall the basic definition and concepts which are 
essential to understand the dynamic model DANTHE (for 
details on the properties of the AF indicator and its 
application to Italian territory, see [1]). 
Anthropentropy is a neologism derived from the Greek 
term Anthropos (Άνθρωπος) = man, and entropy. In 
thermodynamics, entropy is the well-known measure of 
disorder of a system. The term anthropentropy puts in 
evidence the “disorder” introduced in a virgin, wild 
environment by the presence and disturbance of human 
beings. Land use is expressed by labeling a geographic 
area with a new indicator, called Anthropentropy Factor, 
which expresses in an absolute, continuous scale (from 0 
to 1) the degree of penetration of human settlement in the 
environment. The AF indicator does not only computed 
the percentage of land occupied by human activities and 
urban expansion, but also it takes into consideration the 
shape of the areas subtracted to nature. In fact, the 
algorithm performs, before the final computation of area 
ratio, a morphological dilation [12], i.e., a geometrical 
enlargement of the anthropic regions, in which the four-
connectivity contiguity of the areas is taken into 
consideration. In this way, also shapes and relative 
positions of the anthropic regions are determinant to the 
computation of AF, thus incorporating in the indicator the 
concept of fragmentation [1].  
In order to compute the AF, let us consider a 
geographic region which can be bounded by identified 
borders in a proper scaled map (e.g., a municipality, a 
district or a county), and let define S its area (in square 
kilometers). The algorithm for AF computation proceeds 
to the identification of all the sub-regions occupied by the 
anthropic places of Table I. Each sub-region contains at 
least one of the anthropic places listed in Table I. Each 
area occupied by anthropic places is enlarged by the 
morphological operator of dilation (along the two 
Cartesian dimensions X and Y) with a factor of 
"buffering" (radius of the circular dilation) of 50 meters, to 
give rise to anthropic sub-regions. The choice of a 50 
meters has been discussed in [1], and it seems a good 
compromise between a too restrictive and a too permissive 
limit. We define the union of all the anthropic sub-regions 
as Death Zone of the region. Let define DA as the area (in 
square kilometers) of the Death Zone. In Fig. 1a, the map 
of the anthropic places for the island Vulcano (Aeolian 
Islands, Sicily, Italy) is shown. In Fig. 1b, the 
corresponding Death Zone, after the morphological 
dilation, is shown. 
We define a neutral sub-region  as a part of the 
territory containing at least one of the following elements: 
(a) inland waters, (e.g., lakes or lagoons) extending more 
than two square kilometers (according to the limit of the 
Italian administrative coast boundary) and (b) lands 
located more than 3,000 m above sea level. The union of 
all the neutral sub-regions (if present), correspond to the 
Neutral Zone. Let define  NA as the area (in square 
kilometers)  of the Neutral Zone.  
 

88
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
(a) 
 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 1.  
A step of the AF computation for the island Vulcano  
(Aeolian Islands, Sicily, Italy): (a) original map of the anthropic places 
(in red) (b) Corresponding Death Zone after dilation (in white). 
If the  geographic region does not contain at least one 
neutral sub-region, NA is set to 0. It is important to 
consider the Neutral Zone because it represents the regions 
where anthropic places are not possible, and its area has to 
be subtracted to the area S of the region, otherwise the land 
use becomes underestimated. Now, we have all the 
elements to define the Anthropentropy Factor AF as the 
ratio: 
 
AF = DA / (S – NA)   
(1) 
The AF expresses the land use as a fractional number, 
between 0 (completely uninhabited regions without human 
active settlements and only wild nature, DA = 0) and 1 
(fully populated regions, the Death Zone completely 
occupies the territory, but for the Neutral Zone (if any, 
where human settlements are not possible.) In (1) the 
special case of NA = S is not admissible, as it would mean 
that the entire geographic area is occupied by water or is 
above 3,000 m above the sea, thus it is not suitable to the 
presence of human beings and the FA indicator  becomes 
meaningless. 
After expressing the value of AF for a given region, a 
metric is necessary to give a value to the indicator, and to 
link the numbers to a qualitative assessment of  the 
environment and of the quality of life. We have chosen the 
following metric [1]: if AF is between 0 and 0.2, the region 
is considered at a very low level of anthropentropy (the 
ideal condition for nature and human beings). If AF is 
between 0.2 and 0.4, the situation is still good, but the 
region is associated to a worrying level of anthropentropy. 
This type of area have to be monitored, in time, to control 
its evolution, which potentially might reach undesired 
higher levels. If AF is between 0.4 and 0.6, the region is 
labeled with a serious level of anthropentropy. In these 
areas, the presence of humans negatively impacts on 
environment. If AF is between 0.6 and 1, the region is 
considered with a very serious level of anthropentropy, at 
such a point that an irreversible environmental degradation 
has been reached. The increasing levels of anthropentropy 
are represented visually on maps of the territory by 
coloring the regions into varying levels of green, yellow, 
red, violet and black. In the ACI Project [1], our reference 
geographic regions are the Italian municipalities, divided 
in administrative regions. For each region, it is possible to 
generate the corresponding  Anthropentropy Map. In Fig. 2 
and Fig. 3, the Anthropentropy Maps of regions Liguria 
and Puglia are shown, respectively. These maps have been 
processed and generated after the publication of the paper 
on the ACI Project [1], therefore, they can be considered 
as a new update and a completion of the previous results. 
Obviously, in order to compute AF, or any other type 
of indicator based on area computation, it is mandatory to 
have e description of land occupation. For example, Fig. 2 
and Fig. 3 are the result of the AF computation on the land 
cover description of the Corine Land Cover (CLC) project 
[13]. As already pointed out [1], Corine Land Cover data 
are not available for the whole territory, so other solutions 
have to be identified. One promising approach is to use 
remote sensing and satellite image data [14]: color or 
multi-spectral 
image 
processing 
primitives 
and 
classification algorithms are currently being investigated 
in order to  define the land use. However, the main 
limitation, so far, are the difficulties in describing the 
whole territory, without a class of  “unclassified regions”; 
in fact, if the classification algorithm fails in some part of 
the map, it is impossible to compute a precise value of 
land use, as the “unclassified region” cannot be attributed 
either to anthropic places nor to virgin and wild natural 
areas. The full automatic remote sensing approach seems 
to be more useful to detect changes [15] in the land use of 
a particular regions, for successive acquisition and 
differences, rather than to obtain a precise value for an 
indicator. 
In literature, the most similar approach [16] to that of 
the DANTHE project refers only to urban sprawl: it has 
been tested for a specific geographic area of China (Jinan 
City). Moreover, the expansion of the urban area is 
modeled regardless of what there is around the same area, 
as if the growth was a context independent phenomenon. 
Instead, the DANTHE project overcomes these limitations 
and propose different ways of expansion of anthropic 
areas, depending on the type of the places, on their 
dimensions, and, especially, on neighboring areas, which 

89
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
may influence the growth in time. For this reason, the goal 
of the DANTHE project research has slightly changed, if 
compared to the ACI project [1]: we are not only 
interested to the value of land use indicator for a given 
region, computed according the existing, actual situation. 
Rather, we are interested in predicting the future value of 
AF,  after a certain period of time, by taking in 
consideration new settlements in the territory, which have 
been planned and proposed but not yet built. We called 
this shift of goal “from a static to a dynamic dimension of 
AF”, and it corresponds to the main theoretic novelty of 
the  DANTHE project; it can be described, according to 
the European Environment Agency, in terms of type of 
environmental indicators. 
III. 
TOWARD A HIGHER LEVEL OF INDICATOR 
According to the European Environment Agency [17], 
the environmental indicators can be classified in four 
types: descriptive indicators (type A), performance 
indicators (type B), efficiency indicators (type C), and 
Total Welfare indicators (type D). This classification holds 
for every kind of impact on the environment of the human 
activities, not only for the problem of land use. 
The typology of environmental indicators refers to the 
DPSIR framework [17], where the complex interactions 
among the different human activities and the environment 
are described as a chain of causes-effects. The framework 
(Fig. 4) distinguishes driving forces (D), pressures (P), 
states (S), impacts (I) and responses (R). According to this 
framework, driving forces (mainly generated by social and 
economic motivations), generate pressures on the 
environment 
(usually 
negative 
pressures, 
such 
as 
pollution); as a consequence, the state of the environment 
changes. In turn, the state changes have a negative impact 
both on humans and eco-systems. The impact should 
generate a response which try to improve situations or 
remove negative impacts. The response should act on the 
driving forces which started the chain, in order to improve 
the state of the environment and the quality of life, by 
imposing a sort of virtuous feedback. 
 
 
Figure 2.  
Anthropentropy Map of Region Liguria, Italy (land area: 
5416 square kilometers, number of municipalities: 235). 
 
 
Figure 3.  
Anthropentropy Map of Region Puglia, Italy (land area: 
19541 square kilometers, number of municipalities: 256). 
 
Figure 4.  
An example of application of the DPSIR framework to the 
problem of land use (D: driving forces, P: pressure, S: state, I: impact, R: 
response).  
According to this model, indicators are well-defined if 
they are able to describe one or more of the links among 
the several actors of the framework (driving forces, 
pressures, states, impacts and responses). In order to apply 
the DPSIR framework to the problem of land use, one of 
the possible scenario can be the following: in a given 
territory, population growth (D, from a social point of 
view) leads to increasing demand for land use. Without 
any constraint imposed by policies of environmental 
sustainability (D, from a political point of view), this may 
results in an actual request of immoderate land use (P), 
which causes a significant change of state (S, e.g., 
degradation of soil quality, increase of greenhouse gas 
emissions, air and noise pollution). Thus, after a certain 
period of time, a large value of land take causes adverse 
impacts and negative effects (I) on the quality of life for 
people living in the territory, not only on animals and 
plants. In this scenario, the demographic growth and the 
absence of good environmental policies are the driving 

90
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
forces (D), the land take is the pressure (P), the 
degradation of soil and air are the changes on the state (S), 
and their consequences on health and quality of life are the 
impact (I). Fig. 4 shows this example of DPSIR for land 
use problem. The example underlines the greatest 
challenge: what about the response component of the 
framework? In order to close the chain and to implement 
the virtuous feedback, it is necessary to define the correct 
response and to investigate its effect on driving forces.  
According to this framework, environmental indicators 
are classified by an increasing level of complexity: 
 
Type A indicators: these indicators describe the 
current, actual situation of a territory, by referring 
to a specific part of the DPSIR framework. For 
example, the Anthropentropy Factor (1) is a state  
indicator of type A, because it describes land use, 
measured according a precise algorithm/formula. 
State indicators give a description of the quantity 
and/or quality or some physical, biological or 
chemical aspects of the state of the environment. 
Other examples of state indicators are the 
concentration of toxic elements in lakes or the 
level of noise in a certain area. 
 
Type B indicators (performance indicators): type 
A indicators describe  the situation as it is, without 
any reference to how the situation should be, in an 
optimum or near-optimum condition. In contrast, 
performance indicators compare the physical, 
biological, or chemical conditions to a specific set 
of reference conditions. The anthropentropy 
metric we have set in the ACI project [1] is an 
example of indicator of type B, as we compare the 
AF value to a set of intervals, where only the first 
one is desirable, the second one is near-optimum, 
and so on. The Anthropentropy Maps (Fig. 2 and 
Fig. 3) are the visual representation of a type B 
indicator for land use (AF definition and metric). 
 
Type C indicator (efficiency): type A and B 
indicators consider only some aspects of the 
DPSIR framework. However, it is desirable to 
create higher level indicators, which describe how, 
by acting on response, it is possible to improve the 
environmental preservation. A type C indicator  
necessarily is a function of time, as it answers the 
question “is the situation improving”? [17]. Most 
of the time, performance indicators take into 
account economic or social aspects to find out if, 
given a predetermined time period, the indicator 
shows, 
in 
its 
time 
evolution, 
that 
the 
environmental situation has (hopefully) improved. 
 
There is also a last type of indicator (type D, or 
total welfare indicator), which should answer the 
question: “are we on whole better off?”. However, 
to the authors' own admission, find an indicator of 
overall sustainability (i.e., which considers all 
aspects of environmental degradation) is a very 
ambitious goal and these type of indicators are not 
further described and investigated [17]. 
Unfortunately, type B and C indicators are very rare in 
some European countries, including Italy (for details, refer 
to Fig. 11 of the report [17] of the European Environment 
Agency.) For all these reasons, we have been strongly 
motivated by the main theoretical improvement of the   
DANTHE project: to evolve from a type B indicator (AF + 
metric = Anthropentropy Maps)  to a type C indicator. The  
first step is to introduce the variable time: let define AF(t) 
the AF computed at a generic instant t, where t is 
expressed in years and its range is the discrete interval 
[2014:2050]. The upper limit 2050 is the same of the 
policy target of the European Environment Agency [6]. 
The second step is to define what we mean by improved 
situation (referring to land use); in fact, this is a concept 
which is implicit in a type C indicator. However, here 
there is a rub: for its specific nature, land use is, in some 
extents, an irreversible phenomena. In fact, it is unrealistic 
to think to act on drive forces to decrease land use, unless 
you destroy existing human settlements, but we does not 
take into consideration earthquakes or similar events! Land 
take has to be limited in the next years, but most likely it 
will never be negative; even in the most ambitious goals of 
the European Union environmental policy targets and 
objectives for years 2010–2050 [6], there are only partial 
desirable results, as to halt global forest cover loss (by 
2030) and the net land take only for a limited subset of 
human settlements, i.e., for housing, industry, roads and 
recreational purposes (by 2050). Also the European 
Commission's roadmap to an efficient manage of resources 
[18] introduces the idea of “no net land take by 2050”. 
Also from the most optimistic point of view, the AF can 
only be constant (in the case of land take equal to zero) 
but, in more realistic situations, it increases. The model is 
more interesting (and useful) in the undesirable case in 
which the AF is not constant. For this reason, we can 
define a satisfactory improvement if the AF is constant or 
it increases, over time, with a growth rate such as to limit 
the land use under a sustainable situation. To be consistent 
to the previous defined AF metric, we defined the 
condition for an improved situation by the logical AND of 
two conditions:  
 [AF(2050) – AF(t)]/AF(t) < 0.05  AND [AF(t) –
AF(2014)]/AF(2014)  <  0.20  
(2) 
In (2), t is the current year, i.e., when the decision on 
sustainability is made. We define the logical condition (2) 
the constraint of land use sustainability (CLUS). CLUS is 
a Boolean variable and it is the results of the DANTHE 
decision-making support system. If condition (2) is true, 
CLUS is set to 1, otherwise it is set to 0. The constraint of 
land use sustainability has two parts: the first one 
expresses the relative change of AF between the current 
year and 2050 (constraint for the future), the second 
expresses the same relative change between the current 
year and the beginning of the time interval (2014). We call 
the second part constraint towards the past. The constraint 
for the future admits a maximum relative change of AF of 
5%. This condition is used to preserve land by limiting the 

91
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
future impact of a single anthropic place on the 
environment. However, we can suppose that, in the 
horizon of 36 years, several building constructions will be 
delivered and that the system has to decide for more than 
one anthropic place. In order to avoid that several repeated 
limited building constructions on the territory (which 
would pass the constraint for the future) lead to a critical 
situation, the constraint towards the past admit e relative 
change of AF, if compared to the initial situation (2014), 
of 20%. In the second constraint, the relative change is 
higher (20% vs. 5%), because it includes all modifications 
made to the territory in the period [2014: t]. However, the 
limit of 20% allows the regions which start with a 
reversible degradation of land (AF(2014) < 0.4) to remain 
still to sustainable land use values. Obviously, if t = 2014, 
the second constraint will be always satisfied: the is no 
past, we are at the beginning of the time interval. 
Similarly, if t = 2050, there is no future in our model, and 
the only part of the constraint which survives is the second 
one. The terms 0.05 and 0.20 in (2) might seem too low: 
we have derived these values from several simulations of 
the system on the Italian territory, by comparing different 
areas and typology of new anthropic places. Besides, if  
the ecological consciousness of Italian and European 
citizens will rise in the future, and if the “no net land take” 
target of the European Union [18] will become a highly 
shared goal, probably these values should be even 
considerably reduced. 
To move to a type C indicator, the ultimate challenge 
is to define the Response component in the DPSIR 
framework (Fig. 4), so that the indicator encompasses the 
largest possible number of states of the model. Let recall 
that the Response indicates some kind of action performed 
on driving forces, which is able to change the negative 
pressures on the environment. Since the DANTHE project 
is a decision-making support system, the action of 
Response is to guide the political organizations for 
territory planning control to make sustainable decisions on 
new human settlements (both rural or urban ones): a new 
human settlements, in a given region, will be built only if 
the AF indicators satisfies the constraint of sustainability 
of (2). Otherwise, the construction is not authorized by 
whom has the responsibility to preserve the territory 
environment. In this way, even if driving forces would 
push towards the new anthropic places, the response of the 
decision-making system suggests which of them are 
compatible to a sustainable land use for the territory, in 
2050 near future, the last deadline for environmental 
preservation.  Fig. 5 shows the role of the  DANTHE 
system in the  DPSIR framework for land use: the system 
considers nodes D, P, S and R. Node I is beyond the goals 
of this work, as the impact on health of humans and nature 
is very far from our research. 
In order to use this new type C indicator, it is necessary 
to have a description of the new planned, but not already 
built, anthropic place. We denote by description a vector 
of data which describes the new anthropic place.  
Therefore, for a given region S, we define a new indicator, 
called Dynamic Anthropentropy Factor (DAF), as the 
following set of data: 
 
Figure 5.  
The role of the DANTHE system in the DPSIR framework 
for the problem of land use (D: driving forces, P: pressure, S: state, I: 
impact, R: response). 
 
 
DAF = (t, AF(t), description, CLUS) 
(3) 
 where: 
 
t is the current year (t is a discrete variable in the 
range [2014:2050] ) ; 
 
AF(t) is the Anthropentropy Factor (1) of region S 
at time t; 
 
description is a set of data which describes the 
new anthropic place which is going to be built in 
the region S;  
 
CLUS is the Boolean output (2) of the DANTHE 
decision-making support system: if CLUS = 0, the 
new anthropic place does not  satisfy the 
constraint of land use sustainability. The condition 
CLUS = 1  means that the creation of the new 
anthropic place in region S is compatible with an 
innovative policy of environment preservation 
which takes into consideration a fair land use.  
 
The DANTHE system performs the computation of the 
DAF indicator and generates the correct answer to the 
question: “will the new anthropic place be compatible to 
the environmental preservation target”? After the 
definition (3) of the new indicator DAF, it is possible to 
analyze how it is computed  by the DANTHE system. 
IV. 
THE ARCHITECTURE  OF THE DECISION-MAKING 
SUPPORT SYSTEM 
 
In Fig. 6, the architecture of the DANTHE system is 
shown. The inputs of the system are the following: 
 
 the visual map of the anthropic places, for the 
region of interest S under investigation (Map1). It 
is a Google Earth map, at the proper scale, where 
all the anthropic sub regions are delimited and 

92
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
colored in red. It represents the current land cover 
situation. 
 
The current year t, at which the input visual map 
Map1 refer to; this time stamp is the starting point 
of the prediction and it is used in the condition (2). 
 
The demographic model used in the prediction 
(see Section V.A). 
 
The initial Anthropentropy Factor, i.e.,  AF(2014). 
 
The description of the new anthropic place: its 
position, shape and area are represented on the 
second visual  Map2, at the same scale of  Map1, 
while its type is represented by its class i.  
 
The class i of the new anthropic place, according 
to the classification of Table I.  
Fig. 7a and Fig. 7b  show examples of the input visual 
maps Map1 and Map2, respectively, for the island 
Vulcano (Eolie Islands, Sicily, Italy): in Fig. 7a, the red 
areas defines all the anthropic sub regions which are 
already present at time t, Fig. 7b shows the new anthropic 
place (in green), added to the existing situation, on the 
western coast. 
The system architecture includes three modules: the 
computation, the predictive, and the decision module. The 
computation module computes the current Anthropentropy 
Factor AF(t), according to the method proposed in the ACI 
project [1] and summarized in Section II. The only 
difference, with respect  to the previous computation, is 
that in the DANTHE project the calibration of the maps is 
no longer necessary, as the scale is derived directly from 
the Google Earth data.  
 
 
 
Figure 6.  
The architecture of the DANTHE system. 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 7.  
The input visual maps to the DANTHE system: (a) the 
visual map of the current anthropic sub regions (in red) of S (Map1). (b) 
the same map, with the addition of the new planned anthropic place (in 
green, Map2).  
The second module is the predictive model, which 
predicts, starting from the input conditions, the value of 
AF at year 2050. The predictive model uses data derived 
by a database of “training cases” which present, for each 
class, a set of “worst cases” derived from the history of the 
Italian territory. The predictive model and its training will 
be discussed in detail in Section V.  
The third module generates the output of the decision-
making support system, i.e., the answer about the 
environmental sustainability of the new anthropic place. 
The module computes the logical  condition of (2), i.e., the 
constraint of land use sustainability (CLUS). 
It is clear that the intelligent core of the system is the 
predictive model and its assumption about the expansion 
of the AF for the different regions in the input maps. 
V. 
THE PREDICTIVE MODEL 
The predictive model  computes the value of AF for the 
year 2050; actually, it can generate a predicted value of AF 
for every year, from the current year t to 2050, but the 
output refers only to 2050, as it is used by the decision 
module to compute the CLUS value. In order to compute 
AF(2050), the model has to depict the situation of the 

93
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
anthropic places, i.e., it has to foresee how they will grow 
in time. The prediction has to answer two different 
questions: 
 
How will expand the area of the existing anthropic 
places?  
 
How will expand the area of the new anthropic 
place?  
For example, if we consider the case depicted in Fig. 
7b, the predictive model has to compute the future 
situation for the “red” regions and for the “green” region. 
After the prediction,  the system applies  standard dilation 
of 50 meters, in order to compute the future Dead Zone 
and, consequently  the predicted AF value, according to 
(1). The predictions of the area expansion, both for the 
existing and for the new anthropic places, are based on 
different assumptions. 
A. Assumptions on  the expansion of existing areas 
For what concern the existing anthropic places, they 
are described by their shape and dimensions, without any 
assumption of what they are. For example, in Fig 7a, we 
know only that the red regions represent anthropic places, 
but we do not know where there are houses, industries, 
touristic settlements or commercial centers. Obviously, red 
regions contains hundreds, or more, anthropic places 
belonging to every class of Table I. The definition of 
“existing anthropic places” does not contain information 
about the type, because the input of the system (Map1) is 
only a visual map with red regions. For this reason, it is 
not possible to make assumptions on the growth of the 
areas by considering some elements related to the type of 
anthropic places, as classified in Table I. The only 
information we have are the regions, their shapes and their 
relative positions. For this reason, we can make the 
following most general assumption: the existing areas 
grow, without a preferred direction, according to a growth 
rate. Therefore, on red regions, the model performs a 
standard morphological operator [12], a circular dilation, 
to enlarge the total red areas according to a specified 
growth rate. What is a sensible value for this parameter? 
We cannot use average annual land take indexes, as 
measured by several sources [3-5]. In fact, these values are 
the result of a dramatic land take on the territory, in the 
last years. As we are interested in sustainability, our model 
has to make an assumption which is coherent with the goal 
of a controlled land take. Land is a precious resource, and 
the only reason a green society has to consume this 
resource is a demographic expansion. Without a positive 
growth of populations, existing anthropic places should 
not expand. This is far off of being a radical position: it is 
well known in the field of urban planning and urbanization 
[19], as supported also by famous architects, such as 
Renzo Piano [20], who syntheses this concept in an 
meaningful sentence: “stopping the expansion of the city 
by explosion and starting implosion. Growth of the city 
from inside” [21]. By adopting this rationale,  the 
DANTHE project uses a projections estimate of the 
resident population. There are several projection models 
on population growths [22-24], but the majority estimate, 
for Italy, a demographic expansion until 2015; later, a 
negative population growth until 2050. For example, a 
detailed projection from ISTAT [24], the Italian National 
Institute of Statistic, shows only an increment for years 
2014 and 2015, equal to 0.11% a year, followed by a 
decrement of population. By transferring this rate on the 
areas, we can foresee an increment, for the entire horizon 
[2014-2050], of 0.22%.  The DANTHE project uses these 
data, thus assuming that the existing anthropic places areas 
have to expand according to a Sustainable Growth Rate 
(SGR) of  0.22%. Obviously, this value is parametric, and 
the predictive model can accept in input other 
demographic projection models, and, consequently, other 
values for SGR. 
  
B. Assumptions of the growth of the new area 
For the new anthropic place, the model can do better 
that a computation based on an parametric growing rate, 
because it can exploit the important information about 
what type of anthropic place is: a new set of cottages, a 
stadium or a large commercial center? The model 
considers peculiar characteristics of the new anthropic 
place to perform a customized prediction, based on some 
intrinsic features: the initial area, the type and the 
relationship to existing surrounding settlements. 
The initial area of the new anthropic place is the green 
area depicted in Map2 (see Fig. 7b): it determines the 
initial impact on the environment. Unfortunately, in most 
of the environmental compatibility studies, this is the only 
element. This means that usually the evolution in time is 
completely ignored. Instead, the DANTHE model cannot 
limits its prediction to a static evaluation of the situation, 
as it is based on a dynamic indicator. For this reason, the 
system considers other elements to predict the enlargement 
of the new area. First of all, the type of the anthropic place: 
a large commercial center will grow at a fast rate, because 
of the addition of new shops, parking, restaurants, and 
other services. The ability to attract economical 
investments will transform this type of anthropic place 
itself as a magnet for new settlements. A reasonable 
assumption is that the growth will be greater for a large 
commercial center than for other types of settlements, such 
as small shops, schools, or cemeteries. We call the 
property of attracting other new anthropic places the 
anthropogenic characteristic: some types of new anthropic 
places are able to generate, in a sufficient number of years, 
a consistent numbers of other anthropic places (this is the 
reason of the suffix genic in the anthropogenic term). 
According to this assumption, the DANTHE model 
classifies the new anthropic places in twelve classes (Table 
I): inside a class, different human settlements can be 
present, but all of them share the same anthropogenic 
characteristic. For example, in class 1, a school is 
something very different from a cemetery, but both have 
the same low growing behavior. The terms low growing 
and fast growing (Table I) for the similar typology of 
human settlements differentiate their anthropogenic 
characteristic. The classification of Table I has been 

94
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
confirmed by the study of the history of the Italian 
territory. The model is able to compute the future  
configuration (shape and area) of the new anthropic place 
only if there is an estimation about the annual growing rate 
of land use, expressed as the relative increment of area for 
each year of prediction. According to the basic assumption 
that the Annual Growing Rate is specific of the class i the 
new anthropic place belongs to, let denote this parameter 
of the model as the Annual Growing Rate, or AGRi, for the 
class i: its numerical values will be estimated in the 
training phase, as explained in Section VI. 
The initial area and the class (and, consequently, its 
Annual Growing Rate) of the new anthropic place 
determine the area it will occupy at the prediction time. 
However, they do not determine the shape of the 
expansion. As AF computation is based on morphological 
operators, shape is fundamental to determine the final 
result. The third characteristic of the expansion of new 
anthropic places considers this element: how far the 
surrounding area influences the future shape of the new 
human settlements? The model gives three possible 
answers: no influence, gravity influence and road 
influence. 
No influence means that the new anthropic place is not 
influenced by the surrounding existing anthropic places, 
due to the distance or because, for its intrinsic typology, 
the new anthropic place tends to enlarge its shape without 
a preferred direction and independently from the existing 
situation. In this case, the model applied to the initial area 
(green area of Map2) a classical operator of mathematical 
morphology: the dilation with a  circular  structural 
element.  It is the same operator used in the computation 
of the static AF, to determine the Death Zone. Fig. 8 shows 
an example of no influence growth. The green area is the 
new anthropic place, the red area is an existing anthropic 
place; the new anthropic place enlarges its shape with a 
circular symmetry, regardless the existing “red object”. 
After a certain period, the new anthropic place will have 
the same initial shape, with a symmetrical enlargement in 
every direction (0-360 degree).  
Gravity influence means that the new anthropic place is 
influenced, in its growth, by the surrounding existing 
places, because it is attracted by the mass center of 
existing area, as two objects are attracted by the universal 
gravity law. For example, small shops and human 
settlements (class 1) tend to be attracted to the surrounding 
urban settlements. Fig. 9 shows an example of gravity 
influence: the new place grows in the direction of the line 
which ideally conjugates the two mass centers. This type 
of growth is implemented by a modification of the 
standard dilation with a circular structural element: the 
algorithm computes the two mass centers, the equation of 
the line  and performed a reduced circular dilation, where 
only a subset of directions are considered; the directions 
change as the dilated area gets closer to the existing area, 
as the gravity force increases. We call this new 
morphological operator gravitational dilation  (Fig. 9).  
 
 
Figure 8.  
The result of a dilation with a  circular structural element. 
The original area (in green) is enlarged in each direction with a circular 
symmetry. In red, the existing anthropic place, which does not influence 
the new area (in light blue). 
 
 
Figure 9.  
The result of the new morphological operator gravitational 
dilation. The original areas (in green) are enlarged in the direction of the 
existing anthropic place (in red) as if they were attracted by its mass 
center. 
Road influence: roads are very important to define the 
future development of anthropic places. They are a catalyst 
for the expansion of urban and rural settlements, as it is 
much more probable that new settlements will develop 
along 
existing 
roads 
to 
facilitate 
travel 
and 
communications. This is particular true for certain type of 
anthropic places, such as houses and residential buildings. 
The model defines and implements a road dilation, where 
the new area grows  in parallel to the road (see Fig. 10).  In 
the current implementation of the DANTHE model, the 
road dilation can considers up to three  main roads, 
surrounding  the new object.  
By analyzing  several real cases of the Italian territory, 
we can make the assumptions that circular dilation is 
typical of anthropic places of class 4, 6, 7, and 8, gravity 
dilation is typical for class 3, 5, 9, 10, 11 and 12, and  road 
dilation is typical for class 1 and 2. 
 

95
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 10.  The result of the modify morphological operator road 
dilation. The original area (in green) is enlarged along of the road (in 
dark blue). 
C. The predictive algorithm 
The predictive algorithm computes the new area both 
for the existing and for the new anthropic places at time t + 
, starting from the initial conditions at time t (t >= 2014, 
t+  <= 2050). 
For the existing anthropic places (Map1), the algorithm 
performs a dilation with a circular structural element, until 
the new area is incremented by a factor equal to the 
Sustainable Growth Rate (SGR) , which is provided by the 
adopted demographic model [24]. 
For a new anthropic place (green part of Map2), 
belonging to class i (1 <= i  <= 12) of Table I,  the future 
area  at time t + Δ is computed by the following algorithm: 
 
 
STEP 1: For each pixel of the initial region, 
perform a circular  dilation (if  i = 4, 6, 7, 8), a 
gravitational dilation (if i = 3, 5, 9, 10, 11,12) or a 
road dilation (if  i = 1, 2). 
 
Compute the area of the new dilated region. 
 
Go to STEP 1, until the new dilated area grows of 
a factor AGRi * 
 
So far, in order to implement the algorithm, the system 
needs a set of values for  AGRi. They have been estimated 
by analyzing the history of the Italian territory (see Section 
VI).  
 
VI. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
We describe two kinds of experimental results: (a) data 
analysis for the estimation of the Annual Growth Rate for 
classes 2, 3, 4, 6, and 7, and (b) a real case of application 
of the decision-making support system. In order to test the 
basic assumptions of the model and the three types of 
dilation (circular, gravitational and road), we have 
analyzed significant cases of the history of the Italian 
territory. The events occurred in the past are the basis for 
the estimation of the Annual Growth Rate. This is called 
training phase, because the model has to learn, from the 
past, reasonable values for the future predictions. The 
phase involves an analysis of Italian territory of many 
examples of new settlements that have been built. For each 
case, we have analyzed the situation at a certain time t’ 
and, for the same area, at t”, using the built in Google 
Earth function View > Historical Imagery. In this case, the 
analysis is related to the past, so both t” and t’ are less than 
2014. The values of t’ and t” may vary for the cases, as we 
need to study situations where Google maps are available 
and where the anthropic place has developed its maximum 
growth (otherwise, it would not be a worst case). By 
comparing the area of the settlement at time t” and time t’, 
it is possible to estimate the Annual Growth Rate. Let 
define A(t’) and A(t”) the two areas for a given anthropic 
place of class i. We define the Annual Growth Rate  for 
class i as: 
 
AGRi = [A(t”) – A(t’)] / [A(t’)*(t”– t’)] 
(4) 
Obviously, each case of the same class, provides a 
different value for AGRi. One possibility is to choose a 
sufficient number of cases in the Italian territory and 
compute average values. However, this method is very 
time consuming and would make the estimations of AGRi 
vulnerable to a number of probabilistic fluctuations due to 
plenty of factors: the great variety of the Italian  territory, 
environmental, 
social 
and 
economic 
factors. 
Overestimating or underestimating AGRi would lead to 
unreliable predictions of the model. For this reason, we do 
not follow a statistical approach (choice of a sufficient 
number of cases and averaging the computed values of 
AGRi). Instead, we perform a “worst case analysis”. We 
choose, for each class, a case which is, for some peculiar 
characteristic, the “worst case” we can find: in this way, 
we know that the prediction will be severe, but not 
unrealistic, because, unfortunately, similar cases have 
already occurred in the past. The worst cases allow to store 
in the model values of AGRi for all the classes. The 
training worst cases can be updated, if in the future we will 
able to find even worst case. The database of our model 
contains all the worst cases (visual maps and data) and is, 
actually, a description of some of the most terrible insult to 
the environment, from a land use preservation point of 
view. 
 
A. The training phase: significant cases 
 
The first training worst case is for class 2 (see Table I), 
i.e., fast-growing settlements, such as houses, villas, 
cottages, mansions,  including small parking lots. We have 
chosen the small town of Cura Carpignano (Pavia, 
Lombardia). Located in east land around Pavia, near the 
river Olona, it is a satellite town of the bigger city of 
Pavia. Cura Carpignano had a large population growth 
[25] during the last decade (Fig. 11). This increase has led 
to double its population in the time interval [2001:2011], 
with a consequent growth of the local construction 
industry. 
 

96
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 11.  The population growth of Cura Carpignano (Pavia, 
Lombiardia). The boom is in the years 2001-2011. 
What makes Cura Carpignano a worst case? The 
architectural choices led the town to expand in a purely 
horizontal direction (no buildings over three floors); as a 
consequence, most of the rural and agricultural lands 
around the village  have become residential zoning, with a 
dramatic land take. Besides, the small area of the town and 
its location allows us to make precise measurements, 
without any influence due to nearby settlements. We 
analyzed the Google Earth maps history for t’= 2003 and 
t” = 2012 and we compute the AGR according to (4). As 
this type of anthropic place belongs to class 2, the resulting 
value is AGR2. In nine years, from 2003 to 2012, the area 
has grown from 0.29 square kilometers to 0.43 square 
kilometers,  with an increasing rate of 48.2%. This is much 
greater than the value of rural land consumption of 8.8% 
for  the same decade from [26]. The results confirm that 
this is really a worst case. In Fig. 12, a plot of the area of 
Cura Carpignano is shown: in red we have covered the 
anthropic area in 2003, in dark blue there is the new area 
subtracted to nature in nine years. This training case 
provides a value for AGR2 = 0.053639. 
 
 
 
Figure 12.  The growth of the residential settlement in the territory of 
Cura Carpignano, Pavia, Lombardia, Italy (in red: initial area in 2003, in 
blue the increment of  area in 2012). 
 
 
 
Figure 13.  The area of the commercial center Euroma 2, Rome  (in 
red: initial area in 2009, in blue the increment of area in 2013). 
The second worst case refers to class 3, Commercial 
centers. We chose Euroma 2, a commercial complex 
located near Rome; as it is considered the largest 
commercial center of Rome (and in Europe, when it began 
to be built), it represents a worst case [27]. In only four 
years (2009-2013), the area of land use increased by 58% 
(see Fig. 13). This was due to the fact that the center has 
attracted the construction of some stores, a residential 
complex, a tower and a sports center. This training case 
provides a value for AGR3 = 0.145.  
The third worst case refers to class 4, Industrial areas 
(Table I). We chose the industrial center near Osoppo 
(Udine, Friuli-Venezia Giulia), an Italian town of 3,016 
inhabitants. We chose the case of Osoppo because, in 
recent years, it became the focus of many environmental 
battles and economic discussions because of its huge 
industrial center, which currently occupies an area of 
2,316,125 square meters. We analyzed the growth of the 
industrial center, from  2002 to 2012: we obtained a 
growth of  38.4%, from 1.3 square kilometers to 1.8 square 
kilometers. In Fig. 14, a plot of the area of Osoppo 
industrial center is shown: in red we have covered the 
anthropic area in 2002, in dark blue there is the new area 
subtracted to nature in ten years. This training case 
provides a value for AGR4 = 0.03846.  
The fourth worst case refers to class 6, fast growing 
service area (Table I): we applied our study methodology 
to the case of the campus of the University of Pavia, in the 
north west part of the city. It was built in the mid-80s and 
expanded several times. Its peripheral location, if referred 
to the old city, allows us to give a correct estimate of such 
expansion, without influences or constraints on the 
construction details. In eleven years, there has been an area 
increase of 95.3%, from 64,000 to 125,000 square meters. 
During these years, there have been several constructions 
and expansions: the parking areas in the south, a new 
museum, a research center, but also a swimming pool and 
several residential settlements. This case really shows  the 
meaning of the term anthropogenic place: the  initial 
situation of 2002 (Fig. 15) attracts new anthropic places 
(Fig. 16), with a land take of  95.3% in eleven years. 
 

97
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 14.  The area of the industrial center of Osoppo (in red: initial 
area in 2002, in blue the increment of area in 2012). 
 
 
 
Figure 15.  The area of campus of the University of Pavia, in the north 
west periphery of the city, in 2001. 
 
 
Figure 16.  The area of campus of the University of Pavia, in the north 
west periphery of the city, in 2012. 
 
Figure 17.  The area of the campus of the University of Pavia (in red: 
initial area in 2001, in blue the increment of area in 2012). 
 
In Fig. 17, a plot of the area of the campus of 
University of Pavia is shown: in red, we have covered the 
anthropic area in 2001, in dark blue, there is the new area 
subtracted to nature in eleven years. This training case 
provides a value for AGR6 = 0.086647.  
The last worst case here described is related to class 7, 
Airports and heliports. We chose the Galileo Galilei 
Airport (Pisa, Tuscany), the main airport of Tuscany for 
number of passengers, the second in Central Italy after 
Rome-Fiumicino. Initially used only for military purposes, 
the Galilei Airport had a significant expansion during the 
90-s, following the opening of low cost airlines. 
In particular, from 2002 onwards, satellite maps allow 
us to estimate the strong expansion of the airport, runway 
and external 
warehouses, 
which 
have completely 
cemented the western  area.  In ten years it has gone from 
an area of 1,209 km square kilometers to an area of 2,608 
square kilometers, with a percentage increase of 115.7%. 
This training case provides a value for AGR7= 0.115715.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 18.  The area of Galileo Galilei Airport, Pisa, Tuscany (in red: 
initial area in 2002, in blue the increment of area in 2012). 
 

98
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
B. An example  of prediction 
 
After the training phase, it is possible to see the result 
of the DANTHE project on a challenging case. Let 
suppose that in Cura Carpignano a new residential 
settlement is proposed: this is the same town we have used 
for a the first training worst case (Section VI.A). As we 
have seen from the past urban planning, in Cura 
Carpignano there is a great demographic expansion (Fig. 
11). This trend is still in place, as the most recent data 
(2013) shows that the population is increasing, with 
respect to data of  Fig. 11 (population at 2013: 4590), even 
if with a less growth rate. Therefore, the hypothesis of a 
new residential settlement is realistic. We processed the 
Google Earth map, at a proper scale, to generate the 
images which describe the present and future, planned 
situation. Fig. 19 shows the red areas, corresponding to the 
present situation (t = 2014) with the existing anthropic 
places: it corresponds to the first visual input Map1. Fig. 
20 shows where the new settlement is expected (green 
area); it corresponds to the second visual input Map2. Also 
the position of the new settlement is realistic: at the 
periphery of the main urban area and close to roads.  
The DANTHE system answers the question: “is the 
settlement sustainable”? The system performs the circular 
dilation according to the previous definition of Sustainable 
Growth Rate (SGR) on the red areas, and a road dilation 
following the two main roads close to the new settlement. 
The result  (Fig. 21) represents the prediction of the new 
area enlargement at year 2050. The two roads used in the 
road dilation are shown in dark blue. Fig. 22 shows all the 
territory of the municipality Cura Carpignano, as predicted 
according to the DANTHE model: both the two 
expansions are combined. After the prediction, the system 
computes the two values of Antropentropy Factors which 
are necessary to obtain CLUS indicator (3). The system 
performs the circular dilation (radius of 50 meters) on 
Map1 for the definition of the corresponding Death Zone, 
and the computation of AF(t) according to (2). 
Subsequently, the system performs the same data 
processing on the result of prediction (Fig. 22) to compute 
AF(2050). The corresponding Death Zone of the predicted 
total area in 2050 is shown in Fig. 23. The numeric results 
are 0.25 and 0.271 for AF(2014) and AF(2050), 
respectively. By substituting these values in (2), we obtain 
for the condition  

0.084 < 0.05  AND 0 < 0.2. 
(5) 
As condition in (5) is false, CLUS = 0 and the 
settlement has been rejected by the DANTHE system. 
According to the previous definitions, at the end of the 
prediction the  DANTHE project outputs the new 
indicator, i.e., the Dynamic Anthropentropy Factor, DAF 
(3) : 
 
DAF = (2014, 0.25, description, 0). 
(6) 
In (6),  description is the set of data (Map1, Map, 2); 
moreover, the new indicator Dynamic Anthropentropy 
Factor means that this new anthropic place, of class 2 
(Table I, “Fast-growing settlements”), planned in 2014 in 
a municipality of current AF = 0.25, is rejected, because it 
is not compatible to the assumptions of environmental  
sustainability (the last component of (6), i.e., CLUS is 0). 
 
 
 
Figure 19.  The visual input Map1 to the DANTHE system for the 
prediction on a new residential settlement in Cura Carpignano: the 
existing situation at t=2014. 
 
 
 
Figure 20.  The visual input Map2 to the DANTHE system for the 
prediction on a new residential settlement in Cura Carpignano (in green: 
the new planned anthropic place). 
 
Figure 21.  The result of the prediction on the new settlemet (in red: 
the existing anthropic places, in green the original new planned 
anthropic place, in light blue the increment according to road dilation, in 
dark blue the road directions). 

99
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 22.  The total antrhopic places for the whole territory of 
municipality of Cura Carpignano, acoording to the prediction for year 
2050. 
 
Figure 23.  The Death Zone corresponding to the total anthropic places 
of Fig. 22 (in white, AF(2050) = 0.271). 
 
C. Discussion about the quality of the prediction 
 
How is it possible to check the quality of the prediction 
of the DANTHE system? As remarked by the European 
Environment Agency [6], the target for environmental 
sustainability is the year 2050, and our system adopts this 
choice. Besides, it is intrinsic in the historical definition of 
sustainable development (“Development that meets the 
needs of the present, without compromising the ability of 
future generations to meet their own needs” [28]) that, in 
order to define a decision as a “sustainable one”, we have 
to choose a medium or long term temporal period of study. 
Obviously, the check of the quality of the prediction 
cannot be a direct check, because we cannot wait until 
2050 to verify if the prediction is true, and in which 
extent! Moreover, even the application of the decision-
making support system  in a retroactive way would not be 
correct, because it would be inconsistent with the 
assumptions. In fact, if we applied the prediction to a 
generic situation of the past, and if we compared the 
prediction to the present and real, situation, this should not 
be enough to prove the validity of the prediction for the 
future, because the starting conditions (i.e., population 
growth, present land use) should be different. For all these 
reasons, we can estimate the quality of the prediction upon 
a probabilistic approach, by making assumptions and 
proposing recommendations that make the conclusions of 
the prediction system reasonable and convincing. The first 
goal has been reached by a careful choice of the worst 
cases in the training phase. The second aspect involves the 
use protocol of the system. It is based on a double-check 
of quality and a certification mechanism, and it is strictly 
related to the new choice of distributed client-server 
architecture, as explained in Section VI.D. 
 
D. Web platform and use protocol of the DANTHE 
system 
One of the innovation of the DANTHE project, if 
compared to the previous ACI project [1], is the software 
platform used to implement the computation of AF and 
DAF indicators. In the previous approach, we used a User 
Generated Content (UGC) and a social crowdsourcing 
paradigm: we involved a social networking community in 
the project, in order to generate open data. Users of the 
social network were asked to use Google Earth Maps to 
generate the maps of anthropic places (according to the 
previous definitions, the Map1 image). However, in order 
to compute AF (2), these maps were collected in a 
centralized point (the University of Pavia) in order to use 
Matlab code to implement the morphological operators. 
By collecting the input maps to the centralized point, a 
careful check of calibration of the map scale and of 
consistency of input data were performed, before the 
computation of AF (2).  
In the DANTHE project, we still use the UGC 
paradigm, but the computation of AF and DAF indicators 
is distributed. The algorithm for standard and modified 
morphological operators (circular, gravitational and road 
dilations) and for the implementation of all the parts of the 
DANTHE architecture (Fig. 6) have been written on an 
open source platform (java and php) in a Web-based 
system. The goal is to allow a user to connect to a server 
and use only the browser in order to submit data and 
compute both AF and DAF indicators. The UGC paradigm 
is still valid, as the user is asked to create and submit to the 
system the two maps (Map1 and Map2) and the class of 
the new anthropic place. The check  of consistency of the 
scale of the map is performed automatically by the 
software, as the scale information are derived directly by 
Google Earth scale indicator. Moreover, the other quality 
checks for the input maps (Map1 and Map2) are 
performed by validating the users, instead of the data, by 
using a certification mechanism. The central operating unit 
of the University of Pavia certificates and authorizes the 
user of the DANTHE system after the check that: a) the 
user has followed a training course on the correct use of 
the system, b) the user is able to generate input maps 
which are consistent to the assumptions of the system and 
strictly adhere to a specified  level of detail and visual 
quality and (c) the user is able to exploit the decision-
making support system in a step-by step protocol of 
correct use. We define this quality check a double-level 

100
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
certification, because it addresses two classes of users: 
UGC creators, who are responsible for generating the 
maps of AF computation for the reference year AF(2014) 
and for the current year (if different, AF(t)), and  the super 
users, who are interested in using the decision making 
support system, to decide if a future anthropic settlement 
will be sustainable. The check of quality is double: on the 
UGC creators, which generate contents for the static 
computation of AF, and on the super users, who actually 
are interested in the DANTHE system capability of 
decision support about sustainability. Who are the 
potential users of the DANTHE systems? UGC creators 
and super users do not necessarily belong to the same set: 
creators can be scattered all over the national territory and 
they are responsible for carefully reporting the actual 
conditions and variations of the land use in a given  
municipality. In this way, the system can react rapidly to 
local changes. Examples of super users are the subjects 
who are involved and can influence the decisions in  urban 
planning. By referring to the DPSIR framework (Fig. 5), 
the super users can be all the subjects in the society who 
have the power to express the right Response, in order to 
react to the Driving Forces which request unsustainable 
land use: for example, organizations and institutions, local 
and 
central 
political 
entities, 
and 
government 
environmental  agencies. 
On the time of writing the final version of the present 
paper, the DANTHE system has been completely 
developed, and also the Web visual interface (in Italian) 
has been completed (Fig. 24). Current work is (a) the 
formalization of the certification process to activate the 
trusted UGC creators and super users, and (b) the 
definition of a database that collects all the cases examined 
by the DANTHE system during the certification phase. At 
the end of these two last steps, the system will be delivered 
over the Web for intensive use by the (trusted and 
certificated) UGC creators  and super users.  
 
 
Figure 24.  The Web interface of the DANTHE system. 
E. Using the DANTHE system for recommended 
positions 
Beside the prediction of sustainability of future 
anthropic places, presented in Section VI.B, the DANTHE 
system can help in deciding the right position of a new 
anthropic place. This is a sort of support for a 
recommended position: as pointed out in Section V.B,  the 
DAF indicator considers not only the initial area of the 
new anthropic place, its anthropogenic characteristic and 
shape, but also the surrounding situation of existing 
anthropic places. Therefore, it is possible, by simply 
moving the position and shape of a new settlement, to 
transform a verdict of unsustainability (CLUS  = 0) to a 
positive verdict of sustainability (CLUS = 1). Let consider 
the case depicted in Fig. 25: a new settlement (in green) is 
positioned in the north west surrounding area, outside the 
existing urbanization (full red areas). This starting point 
leads to a predicted situation in 2015, which the model 
considers unsustainable. In fact, the system computes for 
(2) the following condition: 
 
0.0681 < 0.05 AND 0 < 0.2. 
(7)  
As condition in (7) is false, CLUS = 0 and the 
settlement has been rejected by the DANTHE system. 
However, if we choose another starting condition, with an 
equivalent new anthropic place, with the same dimension 
and anthropogenic class, but different shape and position, 
the prediction can be reversed: if the new anthropic place 
(see Fig. 26) fills the “hole”, the expansion in 2050 will 
preserve land use, as it will occupy an area which is 
incorporated inside the expansion of the existing areas. In 
this case, the system computes for (2) the following 
condition: 
 
0.0147 < 0.05 AND 0 < 0.2. 
(8)  
As condition in (8) is true, CLUS = 1 and the 
settlement has been approved by the DANTHE system. 
The final situations in 2050 are compared in Fig. 27: by 
filling the hole (on the right), the predicted Death Zone is 
reduced, if compared to the unsustainable situation (on the 
left).  
 
Figure 25.  An example of unsustainable settlement (in green: the 
original new planned anthropic place, in light blue the dilated area).  

101
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 26.  The same new anthropic place of Fig. 25, with a different 
position and shape, but equal dimensions: the growth “fills” the hole of 
fragmented original areas. 
 
Figure 27.  By moving the position of the settlement, it becomes 
sustainable: the corresponding Death Zone in 2050, for starting 
condition of Fig. 25 (on the left) and Fig. 26 (on the right), respectively. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, an innovative indicator to evaluate land 
use is proposed, based upon the new concept of Dynamic 
Anthropentropy. It is an improvement of the previous 
indicator, the Anthropentropy Factor, defined in the ACI 
project. It is used in the proposed decision-making support 
system (DANTHE), which allows to discover if a new 
building construction will be compatible, in its dynamic 
expansion, to the target of environmental sustainability of 
a controlled land use. This target is one of the most 
challenging aspect of the policies of European Union and 
of the European Environmental Agency, for the time 
deadline of the year 2050. 
The system performs a prediction of land use and 
compute the new indicator to make the decision of 
sustainability. It has been trained with cases, taken from 
the history of the Italian territory, in order to estimate 
important  parameters of the prediction. The system uses 
also a demographic model, as the projection of future 
population is related to another important parameter: a 
sustainable growth rate of existing anthrophized areas. 
Experimental results have shown the predictions and 
the evaluations of the consequences of new urban 
expansions in the territory, not only for what concerns 
their initial impact, but also for the temporal evolution, 
until year 2050. 
Current work is the refinement of the certification 
process to create a community of trusted users and super 
users, in order to assure the quality of prediction by 
validating the cultural background and skill of use of the 
system, in order to generate affordable predictions. 
Future work will be the complete delivery of the 
system over the Web, and its application to other critical 
cases of urbanization planning of Italian territory, to 
further prove the usability and the performance of the 
system.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors greatly appreciate for his collaboration 
Antonio di Gennaro, for map generation from Corine data 
set, and Gabriele Porro, for the Web  implementation of 
DANTHE model in php technology. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Maria Grazia Albanesi and Roberto Albanesi, “A new 
approach based on computer vision and collaborative 
social networking for  environmental preservation: 
theory, tools and results of Italian ACI project,” 
Proceedings of The Eighth International Multi-
Conference on Computing in the Global Information 
Technology ICCGI2013, Nice (France), 21-26 July 
2013,  pp. 16-21, Copyright (©) IARIA, 2013, ISBN 
978-1-61208-283-7. 
[2] European Environment Agency, “Urban sprawl in 
Europe - The ignored challenge,” EEA Report n. 
10/2006, 
http://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/eea_report_200
6_10 [retrieved: May, 2014]. 
[3] Overview of exiting policies to reduce and mitigate soil 
sealing 
in 
the 
EU 
and 
Member 
States, 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/soil/pdf/sealing/4.%20
Overview%20of%20existing%20Policies%20EU%20a
nd%20MS%20(A-H).pdf [retrieved: May, 2014]. 
[4] Land 
use, 
state 
and 
impact 
(Italy), 
http://www.eea.europa.eu/soer/countries/it/land-use-
state-and-impacts-italy [retrieved: May, 2014]. 
[5] ISPRA, “Urban environment quality, Report IX,” 
Transl. “Qualità dell’ambiente urbano, IX rapporto,” 
2013, 
http://www.isprambiente.gov.it/it/pubblicazioni/pubblic
azioni-del-sistema-agenziale/qualita-dellambiente-
urbano-ix-rapporto.-edizione-2013 
[retrieved: 
May, 
2014]. 
[6] European Environment Agency, “Towards a green 
economy in Europe - EU environmental policy targets 
and objectives 2010–2050,” EEA Report n. 8/2013, 
http://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/towards-a-
green-economy-in-europe  [retrieved: May, 2014].  
[7] J. Dumanski and C. Pieri, “Land quality indicators: 
research 
plan,” 
Agriculture, 
Ecosystems 
& 
Environment 81.2, 2000, pp. 93-102. 
[8] K. Wiebe, Land quality, agricultural productivity and 
food security, 2003, Edgar Publication. 
[9] J. D. Majer, “Ants: bio-indicators of minesite 
rehabilitation, 
land-use, 
and 
land 
conservation,” 
Environmental Management, Vol. 7, n. 4, Springer 
Verlag, 1983, pp. 375-383. 
[10] H.G. Zechmeistera, I. Schmitzbergera, B. Steurerb, J. 
Peterseila, and T. Wrbkaa, “The influence of land-use 
practices and economics on plant species richness in 

102
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
meadows,” Biological Conservation, n. 114, Elsevier, 
2003, pp. 165–177.  
[11] The 
UN 
convention 
on 
biological 
diversity, 
http://enrin.grida.no/biodiv/biodiv/cbd/eeafoll.pdf 
[retrieved: May, 2014] 
[12] R. C. Gonzales and R. E. Woods, Digital image 
processing, Pearson Prentice Hall, 2008, Chapter 9, 
“Morphological image processing”. 
[13] Corine 
Land 
Cover 
Project, 
http://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/COR0-
landcover  [retrieved: May, 2014] 
[14] J. Rogan and D.M.Chen, “Remote sensing technology 
for mapping and monitoring land-cover and land-use 
change,” Progress in Planning, n. 61, Elsevier, 2004, 
pp. 301–325. 
[15] A. Veldkamp and E.F. Lambin, “Predicting land-use 
change,” Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment, n. 
85, Eslevier, 2001, pp. 1–6. 
[16] L. Fang, Q. Zhuping, A. Zengxiang and W. Xianhu, 
“Urban expansion and evolution prediction of Jinan 
city based on remote sensing and GIG technology,” 
Proc. Of Urban remote seninsing joint event, IEEE 
Press, 2009, pp. 1-6, doi: 10.1109/URS.2009.5137633. 
[17] E. 
Smeets 
and 
R. 
Weterings, 
“Environmental 
indicators: 
typology 
and 
overview,” 
European 
Environment Agency Technical Report n. 25/1999 
http://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/TEC25 
[retrieved: May, 2014] 
[18] Communication from the commission to the European 
Parliament, “Roadmap to a resource efficient Europe,” 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/resource_efficiency/pd
f/com2011_571.pdf  [retrieved: May, 2014] 
[19] S. Lehmann, “Sustainability on the urban scale: “green 
Urbanism”,” International Conference on Sustainable 
Architectural Design and Urban Planning Hanoi 
Architectural University, May 15-16, 2007, Hanoi, 
Vietnam, http://unaus.eu/pdf/U010.pdf [retrieved: May, 
2014]. 
[20] Renzo 
Piano 
curriculum 
vitae, 
http://www.fondazionerenzopiano.org/a/46/renzo-
piano/?l=en  [retrieved: May, 2014]. 
[21] Interview: 
Renzo 
Piano 
on 
The 
Shard, 
http://www.dezeen.com/2012/05/18/interview-renzo-
piano-on-the-shard/ [retrieved: May, 2014]. 
[22] United Nations, Department of Economics and Social 
Affairs, 
“Probabilistic 
population 
projections,” 
http://esa.un.org/unpd/ppp/Figures-
Output/Population/PPP_Total-Population.htm 
[retrieved: May, 2014]. 
[23] ISTAT, 
“Population 
projections 
estimate 
of 
the 
resident 
population,” 
http://www.demo.istat.it/prev/index2_e.html [retrieved: 
May, 2014]. 
[24] ISTAT, “National population projections,” Transl. 
Previsioni 
demografiche 
nazionali, 
http://www3.istat.it/salastampa/comunicati/non_calend
ario/20060322_00/nota%20previsioni.pdf 
[retrieved: 
May, 2014] 
[25] http://www.comuni-
italiani.it/018/060/statistiche/popolazione.html 
[retrieved: May, 2014]. 
[26] ISTAT, Agricultural land and land consumption, 2013, 
http://www.istat.it/it/archivio/107569 [retrieved: May, 
2014]. 
[27] http://it.wikipedia.org/wiki/Euroma_2 [retrieved: May, 
2014]. 
[28] Report of the World Commission on Environment and 
Development, 
Our 
Common 
Future, 
http://conspect.nl/pdf/Our_Common_Future-
Brundtland_Report_1987.pdf  [retrieved: May 2014] 

