27
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A Survey on Smart Cities, Big Data, Analytics, and Smart Decision-making 
Towards an analytical framework for decision-making in smart cities 
 
Marius Rohde Johannessen, Lasse Berntzen,  
Department of Business, History and Social Sciences 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
Kongsberg, Norway 
e-mail:{lasse.berntzen; marius.johannessen}@usn.no 
Rania El-Gazzar 
Department of Business and Law 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
Kongsberg, Norway 
e-mail: rania.el-gazzar@usn.no
 
 
Abstract—Smart decision making is based on data combined 
with analytics to improve decision-making. This paper examines 
several application areas of smart cities, and related data 
sources used for decision-making. Further, we present a review 
of analytical techniques used in earlier studies. In many cases, 
systems may make decisions on their own. Such autonomous 
systems may play an essential role in the development of smart 
cities. In other cases, the data can be combined with historical 
data or other open data sources to play a role as the foundation 
for decision-making. Our findings are presented as an analytical 
framework, which will be used for further empirical studies into 
this domain. 
Keywords-smart decision-making; smart cities; big data; sensors; 
analytics; autonomous systems. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This article is an expanded version of an earlier conference 
paper presented at ICDS 2018 [1], and offers an analytical 
framework for smart or (intelligent) decision-making in the 
context of smart cities. The framework is based on a review 
of literature, white papers and news sources covering the 
topic, as well as empirical data from a study on air quality 
monitoring. The analytical framework shows areas in need of 
further study and forms the basis for future research projects. 
The analytical framework shows areas in need of further 
study and as such forms a research agenda for (big) data 
analysis in a smart city context. The target audience for this 
work is mainly Information Systems (IS) researchers and 
practitioners.  
Smart decision-making uses a systematic approach to data 
collection and applies logical decision-making techniques 
instead of using intuition, generalizing from experience, or 
trial and error. 
“Smart cities” is a multifaceted concept and has been 
defined in many different ways; more than 100 definitions of 
smart cities have been analyzed by the International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU)’s focus group on smart 
sustainable cities [2][3]. The mandatory requirement for smart 
cities is to improve quality of life and achieve sustainable 
development (economic, social, and environmental) through 
the use of Information and Communications Technology 
(ICT) and intelligence [4]. Definitions emphasized the 
technological aspect of a smart city as being "a 
technologically interconnected city" or Internet of Things 
(IoT) using big data is promoted to achieve the efficiency and 
intelligence in managing cities' resources [5][6]. 
A smart city is a city that is characterized as 
“instrumented, interconnected, and intelligent” [7][8][9]. This 
can be conceptualized as three layers, as shown in Figure 1. 
These characteristics are enabled by the use of ICT, which 
constitute the heart of a smart city [10]. The “instrumentation” 
layer does data acquisition through sensor-based systems that 
provide real-time data through sensors, meters, and cameras, 
but also from social media and open data sources. The 
instrumentation layer enables capturing and filtering data 
from various sources for timely response. The inputs from the 
instrumentation layer are integrated and transformed into 
event-related information at the “interconnection” layer to 
provide 
rich 
insights 
for 
decision-making. 
The 
interconnection layer provides all forms of collaboration 
among people, processes, and systems to enable a holistic 
view supporting decision-making. At the “intelligence” layer, 
business intelligence and analytics are applied to the 
information provided by the interconnection layer and other 
city-relevant data and, then, the analyzed information is 
visualized to understand the city requirements and city 
policies, hence, make informed decisions and take actions. 
The intelligence layer is focused on deep discovery, analyses, 
and forecasting. These three layers that build up the smartness 
in a smart city are constructed by smart technology solutions 
and ICT infrastructure, such as IoT, big data, and the Internet. 
 
 
 
Intelligence layer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interconnection layer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Instrumentation layer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sensors 
Location 
data 
Social 
media 
Open data 
sources 
 
 
Figure 1. Three-layer model. 
 

28
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Regarding the intelligence layer that is concerned with 
decision-making, a review of studies on smart city and 
decision-making resulted in nine articles. This indicates that 
smart city and decision-making is an area that deserves further 
investigation on how to make a significant impact from big 
data [11]. 
In this article, we elaborate on smart or intelligent 
decision-making in the context of smart cities. Smart decision-
making relies on data and analytics to make better decisions. 
By using autonomous systems, the decisions can be 
implemented in real time. Human intervention can be reduced 
to oversee the decisions and take over if the system is 
malfunctioning. 
The primary focus of this article is on the instrumentation 
and intelligence layers, and the data sources and analytical 
techniques used for decision-making. The data is refined 
through the interconnection layer and processed by the 
intelligence layer to enable decision-making. The three-level 
model provides a systematic approach to collecting facts and 
applying logical decision-making techniques, instead of 
generalizing from experience, intuition (guessing), or trial and 
error. 
The rest of the article is structured as follows: Section II 
discusses methodology. Section III focuses on the 
instrumentation layer, including identification of common 
data sources. Section IV describes some selected smart city 
application areas. Section V presents an overview of relevant 
analytical techniques. Section VI presents our analytical 
framework. Section VII contains our conclusion, some 
limitations, and ideas for future work.  
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
The purpose of this article is to begin exploring how 
common application areas of smart cities use, analyze and 
visualize data. Data analysis and visualization are essential for 
decision-making and intelligence in smart cities [7]-[9]. 
However, our literature review reveals little research in this 
area. 
Figure 2 shows how data is analyzed and visualized. The 
analytics typically stores data for future use, e.g., for 
predictions. The visualization is used for human decision-
making. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. From data to decisions. 
 
Thus, an analytical framework outlining the possible data 
sources, analytical and visualization techniques could be a 
valuable contribution to decision-making, as well as for future 
studies in this domain. Our research question for this study is 
“Which data sources are applicable to the different 
application areas of smart cities?” and “which analytical 
techniques are available for analysis?” 
Data collection was done through several iterations. 
Initially, we planned on conducting this study as a pure 
literature review. However, there are few studies in this area 
so far. Using the Norwegian research library Oria (providing 
access to EBSCO, IEEE, JSTOR, PROQUEST and SAGE), 
we were only able to identify nine research papers (referenced 
in Table I) using the search phrases “smart city” and 
“decision-making” in the title. Thus, we had to rely on 
additional data sources and conduct a document analysis of 
industry white papers, as well as industry, technology and 
regular news sources. In addition, we applied existing 
empirical data from a previous study on air quality 
monitoring.  
This exploratory approach led us to three themes, which 
we summarize in Section III, Table I. Further, the examined 
news sources and white papers identified nine application 
areas of data analysis in smart cities; parking, speed 
monitoring, 
public 
transport, 
traffic, 
environmental 
monitoring, energy management, waste handling, crime 
prevention, and home healthcare.   
We conducted a second literature review round where we 
examined analytical techniques (intelligence layer). There 
were few, if any, studies explicitly combining smart cities and 
in-depth description of analytical technique, so we expanded 
our review and came up with 26 articles describing analytical 
techniques and methods relevant for smart cities. There were 
a lot more articles available, but the 26 we selected provides 
an overview of the most common methods and techniques. 
Snowballing from the reference lists of the articles revealed 
additional relevant references. We applied combinations of 
the following search phrases and keywords for the second 
round: “Big data analysis, tools, “research methods”, 
statistics, “data analytics”, “spatial data”. In addition to the 
research papers, we have also examined additional web 
sources (digital methods initiative, Github). In both rounds of 
the literature review, we read the abstract and conclusions of 
the papers in order to identify which papers were relevant. The 
number of papers reported is what we were left with after this 
process.   
For analysis, we have applied literature, findings from the 
air quality monitoring study, as well as data from industry to 
map potential data sources for each of the nine categories. 
This allowed us to create an initial framework of data sources 
for the nine identified categories.  
III. 
DATA FOR DECISION-MAKING 
At the instrumentation layer, data for decision-making 
may originate from many different sources. Laney [12] 
defines big data as data having high volume, high velocity 
and/or high variety. High volume refers to large amounts of 
data-demanding both specialized storage and processing. 
High velocity refers to streams of real-time data, e.g., from 
sensor networks or large-scale transaction systems. Finally, 

29
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
high variety is about dealing with data from different sources 
having different formats. 
Big data may originate from sensors. Another important 
source for big data is the world-wide-web. Web mining can be 
used to retrieve unstructured data (text) related to everyday 
events happening in a city. In this context social media, such 
as Facebook and Twitter can provide information about 
problems and citizen sentiments. Many government 
organization and private companies offer open data sets online 
that can be used for analysis and decision- making. 
Marr [13] argues that the real value of big data is not in the 
large volumes of data itself, but in the ability to analyze vast 
and complex data sets beyond anything we could ever do 
before. Due to recent advances in data analysis methods and 
cloud computing, the threshold for using big data has 
diminished. 
A. Sensors 
Sensors and sensor networks are essential for smart 
decision-making. Sensors provide real-time information on a 
wide range of areas, such as weather, traffic, air quality, 
energy consumption, water consumption, and waste. Data 
from sensor networks are structured and easy to process, 
although different vendors and makers can introduce some 
difficulty. According to Cambridge dictionary, the word 
“sensor” means a device that is used to record that something 
is present or that there are changes in something. IoT is an 
infrastructure with interconnected units that may among other 
things act as sensor platforms. Botterman [14] defines IoT as: 
“A global network infrastructure, linking physical and 
virtual objects, through the exploitation of data capture and 
communication capabilities. This infrastructure includes 
existing and evolving Internet and network developments. It 
will offer specific object-identification, sensor and connection 
capability as the basis for the development of independent 
federated services and applications. These will be 
characterized by a high degree of autonomous data capture, 
event transfer, network connectivity and interoperability”. 
(p.12). 
B. Location data 
Location data places an object in a specific position. 
Location is important both for stationary and mobile objects. 
For mobile objects, location data comes from the Global 
Positioning System (GPS) or from triangulation of radio 
signals, e.g., belonging to a mobile network. 
C. Social media 
Another possible data source for smart decision-making is 
social media. Social media has been defined differently 
among scholars [15]. However, we adopt the definition by 
Kaplan and Haenlein [16]: “Internet-based applications that 
build on the ideological and technological foundations of Web 
2.0, and that allow the creation and exchange of User 
Generated Content” (p.62).  
Data retrieved from social media will mostly be 
unstructured (text, images, video), but also structured meta-
data providing additional information, e.g., tags containing 
author, 
content 
type, 
title, 
date/time 
and 
location. 
Unstructured data from social media may provide insight into 
the perceptions and sentiments of smart city citizens. 
D. Open Data Sources 
Open data is data that can be freely used, reused and 
redistributed by anyone - subject only, at most, to the 
requirement to attribute and share alike. Open data has the 
following characteristics [17]:  
• 
Availability and access: The data must be available as a 
whole and at no more than a reasonable reproduction cost, 
preferably by downloading from the Internet. The data 
must also be available in a convenient and modifiable 
form. 
• 
Reuse and redistribution: The data must be provided 
under terms that permit reuse and redistribution. 
• 
Universal participation: Everyone must be able to use, re-
use and redistribute - there should be no discrimination 
against fields of endeavor or against persons or groups.  
• 
Interoperability: The ability to interoperate - or intermix 
- different datasets (i.e., one piece of open material 
contained therein can be freely intermixed with other 
open materials). 
E. Decision-making in Smart Cities 
In the context of smart city, decision-making has been 
given less attention in the literature; Google Scholar found 
nine articles discussing decision-making in smart cities (See 
Table I). The nine articles investigated various aspects of the 
three layers described earlier. 
Studies related to the interconnection layer have 
highlighted various collaboration aspects that are important 
for smart cities. Ojasalo and Tähtinen [18] proposed a model 
of an open innovation platform for public sector decision-
making in a city. The authors identified three different kinds 
of relationships that are present and partly interwoven in open 
innovation 
platforms 
(i.e., 
governing, 
sparring, 
and 
collaboration). The proposed model helps in organizing the 
three types of relationships of an innovation platform with the 
city’s decision-making and external actors, by combining 
different decision-making cultures between the public and 
private sector. 
 
TABLE I.  
MAPPING LITERATURE TO SMART CITY LAYERS 
Ref. 
Instrumentation 
layer 
Interconnection 
layer 
Intelligence 
layer 
Others 
[18] 
 
X 
 
 
[19] 
 
 
X 
 
[20] 
 
 
X 
 
[21] 
 
 
X 
 
[22] 
X 
 
 
 
[23] 
X 
 
 
 
[24] 
X 
X 
X 
 
[25] 
 
 
 
X 
[26] 
 
 
 
X 
 
At the intelligence layer, Eräranta and Staffans [19] 
discussed knowledge creation and situation awareness in 
collaborative urban planning practice, and how digitalization 
changes it. The authors argued that smart city planning is not 

30
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
only a data-driven superlinear scaling practice, but an 
integrative and collaborative learning process facilitated by 
face-to-face interaction, advanced analyses and visualizations 
of available data, ongoing processes, and local history and 
stories. The authors brought in collaboration at the 
intelligence layer. 
At the intelligence layer, Passe et al. [20] attempted to 
understand human behavior and decision-making about the 
built environment within an expanding range of spatial, 
political, and cultural contexts. The authors emphasized the 
importance of participation by a broad range of stakeholders 
in making decisions for the future of smart cities. The authors 
argued for the need to consider social dynamics in addition to 
building-occupant interactions, which requires investigating 
multiple scales and types of data to create new methodologies 
for design and decision-making processes. This approach 
moves data collection, analysis, design, and decision-making 
away from hierarchical relationships and utilizes the expertise 
of all stakeholders. 
Also at the intelligence layer, Honarvar and Sami [21] 
talked about the various sensors embedded in different places 
of smart cities to monitor and collect data about the status of 
cities. Mining such data to extract valuable knowledge creates 
a challenge because various sources of data in smart cities are 
big, independent, heterogeneous and no semantic is integrated 
and annotated to them. The authors proposed an approach to 
leverage linked open data and semantic web technologies, 
data mining mechanisms, and big data processing platforms. 
At the instrumentation layer, Khan et al. [22] emphasized 
the role of citizen participation as an important data source for 
social innovation and co-creating urban regeneration 
proposals through innovative IT systems. Those IT systems 
can use open government data, visualize urban proposals in 
3D models and provide automated feedback on the feasibility 
of the proposals. Using those IT systems as a communication 
platform between citizens and city administrations offers an 
integrated top-down and bottom-up urban planning and 
decision-making approach to smart cities. In the same line, 
Foucault and Moulier-Boutang [23] proposed a governance 
model called “Smart City – organological”. The model 
consists of an adaptive device built around differentiation of 
smart sensors and tags to improve human decision-making. 
The device is taking into account both “physical sensors” and 
“economic and social sensors” to capture the explicit or 
implicit needs.  
At the level of the three layers, Nathali Silva et al. [24] 
expressed concerns about the continuous growth of the 
complex urban networks that is challenged by real-time data 
processing and intelligent decision-making capabilities. The 
authors proposed a smart city framework based on big data 
analytics. The framework operates on three levels: 
instrumentation layer (data generation and acquisition level), 
interconnection layer (collecting heterogeneous data related to 
city operations, data management and processing level), and 
intelligence layer (filtering, analyzing, and storing data to 
make decisions and events autonomously, and initiating 
execution of the events corresponding to the received 
decisions).  
Some other topics were studied in the literature, e.g., Gang 
and Yang [25] studied design issues to improve the 
intelligence layer of city emergency management. Kurniawan 
et al. [26] investigated the development and optimization 
possibilities of Makassar City smart operation room. The 
authors used fuzzy multi-criteria decision-making to illustrate 
the project priority rank and further to determine the 
alternative optimal option in conducting the project. 
IV. 
Application Areas 
In order to understand more about data sources and 
decision-making techniques, we have examined some 
common application areas connected to smart cities which 
were identified in the literature review (See Table II). The first 
four areas are connected to transport: 
• 
Smart parking 
• 
Speed monitoring 
• 
Smart public transport 
• 
Smart traffic 
The rest of the application areas represent the broadness of the 
smart city concept: 
• 
Environmental monitoring 
• 
Energy management 
• 
Waste handling 
• 
Crime prevention 
• 
Home healthcare 
A. Smart Parking 
Smart parking assists drivers to find a nearby parking spot. 
The information provided to the driver can have many 
different forms, from public displays placed next to roads to 
mobile apps directing the driver to a free parking spot 
[27][28][29]. 
Smart parking data is sensor based. Outdoor sensors may 
be magnetic sensors located in capsules embedded in the 
ground, detecting the presence of a car, or cameras detecting 
if a parking spot if free or not. Indoor parking spots may 
instead have infrared or ultrasound sensors to detect the 
presence of cars. 
Smart parking may also include payment solutions based 
on mobile phone apps, use of SMS, or dedicated devices like 
SmartPark™ [30]. The payment solutions may give the user 
the opportunity to pay for time actually used instead for 
paying for a fixed time period. 
Smart parking sensor data provides information to city 
planners and car park companies about the occupancy of 
parking spots over time. The collected information can be 
used for decision-making regarding the construction of new 
parking sites, and to decide on pricing. 
B. Vehicle Speed Monitoring 
Vehicle speed monitoring warns drivers about their 
driving speed. The idea is to make drivers slow down if they 
are driving at excess speed. Speed monitoring units may be 
stand-alone, but state-of-the-art units are connected to the 
Internet and provide real-time information on driving habits 
[31]. 

31
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Several technologies have been demonstrated for vehicle 
speed monitoring including the use of cameras, RADAR, 
LIDAR, and underground sensors [32]. A measurement 
station is put in a fixed position, and excess speed is shown on 
a display device. 
Another approach is to install mandatory units in all 
vehicles. The driver can then be alerted of excess speed 
directly by the unit. Such units can also upload speed data 
through some kind of network [32]. 
(Some GPS devices warn the driver about excess speed, 
but such data are not relevant, since data are not uploaded for 
use by traffic authorities.) 
Vehicle speed monitoring data can be used by traffic 
authorities and police to decide on traffic control locations. 
Such data can also be used to implement speed reducing 
measures, such as speed bumps or traffic lights, and even 
control such measures in day-to-day operations. 
C. Smart Public Transport 
One essential measure to reduce environmental footprint 
is to reduce car traffic, in particular the use of private cars. 
Well-developed public transport infrastructure can be an 
incentive to reduce traffic load. Car owners may also be 
discouraged by the toll charges or congestion charges 
implemented in many cities. 
Smart public transport uses technology to provide public 
transport users with a better user experience [33]. Use of 
sensors and GPS technology can provide real-time data on 
arrivals and departures of public transport vehicles. 
Smart ticketing solutions may use smart cards or mobile 
phones equipped with Near Field Communication (NFC) to 
make ticketing more efficient from a user point of view [34]. 
Online route planners may help users choose the most 
efficient route from one location to another location. 
The data collected from smart public transport can be used 
for real-time situation reports and may also be used by public 
transport planners to adjust timetables, change routes, create 
new routes, and adjust fares. 
Social media may be mined to find citizen perceptions of 
the public transport system. 
D. Smart Traffic 
Smart traffic is about using technology to ensure more 
efficient traffic management. Traffic management may use 
road lights and signs to optimize traffic flow in real time [35]. 
Commercial car navigation systems provide information on 
fastest and shortest routes. Some navigation systems collect 
information from other cars real time to detect bottlenecks and 
provide alternative routes. 
Data may come from sensors embedded in the roads. The 
most common technique is to detect traffic density by 
embedding coils under the road surface to pick up passing 
cars. Alternatives are to use cameras or radar technology to 
detect traffic. 
Data may also come from the vehicles themselves, by 
using radio transmissions or a cellular network [36]. 
The data collected may be used by the city-administration 
for road-planning, adjusting intervals of traffic lights. Data 
can also be used by transport companies to decide on best 
schedules for pick-ups and deliveries. 
Mining social media may provide some information on 
how citizens experience traffic situation.  
E. Air Quality Monitoring 
Monitoring 
air 
quality 
and 
other 
environmental 
parameters are the important for decision-making. Some cities 
are enforcing restrictions on traffic when pollution levels 
reach a certain threshold [37]. 
In most cases, the air quality monitoring is done by fixed 
monitoring stations located throughout the city, but may also 
be done by mobile handheld units, or units installed in cars. 
Measurements include gases: CO, CO2, NOX, and dust 
particles, normally 2,5 PM and 10 PM. 
Collected data can be combined with other data sources, 
e.g., meteorological data, to provide real-time situation reports 
and make forecasts for future pollution levels. Data can be 
visualized and be made available to the public. Such data is 
particularly valuable for citizens with respiratory problems. 
Social media may be mined to find citizen perceptions of 
air quality.  
F. Energy Management 
Smart power grids contribute to better energy 
management and reduced environmental footprint. An 
essential part of the smart grid is smart meters. Smart meters 
are devices that continuously measure the power consumption 
of households and buildings. Household appliances can 
communicate with the smart meter to schedule activities when 
the load on the power grid is low. The smart meters also 
communicate with energy management systems to optimize 
energy consumption [38]. Buildings can also take part in 
energy production through the use of solar panels and other 
alternative energy sources. 
Sensor data may be combined with location data and open 
data sources to make forecasts. Social media data plays a 
minor role in the context of energy management. 
G. Waste Handling 
Sorting waste materials for recycling has become common 
practice. Garbage collection can be improved by only 
collecting waste when necessary. “Intelligent” waste 
containers can report their state of becoming full and get 
included in the schedule of trucks collecting the waste 
[39][40][41]. 
The recycling process itself can provide valuable data on 
types and amounts. 
Data from the waste collection process can be used to 
decide on container size and pick-up patterns. Data may also 
be made public to show timeliness and efficiency of the waste 
handling, from garbage collection through recycling. 
Social media data mining can be used to detect sentiments 
about garbage collection. 
H. Crime Prevention 
Crime prevention is about allocating police resources to 
areas most likely to get victims of crime, but also to find out 
where to establish surveillance by video cameras and other 

32
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
means. Home or business security systems may discourage 
criminals and prevent crimes from being committed. 
Data used for crime prevention will mostly be formerly 
reported crimes combined with open data sources, e.g., 
demographic data, property values, income levels of citizens, 
street light coverage, etc. [42][43]. 
Social media may be mined to find indications of 
unreported crimes. 
I. Home Healthcare 
Home health care is an important measure to enable 
healthcare patients to live in their homes as an alternative to 
nursing homes, and thereby reducing the burden on the 
healthcare system. Technology is important for patients to feel 
safe and to manage their health conditions. Safety alarms alert 
healthcare personnel about emergencies including fall 
detection. The safety alarm may have a built-in GPS device to 
provide healthcare personnel with the current location of the 
patient. Vanus et al. [44] describe how different sensors can 
be used to detect daily living activities in smart home care. 
Mshali, Lemlouma, Moloney, and Magoni [45] made a survey 
on health monitoring systems for use in homes. Smart 
medicine dispensers can alert the patient to take medication, 
and also notify healthcare personnel that medicine has been 
retrieved from the dispenser [46]. Sensor platforms are also 
used to monitor chronic diseases to make sure patients receive 
proper care [47]. Sensors may detect changes in medical 
conditions before the patients become aware of the change 
themselves [48]. Such data are important to make home 
healthcare smarter. 
Open data may be used for planning purposes, e.g., 
statistics about the demography and increase of certain 
medical conditions. Social media does not play any significant 
role in home healthcare. 
Table II summarizes the data sources applied in the 
different studies mentioned above. 
TABLE II.  
MAPPING APPLICATIONS TO DATA SOURCES 
 
Application 
areas 
Data sources 
Sensor data 
Location 
data 
Open data 
Social 
media data 
Smart 
parking 
X 
X 
- 
- 
Speed 
monitoring 
X 
x 
- 
- 
Smart 
public 
transport 
X 
X 
- 
x 
Smart traffic 
X 
x 
- 
x 
Air quality 
monitoring 
X 
x 
X 
x 
Energy 
management 
x 
x 
x 
- 
Waste 
handling 
X 
X 
- 
x 
Crime 
prevention 
- 
X 
X 
x 
Home 
health care 
X 
x 
x 
- 
 
X   major data source 
x   minor data source 
-    not applicable 
 
V. 
ANALYTICAL TECHNOLOGIES, METHODS AND 
TECHNIQUES 
There are few research articles on big data in smart cities 
that are explicit about the actual methods, technologies and 
techniques being used for data analysis, so we had to rely on 
more general themed big data analytics articles. In this 
section, we provide an overview of these and attempt to link 
methods with application areas. In an overview section such 
as this, there is only room for a brief overview of each 
individual technology and method. For in-depth descriptions, 
we refer to the individual articles and papers referenced. 
A. Technologies for storage and retrieval 
Our literature review of big data analytical tools returned 
a lot of hits covering not so much methods as technologies. 
The reason for this is that big data requires somewhat different 
approaches in terms of storage and retrieval. Large amounts 
of data and the need for effective and selective filtering and 
retrieval are some of the challenges these technologies attempt 
to address [49]. For smaller data sets traditional techniques, or 
combinations of new and old, are just as appropriate. For 
example, software such as MS Excel can handle sheets of up 
to 1 million rows [50], and SPSS remains a powerful tool for 
statistical analysis.  
Key technologies for big data include cloud computing, 
distributed file systems and distributed programming 
environments, as well as new database technologies such as 
NoSQL and NewSQL [51]. Cloud computing and associated 
technologies have the advantage of being scalable and 
flexible, and No/NewSQL databases have more flexible data 
structures and rules compared to traditional SQL databases, 
allowing for easier filtering, storage and retrieval of data [52]. 
As big data is often un- or semi-structured, there is a need for 
technologies that allow for redundancy and novel 
combinations of data for exploration and analytical purposes 
[53].  
A typical package for big data analysis would include 
Apache Hadoop, using a file system such as HDFS for 
distributed storage, combined with a NoSQL database [54]; 
[55][56]. NoSQL databases can further be divided into  (at 
least) four categories [57]:  
• 
Key-value, where each value corresponds to a primary 
key, offering a simple and powerful structure for handling 
big data.  
• 
Bigtable or wide-column, a more structured approach 
capable of handling large and complex data sets.  
• 
Document, where entries as stored as documents rather 
than relations, and  
• 
Graph, which stores information about nodes and their 
relations. 
Each category has different use cases, which are beyond 
the scope of this section. Details can be found in the following 
referenced papers: Apache HBase and Cassandra are a few 
examples of popular Wide-column databases [58][59]. Oracle 
Berkeley [60] is a popular key-value database, where a 
previous iteration was involved in the first Bitcoin 
implementation. Mongo DB is a popular document database, 
where data is stored in documents rather than records, 

33
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
allowing for easily changing the data structure and varying the 
fields recorded for each piece of data.. Users include Amazon 
and Adobe [61]. Finally, Neo4J is an example of a graph 
database,  used for areas such as bioinformatics, recommender 
systems and network graphs [62]. 
Distributed storage of data introduces some challenges 
related to processing and retrieval of data, which is where the 
map/reduce paradigm comes into play [63]. In short, 
map/reduce provides a programming model which creates a 
set of key-value pairs between records, regardless of where 
they are located in the distributed file system.  
When the core technologies (file system, storage, 
database) are in place, the next layer is the analytical methods 
and techniques applied to analyze data.  
B. Analytical methods and techniques 
The literature review shows that there are many analytical 
methods in use, ranging from traditional statistical analysis to 
a plethora of machine learning methods and algorithms. There 
are also a few papers with a more critical perspective, warning 
researchers to not become deterministic and blind for the 
social construction of algorithms, but rather pay close 
attention to ethics and approach data-driven methods with a 
critical attitude and a thorough understanding of both domain 
and context [64]. An on-going survey from the Universities in 
Nottingham, Oxford and Edinburgh [65] is currently 
examining this, presenting respondents with case studies 
showing the outcome of different algorithms, and asking them 
to reflect on these different outcomes. We suggest that 
researchers from both academia and the private sector apply 
the same ethical and critical perspective to big data analysis as 
they would any other research project, and critically examine 
the fit between research question/hypothesis and the method 
being applied. 
1) Statistical methods  
Several papers combine Big data platforms with 
traditional statistical analysis. A study of terrorist ideology 
and attack type used a Hadoop platform to combine the global 
terrorism big data set with Google news data about terrorist 
attacks. The data was analyzed in SPSS using descriptive 
statistics and correspondence analysis [66]. A similar 
approach was applied to a study of electric vehicle customers 
[67]. However, for data sets that are “true” big data, with 
millions of cases, traditional statistical methods such as 
correlation will often show significant results between 
variables even where there is no real-life correlation, due to 
the sheer volume of data [68]. 
While 
traditional 
statistical 
methods 
have 
been 
successfully applied, several scholars point out that big data is 
often recognized by being unstructured and difficult to 
organize in variables such as we are used to from traditional 
statistical methods. Thus, new methods have emerged, such as 
sentiment, network, various link and content-based analytical 
techniques, and of course machine learning [69]. The 
remained of this section will provide an overview of some of 
the most commonly used methods. An excellent place to start 
could be the wiki of the Digital methods initiative [70], a 
collection of methods for digital research run by a consortium 
led by the University of Amsterdam. 
2) Text analytics and Sentiment analysis 
Text analytics, or text mining, refers to a set of methods 
for extracting and analyzing text-based content from news 
media, social networks, e-mails, blogs etc. [69]. One example 
using a set of text analytics methods is a study of hotel guest 
experiences, where guest ratings were analyzed to extract 
factors that were of particular importance to hotel guests [71]. 
Methods for text analytics include traditional content analysis 
[72] or various forms of discourse analysis [73], counting 
techniques such as word frequency, word count, word clouds 
[71]. Sentiment analysis has become a popular method in 
many areas such as politics [74][75], business and marketing 
[76]. Sentiment analysis is a classification process where 
words and phrases are classified as positive or negative in 
order to analyze public opinion on various things such as 
brands, political parties or current issues. Sentiment can be 
classified using pre-coded lists of words and phrases or as 
supervised machine learning [77].   
3) Social network analysis 
It is said that the Internet and social media has contributed 
to our current age being called the network society, as more 
and more of our lives can be seen as parts of a network [78]. 
Our Facebook and Twitter friends, LinkedIn contacts and the 
websites we follow, connect ideas and opinions. Social 
network analysis examines how information flows through a 
complex network and allows us to visualize and analyze 
networks by examining the connections and attributes of 
connections between nodes [79]. The basic use of network 
analysis is to identify patterns of interaction among the 
participants in a network. Typical variables measured are: 
Degree: The number of participants a given participant 
interacts with, can be split into receiving (in-degree) and 
sending (out-degree) messages. High degree levels indicate 
strong networks and community. Centrality: How important a 
participant is to the network. Measured as closeness (the 
number of nodes between two participants), betweenness 
(how each participant helps connect other participants), and 
eigenvector (how well a participant is connected to other 
active participants). Clustering: The degree to which a set of 
participants form a group within the network. Density: The 
proportion of actual vs. potential connections within the 
network [80].  
  Social network analysis can for example be applied to 
understand how information flows between actors, such as in 
the study of disaster management after the Louisiana floods 
[81], or combined with graph databases when creating 
advanced recommender systems [82].  
4) Spatial analysis 
Combining data and location is a powerful analytical tool 
that has been around for a long time. In Utah, data from health 
records and environmental records were combined and used 
to predict areas likely to see more cases of cancer [83]. A 
similar study from Scotland combined geographical and 
demographic data to examine mortality rates in different parts 
of the country [84].  
These and a range of similar studies rely on traditional 
compiled registry data, which by itself is a powerful tool. 
However, adding data sources such as sensors, data mining of 
the Internet etc can improve the predictive power of these 

34
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
models, for example in fields such as epidemiology, 
transportation, flooding and environment/climate studies. 
Using sensors from cars to collect data along with traditional 
registry data such as traffic congestion statistics, researchers 
were able to create a detailed spatial distribution of Carbon 
emissions in China [85]. Another study combined 
geographical data with accident statistics, data from taxis, 
public transport, and social media to create a predictive model 
of traffic accident hotspots [86].  
5) Machine learning 
Artificial intelligence and machine learning are some of 
the most talked about issues in current science. At its core, 
machine learning involves creating software that improves 
through experience, by being shown some examples which are 
run through various algorithms, allowing the software to learn 
“by itself” [87]. Machine learning is the preferred method for 
development of software for computer vision, speech 
recognition, natural language processing, robot control and 
more, and has also become prevalent in sciences ranging from 
biology to the social sciences [88], as big data is making 
traditional methods more difficult.  
At its core, machine learning consists of feeding data to a 
piece of software and applying various algorithms (step-by-
step instructions) to make sense of the data [89]. There are 
hundreds of techniques and even more algorithms for machine 
learning, but all the different techniques can be categorized 
into two categories: Supervised and unsupervised [89]. A 
review of machine learning literature found 156 supervised 
and 46 unsupervised algorithms tested in 121 different studies 
[89]. 
Supervised machine learning involves feeding data to an 
algorithm along with a set of labeled “training data” [90]. For 
example, sentiment analysis could be conducted by manually 
coding a data set and feeding this to an algorithm which would 
then use the example data to continue coding more data. In 
order to verify the model, several iterations of evaluation are 
needed to calculate accuracy [90]. 
 Supervised learning techniques include the following:  
• 
Regression: for calculating the relationships between 
variables (several algorithms for big data regression).  
• 
Classification trees: Where variables are split into 
multiple dimensions to form a tree structure.  
• 
Ensemble learning/aggregation: Additional training 
techniques to ensure the accuracy of tree models.  
• 
Support 
vector 
machines: 
Another 
method 
of 
classification.  
• 
Neural networks: Often used for learning purposes such 
as speech recognition or social networks, Neural 
networks are made up of nodes and connections receiving 
and sending signals. Originally modeled on the human 
brain, but has since branched out in many directions.  
• 
Nearest neighbors: Used in pattern recognition, 
regression and classification. For example, given the 
length of petals for a set of flowers, the algorithm can 
identify the different types of flower [89].  
Unsupervised machine learning on the other hand, does 
not involve any manual coding. Data is fed unlabeled to the 
algorithm in order to make sense of it [89]. Some of the 
popular techniques include Clustering, where the purpose is 
to find connections between variables. Clustering is a popular 
technique in marketing and recommender systems, as it can 
discover what people with a certain set of characteristics 
typically buy or are interested in. Combining demographic 
data, purchase data, interests, or text from the news articles we 
read are typical data sources [91]. Another popular technique 
is dimensionality reduction, where the objective is to reduce 
the number of variables under consideration. For example, 
sensor-based location data can come from a number of 
different sources, with each source providing overlapping 
information. Dimensionality reduction can help reduce the 
number of variables into one “position” variable [92]. 
The methods reviewed in this section are summarized in 
Table III. 
TABLE III.  
ANALYTICAL METHODS AND APPLICATIONS 
Method 
Techniques/application 
Social network 
analysis 
Identify attributes, relations and networks (of networks) 
Sentiment 
analysis 
Identify negative/positive opinions related to a 
topic/case/issue 
Spatial data 
analysis 
Combine data and location to visualize where something 
happens/could happen 
Statistical 
analysis 
Find relations between variables 
Machine 
learning 
Unsupervised 
techniques  
Find connected variables. Reduce 
dimensions (variables) providing data 
on the same thing. 
Supervised 
techniques 
Classification and regression 
(relations) between different variables. 
Pattern recognition. 
 
VI. 
ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK 
The purpose of our case studies is to examine data sources 
and methods used to analyze data. Seven examples of smart 
city applications show the importance of sensor data, but also 
the opportunities for using open data sets combined with 
sensor data to improve analysis and enable forecasting. Web 
mining and social media have limited use in these cases, but 
can be used to alert city administration about potential 
problems and sentiments. 
The crime prevention case does not rely on sensor data, 
but on reports of crimes. Combining different open data sets 
can provide better insight related to crime prevention. The 
reported crimes can provide patterns, but combining data sets 
may shed light on underlying factors, like property values, 
incomes, absence of street lights and other factors. 
In this study, we have examined mainly the 
instrumentation and interconnection layers, finding a set of 
data sources used in different smart city application areas, as 
shown in Table II. 
When we map these findings to the three layers in Table I, 
we have the outline of an analytical framework as shown in 
Figure 3. The resulting analytical framework may guide future 
research efforts in the field. 
Existing research and white papers provide examples of 
how big data can be applied for decision making, but as our 
framework shows, there is a need for both synthesizing 
existing studies as well as conducting new empirical studies 
to create a roadmap for decision-makers. 

35
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 3. Analytical framework. 
 
This roadmap would list relevant data sources and 
analytical techniques for different users and contexts. The 
framework forms a possible foundation for future studies in 
this area. 
VII. CONCLUSION, LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In this article, we used nine common application areas of 
smart cities to explore their use of data. We examined relevant 
data sources, and their use. Data collected from sensors are 
very important for seven of the chosen application areas. Open 
data is often a valuable supplement to collected data. In some 
cases, location data are combined with other types of data. 
Social media data mining may play a role to show user 
perceptions and sentiments. 
The collected data need to be processed and analyzed to 
be useful for decision-making. 
Data will often be used for automatic decision-making. In 
eight of the chosen application areas, we found examples of 
data used for automatic decision-making: 
• 
Smart parking: Automatic update of displays directing 
drivers to available parking spots. 
• 
Speed monitoring: Automatic regulation of traffic lights, 
or even photographing speeding vehicle to issue a speed 
ticket. 
• 
Smart public transport: Automatic updates of screens 
showing arrival and departure times. 
• 
Smart traffic: Automatic control of signs and traffic lights 
to redirect traffic. 
• 
Air quality monitoring: Automatic alerts to citizens in the 
areas, through signs or SMS service. 
• 
Energy management: Automatic start of household 
appliances, based on grid load. 
• 
Waste handling: Automatic updates of garbage truck 
schedules based on amount of garbage in each container. 
• 
Home healthcare: Automatic requests for health care 
personnel to look into changing medical situation for 
patients living in their own homes. 
For strategic and long-term decisions done by humans, the 
results of the processing and analysis need to be visualized in 
a meaningful way, e.g., through graphs, bar charts, pie charts 
often combined with a map or even embedded in a Geographic 
Information System (GIS) front-end. 
However, researchers analysts should be aware that 
algorithms and methods are social constructions, and that the 
choice of algorithm and method in some cases will influence 
the outcome of research. Careful ethical and methodological 
considerations should therefore be considered when planning 
and implementing an analytics project.  
This article studied application areas of smart cities and 
methods for data analysis to examine use of (big) data. The 
study is not exhaustive. We used example of application areas 
from literature, but as “smart cities” have ambiguous 
definitions, we may have overlooked some areas. Further, as 
we had to start examining white papers from industry it is 
likely we have missed interesting data from relevant sources 
even after our rigorous search in the most well-known big 
data/analytics companies. 
A. Future research challenges 
Finally, we would like to present some future research 
challenges derived from this literature review of smart city 
and data analytics.  
Consolidation: Data analytics and smart cities are both 
new and intertwined fields, with research coming from both 
highly technical and (some) organizational fields. There are 
few studies that combine a technical solution with a thorough 
field test and case study. Thus, we argue there is a need for 
consolidation of the field, in order to move it towards the 
mainstream. City managers need off the shelf tools and simple 
processes in order to make use of analytics. 
Analytical methods: We have attempted to summarize 
the analytical methods identified in literature in Table III. 
However, further work is needed in order to classify these 
methods for managers and the organizational level. Most of 
the literature on these methods were written for a technical 
audience, requiring skills that decision-makers may not have.  
Application areas: The list of smart city application areas 
was selected based on the literature review. There are many 
other application areas, but the selected areas were considered 
to provide good examples on both data sources and analytical 
methods. Future work may include even more application 
areas.   
Actors and process: In our framework (Figure 3) we 
include actors and process (including context) as factors. Few 
of the studies included in this review address these in detail, 
except brief mentions of the actors involved. As context is 
important in technological implementations, there is a likely 
need for more in-depth studies of how process and 
actors/stakeholders influence/are influenced by, the analytical 
process. 
Finally, we intend to investigate further the use cases for 
smart cities’ use of analytics and big data, so that we can 
present a comprehensive model of possible combinations of 
data sources, actors and contexts, and analytical techniques. 
For practitioners and researchers with little technical 
background, a handbook of methods, techniques and use cases 
would be a valuable tool that could potentially improve and 
simplify data analysis strategies and outcomes. 
 
 
 

36
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Berntzen, M. Rohde Johannessen and R. El-Gazzar, "Smart 
Cities, Big Data and Smart Decision-making - Understanding 
´Big Data´ in Smart City Applications", Proceedings of ICDS 
2018. 
[2] ITU-T. Focus Group on Smart Sustainable Cities. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-
T/focusgroups/ssc/Pages/default.aspx [retrieved: 2018.02.04]. 
[3] ITU-T Focus Group on Smart Sustainable Cities, “Smart 
sustainable cities: An analysis of definitions. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-
T/focusgroups/ssc/Documents/website/web-fg-ssc-0100-r9-
definitions_technical_report.docx, 
2014. 
[retrieved: 
2018.02.04]. 
[4] A. Vesco and F. Ferrero, Eds., Handbook of Research on 
Social, Economic, and Environmental Sustainability in the 
Development of Smart Cities. IGI Global, pp. xxv-xxxi, 2015. 
[5] Deloitte. Smart Cities: Big Data. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/fpc/Docume
nts/services/systemes-dinformation-et-
technologie/deloitte_smart-cities-big-data_en_0115.pdf, 2015. 
[retrieved: 2018.02.04]. 
[6] F. Bonomi, R. Milito, P. Natarajan, and J. Zhu, “Fog 
Computing; A Platform for Internet of Things and Analytics,” 
in Big Data and Internet of Things: A Roadmap for Smart 
Environments, N. Bessis and C. Dobre, Eds. Studies in 
Computational Intelligence, 546, Springer, pp. 169–186, 2014. 
[7] V. Albino, U. Berardi, and R. M. Dangelico,. “Smart Cities: 
Definitions, Dimensions, Performance, and Initiatives,” 
Journal of Urban Technology, 22(1), pp. 3–21, 2015. 
[8] IBM. A vision of smarter cities. [Online]. Available from:  
https://www-
03.ibm.com/press/attachments/IBV_Smarter_Cities_-
_Final.pdf, 2010. [retrieved: 2018.02.04]. 
[9] M. Kehoe et al., Smarter Cities Series: A Foundation for 
Understanding the IBM Approach to Smarter Cities, IBM 
Redguides for Business Leaders, pp. 1–30, 2011. 
[10] E. Negre and C. Rosenthal-Sabroux, “Smart Cities: A Salad 
Bowl of Citizens, ICT, and Environment,” in Handbook of 
Research 
on 
Social, 
Economic, 
and 
Environmental 
Sustainability in the Development of Smart Cities, A. Vesco 
and F. Ferrero, Eds., IGI Global, pp. 61-78, 2015. 
[11] H. Chen, R. H. L. Chiang, and V. C. Storey, “Business 
Intelligence and Analytics: From Big Data to Big Impact,” MIS 
Quarterly, 36(4), pp. 1165–1188, 2012. 
[12] D. Laney, 3D Data Management: Controlling data, volume, 
velocity, and variety. Technical Report. META Group, 2001. 
[13] B. Marr, Big Data – Using Smart Big Data Analytics and 
Metrics to Make Better Decisions and Improve Performance. 
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, 2015. 
[14] M. Botterman, Internet of Things: An Early Reality of the 
Future Internet, Workshop Report, European Commission, 
Information Society and Media Directorate, 2009. 
[15] J. W. Treem and P. M. Leonardi, 7 Social Media Use in 
Organizations Exploring the Affordances of Visibility, 
Editability, Persistence, and Association. Communication 
Yearbook, 36, pp. 143–189, 2012. 
[16] A. M. Kaplan and M. Haenlein, “Users of the world, unite! The 
challenges and opportunities of Social Media,” Business 
Horizons, 53(1), pp. 59–68, 2010. 
[17] Open Knowledge International. Open Data Handbook. 
[Online] http://opendatahandbook.org/guide/en/what-is-open-
data/ [retrieved: 2018.02.04]. 
[18] J. Ojasalo and L. Tähtinen, “Integrating Open Innovation 
Platforms in Public Sector Decision Making: Empirical Results 
from 
Smart 
City 
Research,” 
Technology 
Innovation 
Management Review, 6(12), pp. 38–48, 2016. 
[19] S. Eräranta and A. Staffans, “From Situation Awareness to 
Smart City Planning and Decision Making,” Proceedings of the 
14th International Conference on Computers in Urban 
Planning and Urban Management (CUPUM 2015), J. Ferreira 
and R. Goodspeed, Eds., Paper 197, pp. 1-17, 2015. 
[20] U. Passe et al., “Methodologies for Studying Human-
Microclimate Interactions for Resilient, Smart City Decision-
Making, “  Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference 
on Passive and Low Energy Architecture, P. La Roche and M. 
Schiler, Eds., pp. 1735-1742, 2016. 
[21] A. R. Honarvar and A. Sami, “A Multi-source Big Data 
Analytic System in Smart City for Urban Planning and 
Decision Making,” International Conference on Internet of 
Things and Big Data, Doctoral Consortium (DCIT), pp. 32-36, 
2016. 
[22] Z. Khan et al.,  “Developing Knowledge-Based Citizen 
Participation Platform to Support Smart City Decision Making: 
The Smarticipate Case Study,” Information, 8, 47, pp. 1-24, 
2017. 
[23] J.-P. Foucault and Y. Moulier-Boutang, “Towards economic 
and social ‘sensors’: Condition and model of governance and 
decision-making 
for 
an 
organological 
Smart 
City,” 
International Conference on Smart and Sustainable City and 
Big Data (ICSSC), pp. 106-112, 2015. 
[24] B. Nathali Silva, M.  Khan, and K. Han, Big Data Analytics 
Embedded 
Smart 
City 
Architecture 
for 
Performance 
Enhancement through Real-Time Data Processing and 
Decision-Making. Wireless Communications and Mobile 
Computing, pp. 1–12, 2017. 
[25] L. I. Gang and L. I. Yang, “Construction of Emergency 
Decision-making Intelligence System Against the Background 
of Smart City,” Journal of Library Science in China, 3(4), 2016. 
[26] F. Kurniawan, A. P. Wibawa, Munir, S. M. S. Nugroho, and 
M. Hariadi, “Makassar Smart City Operation Center Priority 
Optimization using Fuzzy Multi-criteria Decision-making,” 
4th International Conference on Electrical Engineering, 
Computer Science and Informatics (EECSI), pp. 1-5, 2017. 
[27] Smart 
Parking 
Ltd. 
Company 
website. 
[Online]. 
http://www.smartparking.com [retrieved: 2018.02.04]. 
[28] Fybr. Company website. [Online]. http://www.fybr.com 
[retrieved: 2018.02.04]. 
[29] WorldSensing. 
Company 
website. 
[Online]. 
https://www.worldsensing.com/industries/parking-operators/ 
[retrieved: 2018.02.04]. 
[30] SmartPark. Company website. [Online] https://smartpark.co.nz 
[retrieved: 2018.02.04]. 
[31] C. H. Schaffer, Customer Success Is Key – How a small 
manufacturer transformed an Internet of Things (IoT) solutions 
provider and unlocked $2 million is SaaS revenue. (Kindle 
edition) amazon.com, 2015. [retrieved: 2017.12.01]. 
[32] G. Kirankumar, J. Samsuresh, and G. Balaji, “Vehicle Speed 
Monitoring System [VSM] (Using RuBee Protocol),” IACSIT 
International Journal of Engineering and Technology, Vol. 4, 
No. 1,  pp. 107-110, 2012. 
[33] R. 
M. 
John 
et 
al., 
"Smart 
public 
transport 
system," International Conference on Embedded Systems 
(ICES), pp. 166-170, 2014. 
[34] P. Chowdhury, P. Bala, and D. Addy, "RFID and Android 
based 
smart 
ticketing 
and 
destination 
announcement 
system," Advances in Computing Communications and 
Informatics (ICACCI), pp. 1-5, November 2016. 
[35] R. Hawi, G. Okeyo, M. Kimwele, “Smart Traffic Light Control 
using Fuzzy Logic and Wireless Sensor Network,” Computing 
Conference, London, pp. 450-460, 2017. 

37
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[36] K. Kumarmanas, S.  Praveen, V. Neema, and S. Devendra, “An 
Innovative Device for Monitoring and Controlling Vehicular 
Movement in a Smart City,” Symposium on Colossal Data 
Analysis and Networking (CDAN), pp. 1-3, 2016. 
[37] A. Florea et al., “Low cost mobile embedded system for air 
quality monitoring - air quality real-time monitoring in order to 
preserve citizens' health,” Sixth International Conference on 
Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies, (SMART), 
IARIA, pp. 5-12, 2017. 
[38] C. Meinecke, Potentiale und Grenzen von Smart Metering. 
Springer. 2015. 
[39] F. Folianto, Y. S. Low, W. L. Yeow, "Smartbin: Smart Waste 
Management System," IEEE Tenth International Conference 
on Intelligent Sensors, Sensor Networks and Information 
Processing (ISSNIP), pp. 1-2, 2015. 
[40] A. S. Wiaya, Z.  Zainuddin, and M. Niswar, “Design a smart 
waste bin for waste management,” 5th International 
Conference on Instrumentation, Control, and Automation 
(ICA), pp. 62-66, 2017. 
[41] H. Poddar, R.  Paul, S. Mukherjee, B. Bhattacharyya, “Design 
Of Smart Bin For Smarter Cities,” International Conference on 
Innovations in Power and Advanced Computer Technologies 
[i-PACT2017], IEEE Press, pp. 1-6, 2017. 
[42] F. Wang, Ed., Geographic Information Systems and Crime 
Analysis, Idea Group Publishing, 2005. 
[43] S. Chainey and J. Ratcliffe, GIS and Crime Mapping, Wiley, 
2005. 
[44] J. Vanus, J. Belesova, R. Martinek, J. Nedoma, M. Fajkus, P. 
Bilik and J. Zidek, “Monitoring of the daily living activities in 
smart home care,” Human-centric Computing and Information 
Sciences, (7)30), pp. 1-34, 2017. 
[45] H. Mshali, T. Lemlouma, M. Moloney and D. Magoni, “A 
survey on Health Monitoring Systems for Health Smart 
Homes,” International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics, 
Elsevier (66), pp. 26-56, 2018. 
[46] B. Kon, A. Lam and J. Chen, “Evolution of Smart Homes for 
the Elderly,” Proceedings of the 2017 International World Web 
Conference, pp. 1095-1101, 2017. 
[47] P. Leijdekkers, V. Gay and E. Lawrence, “Smart Homecare for 
Health Tele-monitoring,” Proceedings of the First International 
Conference on the Digital Society, IARIA, 2007. 
[48] S. Majumder, E. Aghayi, M. Noferesti, H. Memarzadeh-
Tehran, T. Mondal, Z. Pang and M. J- Deen, “Smart Homes for 
Elderly Healthcare – Recent Advances and Research 
Challenges, Sensors, 17, 2496, 2017 
[49] A. Katal, M. Wazid and R. Goudar, “Big data: issues, 
challenges, tools and good practices,” Sixth International 
Conference on Contemporary Computing (IC3), pp. 404-409, 
2013. 
[50] P. Louridas and C. Ebert, “Embedded Analytics and Statistics 
for Big Data,” IEEE Software, 30(6), pp. 33-39, 2013. 
[51] J. Romero, S.  Hallett, and S. Jude, “Leveraging Big Data Tools 
and Technologies: Addressing the Challenges of the Water 
Quality Sector,” Sustainability, 9(12), 2160, 2017.  
[52] S. Stieglitz, M. Mirbabaie, B.  Ross, and C. Neuberger, “Social 
media analytics – Challenges in topic discovery, data 
collection, and data preparation,” International Journal of 
Information Management,” 39, pp. 156-168, 2018. 
[53] Nosql-database.org, 
[Online] 
http://nosql-database.org/ 
[Retrieved 2018.09.01]. 
[54] A.S. Hashmi and T. Ahmad, “Big Data Mining: Tools & 
Algorithms. International Journal of Recent Contributions 
from Engineering, 4(1), pp. 36-40, 2016. 
[55] F. Nasution, N. E. B. Bazin and A. Z. Daliyusmanto, “Big 
Data’s Tools for Internet Data Analytics: Modelling of System 
Dynamics,” International Journal on Advanced Science, 
Engineering and Information Technology 7(3), pp. 745-753, 
2017. 
[56] C. J. M. Tauro, S. Aravindh and A. B. Shreeharsha, 
“Comparative study of the new generation, agile, scalable, high 
performance NOSQL databases,” International Journal of 
Computer Applications, 48(20), pp. 1-4, 2012.  
[57] K. M. Anderson, A. A. Aydin, M.  Barrenechea, A. Cardenas, 
M.  Hakeem and S. Jambi, “Design Challenges/Solutions for 
Environments Supporting the Analysis of Social Media Data in 
Crisis Informatics Research,” 48th Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, pp. 163-172, 2015. 
[58] Y. Huang, M. Lin and F. Yu, “Analysis on financial 
development correlativity between Zhejiang, Jiangsu, and 
Shanghai,” 
WIT 
Transactions 
on 
Information 
and 
Communication Technologies 49, 2014. 
[59] Oracle, “Oracle Berkeley,” [Online]   https://www.oracle.com/ 
database/berkeley-db/db.html, [retrieved: 2018.09.01], 2018. 
[60] K. Chodorow, “MongoDB: The Definitive Guide: Powerful 
and Scalable Data Storage, " O'Reilly Media Inc.", 2013. 
[61] J. J. Miller, “Graph database applications and concepts with 
Neo4j,” Proceedings of the Southern Association for 
Information Systems Conference, Atlanta, GA, USA, 2013 
[62] A. Katal, M. Wazid, and R. H. Goudar. “Big data: issues, 
challenges, tools and good practices,” Sixth International 
Conference on Contemporary Computing (IC3), IEEE, pp. 
404–409, 2013.  
[63] C. Fuchs, “From digital positivism and administrative big data 
analytics towards critical digital and social media research,” 
European Journal of Communication, 32(1), pp. 37-49, 2017. 
[64] Unbias Research Team, “Algorithmic Preference Survey,” 
[Online] https://unbias.wp.horizon.ac.uk/2018/07/20/unbias-
algorithmic-preference-survey/ [Retrieved 2018.09.01] 
[65] K. D. Strang and Z. Sun, “Analyzing Relationships in 
Terrorism Big Data Using Hadoop and Statistics,” Journal of 
Computer Information Systems, 57(1), pp. 67-75, 2017. 
[66] R. G. Qiu, K. Wang, S. Li, J. Dong and M. Xie, “Big data 
technologies in support of real time capturing and 
understanding of electric vehicle customers dynamics,” 5th 
IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering and 
Service Science (ICSESS), 2014. 
[67] S. T. McAbee, R. S.  Landis and M. I. Burke, “Inductive 
reasoning: The promise of big data,” Human Resource 
Management Review, 27(2), pp. 277-290, 2017. 
[68] A. Gandomi and M.  Haider, “Beyond the hype: Big data 
concepts, methods, and analytics,” International Journal of 
Information Management.  35(2), pp. 137-144., 2015. 
[69] Digital 
Methods 
Initiative, 
Wiki 
[Online] 
https://wiki.digitalmethods.net/ [Retrieved 2018.09.01] 
[70] Z. Xiang, Z. Schwartz, J. H. Gerdes Jr and M. Uysal, “What 
can big data and text analytics tell us about hotel guest 
experience and satisfaction?” International Journal of 
Hospitality Management, 44, 120-130, 2015. 
[71] Ø. Sæbø, “Understanding Twitter Use among Parliament 
Representatives: A Genre Analysis,” In E. Tambouris, A. 
Macintosh, & H. de Bruijn (Eds.), Electronic Participation 
(Vol. 6847, pp. 1-12): Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2011. 
[72] M. Granath, “The Smart City – how smart can ’IT’ be? : 
Discourses on digitalisation in policy and planning of urban 
development,” Linköping University, [Online] http://liu.diva-
portal.org/smash/record.jsf?pid=diva2%3A956501&dswid=-
3723 [Retrieved 2018.09.01] 
[73] A. Al-Rawi, “Online political activism in Syria: Sentiment 
analysis of social media,” SAGE Research Methods Cases, 
2017. 
[74] J. O. Øye, “Sentiment Analysis of Norwegian Twitter 
Messages. (Master Thesis),” NTNU, Trondheim, 2014. 

38
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 12 no 1 & 2, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[75] H. Shirdastian, M. Laroche and M. O. Richard, “Using big data 
analytics to study brand authenticity sentiments: The case of 
Starbucks on Twitter,” International Journal of Information 
Management, 2017. 
[76] W. Medhat, A. Hassan and H. Korashy, “Sentiment analysis 
algorithms and applications: A survey,” Ain Shams 
Engineering Journal, 5(4), pp. 1093-1113, 2014. 
[77] M. Castells, “The New Public Sphere: Global Civil Society, 
Communication Networks, and Global Governance. The 
Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social 
Science, 616(1), pp. 78-93, 2008. 
[78] J. Scott, “Social network analysis,” Sage, 2017. 
[79] A. Mazur, C.  Doran and P. R.  Doran, “ The use of social 
network analysis software to analyze communication patterns 
and interaction in online collaborative environments,” 
International Conference on Education, Training and 
Informatics, ICETI,” Orlando, FL, 2010. 
[80] J. Kim and M. Hastak, “Social network analysis: 
Characteristics of online social networks after a disaster,” 
International Journal of Information Management, 38(1), pp. 
86-96, 2018. 
[81] Y. Wang, L.  Kung, W. Y. C.  Wang and C. G. Cegielski “An 
integrated big data analytics-enabled transformation model: 
Application to health care,” Information & Management, 
55(1), 2017. 
[82] W. Ball, S.  LeFevre, L.  Jarup and L. Beale, “ Comparison of 
different methods for spatial analysis of cancer data in Utah,” 
Environmental Health Perspectives, 116(8), pp. 1120-1124, 
2008. 
[83] S. Sridharan, H.  Tunstall, R.  Lawder, and R. Mitchell, “An 
exploratory spatial data analysis approach to understanding the 
relationship between deprivation and mortality in Scotland,” 
Social Science & Medicine, 65(9), pp. 1942-1952, 2007. 
[84] Z. Huang, F. Cao, C. Jin, Z. Yu and R. Huang, “Carbon 
emission flow from self-driving tours and its spatial 
relationship with scenic spots – A traffic-related big data 
method,” Journal of Cleaner Production, 142, 946-955, 2017. 
[85] K. Xie, K.  Ozbay, A. Kurkcu and H. Yang, “Analysis of 
Traffic Crashes Involving Pedestrians Using Big Data: 
Investigation of Contributing Factors and Identification of 
Hotspots,” Risk Analysis, 37(8), pp. 1459-1476, 2017 
[86] M. I. Jordan and T. M. Mitchell, “Machine learning: Trends, 
perspectives, and prospects,” Science, 349(6245), pp. 255-260, 
2015. 
[87] P. Domingos, “A few useful things to know about machine 
learning,” Communications of the ACM, 55(10), pp. 78-87, 
2012. 
[88] I. Portugal, P. Alencar and D. Cowan, “The use of machine 
learning algorithms in recommender systems: A systematic 
review,” Expert Systems with Applications, 97, pp. 205-227, 
2018 
[89] C. Crisci, B. Ghattas and G. Perera, “A review of supervised 
machine learning algorithms and their applications to 
ecological data. (Report). Ecological Modelling, 240, 113, 
2012. 
[90] Z. Fan, S. Chen, L. Zha, L. and J. Yang, “A Text Clustering 
Approach of Chinese News Based on Neural Network 
Language 
Model,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Parallel 
Programming, 44(1), 198-206, 2016. 
[91] J. P. Cunningham and Z.  Ghahramani, “Linear dimensionality 
reduction: Survey, insights, and generalizations,” The Journal 
of Machine Learning Research, 16(1), pp. 2859-2900, 2015
 

