342
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Business Process Modelling for Measuring Quality 
 
Farideh Heidari 
System Engineering Section 
TPM Faculty  
Delft University of Technology 
Delft, The Netherlands 
f.heidari@tudelft.nl 
 
Pericles Loucopoulos  
Manchester Business School 
 University of Manchester  
Manchester, the United Kingdom 
pericles.loucopoulos@mbs.ac.uk 
Frances Brazier 
System Engineering Section 
TPM Faculty  
Delft University of Technology 
Delft, The Netherlands 
f.m.brazier@tudelft.nl 
 
 
Abstract—Business process modelling languages facilitate 
presentation, 
communication 
and 
analysis 
of 
business 
processes with different stakeholders. This paper proposes an 
approach that drives specification and measurement of quality 
requirements and in doing so relies on business process models 
as representations of business processes. The approach is 
presented in the form of a conceptual model and its application 
is demonstrated for a simplified version of a business process. 
However, communication becomes a challenge in cross-
organizational business processes where multiple business 
process modelling languages are being practiced which calls 
for an abstraction as an integration of concepts of these 
business process modelling languages. In this paper, a business 
process integrating meta-model is presented as an abstraction 
of concepts of seven mainstream business process modelling 
languages. Attaining such level of understanding and 
specifying 
business 
processes 
fosters 
specification 
and 
measurement of quality requirements.  
Keywords- Quality requirements, Quality specification, 
Quality measurement, Business process, Business process 
modeling, Business process integrating meta-model. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Today, new businesses are demanding enterprises to 
understand the behaviour of the business systems and its 
influence on the development of information systems that 
supports their operation. Rapid business and organizational 
changes, knowledge intensity of goods and services, the 
growth in organizational scope, and information technology 
have intensified organizational needs for such understanding. 
The approach of describing organizations in terms of 
business processes not only helps organizations to be more 
responsive to the business and organizational changes but 
also helps them in the development of information systems. 
Moreover, the collective ability of business processes to 
achieve its requirements is central to achieving high-
performance organizations.  
Attaining a level of understanding and specifying 
business processes is a challenge, which calls for business 
process modelling [1]. Business Process Modelling is 
currently not only of core importance to the development of 
software systems [2, 3] but  also  in presenting,  analysing  
and improving business processes [4] within enterprises. 
Business process models are domain specific conceptual 
models that support presentation and integration of business 
processes’ requirements within an enterprise. Linking 
business process quality requirements to business process 
concepts enables IT and business experts to define their 
requirements collaboratively at a common abstract level 
during the earliest stage of design and development of 
information systems. In addition to quality requirements, 
annotation of business process models with related 
information artefacts using domains’ vocabulary leverages 
different concepts (e.g., goals, rules, patterns, motivation, 
etc.)  into the scope of business process [5, 6]. 
Business process modelling provides the realization and 
the presentation of business processes in different levels of 
abstraction from individual concepts (e.g., activity), to 
composition of concepts (i.e., sub-processes), and to the 
business process as a whole. The motivation of this paper is 
to show how business process modelling can be deployed for 
quality specification and measurement of business processes 
in different levels of abstraction. The focus is not on the 
evaluation of the models themselves as it is assumed that the 
models are well-formed and syntactically and semantically 
correct. 
Quality evaluation of business processes in the context of 
their models is not a straightforward task. Many different 
business 
process-modelling 
approaches 
have 
been 
developed, each with their own specific business process 
modelling languages designed to meet a specific business 
requirement. The proliferation of business process modelling 
techniques is realized as a notorious problem for business 
process management [7]. Standardization has been discussed 
for more than ten years, none of the proposals is commonly 
accepted as de facto standard in the industry [7]. In practice, 
multiple business process languages are often being used 
within one and the same enterprise. A systematic realization 
and representation of concepts and relationships between the 
concepts of different business process modelling languages 
in a business process meta-model is essential [8].  This meta-
model is universal and language independent abstraction of 

343
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the concepts of today’s mainstream business process 
modelling 
languages. 
This 
paper 
provides 
a 
brief 
introduction on an integrating business process meta-model 
and its application. Besides, evaluation of business process in 
through its model is addressed in this paper. The levels of 
business process concepts are considered for specification 
and measurement purpose. The approach is exemplified 
using a real-life business process in an industrial case.  
The paper is organized as follows: Section II presents a 
brief summary of related works. Section III elaborates on 
business process integrating meta-model, and its application 
and it introduced an enriched version of it with quality 
factors. Section IV introduces the approach to specification 
and evaluation of quality of business processes’ concepts. 
Section V illustrates the proposed approach for a business 
process and instantiate the framework for it. The paper 
concludes in Section VI with a number of observations, 
reflections and suggestions for future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Quality has been the topic of research in several closely 
related disciplines such as requirement engineering, software 
engineering, workflow analysis, industrial engineering, 
system dynamics and discrete event simulation [1].  
 Different levels of granularity can be considered for 
realizing and measuring quality in an enterprise involving 
many organizational layers from the very general, i.e., 
organization-wide quality to concepts of business processes. 
The analysis of the current state-of-the-art reveals variations 
in specification and measurement of requirements. The 
plethora of approaches has led to compare the existing 
approaches based on a set of criteria. 
Synoptically, 
investigation 
of 
the 
most 
relevant 
approaches in following aspects will be considered in this 
section: (A) the way they are being practiced (i.e., 
methodology e.g., systematic or ad hoc), (B) representation 
of business process and quality requirement (modelling and 
language dependency), (C) generalizability of the approach 
(i.e., application scope e.g., generic vs. specific), (D) 
measurement method (e.g., quantitative vs. qualitative) is 
conducted in this section. 
A. Methodology  
While “focus of work”, “required inputs”, “expected 
outputs” and a “set of phases”, “technique used” and 
possibly “support tool” are prescribed with details in an 
approach, the approach is considered to be systematic in 
terms of methodology (e.g., [14], [9], [10], [11], [12], [1], 
[13]);  otherwise the approach is considered to be ad-hoc in 
terms of methodology (e.g.,  [14], [10],[15]). 
Wolter et al. [16] deploys a method to assign elements of 
their security model to a process model. Capturing quality 
dimensions of a business process in the form of a framework 
are considered by Heravizadeh et al. [17]. A framework for 
evaluation of business process quality is introduced by 
Kedad et al. [18]. A requirements engineering framework 
with the aim of allowing active stakeholder participation is 
introduced by Donzelli et al. [11]. Pourshahid et al. [19] 
introduces a framework to measure and align processes and 
goals subjectively. In their work, key performance indicators 
(KPI) are added to user requirement notation (URN) together 
with explicit goals for each business process. A scenario-
based methodology and a toolset for business process 
modelling and analysis is introduced by Glykas [12]. The 
approach defines and measures KPIs in qualitative as well as 
quantitative manner. 
Heidari et al. [13] proposes a systematic approach in the 
form of meta-models and method steps to capture and 
evaluate quality of individual concepts of business processes, 
considering 
non-functional 
requirements 
defined 
by 
stakeholders.  The evaluation results are compared with the 
quality objectives derived from non-functional requirements. 
They identify quality dimensions of performance, efficiency, 
reliability, recoverability, permissibility and availability for 
corresponding business process concepts and introduce 
objective and quantitative formulae for evaluating them.   
 The approach by Firesmith [10] proposes a checklist of 
questions over which defects in software-intensive system 
architectures would be realized. Measurement is included in 
the structure although the process toward the measurement is 
not discussed.  In a theoretical attempt, Lohrmann et al. [15] 
provides a definition for business process quality and 
introduce business process quality model.  There are no 
details provided on how the measurement should be 
conducted. 
B. Modelling and language dependency   
Modelling is concerned with the way an approach 
represents a business process. The consideration here is the 
use of formal or semi formal languages in the representation 
(e.g., [8], [17], [14], [9], [20]) Language dependency 
examines this fact if an approach’s focus is on a specific 
language. Language independent approaches are not tied to 
any specific modelling languages (e.g., [18], [21], [13], [1], 
[8],[22]).  
Heidari et al. [13] identifies quality metrics and factors 
for business process having its model as a given. Their 
approach is language independent and considers different 
concepts of business process (i.e., event, input, output and 
activity).  
Heinrich et al. [23] uses the quality characteristics and 
attributes of processes. They distinguish on the basis of the 
ISO/IEC standard for software quality [14] to enhance 
BPMN. Saeedi et al. [14] proposes a set of quality 
requirement factors for BPMN concepts. Role Activity 
Diagram notation is considered for representation of business 
processes by Aburub et al. [20]. The strategic rationale for 
the choice of business processes to be specified in BPMN 

344
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
models and described in terminology familiar to business 
people are considered by Decreus et al. [9].  
Heidari et al. [8] introduces a business process meta-
model as an integration of concept of seven business process 
modelling techniques. The meta-model is enriched with 
quality related information (i.e., quality factors). The result 
presented as a quality-oriented meta-model encompassing 
quality factors of throughput, cycle time, timeliness, cost, 
resource efficiency, cost efficiency, maturity, recoverability, 
security and availability. 
C. Application scope  
The application aspect is concerned with the target of the 
approach. Generic approaches can be applied to all or most 
situations (e.g., [22], [18]). Specific approaches (e.g., [16], 
[20]) are dedicated to a particular class or application or 
business sector.  
From a managerial point of view, TQM and ISO quality 
standards act as general guidelines that are applicable to all 
types of organization regardless of the types of product and 
service they offer, organization size, turnover, location, type 
of industry, etc. The literature on business process 
performance measurements systems such as [24] and [25] try 
to provide generic guidelines for developing business 
process performance measurement systems. Quality tools 
and techniques [26] and tools for process improvements such 
as Kaizen Blitz, Poka-Yoke and process simulation [27] are 
generic and try to assist stakeholders in improving their 
processes and presenting output of quality measurements 
without realizing quality dimensions, factors and metrics.  
Wolter et al. [16] focuses on security requirements. 
Aburub et al. [20]  introduces an approach in remodelling 
business processes for identification and inclusion of Non-
Functional Requirements (NFRs) for a specific case. With 
the focus on quality of business process model, the approach 
by Said-Cherfi et al. [21] considers ontologies in a number of 
specific domains.  
Powel et al. [28] and An et al. [29] focus on the area of 
supply chain management and production and define quality 
dimensions, factors and metrics for a specific situation. 
Similar to the efforts in system dynamics, discrete-event 
simulation is used for simulation and analysis purposes and 
introducing the quality dimensions and factors for a specific 
situation [30-32]. 
D. Measurement method 
This aspect is concerned with the degree to which an 
approach can support quantitative measures, that is, the 
results of an evaluation based on objective and quantitative 
metrics (e.g., [33] in the area of workflow and web-services,  
[13] measuring individual concepts of business process), or 
qualitative measures, that is, the results based on analysis 
requiring individual judgement and interpretation (e.g., [34]). 
Cardoso et al. [33] proposes an approach for estimation 
of workﬂow properties (e.g., execution cost, execution time, 
and reliability), using the properties of activities constituting 
block-structured process models containing sequences, XOR 
blocks, AND blocks, and structured loops. Reduction of 
patterns is the common technique of analytical models in 
quantitative approaches. 
Heidari et al. [13] identifies quality dimensions of 
performance, 
efficiency, 
reliability, 
recoverability, 
permissibility and availability for corresponding business 
process concepts and introduce objective and quantitative 
formulae for evaluating them in business process concept 
level (i.e., activity, input, output, event).  
Most of managerial approaches (e.g., TQM [26], ISO 
standards [35], business performance measurement [24], 
quality tools and techniques [27]) provide generic guidelines 
and assistance for organizations, while the realization of the 
quality factors and metrics are not in their scope.  
To conclude, there are variations in methodology, in the 
specification approaches used for presentation, the target 
application and measuring method of these quality 
approaches. The majority of approaches discussed above are 
based on the assumption that a formal language (e.g., 
BPMN) is used to describe business processes, the majority 
of which use one representation scheme. A few are language 
independent. Some provide a systematic way of working and 
some are generic enough to be applied in generic situations. 
Some are quantitative and some focus qualitative method of 
measurement. The approach introduced in this paper in some 
ways complements and in others extends existing approaches 
by emphasizing a well-structured way for specification and 
objectively measurement of business processes, which is 
generic in application and language independent. The desire 
of this paper is to provide an approach, which is systematic 
and well-structured, generic enough and not tied to a specific 
domain or situation, quantitative and objective, and while 
considering the formal expression of business processes, it is 
not tied to any particular business process modelling 
language. 
III. 
BUSINESS PROCESS INTEGRATING META-MODEL 
During requirement analysis, an important consideration 
is to understand current business processes. In this effort, 
business process modelling plays a key role. There are 
currently many business process modelling languages being 
advocated or practiced [36]. A closer inspection however, 
shows that there are many similarities and a great deal of 
convergence. From a theoretical perspective, it is vital to 
have a clear understanding of the semantics of these 
approaches, their overlaps, differences and similarities. Only 
then does it become possible to systematically and 
objectively understand the similarities and limitations of 
different approaches.  

345
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Synchronization between requirements and business 
process models requires a common basis. This common basis 
can be presented in the form of a meta-model confined to 
requirement aspects. Such abstraction is to provide an 
explicit representation of knowledge, that can be understood 
by both computers and people [37]. Therefore, having an 
abstraction as the basis for quality specification and 
measurement 
of 
any 
business 
processes, 
using 
a 
corresponding model, would go a long way to integrating the 
field (i.e., business process modelling approaches) in the 
form of a meta-model and to facilitating a more systematic 
way of treating quality.  
This paper argues that there is a need to view modelling 
structures through a lens that focuses on the semantics of 
concepts and relations and their ability to express different 
aspects of a business process rather than on syntax of the 
language used. This meta-model provides a language-
independent business process ontology and is open to further 
extensions. 
A meta-model is an explicit model of the constructs and 
rules needed to build specific models within a domain of 
interest. A valid meta-model is an ontology, as its constructs 
and rules represent entities in a domain.  The formalism of a 
generic purpose modelling language (GPML) (e.g., UML 
class diagram) provides the ontology description. An 
ontology makes knowledge explicit expressing the concepts 
and relationships between them in a language close to the 
natural language; fostering an “understanding bridge” 
between business and IT experts [2]. In Siau et al. [38] meta-
modelling is classified as positivism in epistemology and 
realism in ontology. In essence, a meta-modelling approach 
aims to be independent of an observer’s appreciation of the 
modelling methods. In comparison to other approaches for 
describing modelling languages such as graph grammars, 
meta-models offer an intuitive way to specify modelling 
languages [39].  
A business process integrating meta-model represents an 
abstraction of business process concepts, which is universal 
and not dedicated to one single business process modelling 
language. The approach in formation of the meta-model is 
presented as a conceptual model (Fig. 1). In this paper, a 
business process is analysed for its quality through its model, 
which obviously would be expressed in some business 
process modelling languages.  Building a domain ontology 
includes the task of defining basic concepts and structures 
that are applicable in the target domain [40]. In this approach 
the concepts of different business process modelling 
techniques are going to be integrated to form the meta-
model. In an example, Heidari et al. [41] proposes a meta-
model resulted from integration of following languages: 
Business Process Modelling Notation (BPMN), Integrated 
Definition for Function Modelling (IDEF0 and IDEF3), Role 
Activity Diagram (RAD), Unified Modelling Language 
Activity Diagram (UML-AD), (Structured Analysis and 
Design Technique (SADT), and Event-driven Process Chain 
(EPC).  The meta-model of each language is created and the 
Fig. 1. Principles of the integrating meta-model development 
 

346
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
semantics of each individual concept are identified in this 
approach. 
Each business process modelling language has its own 
and rich underlying semantics. As concepts from different 
languages do not perfectly match semantically, the unified 
framework first categorizes concepts into different aspects of 
a business process namely: functional, behavioural, 
organizational and informational in the form of a taxonomy. 
In this taxonomy for example role (RAD), organizational 
unit (EPC), swimlane (BPMN), partition (UML AD) are 
grouped together in the organizational aspect as they can 
serve the purpose of representing executers of an activity. 
 Fig. 2 demonstrates a general view of the business 
process meta-model in terms of the main concepts and 
relationships between different aspects. The proposed 
business process integrating meta-model represents an 
abstraction of business process concepts, is universal and not 
dedicated to one single business process modelling language. 
The business process integrating meta-model clarifies the 
exact relationships between the concepts. Moreover, it 
provides an adequate semantics specification prohibiting 
invalid interpretations by experts in different domains. 
Transforming these explicit syntactic relationships into a 
machine-readable language like Web Ontology Language 
(OWL) provides the option of direct implementation. The 
ontology also provides an abstraction upon which elicitation, 
definition and documentation of requirements can happen.  
One of the applications of business process ontology as a 
repository is as a reference to support explication of 
requirements. An ontology can describe both functional and 
non-functional requirements [2]. One of the applications of a 
business process ontology confined to quality aspects is that 
stakeholders can define their desired requirements in a higher 
level (meta-model) rather than in specific business process 
model, that covers just one situation. A business process 
ontology, enriched with the desired requirements, can act as 
a reference model for future enriched business processes 
generations (Fig. 3).  
Fig. 3 provides a partial view of the instantiation of the 
meta-model and incorporation of requirements to the 
business process concepts (meta-level) and instances 
(Model).  Fig. 3 shows that the desired requirements not only 
can be incorporated into the business process concepts in the 
meta-level but in instantiations using Protégé, Protégé 
provides direct, objective and straightforward incorporations 
of requirements. This facilitates not only communication 
between different stakeholders but also provides a guideline 
independence of the developer appreciations. This can 
Fig. 2. The overview of the integrating business process meta-model in relation to different aspect 
 

347
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
fosters efficiency, integrity, consistency, and reusability and 
reduces human mistakes, etc. The business process 
integrating meta-model can also act as a repository. This 
repository can have several applications: (a) to represent 
models created via deploying any of the constructing 
modelling languages as its instantiations, (b) to be a 
reference between multiple business process modelling 
approaches of the same project, (c) to provide the basis for a 
repository of emerging business process models irrespective 
of the language used, (d) to be extended to a knowledge 
base, (e) to facilitate direct implementation, and (f) to be a 
reference model fostering incorporation  of  stakeholders’ 
requirements.  
The quality factors can be realized for specific concepts 
of the integrating business process meta-model. Heidari et al. 
[13] introduces quality factors of throughput, cycle time, 
timeliness, cost, resource efficiency, cost efficiency, time 
efficiency, reliablenss, failure frequency, time to failure, time 
to recover, maturity, authority, time to shortage, time to 
access and availableness for their related business process 
Fig. 3. An example of the instantiation and incorporation of quality requirements  
Table I. Quality Dimensions and Factors 
 

348
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
concepts namely, event, output, input and activity (Table I). 
The integrating business process meta-model can be 
enriched formally with these quality factors. The resulting 
meta-model is shown in Fig. 4. Note that this is a subset of 
the entire integrating meta-model, focusing on those 
concepts that are related to the quality aspects. Business 
process concepts are shown in white classes and quality 
factors are shown in grey classes. The meta-model enriched 
with quality factors can be used for quality modelling and 
business process redesign and can help practitioners to 
consider quality requirements of a business process at the 
earliest stage of system development. 
IV. 
THE MODEL-BASED SPECIFICATION AND 
MEASUREMENT  APPROACH 
This paper proposes an approach to the specification and 
the measurement of quality requirements for business 
process concepts. This approach considers quantitative 
metrics for business processes in its specifications and 
measurement. The conceptual framework of the approach is 
 
The “conceptual framework” encompasses a set of 
concepts that link requirements to specific business process 
concepts, 
their 
factors 
and 
corresponding 
metrics. 
Requirements can be classified into functional and non-
functional requirements of a business process [42]. 
Functional requirements refer to the ability of the business 
process to deliver qualified products and services as well as 
the ability of the outcome to fulfil its functional expectations 
[43]. Glinz [44] offers a set of classification rules for 
distinguishing between functional requirements (FRs) and 
non-functional requirements (NFRs) in system engineering. 
In this classification, the concept of non-functional 
requirements can be defined as: requirements about timing, 
processing or reaction speed, input volume or throughput as 
well as specific quality of business process concepts as a 
whole reflected in those ended in “ –ilities” namely: 
reliability, security and availability etc. This paper considers 
the notion of non-functional requirements by [44] as quality. 
Fig. 5 depicts that “Quality Requirements” (e.g., 
capturing customer data must be most of the time without 
failure), are associated with a “Business Process” (e.g., 
accepting client). A “Business Process” is responsible for 
fulfilling a set of “Quality Requirements”. A “Business 
Process” consists of numerous “ Business Process 
Concepts”. A “Business Process Concept” (e.g., capturing 
customer data) belongs to a “Business Process” (e.g., 
accepting client).  
A 
“Quality 
Requirement” 
is 
expressed 
by 
a 
“Stakeholder” (e.g., company manager) and is operationally 
queried by a set of “Quality Questions” (e.g., what is the 
percentage of the time that the execution is without failure 
out of the whole time of execution?). Operationally querying 
Fig. 4. The business process integrating meta-model enriched with quality factors  
 

349
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
“Quality Requirements” are linked to components that 
participate in measuring achievement of the “Quality 
Requirement”. “Quality Question” essentially is a query on 
the 3-nary relationship of “Business Process Concept”,   
“Quality Factor” and “Quality Metric" as depicted in the 
objectified relationship “Result” related to “Quality 
Question”.  
A “Business Process” consists of a set of “Business 
Process Concepts”. A business process “Quality Factor” is 
an inherent property of a “Business Process” or a “Business 
Process Concept” that can be measured quantitatively by 
“Quality Metrics”. Similar to [45], ‘Quality Factors” are 
grouped 
into 
“Quality 
Dimensions”, 
each 
“Quality 
Dimension” representing an aspect of business process 
concept quality e.g., performance, efficiency and those 
colloquially referred to “-ilities”. 
The “Quality Objective” (e.g., more than 95% of the 
time, execution should be without failure) is a way of 
quantitatively analysing the “Quality Requirement” and is 
defined as some “Target Quality value” (e.g., ≥95%), which 
is shown as objectified relationship of three concepts namely 
those of “Quality Factor” (e.g., maturity) for particular 
“Business Process Concept” (e.g., capturing customer data) 
and 
a 
corresponding 
“Quality 
Metric” 
(e.g., 
M(a)=[TF(a)/TF(a)+TR(a)]*100).  
Fig. 5. Conceptual framework for business process concept quality specification and measurement 

350
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The gap between “Quality Objective” and the observed 
current performance through “Quality Question” is shown in 
the relationship of “Target Quality Value” and “Result”. 
Several “Quality Metrics” can be associated to a single 
“Quality Factor” as there might be several ways for 
evaluating it. Different stakeholders can indicate different 
quality metrics based on their needs [18].  
The conceptual model guides the systematic application 
within the approach. Specifically, the process is described as 
an algorithm in Pseudocode (Fig. 6).  
The 
contribution 
of 
this 
framework 
is 
in 
the 
establishment of a set of conceptual structures that are 
independent of the descriptive languages, or applications. 
Applicability of the framework is illustrated for an example 
of business process in the next section.  
V. 
DEMONSTRATION OF APPLICABABILITY IN AN  
EXAMPLE 
The applicability of the approach this paper proposes is 
demonstrated for a simplified version of business process, 
namely “Accepting clients” from an anonymous enterprise. 
The business process is known to this enterprise.  
First, in a more visual way, the instantiation of the 
conceptual framework is provided (Fig. 7). Fig. 7 illustrates 
not only the business process in terms of a model but also 
provides examples of the related elements for quality 
specification and measurement considering the business 
process concepts. Later, the conceptual framework is 
instantiated formally (Fig. 8) to demonstrate its application 
relates to the example in the form of an ORM model.  
 As can be observed from Fig. 7, there are different 
departments/roles involved in the process. The process 
trigger is the arrival of a request to accept a client. To accept 
the client, a set of activities is performed in a predefined 
order. Some related quality factors are shown in Fig. 7 
namely, time to recover, time to failure, maturity, authority, 
timeliness, cycle time, and throughput. Quality factors are 
assigned to the business process concepts via dashed lines as 
shown. For the mater of distinction, quality factors are 
shown in a separate box below the example. The “business 
process” is presented via applying BPMN as a “Business 
process modelling language” supported by a business 
process meta-model e.g., [8]. 
Fig. 7 shows that the quality requirement of “Capturing 
client data should be executed more than 95% of the time 
without failure”, is associated with the business processes 
concept of “capturing client data”; this concept belongs to 
Fig. 6. Algorithm for quality specification and measurement  

351
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
business process of “accepting client”. The Requirement is 
expressed by a the “company manager” as the stakeholder 
and is operationally queried by questions of “What is the 
percentage of the time that the execution is without failure 
out of the whole time of execution?” The quality factor 
“maturity” can be measured by a quality metric expressed as 
follows:  
M(a)=[TF(a)/TF(a)+TR(a)]*100                   (1) 
Where “a” denotes the “Activity”, TF(a) is the “Time to 
Failure” and TR(a) is the “Time to Recover”.  
Applicability of the proposed approach is also 
demonstrated via instantiation of the conceptual framework 
(Fig. 8) with regards to the example. The instantiation is 
focused on the quality requirement of “ capturing client data 
should be executed more than 95% of the time without 
failure”.  Instances are introduced as “roles” in “fact tables”. 
Information in the fact tables is in line with the example 
described earlier and provided in Fig. 7. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This business process integrating meta-model as an 
abstraction provides an explicit specification of the shared 
conceptualization and understanding of enterprises between 
IT and non-IT experts. This paper focuses on a specific 
modelling approach, that of Business Process Modelling, and 
the use of a meta-model for modelling and evaluating quality 
aspects 
of 
business 
processes. 
Specification 
and 
measurement of requirements based on concepts in business 
process meta-model fosters communication between experts.  
Many different approaches have been developed, each 
with their own specific business process modelling 
languages (BPML) designed to meet specific business 
requirements. In cross-organizational business processes and 
heterogeneous organizations where multiple business process 
modelling languages are deployed, there is a need for a 
unified and integrating view to ease communication and 
foster understandability.  
This paper proposes an approach that drives specification 
and measurement of quality requirements. This paper 
assumes that the quality of a business process can be defined 
by the degree to which pre-defined properties of pre-defined 
concepts identified within a business process are linked to 
stakeholder requirements. The methodological stance of the 
Fig. 7. Business process “Accepting Client” and examples of quality factor, requirement, question and metric 

352
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
approach proposed in this paper is systematic. Stakeholder 
goals are transformed to objectified components, a quality 
objective and a quality question, that are directly linked to 
quality factors for a pre-defined business process concept. 
The approach relies on formal expressions of business 
processes in business process models. At the same time, it is 
independent of any language. The utility of the approach is 
generic, i.e., applicable to any application and within any 
domain.  
 
The approach is systematic and provides methodological 
means to specify and measure requirements for business 
processes. In line with the items introduced in Section IV, a 
set of phase is prescribed with details on the “way of 
working” within each phase, i.e., (a) focus of work, (b) 
required inputs, (c) expected outputs, (d) techniques used and 
(e) support tools. On the basis of these four criteria, the 
Fig. 8. The conceptual framework instantiation for “accepting client” business process (quality 
requirement: capturing client data should be most of the time without failure) 
 

353
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
approach is considered to be systematic in that there is an 
identifiable and generic approach to business process quality 
computation (the focus), analysing business processes given 
the stakeholders’ requirements  (the input), deriving a quality 
evaluation (the output), using objective formulae for such a 
measure (the technique) and finally having a formal 
representation scheme for automated support (the tools). 
 The outcomes of this research are beneficial in the areas 
of business and management, requirement engineering, 
software engineering, business process modelling and 
service-oriented architectures. In the areas of requirement 
engineering and software engineering, these results make it 
possible for practitioners to consider quality requirements at 
the earliest stage. In the area of process modelling, the 
outcomes lead to a quality-driven modelling and redesigning. 
Moreover, qualified business processes have direct impacts 
on the quality of web-services.  
This paper establishes a strong framework upon which 
different methodological and technological developments 
may emerge such as an enhancement of existing business 
process modelling tools with a simulation component, the 
development of a workbench for analysing measured 
qualities and the development of further cases on an 
industrial basis [46]. Future research will focus on extensions 
and developments both in theoretical and practical 
perspectives. Exploring possibilities to enhance existing 
industrial business process-modelling tools with quality 
evaluation extensions is currently subject of research. Also, 
strategic modelling approaches such as system dynamics are 
to be coupled to business process modelling using parametric 
definitions according to quality criteria and experimenting 
with ‘what-if scenarios’ thus giving stakeholders an early 
view of the impact of their choices, on the behaviour of a 
business process [47]. In addition to the specification and 
measurement of quality requirements for individual business 
process concepts, there is a need for measuring requirement 
fulfilment by a business process as a whole or a part of a 
business process. There is a need for an approach that can 
foster objective evaluation of the degree to which a quality 
requirement for a business process is achieved based on the 
achievements of its individual concepts.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
F. Heidari, P. Loucopoulos, and F. Brazier, 
"Ontology 
for 
Quality 
 
Specification 
in 
Requirements 
Engineering," 
in 
Fourth 
International Conference on Models and Ontology-
based Design of Protocols, Architectures and 
Services (MOPAS 2013), Venice, Italy, 2013, pp. 
7-12. 
[2] 
D. E. Jenz, "Business processs ontologies: 
speeding up business process implementation," 
Jenz & Partner GmbH2003. 
[3] 
A. W. Scheer, Business Process Engineering, 
Second ed. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1994. 
[4] 
M. Havey, Essential Business Process Modelling. 
O`Reilly, USA, 2005. 
[5] 
P. Loucopoulos and E. Katsouli, "Modelling 
Business Rules in an Office Environment," SIGOIS 
Bulletin, vol. 13, pp. 28-37, 1992. 
[6] 
E. Kavakli and P. Loucopoulos, "Experiences with 
Goal-Oriented 
Modelling 
of 
Organisational 
Change," IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and 
Cybernetics - Part C, vol. 36, pp. 221-235, 2006. 
[7] 
J. Mendling, G. Neumann, and M. Nuttgens, "A 
comparison of XML interchange formats for 
business 
process 
modelling," 
in 
Workflow 
handbook, L. Fischer, Ed., ed: Future strategies 
Inc. , 2005, pp. 185-198. 
[8] 
F. Heidari, P. Loucopoulos, and Z. Kedad, "A 
quality-oriented business process meta-model," in 
International 
Workshop 
on 
Enterprise 
& 
Organizational 
Modelling 
and 
Simulation,CAiSE/EOMAS 2011, Lecture Notes in 
Business Information Processing (LNBIP), 88, 
2011, pp. 85-99. 
[9] 
K. Decreus and G. Poels, "A Goal-Oriented 
Requirements Engineering Method for Business 
Processes," in CAiSE Forum, Berlin Heidelberg, 
2010, pp. 29-43. 
[10] 
D. Firesmith, "Quality Requirements Checklist," 
Journal of Object Technology vol. 4(9), pp. 1-8, 
2005. 
[11] 
P. 
Donzelli 
and 
P. 
Bresciani, 
"Improving 
Requirements Engineering by Quality Modelling – 
A 
Quality-Based 
Requirements 
Engineering 
Framework," Journal of Research and Practice in 
Information Technology, vol. 36(4), pp. 277-294, 
2004. 
[12] 
M. M. Glykas, "Effort Based Performance 
Measurement in Business Process Management," 
Knowledge and Process Management, vol. 18(1), 
pp. 10-33, 2011. 
[13] 
F. 
Heidari 
and 
P. 
Loucopoulos, 
"Quality 
Evaluation Framework (QEF): Modeling and 
Evaluating 
Quality 
of 
Business 
Processes," 
International Journal of Accounting Information 
Systems, vol. in press, p. in press, 2013. 
[14] 
ISO/IEC, "Software engineering - Product quality - 
Part 4: Quality in use metrics,"  vol. ISO/IEC TR 
9126-4:2004(E), ed. Switzerland: ISO, 2004. 
[15] 
M. Lohrmann and M. Reichert, "Understanding 
Business Process Quality," in Business Process 
Management ,Theory and Applications. Studies in 
Computational Intelligence ed Berlin Heidelberg: 
Springer 2013, pp. 41-73. 
[16] 
C. Wolter, M. Menzel, A. Schaad, P. Miseldine, 
and C. Meinel, "Model-driven business process 

354
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
security requirement specification," Journal of 
Systems Architecture, vol. 55, pp. 211-223, 2009. 
[17] 
M. Heravizadeh, J. Mendling, and M. Rosemann, 
"Dimensions 
of 
Business 
Processes 
Quality 
(QoBP)," in Proceedings of the 6th International 
Conference on Business Process Management 
Workshops (BPM Workshops), Milan, 2008, pp. 
80-91. 
[18] 
Z. Kedad and P. Loucopoulos, "Considering 
quality factors for business processes during 
requirement engineering," in Fifth International 
Conference on Research Challenges in Information 
Science (RCIS), 2011, pp. 1-9. 
[19] 
A. Pourshahid, D. Amyot, L. Peyton, S. Ghanavati, 
P. Chen, M. Weiss, et al., "Towared an integrated 
user requirement notation framework and tool for 
business process management," in 3rd Int. 
MCeTech Conf. on eTechnologies, Montréal, 
Canada, 2008, pp. 3-15. 
[20] 
F. Aburub, M. Odeh, and I. Beeson, "Modelling 
non-functional 
requirements 
of 
business 
processes," Information and Software Technology, 
vol. 49, pp. 1162-1171, 2007. 
[21] 
S. Si-Said-Cherfi, S. Ayad, and I. Comyn-Wattiau, 
"Aligning Business Process Models and Domain 
Knowledge: A Meta-modeling Approach " in 
Advances in Databases and Information Systems, 
AISC 186, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 45-56. 
[22] 
P. Loucopoulos and F. Heidari, "Evaluating 
Quality of Business Processes," in Modelling and 
Quality in Requirements Engineering-Modelling 
and Quality in Requirements Engineering, Essays 
Dedicated to Martin Glinz, N. Seyff and A. 
Koziolek, Eds., ed MV-Wissenschaft, Munste: 61-
73, 2012, pp. 61-73. 
[23] 
R. Heinrich, A. Kappe, and B. Paech, "Modeling 
Quality Information within Business Process 
Models," Proceedings of the SQMB'11 Workshop, 
TUM-I1104, Karlsruhe (Germany), February 21th, 
pp. 4-13, 2011. 
[24] 
P. Kueng, "Process Performance Measurement 
System: 
a 
tool 
to 
support 
process-based 
organizations," Total Quality Management, vol. 11, 
pp. 67-85, 2000. 
[25] 
D. Heckl and J. Moormann, "Process performance 
management," in Handbook on Business Process 
Management 1, J. vom Brocke and M. Rosemann, 
Eds., ed Berlin: Springer, 2010, pp. 115-135. 
[26] 
B. G. Dale, D. T. van der Wiele, and J. van 
Iwaarden, Managing Quality vol. Fifth. Singapore: 
Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 2007. 
[27] 
H. Eriksson and M. Penker, Business Modeling 
with UML : Business Patterns at Work. New York, 
USA: Wiley Publishing, 2000. 
[28] 
S. G. Powell, M. Schwaninger, and C. Trimble, 
"Measurement and control of business processes," 
System Dynamics, vol. 17, pp. 63-91, 2001. 
[29] 
L. An and J. J. Jeng, "On developing system 
dynamics model for business process simulation," 
Proceedings of the 2005 Winter Simulation 
Conference ,Orlando, FL, USA, pp. 2068-2077, 
2005. 
[30] 
E. W. East, J. C. Martinez, and J. G. Kirbya, 
"Discrete-event simulation based performance 
quantification of web-based and traditional bidder 
inquiry processes," Automation in Construction, 
vol. 18, pp. 109-117, 2009. 
[31] 
S. R. Nidumolua, N. M. Menonb, and B. P. 
Zeigler, 
"Object-oriented 
business 
process 
modeling and simulation: A discrete event system 
specification framework," Simulation Practice and 
Theory, vol. 6, pp. 533-571, 1998. 
[32] 
V. Hlupic and S. Robinson, "Business process 
modeling 
and 
analysis 
using 
discrete-event 
simulation," in Proceedings of the 1998 winter 
simulation conference, 1998, pp. 1363-1370. 
[33] 
J. Cardoso, A. Sheth, J. Miller, J. Arnold, and K. 
Kochut, "Quality of service for workflows and web 
service processes," Web Semantics: Science, 
Services and Agents on the World Wide Web, vol. 
1(3), pp. 281-308, 2004. 
[34] 
S. Adam, N. Reigel, and J. Doerr, "The role of 
quality aspect for the adequacy of business process 
and business information systems," International 
Journal of Business process Integration and 
Management, vol. 4, pp. 124-133, 2009. 
[35] 
ISO, "BS EN ISO 9000," ed. Switzerland: ISO, 
2000. 
[36] 
W. J. Kettinger, J. T. C. Teng, and S. Guha, 
"Business 
process 
change: 
A 
study 
of 
methodologies, 
techniques, 
and 
tools," 
MIS 
Quarterly, vol. 21, pp. 55-80, 1997. 
[37] 
S. Fan, L. Zhang, and Z. Sun, "An ontology based 
method for business process integration " in 
International Conference on Interoperability for 
Enterprise Software and Applications, China, 
2009, pp. 135-139. 
[38] 
K. Siau and M. Rossi, "Evaluation techniques for 
systems analysis and design modelling methods – a 
review and comparative analysis," Information 
system journal, pp. 1-20, 2007. 
[39] 
H. Fill and P. Burzynski, "Integrating ontology 
models and conceptual models using a meta 
modeling approach," in 11th International Protege 
Conference, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2009. 
[40] 
H. S. Na, O. H. Choi, and J. E. Lim, "A method of 
building 
domain 
ontologies 
based 
on 
transforamtion of UML models " Proceedings of 

355
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 6 no 3 & 4, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
4th Int’l Conf. on Software Engineering Research, 
Management and Applications, pp. 332–338, 2006. 
[41] 
F. Heidari, P. Loucopoulos, F. Brazier, and J. 
Barjis, "A Meta-Meta-Model for Seven Business 
Process Modelling Languages," in 15th IEEE 
Conference on Business Informatics, Vienna, 
Austria 2013, pp. 216-221. 
[42] 
P. Loucopoulos, J. Sun, L. Zhao, and F. Heidari, 
"A Systematic Classification and Analysis of NFRs  
" in 19th Americas Conference on Information 
Systems (AMCIS 2013) Chicago, USA 2013. 
[43] 
P. Loucopoulos and R. E. M. Champion, 
"Knowledge-Based Support for Requirements 
Engineering," 
Information 
and 
Software 
Technology, vol. 31, pp. 123-135, 1989. 
[44] 
M. Glinz, "On Non-Functional Requirements," in 
15th IEEE International Requirement Engineering 
Conference, 2007, pp. 21-26. 
[45] 
V. Peralta, V. Goasdoue-Thion, Z. Kedad, L. Berti-
Equille, I. Comyn-Wattiau, S. Nugier, et al., 
"Multidimensional Management and Analysis of 
Quality Measures for CRM Applications in an 
Electricity Company," in Proceedings of the 14th 
International Conference for Information Quality 
(ICIQ), Potsdam, Germany, 2009. 
[46] 
D. Karagiannis, "A Business Process Based 
Modelling Extension for Regulatory Compliance," 
in Multikonferenz Wirtschaftsinformatik , MKWI 
2008, München, 2008, pp. 1159-1173. 
[47] 
P. Loucopoulos, K. Zografos , and N. Prekas, 
"Requirements Elicitation for the Design of Venue 
Operations for the Athens 2004 Olympic Games," 
in Proceedings of 11th IEEE International 
Requirements Engineering Conference, Monterey 
Bay, California, U.S.A, 2003, pp. 223-232. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

