1
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Youth with ME/CFS: Untangling Complexities in Technology Design to Support 
Everyday Living  
 
Jorun Børsting 
Department of Informatic 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
jorubo@ifi.uio.no 
Alma L. Culén 
Department of Informatics 
University of Oslo 
Oslo, Norway 
almira@ifi.uio.no
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we argue that the technology design 
needs to take a more holistic perspective, beyond opportunities 
offered by the technology development alone. This is especially 
important when developing technologies for complex contexts, 
such as healthcare, and for users who are at risk. Furthermore, 
we present a sense-making process, informed by tools and 
methods from social science, complex systems design and 
design thinking, and intended for human-computer interaction 
designers and researchers to broaden their understanding of 
entanglement of technology, users, and the design context. This 
is particularly important when working in a new application 
area, where one is not an expert. We illustrate our approach by 
exploring if and how digital tools could support youth with 
Myalgic Encephalomyelitis (ME), also known as a Chronic 
Fatigue Syndrome (CFS), to better cope with everyday 
challenges. Informed by previous research related to our field 
of inquiry, we combine ethnographic research, Actor-Network 
Theory adapted for design, and Giga-mapping (a complex 
systems design technique). We find that this combination of 
methods and techniques supports deeper reflections over the 
domain complexities, and makes it easier to avoid designing 
technologies for adolescents with ME/CFS that do not offer 
real support in day-to-day living.  
Keywords-complex systems; sense-making; ME/CFS; ANT; 
healthcare; design thinking. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper extends our previous work [1], presented at 
the eTELEMED 2016 (International Conference on eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine), on sense-making when 
designing new technologies for adolescents with ME/CFS.  
Increasing attention is given to diverse self-management 
applications and technologies that provide support to people 
with health challenges to improve or maintain the quality of 
everyday living, sustain active recovery processes or monitor 
relevant health data. However, the knowledge required to 
develop such applications successfully is often multi-
disciplinary. Thus, human-computer interaction (HCI) 
researchers and designers need to reach some level of insight 
into these other disciplinary perspectives to gain a holistic 
view of new design contexts, beyond the focus on 
technology alone.  
Healthcare related problems can often be labeled as 
wicked [2]–[4]. Wicked problems have been discussed by 
Rittel and Webber already in 1973 [5] but gained additional 
visibility and attention recently through design-driven 
approaches such as design thinking [6]. Wicked problems are 
incomplete, contradictory, changing and interdependent. 
Working with them is difficult since making changes in one 
area (e.g., making an app for monitoring health data) may 
affect other areas (e.g., how and with whom to share 
information when data shows risks), potentially causing even 
more challenges and making visible previously unidentified 
issues. Thus, isolating a problem and proceeding to find a 
solution for it is not the best way of dealing with problems in 
complex domains. Rather, untangling complexities and 
gaining a deeper understanding of the context, gives a 
possibility to identify underlying issues, patterns and good 
opportunities for a design that may lead to mitigation of the 
challenges that users, and others involved, meet (such as 
medical professional, patient organizations, parents, or 
teachers). Thus, the design of healthcare technologies that 
support users and are well situated in the use context requires 
a broader and deeper inquiry into the nature of problems and 
their relation to the situated design space [7].  
We describe our approach and discuss the initial sense-
making in complex domains, a process that enables this 
broader and deeper understanding of the context, and design 
options. Our approach is illustrated using the inquiry into the 
possibility 
of 
designing 
supportive 
technologies 
for 
adolescents with Myalgic Encephalomyelitis (ME), often 
referred to as the Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (CFS), or 
ME/CFS. Almost no research results were to be found on the 
design of new technologies made specifically for this user 
group. 
Without 
understanding 
challenges 
that 
these 
adolescents meet in their day-to-day life, it is not possible to 
envision technological solution(s), be it self-management 
tools, or other systems or services that could be useful in 
their everyday lives. We, thus, propose a framework for 
sense-making and finding opportunities to resolve issues that 
help untangle some of the complexity within a design 
context.  
In recent years, the increase of chronic diseases, in 
particular among youth, has been significant [8]. Among 
these diseases, ME/CFS has become a growing concern, not 
only for those suffering from it and their families, but also 
for the medical science, governmental health management, 
and society at large. Tweens and adolescents who are 

2
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
affected by the illness would be, if healthy, considered to be 
willing adopters and users of technology [9]. However, even 
for their healthy peers, intensive use of technology may lead 
to negative health consequences [10]. Thus, for those with 
ME/CFS, it is crucial that technology does not introduce a 
new set of problems or worsens their health condition [11].  
From this perspective, we consider youth with ME/CFS 
to be a group of vulnerable users [12]. The vulnerability is to 
be understood as a set of risks that these adolescents are 
exposed to. Understanding these risks, and how to reduce or 
eliminate them, is a step towards understanding design and 
technology design spaces when considering designing for 
and with this user group.  
Furthermore, the understanding of the design space in 
complex contexts may require an understanding of several 
different fields pertinent to the context. Understandings can 
be at the micro-level (e.g., how a specific solution affects the 
user) and understandings at the macro-level (such as social, 
cultural and governmental influences on the design space). 
We have chosen Actor-Network Theory (ANT) as a tool that 
can help produce rich descriptions of the interrelated social 
and material processes at different levels [13][14], Giga-
mapping to represent and communicate our thinking about 
design, and finally, a firm focus on users and use. ANT is 
borrowed from Science and Technology Studies (STS) and 
Giga-mapping from System Oriented Design (S.O.D). In 
combination, for HCI researchers and designers, they offer a 
new tool for initial sense-making. We find that the approach 
helps develop and communicate insights efficiently, 
increases awareness of a broad range of issues and points to 
their interconnectedness. Finally, it engages HCI researchers 
in innovative and exploratory practices within an unfamiliar 
design context and enables critical reflection on own position 
and values. As a consequence, the process points in a more 
informed manner towards areas where prototyping is helpful, 
and when finishing prototypes to the extent that they can be 
used in real life use explorations is essential [15][16][17]. In 
this work, however, we focus only on how we gained 
insights and not on any specific solutions.  
The paper is structured as follows: the contextual 
background is covered in Section II, including relevant 
research findings on ME/CFS and technology design, and 
describing the methodology, methods, and tools (design 
thinking, ANT, and Giga-mapping). Our first expert session 
is described in Section III and analyzed, using ANT, in 
Section IV. Section V addresses the combined approach of 
ANT and Giga-mapping. Section VI describes the Giga-
mapping workshop. The second expert session is presented 
in VII. Section VIII  showcases the first realized technology 
design. The conclusion and the future work follow in Section 
IX. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Previously published research work is a usual starting 
place when exploring a new application domain. In the case 
addressed in this paper, some understanding from several 
disciplines is needed. First and foremost, design for 
adolescents, in particular, those with health challenges, is 
often outside the main research focus within the HCI. 
Designing for children is a well-established subfield of HCI, 
with developed tools, methods and methodologies. The work 
with adolescents has not attracted the same kind of attention. 
In the case presented in this paper, adolescents are exposed 
to numerous health and other risks and can be seen as a 
vulnerable user group. To understand risks that they are 
exposed to, grasping what it means to be an adolescent living 
with ME/CFS is crucial. Empathy [18], interviews, 
observations, and other methods may be used to gain insight 
into lives of adolescents with the illness. However, some 
familiarity with basic scientific results from current and 
published medical research on the condition is also 
necessary, even though it is outside of our main field of 
competence. The medical research results helped to identify 
a broad set of risks that adolescents with ME/CFS face, 
including isolation and stigma.  
We divide this section into four parts A) medical 
understanding of the condition and associated risks, B) 
review of previous research, focusing on technology for 
ME/CFS, C) design thinking and vulnerable users, D) 
pragmatic use of ANT and mapping in design. 
A. A medical understanding of adult and pediatric ME/ 
CFS and its effects: the challenging nature of the disease  
ME/CFS ME/CFS is a debilitating multisystem illness 
resulting in a plethora of symptoms that include severe 
physical and cognitive exhaustion, confusion, difficulties 
with memory, concentration, sensitivity to light and noise 
among others, see [19], [20]. What causes the illness remains 
an enigma, and the condition is presently researched on a 
broad scale, e.g., [21]. Many theories, ranging from viral 
infections to psychological stress have been proposed [19]. 
Some studies suggest that the immune system may be 
chronically active in people with CFS. This might relate to a 
theory that ME/CFS is caused by an abnormal reaction to 
common infectious agents. This theory could link ME/CFS 
to autoimmune diseases such as the Lyme disease and the 
Epstein-Barr virus. 
A review of thirty-four qualitative studies on ME/CFS, 
see [22], was done and the authors find that “For sufferers, 
illness development influenced identity, reductions in 
functioning, and coping. Physician-specific themes described 
lack of awareness about ME/CFS and recommended 
improvement in educational resources. Intersecting themes 
expressed issues with diagnosis creating tensions and fueling 
the stigmatization of ME/CFS”. Also, some research points 
in the direction where people with ME/CFS themselves help 
to perpetuate their condition. For example, Afari and 
Buchwald state that “current knowledge about chronic 
fatigue syndrome suggests that genetic, physiological, and 
psychological factors work together to predispose an 
individual to the condition and to precipitate and perpetuate 
the illness” and, further, that “sufferers’ perceptions, illness 
attributions, and coping skills may help to perpetuate the 
illness” [19, p. 230]. Such results, unless verified carefully, 
may lead to and perpetuate stigmatization. Other research, 
such as that of Geelen et al. [23], or Winger et al. [24], offers 
insight into personality issues relevant for understanding the 
youth with ME/CFS. 

3
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
The treatment of those diagnosed with ME/CFS is highly 
individualized, frequently symptom-based, and includes both 
pharmacological [21] and behavioral approaches [25].  The 
most common form of help to those with illness in Norway 
[26] are self-management courses, offering guidance on how 
to stabilize the symptoms, find a balance between rest and 
activity, and adjust to living a life with ME. This is in line 
with the trend to promote self-management and to, wherever 
appropriate, foster patient participation in care, and 
especially so for people with chronic diseases [27]. Self-
management often involves the management of medical 
conditions, behavior, or emotions [28], [29]. For users with 
ME/CFS, self-management also includes the management of 
so-called energy modulation. A person with ME/CFS is 
considered to have a limited amount of energy available for 
use per day. If an activity takes too much energy, the overuse 
results in extra exhaustion over a period of time lasting from 
several hours to several days, leading to increased pain 
levels, sensitivity and overall aggravate the physical and 
cognitive condition. The problem is often that a person with 
ME/CFS do not know what amount of energy is required for 
an ordinary activity such as, for example, meeting a friend 
for a cup of coffee. Therefore, the energy modulation 
management is difficult. 
A user study carried out by the Norwegian ME/CFS 
association [20] found that 40% of people with ME/ CFS did 
not receive medical help with relieving symptoms caused by 
the illness. When asked what kind of help they would like to 
receive 
from 
the 
healthcare 
sector, 
they 
indicated 
professional 
assistance 
with 
sleep 
problems, 
stress 
management, stomach problems and the general pain relief. 
For children and youth with ME/CFS, the situation is 
additionally difficult because it is harder to make their voice 
on the matter heard:  
“Do children and adolescents suffer from ME/CFS? 
Simple common sense tells most parents, teachers and 
doctors that they do and often more severely than adults. Yet 
there remain a sizeable proportion of professionals in Health 
Care, Education and Social Services who are still prepared to 
ascribe the numerous, disabling but seemingly unconnected 
symptoms of this illness in young people to anorexia, 
depression, 
school 
phobia 
or 
dysfunctional 
family 
background. All are, at least, agreed that the illness presents 
a considerable economic, educational and social problem” 
[30]. 
Resonating with these findings, and in part, because the 
illness does not leave visible marks on a person, people with 
ME/CFS are often dismissed as suffering from psychological 
problems, or worse, stigmatized by general population [22].  
Those diagnosed with ME/CFS have to bear the medical 
uncertainty of what causes the disease and, as a consequence, 
the absence of an effective diagnostic test and treatment for 
the 
illness 
[31]. 
Furthermore, 
social 
and 
political 
uncertainties and risks are tied to the lack of medical 
understandings. 
The youth is affected by nearly the same rates as adults, 
from about the age of eleven [32]. For someone to be 
diagnosed with ME/CFS, the symptoms need to be present to 
such a degree that they clearly limit person’s ability to carry 
out ordinary daily activities [33]. Youth are classified into 
four groups: mild (approximately 50% reduction in pre-
illness activity level), moderate (mostly housebound), severe 
(mostly bedridden), or very severe (totally bedridden and in 
need of help with basic functions) [34].   
B. Previous research on ME/CFS in adolescence and 
technology 
As mentioned in the introduction, there is very little in 
the literature on supporting and assisting people with 
ME/CFS, including adolescents, using technology. People 
with ME/CFS, with their multiple challenges at the physical 
and cognitive level, coupled with reduced tolerance to light 
and noise, may not be the prime candidates for the use of 
screens for receiving information, whether the screens are on 
tablets, smartphones, or personal computers. Yet, all 
solutions that we could find in the previous research were 
screen based. While such solutions may be a good option for 
healthy adolescents, they have limitations for those with 
ME/CFS. Thus, before deciding on any new technological 
solutions for adolescents with ME/CFS, one needs to make 
sure that proposed solutions do not introduce new problems 
and health risks for their users.  
Previous research shows that social isolation and access 
to education are important challenges facing these 
adolescents. Several researchers explored solutions in these 
two directions, studying either the social media as means of 
reducing isolation, or platforms for education. General use of 
social media in medical care was described in [35], where 
authors have analyzed and synthesized 76 articles, 44 
websites, and 11 policies/reports and presented findings 
according to 10 different categories of social media such as 
blogs, microblogs, social networks, professional networks, 
thematic networks, wikis, sharing sites and others 
(represented by the Second Life). Findings, in particular, 
those related to the Second Life are relevant for adolescents 
with ME/CFS and have been taken further in the work of 
Best and Butler [36], [37].  The paper [37] describes how a 
virtual support center was constructed in the Second Life, 
featuring meeting areas, relaxation areas, library resources 
and a gallery of art by and for people with ME/CFS. 
However, the results of the investigation gave mixed 
conclusions, possibly reflecting the fact that certain level of 
mastery of the virtual environment was needed, and that was 
not possible for all users to accomplish. Also, the physical 
and cognitive condition of people with ME/CFS may affect 
their willingness to dedicate energy to learning about new 
virtual environments. The Second Life application provided 
information related to the condition and was aiming to 
address loneliness and social isolation. 
Considering the educational platforms for those with 
ME/CFS, the paper on e-learning, [38], can be pointed out as 
relevant. In this study, e-learning platforms were explored as 
an opportunity for children with ME/CFS to participate in 
classroom activities even though they are staying at home. 
As the authors state, this is especially relevant to Scotland, 

4
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
where many live far away from schools. However, the access 
to school and educational materials is only the first hurdle in 
receiving regular education and does not address other 
problems that youth with ME/CFS often have. 
C. Design Thinking and Vulnerable users? 
 Design Thinking may be defined in many different 
ways. For example, it may be defined as a process that 
fosters innovative and creative thinking [39], or as an 
approach to mitigate complex problems through design [6], 
[40]. Design thinking is also often described as a user or 
human-centered process, resting on three pillars: empathy 
with the user, rapid prototyping and abductive thinking [39]. 
In [41], the authors engage in an important discussion on the 
role of design thinking in research and designerly practice, 
suggesting core concepts that include reflexive practice, 
meaning-making and designerly ways of knowing.  
We argue that in complex design contexts, sense-making 
is also essential. It is to be distinguished from meaning-
making, which has to do with design research, practice and 
designerly ways of knowing. Sense-making, as we use it, 
applies to the understanding of the context. It requires careful 
framing and setting of contextual boundaries, balancing the 
broadness and the depth of inquiries. Giga-mapping, [42], 
can be viewed as a tool for sense-making. As the name 
suggests, it allows for mapping and visualization of a variety 
of perspectives and concerns. The making of a Giga-map 
facilitates thinking and communication. By its large physical 
size, it invites participation and collective production of 
understandings regarding the design context. Furthermore, 
the context can be mapped out in layers (e.g., understandings 
on micro, mezzo, and macro levels), fostering further insight 
into inter-relatedness of problems. As discussed later in this 
paper, maps, including Giga-maps, are important actors in 
design networks. 
When a design context has users at risk in centrum, the 
term ‘vulnerable users’ is often used. In [11], authors argue 
that the term ‘vulnerable’ should not be seen as stigmatizing. 
Rather, it implies a set of risks that users are exposed to. 
When identified, these risks are helpful in defining design 
goals that aim to reduce or eliminate them. They further 
argue “the awareness of risks/vulnerabilities in a design 
situation may be helpful in designing better products for 
vulnerable people” [11, p. 3]. Thus, in design for and with 
vulnerable users, risks need to be recognized and mapped out 
already in the initial, sense-making processes, prior to 
engagement with any concrete design ideas. For example, 
adolescents suffering from ME/CFS often have limited 
ability to read from digital devices, or even just look at a 
smartphone or computer screen (due to the sensitivity to 
light). Thus, they may be at risk of not being able to use any 
screen-based solutions because of their illness symptoms.  
When working with vulnerable users, it is important to 
take into consideration ethical concerns as part of the 
reflection and meaning-making. Ideally, both the sense-
making and the design processes should include real users, in 
co-design setting. With vulnerable users, this may not always 
be possible.  Those speaking on their behalf must be able to 
represent them well, i.e., need to be able to convey their 
interests, challenges, and experiences. 
D. Pragmatic use of Actor-Network Theory and mapping 
 We propose pragmatic use of ANT to inspire analysis of 
design opportunities in the initial, sense-making phases of a 
design process. This aims at creating a holistic picture 
around adolescents with ME/CFS, communicated and 
represented by for example, a Giga-map. The process helps 
to explore opportunities for technology to offer support in 
their everyday lives. It also helps to imagine and discuss 
consequences of future technologies before they are made.  
ANT is traditionally deployed as a framework to gain 
knowledge about heterogeneous networks, consisting of 
diverse human and non-human actors. The inclusion of non-
human actors differentiates ANT from other social theories 
employed in information systems research. ANT focuses on 
both the social and the technical factors involved in the 
research case; all the social-technical elements are 
incorporated into networks of actors/actants. Therefore, ANT 
can also be used to theorize about digital artefacts. Latour 
describes the concept of networks: “Behind the actors, others 
appear; behind one set of intentions there are others; between 
the (variable) goals and the (variable) desires, intermediate 
goals and implications proliferate, and they all demand to be 
taken into account” [44, p. 100]. The social-technical focus 
implies analyzing both the visible (the technical/objects) and 
the invisible (the social) and then distinguishing the 
relationships between them. Those relationships can be both 
semiotic and material simultaneously. Combined, they 
constitute a network of actors that acts as a whole [45]. 
Tatnall and Gilding (2005) argue that ANT can be 
particularly useful for studies in areas that involve 
consideration of political and social issues in information 
systems. They further mention interface design, usability 
testing, and the use of distributed systems within 
organizations as examples of possible application areas [46].  
Currently, there is an increasing focus on how ANT 
could be fruitful in the collaborative design of digital 
artefacts [14], [47], [48]. Stuedahl and Smørdal state that 
“involving ANT concepts in co-design does help to frame 
co-design 
processes 
within 
the 
wider 
context 
and 
consequences of emerging knowledge development” [49, p. 
204]. A number of other researchers focused on ANT and 
design. For example, Schoffelen, in [50], is concerned with 
designing visualizations that make things public, to interest 
and engage people in participatory processes. Storni, in [14], 
explored how ANT can be used to offer an alternative 
perspective to co-designers, focusing on “a convention from 
Latour’s call for risky descriptions to a call to design things 
together” [14, p.167]. He further argues that ANT suggests 
three general turns to rethinking co-design and participatory 
design practices. The first turn addresses the question of 
what to design? It also involves the idea to first design actor 

5
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
networks, and then look for ways to map them. He further 
describes the resulting maps as not only descriptive but also 
as supporting participation in the design process. The second 
turn concerns the question of how to co-design and suggests 
the idea of designing as actor-networking (in public). The 
last turn, described as epistemological, involves what Storni 
describes as “moving from the idea of the designer as a 
network prince to the idea of the designer as an agnostic 
Prometheus” [14, p. 167]. Storni suggests that making maps 
is a way towards holistic and democratic design. The maps 
are themselves actors in the network, drawing things together 
through visual problematization, and equally importantly, 
offering everyone engaged in the design process to add, 
transform, remove, critique or highlight its elements. 
III. 
THE FIRST EXPERT SESSION 
As mentioned in the introduction, this study is informed 
by previous research on ME/CFS, and it uses a combination 
of ethnographic methods, research results, and analysis 
inspired by ANT and Giga-mapping to tease out real 
problems and design opportunities related to assistive 
technologies for young people with ME/CFS.  
Regarding user research, we have organized a session 
with experts on ME/CFS. These experts have an in-depth 
knowledge of ME/CFS, also personally, or through their 
immediate family. They are in daily contact with children, 
youth, and adults with ME/CFS, and their families. 
Therefore, they have a broad, professional and personal 
knowledge of what it is to live with ME/CFS. These people 
came from 1) the Norwegian ME organization [26], 2) an 
organization that provides support to families of those with 
ME/CFS, 3) ME/CFS youth organization and 4) a medical 
doctor. The session lasted for close to three hours. A short 
part of the meeting was dedicated to getting to know what 
they do at the organizational level. The insights gained are 
incorporated in Fig. 1 and 2.  
The session was also used to discuss future technologies 
that could provide some support in everyday lives for those 
with ME/CFS. Given the aforementioned deep knowledge 
the group shared, many design opportunities for future 
technologies, as well as novel uses of existing technology, 
were considered. Some of the suggestions that do not exist 
today, were brought up. We present some opportunities for 
design below.  
The first opportunity was related to education, an 
important area for adolescents. It was an online e-learning 
solution with streamed lectures, accessible anytime. It was 
brought up that most young people with ME/CFS want to 
follow up on their studies, but they have to be able to take a 
break when needed. This addresses the need for a flexible 
educational system.  
The second one was an App designed with a critical 
design approach with a specific focus on how the energy 
levels are different for people with ME/CFS. The App could 
simulate the amount of energy needed for simple everyday 
tasks to reduce prejudice and increase general understanding 
of the illness.  
The third suggestion was another App that could be 
designed for self-management of the illness. The App could 
provide reminders to rest. It could also give short advice on 
things that have worked for others, which they could try to 
reduce illness symptoms. The App could also measure sound 
levels and give warnings when the levels are too high. Since 
exposure to high sound levels is known to increase illness 
symptoms, the App could also help visualize this, by 
showing sound measurements and giving reminders to use 
earplugs in spaces with high sound levels, e.g., when using 
public 
transportation. 
General 
personalized 
everyday 
reminders were also seen as valuable, as an increase in 
disease symptoms may lead to memory problems. 
The fourth suggestion was an electronic diary that could 
be used to register symptoms daily. The knowledge and 
awareness gained through daily activities and their effects on 
illness symptoms were seen as valuable. This diary could 
also be a tool to explain better the current health status to 
healthcare professionals and social workers. For this diary to 
be used in periods with increased illness symptoms, it would 
be of utmost importance that the self-rating process is simple 
to conduct.  
The fifth suggestion was related to wearable devices, 
such as the Fitbit. People with ME/CFS experienced the 
possibility of tracking activity, sleep patterns and energy 
expenditure as desirable. It was suggested that similar 
wearable technology, tailored to the needs of people with 
ME/CFS, could be valuable.  
The sixth suggestion is a Social technology specially 
designed for people with ME/CFS, to meet and seek support 
from other people with the illness. It was expressed that it 
was much easier for people with ME, in most social settings 
to connect in a meaningful way with other people that also 
have the illness. Within the ME community there is a strong 
sense of community, but for adolescents, new ways to 
connect with peers that also have the illness could be helpful.  
 
Researcher
& designer
New
Technology
Social media
Government 
social services
Family
Illness
sympthoms
Social
caseworker
Municipality
ME medical
diagnosis
Prejudices
Government
law
Politics
Rejection
Private 
Future 
prospects
Young disabled
pension
Elementary/
middle school
Friends
Nursing
allowance
Decision
Policies for 
decision
ME- illness
Family 
Physician
Personal/family design space
Educational design space
Government design space
Future 
private
 
Work
 assessment
 
allowance
Hospital
pediatric ward
State 
Educational 
Loan Fund 
Teacher(s)
Young
ME/CFS- patient
Family 
caregiver(s)
The
understanding
of ME/CFS
Higher 
education
 
Figure 1.  The first iteration of combined Giga-mapping/ANT. 

6
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
ME STIGMA  
DESIGN DOMAIN: 
ADOLECENTS LIVING WITH THE ILLNESS MYALGIC ENCEPHALOMYELITIS
GOVERNMENT DESIGN SPACE
PERSONAL/FAMILY DESIGN SPACE
EDUCATIONAL DESIGN SPACE
MUNCIPALITY
POLITICS
GOVERNMENT LAW
POLICIES FOR DECISIONS
DECISION
REJECTION/ACCEPTANCE
NURSING ALLOWANCE
SOCIAL CASE WORKER
ME MEDICAL DIAGNOSIS
GOVERNMENTAL SOCIAL SERVICES
HOSPITAL PEDIATRIC WARD
PRIVATE FINANCES
YOUNG DISABILITY PENSION
WORK ASSESSMENT ALLOWANCE
FUTURE PRIVATE FINANCES
ILLNESS SYMPTHOMS
ME ILLNESS
FAMILY PHYSICIAN
YOUNG ME PATIENT
SOCIAL MEDIA
FAMILY CAREGIVER(S)
FRIENDS
FAMILY
PEERS
TEACHER(S)
STATE EDUCATIONAL LOAN FUND
FUTURE PROSPECTS
ELEMENTARY/MIDDLE SCHOL
HIGHER EDUCATION
THE UNDERSTANDING OF THE ME ILLNESS
STIGMA AND PREJUDICES
PERCEPTIONS
PREJUDICES
THE UNDERSTANDING OF THE ILLNESS
PERCEPTIONS
PREJUDICES
THE UNDERSTANDING OF THE ILLNESS
RESEARCH FUNDING
RESEARCHER & DESIGN
ETHICS
NEW TECHNOLOGIES
VULNERABLE USERS
USER-INVOLVMENT
E-HEALTH
HEALTHCARE
EVERYDAY ACTIVITIES
TIME
CARE
TREATMENT
SOUND
ENERGY MODULATION
 AUTONOMY
TOUCH
TRANSPORTATION
DOCTORS
MEDICATIONS
MANAGMENT 
STRATEGIES
HOME TUTIORING
NEED FOR ADAPTIONS AND FLEXIBILITY
SCHOOL CLASS AFFILIATION
ILLNESS MANAGMENT COURSES
TEMPERATURE
COMMUNICATION
COMMUNICATION
SOCIAL NEEDS
SOCIAL ISOLATION
SMELL
LIGHTNESS
MOVEMENT
SLEEP
SOCIAL MEDIA
PAIN
ME RESEARCH
KOGNITIVE SYMPTHOMS
ANXIETY
EMOTIONS PSYCHOLOGICAL  DISTRESS
UNCERTAINTIES
UNCERTAINTIES
FEELING OF DISCONNECTEDNESS
SOCIAL SUPPORT
LACK OF CONTROL
FEAR
EDUCATION NEEDS
EDUCATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES
EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES
ACADEMIC PERFORMANCE
SPECIAL DIETS
SEPARATENESS
DISRUPTED SCHOOLING
REDUCED ATTANDANCE
PEER RELATIONSHIPS
PROVISION OF EDUCATION SERVICES
SOCIAL NEEDS
ACADEMIC NEEDS
EMOTIONAL NEEDS
LIFESTYLE CHANGES
RISK OF SCHOOL FALIURE
STRESSORS OF HAVING AN ILLNESS
COORDINATED SUPPORT
RESOURCES
SCHOOL COMMUNITIES
EQUAL ACCESS
OPPORTUNITY
HEALTH CARE COSTS
MANAGMENT
STRATEGIES
ACTIONS
SERVICES
PROGRAMS
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH
SPECIAL NEEDS
ME SUPPORT COMMUNITIES
KNOWLEDGE ABOUT THE ME ILLNESS
 
Figure 2.  The new visualization of ANT/Giga-map. 
IV. 
ANT ANALYSIS OF THE EXPERT SESSION 
Instead of considering any one of the mentioned 
suggestions as an automatic lead toward a design, and in 
isolation from other factors that influence people living with 
ME/CFS, we performed an extensive analysis, focusing on 
all of our data collected from the session with experts. The 
identified actors and issues from the expert session were also 
compared to findings from the relevant research literature. At 
first, the traditional ANT analysis was applied, but then, a 
more pragmatic, design and technology-oriented approach 
was deployed, in line with papers such as [14] and [48]. The 
result is shown in Fig. 2. The image is a visual 
representation, a Giga-map, at the macro level. All the 
relations shown are necessary for the initial sense-making 
process and following technology introduction. Each relation 
explicitly or implicitly contributes to a discussion around 
technology that could, in some way, aid adolescents with 
ME/CFS. Three large associated areas of the network 
emerge, related to what we named Personal/Family, 
Educational and Governmental design spaces. At present, 
those spaces are not strongly connected, and connections 
within each one of them are sparse. As mentioned earlier, 
also in the literature, there were very few results from HCI 
research within the research domain found. 
In Fig. 1, a circle represents an actor and lines represent 
relations between actors. The number of actors shown is 
limited to the actors identified in the data analysis from the 
sense-making session with experts on ME/CFS. From an 
ANT perspective, all the relations presented in Fig. 1 is 
relevant to the development of the new technology. The 
actors in the case of research are characterized by their 
differences that affect the network. Actors in the network are 
both human (such as the ME/CFS sufferer, family members, 
hospital doctors and school teachers) and non-human (such 
as politics, prejudice, economics, and social media).This is 
called symmetry in ANT, where the non-human actors are 
integrated in the network in the same way as human actors.  
They all have a role in and influence on the network. These 
roles and influences are not predefined but continuously 
evolve. For example, a family member may consider himself 
or herself to be without prejudice in other situations, but in 
the network representing the youth with ME/CFS, they still 
can think that the adolescent is lazy rather than sick, and so 
contribute to maintaining the prejudice around the disease.  
A concept in ANT is material agency. Agency can be 
seen as the actors ‘capacity for influence’ or the ‘capacity for 
action’ within the network [51]. As mentioned, all the 
different enrolled actors have a role and some influence in 
the network. Agency can be important to consider in early 
sense-making processes. Firstly, for the new technology 
design to be successfully adopted by the user group. The 
technology has to have some level of agency to not become 
obsolete within the design space. Secondly, because the 
technology introduction and use over time will potentially 
influence the agency of other actors in the network. This can 
be especially important with a vulnerable user group were 
unintended harmful effects due to such changes in agency 
can be particularly damaging.  
The differences in patients’ illness symptoms will give 
different results for the individual affected by ME/CFS. The 
level of illness impact on personal health is highly 
fluctuating not only on a day-to-day basis but also from 
person to person. The patients and different people 
interacting with the patient are also heterogeneous actors. 
They bring their different personalities, competencies, and 
experiences into the network. The knowledge of how these 
cases are currently is crucial for successfully identifying a 
technological design opportunity and this knowledge is 
gained through the relation with the people with ME/CFS.  
Adolescents, various people that they interact with, as 
well as non-human entities also form several different 

7
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
heterogeneous networks. This directly relates to the 
wickedness of problems related to defining technologies that 
aim to help youth to have a better life, given their illness. Not 
only do adolescents suffer from the condition to varying 
degrees, but their health changes from day to day and period-
wise as well. This changeability needs to be addressed as 
part of the sense-making. 
Furthermore, the analysis revealed two mediators. 
Mediators are entities that increase difference among actors 
and, thus, should be carefully studied [52]. The mediators 
that we have distinguished impact how our society currently 
faces people with ME/CFS. In Fig. 1, the actors in the 
network, the two mediators are marked with red circles. 
They are the Understanding of ME/CFS and Prejudice. The 
Understanding of ME/CFS is seen as a contributing factor 
that defines relations between those with ME/CFS and many 
other actors in the network. It influences, for example, how 
the social service caseworkers or physicians handle youth 
with ME/CFS. The Prejudice seeks to impose its version of 
reality on those with ME/CFS. Prejudice may determine 
what people perceive and in turn how they act towards 
people suffering from ME/CFS. As one person from our 
expert session said: “If one could only eliminate the burden 
of the shame that many people with ME/CFS live with and 
shift the focus to acceptance and to living their lives as best 
as possible, the quality of their lives would be so much 
better.” The red edges drawn in Fig. 1 between the 
Understanding of ME/CFS and other nodes are also relevant 
for Prejudice as an actor in the network. However, the two 
are 
co-dependent: 
as 
the 
knowledge 
about, 
and 
understanding of, the ME/CFS increase, prejudice decreases. 
The various actors have different roles and tasks, which 
are not predefined but evolved and given on the specific 
network of actors. In this network, the policies of 
governmental social services might result in rejection when 
the patient applies for governmental work assessment 
allowance, but with a patient with a different disease, this 
might be granted. This way the policies of governmental 
social services (which are the same for both patients) have a 
different impact on the lives of patients based on their 
diagnosis. The governmental social services caseworker 
might also have different predefined perceptions of ME/CFS 
compared to other diseases such as cancer. Another 
caseworker might have an entirely different perception of 
ME/CFS patients, which influence their judgment of the 
patient's need for governmental work assessment allowance. 
The role and agency of the parent with a child diagnosed 
with ME/CFS changes based on the magnitude of their 
disease symptoms. For some, the disease debilitates the child 
from performing everyday tasks or staying in touch with 
friends. The parent could then take responsibility for some of 
these tasks, altering the parent-child relationship and their 
agency as a parent. The focus can shift from giving the child 
independence to a focus on the child as completely 
dependent on care from the parent. The delegation of tasks 
could cause the parent to go from not interfering in their 
child’s social life to actively mediating their social 
interactions with friends by acting on behalf of their child. 
Currently, the ME/CFS patients have to comply with the 
diagnostic criteria that apply to be diagnosed with ME/CFS. 
They also have to comply with policies of the State 
Educational Loan Fund and Governmental Social Services, 
to receive student loans or social benefits. These policies 
could be seen as a program of action, which the ME/CFS 
patients have to adhere to. These programs of actions are 
based on strong inscriptions. Therefore, it is not easy for 
ME/CFS patients to oppose these policies. This creates a big 
conflict in the network since the policies demand that one 
cannot study (not even part-time) and receives financial 
support from governmental social services. This is 
problematic for ME/CFS patients based on how their disease 
symptoms vary on a day-to-day basis. Young people with 
ME/CFS could often study if it were possible to do it at their 
pace. This should be provided without having severe 
economic consequences for the ME/CFS sufferer, and they 
should not have to deal with losing their student rights, such 
as they would today. Now people with ME/CFS encounter 
many roadblocks when trying to finalize their education. 
Therefore, there is a lack of alignment between the interests 
of those with ME/CFS and Governmental Social Services/ 
The State Educational Loan Fund. This lack is also visible in 
the current dire need for more medical research, treatment 
options and education of the general public to improve the 
general knowledge about the ME/CFS disease. Alignment 
means that the actors more or less share the same goals and 
motives. 
To achieve stability, there has to be a process of 
compromising the interests of the welfare system and the 
ME/CFS patients. To make the network stable and aligned 
the result from the translation need to be agreed upon by all 
the actors. To increase knowledge about the disease might be 
an important step to remove some of the prejudice and these 
brick walls ME/CFS patients encounter in our society and to 
achieve alignments of the actors in the network. Further 
alignment could be archived by changing the policies of 
Governmental Social Services and providing flexibility and 
tailored solutions that better comply with the nature of the 
ME/CFS disease. 
V. 
ANT AND GIGA-MAPPING 
In the previous section, the research case is addressed by 
focusing on developing actor networks. The network 
describes divisive issues, the political and social dimensions. 
This is described by Storni (2015) as a part of the first turn in 
using ANT in design processes. The second part of this first 
turn is to look for ways to make these designed actor 
networks visible. Giga-mapping is an often used approach to 
making things visible in design processes, drawing upon 
design skills like making visual descriptions that foster 
communication and visual thinking. Giga-mapping is also a 
designerly way of dealing with super-complexity, which is 
highly relevant to our research case and its wicked problems. 
We argue that ANT and Giga-mapping complimented each 
other’s strengths and weaknesses and used combined; it 
provides a powerful tool in sense-making processes. All 
relations among actors are significant for the initial sense-
making process. This fits well with the Giga-mapping 

8
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
approach since it requires that the map includes everything, 
without ordering or giving personal meanings to the different 
elements involved. All the actors, explicitly or implicitly, 
contribute to the discussion around technology that could aid 
adolescents suffering from ME/CFS. ANT, on the other 
hand, was used as a lens to make connections and to group 
the different actors involved in important design spaces. 
Jointly, ANT and Giga-mapping provide a tool for critical 
reflection in the early sense-making phase of trying to 
understand adolescents with ME, and the situated design 
space related to technology that could be useful in their lives. 
In this research we, therefore, started by designing actor 
networks, then we used Giga-mapping to make these 
networks visible. The numerous challenges related to 
ME/CFS are not easy to solve and clearly relate to the main 
characteristics of wicked problems. We have proposed a 
holistic approach to sense-making when considering 
technology design for adolescents with ME/CFS. Using a 
literature review, a sense-making session with experts, ANT, 
and Giga-mapping, we gained insight into what ME/CFS is, 
developed the empathy with youth suffering from it. ANT 
provided rich descriptions of the complex design context and 
Giga-mapping visual representations of relations that 
emerged as relevant. They also helped to define possible 
areas of interest for design (Personal/family, Educational and 
Governmental). The outcome shows that our analysis aligns 
with a few studies from the literature that we have described: 
education and social arena are important. We initially found 
the Governmental space not as readily available to us as 
researchers/designers. However, one possible early design 
focus could be on increasing the general populations’ 
knowledge about illness, thus helping to reduce prejudice 
and stigmatization. Based on our initial sense-making 
process, we argued for a focus on the Educational design 
space, both based on the current and future importance for 
the youth with ME/CFS and based on how the other children 
in their class can learn about ME/CFS. As mentioned, 
knowledge about ME/CFS is of utmost importance to reduce 
prejudices. 
The developed Giga-map served three proposes for our 
research process. These relate to the questions of what to 
design? Who should be involved and aware of important 
issues? How should knowledge be developed and 
documented? Firstly, it helped us to increase our 
understanding of the design case and what to design for these 
users. Secondly, we also wanted to use the developed Giga-
map as a design artifact that supports participation in the 
design of new technologies for youth suffering from 
ME/CFS. As mentioned, there is also limited previous 
research on technology design for ME/CFS sufferers; 
technology interventions have to be aware of and sensitive 
towards the manifestation of the ME/CFS illness and the 
attached political and social issues. Again, addressing the 
wickedness of the problem, the many challenges related to 
ME/CFS are not easy to fix and cannot be solved by any one 
single technological ‘solution.’ Instead, we focus on 
generating awareness within the community and the field of 
design by making things public through the Giga-map aiding 
to inform policy-makers and designers concerning youth 
suffering from ME/CFS. Using design as a powerful tool to 
make concerns about co-habitation and democracy visible. 
Fostering participation from relevant communities could 
prove to be the best way to address the wickedness of the 
problem. Thirdly, we want to use the initially developed map 
together with new Giga-maps and thick descriptions from the 
ANT analysis and our qualitative research, as a way of 
documenting design processes and technology developments 
addressing wicked problems.   
 
 
Figure 3.  The Giga-map workshop. 
VI. 
THE GIGA-MAPPING WORKSHOP 
For the developed Giga-map to function as a means to 
document the pre-technology introduction design context, 
and in such a way that it could help other designers or 
researchers gain the knowledge we acquired through our 
sense-making process. It is imperative that the map is to be 
understood by others that do not necessarily possess prior 
knowledge about the design context. In fact, it is a question 
whether the Giga-map can be fully understood by other 
people than the ones who created them. To gain more 
perspectives on the design context and how others perceive 
our initial mapping of the design context we conducted a 
workshop, with four participants in addition to the 
researchers. It was immediately found that our map did not 
transfer the information to others that we had incorporated 
into the map. While as stated the map was useful for us in 
our initial sense-making, when we were trying to grasp and 
gain an understanding of the wicked problems in our 
research and design context, they were not successful as 
carriers of that knowledge to others. Keeping in mind that 
the Giga-map technique is not intended to ‘tame’ problems 
or be arranged or structured in a way that simplifies or in 
other ways bias the interpretation of reality. The rest of the 
workshop was used to explore how to make improvements. 
We found that instead of showing the actors on our map 
by text and circles, it is much better to use icons or 
illustrations when possible. It was also stated that when 
trying to identify technology design opportunities the service 
lens from Design thinking could prove to be fruitful. In our 

9
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
next iteration of the Giga-map, we actively used these two 
findings. 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  The robot from our first technology design case.  
VII. THE SECOND EXPERT SESSION 
To validate the identified concepts and topics that should 
be included in the Giga-map, we performed a second expert 
session. The participants were the same as those who 
participated in the first session, except that the ME youth 
organization had a different representative participate in this 
second session. In this session, all the issues and concepts 
identified in the first expert session were made into cards 
inspired by [53][54][55]. The participants then sorted the 
cards and discussed the topics displayed on the cards. Even 
though we did validate that the most critical issues were 
included, we found the number of cards, the combined visual 
information, and the card sorting techniques to not fit well 
with the user group and the cognitive illness symptoms, 
mainly problems with memory and thought. To continue 
with the session, we had to start showing only one card at a 
time that was then discussed. This way we validated the 
importance of the identified topics. To get the participants to 
make an overall structure of all the cards that made sense 
regarding placement on the Giga-map was on the other hand 
not possible. We did, however, get much more information 
about the different topics and how they were relevant in their 
everyday living and life with the ME/CFS illness in general. 
The cards that especially generated much data in the 
interview was Governmental Social services, Private 
finances, Politics, Stigmatization, friends, ME support 
community, School, transportation, Education, Illness 
perception and knowledge in society, Everyday life 
activities, illness symptoms, energy modulation. The data 
collected were photographs, observation notes regarding the 
card-sorting method, and detailed notes recording the 
participant’s answers made by two of the facilitators.   
VIII. THE FIRST TECHNOLOGY DESIGN CASE 
Our first technology design case focused on youth with 
ME/CFS, builds on all the insights from the initial sense-
making process. The case involves the use of a little robot 
avatar to physically represents a child at school, giving a sick 
housebound child a view of the classroom in a non-
demanding way, through the remote use of the robot 
supported by an iPad or smartphone app. This design 
possibility is being explored through collaboration with a 
start-up company called ‘No Isolation,' who developed a 
robot avatar in parallel with our research on ME/CFS. The 
robot avatar aims to combat the harmful social isolation, 
which many young people experience due to illnesses or 
physical injuries. The youth with ME/CFS is a separate case 
of the research on the usefulness of the robot and its impact 
on children’s lives. The hope was that the robot would prove 
to be a tool enabling them to fulfill their education, reduce 
their exposure to social isolation from their peers and, thus, 
give them a better starting point for their adult lives. 
 
 
Figure 5.  The robot from our first technology design case.  
For a more thorough description of this study and our 
findings see [16]. The study involves nine participants that 
have used their own robot avatar placed in their homes and 
schools as part of our research. All participants except one 
that had an illness recovery are at the time of writing this 
article still using the robot avatar in its final commercial 
version. One finding from the robot avatar study is how 
beneficial the flexibility of instant access to the classroom is 
for youth with ME/CFS. A user having a day or even just an 
hour with decreased illness symptoms could spontaneously 
login and get some teaching and reduce their exposure to 
social isolation that day. This result relates to the finding in 
the first expert session of how education has to provide 

10
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
flexibility and that it is an advantage if the student with 
ME/CFS do not have to use energy on transportation to get 
access to classroom teaching. The flexibility of instant 
classroom access, illness accommodations to better fit with 
the energy modulation and the social benefits also is 
connected 
to 
the 
Educational 
design 
space 
and 
Personal/Family design space as shown in Fig. 2.  However, 
this benefit also comes with a challenge related to the energy 
modulation, with a perfect balance between use and rest the 
technology could work in sync with the challenging nature of 
the energy modulation attached to the ME/CFS illness. There 
is, however, issues related to potential overuse and negative 
impact on illness symptoms. This mentioned possibility of a 
worsening of illness symptoms is one possible unintended 
harmful consequence of the technology introduction. 
Another unintended consequence could be if the users were 
pressured by others to overuse or if resources used to provide 
special education was withdrawn, a resource that was 
reported as successful for the youth with ME/CFS that has 
home tuition tailored to their educational needs. If such 
support were removed as feared by some parents in our 
study, the technology introduction would result in providing 
the users with a poorer educational offer. This is an example 
of how the technology introduction also affects the 
Governmental design space. Another example of how the 
Governmental design space is relevant for the robot avatar is 
that the Norwegian law was not formulated with the robot in 
mind. Thus, the placement and use of the robot in the 
classroom received many legal concerns, problems, and 
questions. Therefore, In December 2016 the Ministry of 
Education started working on addressing some of the issues 
surrounding the use of the robot avatars. They examined 
what the law says about the use and how to relate to it 
[56][57]. Furthermore, this effect also illustrates the robot 
avatars material agency, through the relations to other actors, 
the robot avatar has a capacity for action and influence on 
the network. 
That politicians are supporting access to the technology 
for everyone, is crucial in providing the technology to 
families with low-incomes or parents that have reduced 
incomes since they are providing care for their loved ones 
suffering from ME/CFS. If the cost of the robot and its use is 
too high, it could result in increased class differences 
between families of low and high income. We observe that 
some parents and physicians of the users in our study, have 
taken the initiative and contacted the media and politicians to 
support access to the technology for others. A new actor in 
the network is the commercial startup company developing 
the robot. Being part of a business, they have to maintain 
high enough unit price for the robots not to go bankrupt. 
Therefore, there is a negotiation between the needs of the 
families of ME/CFS sufferers, which need the price low 
enough so that the technology is accessible to everyone that 
needs it and the company that needs profit to stay viable. 
This negotiation of the cost also involves the possibility of 
politicians making the robot available through the welfare 
system in Norway. As mentioned there are current efforts 
done to convince the politicians to take action and include 
the robot in our welfare system. These efforts come from 
people within ME organizations, a user’s pediatric physician, 
teachers, and parents.  
    Regarding the stigmatization of people with ME/CFS, 
we have not gotten any reports from our users stating that 
these robots were perceived as stigmatizing to use or own, 
more specifically they were reported by peers as cool or 
neutral. For people within the ME/CFS community, it was 
perceived as particularly positive that youth suffering from 
ME/CFS was included in the study, in the same way as 
children suffering from less stigmatized illnesses like cancer. 
Seeing how popular the company has become for young 
people, how the study puts focus on the importance of 
providing technology support for young people with 
ME/CFS, could help increase the understanding of ME/CFS 
in our society. 
To sum up, for the technology introduction to be 
successful for the users, it is critical that other actors are 
enrolled like teachers, parents, and politicians. Keeping the 
energy modulation in mind and together with the users, they 
all have to contribute to providing a successful technology 
introduction outcome. Our case illustrates how a technology 
seen, as a new actor in the network, becomes a catalyst of 
change affecting many of the actors in the pre-established 
network, changing roles and introduce new actors. The 
technology aims to mainly focus on providing users with 
access to education and reduce social isolation from their 
peers. A deeper more thorough ANT inspired analysis 
uncovers how the introduction of this technology sparks and 
in some cases demands changes, affecting many more of the 
actors in the network than intended by the technology 
development initially targeting the Educational design space. 
In fact, we saw that the robot avatar has a strong presence in 
all the design spaces displayed in our Giga-map.  
The process of developing the Giga-map supported by 
ANT resulted in a productive process where our 
understanding of the design context was simultaneously 
enriched. During our first technology introduction in this 
design contest, the developed map provided the recognition 
of invisible issues and possible problems that should be 
addressed in the redesign of the robot or the adopted 
strategies for use. The awareness of matters such as a low 
understanding of the illness or possible issues related to 
stigmatization. Served as a constant reminder to ask difficult 
questions during research and when envisioning further use. 
Both concerns are in nature human and all humans involved 
could be possible carriers of attitudes or wrongful 
understanding of ME/CFS that could result in robot users 
being stigmatized or to get worse if the energy modulation is 
not attended to. Essential questions then became what power 
does the various human actors in the design context have 
about the user or the use of the robot? How could the robot 
or the interaction be designed to lower the chance of such ill 
effects?  
IX. 
CONCLUSION 
We have argued that sense-making is a crucial step in 
understanding complex design domains in HCI, as 
exemplified by the task of identifying technology design 
opportunities aimed to support everyday life of adolescents 

11
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
with ME/CFS. Published research results and ethnographic 
methods were used to understand risks associated with 
having ME/CFS. ANT and Giga-mapping were used to 
analyze and visualize input from sessions with experts. The 
ANT analysis primarily made us aware of the problems 
related to the low level of knowledge about ME/CFS in our 
society, and how those having the illness risk stigmatization. 
It became clear that numerous problems adolescents with 
ME/CFS face in our society cannot be solved by one 
technological ‘solution,’ but instead have to be addressed in 
a holistic way, by several actors including families, schools, 
peers, politicians, health-care providers, and research 
communities and others. The use of Giga-mapping helped to 
visualize all these crucial actors, including the authors, and 
relations among them. The utilization of rich descriptions 
and Giga-maps throughout the design process is also a way 
of annotating, documenting, reflecting on and sharing of 
divisive concerns and lessons learned. As this is a messy and 
unstructured process, we need to mention that the 
communicative value of Giga-maps that we produce to 
others than ourselves, is very low. The map had to be 
visually re-interpreted to make essential issues from the 
sense-making analysis approach visible (understandable) for 
the HCI research community. We, therefore, encourage some 
testing of the visual representation to make sure that it 
conveys the information as intended. 
Our analysis uncovered three main design spaces relevant 
to our research case: educational, government and 
Personal/Family. While there are many different relations 
between actors within these spaces, and different levels of 
granularity that can be represented, when it comes to 
technological solutions these seem to be rather well 
separated, indicating many opportunities and challenges 
when working on boundaries between them. Further, we 
argue that these design spaces can aid in framing how 
potential new research projects, design concepts or 
technology artifacts relate to issues within the situated design 
space.  
We believe that the approach, as presented in this paper, 
successfully combined methods and techniques that can 
guide HCI designers and researchers to conduct a broad 
inquiry and sense-making for new, complex design domains, 
where it is not easy to find solutions that work for all.  
Instead, the approach offers a way to gain a profound and 
vital understanding of the problem space. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Enormous gratitude goes to the Norwegian ME 
organization, the ME youth organization, No Isolation and 
all participants in expert sessions and the workshop for a 
wonderful collaboration in this project.   
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Børsting and A. L. Culén, “Sense-Making in Complex 
Healthcare Domains: The Role of Technology in Every Day 
Lives of Youth Suffering from ME/CFS,” Presented at the 
eTELEMED 2016, The Eighth International Conference on 
eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, 2016, pp. 236–
242. 
[2] B. W. Head and J. Alford, “Wicked Problems Implications for 
Public Policy and Management,” Adm. Soc., vol. 47, no. 6, 
pp. 711–739, Aug. 2015. 1955. 
[3] S. Waddock, “The Wicked Problems of Global Sustainability 
Need 
Wicked 
(Good) 
Leaders 
and 
Wicked 
(Good) 
Collaborative Solutions,” J. Manag. Glob. Sustain., vol. 1, no. 
1, pp. 91–111, Jun. 2013. 
[4] R. Buchanan, “Wicked Problems in Design Thinking,” Des. 
Issues, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 5–21, Apr. 1992. 
[5] H. W. J. Rittel and M. M. Webber, “Dilemmas in a general 
theory of planning,” Policy Sci., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 155–169, 
Jun. 1973.  
[6] J. Kolko, Austin Center for Design, Wicked problems 
problems worth solving. Austin, Texas: Ac4d, 2012. 
[7] J. Redström, “Towards user design? On the shift from object 
to user as the subject of design,” Des. Stud., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 
123–139, Mar. 2006. 
[8] J. M. Perrin, L. E. Anderson, and J. V. Cleave, “The Rise In 
Chronic Conditions Among Infants, Children, And Youth Can 
Be Met With Continued Health System Innovations,” Health 
Aff. (Millwood), vol. 33, no. 12, pp. 2099–2105, Dec. 2014. 
[9] E. A. Witt, A. J. Massman, and L. A. Jackson, “Trends in 
youth’s videogame playing, overall computer use, and 
communication technology use: The impact of self-esteem 
and the Big Five personality factors,” Comput. Hum. Behav., 
vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 763–769, Mar. 2011.  
[10] R. L. Punamäki, M. Wallenius, C. H. Nygård, L. Saarni, and 
A. Rimpelä, “Use of information and communication 
technology (ICT) and perceived health in adolescence: The 
role of sleeping habits and waking-time tiredness,” J. 
Adolesc., vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 569–585, Aug. 2007. 
[11] A. L. Culén and A. Karpova, “Designing with Vulnerable 
Children: a Researchers Perspective,” in Human-Computer 
Interfaces 
and 
Interactivity: 
Emergent 
Research 
and 
Applications Book, IGI Global, 2014, pp. 118–136. 
[12] A. L. Culén and M. van der Velden, “The Digital Life of 
Vulnerable Users: Designing with Children, Patients, and 
Elderly,” in Nordic Contributions in IS Research, Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 53–71. 
[13] B. Latour, “On using ANT for studying information systems: 
a (somewhat) Socratic dialogue,” Soc. Study Inf. Commun. 
Technol., pp. 62–76, 2004. 
[14] C. Storni, “Notes on ANT for designers: ontological, 
methodological and epistemological turn in collaborative 
design,” CoDesign, vol. 11, no. 3–4, pp. 166–178, Oct. 2015. 
[15] P. K. Chilana, A. J. Ko and J. Wobbrock, “From User-
Centered to Adoption-Centered Design: A Case Study of an 
HCI Research Innovation Becoming a Product,” in 
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, New York, NY, USA, 2015, 
pp. 1749–1758. 
[16] J. Børsting and A. L. Culén, “Experiences with a Research 
Product: A Robot Avatar for Chronically Ill Adolescents” 
Smart Technology Applications in Business Environments.  
IGI Global. 8. pp. 159 - 183, 2017. 
[17] A. L. Culén and A. Følstad, “Innovation in HCI: What Can 
We Learn from Design Thinking?,” In Proceedings of the 8th 
Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: Fun, 
Fast, Foundational, NY, USA, 2014, pp. 849–852. 
[18] A. Gasparini, “Perspective and Use of Empathy in Design 
Thinking,” in ACHI 2015, 2015. 
[19] N. Afari and D. Buchwald, “Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: A 
Review,” Am. J. Psychiatry, vol. 160, no. 2, pp. 221–236, 
Feb. 2003. 
[20] G. J. Bringsli, A. Gilje, and B. K. G. Wold, “The Norwegian 
ME Association National Survey Abridged English Version.” 
The Norwegian ME Association, 2014. 

12
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[21] Ø. Fluge et al., “Benefit from B-Lymphocyte Depletion Using 
the Anti-CD20 Antibody Rituximab in Chronic Fatigue 
Syndrome. A Double-Blind and Placebo-Controlled Study,” 
PLoS ONE, vol. 6, no. 10,  e26358, Oct. 2011. 
[22] V. R. Anderson, L. A. Jason, L. E. Hlavaty, N. Porter, and J. 
Cudia, “A review and meta-synthesis of qualitative studies on 
Myalgic 
Encephalomyelitis/chronic 
fatigue 
syndrome,” 
Patient Educ. Couns., vol. 86, no. 2, pp. 147–155, Feb. 2012. 
[23] S. M. van Geelen, G. Sinnema, H. J. M. Hermans, and W. 
Kuis, 
“Personality 
and 
chronic 
fatigue 
syndrome: 
Methodological and conceptual issues,” Clin. Psychol. Rev., 
vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 885–903, Dec. 2007. 
[24] A. Winger, M. Ekstedt, V. B. Wyller, and S. Helseth, 
“‘Sometimes it feels as if the world goes on without me’: 
adolescents’ experiences of living with chronic fatigue 
syndrome,” J. Clin. Nurs., vol. 23, no. 17–18, pp. 2649–2657, 
Sep. 2014. 
[25] P. White et al., “Comparison of adaptive pacing therapy, 
cognitive behaviour therapy, graded exercise therapy, and 
specialist medical care for chronic fatigue syndrome (PACE): 
a randomised trial,” The Lancet, vol. 377, no. 9768, pp. 823–
836, Mar. 2011. 
[26] Norwegian ME Association (in Norwegian only): me-
foreningen.com/. Accessed on April 12th, 2016. 
[27] H. Holman and K. Lorig, “Patient self-management: a key to 
effectiveness and efficiency in care of chronic disease,” 
Public Health Rep., vol. 119, no. 3, pp. 239–243, 2004. 
[28] J. M. Corbin and A. Strauss, “Unending work and care: 
Managing chronic illness at home,” vol. xviii. San Francisco, 
CA, US: Jossey-Bass, 1988. 
[29] K. R. Lorig and H. Holman, “Self-management education: 
history, definition, outcomes, and mechanisms,” Ann. Behav. 
Med. Publ. Soc. Behav. Med., vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 1–7, Aug. 
2003. 
[30] E. G. Dowsett and J. Colby, “Long-Term Sickness Absence 
Due to ME/CFS in UK Schools,” J. Chronic Fatigue Syndr., 
vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 29–42, Jan. 1997. 
[31] M. 
E. 
B. 
Smith 
et 
al., 
“Treatment 
of 
Myalgic 
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome: A Systematic 
Review for a National Institutes of Health Pathways to 
Prevention Workshop,” Ann. Intern. Med., vol. 162, no. 12, 
pp. 841–850, Jun. 2015. 
[32] A. Farmer, T. Fowler, J. Scourfield, and A. Thapar, 
“Prevalence of chronic disabling fatigue in children and 
adolescents,” Br. J. Psychiatry, vol. 184, no. 6, pp. 477–481, 
Jun. 2004. 
[33] National Collaborating Centre for Primary Care (UK), 
“Chronic Fatigue Syndrome/Myalgic Encephalomyelitis (or 
Encephalopathy): Diagnosis and Management of Chronic 
Fatigue 
Syndrome/Myalgic 
Encephalomyelitis 
(or 
Encephalopathy) in Adults and Children,” London: Royal 
College of General Practitioners (UK), 2007. 
[34] B. M. Carruthers et al., “Myalgic Encephalomyelitis: 
International Consensus Criteria,” J. Intern. Med., vol. 270, 
no. 4, pp. 327–338, Oct. 2011. 
[35] F. J. Grajales III, S. Sheps,  K. Ho, H. Novak-Lauscher, and 
G. Eysenbach, “Social media: a review and tutorial of 
applications in medicine and health care,” Journal of medical 
Internet 
research, 
vol. 
16, 
no. 
2, 
2014 
Available: 
http://www.jmir.org/2014/2/e13/. [Accessed: 18-Jan-2016].  
[36] K. Best and S. Butler, “Second life avatars as extensions of 
social and physical bodies in people with Myalgic 
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome,” Continuum, 
vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 837–849, Dec. 2013. 
[37] K. Best and S. Butler, “The Necessity of Control for 
Computer 
and 
Internet 
Users 
with 
Myalgic 
Encephalomyelitis/Chronic 
Fatigue 
Syndrome,” 
Inf. 
Commun. Soc., vol. 16, no. 7, pp. 1042–1060, Sep. 2013. 
[38] A. K. Sheridan and members of the C. P. G. E. of C. with M. 
(Scotland), “Exploring E-learning provision for Children with 
ME in Scotland,” Educ., vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 78–80, Jan. 2013. 
[39] T. Brown, “Design Thinking,” Harv. Bus. Rev., vol. 86, no. 6, 
pp. 84, 2008. 
[40] T. Brown and J. Wyatt, “Design Thinking for Social 
Innovation (SSIR),” Stanford Social Innovation Review, 
2010. 
[41] U. Johansson-Sköldberg, J. Woodilla, and M. Çetinkaya, 
“Design Thinking: Past, Present and Possible Futures,” Creat. 
Innov. Manag., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 121–146, 2013. 
[42] B. Sevaldson, “Giga-Mapping: Visualisation for complexity 
and systems thinking in design,” Nordes, vol. 4, Mar. 2011. 
[43] O. Hanseth, M. Aanestad, and M. Berg, “Guest editors’ 
introduction: Actor-network theory and information systems. 
What’s so special?,” Inf. Technol. People, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 
116–123, 2004. 
[44] B. Latour, “Aramis, or, The love of technology,” Cambridge, 
Mass: Harvard University Press, 1996. 
[45] J. Law, “Notes on the theory of the actor-network: Ordering, 
strategy, and heterogeneity,” Syst. Pr., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 379–
393, Aug. 1992. 
[46] A. Tatnall and A. Gilding, “Actor-Network Theory in 
Information Systems Research,” 2005. 
[47] Y. Akama, “Being awake to Ma: designing in between-ness 
as a way of becoming with,” CoDesign, vol. 11, no. 3–4, pp. 
262–274, Oct. 2015. 
[48] A. Yaneva, “Making the Social Hold: Towards an Actor-
Network Theory of Design,” Des. Cult., vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 
273–288, Nov. 2009. 
[49] D. Stuedahl and O. Smørdal, “Matters of becoming, 
experimental zones for making museums public with social 
media,” CoDesign, vol. 11, no. 3–4, pp. 193–207, Oct. 2015. 
[50] J. Schoffelen et al, “Visualising things. Perspectives on how 
to make things public through visualisation,” CoDesign, vol. 
11, no. 3–4, pp. 179–192, Oct. 2015. 
[51] M. Aanestad, “The camera as an actor design-in-use of 
telemedicine infrastructure in surgery,” Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work (CSCW), vol. 12, no. 1, 2003, pp.1-20. 
[52] E. Sayes, “Actor–Network Theory and methodology: Just 
what does it mean to say that nonhumans have agency?,” 
Social Studies of Science, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 134-147, Feb. 
2014. 
[53] W. Hudson,  “Playing your cards right: getting the most from 
card sorting for navigation design,” interactions, vol. 12, no. 
5, pp. 56-58, 2005. 
[54] A. L Culén and M. van der Velden, “Making Context Specific 
Card Sets-A Visual Methodology Approach: Capturing User 
Experiences with Urban Public Transportation,” International 
Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, 8(1&2), pp. 17-
26. 2015. 
[55] M. M. Sommervold and M. van der Velden, “Transition 
cards: 
Designing 
a 
method 
with 
and 
for 
young 
patients,” IADIS International Journal on Computer Science 
& Information Systems, vol. 10 no. 2, 2015. 
[56] P4 (in Norwegian only): www.p4.no/nyheter/--problematisk-
med-robot-i-klasserom/artikkel/689010/. Accessed on May 
29th, 2018. 
[57] The Norwegian Ministry of Education (in Norwegian only): 
https://www.udir.no/regelverk-og-tilsyn/finn-regelverk/etter-
tema/Skoleeiers-ansvar/bruk-av-robot-i-undervisningen/. 
Accessed on May 29th, 2018. 
 

