Multiuser Simulation-Based Virtual Environment for Teaching Computer 
Networking Concepts
 
Ammar Musheer, Oleg Sotnikov and Shahram Shah Heydari 
University of Ontario Institute of Technology 
Oshawa, Ontario, Canada 
ammar.musheer@mycampus.uoit.ca, oleg.sotnikov@mycampus.uoit.ca, shahram.heydari@uoit.ca 
 
Abstract—In this research we focus on primary design 
principles for  creating interactive activities and serious games 
based on Cisco Packet Tracer tool for the purpose of training 
in the field of Computer Networks.  We present a general 
architecture for a library  of simulation-based interactive 
activities and games for CCNA-level content. We demonstrate 
how  students’ skills in important networking topics such as 
routing, remote access and security help them  succeed in these 
activities. We discuss various challenges in setting up efficient 
multi-user environments based on Packet Tracer, and propose 
solutions for a number of technical problems such as scalable 
addressing, VLAN handling, individual student  monitoring, 
and offline exporting. Conceptual collaborative activities and 
their design principles are  also discussed in this research. We 
also provide testing results to evaluate the performance of 
packet  trace in an interactive multiuser environment. 
Keywords-component; IT learning tools; Serious Gaming; 
Cisco Networking Academy; Blended Learning. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A. Background 
Advances in personal computer technology, as well as 
widespread access to the Internet, have allowed development 
of new and more efficient approaches for teaching 
environments. Technology has greatly facilitated the 
transition 
from 
a 
traditional 
lecture-style 
teaching 
environment in which the teacher had the central role in 
educational activities and student were merely listener, to a 
knowledge-centered environment in which students are the 
main actors and share their process of learning while the 
teacher mostly plays the role of a mentor and facilitator [1] . 
Technology often becomes the main tool for creating such 
environment, and numerous researches have indicated that a 
technology-oriented, 
knowledge-centered 
environment 
increases student attendance, motivation and self-reliance in 
the learning process [1].  
The use of technology in learning environments provides 
the opportunity to create virtual collaborative learning 
environments in which educational interactions between 
students occur in a designed information space [2] in form of 
shared online activities. Such interactions must have a 
carefully 
designed 
structure 
that 
would 
promote 
collaborations and provide incentives for specific learning 
achievements and milestones. Educational games (a.k.a. 
serious gaming), for instance, provide such opportunities.     
In particular, the maturing of the video gaming industry has 
triggered  significant interest in developing simulated and 
interactive  serious gaming platforms. The main advantage of 
serious  gaming platforms is that they combine in-depth 
educational  topics with goal-oriented and realistic scenarios.  
To date  there have been many applications of serious 
gaming, spanned over many industries, from  urban planning 
to business, military, healthcare training etc.  These 
applications have provided the means to an  individual, or a 
group of individuals, to engage in an  artificial conflict, 
assess, and learn the complexities  associated with each of 
their individual area of work. Some  real world applications 
of serious games include INNOV8  Business Process 
Management simulator by IBM [3],  physical conditioning 
games for the general public, e.g.  Fitness Shape Evolved for 
the new Microsoft Kinect  hardware platform [4], Foldit for 
biologists [5], and flight  simulator applications for the 
military [6]. Serious gaming  has allowed users of the 
application to attain skills and  knowledge related to a 
specific activity. The subject can be  as difficult as addressing 
physical and physiological  disorders, or be as simple as 
promoting physical activity. The  main goal of serious 
gaming is to provide a powerful means  of encouraging 
people to learn and provide them with a  more entertaining 
way to obtain the skills and knowledge  addressed by the 
specific serious gaming activities. 
B. Computer Networks Training 
Interactive 
learning 
is 
particularly 
becoming 
more  prominent and shows great potential in teaching 
IT  concepts [7] [8]. The introductory computer networking 
education in colleges and universities typically focuses on 
teaching students both the  theory and the practical 
knowledge about networking  technology that has rarely been 
covered at their prior  educational levels (high school). 
Students often have to  bring themselves up to speed quickly 
on a large amount  of content that includes the entire OSI 
model and TCP/IP  protocol suite, various routing and 
switching protocols, and  local and wide area network 
technologies. The sheer volume of  technical details in this 
subject area can quickly result in a dry  and non-interactive 
environment that can impede student  learning process.  Lab 
components often improve the  dryness of the material by 
giving students practical  examples to reinforce theory.  
However, more can be  gained by increasing the level of 
interaction during lecture  times and in the classroom.  This 
can be achieved by  implementing short in-class activities that 
encourage  students to collaborate with their peers throughout 
the  learning process.  
In order to create the lab-like interaction in a classroom 
environment, e-learning tools based on simulation of 
components and networks have been developed to create a 
76
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

virtual lab environment. The level of details for modeling 
each component in such simulators often depends on the 
desired knowledge and expertise level that the students are 
expected to achieve. One such tool in the field of computer 
networking is Cisco’s Packet Tracer (PT) simulator [9] that 
provides a virtual network  simulation environment with 
sufficient details of the network operating system on 
individual devices that would allow students to test and learn 
different scenarios in an environment that resembles a real 
computer network. The PT allows creation of realistic 
assignments for challenging students’ knowledge of 
networking fundamentals, system configuration and network 
troubleshooting.  
While PT has been used extensively in introductory 
networking curriculum of the Cisco Networking Academy, 
in particular for training of networking professionals for 
industry certifications such as Cisco-Certified Network 
Associate 
(CCNA) 
and 
Cisco-Certified 
Network 
Professional (CCNP) [10], its usage has mostly been limited 
to individual scenarios in which each student would install 
and run PT on his/her computer and work independently on 
the assignment or scenario. This restriction did not allow 
interactive collaboration among students or between students 
and the teacher, and thus limited the extent and effectiveness 
of the virtual learning environment.  In 2008, Cisco added a 
multiuser capability to PT that allowed synchronization and 
communication between instances of PT that are running on 
different machines. This new feature has opened the door to 
develop many interesting new activities such as interactive  
and dynamic troubleshooting and serious gaming for 
introductory networking classes.   
The objective of this work is to use the new  multiuser 
feature in PT to create in-class  interactive learning activities 
that would enhance  students’ understanding of complex 
networking concepts.  The multiuser feature in PT allows the 
students to  work in an environment that is affected by their 
peers and  is under control of the instructor.  Despite 
some  technological problems, PT multi-user activities can 
make  networking more interesting to learn and lead to 
greater  student engagement. The basic multiuser capability in 
PT merely allows  connection of remote instances of PT on 
separate  machines. However, proper design of the 
interconnected 
 simulation 
environment 
and 
learning 
scenarios would  require a number of technical and 
educational  considerations that is the subject of this study.  
C. Related Work 
At the time of writing this paper Cisco has not yet 
developed any curriculum activities that feature multiuser 
operation, leaving it up to individual academies. In 2010 the 
Open University of UK reported on implementation of PT’s 
multiuser functionality into their blended distance learning 
CCNA courses [11].  Their results offered an extensive 
guide to the multiuser architecture as well as the 
implementation of multiuser over the WAN and the inherent 
problems resulting from network delays and congestion.  
We build on their work by implementing our multiuser 
architecture in a traditional classroom through a LAN.  This 
method bypasses the majority of the technical limitations in 
[11] and gives students more interaction with the class. 
Basic technical specifications of the Packet Tracer 
Messaging 
Protocol 
(PTMP) 
and 
Inter-Process 
Communication is available in [11] [12], and while many 
proprietary details were not available or could not be made 
public, the available information helped understanding the 
communication between two hosts running a Packet Tracer 
multiuser connection. 
Cisco has also developed a number of serious games 
for  networking education. Most recently, Cisco ASPIRE 
Beta 4  was released in January 2012 [13]. This is a strategic 
game that utilizes the Packet Tracer  platform to provide the 
players a role-playing/SimCity-like  serious game focused on 
the business of networking. Players  take on the role of a 
network engineer who applies his/her  entrepreneurial and 
networking skills to complete several  contracts that arise 
during the game. They must purchase  the correct hardware 
and apply the correct configuration  schemes in order to 
complete the contract. For the correct  completion of 
contracts players receive credits which they  can spend 
toward improving their network. Cisco Systems has also 
released Cisco myPlanNet 1.0 [14].  Players are put into the 
shoes of a service provider CEO.  They must direct their 
business through various  technological ages ranging from 
dial-up all the way up to  the broadband/mobile connected 
ages. Along the way,  players learn about the various 
technologies that make the  networking world possible. The 
game provides a SimCity- like overlay where issues arise in 
the city and must be  resolved. There is a credit system that 
players must use to  purchase new technologies to advance 
their businesses and  provide better services to the civilians in 
their cities. There is  also a leaderboard to encourage players 
to attain higher  scores and improve their skills. Additionally, 
Cisco provides many smaller serious games  that allow users 
to improve their skills, such as: Wireless  Explorer, Unified 
Communications Simulation Challenge,  Cisco Mind Share, 
and Edge Quest. The objective of these activities is 
to  provide players with a means to enjoy learning 
the  complicating subjects related to the networking field, 
albeit  on a smaller scale. 
D. Contributions 
This paper discusses in detail a project at University of 
Ontario Institute of technology (UOIT), Oshawa, Canada,  
to develop interactive learning modules and educational 
games using the virtual simulation environment of packet 
trace for use in introductory networking classes at the 
CCNA certification level. We provide the concepts, a client-
server architecture and high level design for such activities. 
We also summarize technical challenges in efficient design 
and delivery of such modules, and propose methods to deal 
with them. We also measure the scalability of multiuser PT-
based simulation environments, and provide performance 
results regarding CPU load, memory usage, offline saving 
time and network resource requirements for such 
deployments. 
77
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The rest of this paper is organized as following. In 
Section II a brief description of PT multiuser feature is 
presented and detailed specifications of the learning 
modules are discussed. In Section III we will have a close 
look at several technical challenges faced in building 
efficient interactive virtual environments based on multiuser 
PT. Our design for serious educational multiplayer games 
based in PT environment is discussed in Section IV. In 
Section V we present some extended features that can 
provide more efficient and comprehensive learning 
experience for networking student. An analysis of 
performance and resource requirements is presented in 
Section VI, and our conclusions and proposed future works 
are detailed in Section VII. 
II. 
LEARNING MODULE SPECIFICATIONS 
The problem of engaging students effectively in the 
process of learning is normally solved by using blended 
learning  techniques that involve a hands-on approach, such 
as the PT simulator. However, current PT activities are 
highly scripted, having little interactivity and class 
participation. Multiuser activities would allow PT to be used 
in a more dynamic way,  allowing the instructor to affect 
student’s 
PT 
environment 
in 
real-time. 
 
Having 
multiuser  activities as part of a networking course would fill 
a gap of short, interactive and extensible activities  that can 
be used to promote student participation in lectures.   
The multiuser feature in PT uses a proprietary 
application-layer protocol, PMTP [12], for communication 
between PT instances. A description of its operation can be 
found in [11]. PMTP uses TCP as its transport protocol.  
The design  of the PT-based activities in this work closely 
followed the framework described in the following. The 
activities are currently  being integrated into the two 
introductory networking courses at UOIT that cover the 
CCNA  curriculum.   
A.  PT Multiuser Environment 
There are many operational differences between standard 
and multiuser CCNA activities, as outlined in [11] and 
described in the following. These differences create  a whole 
new set of factors that has to be taken into account.  The 
main  task is minimizing the disadvantages and limitations of 
the multiuser feature and maximizing the  advantages it offers 
in interactivity and real-time communication.   
PT allows users to use a simple drag and drop cloud icon 
to connect to peer clouds. Each  multiuser cloud supports 
one-to-one, 
many-to-one 
and 
many-to-many 
peer-
connection  configurations. The activities that are created 
operate on a client-server environment in which most of  the 
complexity and configurations are handled on the instructor 
side. The central file of the activity scenario is hosted on an 
instructor PC and the student side file is used by each student 
to connect to  the central PT file hosted on the instructor PC. 
This 
instructor/student 
architecture 
 allows 
for 
easy 
management and control, and provides an overall view for 
the instructor operating the  activity. The multiuser 
capabilities of PT during testing allowed the connection of 
up to 60-75  users simultaneously to a single activity over 
LAN.   
UOIT has a laptop-based learning environment in which 
all students use pre-configured university-issued laptops 
in  the classroom; this greatly facilitated the implementation 
and use of the instructor-student model.   The instructor-side 
module is responsible for providing the hub part of a hub-
and-spoke topology.  The  students can then start a multi-user 
PT activity on their respective laptops and establish 
connections to  the instructor side of the activity. Student-
specific configurations or modifications must be kept 
to  minimum.  
 Figures 
1 and
 
2 show examples of the activity 
files on  the instructor and student sides . 
The instructor should also be able to save the student’s 
progress at any point and inspect it on his/her  own time. This 
approach is ideal for completing an activity in the classroom 
and marking it later.   Depending on who the instructor file is 
released to, the activities are open for modification and 
can  feature any new content that gets added to PT in the 
future.  In general, a laptop, personal computer or other 
device capable of running PT is  required for each student.  
The requirements for the instructor computer depend on the 
number of students that are  expected to connect and will be 
discussed later in this paper.  The number of connections 
possible is  directly limited by the hardware performance of 
the instructor PC. We will explore this limitation further in 
Section VI. 
B. Multi-user Activity Specifications  
To retain student attention, the multi-user activities and 
serious games were designed to be  completed within 10-20 
minutes.  The activities would be presented in the middle of 
the lecture and  allow the instructor to demonstrate a 
particular networking concept interactively with the 
students.    The activities assume that the students have 
limited 
hands-on 
experience 
and 
are 
mainly 
used 
to  demonstrate the networking concept.   In general, the 
activities follow these requirements:  
• 
Minimal configuration or Pre-configured Student-
side files 
• 
Can be used to assess student progression 
• 
Ensure maximum collaboration 
• 
Task variety between activities  
• 
Easy deployment in large user environments 
• 
Scalability to ensure reusability 
• 
Provide an educational experience 
Serious gaming activities have to provide a psychological 
perception of having won or lost. The psychological 
perception of win or loss is one of the key elements that 
make up a serious game. The enthusiasm of a student is 
very  crucial in a serious gaming aspect. It is an emotional 
driver that encourages students to improve  his/her 
networking abilities in order to better compete against fellow 
classmates. Implementing this  perception improves our 
chances of encouraging students to participate  and learn the 
skills and knowledge needed to complete the activities and 
course material more  efficiently.  
A major limitation to utilizing the multiuser architecture 
is that PT’s non-real time simulation mode cannot be 
78
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

used  during a multiuser session. This mode would allow 
students to analyze the traversal of packets  through a 
network visually step-by-step. By eliminating the use of 
simulation mode we lose a valuable  option but push the 
focus of the activities to the real-time interaction between the 
instructor and  student networks further encouraging 
communication and collaboration. 
C. Modifying and extending activities  
Creating and editing router and switch configurations in 
text files is considerably easier and more  manageable than 
working within PT.   To create or extend the functionality of 
a certain activity or  serious game, it is easiest to first export 
all configurations of each device into text, and edit 
the  configurations using a text editor.  This allows us to 
either erase the configuration in the old topology later, 
or  load the new configurations. This was  found to be the 
easiest method when altering the game scenarios of the 
serious games. One must be  aware that certain configuration 
options (e.g. Virtual Trunking Protocol) are not saved in the 
running configuration and must be  configured each time.   
The intent of multiuser is not to replace the physical 
hands-on 
portions 
of 
networking 
within 
real 
lab  environments.  Instead it is meant to increase student 
engagement during lectures.  As such, in  multiuser activities 
the learning curve to get started and the amount of tedious 
configuration should  be minimized. This can be done by 
putting commonly accessed devices in the simulation 
scenario, such as servers and core  devices, on the instructor 
side.   To minimize configuration, the student side has 
devices that are  preconfigured, allowing the instructor to 
limit the focus to a particular topic discussed in class.  
Minimal  configuration from the student is necessary to 
differentiate 
the 
students 
and 
allow 
the 
networks 
to  communicate. DHCP mechanisms were implemented 
inside the simulator wherever possible to ensure that the 
automatic  allocation of simulated IP addresses occurred. The 
IP addresses (i.e. subnets) that were constructed within 
the  serious gaming activities ensured that a wide variety of 
network topologies could be supported. Therefore, IP 
address subnets and schemes could be left unchanged 
and  designing new scenarios would only require changing 
routing protocols or other configuration  parameters. This 
reduces the time it takes to produce new serious gaming 
activities, which generally  take more time to create than the 
topic based in-class activities. 
Simulated student devices can be assigned simulated IP 
addresses in a unique network  depending on how the 
simulated Virtual LANs (VLAN) are configured.  This 
feature allows students to configure routing  protocols 
between each other.  Alternatively, students can be split up 
into groups on different VLANs to assign them addresses 
accordingly.   
D. Student Evaluation and Monitoring   
PT’s activity wizard offers an extensible script-based 
evaluation system that examines the parameters  of each 
device in the student network. For in-class topic-based 
activities, 
students 
were 
evaluated 
 based 
on 
their 
participation in the specific multiuser activity.  The TCP 
traffic between PT instances is  unencrypted and information 
such as hostnames can be found by capturing that traffic. 
Additionally,  PT allows the ability to save an offline file. 
The offline file saves can be described as a  snapshot of the 
entire network at an instance of time. The file consists of all 
of the peer connected  multiuser clouds and each device in 
that peer cloud. The offline file saves also includes all of 
the  devices current state, configuration, and connection 
status. Typically, during the setup phase of the  activity 
students can be asked to name the devices which they 
configure with their student ID  numbers. This method will 
easily help us later identify each remote student-side network 
in an offline  save for evaluation purposes.    The offline file 
proves to be a great tool to use when assessing the  results of 
an activity or grading students depending on the 
configuration status of the devices they  were responsible for. 
This method is used to evaluate a student performance on the 
two  serious gaming activities in Section IV, but can also be 
used on the topic based activities if needed. 
III. 
DESIGN CHALLENGES 
In designing multiuser PT activities, several good practices 
were developed.   The main principle is to maximize the 
advantages 
gained 
by 
having 
interactive 
activities.   
Configuring multi-user activities can be split into three 
layers.   Layer 1 is the physical and data connection between 
hosts running the PT instances.  Layer 2 is the data 
connections between switches and relates to simulated MAC 
addressing 
and 
VLAN 
assignment 
within 
the 
PT 
environment.  Layer 3 is responsible for the rest of the 
connectivity between PT environments such as simulated IP 
addressing and routing.  
A. Layer 1 Issues  
Documentation on how to setup multi-user connections 
between PT instances is readily available [9]. Connections 
between instances are done by matching IP address, port, 
specific cloud name, and password parameters from the 
instructor file. PT offline saving option accounts for the 
most overhead activity on computer and network resources. 
Remote student computers are polled at the same time when 
offline file saves occur. This results in bursts of traffic that 
is well handled over the LAN but may result in problems in 
WAN implementations, as reported in [11]. The serious 
gaming activities require extra explanation from the 
instructor on how to set-up the multiuser clouds. Each cloud 
within a serious gaming activity must be renamed 
specifically to a student name or ID so that the instructor 
can distinguish which users have successfully gained access 
into the instructor side network. PT traffic is unencrypted; 
so if necessary, useful information can be gathered by 
collecting PT the traffic data within Wireshark; this 
however can prove to be a difficult task to commit to for 60-
75 students. 
 
 
79
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Example of a Student-Side Module
Figure 2: Example of an Instructor-Side Module
80
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

B. Layer 2 Issues  
As mentioned in the previous section, in most activities 
students start out with an identical student-side file of the 
network.   This presents a problem because all students now 
share the same simulated MAC addresses within the PT 
environment.  One way to work around duplicate MAC 
addresses is by using NAT (Network address translation), 
but this effectively cuts off inter-student communication. 
Multiple VLAN’s on the other hand maintain inter-student 
communication 
when 
configuring 
routing 
protocols. 
Duplicate MAC addresses can still interfere with various 
protocols on the instructor-side.   STP (Spanning tree 
protocol) must be properly configured on the switches 
within PT.  The switchport connections can be inadvertently 
blocked off by STP due to the adjacent port MAC addresses 
being identical.   The switches on the instructor side should 
be configured with a very low STP priority to guarantee that 
they become the root and no port gets blocked. There have 
been cases observed during testing periods when STP has 
behaved incorrectly and unexpectedly.   
When designing activities that teach VLAN concepts, 
problems can be encountered on the instructor side if past 
configurations 
with 
different 
VLAN 
schemes 
are 
reintroduced to the instructor network.  It is recommended 
to save the start configuration, erase the vlan.dat file (stores 
VLAN 
information) 
and 
restart 
all 
the 
routers 
simultaneously to avoid VLAN/VTP problem when 
reconfiguring VLANs. Despite the additional complexity on 
the instructor side, in most activities no other changes have 
to be made on the student side. Activates designed to 
explore the routing and WAN topics within the course did 
not encounter many Layer 2 issues. The instructor side file 
is almost identical for each routing scenario, every student 
was separated into their own VLAN and router-on-a-stick is 
used along with a topic specific routing protocol to allow 
communication between all student files. 
The serious gaming activities focused on testing the 
ability of the students to troubleshoot layer 3, NAT, DHCP 
and other protocols. Layer 2 issues were largely avoided 
because creating layer 3 oriented problematic scenarios for 
students to solve was simpler and much more manageable. 
C. Layer 3 Issues  
DHCP is primarily responsible for achieving layer 3 
connectivity with minimal configuration from the students.  
Prior to developing addressing schemes, layer 2 issues 
should be resolved.   While DHCP servers can be set up on 
routers, for classless networks the DHCP has to be setup on 
a separate server within the instructor file.  Although DHCP 
is not intended to provide IP addresses to devices with 
identical MAC address, if layer 2 is problem-free otherwise, 
the only DHCP problems encountered can be solved by 
issuing DHCP release/renew commands.  Instructor-side 
files for serious games usually have all of the devices that 
are needed within them, whereas topic based activities have 
topic related devices configured on student-side files and 
devices that allow intercommunication between student side 
files on the instructor side. With this difference, DHCP 
services are configured inside each student’s cluster within 
serious games. This ensures easy manageability and 
provides isolation of student clusters. 
D. Scalability, Security and other Limitations  
The scalability of the activities is limited.  Within a 60 user 
activity session, the hub/instructor computer will be 
responsible for any bottleneck encountered.  It may be 
necessary to split the class into a number of student groups 
that will connect to different hub computers (instructor 
laptops).    The hub computers can also optionally be 
connected to each other, providing connectivity in a more 
scalable manner than a single hub computer.   
Accountability between authenticated users is very 
limited and the productive use of PT would require mutual 
trust between the users.    Also, offline saving as well as 
capturing Wireshark traces provide limited logging 
capability.  While  specific  task  evaluations  can  be 
automated using  PT's Activity Wizard,  it is not possible to 
find a  practical method  to account for every  detailed  
student action  in the multiuser network unless the PT traffic 
captured by Wireshark is inspected packet-by-packet.   
Denial of service is possible; students can configure a 
Layer 2 loop between switches in PT which can affect the 
instructor side,   although technological solutions may be 
written and added onto the PT platform by using the 
included extensions interface. Due to lack of documentation 
and added complexity, these resources were not considered 
in this work when implementing module activities.  The risk 
of such attacks also depends on the weight of the activity 
completion in the course grade; if these activities constitute 
a significant portion of the grade, security measures must be 
implemented in the activity design.    
The limited scope of supported Command-Line Interface 
(CLI) commands in PT is probably the most common 
limitation that will be encountered in designing multiuser 
activities.   The level of CLI commands is acceptable for a 
CCNA level at the student side.  However to facilitate large 
interconnected network, it often requires a CCNP level set 
of commands on the instructor side, which PT often does 
not provide. The level of complexity on the instructor side is 
also much higher than the student side, making 
troubleshooting more difficult.   
The lack of supported commands and the increased level 
of complexity on the instructor side files limit the creativity 
that can be expressed while constructing serious gaming 
activities. Serious gaming activities can only be constructed 
in linear fashion. The team attempted to explore the idea of 
creating a network traversal game but was restricted by the 
lack of logging and management capabilities of PT. Time 
limitations placed inferred that activities could not be too 
complex. The team also had to ensure that the educational 
content being delivered to the students was not beyond the 
scope of the course. 
81
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

E. Exporting  
PT is limited to interact only with devices that are 
simulated in the PT environment; external syslog servers 
cannot receive logs. Text, such as router configurations is the 
most easily exportable information, but not all devices have 
text interfaces. For example, DHCP servers that address all 
the VLANs can only be configured through a GUI.  As such 
it can be more practical to build on prior versions of the 
instructor file rather than create a new one. Unlike 
GNS/Dynagen [20] and other network simulators, PT cannot 
generate a network from a text file, nor export a network into 
any other format.  The simplest way to save the work of a 
student is by using the offline saving feature on the instructor 
side. PT does however contain a logging services that logs 
all of the input typed into any device in no specific format 
that can be exported. This idea was deemed infeasible for our 
application and consumed too much time for a limited in-
class lab scenario. 
IV. 
SERIOUS GAMING ACTIVITIES 
Each of the games presented students with artificial 
conflicts that resembled various real world  networking 
problems that had to be fixed before achieving the game’s 
end goal. Simulated DHCP mechanisms  were used to 
provide each connected player with a set of unique IP 
address ranges for management  and game play structure 
purposes. Each activity tested the configuration and 
troubleshooting abilities  of the players while providing an 
educational experience that was novel and entertaining for 
the  students.  A detailed explanation of each game follows.  
A. Domination Game 
The game topology is broken down into four sections. 
Each section consists of layer 3 switches,  multiuser clouds, 
and clusters. The Section switches all connect to a central 
Main Domination Switch.  Each section consists of 15 cluster 
clouds and 15 multiuser clouds, all of which are connected to 
a  Section Domination Switch, as shown in Figure  3.  Each 
cluster cloud contains an identical network topology that 
presents  students with a network problem. Each of the 
clusters have been assigned a /24 virtual subnet, from 
which  the first host IP is assigned to the default gateway. 
Student side PT instances connect into  the multiuser clouds 
assigned to them by the instructor. Multiuser clouds are 
distinguished by the  Peer Network Name property within 
each cloud.  The game is initiated by the instructor when 
all  players have obtained a connection to the peer multiuser 
cloud. Once all students clouds are active,  students begin by 
using the telnet protocol in PT to obtain access into their 
specific cluster. 
1) Domination Gameplay 
The student’s main goal is to fix the network problems 
presented to them within their clusters.  The  problems within 
the cluster can vary in complexity. By solving their cluster 
problems, the students eventually gain telnet access into the 
directly  connected section switch which enables them to  
shutdown all other interfaces except the interface directed 
toward the  main domination switch. Once a student has 
managed 
to 
dominate 
their 
sections 
switch, 
they 
must  quickly telnet into the Main Domination Switch and 
shutdown 
the 
three 
other 
ports 
to 
block 
other 
section  switches to telnet into the main switch. The first 
person to quickly dominate their section’s switch and  the 
main switch is the winner. The other three that have 
managed to dominate only their sections switch  are runner 
ups.  
The domination game comes with only one student side 
file that will work with all of the Multiuser  clouds within the 
instructor file. The student file consists of a single 
workstation and a multiuser cloud  to allow connectivity to 
the instructor file.  By providing a standard student file with 
basic  configurations already applied to the workstation 
allows for easy deployment in large user  environments. 
Furthermore, virtual IP addresses are dynamically assigned 
by a DHCP server located in each cluster.  Simulating DHCP 
on each cluster eliminates the need for students to configure 
an initial IP  address to their student side PT Workstation.  
The complexity of cluster problems that the students 
must solve can be increased as needed. Additional devices 
can be added  within a single cluster and be duplicated easily 
across the clusters because of the easy IP addressing  scheme. 
We simulated EIGRP protocol on the multilayer switches to 
allow virtual telnet capabilities to the  students. IP addressing 
schemes were designed to be as simple as possible to 
encourage future  development within the activity. The 
number of VTY lines available within each switch limits 
the  section sizes to 15.  
2) Domination Educational Value 
The domination game allows students to experience the 
pressure sometimes put on network  engineers in the real 
world environment. It forces students to apply all of their 
learnt networking  knowledge to troubleshoot a problem. By 
gaining the ability to combine the hands-on and theoretical 
knowledge  learnt throughout the introductory networking 
course, students will gain a better understanding of how  to 
apply these skills and tools in the real world. Moreover, the 
game can also be used as an  evaluation tool to see if the 
students understand the concepts delivered in the course. 
B. Relay Race   
Adapted from the original Relay Race game presented by 
Cisco, this Relay Race game incorporates  new features. The 
topology is broken down into four sections, each consisting 
of five Main Line  Routers, four network clusters and five 
multiuser clouds. The whole topology is brought together at 
a  central Finish Line Router. Each cluster contains 
problematic network scenarios that students must  correct in 
order to allow a Runner, designated in each team, to move 
closer to the Finish Line Router.  The network scenarios 
within the clusters progressively become harder the closer 
the cluster is to the  Finish Line Router. The five Main Line 
Routers act as doorways, locked, preventing the runner 
from  moving forward. Figure 4 shows an overview of Relay 
Race topology. 
 
 
82
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

1) Relay Race Gameplay 
Although slightly more complicated, the concept of the 
game remains somewhat similar to the  Domination game. 
Relay Race consists of 4 Teams each consisting of 5 team 
members. Each team  consists of 1 Runner and 4 members 
responsible for solving the problematic network clusters. 
Once  the problem within the cluster is solved they must 
move forward to their Main Line Router and no  shutdown 
their routers Serial 0/0/0 interface. This will allow the runner 
of the team to telnet into their  routers in order to move 
forward towards the Finish Line Router. Several access lists 
have been put in place  so that only the appropriate hosts can 
telnet into the appropriate devices. For example, none of 
the  team members responsible for solving cluster problems 
can telnet into the Finish Line Router; only  the runner will be 
able to telnet into that router. The access lists also ensure that 
telnets to other Main Line  Routers will only work from the 
Runner’s Workstation on the student PT file.  The Goal 
of  the game is to have the fastest team to enable all of their 
S0/0/0 interfaces within the Main Line  Routers. The Runner 
must then run (telnet) into the Finish Line Router before any 
of the other teams  and shutdown all of the other interfaces to 
block the opposing teams’ access to the Finish Line Router.   
A common student file is used in this game and DHCP 
has been simulated in PT in a manner allowing the same file 
to be used among all multiuser peer-connection within the 
game.  The instructor file contains the Relay Race game that 
students must telnet into. The students connect  to the 
multiuser clouds according to the name of the cloud in 
correspondence to the role of the  student within each team.  
By providing this instructor/student architecture we ensure 
easy  deployment of the game during play time. The clusters 
problem can be easily changed if need be.   
2) Relay Race Educational Value 
Relay Race pits students together in a team environment 
where they must communicate and apply  their skills to a 
problem. The activity will help hone communication skills 
and also improve the ability of  the students to solve network 
problems. The game will force students to work rapidly and 
correctly to  solve their problems the fastest in order to win. 
This environment emulates the fast paced  environments of 
the networking world today, where problems arise quickly 
and must be solved  rapidly. The game can also be used as an 
evaluation tool to see how far student’s configuration 
and  troubleshooting skills have progressed. 
V. 
EXPLORING UNIQUE NETWORK ACTIVITIES 
This 
section 
discusses 
some 
ideas 
for 
further 
development of PT-based activities. 
A. Network Traversal Activities 
During this project a small scale network traversal 
activity was created for one of the in-class  modules. The 
unique PT activity required students to attempt to discover 
the network by  using various telnet and show commands. 
The goal of the activity was to learn how to fix the 
router  problems they encounter within a topology before 
moving forward. Most of the  devices in the activity are 
hidden and cannot be accessed by double clicking on them 
nor can be  moved. The activity forces the students to use 
various CLI commands that are necessary to know at  the 
CCNA level. Connectivity will be achieved when the lab is 
successfully  completed.  
A large scale version of the activity can be created to 
encompass multiple students. The activity can be  presented 
as a race to the last node within the topology. Each node 
within the topology would include  the privileged password 
to a router that would allow them to move to a different 
segment within the  topology. The password can easily be 
stored within the description of a specific link or the router 
itself.  Each segment within the traversal topology would 
present the racers with a problem that they must  solve and 
traverse to each node within the segment using telnet/show 
commands. The concept will  require an instructor file that 
contains multiple identical traversal networks. Each identical 
traversal  topology would be assigned to a student and 
accessed via a multiuser cloud. The start of the race can  be 
controlled by releasing the passwords to the first node to 
every student simultaneously at the  beginning of the race. 
The main issue with this concept is that the instructors PCs 
will have to be  computationally powerful machines to handle 
multiple, possibly 60, identical networks containing 
a  minimum of 10 devices each. 
B. PT Plus Web App Activity 
A PT plus Web App activity is a  conceptual activity that 
will be utilized for mid-term or final lab examination 
evaluation purposes. The  concept also relies on a Web based 
application that has accounts for each student and can 
process  multiple choice questions on it. Most universities 
utilize online student accounts managing system that can 
be  utilized for this purpose. The concept is similar to 
network traversal in that at the end of each segment  within a 
network traversal topology a password is given to the student 
that can be used to unlock a  multiple choice question on the 
Web application as well as allow them to progress through 
the  traversal topology. This way a student can be evaluated 
for their knowledge in practical configuration  expertise as 
well as theoretical knowledge questions via the multiple 
choice answers.  
This concept can also be used to deliver interactive labs 
that present students with a situation. The lab  can progress 
online on the Web App as the students complete tasks within 
the lab. This type of activity  is not a collaborative activity 
however it does deliver content in a different manner that can 
enable the  possible creation of collaborative labs as future 
experimentation is done with the concept. 
VI. 
RESOURCE REQUIREMENTS AND SCALABILITY 
In order to test the scalability of the learning 
environment, the activities and games were deployed in an 
instructor set up with multiple multiuser PT clouds 
connecting to the instructor server and executing the 
activities from their side. Packet Tracer 5.3 was chosen as 
the platform for these activities. 
 
 
83
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 3: Domination Game Screen Shot
Figure 4: Relay Race Game Screen Shot
84
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
A. CPU load and offline save time 
In this test case a single prototype activity file was used 
for all the  student connections, and a single instructor file 
was used  that would accept all the connections.  Statistics 
about  resource consumption were recorded by observing 
CPU,  memory, and network usage as more and more 
students  were connected to the instructor’s simulated 
network.   The hub was based on a school Lenovo T61p 
laptop  (Core 2 Duo T8300 2.4GHz, 2GB RAM).  The 
method of  gathering the system information has its 
limitations in  precision but portrays an accurate picture of 
the increase  in system resources as the number of student 
rises. 
 Figure
5 
rage offline save shows the CPU load and ave
stime
. During this test, frequently the instructor file became 
unresponsive  and the testing had to be restarted.  The 
growth for memory  resource was very scalable to the 
amount of students.   However, CPU usage and loading 
times grew at a greater  rate. As such, multiuser activities 
remain most  practical in classes that have less than 60 
students per instructor server.   Likewise, if classes are small, 
the requirements for  reliability can be lower, as 
technological problems can be  easily managed by the 
instructor.  
B. Scalability 
Two sets of tests were conducted on each of the 
two  activities instructor files. The first was done using 
the  Domination instructor file and its companion student 
file.  The second was done using the Relay Race instructor 
file  and its companion student file.  During the testing 
procedure  for the Domination game a total of 60 multiuser 
clouds  were connected in increments of 5 users to the 
instructor  file. Each time five users connected to the game, 
new data was  collected. The Relay Race game has a 
maximum capacity  of 20 users playing at the same time 
therefore, 20 multiuser  clouds were connected to the Relay 
Race instructor file in  increments of five users. 
The results for this test were very satisfying for both 
of  the activities. Figure Figure 6 shows the CPU utilization 
for  Domination and Relay Race. It is evident that the as 
more  hosts connect to the instructor files, the CPU 
utilization  increases in a logarithmic form. This indicates 
that the  instructor side was capable of handling higher 
levels  of stress if need be.  
Test results for both activities indicated linear  growth 
rates in memory utilization. Figure 7 shows that  growth rate 
for both the Domination activity and the Relay  Race activity 
is linear as the number of users increases.  Although memory 
is not an issue with 50 users connected to  an activity, if we 
were to connect up to 100 or more users’  memory could 
potentially become an issue. For our  university use cases 
memory does not pose a threat to the  functionality of our 
activities. 
 
  
Figure 5: Packet Tracer scalability with 1 hub
85
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

We also measured the required network resource and 
 bandwidth for these scenarios, and the test results 
indicated  that the multiuser environment places minimal 
burden  on  network resources. It indicated that we 
could  have a  large number of users connected to a 
single  instructor file  without worrying about the network 
capacity and  bandwidth. The network utilization test 
increased in a  linear  fashion and these values are bound to 
increase as  the  number of users increase. An important issue 
to note is  that  these values are bound to change depending 
on 
 how 
 actively 
the 
students 
interact 
with 
the 
instructor  side  network .  
The offline file-save for recording students’ works could 
potentially become a bottleneck issue. The offline file 
consists of all  of the peer connected multiuser clouds and 
each device in  that peer cloud. It also saves all of 
the  devices current state, configuration, and connection 
status.  Offline saving times of greater than five minutes for 
a 30  user Multiuser environment could render useless a 20-
 minute activity and a class room limited to an 80 
minute  class. Therefore it is important to test how long it 
actually  takes to create the offline file. The results indicated 
that for  the Domination activity the time to create the offline 
file  grew exponentially. The Relay Race activity indicated 
a  linear growth rate. The exponential growth rate for 
the  Domination file could prove to be troublesome if more 
than 
 60 
users 
are 
connected 
to 
the 
Domination 
activity.  Currently it takes about 25 seconds for a 50 user 
multiuser  environment offline file to save. Although it 
serves our  purpose to provide 60 students a reliable platform 
to use the  activity, connecting more than 100 users to a 
single  instructor file could take much longer and may 
require multiple interconnected instructor servers. These 
values are  bound to change if the complexities of the 
problems in each  cluster are increased. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Networking courses that cover introductory, CCNA-level 
course material usually have to cover a large amount of 
theory for students that may have little prior networking 
experience. In-class lectures can be improved by using 
interactive activities that foster student collaboration.   
Multiuser achieves greater class interaction by allowing 
students to form what is essentially one large network 
supervised by the instructor.  Using the multiuser 
architecture we can also develop serious gaming activities 
that can provide a simple and entertaining solution to 
present complex networking scenarios to networking 
students enrolled in our courses. We can train students to 
not only improve their configuration and troubleshooting 
skills but also improve communications skills in an IT 
environment. We can also increase the speed at which they 
tackle these problems and provide them with the expertise 
and knowledge to excel in the fast paced networking 
environments of today. 
In this project, we developed a set of modules containing 
learning activities and educational games based on Cisco 
Packet 
Tracer 
simulation 
environment 
for 
use 
in 
introductory networking classes. Along the way we faced 
and solved several challenges for efficient design of such 
activities, which we presented here as a guideline for 
creating efficient multiuser interactive modules in a virtual 
environment. Our results indicated that the proposed design 
can be used in medium size classes without the need for 
significant investment in servers and network resources. 
Future work on the multiuser feature in packet tracer 
could improve the quality and user experience offered by 
multiuser activities.  Other academies may seek to modify 
the instructions in order to change the difficulty of some 
activities.   Student feedback is critical to effectively 
improving activities and bringing them up to the standard of 
activities offered by Cisco.   In the meantime it is up to the 
instructor judgment to adjust the difficulty or instructions on 
the spot. Various multiuser architectures may be attempted.   
In contrast to client-server topology in use, ad-hoc PT 
connections are low resource and can make use of the 
simulation mode of PT. The problem with ad-hoc 
connection is that the instructor is not present to assist 
students and it is difficult to account for the activities 
completed.  This may offer a different learning experience 
to the student.  However user input would be needed for a 
successful implementation.  The activity wizard provided by 
PT can be used to create more locked down activities for the 
student and may address certain security limitations.  The 
challenge with using the activity wizard lies with the 
increased development time and the requirement to account 
and restrict/facilitate all the student actions that may occur 
in the activity.  
In the meantime implementing some of the new ideas 
presented in section V may prove to be a challenge 
worthwhile. Compared to regular PT activities, by being 
connected to the same network, multiuser allows students to 
collaborate and work towards a common goal.   This allows 
the creation of activities that have before been impractical to 
implement, such as group troubleshooting, capture the flag, 
and relay race games.  This research has shown the great 
potential of the topic and the educational values PT holds. 
 
 
86
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
Figure 7: Memory Utilization (a) Domination Memory Utilization (b) Relay Race Memory Utilization
Figure 6: CPU Utilization: (a) Domination CPU Utilization (b) Relay Race CPU Utilization 
87
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported through a Teaching 
Innovation Funding (TIF) grant from the office of  the 
Associate Provost, Academic, of the University Of Ontario 
Institute Of Technology. Packet Tracer is  a product of Cisco 
Networks and is provided free of charge to Cisco 
Networking Academy students and  instructors. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] R.G. Muir-Herzig, "Technology and its impact in the 
Classroom," Computers & Education, vol. 42, no. 2, 
pp. 111-131, February 2004. 
[2] P. Dillenbourg, D. Schneider, and P. Synteta, "Virtual
Learning Environments," in Proceedings of the 3rd 
Hellenic 
Conference 
on 
Information 
& 
Communication Technologies in Education, 2002, pp. 
3-18. 
[3] A. All. (Accessed 2011, March 20) "Serious Games 
Entertain, Educate Employees", IT  Business Edge, 
August 5, 2009. [Online].  
http://www.itbusinessedge.com/cm/community/featur
es/articles/ blog/serious-games-entertain-educate-
employees/?cs=34730 
[4] C. Kohler. (Accessed 2011, March 20) "Xbox Kinect 
Games Give You a Serious Workout",  Wired 
Magazine, June 15, 2010. [Online].  
http://www.wired.com/gamelife/2010/06/kinect-
hands-on/ 
[5] J. Bohannon. (Accessed 2011, March 20) "Unravel 
the Secret Life of Protein", Wired  Magazine, issue 
17.05, 20 April 2009. [Online].  
http://www.wired.com/medtech/genetics/magazine/17
- 05/ff_protein?currentPage=all  
[6] M. Macedonia. (2001) "Games, simulation, and the 
military education dilemma", Internet and the 
University. [Online].  
http://www.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/ffpiu018.pdf 
[7] D.D. Burdescu, M.C. Mihaescu, C.M. Ionascu, and 
B.  Logofatu, "Support system for e-Learning 
environment based  on learning activities and 
processes," in Fourth International  Conference on 
Research Challenges  in Information Science , 2010, 
pp. 37-42. 
[8] M. Chang and Kinshuk, "Web-Based Multiplayer 
Online  Role Playing Game (MORPG) for Assessing 
Students' Java  Programming Knowledge and Skills," 
in Third  IEEE International Conference on Digital 
Game and  Intelligent Toy Enhanced Learning, 2010, 
pp. 103-107. 
[9] "Packet Tracer Reference Guide and Tutorials," Cisco 
Networking Academy, 2010. 
[10] F. Jakab, M. Bucko, I. Sivy, L. Madarasz, and P. 
Cicak, "The system of career promotion of 
networking 
professionals 
 based 
on 
industrial 
certificates," 
in 
International 
Conference 
on 
Intelligent Engineering Systems (INES 2009), 2009, 
pp. 221 - 226. 
[11] A. Smith and C. Bluck, "Multiuser Collaborative 
Practical 
 Learning 
Using 
Packet 
Tracer," 
in 
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on 
Networking and Services   (ICNS), 2010, pp. 356-362. 
[12] "Packet 
Tracer 
Messaging 
Protocol 
(PTMP) 
Specification  Document," Cisco Networks, 2008. 
[13] Cisco Aspire CCNA Edition. (Accessed 2012, 
February 14) [Online]. 
https://learningnetworkstore.cisco.com/market/prod/a
spireFAQ.se.work 
[14] M. Torrieri. (Accessed 2011, March 20) "Cisco's 
MyPlanNet Simulation Game Touches on  Broadband 
Growth 
and 
Other 
Hot 
Communications 
Topics",  TMCnet, Nov. 4, 2009. [Online]. http://4g-
 wirelessevolution.tmcnet.com/broadband-
 stimulus/topics/broadband-stimulus/articles/68180-
ciscos- myplannet-simulation-game-touches-
broadband-growth- other.htm 
[15] M. Virvou, G. Katsionis, and K. Manos, "Combining 
Software Games with Education: Evaluation of its 
Educational Effectiveness," Educational Technology 
& Society, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 54-65, 2005. 
[16] K.D. 
Squire, 
"Video 
games 
in 
education," 
International Journal of Intelligent Games & 
Simulation, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 49-62, 2003. 
[17] J.T. Behrens, D.C. Frezzo, R. Mislevy, J. Kroopnik, 
and D. Wise, "Structural, Functional and Semiotic 
Symmetries 
in 
 simulation 
based 
games, 
and 
assessments," in Assessment of  Problem Solving 
Using Simulations., 2007, pp. 59-80. 
[18] A. Musheer, O. Sotnikov, and S. Shah-Heydari, 
"Packet Tracer as an Educational Serious  Gaming 
Platform," in Proceedings of the 7th International 
Conference on Networking and Services, 2011, pp. 
299- 305. 
[19] O. Sotnikov, A. Musheer, and S. Shah-Heydari, 
"Building Interactive multi-user in-class  learning 
modules for computer networking," in Proceedings of 
the 7th International Conference on  Networking and 
Services, 2011, pp. 326-331. 
 [20] GN3/Dynagen (Accessed 2012, June 24) [Online] 
http://www.gns3.net/dynagen/ 
 
 
88
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

