Working Globally via Wikis while Innovating and Acting Together: Case Wiki-
Based Knowledge Sharing Portal
Helena Suvinen
Agora Center
University of Jyväskylä
Jyväskylä, Finland
Helena.suvinen@jyu.fi
Pertti Saariluoma
Computer Science and Information Systems
University of Jyväskylä
Jyväskylä, Finland
ps@jyu.fi
Abstract—Wiki-technology
is
one
of
the
new
Internet
collaborative service platforms that allows, among other
things,
building
innovation
networks
for
industries
and
research groups. To make these wiki tools really effective it is
essential to understand human interaction problems within
information and communication technology (ICT)
based on
scientific psychological grounds, rather than resorting to folk
psychological intuitions.
The problem with wikis is that their inbuilt interaction
problems may substantially interfere with the development of
open innovation communities. This is why it is essential to
investigate psychological factors evident in the interactions
within open innovation systems. This study, realized with a
wiki-based portal, aimed to help build innovation systems
within a particular industrial area. Our results identified
several problems and point to a variety of user psychology
reasons behind these problems. These reasons were organized
into a classification system of problems experienced by users in
task execution.
Keywords—Innovation, networked co-creation, wiki, psychology,
usability
I.
INTRODUCTION
User psychology refers to the psychological analysis of
users
in
interaction
situations
[27],
[29],
[30],
[35].
Psychological concepts, methods, and theories can thus be
used to analyze human–technology interaction. This type of
approach is required to find scientifically grounded solutions
to interaction and design challenges. Thus, psychological
knowledge is more useful than folk psychology intuition.
The importance of psychological knowledge has been
known for decades, and it has been applied in various forms
to human–technology interaction. Human factors, cognitive
ergonomics,
and
psychological
usability
research
are
examples of good approaches in which psychological
knowledge
has
played
an
important
role
[34].
User
psychology collects these scientific themes under a single
approach. It is characterized by the pursuit of psychological
explanations to various interaction phenomena, and, in the
long run, a desire to replace folk psychological practices in
interaction design [3], [32], [36]. User psychology originates,
to a great extent, from cognitive modeling, which also has
the goal of applying psychological theories for analyzing
interaction problems [1], [3]. However, user psychology is
not restricted to cognitive psychology only.
One reason for the pursuit to build on scientific
psychology is the constant developments in technology,
which
makes
some
interaction
problems
increasingly
complex. Ubiquitous, pervasive, and embedded computing,
as well as novelties such as WEB 2.0 or agent technologies,
are providing a more challenging field for designing
interaction processes than did the traditional keyboard and
screen interaction types [34]. The crucial difference is that,
instead of immediate usability properties, today’s designers
must pay attention to more holistic interaction processes.
One must be able to thoroughly grasp what people want to
do, why they want to do that, can they do what they like, and
how they feel about doing what they want to do. And,
because these are psychological questions, it is important to
investigate, in different types of environments, what kinds of
psychological
categories
are
important
in
explaining
interaction problems. As a result, it is possible over time to
implement psychological knowledge in design processes.
The European Union (EU) has launched a number of
European
Technology
Platforms
for
interconnecting
industrial
and
research
communities.
This
kind
of
knowledge-oriented policy (KOP) underpins the construction
of a cognitive web that allows various communities to
communicate
successfully among
themselves
and
thus
acquire and assimilate essential knowledge [9]. It also
promotes “hybrid forums” [7] that bring together, in an
innovative way, the insights emanating from markets,
companies, and research communities. A network of agents
interacting in a specific economic industrial area and
working
within
a
particular
institutional
research
infrastructure [7] provides a rich web of channels, with the
advantage of high source credibility. Experiences and ideas
126
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

can arise within the network [5]. An innovation system can
be used to correlate and communicate knowledge [23] and to
coordinate access to complementary knowledge. The Finish
Fores Cluster Research portal, introduced at the Third
International Conference on Internet and Web Applications
and Services [41], is in focus of this study. Built on
Mediawiki, the portal is a good platform for networked
communication, co-creation, and global innovation. The
development of WEB 2.0 opens up new possibilities for
improved innovation management.
Wikis are groupware tools with collaborative capabilities.
They work well in areas in which knowledge may be
changing dynamically or where viewpoints differ about that
knowledge and how to capture the informal knowledge that
draws on the contributions [31] of a larger society for a
specific domain. In organizations, the target area of wikis
mainly consists of ad hoc problems in a distributed
knowledge environment [44], [18]. Wikis can be used as a
tool
for
continuous
learning
within
and
between
organizations [18]. These tools can be private or public. The
rapid
growth
of
wikis,
thanks
mainly
to
voluntary
contributors, shows that this environment as a service tool on
the Internet merits serious attention [46], [47].
Wikis allow collaborative authoring in the context of a
hypertext document set [33]. The main “wikinomics”
principles are openness, peer-to-peer collaboration, sharing,
and
interacting
globally
[42].
This
facilitates
a
real
possibility for users to broaden their knowledge about a
domain by openly sharing their own expertise and absorbing
information
from
the
large,
global
knowledge
pools
constructed via these wikis. Because the participants can
possess
totally
different
backgrounds
regarding
their
educations and
professional careers, this platform for
combining of a variety of knowledge from several areas
provides
new opportunities for radical innovations
to
emerge.
Our article is presented as follows. In Section II, we
describe
our
experiment:
the
materials,
participants,
procedure, and design. Section III contains the results of the
research,
with
three
qualitative
examples
of
subjects
executing the tasks, the number of errors the test subjects
encountered, as well as the qualitative analysis of the errors
the
test
subjects
committed.
The
Discussion
section
delineates the user psychological problems behind these
errors, the technical classification of the problems, and
suggestions for developers. Finally, Section IV, Conclusions
and Further Work, presents our proposals for remediation
concerning
the
innovative
Mediawiki-type
knowledge-
sharing portals. We end that section with our objectives for
further work. Acknowledgments conclude the paper.
II.
EXPERIMENT
We focused on Mediawiki as a portal developed for
building innovation systems, particularly in industrial areas.
There are several reasons why we chose this Mediawiki-
based portal for our research. First, it has been the official
tool since early 2008 for the Finnish Forest Cluster [11],
which was established in September 2007 in line with the
EU’s European Technology Platforms [10], designed to
encourage collaboration among industrial domains and
public and non-public research communities toward joint
innovation. This particular portal was developed according to
the Strategic Research Agenda of the European Forest Sector
within the European Technology Platform [39]. It became
obvious that efficient tools such as portals are needed to
enable researchers from traditional and emerging areas to
contribute to national and Europe-wide research agendas.
By use of the portal, research groups can demonstrate
their competencies, post research ideas, and plan projects. If
needed, they can get help from portal facilitators familiar
with the domain who champion research needs derived from
the research agenda and the program related to it. These
kinds of programs have been launched by Finland’s Strategic
Centre for Science, Technology and Innovation (TEKES).
First of these programs, the Finish Forest Cluster (now,
Forestcluster Oy), was established 2007 and our studies
focused on its research portal.
The study dealt with the usability of a Mediawiki-based
portal, with the aim to increase awareness about the technical
usability of this kind of application [41].
A.
Materials
The target in this study was a Mediawiki-based platform
[49] written with the PHP scripting language for a Linux
operating system. Mediawiki uses an Apache web server and
a MySQL database. The idea behind this application was to
gather the knowledge of various researchers and their teams,
as well as other actors in this forest domain, into a single
virtual location, allowing all participants to build up their
knowledge, to share it with others, and employ it. The
application was built for collaborative communication, co-
creation, and open innovation in a networked environment.
The tests were recorded by way of an Easy Screen
Recorder, which documents user behavior on the platform
and the mouse clicks on the screen, as well as the speech of
the test subject.
B.
Participants
The experiment involved 14 researchers as test subjects.
The test subjects comprised 7 women and 7 men, aged 18-48
years. All were very experienced computer users and
information seekers: two of them had between 5 and 10
years of computer experience and the other 12 had used
computers in their work for more than 10 years. Of this test
group, 12 searched for work-related information daily, and
the others a few times a week during work hours; all of them
searched to some extent in their spare time. All of them also
had used Wikipedia in the past, 13 of them when searching
for information. One had built his own wikis and inserted
information into them. Thus, the subjects demonstrated a
deep understanding of the use of computers and Websites,
mostly for work but also for personal interests. In addition,
the subjects were motivated information seekers via the Web
since they were postgraduates of various information science
disciplines. These statistics are described in Table 1.
127
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

TABLE I.
THE BACKGROUND INFORMATION ON EXPERIMENTAL
SUBJECTS
N = 14
Experience/years
Sum
Use of computers
5-10 years
2
>10 years
12
Use of WWW sites
6-7 days/wk
11
3-5 days/wk
3
Information searching
at job
Daily
12
Few times/wk
2
Information searching
on free time
Daily
5
Few times/wk
8
Few times/month
1
Use of Wikipedia
14
Use of Wikipedia for
Searching info
13
Adding info
1
The test subjects were asked for their principal reasons
for using Web sites. The foremost reason was for work-
related information, followed by studying, and then for
commercial use. Hobbies and entertainment were equal
reasons. The least important reason for the subjects was use
of public services.
C.
Procedure and design
The research data were gathered in experiments where
one test subject at a time navigated through the portal while
thinking aloud about solving four different tasks. The
navigation from an entry page to the target page could be
executed via different routes but the most efficient way was
known as the optimal path [12], [2]. This shortest path
consisted of the Web pages the user had to visit, and there
can be “several optimal paths for one information search
[21].” The tasks studied and their optimal paths are presented
here.
1) Find the main idea behind this Mediawiki-based
portal.
Optimal path: Read from the Main Page.
2) Find the available research groups.
Optimal path: Main Page Click one of the eight
Research Communities
names
Click
some
Research
Group name Read the name of some researcher.
3) Find how to add wiki-type information into this
Mediawiki-based portal.
Optimal path (When no information on that topic is
available yet): Type some word in the Search box Press
the GO button Click the Create This Page link Add
information.
Optimal path (When information on that topic is already
available): Type a word in the Search box Press the GO
button Click Edit Add information.
4)
Find
how
to
format
and
organize
wiki-type
information in this Mediawiki-based portal.
Optimal path: Main Page Click the Quick Guide in the
left bar Scroll to the end of the page and read the
instructions and understand content.
The experiment was conducted in December 2006 at the
University of Jyväskylä’s User Psychology Laboratory.
During the recording researchers observed the situation and
the behavior of the test subjects. Following the tests, the data
were analyzed and organized to investigate the usability of
the Mediawiki-based interface and offer suggestions to its
developers.
III.
RESULTS
In this study the results were analyzed first on the basis
of success (the number of subjects able to succeed executing
the task) and then on the basis of using the optimal path (the
number of subjects able to execute the tasks on the basis of
the optimal path). The final analysis was based on the kinds
of difficulties/problems the test subjects had during tasks
executions.
A.
Three qualitative examples
While it is not possible to present all our analyses in
detail, for want of space, the examples below will give the
reader a concrete view to the navigation processes and to the
subsequent analyses. Our examples involve three subjects:
one each performing Task 3 (inserting information to the
portal) or Task 4 (editing text in the portal), and the final
subject performing all four tasks. These examples are
described here step by step in a text form and illustrated in
figures as well. The Easy Screen Recorder captured the
subject’s navigation decisions in addressing the stated task.
Their verbatim comments are stated in italic in quotation
marks,
and
paraphrased
comments
are
present
in
parentheses. Although they were asked to think aloud, there
are silent phases in their task executions and this is
represented with a dash (—) in verbatim quotes. Editorial
comments are in brackets. The portal text at the time of the
study was only English and thus subjects were Finnish non-
native speakers of English; the direct quotes are translations
by the researcher.
The first one shows how troublesome wikis can be for
new users, regardless of whether they are experienced
computer users or information seekers on the Web. In the
second example, the test subject comes through easily,
giving then her own contribution to the developers of this
particular portal. In the last example the user is not familiar
with wikis and, being an excellent computer user, performs
quite well with this particular portal under study.
1) Subject 1, Task 3: Find how to
add
wiki-type
information in this Mediawiki based portal.
Main page clicked the Smart Products link scrolled
down clicked the Research Group link clicked the Back
button clicked the Upload File button clicked the
Browse button (wondered where the information would be
saved) clicked the Cancel button scrolled down
clicked the Community link clicked the first article under
the letter C clicked the Back button clicked the first
article under letter N clicked the Ideas for Future Research
Projects link clicked the Ideas link (wondered whether it
would be possible to edit here) clicked the Edit link at the
top of the page clicked the Back button clicked the
History button clicked the Back button clicked the
128
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

Move button at the top of the page
clicked the Back
button clicked the Unwatch tab clicked the Discussion
button clicked the Back button clicked the Back
button clicked the Upload file link clicked the Back
button clicked the Back button clicked the Main Page
link clicked the Back button clicked the Community
Portal link scrolled down the Community Portal page
clicked on the Selected Research Communities link
scrolled the page clicked the Help link in the left bar
clicked the Wikipedia Edit Page link [test subject got to the
Wikipedia page and did not even notice that she had left the
portal under study] clicked the Back button clicked the
Back button clicked the Recent changes link on the left
bar clicked the Community Portal link on the left bar
scrolled
down
(admitted
not
knowing
how
to
add
information for this site) clicked the Special Pages link
[while the researcher were advising her to use the Help page]
 clicked the Back button [researcher advised her to select a
word for the search box] typed usability clicked the Go
button [was advised to move to the Create a page link on
the opened page] (understood the procedure).
In Figure 1 the Optimal Path in Task 3 is illustrated in
white circles. The large number of steps the Subject 1 took
while trying to insert information to the Mediawiki–based
portal are in black ovals.
Figure 1.
The results of the Subject 1executing Task 3.
This example was about inserting information. Only four
test subjects were able to execute this task independently and
none of them did so by following the optimal path. One
subject vocalized her ideas regarding the application and
about possible remediation of problems while she was
searching for guidance in the portal in order to edit
information. She managed to perform the task, using 4
minutes for five steps, but not along the optimal path.
2)Subject 5, Task 4: Find how to format and organize
wiki-type information in this Mediawiki based portal.
“Here is the HTML editor,” clicked Help scrolled
down the page [when reached the right place] “I assume that
Wikipedia does the overall formatting, but I guess that is in
the User’s Guide.” scrolled to the actual text about content
formatting at the bottom of the Help page [thought she was
in the User’s Guide] clicked the Back button [in the
interface and got back to the right Editing “Digimedia”
page]
filled
in
information
on
the
page
started
formatting with the buttons at the top of the page, “This has
its own, special syntax for the formatting that differs in a
very interesting way from everything else I am used to.”
clicked the Forward button in the interface, “This is not
HTML coding. This is some kind of totally individual
marking language and text formatting. Obviously this is
specified in the instructions, this syntax, which does not
make it easier to insert content. So one would have to study a
new content formatting language—. Add an asterisk. The
more asterisks, the deeper the level—. In Word, the
formatting is hidden from the writer. There is WYSIWYG—.
In this we go back to the 1980s, when the formatting was
done by coding separately with different symbols—with
some code language. And this code is, for me, totally new. I
have never seen anything like this—. This might come from
some formatting language that I don’t know—. One way to
improve this would be to make it consistent with HTML
code—so those who know HTML formatting, they would not
have to learn a new code—. Does this come from the
platform [Mediawiki]? —There is always the threshold of
learning new [tool]—. All wikis should be the same—. These
transitional periods for these kinds of new systems and
environments are always cumbersome to the users and
frustrating. They think that it is needless to learn a new
coding language again—.” [Task completed.]
In Figure 2, the Optimal Path in Task 4 is illustrated in
white circles. Subject 5 took only three extra steps, pictured
in black ovals, to find out how to format the added
information.
Figure 2.
The results of the Subject 5 in executing Task 4.
Altogether 10 subjects managed to edit the information
and three were able to do it following the optimal path. Only
four subjects managed both the inserting and editing
information to the portal and editing it (Tasks 3 and 4), but
none executed these two most important tasks using the
optimal paths.
129
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

3) Subject 13, Tasks 1- 4: Task 1, Find the main idea
behind this Mediawiki-based portal.
Main Page clicked the Behind This link clicked the
Main Page found the header What is New in Forest
Cluster Portal [read] “OK. It is on this page.”
In Figure 3, the Optimal Path in Task 1 is in white
circles. It did not need any steps, just understanding that the
information was on the Main Page. Still Subject 13 needed
two additional steps (black ovals) for understanding this
main idea.
Figure 3.
The results of the Subject 13 executing Task 1.
Task 2: Find the available research groups.
Main Page clicked the Community Portal link
clicked the All Research Groups link clicked Template
Research Groups clicked the Back button clicked the
Groups: Scoma link “OK. It is here.”
In Figure 4, the Optimal Path in Task 2 is illustrated in
white circles. Subject 13 needed four additional steps (black
ovals) to be able to read a researcher’s name in one of the
available research groups.
Figure 4.
The results of the Subject 13 executing Task 2.
Task 3: Find how to add wiki-type information in this
Mediawiki-based portal.
Main Page clicked the Others link clicked the Back
to Main Page link clicked the Intelligent Resource link
clicked the Main Page link clicked the Others link, “I
assume that my information would go to the Proposals or
Ideas partition. No this does not so—.” clicked the
Community Portal link clicked the Smart Fibre and
Resources
link
clicked
All
Articles
clicked
the
Proposals link clicked the Community Portal link
clicked the All Categories link, “It’s a little bit confusing,
flicking through these categories.— There are only 42—it’s
working quite badly…—. It is not sensible to show hundreds
of
available
categories
[when
only
42
results
were
available].” Clicked Main Page, “I can create new
categories, but how am I going to link them to other pages?”
[Researcher asks if the subject commonly uses the Help
option.] “I didn’t expect that wikis would need help—; I
thought it is easy to insert information in wikis!” clicked
Help clicked New Page Creating clicked Main Page
typed data mining in the Search box pressed the Return
key arrived at the Search Results page “I found it—. It’s
same problem with the navigation as before. This shows
there are up to 500 pages to see but there exists only five
pages. This is confusing—. It is even possible to choose
previous pages. It’s a bad problem!” opened a new
working window typed “text mining” pressed the
Return key opened the link to the Create This Page: Text
Mining started editing the blank page Text Mining 
“OK. This is it.”
In Figure 5, the Optimal Path in Task 3 is in white
circles. The additional steps the Subject 13 took while trying
to insert information to the Mediawiki-based portal are
shown in black ovals.
Figure 5.
The results of the Subject 13 executing Task 3.
130
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

Task 4: Find how to format and organize wiki-type
information in this Mediawiki-based portal.
“I suppose there are instructions for formatting in
Help. pressed the Quick Guide link, “Yes.”  scrolled to
the end of the page “OK,” and wrote some sentences onto
the Text Mining page. “How do these icons work? — First
we choose the text— ok— not all symbols are familiar to
me—. Luckily, there are tool tips — makes it much
clearer—. It would take some time to learn all these
notations.” [The researcher asks if the subject thinks it is a
good tool for formatting.] “Enough for me—. Some would
like to have WYSIWYG.” [Researcher asks if it would be
easy to implement the WYSIWYG for this application.]
“Tools exist that generate HTML code—. Yes certainly—my
opinion is that this wiki-formatting is generated so that you
don’t have to write HTML—. Yes this is a quite interesting
way of formatting.”
Figure 6 shows only the optimal Path, which Subject 13
was able to follow correctly. He wrote some information on
the page and formatted it instantly.
Figure 6.
The results of the Subject 13 executing Task 4.
This particular test subject performed well with three
tasks, even though he used the optimal path only in the
fourth task. Only Task 3, adding information, was quite
confusing for him. Even though the use of the wiki platform
was quite transparent to him, he had to click around the
portal while performing these four tasks, and once the
researcher prompted him to use the Help. During the last
task, while he was formatting the information he had typed
in the portal, he gave some useful observations and ideas on
how to evolve this kind of tool.
“Basically—clear
layout—
if
someone
has
used
Wikipedia before— maybe, if you
should insert new
information here—. Not very many would use Help—. There
should be ‘Welcome to insert information’—. Usually I can
keep trying for a long time—.I don’t give up easily—. Maybe
it is more like— yes— in one way or another I insert
something—. Maybe there does not exist a technology
threshold—. You can always put in plain text— without any
bolds or other formatting.”
When they were inserting information, the users were
confused between concepts such as article, page, and file, on
the one hand, and wiki-type information, on the other. These
differences are not obvious for new users to wikis. Younger
people
are
quite
likely
to
adapt
into
these
working
environments, judging by their habits of discussing and
sharing their knowledge in the networked world, even in
their spare time. This willingness to discuss and share
knowledge is most likely going to change the way that work
is conducted in organizations. Regarding older experts,
capturing their vast knowledge in particular domains is not
so simple. Equivocal concepts involved make their use of
these cooperation tools more difficult for them.
B.
Number of errors
The main quantitative results are presented in Figure 7.
Columns 1-4 depict the tasks that the subjects were asked to
do. All 14 of the subjects solved the first two tasks, 4 were
able to add information (Task 3), and 10 were able to format
that information (Task 4). The fifth column shows that only
4 subjects were able both to insert and to format information
in the portal. Searching, inserting, and editing are critical
functions with these knowledge tools. Properly designed,
these functions prepare the way for collaboration, co-creation
and innovating in networked societies.
14
14
4
10
10
4
4
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Number of test
subjects
1
2
3
4
5
Tasks
Results of the study
Not
Succeeded
Figure 7.
The results of the four tasks in the experiment with the
Mediawiki based portal. Column 5 contains summary information showing
the number of those who managed to do both tasks 3 and 4.
The optimal paths seemed more troublesome for the
users. Six subjects managed this aspect in the first task, 4 in
the second task, and 3 in the fourth task. In the third task,
where the subjects were asked to insert information to the
portal, no one followed the optimal path. These results are
shown in Figure 8.
131
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

6
8
4
10
0
14
3
11
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Number
of test
subjects
1
2
3
4
Tasks
Follow ing the optimal path w hile performing tasks 1-4
Did not
succeed
Succeeded
Figure 8.
The results on how the subjects were able to perform the four
tasks by way of the optimal paths.
The reasons for the problems that the users came across
are explained in Subsection C. The number of users (NOC)
who came across each problem is given and there is one
example of each problem. The difficulties have been divided
into several different categories.
C.
Qualitative analysis of the errors committed by the test
subjects
Quantitative distribution does not tell us much about the
type of difficulties people had with this wiki. They merely
show that certain types of task were difficult. It would be
very important to also consider the quality of errors and their
psychological interpretations. The latter indicates the kinds
of psychological factors that can explain what is happening.
In order to get a better idea about the errors and be able
to examine their psychological backgrounds it is essential
first to discover the errors and then to find a scientific basis
for understanding why these error generating points are
difficult for people. This is why we present the qualitative
analyses
of
all
data
classified
into
psychologically
meaningful categories.
This type of categorization is a normal procedure in
qualitative analyses [8]. However, using psychological
categories presupposes interpretation of the observations in
psychological terms. From a psychological point of view this
process is in many respects methodologically close to
clinical processes. In personality assessment, for example,
psychologists categorize the symptoms and patients to
connect the observed cases with psychological knowledge.
This is a rather detailed list but we think that it may be
better from a developer’s point of view than mere examples
or numeric information would be. Nearly all errors we found
in this study derived from the Mediawiki platform, but these
same problems can be found in other ICT services too. Note
that unlike earlier, verbatim texts are not italicized.
1)
Difficulties in perceiving
We classify any failure as perceptually originated when
the problems in navigating can be explained on the basis of
some perceptual phenomenon that can be elaborated in
perceptual terms.
Color of links: Subject 7 in Task 3 stated, “Is here some
link? … It cannot even be seen that there is a link here. It is
nearly of the same color [as the other text].” NOC 5.
Disconnecting the page by a picture: Subject 9 in Task 3
noted, “This picture disconnects the page [in the User’s
Guide]”. NOC = 1.
Page resembling code: Subject 7 in Task 2 regarding the
Recent Changes page, “Not a user friendly page. …Looks
just like some code.” NOC = 1.
Confusing namespaces area: Subject 2 in Task 3 noted,
“Search in namespaces at the bottom deals with an area that
is too wide.” NOC = 2.
User’s glance not directed to the right place: Subject 12
in Task 3 said, “This directs my glance to the middle of the
page because there is the ‘Munch’ [the word she searched],
not towards the top of it as it should. …I thought I should
find it here nearby [word ‘Munch’] and not on the top.”
NOC = 1.
Too much text: Subject 8 in Task 4 said, “Too much text
to read.… Probably I would ask for advice from someone.”
NOC = 4.
No WYSIWYG: Subject 13 in Task 4 said, “For my needs,
these editing icons are enough, but someone else might like
to have WYSIWYG.” NOC = 1.
2)
Difficulties in understanding
Page layout leads to wrong navigation: Subject 3 in Task
2 saw that “Links to Wikipedia Help on top of the Help page
guided users to Wikipedia.” NOC = 1.
Hierarchy of the concepts not evident for users: Subject 5
in Task 2 had problems with the hierarchy of concepts. NOC
= 1.
Confusing concepts: Subject 5 in Task 3 found, “The
relation between Page, Article, Research Project, and
Research Group is not obvious for the user.” NOC = 15.
Confusing instructions: Subject 11 in Task 3 noted, “The
Help is a little bit hard to understand because after
[instructions of] creating a page, there is an instruction:
‘However, this way isn’t recommended.’” NOC = 1.
Confusing information on the page: Subject 9 in Task 3
went to the Recent Changes page and said, “No one is going
to understand this page.” NOC = 2.
Confusing messages, such as “There is no page titled [or
article title and page text] matches”: Subject 11 in Task 3
said, “The ‘Usability’ page already exists here.… This is
confusing.” The Search Results Page gave different matches
for the page that the user was searching for, for the Page title,
and for the content of the pages. NOC = 2.
Confusing content: Subject 1 in Task 2 said that the page
content did not seem self-evident for her. NOC = 1.
The logic is not clear: For Subject 5 in Task 2, the logic
of the portal was not that clear. NOC = 1.
Editing wrong page: Subject 3 in Task 4 edited the Help
page. NOC = 7.
Hierarchy not evident for the user: Subject 9 in Task 4
noted, “It is easy to get lost in this interface.” NOC = 5.
Information storing hierarchy not evident: Subject 7 in
Task 3, queried, “How do I know, if I insert some
132
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

information here, whether it goes to Wikipedia or to this
portal?” NOC = 2.
3)
Transfer and memory
Difference between menus on the top and side: Subject
12 in Task 4 noted, “With these top and side menus, it is
somehow difficult to see where to start.” NOC = 1.
Difference between a portal and wiki: Subject 7 in Task
3 said, “I don’t understand what the difference is.— Why is
the wiki here?” NOC = 1.
Difference between Help, User’s Guide, and Quick
Guide: Subject 5 in Task 2 noted, “The difference between
User’s Guide, Help, and Quick Help is not evident for the
users.” NOC = 5.
Difference between Go, Search, and Return: Subject 3 in
Task 3 stated the difference between the Go/Search buttons
and the Return key was not very clear to him. NOC = 3.
Confusing information architecture: Subject 5 in Task 2
said, “The way the information architecture is constructed in
wiki type portals is new and not yet well known.” NOC = 2.
Confusing namespace listing: Subject 11 in Task 3
wondered, “Search in namespaces—. I could select— but
what is the idea in this—. Default is Main—. This is a little
confusing.” NOC = 6
New formatting: Subject 5 in Task 4 found it difficult
because “I would have to learn a new formatting style—. Not
even HTML code.” NOC = 1.
No breadcrumb trail: Subject 3 in Task 4 said, “There
should be a breadcrumb trail so that the user would know
where he located.” NOC = 2
No site map: Subject 10 in Task 3 commented, “I didn’t
find the Main Page of the dictionary.” NOC = 2.
Confusion
about location. Out of the portal and
in
Wikipedia: Subject 7 in Task 4 stated, “I don’t even know
whether I am in this portal or in Wikipedia.” NOC = 5.
4)
Motivation
Motivational reasons: Subject 4 in Task 4 saw that the
usage motivation is dependent on the necessity to use the
portal. One might use it only if it was necessary for work, but
it was too complicated to use with hobbies. NOC = 4.
Users
do
not
use
Help:
Subject
9
in
Task
3
acknowledged about the Help page, “No one reads this kind
of information.” NOC = 5.
5)
Other functions
No inspection for formatting: Subject 9 in Task 4
wondered why “this does not inspect the formatting after one
has inserted information.” NOC = 3.
Linking stored information between pages: Subject 13 in
Task 3 asked, “If I insert something, how do I link it to other
pages?” NOC = 1.
IV.
DISCUSSION
The experiment illustrates the substantial difficulties that
the subjects can have with the two essential tasks in using
these
types
of
portal:
inserting
and
formatting
the
information. These problems can be traced to the inherent
problems in the Wiki platform. Qualitative investigation of
stumbling blocks makes it clear that human psychological
functioning is not sufficiently understood in the construction
of wikis.
The data were gathered through the so-called thinking
aloud method. When a test subject is quiet while working,
the researcher is unsure whether the subject is reading the
content or uncertain or confused about how to continue with
the task. While observing the situation, the researcher is
unable to perceive if there is a problem, any of the situations
where he/she might be encountering a problem, or any of the
reasons for the test subject’s problems. When the subject
thinks aloud, he/she provides the researcher a level of insight
into what the subject is perceiving and reasons why he/she is
completing the task in a particular way.
A.
User psychological reasons behind the problems
Our aim is to categorize the usability problems raised by
the subjects in psychological terms. This allows a direct
connection between the problem points and the currently
available
psychological
knowledge.
Further,
we
can
elaborate our conception of the human mind in interaction.
One of our main goals is to develop psychologically
grounded
design
principles.
However,
while
modern
engineering
design
is
generally
based
on
scientific
knowledge, interaction design is mostly intuitive and based
on folk psychology [36].
Some of the interaction problems were caused by
perceptual difficulties.
We found 15 such cases.
One
problem was caused by colors that were too similar and
people could not easily discriminate between them. Properly
used, color is a very good directive search cue, but if colors
are too similar, the benefit is eliminated [43]. Situations
comparable to this would be text too closely resembling code
or simply too much text on a page. In both cases,
discrimination of the target becomes problematic because the
target and the background information confuse the user
during a search [25], [40].
Another important problem is information invisibility, in
which all the information necessary for controlling ongoing
actions cannot be visually provided to the users. Essential
information may be placed outside the screen. This of course
can also be regarded as a memory problem, but because its
correction is based on making missing information visible,
we have classified it as a perceptual difficulty. We found
three cases like this. Another demonstrative case of this
effect is when important information is allocated outside the
focus of the gaze. These problems often are due to overlong
texts and
incorrect page sizes. It may also
be that
WYSIWYG did not work adequately.
A
third
general
concern
about
user
psychological
problems
in
wikis
has
to
do
with
understanding.
Understanding
involves
a
human’s
ability
to
encode
information into one’s own mental representations. This
means comprehending the meaning of information that is a
word, a sentence, or an event.
In this experiment, subjects confronted many types of
problems in understanding the interfaces. Some of the
commands used in the portal were quite ambiguous and
partly
incomprehensible.
Terms
were
not
explained.
Feedback was inadequate and thus prevented the subjects
133
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

from understanding the operational logic of the system.
Navigation tools were inadequate or absent. The system did
not indicate where the user was at any given time. The
purposes of actions on some pages were not explicated or
intuitive. Thus, expectations were difficult to comprehend.
Understanding is a complex process. One has to be able
to take in and comprehend meaningful details and determine
the right way of doing things. It is essential to be able to
follow simultaneously many different types of information
flows [24], [37]. In this study, the user had to be able to
control at the same time navigations and program control
flow while not forgetting the actual innovation text as well.
Failure in processing any single component of this process
may cause the entire process to fail.
Fourth, some of the problems were related to transfer, in
which earlier learning negatively or positively affects
learning new information [14]. For example, link colors were
non-standard or inconsistent, causing problems for subjects
who were used to different color codes. The same was true
with the wiki’s original features.
Two major types of situations can affect transfer. First,
external user culture may influence the usability of a new
system. People have usability habits and practices. If a new
system or program differs fundamentally from the previous
versions or familiar application, it will cause problems of
negative
transfer.
Second,
the
system
itself
may
be
inconsistent and thus cause incorrect expectations in users.
One important rule has been found in research into
transfer: The more overlapping the features of two interfaces,
the greater the positive transfer between them [38]. Transfer
is thus a very important phenomenon to consider when
addressing user–technology interaction problems.
Fifth, we found concerns related to motivation. In
human–device interaction, success is one of the main
motivation factors for users. In e-learning, for example,
people who are able to solve interaction problems often seem
to become proud and self-confident, while people who fail
might lose their motivation and often demonstrate a negative
attitude towards e-learning [16], [17].
The final major set of problem we found were clearly
technical bugs that hindered usability. These will be
addressed separately because their resolution cannot be
based on psychological information.
We focused on psychological analyses of the difficulties
people face when interacting with technologies because such
analyses can indicate to advanced interaction specialists how
problems could be solved. We can speak of explanatory
frameworks, among them cognitive, emotional, and socio-
cultural, when we refer to the theory languages we can use in
solving an interaction problem. We simply have to find the
right explanatory framework in each case to be able to
explain the problem. This means the right psychological
basis for explaining why the interaction does not work
optimally.
B.
Technical classification of usability problems and
suggestions to developers
While we need look the problems from a psychological
point of view, it is important to pay attention to the technical
side of interaction as well in order to get a clear idea of the
types of corrections needed. We have listed the technical
problems in a table in Appendix 1.
The area of concept clarification contained two kinds of
problems in this portal. There were concepts that were not
self-evident, so
users either did
not
understand
their
meaning, or misinformed. A Tooltip help, which explains the
word in a wiki page and does not merely replicate it, would
make it easier to understand the concepts.
In the area of content facilitation, a distinction should be
made between content, its generation, and its use. Titles
should be clear and short and be made up of highly
informative words. The first two paragraphs of a Web page
must state the most important information.
There are several possibilities for function facilitation in
wiki sites that can be employed well. First, there should be a
page map with the location of the user visible, as well as a
complete path from the home page down through all the
levels of the information architecture. Second, the difference
between the links on the left and at the top of a page (in this
particular Mediawiki-based portal), as well as at the top of an
article, should be made more clear to the users. In addition,
the difference between the Go and Search buttons should
also be made clearer, as well as how the Return key works in
this portal. Finally, the use of namespaces at the bottom of
the search results page should, likewise, be explained better.
Regarding
page
elucidation,
we
had
several
recommendations. First, pages with multiple content areas
(header, its design element, and content) were confusing. To
eliminate confusion, the line below the header that was used
as a design element should be above the header and content
area, rather than between the header and content. Moreover,
pages such as this that were in the portal (groups of headers,
content and edit functions) was not self-explanatory. In
addition, users do not like scrolling very much, and for this
reason, too much information on the Help pages induces
errors when
users search the rules in order to
add
information.
Finally,
employing
effective
visualization
would make it easier to understand the functions available in
this particular portal.
Well-executed function automation can prevent many
errors. An Add button, which opens a template for writing
new information, would facilitate the process. In addition,
function
automation
should
attend
to
the
details
of
processing the added information. There should be access to
help online, with an option to jump to the specific answer on
the Help page. Hovering the cursor over a link should give a
Tooltip text with more information about the link.
The study site contained so much text that only highly
motivated users would read it all. Providing in the portal a
demo on how to use the port would make it easier to get a
mental picture of the site. It is obvious that training and
motivating users are big challenges for the designers of this
portal. Therefore, the working cultures of open societies that
are adapting wikis for particular industrial and research
domains should be built or adapted through carefully
planned user training. This would facilitate the emergence of
truly open societies creating new knowledge and innovating
together on a particular domain.
134
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Because the trend in emerging innovations is about firms
operating in a coordinated manner in networks [22], the
nature and necessity of collaboration within networked
environments must be understood. In this context, large-scale
collaborative development of tools, like wikis “and use of
open source software merits a great deal of further attention
and analysis” [48].
The role of human capital in innovation is important as
well, both at the firm and the aggregate levels [28]. Wikis are
tools that enable organizations to gather some of this capital
for collective use, while the “open innovation paradigm
assumes that there is bountiful supply of potential useful
ideas outside the firm” [6]. This means “valuable ideas can
come from inside or outside the company and can go to
market from inside or outside the company as well” [6].
“Innovation co-operation requires active co-operation with
other firms or public research institutions on innovation
activities (and may include purchases of knowledge and
technology)” [28].
Wikis
can
be
bridges
to
sources
of
information,
knowledge, technologies, practices, and human and financial
resources. They can be used a link that “connects the
innovating firm to other actors in the innovation system:
government laboratories, universities, policy departments,
regulators, competitors, suppliers and customers” [28].
Moreover, “the supply of knowledgeable minds to which
innovating firms have access is perhaps the most crucial
aspect of the innovation systems approach and of innovation
policy for it is individuals within organizations who are the
elemental components of innovation systems” [23].
Even with these kinds of knowledge-oriented policies,
innovation systems, and global cooperation, our results
illustrate that interaction through open innovation platforms
is neither easy nor straightforward. Though the literature on
psychological problems that users may encounter is solid, the
principles are not easy to apply [3], [4], [13]. Consequently,
people encountering problems may give up the idea of
sharing their respective knowledge on a particular innovation
domain and in interacting via continuous feedback to
improve the creative principles [26].
To
avoid
this
potentiality,
some
proposals
for
remediation are offered. First, it must be determined how
new users can obtain the correct mental representation of a
wiki: its structure, functions, and the activities the user can
perform. These can be represented through demos, and with
various training procedures, such as sandbox and illustrative
sitemaps. Second, the content of a wiki must be clearly
distinguished from its functions. Third, because contributing
to a wiki is an entirely new working culture, employees need
a kind of usability that is different from the usability of a
common interface. The platform should evoke understanding
of the very idea of knowledge sharing, co-creating, and
contributing within an open society. To succeed at all of
these challenges, the developers
should
have a deep
understanding of human psychology.
These kinds of portals, and especially the possibilities
they
can
offer
for
global
networked
co-creation
and
innovation, demand the ease of usability. For the portal in
this study, the remediation we suggested is already in
process. In the wider perspective, work and other activities in
networked environments and open innovation with peer
experts or other users already are creating a global working
model that is growing fast. The users should be able to use
these portals easily, without wasting time learning another
new tool, new application, codes, or action model. They
should be able to simply concentrate on the sharing their
expertise of the subject as it evolves, thereby partaking in
and adding to the knowledge of the societies involved.
Designers should rethink how user-created content [48],
especially in open innovation [6] context, can best be used
by people with low levels of computer knowledge. The
current usability problems with wikis, as illustrated here,
may compromise the very idea of open innovation. In this
experiment, the subjects were postgraduate students of
information systems and computer science, and thus may be
looked upon as experienced users. Nevertheless, they still
experienced problems with relatively elementary tasks on
this platform. This shows that poor understanding of human
psychological requirements can lead even quite sophisticated
users into problems. This runs counter to the very philosophy
of open innovation. All people should be able to participate
in open societies and knowledge production. Therefore, it is
essential to eliminate as many of these user psychological
problems as possible.
With the rapid expansion of wiki use in organizations and
between them, users are faced with problems in finding the
core knowledge they seek. One of the most fascinating
approaches in addressing this difficulty is the Semantic Web
[45], which includes ontologies and reasoning on domains,
as seen on the Gene Functions Wiki [15], Semantic
MediaWiki, IkeWiki [19], and EKOSS [19]. As stated in
[33], “We believe that by combining rich XML (DITA)
structure, collaborative DocumentSpaces and wikis, we can
help organizations break down the barriers that prevent them
from
achieving
cross-departmental
collaboration.”
This
perspective can be expanded from the organizational context
to the cooperation and co-work between organizations and to
their whole supply chain [28], which is one of the sources of
innovations made via cooperation.
Our continuing work involves an inquiry into the barriers
of using these kinds of innovation portals the users encounter
in their work. It is necessary to understand the various
psychological hindrances people meet at the individual,
group, organizational, and corporate levels in participating in
decentralized innovation societies. In the future, such
societies will be the most prominent sources of new,
breakthrough innovations and the starting points for new
economic growth in the global economy.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors express appreciation to the Finnish Forest
Cluster for its favorable attitude toward our studies. We will
also give thanks to the new, innovative company, Inno-w,
the designer of this particular platform under investigation,
for the possibility to use it as the research subject.
135
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

REFERENCES
[1]
J. Anderson, John, M. Matiessa and C. Lebiere, “ACT-R: A theory of
higher level cognition and its relation to visual attention.” Human
computer interaction, 12, 1997, pp. 439-462,
[2]
M. Bernard, “Examining a Metric for Predicting the Accessibility of
Information
within
Hypertext
Structures.”
Dissertation
Thesis,
Wichita State University, 2002.
[3]
S. K. Card, T. P. Moran and A. Newell, The Psychology of Human-
Computer Interaction, Erlbaum, Hillsdale NJ, 1983
[4]
B. Carlson and R.
Stankiewicz, “On the Nature, Function, and
Composition of Technological Systems”, Journal of Evolutionary
Economics, 1(2), 1991, pp 93-118.
[5]
J. M. Carroll, “Human-computer interaction: Psychology as a Science
of Design”, Annual Review of Psychology, February, 48, 1997, pp.
61-83.
[6]
Henry, W., Chesbrough, The New Imperative for creating and
Profiting from Technology, Boston, Massachusetts, Harvard Business
School press, 2003.
[7]
P. Cohendent and F. Meyer-Krahmer, ”Technology Policy in the
Knowledge-Based Economy”, in Innovation Policy in a Knowledge-
Based Economy. Theory and Practice, L. Patrick and M. Mireille,
Eds. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2005, pp. 75-112.
[8]
Ian Dey, Qualitative Data Analysis: A user-friendly guide. London:
Routledge, 1993.
[9]
M., Dodgson and J. Bessant, Effective Innovation Policy: A New
Approach, London: International Thomson Business Press, 1996.
[10] EU’s
European
Technology
Platforms.
[Online]
Available:
http://cordis.europa.eu/technology-platforms/home_en.html.
[11] The
Finish
Forest
Cluster.
[Online]
Available:
http://www.forestindustries.fi/infokortit/forest%20cluster%20ltd/Page
s/default.aspx.
[12] J. Gwizdka and I. Spence, “Implicit measures of lostness and success
in web navigation”, Interacting with Computers, 19, 2007, pp. 357-
369.
[13] M. G. Helander, Handbook of human-computer interaction, Eds.
Martin G. Helander, Thomas K. Landauer and Prasad V. Prabhu,
Amsterdam: Elsevier 1997.
[14] Sacha Helfenstein and Pertti Saariluoma, ”Mental contents in
transfer”, Psychological Research, 70 (4), July, 2006.
[15] Robert Hoehndorf, Kay Prüfer, Michael Backhaus, Heinrich Herre,
Janet Kelso, Frank Loebe and Johann Visagie, „A Proposal for a
Gene Functions Wiki” R. Meersman, Z. Tari, P. Herrero et al. (Eds.):
OTMWorkshops 2006, LNCS 4277, pp. 669–678, 2006. Springer-
Verlag
Berlin
Heidelberg.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.
springerlink.com/content/t535073n63336068/fulltext.pdf.
[16] Sanna Juutinen and Pertti Saariluoma, P. ”Some emotional Obstacles
of E-learning”, Digital Learning India 23-25.8.2006, New Delhi,
India.
[17] Sanna Juutinen and Pertti Saariluoma, P. ”Usability and emotional
obstacles in adopting e-learning - A case study”, 2007 IRMA
International conference, May 19-23, 2007, Vancouver, Canada
[18] J. Klobas, Wikis: Tools for information Work & Collaboration, J.
Klobas, Ed. Oxford: Chandos Publishing, 2006.
[19] Steven Kraines , Weisen Guo , Brian Kemper and Yutaka Nakamura,
“EKOSS: A Knowledge-User Centered Approach to Knowledge
Sharing, Discovery, and Integration on the Semantic Web”, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science 4273/2006, Springer Berlin/Heidelberg,
2006.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.metapress.com/content/85617065848214g7/fulltext.pdf
[20] Markus
Krötzsch,
Sebastian
Schaffert
and
Denny
Vrandecic,
“Reasoning in Semantic Wikis”, Lecture Notes in Computer Science
4636/2007. Springer Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007. [Online]. Availabel:
http://www.metapress.com/ content/g2jx102461w52456/
[21] Juha,
Lamminen,
Mauri,
Leppänen,
Risto,
Heikkinen,
Anna,
Kämäräinen,
and
Elina,
Jokisuu,
”A
quantitative
method
for
localizing user interface problems”, Submitted to Human technology,
2009.
[Online]
Available:http://www.
humantechnology.jyu.fi
[22] Alan MacCormack, Theodore Forbath, Peter Brooks, and Patrick
Kalaher, “Innovation through Global Collaboration: A New Source of
Competitive Advantage”, Working Knowledge, Harward Business
School, 2007.
[23] James Stanley Metcalfe,. “Systems failure and the case of innovation”
in Innovation Policy in a knowledge-Based Economy. Theory and
Practise, Patrick Llerena and Matt Mireille (Eds.). Springen-Verlag,
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2005.
[24] Raquel Navarro-Prieto and Jose J. Canas, “Are visual programming
languages better? The role of imagery in program comprehension”,
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, Volume 54, Issue
6, June 2001, pp. 799-829.
[25] U. Neisser, Cognitive Pyschology, New York: Appleton-Century-
Crofts, 1967.
[26] L. Patrick and M. Mireille, Eds. Innovation Policy in a Knowledge-
Based Economy. Theory and Practice, Springen-Verlag, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2005, pp. 1-11.
[27] T. Moran, “An applied psychology of the users,” Computing Surveys,
13, 1, March, 1981, pp. 1-11.
[28] Oslo manual: Guidelines for collecting and interpreting innovation
data. Measurement of scientific and technological activities, 3rd ed.
Paris: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
Statistical Office of the European Communities, OECD, 2005.
[Online].
Available:
http://ulutek.uludag.edu.tr/downloads/Oslo_Manual_Third_Edition.p
df.
[29] A. Oulasvirta and P. Saariluoma, “Long-term working memory and
interrupting messages in human-computer interaction,” Behaviour &
information Technology, 23, 1, Jan-Feb, 2004, pp. 53-64.
[30] A. Oulasvirta and P. Saariluoma, “Surviving task interruptions:
Investigating
implications
of
long
tern
mowrking
memory,”
International journal of human computer studies, 64, 2006, pp. 941–
961.
[31] S. Paquet, “Wikis in business,” Wikis: Tools for information Work &
Collaboration, J. Klobas, Ed. Oxford: Chandos Publishing, 2006.
[32] H.
Parkkola,
P.
Saariluoma
and
E.
Berki,
”Action
oriented
classification of families’ information and communication anctions:
Exploring
mothers’
viewpoints,”
Journal
of
behaviour
and
information technology, 2006.
[33] Paul Prescod, “Blast Radius XMetaL, The convergence of structure
and chaos.” 2005. [Online]. Available:
http://www.idealliance.org/
proceedings/xtech05/papers/03-02-04/.
[34] Teresa, Roberts, in Handbook of human computer interaction, M.
Helander Ed. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1988.
[35] P.
Saariluoma,
Käyttäjäpsykologia
[User-psychology],
Porvoo,
Finland, WSOY, 2004.
[36] P.
Saariluoma,
(2005).“Explanatory frameworks
for
interaction
design,” A. Pirhonen, H. Isomäki, C. Roast & P. Saariluoma, Eds.
Future interaction design, London, Springer.
[37] L. Salmeron, J. Canas, W. Kintsch and I. Fajardo, 2005. “Reading
Strategies and Hypertext Comprehension”
Discourse Processes,
40(3), 2005, pp. 171–191.
[38] M. K. Singley and J. R. Anderson, The Transfer of Cognitive Skill,
Cambridge, MA: Harward University Press, 1989.
[39] Strategic Research Agenda of the European Forest-based Sector
Technology
Platform,
2008.
[Online]
Available:
http://www.forestplatform.org/.
[40] E. Styles, “The psychology of attention”, Hove: Psychology press,
1997.
[41] Helena
Suvinen,
and
Pertti
Saariluoma,
”User
Psychological
Problems in a Wiki-Based Knowledge Sharing Portal”, Proceedings
136
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

of
the
Third
International
Conference
on
Internet
and
Web
Applications and Services, (ICIW’08), June 8-13, 2008 – Athens,
Greece. 2008, ISBN: 978-0-7695-3163-2, IEEE Computer Society,
Washington, DC, USA, pp. 552-557.
[42] Don Tappscott and Anthony Williams, Wikinomics How Mass
Collaboration Changes Everything, Penquin Group (USA) , New
York, 2006.
[43] A.
Treisman,.
“Features
and
objects”,
Quarterly journal
of
experimental psychology, 40A, 1988, pp. 201-237.
[44] C. Wagner, “Wiki: A technology for conversational knowledge
management and group collaboration”, Communications of the
Association for Information Systems, 13, 2004, pp. 265-289.
[45] Christian, Wagner, Karen, S., K., Cheung, and Rachael, K., F., Ip,
“Building Semantic Webs for e-government with Wiki technology”,
Electronic Government 3(1), 2006, pp 36-55.
[46] C. Wagner and A. Majchrzak, “Enabling Customer-Centricity Using
Wikis and the Wiki Way”, Journal of Management information
Systems, 23, 3, 2006,pp.17-43.
[47] C. Wagner and P. Prasarnphanich. “Innovating Collaborative Content
Creation: The Role of Altruism and Wiki Technology”, Proceedings
of the 40th international Conference on System Sciences – 2007, pp
18-28.
[Online]
Available:
http://csdl2.computer.org/comp/proceedings/hicss/2007/2755/00/2755
0018b.pdf.
[48] Graham Vickery and Sacha Wunsch-Vincent, Participative Web and
User-Created
Content.
WEB
2.0,
WIKIS
AND
SOCIAL
NETWORKING.
OECDpublishing,
2007.
[Online]
Available:
http://213.253.134.43/oecd/pdfs/ browseit/9307031E.PDF.
[49] Wiki-based portal, Forest Cluster Research Portal, 2006, 11. [Online].
Available: http://www.forestclusterportal.fi/index.php/Main_Page.
137
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

APPENDIX 1
Classification of the usability problems and proposals for solving them [41]
Concepts
1.
Group facilitator and Support facilitator are not obvious concepts for the user.
2.
While making groups, the concept KR1 is not obvious for the user.
3.
There is no easy way of adding new information in correct form: The Help-section is needed to understand
the task. There is confusion about the concepts of article, page, file and Wiki-type information. Only 4 of 14
subjects were able to contribute without the help of the researcher.
Content
clarification
4.
On the Search results page, the color of links and the color and size of fonts for the text are confusing. The
primary heading must be clearer so users do not cast down their gaze.
5.
The main page of dictionary is necessary.
6.
The Category: Research group page is, at the moment, confusing. G, G Cont and T are not obvious for users.
7.
The purpose of the Special Pages page is not comprehensible to users.
8.
Technical pages or content generation and using of them are confusing.
9.
It is not obvious where the information is stored and how it is connected and linked.
Function
clarification
10. The differences between the links on the left, at the top of the article, and at the top of the page are not
obvious to users.
11. There is no page map. The user should know his/her navigation point all the time.
12. The difference between the function of the Go button and the Search button is not obvious to users.
Experienced users use the Return key without thinking, thus it functions as the Go button.
13. Scanning the Search Results page is confusing when there are not many pages. The results page should
include information regarding the number of pages returned.
14. The use of the namespaces at the bottom of the page is not comprehensible to users.
15. The difference between Quick Guide and the Help page is not comprehensible to users
16. On the Help page, the Creating New page steps 1, 2 and 3 are explained well, but are confusing, because the
last step includes the text “This way isn’t recommended.”
17. The picture on the User’s Guide page is illustrative, but it divides the page. The instructions mislead users to
start adding groups and ideas, when they should add information.
18. There should be clear hierarchies and routes to execute functions.
Page
elucidation
19. The grouping of the information on the pages of the various communities is confusing. The information in
the areas between lines should belong together.
20. The headings on the Community Portal page are not clear: First a black heading, then the same in green.
21. In the Help page before the Creating New page is the Editing Images & Files –section. Users do not
scroll/read long texts.
22. The site has too much text, and too little visualization that would make it easier to understand the functions
available in this portal.
23. The Welcome texts are not needed.
Function
automation
24. The Research Group list should be updated automatically when new research groups are created.
25. There should be an Add button for inserting new information that should link directly with a template where
the users could write the content, and it should function in the WYSIWYG-mode. The application should at
least ask about the text formatting before saving.
26. There should be an online Help site with the option to jump directly to the sought place in the Help page.
27. The cursor hovering on a link should give a Popup text with more information about the link.
28. New links should be provided in blue and visited links in red, in line with the standard in Web interfaces.
Training
29. Many of the subjects would have stopped inserting information and tried to get help from someone else.
There should be one trained expert for this application in every research unit.
30. There is no working culture of this kind of wiki societies, so it should be created by training.
31. The site contained so much text that only highly interested users would use it. A clear demo can make it
easier to get a mental picture of it. There are several domains that can induce problems: Using Wiki, the
FFCRP interface, and the domain of the forest sector. There is no active working culture yet for this kind of
application. [However, this culture has evolved quickly since our experiment.)
138
International Journal On Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/

