Smart Spaces Based Construction and Personalization
of Recommendation Services for Historical e-Tourism
Oksana B. Petrina
Faculty of Mathematics and Information Technology
Petrozavodsk State University
Petrozavodsk, Russia
Email: petrina@cs.karelia.ru
Dmitry G. Korzun
Department of Computer Science
Petrozavodsk State University
Petrozavodsk, Russia
Email: dkorzun@cs.karelia.ru
Aleksey G. Varfolomeyev
Faculty of Mathematics and Information Technology
Petrozavodsk State University
Petrozavodsk, Russia
Email: avarf@petrsu.ru
Aleksandrs Ivanovs
Department of History
Daugavpils University
Daugavpils, Latvia
Research Institute for Regional Studies (REGI)
Rezekne University
Rezekne, Latvia
Email: aleksandrs.ivanovs@du.lv
Abstract—The smart spaces approach enables development of
advanced digital services referred now as “smart services”. In
this paper, we discuss the development problem of smart services
for the domain of historical e-Tourism. We show the applicability
of recommender systems for constructing and personalizing such
services within a smart space. The latter is created to accompany
a tourist or a group of them. A corpus of historical data
distributed among multiple sources in the Internet is collected
the tourist’s smart space, forming a kind of custom and dynamic
historical knowledge. In particular, context-aware semantic rela-
tions between historical objects are established and manipulated.
This semantics-rich information is an input for recommendation-
making. Personalized recommendations with quantitative and
qualitative estimates can be constructed. The result then is
visualized to assist a historian tourist in historical analysis of
points of interests. The contribution consists of the concept
deﬁnition and system design for creating a smart space with
assistance services of personalized recommendations.
Keywords–Historical e-Tourism; Cultural Heritage; Point of
Interest; Recommender Systems; Semantic Network; Smart Spaces;
Personalized Services.
I.
INTRODUCTION
This work extends the results presented in our UBICOMM
2015 paper [1] on the role and smart spaces based design of
e-Tourism recommender systems. A lot of research has been
already done, especially in the direction of making the services
of e-Tourism systems mobile and intelligent [2], [3]. A topical
subdomain is historical tourism [4], which we distinguish
from more general cultural heritage tourism. In particular,
the historical tourism focuses on visiting historical Points of
Interest (POI) and on studying their history-aware relation with
other historical objects (POIs, events, persons, etc.).
For a historian tourist, a POI is recommended not only if it
is nearby and within user’s interests. Such a tourist would like
to see a spectrum of historically related POIs; some are closely
located and some can be faraway. Clustering important POIs
for recommendation needs semantic analysis of their relation
with historical objects and can be performed by means of
ontologies [5]. The content for reasoning about, however, must
be extracted from some historical databases or digital archives.
Moreover, some historical relations are subjective, e.g., depend
on context or personal vision of historical facts.
The study presented in this paper is motivated by the lack
of “smart” assistants for historian tourists, although there is
a lot of them for mobile e-Tourism in general [2]. Based on
our previous work [1], [6]–[9], we expect that development
of recommendation services with built-in semantic analysis of
historical data can be implemented using ontology-based tech-
nologies of the Semantic Web. Furthermore, traditional web-
based architectures and mobile standalone applications seem
insufﬁcient for this development. We focus on the emerging
approach of smart spaces [10], [11]. A ubiquitous computing
environment is created where mobile users, multisource data,
and various services constructed over these data are intelli-
gently connected based on ontology-driven information sharing
and self-generation. Services can be personalized by means
of augmentation of personal data to the shared content and
customization of required reasoning about the content.
In this paper, we analyze the historical POIs recommen-
dation problem. Our research scope is limited to such im-
portant phases of service development as concept deﬁnition
and system design. To deﬁne the concept we provide a
reference scenario of recommendation services for historical
e-Tourism. Additionally, we explain the concept by a detailed
85
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

example. The proposed system design consists of a smart space
based architecture and operation description for participating
software agents. The proposed design supports multiple data
sources and adopts various ranking methods. This contribution
enables creation of a personalized smart space with services
assisting its historian tourists by means of recommendations.
We also perform experimental performance evaluation for
iterative acquisition of historical knowledge from available
data sources in the Internet.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
discusses the related work motivating our study of POI recom-
mendation services in historical tourism. Section III introduces
our reference service scenario for historical e-Tourism. Sec-
tion IV illustrates by a detailed example the semantic network
construction and its use for POI ranking. Section V describes
the smart space based system design. Section VI provides
details of the software agents that cooperatively construct
the recommendation service in the smart space. Section VII
analyses the proposed concept deﬁnition and system design
using experiments and contrasting with the existing solutions.
Section VIII concludes the paper.
II.
MOTIVATION AND RELATED WORK
Historical tourism has distinctive features [4] compared
with the general application domain of cultural heritage
tourism. The latter embraces both historical and present-day
cultural phenomena. According to Nora [12], historical tourism
addresses the so-called “sites of memory”. They present any
material traces of historical events, which sometimes coincide
with cultural heritage artifacts. For instance, an architectural
monument is directly “involved” in historical developments
related to its construction. Another example is any place or a
spot associated with a historical event. Traces of historical facts
are presented in the multitude of historical sources, including
open sources in the Internet.
In general, a point of interest (or attraction) is an actual
spot with precise localization on the geographical map (e.g.,
geo-position coordinates or postal address). Nowadays, POI
recommender systems form an important services class in
e-Tourism [2]. In addition to POIs, historical tourism takes
into consideration a lot of other historical-valued objects
such as persons, events, and data sources (written records
and narratives, artifacts, alternative information sources, data
and knowledge bases available on the Web, etc.). Relations
between historical objects deﬁne important semantics [13].
Moreover, any historical event might be conditionally deﬁned
as a semantic relation between several historical objects [14].
Ontologies become of high application interest for knowledge
representation and reasoning in historical research [5] and e-
Tourism [3].
In historical tourism, we expect that semantic relations can
be effectively represented and manipulated using the technolo-
gies of the Semantic Web. To the best of our knowledge,
no specialized knowledge base that comprise semantically
enriched information about historical objects has been created
yet, e.g., see [15]. To a certain extent, a corpus of historical
information is represented in the ontological form in such
knowledge bases for cultural heritage as DBpedia, Freebase,
or YAGO. Additional information can be extracted from web
publications of historical sources [6], [16]. In these settings,
the methods of web-based systems, mobile programming, and
multi-agent systems provide effective means for implementa-
tion of data search, access, and reasoning [2], [3].
Semantic Web methods and technologies help to solve the
problems of creation, design, enrichment, editing, retrieval,
analysis and presentation of historical information [15]. There
are mobile services for cultural heritage e-Tourism developed
using semantic technologies, e.g., see the review in [17].
For instance, an intelligent tourist guide [18] utilizes cultural
heritage information. Nevertheless, the present-day applica-
tion developments do not take into account the principal
peculiarity of historical tourism—semantic relations among
historical data. The problem of the semantic-aware retrieval
information from multiple data sources can be settled by using
semantic technologies, e.g., by parsing the query and ranking
the relevance of content [19]. However, effective POI ranking
requires the combination of different algorithms. One of the
ranking parameters can be the recalls of the users with similar
interests that have been posted on a Smart Tourism Web-
site [20]. In addition to users recalls, other parameters should
be taken into account, e.g., such context attributes of visited
places as time and weather.
Methods of ubiquitous computing and, in particular, the
recent progress in communication technologies of the Internet
of Things make possible creating environments where diverse
devices and computer systems cooperatively construct services
surrounding the user [10], [11], [21]. New programming
paradigms emerge, such as smart spaces. A smart space sup-
ports cooperation by establishing a shared view of resources in
the environment. The shared view is ontology-based, applying
the technologies of the Semantic Web. For e-Tourism services,
a smart space is mobile and personalized, i.e., created around a
traveling tourist, attracting appropriate web services and other
data sources from the Internet [6], [22], [23]. In particular,
smart service attributes and their smart space based imple-
mentation were proposed in [9]. As a result, these attributes
introduce a new level of adaptation and personalization for
e-Tourism services.
The discussion above motivates our research focus on POI
recommendation services for historical tourism. First, semantic
relations between historical objects cannot be bypassed in
recommendation making. Second, there is no single source of
needed information. The latter is distributed within multiple
sources, each represents the information either in ontological
form or requires an extraction procedure. Third, a historian
tourist needs personalized services, i.e., source information and
the result are subject to her/his preferences and context. Last
but not least, a recommendation service is “ubiquitous”, i.e.,
the service accompanies a mobile tourist in the anywhere and
anytime style. In this paper, we propose the concept model
and system design for the smart space based implementation
of recommendation services for historical tourism. The key
advantage of the proposed solutions is their support for various
smart services attributes.
III.
RECOMMENDATION SCENARIO
Consider a historical POI recommendation service that
provides personal assistance for a tourist during her/his jour-
ney. This way, we introduce a reference scenario that deﬁnes
our concept model of a historical e-Tourism service. Table I
summarizes the formal symbol notation.
86
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 1. Sample semantic network: historical relations built around Hotel Negresco.
Let P consist of POIs that are accessed from multiple
sources. Typical examples of historical POIs are buildings,
monuments, fountains, bridges, squares, etc. Spacious objects,
such as streets or rivers, are not POIs. As a rule, a historical
POI has a particular name. There can be several names associ-
ated with a given p ∈ P, e.g., due to historical developments or
due to the use of different languages. Each POI has distinctive
properties: coordinates and/or address, date, architect, etc. In
the service, POIs and other historical objects form the set H.
A historical POI recommendation is essentially based on
relations between the elements of H. First, “direct” links exist
between historical objects. For instance, a person x is the
architect of a building y. Second, links can appear between
objects due to similarity. For instance, two buildings have
been constructed by the same architect or they are located on
the same street. Third, links are a result of involving diverse
objects and POIs in a common historical event. Therefore, a
semantic network G with nodes H can be constructed.
TABLE I. SYMBOL NOTATION.
Symbol
Description
H
The set of all historical objects H = H1 ∪ . . . ∪ Hn acquired from
n data sources. Overlapping Hi ∩ Hj ̸= ∅ is possible.
P ⊂ H
The set of all POIs P = P1 ∪ . . . ∪ Pn, where Pi ⊂ Hi for any
data source i.
G, Gp
Semantic network G where nodes are from H and links are historical
relations. In Gp, an initial POI p ∈ P is ﬁxed.
O
Ontology O describes the historical domain: possible classes and
properties of historical objects as well as relations and restrictions for
them.
Rp
Star graph Rp is a POI recommendation, where the internal node is the
initial POI p ∈ P and leaves are recommended POIs q ∈ P .
rq > 0
Real-valued rank rq shows the recommendation degree of q ∈ P in
respect to the initial POI p.
tq
Annotation tq summarizes (in a human-readable form) the reason of
recommending q if the initial POI is p.
The historical relation semantics have a personalized char-
acter: some relations are treated differently by different his-
torians or dependently on a context. For instance, there can
be several visions of the role of a person for a certain POI.
An important context corresponds to an initial POI; a tourist
selects p ∈ P and considers a semantic graph Gp. The all three
types of links mentioned above can be a subject to context
consideration and personalization.
Figure 1 shows a sample semantic network that is built
manually around Hotel Negresco, one of the most famous
buildings of Nice. Small circles are POIs, triangles denote
historical persons, text rectangles describe POI properties,
and rhombuses represent historical events. The initial POI
(p = “Hotel Negresco”) is linked with seven other POIs (ﬁve
of them are located in Nice). The links are based on different
properties: one and the same architect, close location, involve-
ment in common historical events, etc. Hotel information is
extracted mainly from Wikipedia (see the next section for
detailed description).
Based on Gp, a tourist would like to understand which POIs
are interesting for her/his personal consideration from histor-
ical perspective. An important context for this understanding
is that she/he starts from p (e.g., being actually or virtually
in this POI). The recommendation result can be represented
as a star graph Rp. Its internal node is p and the leaves
represent all recommended POIs q ∈ P. Ranks rq > 0 can
be associated with the POIs to describe the recommendation
degree of q (the higher rank the more recommendable). In
a visual representation of Gp the length of edge (p, q) is
proportional to the rank. Additional annotations tq, which
describe the reason of recommendation (in an aggregative
form), can be also associated. Visual layout of Rp can also
take into account the geographical position of q in respect
to p (e.g., when q is on the North-East of p).
87
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

An example of recommendation is shown in Figure 2 in
the form of a star graph derived from the semantic network (it
was shown in Figure 1). The example star graph has been built
by hand. With this example, we considered the possibility of
processing unstructured data sources [8]. If text information is
automatically processed, then the star graph will be identical.
Geographical positions of the POIs are not reﬂected.
Now we can formulate our reference scenario of recom-
mendation services for historical e-Tourism as consisting of
the following steps.
Step 1: Initial POI selection. It can be made either manually
(e.g., pointing out coordinates, a spot on the map, or POI’s
name) or automatically (e.g., within a deﬁnite area pointing
out the nearest POI). The area can be either set by the tourist
(for instance, on a map), or determined automatically taking
into consideration the location of the tourist.
Step 2: Semantic network around the initial POI. The
sets H and P ⊂ H as well as semantic relations among them
are searched for and retrieved from available knowledge bases
and other data sources. Since the network Gp is potentially
inﬁnite, the process is limited. For instance, if the construction
reaches another POI q from p, then the search for additional
historical objects interconnected with q is terminated. Note
that the path from p to q is subject to analysis in order
to derive the reason of recommending q (construction of
an annotation tq). This example of limiting the construction
process straightforwardly leads to a star graph Rp.
Step 3: POI ranking. Differentiation of recommended POIs
can be based on ranks rq. They are computed based on tourist’s
preferences. For instance, she/he needs to ﬁnd a building
constructed by the same architect, an ediﬁce that built in the
same architectural style, or another historical building located
on the same street. Such preferences can be deﬁned in the
user’s proﬁle. They can be manually deﬁned for the initial
POI (before the implementation of the second scenario step).
A signiﬁcant component of the user’s proﬁle is the history of
the choices of previous initial POIs (e.g., history of visits).
For instance, the previously chosen POIs acquire lower ranks,
since these POIs should not be repeatedly recommended.
Step 4: Visualization. The recommendation results achieved
on Steps 2 and 3 are visually presented in a user friendly way,
i.e., by means of a star graph possibly augmented with a map
Figure 2. Star graph example: Hotel Negresco and recommendations on its
historical surrounding.
and textual/visual descriptions. For instance, annotations tq
show the reasons of the provided POI recommendations.
Step 5: Feedback. The recommendation process is iterative.
Based on the presented results (the star graph with ranks
and annotations), the tourist supplements this information by
expanding the semantic network G (additional data retrieved
from historical sources). The process—supplementing and
expanding network—is represented in G: new historical events
appear in which both the user and the objects are involved. The
user becomes a historical person—a network node in G.
In summary, this reference scenario deﬁnes our concept
model of a recommendation service for the considered class
of recommender systems in historical e-Tourism.
IV.
EXAMPLE OF SEMANTIC NETWORK CONSTRUCTION
AND POI RANKING
The previous section showed the construction of a semantic
network around POIs. Let us now illustrate some important
details of the construction. We continue the handmade example
on Hotel Negresco from Section III. The example reﬂects the
operations to be implemented in the proposed smart space
based system design.
The initial POI of the semantic network in Figure 1 is
Hotel Negresco. It attracted our attention by its position in
the center of Nice and its role of an architectural symbol, the
most popular siteseeng in that city. Hotel information is widely
represented on several pages in Wikipedia. Not surprisingly,
the French version is the most complete one, but it is quite
interesting that the same information from different pages
is slightly different: for example, there are few differences
in the histories how the unique chandelier under the hotel
canopy is linked to the Russian Emperor Nicholas II. The
Russian version simply states that two chandeliers were made.
The ﬁrst one is for Nicholas II, who placed it in the Grand
Kremlin Palace. The second one is for the hotel. The French
version says that the chandelier in the hotel was also originally
intended to the Russian Tsar. The English version sais that
Nicholas II was not able to take the chandelier because of the
October Revolution.
By this example, we can see the deﬁciencies of Wikipedia
as a source of historical information. There are no precise refer-
ences to the sources. The connection between Hotel Negresco,
Nicholas II, and the Grand Kremlin Palace is expressed using
“event4” event, as it is shown in Figure 1.
From the text of Wikipedia pages, it should be noted
that the hotel is connected with two bright personalities:
1) the author of the idea, the customer of the construction,
the ﬁrst owner of the hotel, the Romanian adventurer and
businessman Henri Negresco, and 2) Dutch architect Edouard-
Jean Niermans. There are other persons as well, for example,
Jeanne Augier, the owner of the hotel in the last decades, who
has breathed new life into the hotel, aligning it with the art
museum. There are also many links away with directors and
actors through the movies that were ﬁlmed there, or with great
people who lived in the hotel. That is, the semantic network
around the hotel could be much more extended. We decided to
stay at Negresco and Niermans because additional links were
discovered between them, and quite an interesting network
with no other persons is constructed. In practice, limiting the
expansion of the semantic network can be implemented by
88
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

input of speciﬁc parameters, e.g., the network depth or the
number of POIs.
Shortly before the start of construction of the hotel Henry
Negresco had become the director of the restaurant in Mu-
nicipal Casino in Nice. In this period, Niermans performed
work on the reconstruction of the premises in that building.
Apparently, they met there; as a result Niermans was embodied
in the idea to build the hotel. Unfortunately, the Municipal
Casino of Nice has not survived to the present time; it was
demolished in 1979. It was located on Place Massena, now
this place is just a square. The existing connection between
the Place Massena, Negresco and Niermans is expressed in
Figure 1 by three events: “event2” and “event3” link Niermans
and Negresco with the Municipal Casino (the historical object
that do not exist now), and “event1” connects the Municipal
Casino with Massena Square (the event is that there was casino
that had been constructed and then disassembled). The last case
can also be described as two events.
In addition to Hotel Negresco, Niermans was the architect
of many other buildings, but there are few of them in Nice.
For example, the apartment house, which is not far from the
hotel (on the same street Promenade des Anglais), and Villa
Le Colombier, which is quite far from the center (it was built
by the architect for his daughter). These objects do not have
their own pages on Wikipedia, but the Niermans’ page has
references to them. In addition, Niermans’ page describes that
Niermans was graduated from Delft University of Technology.
In addition to these connections of Hotel Negresco, the
semantic network also embraces other historical monuments,
which are located in the nearest neighbourhood like Villa
(museum) Massena, or located on the same street as the
historic hotel-casino Mediterranean Palace.
Thus, the initial POI is associated with seven related POIs,
ﬁve of which are in Nice, the sixth one is the Grand Kremlin
Palace in Moscow, and the seventh one is Delft University of
Technology. Of course, the location (proximity to the initial
POI) should inﬂuence the rank of an object: the closer the
POI, the higher the rank. In addition, it is necessary to take
into account the convenience of the route - it is the best
when objects are located on the same street. By proximity
and convenience the POIs could be ranked as follows:
1)
Mus´ee Mass´ena;
2)
Apartment house (31, promenade des Anglais, Nice);
3)
Palais de la M´editerran´ee;
4)
Place Mass´ena;
5)
Villa Le Colombier;
6)
Delft University of Technology;
7)
Grand Kremlin Palace.
It is also necessary to take into account the degree of
interest for a historian tourist. This degree can be estimated by
the number of connections and the level of facts saturation. For
example, the story of Nicholas II and the chandelier is much
fuller of facts relevant to the initial POI, than the mention
of the fact that the architect Niermans studied in Delft. The
same can be said about the Place Massena in comparison with
any other POI. If Casino Municipal was preserved, it certainly
would have to take the top spot in the ranking. However, as a
look at the square, where once there was this casino, still is
not as interesting as a building, in the ﬁnal ranking, it would
be put on the 3rd place:
1)
Apartment house (31, promenade des Anglais, Nice)
– the same street and the same architect;
2)
Palais de la M´editerran´ee – the same street and the
same type of building (historical hotel-casino);
3)
Place Mass´ena – rich history closely related with the
initial POI, but now it is not so interesting;
4)
Mus´ee Mass´ena – very close to the initial POI, but
the relation is rather weak (it is also a historical
monument);
5)
Villa Le Colombier – it is interesting to see it because
it was built by the same architect, but it is very far
from the initial POI.
V.
SMART SPACE BASED DESIGN
The smart spaces paradigm considers computing networked
environments equipped with a variety of devices and with
access to the Internet [10], [11], [24]. Software agents act
as knowledge processors (KPs) running on the devices and
interacting via information sharing. A semantic information
broker (SIB) is a mediator for information collection and ex-
change. Each KP produces its share of information and makes
it available to others via the SIB. Similarly via the SIB, a
KP consumes information of its own interest. The information
storage employs RDF (Resource Description Framework) [25].
Agents can apply such advanced Semantic Web technologies as
SPARQL Protocol and RDF Query Language or Web Ontology
Language (OWL) for shared information maintenance, search,
and reasoning [26].
This programming paradigm suits well for the development
of e-Tourism services, as recent work [6], [22], [23] indicated.
Figure 3 shows the multi-agent system architecture that we
adopted from [6] for the case of historical recommendation ser-
vices. Data source KPs for historical sources provide the smart
space with extracted historical data. Client KPs allow the user
to participate in the smart space receiving and consuming its
services. Semantic network combiner constructs personalized
Figure 3. Multi-agent system architecture: historical information from
multiple sources and other relevant information are semantically related and
collectively processed in the smart space.
89
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

structures of POIs and builds the semantic network. Ranking
KP makes ranking POIs using different ranking algorithms.
The recommendation service is constructed by cooperative
work of multiple KPs on historical data and other information.
Consider the properties of the proposed architecture to analyze
the advantages that the smart spaces approach provides to
the development of recommendation services for historical
tourism. Some advantages are valid even for the more general
case of e-Tourism.
Popular architectural styles for e-Tourism recommender
systems are web-based, agent-based, and mobile [2], [3]. Smart
spaces support them to be applied in a composition. SIB is
deployed on a host machine in the Internet, similarly as it
happens with web services now. Each user (tourist) is mobile,
acts using her/his client KP (e.g., on smartphone or tablet),
and consumes the service anywhere and anytime. Other KPs
produce the information collecting it in the smart space for the
use by the service. They can be hosted on the same machine
with SIB (web-like solution) or on other computers (agent-
based solution). The latter property leads to higher ﬂexibility
for system deployment. For instance, some KPs are provided
by a travel agency and some KPs are attached from the user
side in order to augment the system for personalized operation.
The recommendation service becomes not attached to a
ﬁxed source of historical information. A wide pool of available
sources is used, where a data source KP is assigned per source
(DBpedia, Freebase, YAGO, etc.). Conﬁguration of the pool is
ﬂexible and a subject to dynamic inclusion/exclusion. Some
data source KPs are set up by system administrators. Some
KPs can be attached by the users if the appropriate rights are
delegated. Each data source KP has to implement its source-
speciﬁc interface to access and search for information. Note
that a client KP can also provide historical information to the
smart space, in addition to her/his preferences, context, and
control. The information is further used for personalization.
The function of the data source KPs is to extract historical
information from two key types of data sources. The ﬁrst type
is tourism-oriented or universal knowledge bases (e.g., DBpe-
dia). They store many POIs and related information. The POI
search is primarily based on coordinates, similar to popular
location-based systems. The other type is historical publica-
tions (as a rule, in HTML—HyperText Markup Language or
in PDF—Portable Document Format) or archival databases
records (e.g., in XML—eXtensible Markup Language). XML-
ﬁles can be mapped into OWL [6]. HTML sources can be
processed by means of NLP (Natural Language Processing)
tools. In treating data sources of the second type, the main
difﬁculty is that historical objects are usually identiﬁed by their
names only.
As a result, the smart space contains a representation of
the semantic network G, integrating the information extracted
from multiple data sources. Their parallel activity is coordi-
nated by combining KPs. The common ontology O is used
to represent G in the smart space. The ontology provides a
system of classes, relations, and restrictions that collected his-
torical information must conﬁrm. As a result, they constitute a
historical semantic network for the reference recommendation
scenario. A combining KP reasons over the extracted histor-
ical information and establishes semantic relations between
historical objects. There can be several combining KPs, and
the consistency of G is ensured by O. A combining KP can
represent interests of a given tourist, act on behalf of a group
of tourists, or perform generic context-aware construction.
Based on the whole semantic network G in the smart space,
a ranking KP constructs recommendations. Each recommenda-
tion is represented as star graph Rp for a given tourist, initial
POI p, and context. Visualization on the client KP can utilize
additional information such as ranks rq and annotations tq for
all recommended POIs from Rp. Importantly that there can be
many ranking KPs, each employs own computational method
of POI selection for the recommendation. For instance, in POI
selection method [6], values of rq reﬂect the closeness of q’s
categories to the categories the initial POI p has. Then an
annotation tq can describe the common categories of p and q.
The proposed architecture reduces the service construction
to the interactions of KPs. It follows the principle that a
smart space service is knowledge reasoning over the shared
content and delivering the result to the users [27]. In our
case of historical recommendation services for e-Tourism, the
proposed model of KPs interaction is presented in Figure 4.
Smart space content is shared, forming a subject to self-
generation. That is, the steps in Figure 4 are performed si-
multaneously, with event-driven synchronization. An important
event to activate data extraction is specifying the initial POI
of a tourist (step 1). Content self-generation also supports
the service personalization. New historical objects can be
found and new semantic relations can be associated with
this given POI (the iteration in steps 2a and 2b). Request
for additional information about historical objects (step 2b)
occur until semantic network around a tourist is being formed.
The POI recommendation and ranking are further personalized
(the iteration in steps 4a and 4b) when personal information
is directly integrated into the rank computation, e.g., the
POIs that a tourist has already visited. Updating the user’s
personal information or preferences (step 4a) requires the rank
conversion. This conversion can occur until the user likes the
recommended POIs (step 4b).
Table II illustrates this content self-generation model by
showing the construction of the semantic network from Fig-
ure 1 and, consequently, the star graph from Figure 2. Note
Figure 4. Many KPs interact in a smart space to construct a service.
90
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE II. EXAMPLE OF CONTENT GENERATION.
Step Interaction
Generated content
1
Initial POI
Hotel Negresco
2
Data source KPs retrieve
facts about the initial POI
from different data sources.
Hotel Negresco is located at Promenade des
Anglais, 37. The architect of Hotel Negresco
is E.-J. Niermans. The ﬁrst owner of Hotel
Negresco is H. Negresco.
3
Combining KP collects an
information
about
other
POIs
which
relate
with
initial
POI
to
create
a
semantic network.
POIs on the same street: Apartment house,
Palais de la M´editerran´ee.
POIs by the same architect: Villa le Colombier,
Apartment house.
POIs related with H. Negresco: Place Mass´ena.
4
Ranking KPs differentiate
the POIs in the semantic
network, selecting the most
attracting for the user.
Rank-sorted
list:
Apartment
house,
Place
Mass´ena, Palais de la M´editerran´ee, Villa le
Colombier.
that in this paper we do not focus on a particular ranking
criterion. Intuitively, the closer the POI and the richer and more
appropriate the established relations then the rank becomes
higher. For instance, Apartment house receives the highest rank
since the POI is a) located on the same street and b) designed
by the same architect.
VI.
KNOWLEDGE PROCESSORS
The proposed system architecture deﬁnes the service-
oriented application as a system of KPs interacting in the
smart space. We classify these KPs as follows: A) Historical
data source KP, B) Semantic network combiner, and C) POI
Ranking KP. This section provides our design details of such
KPs with an overview of possible algorithms that such KPs
can implement.
A. Historical data source processors
Each data source KP provides the smart space with cultural
heritage data. As shown in the previous section, different
sources — universal knowledge bases (e.g., DBpedia), HTML-
pages, databases records etc. can contain historical information
about POIs. Consider design of a data source KP for the case
of DBpedia knowledge base.
Dbpedia is created by means of automatic transmission of
structured information from the Wikipedia pages to a semantic
network [28]. Structured information in DBpedia consists of
categories related with a Wikipedia page, references to other
pages as well as to external resources, and facts presented
in the so-called “infoboxes”. They are the fragments of the
pages, which provide data structured according to a certain
pattern. DBpedia is a source that is conceptualized with a
ﬁxed ontology. DBpedia uses RDF for representation of the
information, which is automatically extracted from Wikipedia.
The scheme of data source KP operation with the DBpedia
knowledge base is shown in Figure 5.
TABLE III. DBPEDIA INFORMATION ABOUT HOTEL NEGRESCO.
Property
Value
geo:lat
43.694443
geo:long
7.257500
foaf:homepage
http://www.hotel-negresco-nice.com/
is dbo:knownFor of
dbr:EdouardNiermans(architect)
rdfs:comment
The Hotel Negresco is a famous hotel and site of the equally
famous restaurant Le Chantecler, located on the Promenade
des Anglais on the Baie des Anges in Nice, France. It was
named after Henri Negresco
Figure 5. Data source KP operation with DBpedia.
Information representation in the format of RDF triples
supports effective searching through the knowledge base using
SPARQL queries. The data source KP is oriented to the
Dbpedia ontology. The KP implements SPARQL queries to
DBpedia, which also provides a certain set of query tem-
plates. Application development tool SmartSlog [26] is used
to convert the SPARQL query XML result into a local data
structure. The KP publishes the information in the smart space
using the application ontological model [29]. This ontological
model encompasses several important aspects of the tourism
problem domain, including tourist places (cities, towns), tourist
attractions, tourist events (concerts, shows, etc.), and transport
issues. As a result, the KP provides POIs and other objects to
construct the semantic network in the form of an RDF graph.
An example of information acquisition about Hotel Ne-
gresco from DBpedia is shown in Table III. Experimental
performance evaluation of the data source KP operation is
presented further in Section VII.
B. Semantic network combiner
Each combining KP is responsible for processing the
information extracted from different sources. It aggregates the
information received from the data source KPs. A combining
KP constructs a personalized structure of POIs according to
a given ontological model. The fragment of the ontological
model is shown in Figure 6.
The ontology describes the three main entities: POI, Per-
son, Event, and relations between them. Class Location repre-
sents POI location in the form of geographical coordinates.
Geographical coordinates correspond WC3 Geo with data
properties lat and long to designate geographical latitude and
longitude, respectively. Class User is linked to class POI
with two object properties hasVisitPoint and hasFavoritePoint.
Thus, the user can mark a POI that she/he has visited and that
she/he wants to visit.
If the received information is insufﬁcient for semantic
network extension, then the combining KP can send specifying
queries to ﬁll information structure of a POI. It is provided with
a certain set of query templates that can be put to information
sources. Thus, the combining KP establishes semantic relations
91
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

for the semantic network between POIs and other historical
objects. The constructed semantic network is ensured by
ontological model; it also takes into account users’ preferences
and generic context.
In summary, each combining KP publishes information
about POIs and the relations between POIs and other historical
objects in the smart space. Then the published information is
used to determine rank of each POI.
C. POI ranking methods
Ranking KP can use various algorithms to calculate the
rank of a POI. In this section some methods are listed that
can be used for future research. The proposed system design
potentially adopts various ranking methods. Let us consider
three classes of ranking algorithms. They show the spectrum
of possible solutions, while the implementation and its analysis
is the subject of our further research.
The simplest case is when basic information about POI
is used, e.g., categories (a particular case of keywords or
tags). Computational method in [6] solves the problem of
ranking the available POIs by the level of proximity to the
tourist’s context based on the information about the set of the
categories relating to a POI. Different knowledge bases (e.g.,
DBpedia, Freebase, and YAGO) are found on rich systems
of categories. In different knowledge bases, there will be
systematic differences in the values of distances between the
sets of categories, thus the method used probabilistic approach
determining distances between the subsets of a ﬁnite set.
Besides the possibility to compare the distances between
the sets of categories, the probabilistic distance provides
one more advantage: it provides an opportunity to evaluate
the value of distance in the terms “long”/“short” before the
whole set of the distances has been obtained. In the mobile
environments, this extra opportunity is very useful, since it
reduces the amount of computation by means of ranking POIs
in accordance with the preferences and interests of a user.
The second class of algorithms comes from the recom-
mender systems. Such systems are typically divided into the
following three types [22]:
Figure 6. Example fragment of the ontological model.
1)
content-based, which are based on similarity of POI’s
characteristics;
2)
collaborative ﬁltering, which are based on similarity
of user preferences;
3)
hybrid, which are combining 1 and 2.
In
particular,
a
context-aware
recommender
system
from [22] ranks a POI in terms depending on similarity to
user preferences. It considers the following context attributes:
time, company in which a tourist has visited an attraction, and
weather.
The tourist can evaluate the attractiveness of POIs from one
to ﬁve. Attraction rating estimation for a given tourist is per-
formed in two steps: a group of tourists with ratings similar to
the given tourist is determined; rating of attraction is estimated
based on ratings of this attraction assigned by the tourists of
the group. A recommendation is based on assessment of the
similarity between the two tourists depending on the tourist
evaluations. Then it calculates the group which the tourist can
be classiﬁed to. A tourist group is determined by k-Nearest
Neighbors method. It composes the resulting list of POIs.
Estimation of rank ruq for POI q ∈ P and tourist u is
based on ratings (scores) of that POI. They are assigned by
other tourists of the group with respect to their similarity to
the tourist u. The resultant list of attractions L presented to
the tourist u is sorted in descending order of:
sq = kr∗
uq + (1 − k)(1 −
dw
q
maxi∈L dw
q
)
where k ∈ [0, 1] is a model parameter reﬂecting the importance
of the POI rating estimation in favor of its reachability; dw
q is
the estimation of time for u to reach q.
Since the semantic network provides rich structural infor-
mation, we can use the methods of structural ranking. For
instance, a variant of the well-known PageRank algorithm can
be applied. The basic idea behind PageRank for any directed
graph is that a link from a node to another states an endorse-
ment of the latter node, indicating the quality. PageRank takes
advantage of the global link structure to order nodes according
to their perceived quality. Various algorithms for computing
PageRank in general graphs are presented in [30]. Consider
the basic idea.
Given a semantic network Gp for p ∈ P. Ranks rq for all
q ∈ P can be computed iteratively starting from some initial
values r(0)
q :
r(i+1)
q
= α
X
∀s:q→s
psqr(i)
s
+ (1 − α)πq,
where q → s is a link in Gp, pqs is the weight of the link, α is
the damping factor denoting the probability of following the
link structure, and π is a personalization vector of damping
factors for all POIs.
VII.
COMPARISON AND APPLICABILITY ANALYSIS
One of the key performance bottlenecks of the proposed
smart space based architecture is the need to search and
retrieve information from multiple data sources, which are
available in the Internet. We experimentally analyze the perfor-
mance of information acquisition from DBpedia. We assume
92
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 7. Estimated average time Tntw(n) of sending a query in DBpedia
and getting a result.
that the source has enough information on the studied history-
aware problem. The information completeness in open data
sources is a subject of our further research.
For this experiment we cannot use Hotel Negresco and its
surroundings since it has a modest representation in DBpedia.
Let us consider the case of Eiffel Tower to evaluate the
performance of the data source KP. DBpedia information about
Eiffel Tower is shown in Table IV. The information is much
richer than about the Hotel Negresco (see Table III above).
There are at least 8 parameters to search with the known
coordinates of Eiffel Tower. As a result of the search, rela-
tions with 3 persons can be found (Stephen Sauvestre, Emile
Nouguier, and Maurice Koechlin) and one historical event
(Exposition Universelle in 1989). They deﬁne the ﬁrst relations
in the semantic network. Consider data source processing
performance under speciﬁed conditions.
To retrieve information from DBpedia the data source KP
sends a SPARQL query, processes the XML-result, and pub-
lishes the found information in the smart space in accordance
with the application ontological model. In the experiments,
we varied from one to eight query parameters (n = 8). The
resource-expensive operations for our service are sending a
query in DBpedia and receiving its result by network commu-
nication (time delay Tntw). Then the XML result is processed
and the information is published in the smart space (time Tloc).
The experimental behavior of Tntw(n) and Tloc(m) is
TABLE IV. DBPEDIA INFORMATION ABOUT EIFFEL TOWER.
Property
Value
geo:lat
48.858223
geo:long
2.294500
dbo:architect
dbr:StephenSauvestre
foaf:homepage
http://www.tour-eiffel.fr
dbo:openingDate
1889-03-31
dbo:thumbnail
wikipedia-en:Special:FilePath/TourEiffelWikimediaCommons.jpg
dbp:height
300
dbp:structuralEngineer dbr:EmileNouguier
dbr:MauriceKoechlin
rdfs:comment
The Eiffel Tower is an iron lattice tower located on the
Champ de Mars in Paris, France. It was named after the
engineer Alexandre Gustave Eiffel, whose company designed
and built the tower.
is dbp:building of
dbr:ExpositionUniverselle (1889)
Figure 8. Estimated average time Tloc(m) of processing the XML-result
and publishing the information in smart space.
shown in Figure 7 and Figure 8, respectively. The number
of parameters is varied for 1 ≤ n ≤ 8. The number of found
elements is varied for 1 ≤ m ≤ 8. Although the higher number
of published RDF triples can be, we consider only ones which
are necessary for the semantic network construction. For each
n and m we made 50 runs, and the plot shows the average with
the standard deviation bars. The presented plots also include
the linear regression to show the trend.
We can see that DBpedia lets to get some important
information about POI, including, in particular, the coordinates
and some relations with other historical objects. Nevertheless,
this information is not sufﬁcient to build a rich semantic
network around the POI. It is necessary to develop other Data
source KPs, which would be able to analyze the information
from different types of sources (e.g., HTML pages).
The case of HTML-page analysis is considered in [8].
It describes the extraction of historical facts as RDF-triples
from the regional history database “Latgales Dati” (http://
latgalesdati.du.lv) by means of PHP Simple HTML DOM
Parser. An example of this activity is shown in Table V.
Now let us consider distinctive properties of our system
design based on results published in previous works.
The proposed service scenario differs from other proposals.
The most close to our work is [18]. The authors explore
the use of location aware mobile devices for searching for
and browsing a large number of general and cultural heritage
information repositories. The application—Mobile Cultural
Heritage Guide— searches for POIs in the current tourist’s
physical location and constructs a “mental map” of nearby
POIs within a circular shape. Next semantic crawling is applied
TABLE V. HTML TO RDF TRANSFORMATION.
HTML
RDF triples in Smart-M3 format
<div class=’page-header’> <h1>Edids
Udems</h1> </div>
123, fullName, “Edids Udems”
<div class=’person’>
<div class=“birth”>Dzimis 1877. gada 15.
maij¯a </div>
123, Birthday, “1877. gada 15 maij¯a”
(15 May 1877)
<div class=“info”> Uzn¸¯em¯ejs (tirgot¯ajs).
<br>...</div>
123,
profession,
“Uzn¸¯em¯ejs
(tir-
got¯ajs)” (Businessman (trader))
93
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

to resemble the process of a human using the Web to ﬁnd other
information relevant to these POIs. Finally, augmented reality
is used in combination with facet selection to present this
POI-related information to an active tourist on her/his mobile
device. Similarly to our scenario, this application aims at dy-
namic provision of semantically-enriched information in favor
of a classical travel guide. In contrast, our scenario introduces
both nearby and faraway POIs, which are semantically related
within a variety of historical objects, including common histor-
ical persons and events. Our scenario supports automation of
semantic crawling with POI ranking; the ranks are then used
for visual representation of POI recommendations to the user.
Paper [31] considers a prototype application with POI
ranking. It supports content-based recommendations for gen-
erating personalized routes along cultural heritage assets in
outdoor environments (e.g., city tours). The case of indoor
environments, such as museums, is studied in recent work [32].
The mobile application helps the visitors to access informa-
tion concerning exhibits that are of primary interest to them
during pre-visit planning, to provide the visitors with relevant
information during the visit, and to follow up with post visit
memories and reﬂections. In contrast, our scenario resembles
the process of a historian studying historical facts.
Based on recent studies of the Smart-M3 performance,
we expect the proposed system design is applicable in real-
life setting and has advantages over the other approaches to
recommender system development. The applicability of the
smart space based architecture, similar to the one shown in
Figure 3, is discussed in [10]. A realistic case is a smart
space [22] where the number of large data sources, such
as web-based databases and repositories, is of the 10-order
magnitude and the number of mobile users is of the 103-order
magnitude.
In contrast to mobile standalone applications, the work-
load is delegated from a personal mobile device to smart
space infrastructure deployed on powerful hosts. Experiments
in [33] conﬁrm that this design solution additionally improves
reliability and fault tolerance, essentially in wireless network
settings. In our scenario, the delegated workload includes
the construction of semantic networks for many users and
POI ranking over these networks. A personal mobile device
visualizes aggregated fragments (e.g., a star graph) of the
whole semantic network enriched with derived ranks.
In comparison with web-based recommender system, the
proposed smart space based system design provides ﬂexibility
in selection of 1) data sources, 2) semantic network construc-
tion, 3) POI ranking, and 4) personalization. Although the cost
is performance, Semantic Web technologies are now capable
to create and maintain relatively large RDF triple stores [25],
where the number of RDF triples is of the 105-order magnitude
and more. In particular, Smart-M3 SIB employs the Redland
library for RDF triple store and SPARQL support [11], [24].
VIII.
CONCLUSION
This paper addressed recommendation services develop-
ment for historical e-Tourism. We studied the problem of
historical POI recommendation, the necessity of using seman-
tic relations between historical objects, and the personalized
(subjective, contextual) aspect of services. We proposed the
smart space based system design for implementing such a rec-
ommender system. The proposal provides a concept deﬁnition
and design solutions for creating a smart space to accompany
a historian tourist. Multiple external sources of historical data
can be attached to the smart space and used for provision
of information relevant to the situation and user’s interests.
The information is integrated using Semantic Web technologies
and analyzed to produce personalized recommendations. The
result is visually presented with quantitative (POI ranks) and
qualitative (reason annotations) estimates.
Our study makes a step towards concept development
for historical e-Tourism. Feasibility study of the proposed
concept model, including ontology engineering for integrated
representation of historical objects, analysis of POI ranking
methods over a semantic network of historical objects, and
comprehensive experimental evaluation, is a subject to our
further research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is ﬁnancially supported by the Ministry of
Education and Science of the Russian Federation within project
# 2.2336.2014/K from the project part of state research assign-
ment and project # 14.574.21.0060 (RFMEFI57414X0060) of
Federal Target Program “Research and development on priority
directions of scientiﬁc-technological complex of Russia for
2014–2020”. The reported study was partially funded by RFBR
according to the research project # 14-07-00252.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. G. Varfolomeyev, A. Ivanovs, D. G. Korzun, and O. B. Petrina,
“Smart spaces approach to development of recommendation services
for historical e-tourism,” in Proc. 9th Int’l Conf. on Mobile Ubiquitous
Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies (UBICOMM). IARIA
XPS Press, Jul. 2015, pp. 56–61.
[2]
D. Gavalas, C. Konstantopoulos, K. Mastakas, and G. Pantziou, “Mobile
recommender systems in tourism,” J. Netw. Comput. Appl., vol. 39,
Mar. 2014, pp. 319–333.
[3]
J. Borr´as, A. Moreno, and A. Valls, “Intelligent tourism recommender
systems: A survey,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 41, no. 16, Nov. 2014, pp.
7370–7389.
[4]
V. L. Smith, Hosts and Guests: The Anthropology of Tourism.
Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania Press, 1989.
[5]
N. Ide and D. Woolner, “Historical ontologies,” in Words and Intel-
ligence II: Essays in Honor of Yorick Wilks, ser. Text, Speech and
Language Technology, K. Ahmad, C. Brewster, and M. Stevenson, Eds.
Springer, 2007, vol. 36, pp. 137–152.
[6]
A. Varfolomeyev, D. Korzun, A. Ivanovs, and O. Petrina, “Smart
personal assistant for historical tourism,” in Recent Advances in En-
vironmental Sciences and Financial Development. Proc. 2nd Int’l Conf.
on Environment, Energy, Ecosystems and Development (EEEAD 2014),
C. Arapatsakos, M. Razeghi, and V. Gekas, Eds., Nov. 2014, pp. 9–15.
[7]
A. Varfolomeyev, D. Korzun, A. Ivanovs, H. Soms, and A. Pashkov,
“Smart space services as a teaching aid in history and cultural heritage
studies,” in ICERI2015 Proceedings. 8th International Conference of
Education, Research and Innovation.
IATED, Nov. 2015, pp. 1373–
1380.
[8]
A. Varfolomeyev, D. Korzun, A. Ivanovs, H. Soms, and O. Petrina,
“Smart space based recommendation service for historical tourism,” in
ICTE in Regional Development 2015 Valmiera, Latvia, ser. Procedia
Computer Science, E. Ginters and M. Schumann, Eds.
Elsevier, 2015,
vol. 77, pp. 85–91.
[9]
K. Kulakov, O. Petrina, D. Korzun, and A. Varfolomeev, “Towards an
understanding of smart service: The case study for cultural heritage e-
tourism,” in Proc. 18th Conf. Open Innovations Framework Program
FRUCT.
ITMO Univeristy, Apr. 2016, pp. 145–152.
94
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[10]
D. Korzun, S. Balandin, and A. Gurtov, “Deployment of Smart Spaces
in Internet of Things: Overview of the design challenges,” in Proc.
13th Int’l Conf. Next Generation Wired/Wireless Networking and 6th
Conf. on Internet of Things and Smart Spaces (NEW2AN/ruSMART
2013), LNCS 8121, S. Balandin, S. Andreev, and Y. Koucheryavy, Eds.
Springer, Aug. 2013, pp. 48–59.
[11]
J. Kiljander, A. D’Elia, F. Morandi, P. Hyttinen, J. Takalo-Mattila,
A. Ylisaukko-oja, J.-P. Soininen, and T. S. Cinotti, “Semantic interop-
erability architecture for pervasive computing and Internet of Things,”
IEEE Access, vol. 2, Aug. 2014, pp. 856–874.
[12]
P. Nora, “Between memory and history: Les lieux de m´emoire,”
Representations, no. 26, 1989, pp. 7–24, Special Issue: Memory and
Counter-Memory.
[13]
M. Kalus, “Semantic networks and historical knowledge management:
Introducing new methods of computer-based research,” The Journal of
the Association for History and Computing, vol. 10, Dec. 2007.
[14]
A. Ivanovs and A. Varfolomeyev, “Computer technologies in local
history studies: Towards a new model of region research,” Acta Hu-
manitarica Universitatis Saulensis, vol. 19, 2014, pp. 97–107.
[15]
A. Mero˜no-Pe˜nuela, A. Ashkpour, M. van Erp, K. Mandemakers,
L. Breure, A. Scharnhorst, S. Schlobach, and F. van Harmelen, “Se-
mantic technologies for historical research: A survey,” Semantic Web
journal, vol. 6, no. 6, 2015, pp. 539–564.
[16]
E. Ahonen and E. Hyvonen, “Publishing historical texts on the semantic
web - a case study,” in Proc. 2009 IEEE Int’l Conf. on Semantic
Computing (ICSC ’09).
IEEE Computer Society, 2009, pp. 167–173.
[17]
L. Ardissono, T. Kuﬂik, and D. Petrelli, “Personalization in cultural
heritage: The road travelled and the one ahead,” User Modeling and
User-Adapted Interaction, vol. 22, no. 1-2, Apr. 2012, pp. 73–99.
[18]
C. van Aart, B. Wielinga, and W. R. van Hage, “Mobile cultural heritage
guide: Location-aware semantic search,” in Proc. 17th Int’l Conf. on
Knowledge Engineering and Management by the Masses (EKAW’10),
LNCS 6317, P. Cimiano and H. S. Pinto, Eds.
Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer, 2010, pp. 257–271.
[19]
F. Zhao, Z. Sun, and H. Jin, “Topic-centric and semantic-aware retrieval
system for internet of things,” Information Fusion, vol. 23, 2015, pp.
33–42.
[20]
A. Becheru, C. Badica, and M. Antonie, “Towards social data analytics
for smart tourism: A network science perspective,” in Linguistic Linked
Open Data.
Springer International Publishing, 2016, pp. 35–48.
[21]
J. Augusto, V. Callaghan, D. Cook, A. Kameas, and I. Satoh, “Intelligent
environments: a manifesto,” Human-centric Computing and Information
Sciences, vol. 3, no. 1, 2013.
[22]
A. Smirnov, A. Kashevnik, A. Ponomarev, N. Teslya, M. Shcheko-
tov, and S. Balandin, “Smart space-based tourist recommendation
system,” in Proc. 14th Int’l Conf. Next Generation Wired/Wireless
Networking and 7th Conf. on Internet of Things and Smart Spaces
(NEW2AN/ruSMART 2014), LNCS 8638, S. Balandin, S. Andreev,
and Y. Koucheryavy, Eds.
Springer, Aug. 2014, pp. 40–51.
[23]
K. Kulakov and A. Shabaev, “An approach to creation of smart space-
based trip planning service,” in Proc. 16th Conf. of Open Innovations
Association FRUCT.
ITMO Univeristy, Oct. 2014, pp. 38–44.
[24]
I. Galov, A. Lomov, and D. Korzun, “Design of semantic information
broker for localized computing environments in the Internet of Things,”
in Proc. 17th Conf. of Open Innovations Association FRUCT.
ITMO
Univeristy, IEEE, Apr. 2015, pp. 36–43.
[25]
C. Gutierrez, C. A. Hurtado, A. O. Mendelzon, and J. P´erez, “Founda-
tions of semantic web databases,” J. Comput. Syst. Sci., vol. 77, no. 3,
May 2011, pp. 520–541.
[26]
D. G. Korzun, A. A. Lomov, P. I. Vanag, J. Honkola, and S. I. Balandin,
“Multilingual ontology library generator for Smart-M3 information
sharing platform,” International Journal on Advances in Intelligent
Systems, vol. 4, no. 3&4, 2011, pp. 68–81.
[27]
D. Korzun and S. Balandin, “A peer-to-peer model for virtualization
and knowledge sharing in smart spaces,” in Proc. 8th Int’l Conf. on
Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies
(UBICOMM 2014).
IARIA XPS Press, Aug. 2014, pp. 87–92.
[28]
C. Bizer, J. Lehmann, G. Kobilarov, S. Auer, C. Becker, R. Cyganiak,
and S. Hellmann, “DBpedia – a crystallization point for the Web of
Data,” Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the World Wide
Web, vol. 7, 2009, pp. 154–165.
[29]
K. Kulakov and O. Petrina, “Ontological model for storage historical
and trip planning information in smart space,” in Proc. 17th Conf. Open
Innovations Framework Program FRUCT. ITMO Univeristy, Apr. 2015,
pp. 96–103.
[30]
A. D. Sarma, A. R. Molla, G. Pandurangan, and E. Upfal, Fast
Distributed PageRank Computation, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013.
[31]
N. Stash, L. Veldpaus, P. D. Bra, and A. P. Rodeirs, “Creating
personalized city tours using the CHIP prototype,” in Late-Breaking
Results, Project Papers and Workshop Proceedings of the 21st Conf. on
User Modeling, Adaptation, and Personalization (UMAP 2013): Proc.
Workshop on Personal Access to Cultural Heritage (PATCH 2013), ser.
CEUR Workshop Proceedings, S. Berkovsky, E. Herder, P. Lops, and
O. C. Santos, Eds., vol. 997, Jun. 2013, pp. 68–79.
[32]
T. Kuﬂik, A. Wecker, J. Lanir, and O. Stock, “An integrative framework
for extending the boundaries of the museum visit experience: linking the
pre, during and post visit phases,” Information Technology & Tourism,
vol. 15, no. 1, 2015, pp. 17–47.
[33]
I. Galov and D. Korzun, “Fault tolerance support of Smart-M3 applica-
tion on the software infrastructure level,” in Proc. 16th Conf. of Open
Innovations Association FRUCT.
ITMO Univeristy, Oct. 2014, pp.
16–23.
95
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 9 no 1 & 2, year 2016, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2016, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

