167
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
     Intelligent Agents to Efficient Management Industrial Services and Resources 
Antonio Martín-Montes 
Higher Polytechnic School 
Seville University 
Seville, Spain 
toni@us.es  
Mauricio Burbano, Carlos Leon 
Technical High School of Computer Science 
University of Seville 
Seville, Spain 
aryburcen@us.es, cleon@us.es
 
 
Abstract— Increasing product and process complexity 
combined with rapidly changing markets and dynamic 
competition are daily challenges faced by industries. Current 
industrial platforms need to evolve in order to support different 
advanced capabilities including semantic interoperability, self-
optimization between edge and cloud, sensor fusion and 
processing, and edge-aware stream processing, among others. 
Companies can benefit greatly from of Internet of Things as a 
tool for finding growth in unexpected opportunities. In this area 
an enormous quantity of heterogeneous and distributed 
information is stored in databases, web sites and digital 
storehouses. In the traditional search engines, the information 
stored in Digital Industry Repository (DIR) is treated as an 
ordinary database that manages the contents and positions. The 
present search techniques based on manually annotated 
metadata and linear replay of the material selected by the user 
do not scale effectively or efficiently to large collections. This 
can significantly reduce the accuracy of the search and draw in 
irrelevant 
documents. 
This 
paper 
describes 
semantic 
interoperability 
problems 
and 
presents 
an 
intelligent 
architecture to address them. We concentrate on the critical 
issue of metadata/ontology-based search and expert system 
technologies. Our approach for realizing content-based search 
and retrieval information implies the application of the Case-
Based Reasoning technology and ontologies. The objective here 
is thus to contribute to a better knowledge retrieval in the 
industrial domain. We have developed a prototype, which 
suggests a new form of interaction between users and digital 
enterprise repositories, to support efficient sharing of 
distributed knowledge. 
 
Keywords-Case 
base 
Reasoning; 
Ontology; 
jColibri; 
Semantic Interoperability; Artificial Intelligence. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Currently, industrial information provides even more 
granular information through unit and equipment databases, 
which provide details about installed equipment, including 
models, 
designed 
capacity, 
throughput, 
and 
start 
up/shutdown dates for turbines, generators, and refining 
equipment. This data and information are stored in digital 
repositories, digital archives, and business Web sites. Digital 
Industry Repository (DIR) presents centralized hosting and 
access to content. DIRs provide the ability to share digital 
objects or files, the permissions and controls for access to 
content, the integrity, and intellectual property rights of 
content owners and creators. A primary research goal 
thereby is the development of concepts for semi-automatic 
service composition to support flexibility in re-tooling 
knowledge and quick adaptation to failures in the automation 
chain.  
Digital repositories are online databases that provide a 
central location to collect, contribute and share knowledge 
resources to use in the industrial domain. In order to remain 
competitive, companies must be able to develop products 
and services quickly and manage data and knowledge 
efficiently. Access to these collections poses a serious 
challenge. 
Mechanisms 
to 
retrieve 
information 
and 
knowledge from digital repositories have been particularly 
important. Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Semantic Web 
provide the common framework to allow knowledge to be 
shared and reused in an efficient way. Results generated by 
the current searches are a list of results that contain or treat 
the pattern. Although search engines have developed 
increasing efficiency, information overload obstructs precise 
searches. Thus, it is necessary to develop new intelligent and 
semantic models that offer more possibilities [1]. In this 
paper, we propose a comprehensive approach for discovering 
information objects in large digital repositories based on 
analysis of recorded semantic metadata and the application 
of Case Based Reasoning technique. We suggest a 
conceptual architecture for a semantic search engine. 
There are researchers and related field works that include 
intelligent techniques to share information such as [2] that 
describes the application of intelligent systems techniques to 
provide decision support to the condition monitoring of 
nuclear power plant reactor cores. An intelligent image agent 
based on soft-computing techniques for color image 
processing is proposed in [3]. Huang et al. [4] propose an 
intelligent human-expert forum system to perform more 
efficient knowledge sharing using fuzzy information retrieval 
techniques. Yang et al. [5] present a system to collect 
information through the cooperation of intelligent agent 
software, in addition to providing warnings after analysis to 
monitor and predict some possible error indications among 
controlled objects in the network. Gladun et al. [6] suggest a 
Semantic Web technologies-based multi-agent system to 
allow 
automatically 
controlling 
students’ 
acquired 
knowledge in e-learning frameworks. 
The meta-concepts have explicit ontological semantics, 
so that they help to identify domain concepts consistently 
and structure them systematically. The architecture presented 
differs from other reference architectures and we include it 
here due to its widespread use and importance in designing 
Internet of Things (IoT) systems capable of handling the 
tremendous amounts of data and knowledge generated by the 

168
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
sensors. In [7], the authors propose the construction of an 
ontology to formalize the industrial management knowledge. 
Bertola et al. [8] present the building blocks for creating a 
semantic social space to organize artworks according to an 
ontology of emotions, which takes into account both the 
information two ancestral terms share and the probability 
that they co-occur with their common descendants. In [9], 
the authors present an approach, which allows users to 
semantically query the building information modeling design 
paradigm using a domain vocabulary, capitalizing on 
building product ontology formalized from construction 
perspectives. Zhang et al. [10] propose a framework to 
quantify the similarity measure beneath a term pair, which 
takes into account both the information two ancestral terms 
share and the probability that they co-occur with their 
common descendants. In [11], the authors present a method 
for selecting a semantic similar measure with high similarity 
calculation accuracy for concepts in two different Computer-
aided design model data ontologies.  
In addition, the advancing development of integrated 
intelligent management systems has motivated to researchers 
to address the specific problem of integrating knowledge 
management. Many researchers have suggested that 
intelligent sensor network technologies could improve the 
effectiveness and efficiency of real-time management. In 
[12] authors have developed a distributed information 
management system to integrate and manipulate the 
heterogeneous, distributed information resources in the 
Iranian power industry. Mehrpoor et al. [13] describe an 
intelligent service to improve knowledge and information 
accessibility 
by 
personalizing 
the 
knowledge 
and 
information based on the stakeholder's situation in their 
working life, which is known as a recommender system. In 
[14], the authors study a grid-based infrastructure, which 
adopts the semantic Web and the Grid to share information 
in the press industry chain. Chen et al. [15] address the 
important issues in developing domain-specific ontology for 
manufacturing 
used 
in 
Industrie 
4.0 
demonstration 
production lines. For this purpose a generic ontology is 
developed considering all the aspects about the product from 
customized order to resulting production. 
There is a lot of research on applying AI and semantic 
techniques to share knowledge. In this work we focus upon 
the latter tasks, which are intended to guarantee the desired 
quality of network services to the industry and to collect and 
evaluate the associated knowledge. Information has to be 
gathered for the purposes of accounting and for gaining 
information for future industrial services design. In this 
paper, we present a full integration of AI technologies and 
semantic methods during the whole life cycle from the 
industrial point of view. Our work differs from related 
projects in that we build ontology-based contextual profiles 
and we introduce to an approach using metadata-based 
ontology search and expert system technologies [16]. More 
specifically, the main objective of this research is to search 
possible intelligent infrastructures based on the construction 
of decentralized public repositories where no global schema 
exists. For this reason, we are improving representation by 
incorporating more metadata from within the information. 
The objective has focused on creating technologically 
complex to environments in the industrial domain and 
incorporates Semantic Web and AI technologies to enable 
precise location of industrial resources.  
The remaining paper is organized as follows: In Section 
II reports a short description of important aspects in 
Industrial domain, the research problems and current work. 
Section 
III 
describes 
the 
systems 
and 
services 
interoperability requirements. Section IV studies the role of 
semantic and artificial intelligence in industrial domain. 
Section V y Section VI concern the design of a prototype 
system for semantic search framework, in order to verify that 
our proposed approach is an applicable solution. Section VII 
and Section VIII demonstrate the proposed intelligent 
architecture can successfully control an industrial domain. 
Finally, Section IX concludes chapter and outlines the future 
work. 
II. 
TRANSFORMING INDUSTRIAL VALUE CREATION 
Industrie 4.0 is currently one of the most frequently 
discussed topics by researches. Its aim deals with intentions 
between science and industry with continuous improvements 
of the general conditions for innovations. Industrie 4.0 is a 
strategic initiative to take up a pioneering role in industrial 
Information 
Technology 
(IT), 
which 
is 
currently 
revolutionizing the manufacturing engineering sector. 
Industrie 4.0 covers science and technology-based solutions 
in different specific fields like climate and energy, health and 
nutrition, mobility, security, and communication. Industrie 
4.0 represents the coming fourth industrial revolution, which 
connects embedded system production technologies and 
smart production process to pave the way to a new 
technological age. In other words, industrial production 
machinery no longer simply processes the product, but the 
product communicates with the machinery to tell it exactly 
what to do. In more depth, we recognize six design principles 
of Industrie 4.0: 
- Interoperability: it means that it is crucial to set up 
standards in order to rule the communication between Cyber-
Physical Systems (CPS) of various manufacturers. 
- Virtualization: necessary for an overall monitoring of 
physical processes, thus enables us to use it for simulations 
of models. 
- Decentralization: it enables the different systems to 
make their decisions separately. 
- Real-time capability: collecting of data in each step of 
the process should be in real-time. 
- Service orientation: reliable service must be considered 
as well. 
- Modularity: Modularity brings up flexibility to in terms 
that each individual model must be designed in such a way 
that it is easy to replace or apply new innovations. 
In the age of Industrie 4.0, products have barcodes or 
Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) chips on the surface 
to pass information to machines, which communicate with 
and control each other. The physical and virtual worlds 
merge into cyber-physical systems. Not only intelligent 
machines and products, but also all entities involved in 
production, including suppliers and customers along the 

169
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
entire value chain are networked with Information 
Communications Technology (ICT), from logistics to 
production and marketing to service. They may have a need 
to know any information to provide efficient services: What 
product belongs in which packaging? What transport 
container is where? What processing step comes next? What 
machine requires maintenance or replacement parts, and 
when? Where can unrealized cost reduction potential be 
found in the logistics process?  
The reason why researches have been investing so much 
effort in this project is that technology is the main building 
block for innovations and innovations shape the future. An 
important aspect is the connection between the physical and 
the knowledge of resource management and this connection 
can be established due to DIRs. DIRs contain data and 
knowledge of management about physical resources, which 
conform IoT. Embedded computer and networks monitor 
and control the physical processes, usually with feedback 
loops where physical processes affect computations and vice 
versa. This demonstrates why efficient knowledge retrieval is 
important to monitor physical processes, to create a virtual 
copy of the physical world and then make decentralized 
decisions. 
For example, a machine at step 3 of a production process 
could alert other machines from steps 4 and onward that the 
production will be delayed a bit because there’s an urgent fix 
that needs to be done on the machine at step 3. Of course, 
there will still be humans interacting with the machines in 
this manufacturing process. A production plant manager will 
still manage the plant, but s/he will have more data coming 
from all the machines, therefore enabling a better use of 
resources, better scheduling of maintenance and delays. 
Based on current technology, the manager located in the 
middle of the plant, with a tablet in hand, looking at all the 
data coming in from the machines, taking in all the 
information coming in verbally from the employees, and 
making decisions based on this data can therefore be: 
adjusting the production schedule, ordering supplies and 
adjusting employee assignments all according to the current 
plant conditions. 
The knowledge and information data volumes produced 
in this complex system are permanently available and 
evaluated in real time. Not only do employees have mobile 
access to this data, they can also intervene in the processes 
using mobile devices. In this sense, the efficient knowledge 
retrieval is becoming increasingly important. The benefits for 
participants along the entire value chain are varied. Waste is 
reduced, the ability to respond to individual customer wishes 
is improved, and the production of one-offs, and very small 
quantities becomes more cost-effective. Faster, more reliable 
decisions can be made, business processes become more 
flexible and dynamic, new business models are created. 
Downstream services complement the traditional portfolio of 
manufacturing companies. 
To reach these goals we need the capacity of different 
information systems, applications and services to retrieve, 
communicate, share and interchange knowledge in an 
effective and precise way, as well as to integrate with other 
systems, applications and services in order to deliver new 
products and services.  
III. 
SYSTEMS AND SERVICES INTEROPERABILITY 
REQUIREMENTS 
Connectivity and interoperation among computers, 
among entities, and among software components can 
increase the flexibility and agility of industrial systems, thus 
reducing administrative and software costs for industry. This 
capacity expands the industrial processes to automatically 
work together in an eficency way [17]. It is clear that the 
ability to interoperate is key to reducing industrial integration 
costs and inefficiencies, increasing business agility, and 
enabling the adoption of new and emerging technologies.  
Interoperability is the ability of two or more industrial 
assets like hardware devices, communications devices, or 
software components, to easily or automatically work 
together. ISO/IEC 2382 Information Technology Vocabulary 
defines interoperability as “the capability to communicate, 
execute programs, or transfer data among various functional 
units in a manner that requires the user to have little or no 
knowledge of the unique characteristics of those units”. An 
interoperability framework can be described as a set of 
standards and guidelines, which describe the way in which 
organizations have agreed, or should agree, to interact with 
each other. 
In this context, interoperability is the ability of 
information and communication technology systems and of 
the business processes they support to exchange data and to 
enable sharing of information and knowledge. Technical 
dimension of interoperability includes uniform movement of 
industrial data, uniform presentation of data, uniform user 
controls, uniform safeguarding data security and integrity, 
uniform protection of industrial confidentiality, uniform 
assurance of a common degree of service quality (Figure 1). 
 
 
Figure 1. Levels of interoperability 
Specifically, organizational interoperability is defined as 
the state where the organizational components of the 
industrial system are able to perform seamlessly together. 
The goal of semantic interoperability is to improve 
communication on industrial related knowledge both among 
humans and machines. In order to achieve this, a two-

170
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
pronged approach is necessary: achieving a unified ontology 
and tackle concrete and clearly delineated issues. The 
functional goal is to allow data to be exchanged between 
different projects in multiple corporations using different 
equipment and software. From multiple manufacturers or 
vendors. Technical interoperability consists in being able to 
communicate and interact between two systems coming from 
different manufacturers.  
Furthermore, achieving semantic and organizational 
interoperability requires strictly agreeing on the meaning of 
information 
and 
aligning 
business 
processes 
across 
enterprises/industries. At one level, general cross-industry 
frameworks and software infrastructure approaches can be, 
and are being, developed for semantics and business 
processes. For example, general semantics for major 
business transactions, such as purchase orders and invoices, 
are outlined through standards such as Universal Business 
Language (UBL), UN/CEFACT Core Components, and 
Open Applications Group Integration Standard (OAGIS). 
Different efforts are being leveraged by many standards 
efforts 
to 
address 
semantic 
and 
organizational 
interoperability and are proving to be a model for addressing 
semantic and organizational interoperability like ebXML, 
RosettaNet, the new UN/CEFACT work on aligning its 
global business process standards work with Web and other 
services. In June 2002, European heads of state adopted the 
Europe Action Plan 2005 at the Seville summit. They call on 
the European Commission to issue an agreed interoperability 
framework to support the delivery of European Digital 
services to enterprises. This recommends technical policies 
and specifications for joining up public administration 
information systems across the European Union. This 
research is based on open standards and the use of open 
source software. These aspects are the pillars to support the 
European delivery of Digital services of the recently adopted 
European Interoperability Framework (EIF) [18] and its 
Spanish equivalent [19]. This document is a reference for 
interoperability of the new Interoperable Delivery of Pan-
European Digital Services to Public Administrations, 
Business and Citizens program (IDAbc). Member States 
Administrations must use the guidance provided by the EIF 
to supplement their national Interoperability Frameworks 
with a pan-European dimension and thus enable pan-
European interoperability [20]. 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF INDUSTRIE 4.0 WITH 
ONTOLOGIES AND ARTIFICAL INTELLIGENCE 
In the current industry it is a need to disperse real time 
data, which can spread the effort and resources more 
accurately. So, productivity is increased and the use of raw 
material is optimized. The quality of the final product should 
also be improved; if the data coming from design process 
shows that the real value used always has an offset from the 
set point, then the design plans can be adjusted accordingly 
and the simulations as well. This will enable a simulation 
that actually corresponds to reality, and eventually a product 
that is closer to its original design. Adaptability is a big plus 
in Industrie 4.0. So, intelligent management of huge amounts 
of resources and associated data are areas that need a rapid 
development. 
In practice, it is apparent that some companies have only 
a rudimentary grasp on Industrie 4.0 and so a basic 
automation and IT infrastructure must first be created. Even 
more advanced companies generally have a conventional 
system environment according to the classic automation 
pyramid with relatively rigid and outmoded systems that 
were installed for a specific task. These systems are usually 
based on proprietary and therefore inflexible data structures. 
Consequently, modifications and expansions are very time 
consuming and costly. This makes it possible to achieve 
enormous cost savings and economies of scale. Management 
has genuine real-time information for its decision-making 
processes. The results of any action taken can be directly 
measured, identified and then corrected as needed. 
The 
Industrie 
4.0 
vision 
assumes 
the 
secure 
communication and cooperation of all participants across 
companies in real time for the entire lifetime of the product. 
The first step towards Industrie 4.0 for most companies is the 
complete vertical integration and digitization of the systems 
involved in the manufacturing process via a Manufacturing 
Execution 
System 
(MES), 
which 
allows 
real-time 
transparency. 
A 
horizontal 
integration 
of 
individual 
functionalities is also necessary. In this context, MES, the 
information hub, is the central element that collects, 
analyzes, processes and provides the other systems with the 
big data. The information that Industrie 4.0 provides together 
with, for example, big data, social media, and cloud 
computing, make it possible to optimize the decision-making 
process, secure design decisions early on and respond 
flexibly to disturbances, as well as optimize all the resources 
across more than one site. 
In the industry domain levels of service provision can be 
influenced by different operations and parameters that affect 
the bottom-line results: 
• Do you need to know in real time the status of many 
different components and devices in a large complex 
system? 
• Do you need to measure how changing inputs affect the 
output of your operations? 
• What gear must you to control, in real time, from a 
distance? 
• Where are you lacking accurate, real-time data about 
key processes that affect your operations? 
This has a variety of benefits along the entire value chain. 
It improves the ability to respond to individualized customer 
needs and makes it more profitable to manufacture 
individual units and small quantities. The flexibility is 
progressing through the dynamic design of business 
processes via the Internet in various dimensions as well as 
agile engineering processes. Intelligent monitoring and 
control increases efficiency and maximizes profitability. 
Here are few of the things you can do with the information 
and control capabilities you get from an intelligent system:  
• Detect and correct problems as soon as they begin. 
• Measure trends over time. 
• Discover and eliminate bottlenecks and inefficiencies 

171
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
• Control larger and more complex processes with a less 
specialized staff. 
Industrie 4.0 is actually a concept, which has the 
strength of focusing the development efforts in the right 
places. Once the concept is defined, we can see where the 
system fails to perform, and this is where the effort for 
improvement can be concentrated. Using a simple analogy, 
we can compare the industrial paradigm with Formula One 
racing where the cars are going around a track with 
thousands of sensors monitoring the cars. Every time a car 
goes past the pit wall, the systems downloads data, and the 
race engineers tell the driver how to drive in response to that 
data. That is what is needed in our factories. There needs to 
be the equivalent of the pit wall somewhere to make sure 
that the factory machinery is working better than that of the 
competitors. 
We propose a modern factory with all the steps 
automated and interrelated, with operators on their tablets 
tracking on going production. In industry it is important to 
stay aware of the global strategies of Industrie 4.0, and think 
of Industrie 4.0 when you acquire new equipment; a sensor 
with an Ethernet connection will eventually be useful to 
connect to the rest of the factory. 
Thus, considerable effort is required in creating 
meaningful metadata, organizing and annotating digital 
documents, and making them accessible. This work concerns 
applications of the semantic technology for improving 
existing information search systems by adding semantic 
enabled extensions that enhance information retrieval from 
information systems. 
Industrial repositories contain a large volume of digital 
information, generally focusing on making their knowledge 
to improve associate decision-support systems. Within a pool 
of heterogeneous and distributed information resources, 
users take site-by-site searching. Quality of search results 
varies greatly depending on quality of the search query from 
too limited set of results to a too large number of irrelevant 
results. For certain cases specifying a couple of keywords 
can be enough, if they are really specific and no ambiguity is 
possible. Currently, electronic search is based mainly on 
matching keywords specified by users with sought 
information web pages that contain those keywords. 
Ambiguity of most word-combinations and phrases, which 
are used for searching web resources, and poor linguistic 
features of available web-content indexing and matching 
mechanisms severely affect the results of most internet 
searchers.  
Essentially, most Industrie 4.0 experts agree that a 
number of norms and standards already exist. Use of 
ontologies can provides the following benefits: 
- Share the knowledge domain that can be communicated 
between agents and application systems. 
- Explicit conceptualization that describes the semantics 
of the data. 
In our work we analyzed the relationship between both 
thecniques ontologies and expert systems. We have proposed 
a method to efficiently search the target information on a 
digital repository network with multiple independent 
information sources. The use of AI and ontologies as a 
knowledge representation formalism offers many advantages 
in information retrieval. This scheme is based on the 
principle that knowledge items are abstracted to a 
characterization by metadata description, which is used for 
further processing. This characterization is based on an 
ontology that allows sharing the relevant information 
domains sources. This motivates researchers to look for 
intelligent information retrieval approach and ontologies that 
search and/or filter information automatically based on some 
higher level of understanding what is required. We make an 
effort in this direction by investigating techniques that 
attempt to utilize ontologies to improve effectiveness in 
information retrieval. 
V. 
IMPLEMENTATION INTELLIGENT AGENTS 
Nowadays there are many platforms and tools available 
for the retrieval information and data. Although these tools 
are powerful in locating matching terms and phrases, they 
are considered passive systems. Intelligent Agents (IAs) may 
prove to be the needed instrument in transforming these 
passive search and retrieval systems into active, personal 
user assistants. In this sense, IAs are currently used to 
improve the search and knowledge retrieval from online 
databases and repositories. Software agents function in a 
particular environment, i.e., an agent platform, which is often 
populated by other agents and processes. While there are 
obvious similarities, there are also significant differences 
between agents and objects. The first is in the degree to 
which agents and objects are autonomous. 
A model uses multiple agents, which deliver personalized 
search engine results. An IA is a data-processing entity, 
which carries out in an autonomous way tasks delegated by a 
user, but also a part of software, which can operate on behalf 
of another entity. In our context, intelligent software agents 
may be provided with a user-friendly interface, which is used 
to acquire user specifications of industry domain. In the 
context of this research, however, the tasks that we are 
primarily concerned with include reading, filtering and 
sorting, and maintaining information. 
In the industry environment, IAs can be used to 
recommend actions, or distribute searches of the users 
among available multi-agents. The IA platform hosts several 
IAs, each of them having local knowledge and which may 
move autonomously in form of mobile intelligence to other 
agent platforms. An intelligent software agent has 
characteristics like mobility, ability to interact and to 
cooperate, learn and even reason, based on certain 
knowledge representations. These skills can be used for 
personalization or information filtering, motivating the usage 
of intelligent software agents in the context of educational 
systems to improve the knowledge retrieval. Each IA 
contains a list of knowledge storage registries to find 
additional content, and a list of other known IA platforms, 
which may belong to other institution. IAs can update their 
lists by communicating with other agents using a predefined 
communication protocol.  
The agent knowledge acquisition can happen through 
experience 
problem 
solving, 
and 
inductive/deductive 

172
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
reasoning. In our proposal the IA intelligence consists of two 
components: semantic intelligence and rational intelligence. 
These two parts have different purpose and characteristics 
(Figure 2).  
 
Figure 2. Intelligent Agent components 
Rational intelligence depends on insight, which is the 
ability 
to 
detect, 
establish, 
forecast, 
and 
modulate 
relationships between problems and solutions. A high 
rational intelligence degree is usually not enough to produce 
proper behaviors and efficient results in the search engine. 
An engine with a high rational intelligence also needs to 
have a high semantic intelligence to thrive. Semantic 
intelligence improves productivity and effectiveness in 
making meaning connections. Semantic intelligence links 
knowledge through conceptual constructs (ontologies) 
connecting pieces of knowledge critical to achieve the 
integration of the data meaning. Thus, semantic reflects the 
knowledge in a general work domain, but rational 
intelligence decides how wisely these abilities are engaged, 
directed, and applied.      
A. Ontology Development 
Interoperability is the ability of two or more systems or 
components to exchange data and uses of information. 
Semantic interoperability is achieved when the interacting 
system attributes the same meaning to an exchanged piece of 
data, ensuring consistency of the data across systems 
regardless of individual data format. The semantics can be 
explicitly defined using a shared vocabulary as specified in 
an ontology. Semantic interoperability can be applied to all 
parts of an IoT system, i.e., on IoT platforms in the cloud, 
but also reaching to edge components and IoT devices. An 
important area to study IAs communication, collaborative, 
problem solving, and interaction in industry environments 
are the IA. These objects must have work area knowledge to 
solve domain-specific problems. In industry domain 
semantic interpretation of the information plays an important 
role in knowledge communication and transferring between 
the plant sensors and the control center. Considering the 
similarities and divergences in the different knowledge 
representation kinds we have chosen ontology. Ontology is a 
formal and explicit specification of shared conceptualization 
of a domain of interest. IAs must have common shareable 
ontology to share knowledge with each other and this 
common sharable ontology must be represented in a standard 
format so that all software agents can understand and thus 
communicate with. 
Ontology is the knowledge structure, which identifies the 
concepts, property of concept, resources, and relationships 
among them to enable share and reuse of knowledge that are 
needed to acquire knowledge in the specific search domain. 
The ontology index comprises a plurality of relationships 
between the plurality of terms and sub-category terms of the 
ontology and a plurality of documents residing on the 
network. One or more search results that describe the one or 
more documents are presented to the user. The one or more 
documents contain the one or more search terms, or one of 
plurality of sub-category terms of the one or more search 
terms. The search request comprises one or more search 
terms of ontology. The ontology includes a plurality of 
terms. 
Ontology models can be used to relate the physical 
world, to the real world, in the line-of-business and decision 
makers. The objective of our system is to improve the 
modeling of a semantic coherence for allowing the 
interoperability of different modules of environments 
dedicated to the industrial area. We have proposed to use 
ontology together with Case-Based Reasoning (CBR) in the 
acquisition of an expert knowledge in the specific domain. 
We need a vocabulary of concepts, resources and services 
for our information system described in the scenario, which 
requires definition about the relationships between objects of 
discourse and their attributes. The primary information 
managed in the domain is metadata about industrial 
resources, such as guides, digital services, alarms, and 
information. ReasInd project contains a collection of codes, 
visualization tools, computing resources, and data sets 
distributed across the grids for, which we have developed a 
well-defined 
ontology 
using 
Resource 
Description 
Framework (RDF) language [21] (Figure 3). 
 
 
Figure 3. Class hierarchy for the ReasInd ontology 
The total set of entities in our semantic model comprises 
the taxonomy of classes we use in our model to represent the 
real world. Together these ideas are represented by ontology. 
This provides the semantic makeup of the information 

173
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
model. The vocabulary of the semantic model provides the 
basis on which user-defined model queries are formed. Our 
ontology can be regarded as quaternion ReasInd:={caller, 
resources, properties, relation}, where caller represents the 
user kinds, resources cover different information sources like 
electronic services, web pages, databases, and guides. Also, 
properties contain all the characteristics of the services and 
resources and a set of relationships intended primarily for 
standardization across ontologies. We integrated three 
essential sources to the system: electronic resources, a 
catalogue of documents, and personal database.  
We choose Protégé as our ontology editor, which 
supports knowledge acquisition and knowledge base 
development. It is a powerful development and knowledge-
modeling tool with an open architecture [22]. Protégé uses 
OWL and RDF as ontology language to establish semantic 
relations [23]. For the construction of the ontology of our 
system, firstly we determine the domain and scope of the 
ontology: electronic services, web pages, DD.BB, and 
guides. Also it is also necessary to adapt the ontology to the 
user kinds needs. Second, we enumerate important terms in 
the ontology. It is useful to write down a list of all terms we 
would like either to make statements about or to explain to a 
user. Then we define the classes and the class hierarchy. 
Based on RDF Schema we describe the relations between 
classes, currently implemented 10 classes and about 175 
properties. The ontology and its sub-classes are established 
according to the taxonomies profile. As mentioned in 
previous sections, relations among ontologies can be 
composed as a form of declarative rules, which can be 
further handled in inference engines.  
The last step is to provide a conversational CBR system 
to retrieve the requested metadata satisfying a user query. 
We need to add enough initial instances and item instances to 
the knowledge base. Thirteen thousand cases were collected 
for user profiles and their different resources and services. 
This is sufficient for our proof-of-concept demonstration, but 
would not be sufficiently efficient to access large resource 
sets. Each case contains a set of attributes concerning both 
metadata and knowledge. However, our prototype is 
currently being extended to enable efficient retrieval directly 
from a database, which will enable its use for large-scale sets 
of resources. 
 
VI. 
SYSTEM ACHITECTURE AND KEY ELEMENTS 
The proposed architecture is based on our approach to 
share information in an efficient way by means of metadata 
characterizations and domain ontology inclusion. The system 
works by comparing items that can be retrieved across 
heterogeneous repositories and capturing a semantic view of 
the world independent of data representation. It implies to 
use ontology as vocabulary to define complex, multi-
relational case structures to support the CBR processes [24]. 
The goal is achieved from a search perspective, with possible 
intelligent 
infrastructures 
to 
construct 
decentralized 
industrial repositories where no global schema exists. This 
goal implies the application of CBR technique.  
In order to support the semantic shared knowledge in 
industrial repositories, a prototype CBR and ontology-based 
techniques have been development. The architecture of our 
system is shown in Figure 4, which mainly includes four 
elements: the acquire engine, ontology, knowledge base, and 
graphical user interface. 
 
Figure 4. ReasInd architecture 
A. The Acquire Engine - Case Based Reasoning 
Our architecture itself is separated into three layers: 
DD.BB capable of storing, managing and controlling the 
extensive sets of knowledge; the CBR layer for indexing the 
knowledge for efficient retrieval and retain knowledge set; 
and GUI to provide low-latency functionality and access to 
recent data. CBR is a problem-solving architecture that 
solves a new problem, by remembering a previous similar 
situation and by reusing knowledge of that state. In the CBR 
application, problems are described by metadata concerning 
desired characteristics of an industry resource, and the 
solution to the question is a pointer to a resource described 
by metadata. A new difficulty is solved by retrieving one or 
more previously experienced cases, reusing the case, 
revising, and retaining. When a user introduces a description 
request to the system the reasoning cycle may be described 
by following processes  (Figure 5). 
 
Figure 5. ReasInd Case Based Reasoning Cycle  
The system retrieves the closest-matching cases stored in 
the case base. It reuses a complete design, where case-based 
and slot-based adaptation can be hooked, is provided. If 

174
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
appropriate, the validated solution is added to the case for 
use in future problem solving. It then checks out the 
proposed solution if necessary. Since the proposed result 
could be inadequate, this process can correct the first 
proposed solution. The system retains the new solution as a 
part of a new case. This process enables CBR to learn and 
create a new solution. The solution is validated through 
feedback from the user or the environment. 
Implementing a CBR application from scratch remains a 
time-consuming software engineering process and requires a 
lot of specific experience beyond pure programming skills. 
This involves a number of steps, such as: collecting case and 
background 
knowledge, 
modeling 
a 
suitable 
case 
representation, defining an accurate similarity measure, 
implementing retrieval functionality and implementing user 
interfaces. In this work, we have chosen framework jColibri 
to develop the intelligent search.   
JColibri is a java-based configuration that supports the 
development of knowledge intensive CBR applications and 
helps in the integration of ontology in them [25]. This way 
the same methods can operate over different types of 
information repositories. The Open Source JColibri system 
provides a framework for building CBR systems based on 
state-of-the-art software engineering techniques. JColibri is 
an open source framework, which affords the opportunity to 
connect easily by ontology in the CBR application to use it 
for case representation and content-based reasoning methods 
to assess the similarity between them. Nevertheless, at the 
same time, it ensures enough flexibility to enable expert 
users to implement advanced CBR applications. 
B. Knowledgebase 
The understanding provided through semantic models is 
critical to being able to properly drive the correct insights 
from the monitored instrumentation, which ultimately can 
lead to optimizing business processes or, in this case, 
industry services. As a result, semantic models can greatly 
enhance the usefulness of the information obtained through 
operations integration solutions. In the physical world a 
control point such a valve or temperature sensor is known by 
its identifier in a particular control system, possibly through 
a tag name like 103-AA12.  
CBR case data could be considered as a portion of the 
knowledge, i.e., metadata about resources. The metadata 
descriptions of the resources and objects (cases) are 
abstracted from the details of their physical representation 
and are stored in the case base. Every case contains both a 
description of the problem and the associated solution. The 
information model provides the ability to abstract different 
kinds of data and provides an understanding of how the data 
elements relate. A key value of the semantic model then is to 
provide access to information in context of the real world in 
a consistent way.  
Semantic models allow users to ask questions about what 
is happening in a modeled system in a more natural way. As 
an example, an oil production enterprise might consist of five 
geographic regions, with each region containing three to five 
drilling platforms, and each drilling platform monitored by 
several control systems, each having a different purpose. One 
of those control systems might monitor the temperature of 
extracted oil, while another might monitor vibration on a 
pump. A semantic model will allow a user to ask a question 
like, "What is the temperature of the oil being extracted on 
Platform 5?", without having to understand details such as, 
which specific control system monitors that information or, 
which physical sensor is reporting the oil temperature on that 
platform. Within a semantic model implementation, this 
information is identified using "triples" of the form "subject-
predicate-object"; for example: 
    Tank1 <has temperature> Sensor 7 
    Tank 1 <is part of> Platform 4 
    Platform 4 <is part of> Plant1 
These triples, taken together, make up the ontology for 
Plant1 and can be stored in the model server. This 
information, then, can be easily traversed using the model 
query language more easily than the case without a semantic 
model to answer questions such as "What is the temperature 
of tank 1 on Platform 4". 
C. Evaluating a Set of Maching Cases 
The inference engine contains the CBR component that 
automatically searches for similar queries-answer pairs based 
on the knowledge that the system extracted from the 
questions text. The retrieval process identifies the features of 
the case with the most similar query. It treats the RDF query 
schema and the RDF query instance as a tree then tries to 
match all possible interpreting paths of a query instance with 
annotated pictures and finally ranks the similarity match and 
finds the best answer. Based on the proposed representation 
model, we have developed a retrieval scheme for the 
intelligent retrieval system. Given a new case and a large 
precedents database, we develop the following scheme to 
identify those relevant precedents step by step. When a new 
case arises, users always want to find the factually relevant 
precedents that are similar in all or most representation 
elements. However, it is impossible to find an identical 
precedent with the new case due to the factual diversity of 
actual cases. In that case, those precedents sharing one or 
more representation elements with the new case are desired 
as they are potentially useful for making legal arguments 
[26]. 
The use of structured representations of cases requires 
approaches for similarity assessment that allows a 
comparison of two differently structured objects, in 
particular, objects belonging to different object classes. 
Retrieval strategy used in our system is cosine approach. 
Cosine similarity is a measure of similarity between two 
vectors by measuring the cosine of the angle between them 
[27]. The system relies on cosine similarity distance metrics 
when computing distance between symbolic vectors 
representing the retrieved cases. First, let us take an instance 
and break it down into features, in the simple case features 
can be just important attributes. Then we count the times a 
particular word appears in the document. What we end up 
with is a term vector or vector of terms and frequencies: 
aj= (a1,j, a2,j, …, at,j) 
x= (x1, x2, …, xt) 

175
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
The attributes are used as a vector to find the normalized 
dot product of the two cases. By determining the cosine 
similarity, the system is effectively to find cosine of the 
angle between the two objects (Figure 6). 
 
Figure 6. Similarity between documents 
We can use the cosine similarity between the query 
vector and a document vector as a measure of the score of 
the document for that query. The resulting scores can then be 
used to select the top-scoring documents for a query. The 
result of cosine function is equal to 1 when the angle is 0, 
and it is less than 1 when the angle is of any other value. 
Calculating the cosine of the angle between two vectors thus 
determines whether two vectors are pointing in roughly the 
same direction. For cosine similarities resulting in a value of 
0, the documents do not share any attributes because the 
angle between the objects is 90 degrees.  
 
D. graphical user interface. 
ReasInd is a platform, which is an intermediate link 
between users and search engine. Keeping in mind that our 
final goal is to reformulate requests in the ontology to 
queries in another with least loss of semantics. We come to a 
process for addressing complex relations between ontologies. 
By using ReasInd, the user can tune the query in accordance 
with his needs, excluding answers from an inappropriate 
domain and add semantically similar results. Advanced 
conversational user interface interacts with the users to solve 
a query, defined as the set of questions selected and 
answered by the user during the conversation. The real way 
to get individualized interaction between a user and ReasInd 
is to present the user with a variety of options and to let the 
user choose what is of interest at that specific time. In our 
system, the user interacts with the system to fill in the gaps 
to retrieve the right cases (Figure 7). 
A transformation algorithm was implemented in the 
research prototype as the combined capability of the query 
transformation agent and the ontology agent of the intelligent 
multi-agent information retrieval mediator. The system has 
different users profiles to help to user to build a particular 
environment, which contains his interest search areas in the 
industry repositories domain: Plan Managers, Assistants, 
Operators, and Engineers. In this intelligence profile setting, 
people are surrounded by intelligent interfaces merged, thus 
creating a computing-capable environment with intelligent 
communication and processing available to the user by 
means of a simple, natural, and effortless human-system 
interaction. If the information space is designed well, then 
this choice is easy, and the user achieves optimal information 
through the use of natural intelligence that is, the choices are 
easy to understand so that users know what they will see if 
they click a link, and what they annul by not following other 
links. 
 
Figure 7. Graphical User interface 
Profile agents assist the technicians with the search, 
according to the specifications they made. The search 
parameters in a profile, the start of a search, or the access to 
the list of retrieved knowledge can be controlled by invoking 
appropriate search operations, which extract metadata from 
plants resources. Ideally, profile agents learn from their 
experiments, communicate and cooperate with other agents, 
around in DIRs. 
 
VII. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION 
As the private networks have grown from small networks 
into a large global infrastructure, the need to manage the 
huge number of hardware and software components within 
these networks more systematically has grown more 
important as well. In order to validate our approach, we have 
developed an intelligent control architecture in an industrial 
domain, specifically in an electric power system. 
 This system integrates the management knowledge into 
the network resources specifications. We study an example 
of alarm detection and intelligent troubleshooting. We have 
used a network that belongs to a company in the electrical 
sector Sevillana-Endesa's (SE) a Spanish power utility. 
ReasInd is used to optimize the operation of hundreds of 
connected sensors currently installed. The Spanish power 
grid company has a network using wireless on the regional 
high-tension power grid. These low-cost wireless sensors 
and accompanying analytics can dramatically improve plant 
performance, increase safety, and pay for themselves within 
months. The use of integrating knowledge in agents can help 
the system administrator in using the maximum capabilities 
of the intelligent network management platform without 
similarity = Cos(θ) = aj ⋅ x
aj
x =
aij ⋅ xi
i=1
n
∑
ai
( )
2
i=1
n
∑
⋅
xi
( )
2
i=1
n
∑

176
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
having to use another specification language to customize the 
application. To most companies, communications spending 
is an obscure recurring cost composed of complex bills, 
vendors, and services that can represent as much as 4% of 
their total revenue [28]. If we add to this an environment of 
ever-changing technology and typical business requirements 
such as mergers, multiple sites, and different geographic 
locations, the end result is a highly technical function with 
financial impacts that can easily be misunderstood and over-
invested. 
It 
is 
necessary 
to 
analyze 
the 
entire 
telecommunications 
environment 
for 
an 
efficient 
management of the network resources. 
We have used the Supervisory Control And Data 
Acquisition (SCADA) system due to the management 
limitations of network communication equipment (Figure 8). 
 
Figure 8. Elements of the prototype 
SCADA consists of the following subsystems: 
- Remote Terminal Units (RTUs) connecting to sensors in 
the process, converting sensor signals to digital data and 
sending digital data to the supervisory system.  
- Communication infrastructure connecting the supervisory 
system to the RTUs. 
- A supervisory computer system, acquiring data on the 
process and sending commands control to the process. 
ReasInd monitors in real time, the network’s main 
parameters, making use of the information supplied by the 
SCADA, placed on the main company building, and the 
RTUs that are installed at different stations. SCADA systems 
are configured around standard base functions like data 
acquisition, monitoring and event processing, data storage 
archiving, and analysis. The fundamental role of an RTU is 
the acquisition of various types of data from the power 
process, the accumulation, packaging, and conversion of data 
in a form that can be communicated back to the master, the 
interpretation and outputting of commands received from the 
master, and the performance of local filtering, calculation 
and processes to allow specific functions to be performed 
locally. The supervision below and RTU include all network 
devices and substation and feeder levels like circuit breakers, 
reclosers, autosectionalizers, the local automation distributed 
at these devices, and the communications infrastructure. 
ReasInd allows the operator to search information, 
alarms, or digital and analogical parameters of measure, 
registered on each RTU. Starting from the supplied 
information, the operator is able to undertake actions in order 
to solve the failures that could appear or to send a technician 
to repair the equipment of the station. The system has the 
capability of selecting an agent, which is best suited for 
satisfying the client’s requirement, without the client being 
aware of the details about the agent. Collaborative agents are 
useful, especially when a task involves several systems on 
the network.  
VIII. EVALUATION AND CORROBORATIONS 
Experiments have been carried out in order to evaluate 
the effectiveness of run-time ontology mapping. The main 
goal has been to check if the mechanism of query 
formulation, assisted by an agent, gives a suitable tool for 
augmenting the number of significant cases, extracted from 
DIRs, to be stored in the CBR. For our experiments, we 
considered 100 users with different profiles. So that we could 
establish a context for the users, they were asked to at least 
start their essay before issuing any queries to the system. 
They were also asked to look through all the results returned 
by the system before clicking on any result. In each 
experiment, we report the average rank of the user-clicked 
result for our baseline system, another search engine, and for 
our system ReasInd [29]. Then we calculated the rank for 
each retrieval document by combining the various values and 
comparing the total number of extracted documents and 
documents consulted by the user (Figure 9). 
 
Figure 9. Performance ReasInd & traditional ES 
In our study domain, we can observe that the best final 
ranking was obtained for our prototype and an interesting 
improvement over the performance of others search engines. 
Our system performs satisfactorily with about a 98.5 % rate 
of success in real cases.  
During the experimentation, heuristics and measures that 
are commonly adopted in information retrieval have been 
used. Statistical analysis has been done to determine the 
important values in the results. While the users were 
performing these searches, an application was continuing to 
run in the background on the server, and capturing the 
content of queries typed and the results of the searches. We 
will discuss the issue of response time for five agents 
associated with transceiver resources. We can establish that 
our prototype improves the answer time and the average of 
the traditional search engine. The results for ReasInd are 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
110 
120 
130 
140 
150 
160 
170 
180 
190 
200 
1 
6 
11 
16 
21 
26 
25 
30 
35 
40 
45 
50 
Ranking 
ReasInd 
Other Search 
Engines 

177
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
25.4 % better than the time to execute searches in the 
traditional search engines. 
IX. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
 
Semantic models based on industry standards take that 
one step further, especially in intelligent techniques 
application. Semantic models play a key role in the evolving 
solution architectures that support the business goal of 
obtaining a complete view of “what is happening” within 
operations and then deriving business insights from that 
view. In this paper, we provide different possibilities, which 
semantic web opens for industry. One important objective is 
to study appropriate industrial cases, collect arguments, 
launch industrial projects and develop prototypes for the 
industrial companies that believe in the benefits of the 
Semantic Web.  
We investigated how the semantic technologies can be 
used to provide additional semantics from existing resources 
in industrial repositories. This study addresses the main 
aspects of a semantic and intelligent information retrieval 
system architecture trying to answer the requirements of the 
next-generation semantic search engine. For this purpose, we 
presented ReasInd, a system based on ontology and AI 
architecture for knowledge management in industrial 
repositories. This scheme is based on the principle of the 
knowledge items that are abstracted to a characterization by 
metadata description, which is used for further processing. 
We have proposed to use ontology together with CBR in the 
acquisition of an expert knowledge in the specific industry 
domain. The study analyses the implementation results and 
evaluates the viability of our approaches in enabling search 
in intelligent-based digital repositories.  
We conclude by pointing out an important aspect of the 
obtained 
integration: 
improving 
representation 
by 
incorporating more metadata from within the information 
and intelligent techniques into the retrieval process enhances 
the effectiveness of the knowledge retrieval. 
Industrie 4.0 will play a crucial role in shaping the future 
in the next five to ten years in the world. Various strategy 
and working groups are working on the Industrie 4.0 
extension of existing norms and standards. Future work will 
be concerned with the design of distributed and self-
managed industry services, which are able to automatically 
discover, compose, and integrate heterogeneous components, 
able to manage heterogeneous knowledge and intelligence 
sources, able to create, deploy and exploit linked data, and 
able to browse and filter information based on semantic 
similarity and closeness. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Martín, M. Burbano, I. Monedero, J. Luque, and C. León. 
“Semantic Reasoning Method to Troubleshoot in the Industrial 
Domain,” The Fifth International Conference on Intelligent Systems 
and Applications, INTELLI, InfoWare, November 2016, pp. 89-94. 
[2] 
G. M. West, S. D. J. McArthur, and D. Towle, “Industrial 
implementation of intelligent system techniques for nuclear power 
plant condition monitoring,” Expert Systems with Applications, 
Volume 39, Issue 8, pp. 7432-7440, 15 June 2012. 
[3] 
S. Guo, C. Lee, and C. Hsu, “An intelligent image agent based on 
soft-computing techniques for color image processing,” Expert 
Systems with Applications, Volume 28, Issue 3, pp. 483-494, April 
2005. 
[4] 
Y. Huang, J. Chen, Y. Kuo, and Y. Jeng, “An intelligent human-
expert forum system based on fuzzy information retrieval technique,” 
Expert Systems with Applications, Volume 34, Issue 1, pp. 446-458, 
January 2008. 
[5] 
S. Yang and Y. Chang, “An active and intelligent network 
management 
system 
with 
ontology-based 
and 
multi-agent 
techniques,” Expert Systems with Applications, Volume 38, Issue 8, 
pp. 10320-10342, August 2011. 
[6] 
A. Gladun, J. Rogushina, F. Garcia-Sanchez, R. Martínez-Béjar, and 
J. Fernández-Breis, “An application of intelligent techniques and 
semantic web technologies in e-learning environments,” Expert 
Systems with Applications, Volume 36, Issue 2, Part 1, 1922-1931, 
March 2009. 
[7] 
S. Zhang, F. Boukamp, and J. Teizer, “Ontology-based semantic 
modeling of construction safety knowledge: Towards automated 
safety planning for job hazard analysis (JHA),” Automation in 
Construction, Volume 52, pp. 29-41, April 2015. 
[8] 
 F. Bertola and V. Patti, “Ontology-based affective models to 
organize artworks in the social semantic web, Information Processing 
& Management,” Volume 52, Issue 1, Pp. 139-162, January 2016. 
[9] 
H. Liu, M. Lu, and M. Al-Hussein, “Ontology-based semantic 
approach for construction-oriented quantity take-off from BIM 
models in the light-frame building industry,” Advanced Engineering 
Informatics, Volume 30, Issue 2, pp. 190-207, April 2016. 
[10] S. Zhang and J. Lai, “Exploring information from the topology 
beneath the Gene Ontology terms to improve semantic similarity 
measures,” Gene, Volume 586, Issue 1, pp. 148-157, 15 July 2016. 
[11] W. Lu et al., “Selecting a semantic similarity measure for concepts in 
two different CAD model data ontologies,” Advanced Engineering 
Informatics, Volume 30, Issue 3, pp. 449-466, August 2016. 
[12] C. Lucas, M. A. Zia, M. R. A. Shirazi and A. Alishahi, "Development 
of a multi-agent information management system for Iran power 
industry. A case study," 2001 IEEE Porto Power Tech Proceedings 
(Cat. No.01EX502), Porto, 2001, pp. 6. 
[13] M. Mehrpoor, A. Gjærde, and O. I. Sivertsen, "Intelligent services: A 
semantic recommender system for knowledge representation in 
industry," 2014 International Conference on Engineering, Technology 
and Innovation (ICE), Bergamo.  
[14] H. Chen, B. Liu, and W. He, "PISGrid: A Semantic Grid 
Infrastructure of Establishing Dynamic Virtual Organizations 
According 
to 
Requirement 
for 
Press 
Industry," 
2006 
IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web Intelligence and 
Intelligent Agent Technology Workshops, Hong Kong, 2006, pp. 
287-290.  
[15] H. Cheng, P. Zeng, L. Xue, Z. Shi, P. Wang, and H. Yu, 
"Manufacturing Ontology Development Based on Industrie 4.0 
Demonstration 
Production 
Line," 
2016 
Third 
International 
Conference on Trustworthy Systems and their Applications (TSA), 
Wuhan, China, 2016, pp. 42-47.  
[16] A. Badii, C. Lallah, M. Zhu, and M. Crouch., “Semi-automatic 
knowledge extraction, representation and context-sensitive intelligent 
retrieval of video content using collateral context modelling with 
scalable 
ontological 
networks,” 
Signal 
Processing: 
Image 
Communication, Volume 24, Issue 9, pp. 759-773, 2009. 
[17] M. Fernandez. et. Al., [online]. “Semantically enhanced Information 
Retrieval: An ontology-based approach, Web Semantics: Science, 
Services and Agents on the World Wide Web,” In Press, Corrected 
Proof, Available online 01 July 2014. 
[18] EIF. European Interoperability Framework Version 2. Retrieved from 
http://ec.europa.eu/isa/strategy/doc/annex_ii_eif_en.pdf, 
February, 
2017. 
[19] MAP. Aplicaciones utilizadas para el ejercicio de potestades. 
Criterios de Seguridad, Normalización y Conservación. Ministerio de 

178
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Administraciones 
Públicas. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.csi.map.es/csi/criterios/index.html, March 2017. 
[20] SEC. Commission Staff Workking Paper: linking up Europe, the 
importance of interoperability for egovernment services, [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://europa.eu.int/ISPO/ida/export/files/en/1523.pdf, July 2017. 
[21] T. Segaran, “Programming Collective Intelligence: Building Smart 
Web 2.0 Applications,” Published by O'Reilly Media, August 23rd 
2007. 
[22] PROTÉGÉ. “The Protégé Ontology Editor and Knowledge 
Acquisition 
System,” 
[Online], 
Available 
from: 
http://protege.stanford.edu/, July 2017. 
[23] W3C. “RDF Vocabulary Description Language 1.0: RDF Schema,” 
[Online]. Available from: http://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-schema/, July 
2017. 
[24] J. Toussaint and Cheng, K., “Web-based CBR (case-based reasoning) 
as a tool with the application to tooling selection,” International 
Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, Volume 29, Issue 1, 
pp 24–34, 2006. 
[25] GAIA - Group for Artificial Intelligence Applications. jCOLIBRI 
project, “Distribution of the development environment,” [Online]. 
Available from: http://gaia.fdi.ucm.es/research/colibri/jcolibri/, July 
2017.  
[26] H. Stuckenschmidt and F. V. Harmelen, “Ontology-based metadata 
generation from semi-structured information,” K-CAP, pp. 163–170, 
ACM, 2011. 
[27] G. Finnie and Z. Sun. “Similarity and metrics in case-based 
reasoning,”. Int J Intelligent Systems 17 (3), pp. 273-287. 2002 
[28] Global Communications Report - USC Annenberg, 2017. 
[29] D. Amerland, “Google Semantic Search: Search Engine Optimization 
(SEO) Techniques That Get Your Company More Traffic, Increase 
Brand Impact and Amplify Your Online Presence,” Que Publishing 
Kindle Edition, July, 2013. pp. 2013 – 229. 
 

