Supporting Lifelong Learning with Smart Blockchain Badges
Alexander Mikroyannidis, Allan Third, Niaz Chowdhury, Michelle Bachler and John Domingue 
Knowledge Media Institute 
The Open University 
Milton Keynes, United Kingdom 
{Alexander.Mikroyannidis, Allan.Third, Niaz.Chowdhury, Michelle.Bachler, John.Domingue}@open.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract—This paper presents the initial implementation, 
deployment and evaluation of a pilot case study, aiming at 
supporting lifelong learning through the use of Blockchain 
technology. This pilot case study uses Blockchain technology 
for decentralising lifelong learning and providing lifelong 
learners 
with 
transparent 
and 
immutable 
educational 
accreditation in the form of Smart Blockchain Badges. At the 
same time, lifelong learners are provided with personalised 
recommendations that help them reach their personal and 
professional learning goals. This paper presents a web-based 
prototype implementing the main scenario of this pilot case 
study, as well as the initial deployment and evaluation phases 
conducted with stakeholders from the education community. 
Keywords-lifelong learning; blockchain; decentralisation; 
smart badge; personalised recommendation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In 
this 
paper, 
we 
investigate how 
Blockchain 
technologies can help realise the decentralisation of lifelong 
learning, via a pilot case study for offering support to 
lifelong learners in various stages of their learning journeys 
and of their career trajectories. This paper builds upon and 
extends our previous work [1], where we first introduced the 
lifelong learning pilot case study. 
Education today is still controlled mostly by educational 
institutions, which offer quality, credibility, governance, and 
administrative functions. This model is not flexible enough 
and poses difficulties in recognising the achievements of a 
lifelong learner in informal and non-formal types of 
education. As a result, a lifelong learner’s transition from 
formal to informal education and vice versa can be 
hindered, as the achievements acquired in one type of 
education are not easily transferable to another [2-5]. This 
indicates the need for a decentralised model across all types 
of education, offering learners with a framework for fully 
controlling how they are learning, how they acquire 
qualifications and how they share their qualifications and 
other learning data with third parties, such as educational 
institutions or employers [6, 7].  
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows. 
Section II discusses related work in the areas of Blockchain 
technologies and Open Badges. Section III introduces the 
overall framework of the QualiChain project. Section IV 
presents the pilot case study for supporting lifelong 
learning, its scope, the stakeholders involved, the main 
scenario, as well as a prototype implementation and its 
initial deployment and evaluation. Finally, the paper is 
concluded and the next steps of this work are outlined. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
A. Blockchains and associated technologies 
It is important to distinguish between the terms 
‘distributed ledgers’ and ‘blockchains’, which are often 
incorrectly used as synonyms. Distributed ledgers are 
replicated, 
shared 
and 
synchronised 
digital 
data 
geographically dispersed over multiple sites possibly 
including multiple institutions. A peer-to-peer network is 
required for communication and a consensus algorithm to 
ensure replication and synchronisation across multiple 
nodes.  
There are key differences between applications that run 
on standard platforms and those that run on top of 
distributed ledgers. Rather than connecting from a device 
(e.g., a mobile phone) to a central server, which holds all the 
required data (possibly including private customer data), 
every player or volunteer in the network gets a complete 
copy of all the data. This changes a fundamental dynamic. 
The notion of centralised control disappears completely, 
rather data and computation are evenly owned, controlled 
and shared across the peer network.  
A Blockchain is a specific type of distributed ledger 
where an ever-growing list of records, called blocks, are 
linked together to form a chain – hence the term 
‘Blockchain’. The first Blockchain was conceived by 
Nakamoto [8] as the basis for Bitcoin the most famous 
Blockchain based crypto-currency. The main idea behind 
Bitcoin was to create a currency specifically for the Internet 
rather than (as is the case in all fiat currencies) mapping an 
originally physical currency to the global communications 
infrastructure.  
The first issue that arises with internet-based currencies 
is what is called the ‘double spend problem’ [9]. This is the 
case when a digital ‘coin’ is spent, by an individual, for 
some service or good, and then the same coin is spent again 
by the same individual, for example by copying or 
duplicating the relevant data. The Blockchain addresses this 
problem by providing an immutable public ledger of all 
historical transactions. Once processed and stored within a 
163
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

block, a transaction cannot be altered even by the 
transaction owners.  
Within a Blockchain, immutability is provided through a 
number of related mechanisms: 
• 
Timestamp – Each block has a unique timestamp. 
• 
Cryptographic hash – Each block is linked to the 
previous block through a crypto-graphic hash [10]. 
A cryptographic hash function is a hash function 
that takes an input of any size and returns a string of 
fixed size. Small changes in the input result in large 
changes in the output. It is this last feature that 
guarantees that changes to the input can be easily 
detected, as the hash function will no longer be 
verifiable. Additionally, it is not easy to regenerate 
the input from any given output. This aids in use 
cases involving an element of privacy or security. 
• 
Cryptographic puzzle – In order to gain the right to 
create the next block, a participant (often called a 
‘miner’) has to be the first to solve a cryptographic 
puzzle. This feature prevents a malicious attack 
aiming to re-write the history of a set of 
transactions, since this would require many 
cryptographic puzzles to be solved, as the hash of 
each block would have to be altered. 
• 
Participant network – Since the data related to all 
the transactions are copied across all participants 
(miners) in the network, all miners are able to check 
if any protocols or rules have been violated. 
Figure 1 (Appendix) shows a Blockchain containing 
three blocks. Starting from the right, which is the newest 
block, each block points to its predecessor using a hash 
function. Additionally, each block contains the solution to 
the cryptographic puzzle, termed ‘nonce’ and a timestamp. 
Transactions are stored in a Merkle Tree [11] - a tree of 
hashes - where the leaf nodes contain the transactions. This 
structure allows for efficient retrieval and ensures the 
veracity of the individual transactions in addition to the 
block, i.e., if a transaction is altered then the hash will no 
longer be valid.  
The proof of work consensus mechanism, which 
involves solving the cryptographic puzzle before anyone 
else, has led to the growth of the computing power and 
electrical 
consumption 
associated 
with 
Blockchain 
networks. Estimates are that by 2020 the Bitcoin network 
will expend as much electricity as the whole country of 
Denmark [12]. This has led to several Blockchain platforms 
exploring other consensus mechanisms, such as: 
• 
Proof of stake [13] – where the chances of being 
selected to produce the next block depend on the 
value of a ‘stake’ stored by a miner in a specific 
location. Variants of this take into account the ‘age’ 
of the stake. 
• 
Proof of capacity – rather than the chances of being 
selected being related to the amount of computing 
power, as for proof of work, here the probability is 
related to the amount of storage a miner holds.  
• 
Proof of burn – sending coins to an irretrievable 
address (‘burn’) gives one the right to be selected. 
The chances of being selected to mine the next 
block are related to the value of the burn. 
• 
Proof of elapsed time – Intel has produced a special 
processor capability to implement this mechanism 
which relates elapsed time to the probability of 
being selected [14]. 
Ethereum [15] is currently the most well-known and 
widely used Blockchain platform. Rather than serving as a 
platform for a crypto currency, the underlying aim for 
Ethereum is to be an open Blockchain platform to support 
the development and use of decentralised applications. 
Unlike Bitcoin, the programming language available on the 
Ethereum platform is Turing complete so that general 
applications can be run on what the founders call a ‘world 
computer’.  
At the core of the Ethereum concept are two types of 
accounts: 
• 
Externally Owned Accounts (EOAs), which are 
controlled by private keys. A private key is a 
cryptographic mechanism allowing for individuals 
to unlock data that has been secured by a 
corresponding public key. EOAs are controlled by 
individual users or organisations.  
• 
Contract Accounts, also termed ‘Smart Contracts’, 
which can be defined as “automatable and 
enforceable agreements” [16]. Smart Contracts 
constitute one of the main features of current 
Blockchain platforms, such as Ethereum. They are 
controlled by contract code and are activated by 
EOAs.  
When ether, the currency used within Ethereum, is sent 
from an EOA to a Contract Account, the contained program 
is executed. This can result in further transactions and 
payments and additional Smart Contracts being invoked. 
Through these chains of invocation, connected Smart 
Contracts form the basis of Ethereum applications which are 
called ‘DApps’ (short for ‘Distributed Applications’). A 
number of high-level languages exist for writing Smart 
Contracts, including Solidity [17] (similar to C and 
JavaScript), Serpent (similar to Python) and LLL (a low-
level lisp-like language).  
From and end-user point of view, Ethereum, like 
Bitcoin, 
can 
be 
accessed 
through 
a 
number 
of 
implementations. It should be noted that the term ‘Ethereum 
Client’ includes software able to create transactions and 
mine new blocks, as well as wallets that manage private and 
public keys associated with an EOA. A screen snapshot of 
such a wallet that can be used for both Ethereum and 
Bitcoin is shown in Figure 2. As in many banking apps, 
users of this wallet are able to select accounts, view 
balances and transfer funds to other accounts. Other wallets 
164
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

also allow DApps to be managed in a fashion similar to 
Apple’s iTunes application.  
 
 
Figure 2. Snapshot of a Jaxx wallet used for both Bitcoin and Ethereum 
[18]. 
One of the first main problems that Ethereum faced was 
how to prevent arbitrary programs hogging the combined 
computational power of the mining community. A 
developer may inadvertently or maliciously create a 
program that never halts or eats up CPU or space resources. 
The solution to this is a transaction pricing mechanism, 
based on the concept of ‘gas’. Every transaction request 
must be accompanied by a maximum amount of gas that a 
user is willing to be spent on a transaction. Miners execute 
transactions until they complete, or the gas runs out. 
Insufficient gas will result in a failed transaction and all of 
the fee lost. Otherwise, the remaining gas is returned to the 
user. Gas is paid for in ether with the purchase price fixed 
by the Ethereum mining community.  
Because of the associated costs, large data files are not 
stored on the Ethereum platform. Typically, large files are 
stored elsewhere (off-chain) and referenced using a 
cryptographic hash. This solution enables the validity of a 
document to be checked (by comparison with its hash), 
whilst dramatically reducing storage costs. The peer-to-peer 
storage system IPFS (Inter Planetary File System) [19] is 
often used in conjunction with Ethereum. 
B. Open Badges 
Open Badges [20] allow for detailed recording of 
accreditation in digital form from both formal and informal 
learning contexts. Figure 3 shows the metadata stored in an 
Open Badge, including its name, criteria, image, issuer, 
recipient, etc. Open Badges were initiated by the Mozilla 
Foundation in 2010 [21] as a way of providing a verifiable 
digital recognition of learning across a wide variety of 
contexts, including: 
• 
Capturing a learning path – in essence breaking up 
a single large qualification, such as a degree, into 
constituent parts giving a detailed account as to 
what has been achieved. The learning path may 
cross institutions.  
• 
Achievement signalling – indicating to the outside 
world specific skills or achievements. For example, 
enabling recruiters to identify suitable candidates.  
• 
Motivation 
– 
through 
intrinsic 
feedback 
encouraging continued engagement and retention. 
Additionally, badges can enable awareness of or 
grant specific privileges. 
• 
Innovation and flexibility – enabling the capture of 
skills which may be missed or ignored within 
formal accreditation and newer emerging skills for 
example, related to particular forms of digital 
literacy. Badges provide a flexible channel to 
recognise new or currently unrecognised skills. 
• 
Identity/reputation building – badges can promote 
identity and reputation within learning and peer 
communities. 
Any 
existing 
individual 
and 
aggregate identity and reputation can be made 
explicit and portable across communities and peer 
groups. 
• 
Community building/kinship – membership of a 
community can be signalled enabling peers with 
similar interest to be found or potential mentors or 
teachers. Badges are a mechanism for providing 
social capital and the formalisation of camaraderie 
and communities of practice. 
Since 2010, millions of Open Badges have been awarded 
[20] and have been taken up by a number of organisations 
including the Clinton Global Initiative [22] and NASA [23]. 
Although in extensive use, a number of problems have been 
articulated with the use of Open Badges. Belshaw [24] notes 
that often complaints are made on how the value of a badge 
can be judged. With an Open Badges infrastructure, there 
165
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

are no gatekeepers, meaning that anyone is allowed to issue 
a badge for anything.  
 
 
Figure 3. The structure of an Open Badge. 
In their assessment of 29 badge development efforts, 
Hickey et al. [25] found that unsuccessful projects were 
hindered by problems of interoperability and integration 
between badging systems and institutional platforms. On the 
other hand, successful badge deployments layered badges 
on top of existing content and infrastructure, were tied to 
public student ePortfolios and used a mix of automated and 
human expert issued awards. They also found key to success 
were the embedding of badges in more social learning forms 
and ensuring that the badges contain unique non-redundant 
information. The most promising route for badges, they 
argue, is to link to formal externally recognised certificates 
whilst adding additional claims and evidence. 
Badges are usually stored in what are known as 
backpacks. Backpacks give the user complete control over 
their achievements by allowing them to organize, display 
and manage their badges in one place. Until very recently, 
Mozilla ran the biggest badge portfolio system called 
‘Mozilla Backpack’. Mozilla have now closed their service 
down and handed over the running of a backpack service to 
Badgr [26]. A snapshot of a Badgr backpack is shown in 
Figure 4 (Appendix). Badgr backpacks allow someone to 
store and organize their badges into collections and shared 
badges or collections with others. Badgr allows a person to 
share badges via URL links, via social media, as well as via 
embedding. 
III. 
THE QUALICHAIN PROJECT 
The emergence of the Blockchain promises to 
revolutionise not only the financial world, but also 
education in various ways. Blockchain technology offers a 
decentralised peer-to-peer infrastructure, where privacy, 
secure archiving, consensual ownership, transparency, 
accountability, identity management and trust are built-in, 
both at the software and infrastructure levels. This 
technology offers opportunities to thoroughly rethink how 
we find educational content and tutoring services online, 
how we register and pay for them, as well as how we get 
accredited for what we have learned and how this 
accreditation affects our career trajectory. 
The QualiChain [27] research and innovation project 
focuses on the assessment of the technical, political, socio-
economic, legal and cultural impact of decentralisation 
solutions on education. As shown in Figure 5, QualiChain is 
targeting four key areas for exploring the impact of 
decentralisation: (i) lifelong learning; (ii) smart curriculum 
design; (iii) staffing the public sector; (iv) providing HR 
consultancy and competency management services. 
 
 
Figure 5. The key areas targeted by the QualiChain project. 
QualiChain investigates the creation, piloting and 
evaluation of decentralisation solutions for storing, sharing 
and verifying education and employment qualifications and 
focuses on the assessment of the potential of Blockchain 
technology, algorithmic techniques and computational 
intelligence for disrupting the domain of public education, 
as well as its interfaces with private education, the labour 
market, public sector administrative procedures and the 
wider socio-economic developments. 
IV. 
SUPPORTING LIFELONG LEARNING 
As outlined in the previous section, lifelong learning is a 
key area targeted by the QualiChain project. We are 
therefore aiming to provide support to lifelong learners in 
various stages of their learning journeys and of their career 
trajectories. In the context of this pilot case study, we 
investigate how Blockchain technologies can support 
lifelong learners in their learning journey and in advancing 
their career. Figure 6 illustrates the main goals of this pilot, 
which are the following: 
• 
Awarding lifelong learners with transparent and 
immutable educational accreditation. 
• 
Offering 
lifelong 
learners 
personalised 
recommendations 
based 
on 
their 
learning 
achievements. 
• 
Supporting lifelong learners in reaching their 
personal and professional learning goals. 
The next sections describe the scope, stakeholders and 
main scenario of this pilot, as well as the outcomes of a 
series of consultation workshops about this pilot. 
166
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 6. The overall goals of the pilot on supporting lifelong learning. 
A. Scope 
The scope of this pilot case study spans across the 
following: 
• 
We are targeting both formal and informal 
learning. While formal learning typically happens 
inside the classroom, for example in a traditional 
university lecture, informal learning happens outside 
of the classroom, for example by studying free 
online courses. 
• 
We are targeting both academic degrees and other 
forms of educational accreditation. For example, 
open badges have emerged as a new form of 
certifying that someone has acquired certain skills 
and has gained specific knowledge upon fulfilling 
certain criteria, e.g., by completing an online course. 
• 
We are supporting the learning journey and career 
trajectory of learners. We are aiming to support the 
whole learning journey of learners by offering them 
recommendations on what to study next. We are also 
offering recommendations about their next career 
steps, based on the educational credentials they have 
acquired.  
B. Stakeholders  
The two main categories of stakeholders involved in this 
pilot are the following: 
Lifelong learners. The concept of “lifelong learning” is 
based on the fact that learning is not confined to childhood or 
the classroom, but can take place throughout life and in a 
range of situations. Lifelong learners pursue learning 
throughout their lifetime, for either personal or professional 
reasons. They may study to develop new skills that they need 
in their professional life, for example to advance their career 
by finding a new job or by being promoted in their current 
job. They may also study to acquire skills and knowledge for 
personal reasons, for example as a hobby of theirs. Lifelong 
learners may engage either formal or informal education, or 
both, depending on their current learning goals and personal 
or professional circumstances. 
Lifelong learners face various challenges associated with 
the recognition of their learning achievements, for example 
when transitioning from formal to informal education or vice 
versa. In this pilot, we seek to support them in various ways, 
for example by verifying their learning achievements on the 
Blockchain, 
or 
by 
offering 
them 
personalised 
recommendations about what to study next or which job 
position might be suitable for them. In this way, we aim to 
help lifelong learners reach their personal or professional 
learning goals. 
Educational institutions. These are institutions that 
provide education or training services, either paid ones or 
free. The offerings of educational institutions can vary from 
conventional offline degrees to online free or paid courses, 
such as Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) or Open 
Educational Resources (OERs) [28]. 
In the context of this pilot, we seek to make the awarding 
of accreditation by educational institutions transparent and 
immutable with the use of Smart Badges [29]. Smart Badges 
are dynamic records of accreditation that follow the same 
principles as Open Badges and offer the same benefits in 
recording accreditation. However, Smart Badges are 
immutable and easily verifiable as they are stored on the 
Blockchain. The other novelty of Smart Badges lies in their 
dynamic features. For example, apart from just recording a 
learning achievement, a Smart Badge can also offer job or 
course recommendations as described in the next section. 
C. Scenario 
In this section, we present the interactions between 
stakeholders in the context of the main scenario of this pilot, 
as illustrated in the workflow of Figure 7 (Appendix). Let us 
consider a lifelong learner, who is looking to expand her 
knowledge and skills on data science and has thus enrolled to 
a number of courses offered online, including MOOCs and 
OERs. Each time the learner completes a course, she is 
awarded a Smart Badge by the educational institution that 
offers the course. This Smart Badge includes data about the 
skills that the learner has acquired upon completion of the 
course. Each Smart Badge the learner earns is verified and 
stored on the Blockchain as part of her personal ePortfolio.  
After studying for several months, the learner has 
mastered some basic data science skills, including various 
computer science topics such as databases. Based on these 
skills, the Smart Badges generate recommendations about 
jobs that may be suitable for the learner. The learner receives 
personalised recommendations about jobs that fully match 
her skills, as well as about jobs that match her skills partially. 
The 
learner 
may 
also 
further 
personalise 
these 
recommendations and filter them according to her specific 
criteria, such as the location of the job, salary, employer, etc. 
The learner is interested in one of the jobs that matches 
her skills partially. She then receives recommendations about 
courses that will give her the additional skills required for 
this job. The learner enrols for these courses, in order to 
acquire the needed skills. When she has acquired them, she 
proceeds to apply for her desired job and allows the prospect 
employer to access the relevant Smart Badges from her 
ePortfolio. By using this Blockchain-based infrastructure to 
167
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

support her in her studies, the learner has adopted a more 
efficient and targeted approach to learning, towards 
achieving her desired career trajectory. Figure 8 shows a 
more detailed view of the workflow associated with this 
scenario. 
 
 
Figure 8. Stakeholder interactions in the main scenario of the lifelong 
learning pilot. 
Our early work on implementing this scenario can be 
found at [29]. This implementation has been based on the use 
of Smart Contracts for the Ethereum Blockchain platform. In 
order to collect job market data, we are harvesting datasets of 
current job offers and their associated skills from a job 
aggregator that has been developed by the European Data 
Science Academy (EDSA) project [30]. These datasets are 
placed in Smart Contracts on the Ethereum Blockchain and 
are then used for matching jobs with a learner’s badge-based 
skills. In this way, the awarded badges are smart, in the sense 
that they are being used to offer recommendations to 
learners. 
D. Implementation 
In this section, we provide an overview of a prototype 
platform that implements the basic functionalities for 
supporting lifelong learning through Smart Badges. It should 
be noted that this platform is only a proof of concept 
developed for the early deployment and evaluation of the 
lifelong learning pilot of the QualiChain project. The 
platform that will implement all pilots of the QualiChain 
project, conducted in the 4 key areas of the project, is 
currently under development, with both its front-end and 
back-end scheduled to undergo extensive updates before 
large-scale deployment takes place.  
Figure 9 (Appendix) shows the educator’s homepage 
view on the prototype platform. In this scenario, we assume 
that the educator is also the issuer of Smart Badges to 
lifelong learners. The homepage offers the following options 
to the educator/issuer: 
• 
View Badges: This option allows the educator/issuer 
to view a list of the Smart Badges available to issue 
via the platform.  
• 
Manage Badge Issuing: This option allows the 
educator/issuer to issue Smart Badges either to 
individual students, or to cohorts of students. 
• 
Manage Claimed Badges: Through this option, the 
educator/issuer can view the Smart Badges claimed 
by learners. 
• 
Manage Badge Recipients: Through this option, the 
educator/issuer is able to manage the registered 
learners that will be receiving Smart Badges. 
• 
Recipient 
Groups: 
This 
option 
allows 
the 
educator/issuer to manage the groups that learners 
can be assigned to. 
• 
Recipient Groupings: This option allows the 
educator/issuer to add or remove learners from 
groups. Each learner can be assigned in more than 
one group. 
Figure 10 (Appendix) shows the options available to the 
educator/issuer for managing the recipients of Smart Badges 
on the platform. In particular, clicking the "Create Recipient" 
button expands a form at the top of the page with the relevant 
fields for adding new recipients individually. Clicking the 
"Import Bulk Recipient" button expands a form at the top of 
the page with instructions on what is required to bulk import 
recipients, rather than adding them individually.  
Figure 11 (Appendix) shows the options available to the 
educator/issuer for managing the issuing of Smart Badges on 
the platform. More specifically, the educator/issuer is able to 
initialise a badge issuance to a recipient, add evidence to a 
badge issuance and then issue a badge. The educator/issuer is 
also able to revoke badges that have already been issued. The 
information is displayed in 3 different tables: Pending, 
Issued and Revoked. On initial load of the page, a form at the 
top of the page shows for "Create a Badge Issuance". The 
educator/issuer is required to select a recipient name and 
then the badge they wish to issue to the recipient. A 
dropdown at the top of the form allows the educator/issuer to 
select a group, which will filter the recipient name list to 
only show recipients within that group, thus narrowing down 
the list, rather than having to scroll through all recipients. 
Only recipients with accounts, and therefore verified email 
addresses, will appear in the recipient name dropdown list. 
Only one of each badge can be issued to a recipient. 
Therefore, if a badge has been issued already or revoked, it 
cannot be re-issued to the same recipient. 
Figure 12 (Appendix) shows the detailed view of a Smart 
Badge on the platform. From this view, the user is able to see 
all relevant information relating to a particular Smart Badge, 
including: 
• 
Issuer details 
• 
Badge details 
• 
Event details 
• 
Alignments 
• 
Endorsements 
Finally, Figure 13 (Appendix) shows the verification of a 
Smart Badge on the platform. This function can be executed 
by any third party wishing to verify a Smart Badge and does 
not require having an account on the platform. Such a third 
party can be, for example, an employer who wants to verify 
Lifelong Learner
Educational Institution
Smart Badge
Course recommendation
Job recommendation
Studies
Receives
Receives
Receives
Offers
Awards
Personal ePortfolio
Online course
168
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

the qualifications submitted by a job applicant, or an 
educational institution wanting to verify the qualifications of 
a student applicant. In order to perform the verification, the 
third party needs to upload the badge and enter the email of 
the recipient of the badge. The checks performed against this 
data and their results are shown at the bottom of the page. 
E. Initial deployment and evaluation 
In order to initiate the deployment and evaluation of the 
lifelong learning pilot, we have introduced a series of pilot 
workshops, 
where 
participants 
(learners, 
educators, 
researchers and practitioners) acquire hands-on experience 
with Smart Badges. This series of pilot workshops serves a 
two-fold purpose: 
• 
Dissemination of the QualiChain framework and 
the use of Smart Badges. 
• 
Collection 
of 
evaluation 
data 
via 
logs, 
questionnaires, and face-to-face feedback from 
participants. 
The first pilot workshop took place in the context of the 
9th eSTEeM Annual Conference [31] organised by The 
Open University on April 29-30, 2020. Although this was 
originally planned as a face-to-face event, it had to take 
place online because of the COVID-19 pandemic. During 
this pilot workshop, we piloted the prototype platform 
presented in the previous section of this paper. Participants 
were first introduced to the QualiChain project and the 
lifelong learning pilot and were then asked to perform the 
following sequence of activities on the prototype platform: 
• 
Register an account on the platform. 
• 
Receive a Smart Badge. 
• 
View and download their Smart Badge. 
• 
Verify their Smart Badge. 
Figure 14 shows the Smart Badge awarded to 
participants of this workshop. The badge contains the title of 
the workshop, together with the QualiChain, and The Open 
University logos. The JSON data of the badge also contains 
the following tags: blockchain, decentralisation, lifelong 
learning, ePortfolio, and accreditation. These tags represent 
the skills participants have acquired from the workshop. 
These skills will be used at a later stage to provide job and 
course recommendations.  
After the end of the workshop, participants were asked 
to respond to a short questionnaire, in order to collect 
evaluation data about the perceived usefulness and usability 
of the platform, as well as the overall QualiChain approach. 
Regarding the approach of the QualiChain project, 
participants recognised its potential for lifelong learning and 
education in general. Some participants stated that the 
purpose of introducing blockchain technologies in education 
needs to be made clearer, for example by defining the USP 
(unique selling proposition) of the QualiChain platform and 
Smart Badges over other badge approaches and platforms.  
As expected, the feedback received from this first pilot 
workshop has been mixed, mainly due to the early prototype 
status of the piloted platform at the time of conducting this 
workshop. Overall, participants appreciated the potential of 
the QualiChain project and the lifelong learning pilot. 
However, they pointed out that the QualiChain platform as 
an integrated product has to be further developed prior to 
detailed review. As the maturity of the QualiChain platform 
improves with additional functionalities, more positive 
feedback from subsequent pilot workshops is expected. 
 
 
Figure 14. The Smart Badge awarded to the participants of the lifelong 
learning pilot workshop. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND NEXT STEPS 
This paper has presented a pilot case study for supporting 
lifelong learning via Smart Badges and personalised 
recommendations. The pilot case study employs Blockchain 
technology for providing lifelong learners with transparent 
and immutable educational accreditation. It also uses 
personalised recommendations for helping lifelong learners 
reach their personal and professional learning goals. This 
pilot is part of the QualiChain initiative for decentralising 
education and employment qualifications using Blockchain 
technologies.  
The next steps of this work will be focused on further 
engaging the communities of stakeholders, in order to better 
understand the lifelong learning challenges that they face and 
their proposed solutions. This will help us further shape the 
scenario to be implemented in the context of this pilot. We 
will continue consulting with the communities of 
stakeholders throughout the implementation, deployment and 
evaluation of our pilot, so as to better understand and address 
their needs.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme 
under grant agreement No 822404 (QualiChain). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Mikroyannidis, "Blockchain Applications in Education: A 
Case Study in Lifelong Learning," in 12th International 
Conference on Mobile, Hybrid, and On-line Learning (eLmL 
2020), Valencia, Spain, 2020. 
169
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[2] 
J. Harris and C. Wihak, "To what extent do discipline, 
knowledge domain and curriculum affect the feasibility of 
the Recognition of Prior Learning (RPL) in higher 
education?," International Journal of Lifelong Education, pp. 
1-17, 2017. 
[3] 
B.-Å. Lundvall and P. Rasmussen, "Challenges for adult skill 
formation in the globalising learning economy–a European 
perspective," International Journal of Lifelong Education, 
vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 448-464, 2016. 
[4] 
C. Mayombe, "An assessment of non-formal education and 
training centres’ linkages with role-players for adult 
employment in South Africa," International Journal of 
Lifelong Education, vol. 36, no. 3, pp. 339-358, 2017. 
[5] 
R. Müller, S. Remdisch, K. Köhler, L. Marr, S. Repo, and C. 
Yndigegn, "Easing access for lifelong learners: a comparison 
of European models for university lifelong learning," 
International Journal of lifelong education, vol. 34, no. 5, 
pp. 530-550, 2015. 
[6] 
A. 
Mikroyannidis, 
A. 
Third, 
and 
J. 
Domingue, 
"Decentralising 
online 
education 
using 
blockchain 
technology," in The Online, Open and Flexible Higher 
Education Conference: Blended and online education within 
European university networks, Madrid, Spain, 2019. 
[7] 
A. Mikroyannidis, J. Domingue, M. Bachler, and K. Quick, 
"A Learner-Centred Approach for Lifelong Learning 
Powered by the Blockchain," in EdMedia: World Conference 
on Educational Media and Technology, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands, 2018: Association for the Advancement of 
Computing in Education (AACE), pp. 1403-1408. 
[8] 
S. Nakamoto, "Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash 
system," 2008. 
[9] 
"Double-spending." 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Double-
spending (Accessed November 2020). 
[10] "Cryptographic 
hash 
function." 
https://simple.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptographic_hash_functi
on (Accessed November 2020). 
[11]  R. C. Merkle, "Protocols for public key cryptosystems," in 
Security and Privacy, 1980 IEEE Symposium on, 1980: 
IEEE, pp. 122-122.  
[12] "Bitcoin Could Consume as Much Electricity as Denmark by 
2020." 
https://www.vice.com/en/article/aek3za/bitcoin-
could-consume-as-much-electricity-as-denmark-by-2020 
(Accessed November 2020). 
[13] "Proof of stake." https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Proof-of-stake 
(Accessed November 2020). 
[14] "Intel is Winning Over Blockchain Critics By Reimagining 
Bitcoin’s DNA." http://www.coindesk.com/intel-winning-
blockchain-critics-reimagining-bitcoins-dna/ 
(Accessed 
November 2020). 
[15] V. 
Buterin. 
"Ethereum 
white 
paper." 
https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/wiki/White-Paper 
(Accessed November 2020). 
[16] C. D. Clack, V. A. Bakshi, and L. Braine, "Smart contract 
templates: foundations, design landscape and research 
directions," arXiv preprint arXiv:1608.00771, 2016. 
[17] "Solidity." 
https://solidity.readthedocs.io 
(Accessed 
November 2020). 
[18] "Jaxx wallet." https://jaxx.io/ (Accessed November 2020). 
[19] "IPFS." https://ipfs.io/ (Accessed November 2020). 
[20] "Open Badges." https://openbadges.org/about/ (Accessed 
November 2020). 
[21] Mozilla Foundation, Peer 2 Peer University, and The 
MacArthur Foundation. "Open Badges for Lifelong 
Learning." 
https://wiki.mozilla.org/images/5/59/OpenBadges-Working-
Paper_012312.pdf (Accessed November 2020). 
[22] "Better Futures for 2 Million Americans Through Open 
Badges." 
https://www.macfound.org/press/press-
releases/better-futures-2-million-americans-through-open-
badges/ (Accessed November 2020). 
[23] "NASA 
Digital 
Badges." 
https://www.nasa.gov/offices/education/programs/national/dl
n/special/DigitalBadges.html (Accessed November 2020). 
[24] D. Belshaw. "The three biggest (perceived) problems with 
Open 
Badges 
[Blog 
post]." 
https://dougbelshaw.com/blog/2015/04/16/three-biggest-
problems-with-badges/ (Accessed November 2020). 
[25] D. T. Hickey, J. Willis, and J. Quick, "Where badges work 
better," Educause Learning Initiative ELI, 2015. 
[26] "Badgr 
Support." 
https://support.badgr.com/ 
(Accessed 
November 2020). 
[27] "QualiChain." 
https://qualichain-project.eu 
(Accessed 
November 2020). 
[28] D. E. Atkins, J. S. Brown, and A. L. Hammond, "A Review 
of the Open Educational Resources (OER) Movement: 
Achievements, Challenges, and New Opportunities," The 
William and Flora Hewlett Foundation, 2007. 
[29]  A. Mikroyannidis, J. Domingue, M. Bachler, and K. Quick, 
"Smart Blockchain Badges for Data Science Education," in 
IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference (FIE), San Jose, 
California, 
USA, 
2018: 
IEEE 
Education 
Society 
Publications. 
[30] A.-S. Dadzie, E. Sibarani, I. Novalija, and S. Scerri, 
"Structuring visual exploratory analysis of skill demand," 
Journal of Web Semantics, 2017. 
[31] "The 9th eSTEeM Annual Conference: Informing Student 
Success 
– 
From 
Scholarship 
to 
Practice." 
http://www.open.ac.uk/about/teaching-and-
learning/esteem/events/the-9th-esteem-annual-conference-
informing-student-success-%E2%80%93-scholarship-
practice (Accessed November 2020). 
 
170
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

APPENDIX 
 
Figure 1. Example of a Blockchain consisting of three blocks. 
 
 
Figure 4. Snapshot of a Badgr backpack [26]. 
171
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 7. Workflow of the lifelong learning pilot scenario. 
 
 
Figure 9. Snapshot of the options available to the educator/issuer of Smart Badges. 
172
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 10. Snapshot of managing the recipients of Smart Badges. 
 
173
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 11. Snapshot of managing the issuing of Smart Badges. 
174
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 12. Detailed view of a Smart Badge. 
 
175
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 13. Verifying a Smart Badge. 
 
 
 
 
 
176
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

