How to Switch IT Service Providers:  Recommendations for a Successful 
Transition 
 
Matthias Olzmann 
Business Solutions 
noventum consulting 
Muenster, Germany 
e-mail: Matthias.olzmann@noventum.de 
Martin Wynn 
School of Computing & Technology 
University of Gloucestershire 
Cheltenham, UK 
e-mail: MWynn@glos.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract—Although IT outsourcing is a growing industry 
and a common topic in the literature, there is limited 
research which critically analyses and assesses the switching 
of IT outsourcing providers – in particular the factors 
contributing to success are under-researched. This article 
explores this growing area of management and consultancy 
activity by analyzing the existing literature in the field. This 
allows the identification of critical success factors that are 
pertinent to the switching of providers and provides 
recommendations for a successful transition.  
Keywords - service providers; outsourcing; IT outsourcing;  
ITO; switching providers; changing providers; transition; exit 
management; critical success factors; checklist for success. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
When companies outsource their IT for the first time, it 
can be assumed that the majority of IT experts will transfer 
from the client company to the IT outsourcing (ITO) 
provider. Together with the IT experts, the client specific 
knowledge is transitioned to the provider. This reduces the 
negative performance impact. In contrast, when providers 
are switched, it cannot be anticipated that the majority of 
IT experts (together with the client specific knowledge) 
will transition from the incumbent provider to the new 
provider [1]. 
It can be assumed that the leaving provider has only 
marginal interest in actively supporting the incoming 
provider, for example with knowledge transition. This 
results in major challenges for the tripartite relationship 
(client, incumbent provider, new provider). 
 A main building block in switching ITO providers is 
the transition. Transition is a complex, risky, and 
challenging building block of strategic importance which 
begins after the contract is signed and ends with service 
delivery. Two thirds of all issues can be tracked to the 
transition [2, 3]. Despite growing interest in topics such as 
sourcing the IT back in-house or switching providers [4-6], 
no studies have holistically focused on how successful 
ITO transitions are performed for clients switching service 
providers. 
The factors contributing to a successful transition from 
the incumbent provider to the new provider are not fully 
understood. Yet understanding the factors contributing to a 
successful transition is vitally important. For the client, 
these factors determine on the one hand the success or the 
failure of the whole outsourcing endeavour; and on the 
other hand, ultimately the survival of the overall business, 
as it is linked to the successful switch of the ITO 
providers. This is exemplified by the following quotes 
from three ITO researchers: 
1. “To our knowledge, no work has suggested 
strategies that managers should employ during the process 
of transitioning from one vendor to another” [7].  
2. “However, all of this extant literature focuses on the 
decision to switch a vendor or include a new vendor in the 
supplier portfolio rather than manage the change-over. The 
implication is that the outsourcing literature provides little 
insight about managing the switching process from a long-
lived prior vendor relationship to a new vendor 
relationship” [8]. 
3. “Relatively little work has focused on the area of 
switching vendors and bringing previously outsourced 
activities back in-house (backsourcing) (Lacity and 
Willcocks, 2000). Even less has been done specifically in 
the context of planning for the possibility of either of these 
two events” [9].  
This article sets out to review available literature 
related to this topic and draws conclusions regarding 
critical success factors for achieving the switching of 
service providers. In the following section, a wide range of 
literature related to ITO is systematically reviewed. This 
leads to a discussion of critical success factors in section 
III, focusing on both the pre-delivery phase and the critical 
transition process. Section IV then makes some concluding 
remarks related to the analysis of existing literature, and 
highlights a conceptual framework for future work in this 
field. 
This literature review and analysis will provide the basis 
for recommendations to guide practitioners involved in the 
switching of ITO providers, and also act as a platform for 
subsequent research in this field.  
II. 
INITIAL LITERATURE REVIEW 
“Outsourcing can be defined as turning over all or part 
of an organizational activity to an outside vendor” [10]. In 
contrast to other types of outsourcing, ITO affects the 
complete organisation – IT “is pervasive throughout the 
organization”[11]. Reference [5] suggests that in an ITO 
deal, the IT is either partly or fully turned over to “…one 
or more external service providers”. As such, in the 
209
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

context of this paper, the scope of ITO is likely to be more 
than just one of the possible elements depicted in Fig. 1. 
A. ITO History and Market Development 
Even though large scale modern ITO began in 1989 
with the Kodak outsourcing deal [11, 12], some 
researchers argue that ITO “is still at the early stages of the 
profession itself” [12]. Kodak was not the first ITO deal in 
history although other deals had only received scarce 
attention. “It was not until Kathy Hudson, the Kodak CIO, 
announced to the world that Kodak had entered into a 
‘strategic alliance’ with its IS partners, led by IBM but 
also including DEC and Businessland, did the world sit up 
and take notice” [11]. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  The scope of IT Outsourcing (ITO) 
 
Many scholars and practitioners forecast further 
growth of the ITO market [12-14]. Reference [15] 
emphasizes that: “on conservative estimates, looking 
across a range of reports and studies, global ITO revenues 
probably exceeded $270 billion in 2010; it is very clear 
that, with its 20-year history, outsourcing of IT and 
business services is moving into becoming an almost 
routine part of management, representing in many major 
corporations and government agencies the greater 
percentage of their IT expenditure”. All reports (Gartner, 
Everest, NASSCOM, and IDC) reviewed have indicated a 
global growth of ITO in the range of 5-8% per year [15].  
B. Reasons for ITO 
Research findings indicate that the main reasons for IT 
outsourcing are driven by the goal of cost reduction [16, 
17], the focus on core capabilities and a desire to access 
resources of the provider such as superior capabilities, 
expertise and technology [10, 15]. 
The primary reason for outsourcing in 90% of the 
reviewed literature indicated the motivation of cost 
reduction [15]; but not all researchers agree that the goal 
of cost reduction and performance improvement will 
automatically be achieved - no matter how the outsourcing 
endeavour is managed. Reference [10] argues that “this 
overly optimistic view of outsourcing derives from the fact 
that most articles about outsourcing are written during the 
so called ‘honeymoon’ period i.e., just before or after the 
contract is signed”. Hirschheim and Lacity [17] warn that 
cost reduction and service reduction frequently go hand in 
hand. Company executives often strive for cost cutting 
while company employees strive for a better service [17]. 
Outsourcing strategies therefore need to be deliberate to 
increase the companies’ overall performance. 
From the perspective of the ITO provider, long-term 
revenue is the primary reason to enter outsourcing 
arrangements. Reference [11] points out that “long-term 
outsourcing arrangements help stabilize vendor business 
volume and revenue, making planning more predictable, 
and increase shareholder’s comfort levels”.  
The typical length of ITO contracts is generally 5-10 
years and “thus, both client and vendor have come to 
expect that during the life of the contract, some form of 
renegotiations will be likely” [11]. The rapid growth and 
the complex nature of ITO have not been without impact. 
Recently a number of outsourcing deals have experienced 
both serious problems and the premature discontinuation 
of contracts [3-6, 11, 13, 18]. This leads companies to re-
consider 
sourcing 
options 
and 
strategies. 
The 
discontinuation of contracts results in several strategic 
options. Regarding ITO contracts, “as much as 50%” of 
these are ended for other options such as switching the 
provider, or IT backsourcing” [5]. Other researchers have 
found that most clients stay with the incumbent provider 
[12, 13]. Reference [13] estimates that 25% of contracts 
will be awarded to new providers and merely 10 % will be 
back-sourced. Reference [4] notes the reasons for 
changing ITO providers as follows: 
 
“Dynamic changes in the customer landscape 
(e.g. the client organization may have outgrown 
the supplier) 
 
A shift in management’s risk tolerance 
 
Changes in the supply market (e.g., emergence of 
new or specialized players) 
 
Supplier rationalization (e.g., consolidation to 
enhance bargaining power)”. 
C. Factors Influencing Sourcing Options 
What factors influence sourcing option decisions when 
contracts are re-evaluated? Switching costs play a vital 
role in sourcing decisions – they are a good indicator for 
understanding 
and 
predicting 
clients’ 
outsourcing 
decisions after re-evaluating sourcing options [19]. After 
the client has initially outsourced the IT and has 
transferred employees and capabilities to the provider, it is 
difficult to bring the services back in-house [20] .  
 “In sum, the literature defines operationalized 
switching costs in terms of economic (i.e., monetary) 
expenditures and intangible (i.e., psychological or 
relational) costs associated with changing an exchange 
relationship” [19].  Reference [5]  argues that “the greater 
the information transfer/setup costs, the more likely that 
outsourcing continuation will be the strategic choice, 
vendor switching will be the intermediate choice, and 
backsourcing will be avoided”. The researchers warn that 
210
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

“high switching costs might entrap the customer 
organization into a ‘no change situation’, forcing it to 
continue outsourcing IT work to the same vendor”. “Two 
factors amplify these latent risks. First, when firms 
outsource processes that require the transfer of a large 
amount of tacit knowledge, they have to invest time and 
effort in training providers' employees. Second, some 
processes take a long time to stabilize when companies 
offshore them. In both cases, the cost of switching from 
existing providers is very high. That accentuates the risk 
that over time, vendors will dictate terms to buyers” [20]. 
Although customer entrapment has been noted - not much 
has been written in the academic literature about how to 
avoid or adequately address it.  
In contrast to high switching costs, if companies 
anticipate low switching costs and the option to choose 
from many vendors, there is “no real advantage in 
recontracting with the same vendor” [10]. Despite the 
significance of switching costs, the measurement of these 
costs remains unclear [19].  
A study analyzing the influencing factors of sourcing 
options found that firms which decided to switch providers 
or to backsource typically experienced high service quality 
and low relationship quality [6]. They acknowledged that 
“relationship quality plays on important role in the 
decision to switch vendors. Of our three groups, those that 
switched vendors had the lowest perception of trust, 
commitment, culture, and communication in relation to 
their vendors…hence, the building of trust between an 
outsourcer and a firm is far more a socio-emotional 
condition than it is a matter of providing excellent product 
and/or service” [6]. 
The importance of relationship for staying with the 
current provider has been highlighted in a previous study 
[10], where the researchers found a high interest in staying 
with the same provider if relationship specific investments 
have been made. Reference [21] concludes that when there 
is low trust in the capabilities of the provider to manage 
the outsourcing deal and the relationship qualities are also 
low that this brings the client to consider backsourcing or 
switching providers. The risk of losing knowledge and the 
potential service operation distortions prevents companies 
from switching ITO providers [8]. Reference [8] argues 
that the “switching of IT vendors is seen to impose too 
much short-term operational risk to justify the financial 
savings and quality improvements that could accrue from a 
relationship with a new vendor”. 
D. ITO Success 
There are contrasting conclusions on the contributing 
success factors for ITO success [22]. It is not clear if this is 
due to the lack of a generally accepted construct of a 
success definition or because “ITO success is so 
idiosyncratic that one must assess it against each 
organization’s own, different criteria” [22]. Reference 
[11], in a widely cited (more than 500 times according to 
Google scholar) literature survey and analysis, notes that 
“outsourcing success is usually viewed as the attainment 
of economic, technological or business-related benefits. 
Satisfaction with the benefits attained is often used as an 
indicator of outsourcing success”. Reference [23] found in 
their literature review on critical success factors that the 
research is typically divided between research on the 
success or “on the failure of economic activity”. 
Companies outsource their IT for different reasons, as 
previously noted. For example one company outsources to 
gain access to superior IT capabilities, another to focus on 
core competences, and another to reduce costs. This means 
that outsourcing success is dependent on the overall 
context. Thus, it is plausible that  “any attempt to assess 
ITO success in terms of more detailed criteria, such as cost 
savings 
or 
focusing 
on 
core 
business, 
requires 
identification of the different criteria relevant to each 
organization for each different contract at the time of the 
study” [22]. 
Therefore it appears to be important to define factors 
contributing to outsourcing success before the contract is 
signed [24].  Reference [22] argues that success should be 
assessed by: 
1. Defining most important outcomes before they 
actually materialise during the lifecycle of the 
contract 
2. Measuring the extent to which the outcomes have 
been achieved. 
Can outsourcing be considered as a standardised 
activity of everyday management with readily defined 
solutions? Reference [15] disputes this and concludes that 
“our review of 20 years of research establishes the 
common 
denominator 
that, 
for 
management 
and 
operational staff, outsourcing is far from easy”. Reference 
[25] found that even skilled organizations don’t work in a 
proactive mode and are hurt by slow organizational 
learning. Therefore, in order to reduce learning curves, it is 
important to understand how success can be defined and 
what the contributing factors are.  Reference [24] suggests 
a more abstract description of success factor such as: 
 
“Use ‘best outsourcing practices’ as major 
references for corporate outsourcing decision. 
 
Clearly understand the goals, objective, scope, 
budget, and the duration of IS outsourcing 
project…. 
 
Select a reputable vendor and then communicate 
well on the corporate outsourcing plan. 
 
Realize the legal issues related to contract 
negotiations and signing. 
 
Communicate 
well 
with 
employees 
and 
stakeholders about the outsourcing plan; this may 
reduce the severity of resistance.” 
Even though these factors are useful to get an overview 
about common success factors, they are of limited 
applicability for the specific issue of switching ITO 
providers. A review of 191 ITO articles relevant to 
practice from the early 1990s until 2009 found that “the 
three major categories of determinants of ITO success are 
ITO decisions, contractual governance, and relational 
governance. These determinants are depicted as direct 
relationships to ITO success” [26] in Fig. 2.  
211
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Although organizational capabilities are also important 
as a success contributing factor, they are neither depicted 
in Fig. 2 nor are they described in the section about the 
determinants of success. Reference [26] recognises that 
“the most widely cited papers on this topic identify a mix 
of complementary capabilities that lead to ITO success”.  
Reference [27] develops this further into a list of nine 
pertinent organizational capabilities shown in Table I. 
  
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Three main categories of determinants of ITO success 
[26] 
 
Reference [27] summarises research findings thus: 
“overall, we know ITO decisions that entailed selective use 
of outsourcing, the involvement of senior managers, and 
rigorous evaluation processes, were associated with higher 
levels of ITO success. Contractual governance also 
positively affected ITO success. In general, more contract 
detail, shorter-term contracts, and higher-dollar valued 
contracts were positively related to outsourcing success…. 
Relational governance positively affected ITO outcomes. 
Trust, norms, open communication, open sharing of 
information, mutual dependency and cooperation were 
always associated with higher levels of ITO success”.  The 
researchers 
found 
that 
top 
management 
commitment/support is the most critical success factor 
[26]. That trust plays a vital role in the success of ITOs is 
emphasized by Reference [11]. Reference [11] adds that 
“Sabherwal also suggests that a ‘psychological contract’ 
exists in outsourcing relationships. This contract, which 
consists of unwritten and often unspoken expectations, is 
supported by the level of trust between the parties, and 
plays a role in resolving unanticipated problems or 
changes in the accomplishment of outsourced activities”. 
      Based on these findings, it seems clear that trust and 
the management of relationships between the client and 
the outsourcing provider are important factors contributing 
to success. However, given that significant amounts of 
capital are often invested in outsourcing deals, clients 
should probably not solely rely on relational governance 
factors such as trust and relationship. Reference [10] 
endorses this view in asserting that it is not advisable to 
completely rely on partnership factors and neglect contract 
negotiation – “a good contract is essential to outsourcing 
success because the 
contract helps establish a balance of power between the 
client and the vendor”. 
Understanding the budget is of critical importance 
[24]. Reference [10] proposed the hiring of external 
experts as they know the hazards of outsourcing and how 
they can be managed. They argue that the additional costs 
may be justified in relation to the potential impact of the 
hidden costs. Other researchers found that “managing 
costs is less 
TABLE I.  ORGANISATIONAL CAPABILITIES RELEVANT TO ITO 
SUCCESS [27] 
 
Capability 
 
Capability 
1 
IS/IT leadership 
6 
Informed buying 
2 
Business 
systems thinking 
7 
Contract 
facilitation 
3 
Relationship 
building 
8 
Contract 
monitoring 
4 
Architecture 
planning 
9 
Vendor 
development 
5 
Making 
technology work 
 
 
 
important 
than 
managing 
portfolio 
configuration, 
complexity and risk” [25]. This implies the importance of 
actively managing the outsourcing provider. Reference 
[10] emphasis this notion: “When an activity is 
outsourced, it is crucial to retain a small group of 
managers to handle the vendor. These managers must be 
able to develop the strategy of the outsourced activity and 
keep it in alignment with the overall corporate strategy.” 
Success itself can be considered an important factor 
contributing to success. “Specifically, ITO success fuelled 
higher levels of trust (relational governance, built stronger 
client and supplier capabilities, and determined the kinds 
of ITO decisions and ITO contracts clients made moving 
forward”[26] Reference [26] concludes that: “Conversely, 
ITO failure fuelled greater need for controls, monitoring 
mechanisms, tougher contracts, and determined the kinds 
of ITO decisions clients made”. 
It is advisable to view success factors in specific 
contexts. Reference [22] observes that: ”For these reasons, 
the wide range of success advice and prescriptions 
appearing throughout the literature must be viewed as 
highly conditional – not only in terms of the success 
constructs the author/s have adopted, but also in terms of 
the contextual situation of each of the organisation.” This 
indicates for example that an organization which has 
outsourced its IT services in just one country will need a 
different transition strategy than an organization which has 
outsourced its IT services in 5 countries.  
 
212
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 Figure 3.  Conceptual framework - Switching providers with the 
focus on transition 
E. ITO Methodologies 
Reference [25] defines a detailed process model using nine 
building blocks with 54 activities. This model describes 
the complete ITO process lifecycle and appears to be the 
most comprehensive in the academic literature. Many ITO 
process models distinguish between activities before 
signing the contract (pre-delivery) and after signing the 
contract (delivery & re-evaluate) [4, 8, 25, 28]. The ITO 
process model for this research is depicted in Fig. 3. The 
six major building blocks are: investigation, provider 
selection, contract negotiation, transition, manage/service 
delivery, and options evaluation. The first three building 
blocks can be considered as pre-delivery phase, the next 
two can be considered as delivery-phase, and the last 
activity can be considered as the re-evaluation phase.  
Transition “sets the tone for the entire relationship and 
involves handover of outsourced services from either the 
client’s internal IT department or the incumbent service 
provider” [2]. Transition can be summarized as the 
seminal milestone for the successful implementation of an 
outsourcing contract [2]. Reference [29] defines the 
transition stage as “implementing the new way of 
operating” and states that it is the goal of transition to 
ensure that the new way of working is realized.  
Transition 
includes 
the 
following 
activities: 
“conducting 
knowledge 
transfer, 
determining 
and 
implementing new governance structures, and applying the 
processes of the service provider” [2]. This demonstrates 
that many actions need to take place during transition 
before an outsourcing project can be actually implemented 
[24]. “The parties should have a clear understanding, 
typically set out in a detailed transition plan, as to how 
operations, assets, and employees will be transitioned to 
the vendor….The parties may want to consider including 
testing requirements in the agreement, as well as the 
operation of parallel operating environments for a 
specified 
period. 
In 
order 
to 
reduce 
customer 
dissatisfaction in the early phases of the outsourcing 
relationship, it is useful for the parties to have an 
understanding about the levels of service to be delivered to 
the customer during transition” [18]. 
Reference [25] has identified the main transitional 
activities as shown in Fig. 3, whilst reference [16] have 
defined the following 8 main activities during transition: 
“Distribute the contract”, “interpreting the contract”, 
“establishing post contract management infrastructure 
and  
process”, “implementing consolidation, rationalization, 
and standardization”, “validating baseline service scope, 
costs, levels, and responsibilities”, “managing additional 
service requests beyond baseline”, “fostering realistic 
expectations of supplier performance”, and “publicly 
promoting the IT contract”.  
The cost for the transitional building block can take a 
significant portion of the overall costs [2].  It is assumed 
IT outsourcing process
4. Transition
Pre-delivery
Delivery
Re-evaluate
Activities
Building block
6. Options 
evaluation 
(continue, 
backsource, switch)
4.1 Finalize and mobilize all 
plans (e.g. communication, risk, 
setup, acceptance)
4.2 Resource the transition 
project
4.5 Manage knowledge 
retention and transfer
4.4 Manage the transfer (staff, 
asset, 3rd party contracts, work-
in-progress, etc)
4.3 Manage the impact on staff 
(retained, transferring and 
departing)
4.6 Adapt retained organization 
and contact management
4.7 Engineer workflows, 
communication channels, 
authorities, etc
4.8 Conduct acceptance, 
closeout and post-
implementation review
Source: Created for this 
research
4.0 Manage the 
programme
0. Implement 
governance structure
4.9 Manage tripartite operations
 ITO decisions (top mangement decisions & support)
 Relational governance (Trust, manage relationships)
1. Investigation
2. Provider 
selection
3. Contract 
negotiation
4. Transition
5. Manage/service 
delivery
Source: Adapted from Cullen 
et al. (2005) p.7
213
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

that “over two-thirds of the problems in these unsuccessful 
engagements arise due to failed or poor transition” [2]. 
Due to the lack of statistical information regarding what 
percentage of switching ITO providers fail due to poor 
transition, it is assumed in this review that the percentage 
is at least as high as this.  
 
III. CRITICAL ISSUES IN SWITCHING PROVIDERS 
When companies outsource their IT the first time it can be 
assumed that the majority of IT experts will transfer from 
the client company to ITO provider. Together with the IT 
experts, the client specific knowledge is transitioned to the 
provider. This reduces the negative performance impact. In 
contrast, when providers are switched it cannot be 
anticipated that the majority of IT experts (together with 
the client specific knowledge) will transition from the 
incumbent provider to the new provider. Reference [8] 
concludes that “a 
long-term outsourcing relationship with a prior vendor 
means that much daily operational knowledge stays with 
the prior vendor. The client’s knowledge loss exacerbates 
the problem of knowledge transfer as the client no longer 
possesses the information that the new vendor critically 
needs to service the client”. The new provider requires 
close cooperation with the incumbent provider, who can 
pursue two different exit strategies. They can either 
actively co-operate with the new provider or “pursue a 
hostile strategy of being uncooperative” [7].  
It can be assumed that the leaving provider has only 
marginal interest in actively supporting the incoming 
provider, for example with knowledge transition. This is 
particularly the case if the outgoing provider is not 
contractually obliged to support the incoming provider. 
This is confirmed by Reference [7] who find: “Being 
competitors, the transfer of resources between the 
outgoing (i.e., incumbent) and incoming (i.e., new) vendor 
presents a series of challenges not present in traditional 
outsourcing arrangements. Technologies, tools, business 
processes, intellectual properties and knowledge have to 
be transferred between vendors, not just between client 
and vendor. Pure monetary reward may encourage 
cooperation in traditional outsourcing; but in vendor 
transition, the outgoing vendor is reluctant to transfer 
assets to the incoming vendor. Such assets (e.g. source 
code) often provide the outgoing vendor with competitive 
advantage in other contracts.” Reference [7] named source 
code as an example of this, but the findings apply to all 
client specific knowledge.  
Intellectual property is already a complex topic in first 
generation outsourcing deals [30] and it becomes even 
more complex if the incumbent outsourcing provider is 
asked to transfer the intellectual property to its rival. In 
particular since IT outsourcing is based on sharing 
“business secrets” [30]. Managers often do not think about 
the termination of an outsourcing deal [10, 16] 
“…therefore, they often fail to plan an exit strategy…” 
[10] or draft only a contract which is too high-level for 
later execution [16]. 
With the risk of loss of knowledge comes the risk of 
degraded service quality. Reference [8] found that 
switching often leads to “temporary service disruptions of 
operations, lowered service levels and frustrations and 
dissatisfaction among the client employees”. In addition 
this can lead to broken transition milestones, extended 
project duration and additional costs. Clients should take 
into consideration that once the contract of the incumbent 
provider has expired, the provider will leave regardless of 
whether the new provider is already prepared to deliver the 
service [7]. This can negatively impact service levels and 
even risk business continuity if the new provider is not 
completely ready. Alternatively, the client needs to be 
prepared to additionally pay the old provider for extending 
the contract until the new provider can adequately deliver 
the IT services. 
“When contracts expire there is a need to have an exit 
strategy focusing not only on the economic success of the 
IT outsourcing, but also to question issues such as core 
competence management, access to resources, and the 
maturity of the relationship.” [16]. Clients should make 
sure that the contract with the initial service provider 
contains a transition clause which regulates how and what 
the incumbent provider needs to transition to the new 
provider. Reference [30] suggests that: “The client may 
insist on having the right to purchase the assets and 
infrastructure that are being used to provide the services 
and employ the persons on the team that were providing 
such services”.  Reference [30] demands that: “The 
transition clauses also cover the effects of termination on 
various aspects such as payment of outstanding fees, 
escrow, IP and confidential information, and current work 
orders”. Clients are well advised “to think exit” and plan 
accordingly right from the beginning even if this seems to 
be an unnecessary activity since the outsourcing deal has 
not been started yet [16]. 
When providers are switched transitional activities can 
be extensively resource draining for client, who needs to 
manage (monitor and correct) the operations of both the 
incumbent and new provider and additionally the transition 
between the two. Even relatively simple transitions where 
the IT can be transferred directly from the client to the 
outsourcing provider can be a costly phase and “in some 
cases, they (the transition activities) halved or even 
cancelled out the company’s potential savings from 
outsourcing” [31]. It can be assumed that the transitional 
activities for switching providers are even more costly. As 
a general rule it can be stated that the more idiosyncratic 
the IT service to be outsourced, the more complex and 
costly the transition. Most clients are not able to calculate 
the transition costs [31]. 
If the perception is that ITO can be handled as a 
commodity, there is a risk that companies which have 
chosen to switch outsourcing providers underestimate the 
effort, complexities and risks involved. Reference [4] has 
disputed the common perception that “once part of a 
business process has been outsourced, it can, if necessary, 
easily be ‘un-plugged’ from one supplier and ‘re-plugged’ 
into another”.  
214
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A. Pre-delivery Phase – Factors Contributing to 
Switching Success 
The client should ensure that the new potential ITO 
provider conducts an extensive due diligence review. 
“Before the service providers make a final offer during 
contractual negotiations, a thorough due diligence activity 
is required to closely understand the actual outsourced 
work and its related dependencies.” [2]. Due diligence is 
even more important when providers are switched to 
ensure that the interdependencies between client and 
leaving provider are fully understood. Due diligence lays 
the baseline for the overall project management of the 
outsourcing transition, encompassing scope, time and 
quality definition. Reference [4]  has noted the importance 
of identifying essential specific knowledge before the 
actual transition phase to avoid disruptions during 
transition. Reference [4] suggests that: “Alternatively, 
organizations should systematically ensure that new and 
changed process knowledge is acquired, transferred, and 
retained. Actions to achieve this include auditing the 
quality of documentation periodically, co-locating or 
seconding internal staff with the supplier, appointing 
internal ‘knowledge owners’ for specific subject matter, 
and even occasionally negotiating to recruit key supplier 
staff as internal employees.” 
Aron and Singh [20] recommends that the clients 
should plan to have sufficient expertise in-house so that 
the client is able to train the new provider. Alternatively 
the incumbent provider needs to train the new provider, 
which in the experience of Aron and Singh [20] is  
suboptimal since providers are often competitors. 
Although this is a good recommendation the client will 
often have not the resources and the expertise to train the 
new provider. As a rule of thumb it can be said that the 
bigger and the more complex the outsourcing deal the less 
likely it is that the client has sufficient in-house resources. 
Identifying knowledge gaps before the transition is 
likely to be only partly successful.  Reference [8]  noted 
that “at the time of the contract negotiations, both parties 
(client & new provider) were still largely unaware of the 
gaps in the knowledge that would trouble the change-over 
from the prior provider to the new provider”. Much of the 
operational knowledge is only visible to the people 
involved in everyday operations [8].  This means that the 
client and the new provider can possibly face unexpected 
knowledge gaps during transition. 
B. Building Block Transition - Factors Contributing to 
Switching Success 
Good project management and realistic time schedules 
are critical. “Unrealistic transition timetables are a frequent 
source of trouble. Both buyers and providers should look 
with a sceptical eye at the viability of their transition 
timeframes” [3].  
Various researchers [32, 33] estimate that the transition 
takes two to three months. Reference [31] finds that the 
average transition time for initial outsourcing deals is 12 
months while reference [16] estimates that the transition 
for large outsourcing deals can take between “18 month 
and more than two years”.  Generally can be said that the 
more complex the outsourcing endeavor the longer the 
duration of the transition. The literature review has not 
revealed any figures for outsourcing deals where providers 
are switched. As an indication it can be expected that the 
transition to the new provider will take as long as the 
transition to the incumbent provider [16]. 
It is also important to incorporate project buffers or 
contingencies into the project plan. “Any organization that 
explores a new sourcing option in terms of suppliers, new 
services, or new engagement models…must plan on false 
starts. Executives often manage learning by pilot testing 
new sourcing options” [26]. Although this is a good 
method of learning and getting the experience for some 
sourcing options in principle, it is not easy to pilot test 
switching ITO providers in practice.  
To effectively manage the transition the client needs to 
set up an overall transition governance structure. 
Reference [2]  asserts that “both client and service 
providers need to develop and implement an appropriate 
governance model for efficiently conducting day-to-day 
activities and for monitoring it at a higher level”. The 
governance structure should define project roles and 
responsibilities such as the project joint steering 
committee. All parties (client, new provider and old 
provider) should be part of the joint steering committee. 
Part of the responsibilities of the joint steering committee 
is it to manage conflicts and to implement a joint transition 
program to plan, monitor, execute, and report on all 
transition switch deliverables and milestones.  
Managing the complex tripartite relationship is 
resource intensive. 
Reference 
[4] 
emphasizes the 
importance of sufficient resources from the client to 
manage the transition and materializing risks. The authors 
call for the active involvement of the client management to 
ensure that the old provider supports the new provider as 
needed and therefore minimize service disruptions.  
Reference [8] found that: “switching required close 
collaboration and mutual adjustment among all parties”. 
Although the motivation of the old ITO provider to 
support the new provider might be low, it is a critical 
success factor for the overall transition success. “An 
uncooperative old supplier or an insensitive new supplier 
increases the risk of transition problems. Organisations 
must therefore carefully manage the delicate tripartite 
relationship tensions”[4]. Reference [8] also found that the 
old supplier is often needed to develop joint knowledge 
together with the new supplier to ensure that all parties 
meet their responsibilities - “critical to the success is the 
transfer of the knowledge of the client’s environment and 
processes. Poor knowledge transfer may result in 
disruptions of operations, lowered service levels, and 
frustrations and dissatisfaction among the client’s and the 
new vendor’s employees”. 
Reference 
[10] 
emphasizes 
the 
importance 
of 
“commitment of employees transferred” to the provider 
and that the outsourcing success is related to it. “First, key 
employees must be retained and motivated. For most 
215
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

activities, outsourcing does not mean transferring all the 
employees to the vendor. When an activity has been  
performed in-house for a long period of time, firm-
specific knowledge about how to run the activity smoothly 
has accumulated. Employees who possess this firm-
specific knowledge must be identified”. 
What does this mean for switching providers? Clients 
need to identify employees from the incumbent provider 
who possess important firm specific knowledge and try 
either to reintegrate them into the client company or make 
sure that they move over to the new client or ensure 
adequate knowledge transfer. However, it is likely that the 
leaving provider will block the transfer of personal to stay 
competitive [7]. Transferring key employees early to the 
new provider could negatively impact the production 
capability of the incumbent provider. “Any transition in 
the key personnel should take place in a phased manner 
approved the client. This is critical for ensuring stability 
and consistency in the management of the project” [30]. 
Beulen, Tiwari, and van Heck [34] identify the following 
four major categories in an extensive literature review 
which fundamentally impact the performance of transition: 
transition 
planning, 
knowledge 
transfer, 
transition 
governance, and retained organisation. The four major 
categories are shown in Fig. 4.  
 
Figure 4. Theoretical framework of transitional performance [34] 
 
In their longitudinal in-depth case study which was 
based on the 4 identified performance factors, the 
researchers found that knowledge transfer and transition 
governance had the strongest impact on transition 
performance [34]. 
 
IV.CONCLUDING REMARKS: TOWARDS A CHECKLIST 
FOR SUCCESSFUL ITO TRANSITION 
Even though the modern form of ITO practice 
effectively started in the late 1980s, it still cannot be 
considered a standardized routine management practice. 
Companies outsource their IT for different reasons though 
the primary objective is cost reduction. Several studies 
indicate a further growth of the ITO market of 5-8% per 
year [15]. The typical length of ITO contracts is 5-10 years 
[11]  - a time span over which it is neither possible to 
foresee the clients’ IT requests nor to estimate the impact 
of the overall economic environment. Various factors have 
led a number of clients to cancel their contracts 
prematurely.  
The options for clients are to continue with the 
incumbent provider, switch the provider, or IT backsource 
(i.e., in-source again). It is estimated that between 25% 
[13]  and 50% [5] of clients do not continue the 
relationship with the same provider. Miscellaneous factors 
influence these three sourcing options, most importantly 
the anticipated switching costs, the relationship between 
client and provider, and the fear of losing knowledge.  
ITO success has not been extensively researched and 
there 
are 
contrasting 
conclusions 
regarding 
the 
contributing success factors [22]. Research has found that 
success needs to be considered in the context of the 
specific outsourcing arrangement. Several academics agree 
that the desirable outcomes need to be defined before the 
ITO starts, and that outcomes should be systematically 
assessed after it has been finalized and is underway. 
General ITO factors contributing to success can be 
grouped into the major categories of ITO decisions, 
contractual 
governance, relational 
governance, 
and 
organizational capabilities [26]. In the category of ITO 
decisions, top management commitment and support is the 
most important factor [26]. In the relational governance 
category, trust and relationship management play a vital 
role [26]. However, given that significant amounts of 
capital are often invested in ITO deals, clients should not 
completely rely on relational governance factors such as 
trust and relationship. Important capabilities are required 
for success such as cost control and provider management. 
In addition, success itself can be considered as an 
important factor contributing to success. 
The outsourcing process may be conceptualized as six 
major building blocks - investigation, provider selection, 
contract negotiation, transition, manage/service delivery, 
and options evaluation. The first three building blocks can 
be considered as the pre-delivery phase, the next two can 
be considered as the delivery phase, and the last activity 
can be considered as the re-evaluation phase. The 
transition building block is a complex, risky, and 
challenging process of strategic importance which begins 
after the contract is signed and ends with service delivery. 
It is assumed that “over two-thirds of the problems in these 
unsuccessful engagements arise due to failed or poor 
transition” [2].  
216
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

When providers are switched, it cannot be assumed 
that the accumulated IT expertise (both in terms of 
personnel and client specific knowledge) will transition 
from the incumbent provider to the new provider. This 
results in several major issues, which are significantly 
impacted by the strategy of the incumbent provider. Their 
reaction can be grouped into two categories – a 
cooperative strategy or hostile strategy. Clients are well 
advised to prepare for both scenarios. Switching providers 
can be extremely resource draining for clients, as clients 
need to manage (monitor and correct) the operation of the 
incumbent provider, the operations of the new provider 
and additionally the transition from the old to the new one. 
This means clients should budget and plan for extra 
resources and associated contingencies. 
During the pre-delivery phase it is essential for a 
successful transition to identify specific knowledge that 
needs to be transferred.  A strategy should be developed to 
establish how this knowledge will be transferred and key 
knowledge experts need to be identified. Clients may 
reckon that major knowledge gaps will only be recognised 
during the actual transition. 
In the critical transition building block, several factors 
contributing to success have been identified. Employing a 
stringent project management methodology with focus on 
realistic time schedules and incorporated buffers is an 
important ingredient for success. Implementing an 
effective governance structure plays a vital role for a 
successful transition when providers are switched. 
Ensuring early 
knowledge transfer and the transfer of key knowledge 
experts from the incumbent provider are two of the most 
important factors for success. Finally, managing the 
complex 
tripartite relationship is resource intensive but an important 
factor for success. The conceptual framework depicted in 
Fig. 3 has been developed to guide further research. 
In conclusion, the switching of ITO providers is a 
complex, risky and resource intensive endeavour with the  
transition stage being the major building block in a wider 
process. However, not much is known about methods, 
processes and strategies for switching ITO providers as 
most research has focused on the initial outsourcing. [7-9, 
24].  We therefore list below a series of recommendations 
distilled from the analysis of existing literature and 
documented experience, which may be used as a 
framework for further research and practitioner guidance. 
 
A checklist for a successful transition would include the 
following main items for consideration: 
A. Planning and Strategy 
 
Establish an overall governance structure 
 
Establish a culture of trust – knowing that distrust 
has the potential to seriously disrupt the overall 
transition process 
 
Develop a transition strategy for 
o 
People  
 
Identify employees from the 
incumbent 
provider 
who 
possess important firm specific 
knowledge  
 
Try either to reintegrate key 
employees 
into 
the 
client 
company or make sure that 
they move over to the new 
client 
or 
ensure 
adequate 
knowledge transfer. 
 
Identify which employees need 
to transition early 
o 
Processes 
o 
Knowledge 
o 
Assets 
o 
Intellectual property 
o 
Applications 
 
Develop a strategy for a mixed operation scenario 
(since often both providers need to work jointly 
for a defined time to ensure continuity of service 
for the client) 
 
Develop a strategy to deal with a hostile 
incumbent provider 
 
Jointly develop a detailed transition plan 
 
Ensure that the transition plan is realistically 
timed and agreed by all three parties (client, 
incumbent provider, and new provider) 
 
Ensure that sufficient time for knowledge transfer 
is incorporated into plans 
B. Operational issues 
 
Define and agree detailed transition success 
criteria which are relevant for the customer 
organization  
 
Measure success and tie success to payment for 
the new provider 
 
Ensure that the transition manager from the new 
provider has a successful track record for similar 
transitions 
 
Ensure that senior management from all parties 
are actively involved in the process 
 
Establish clear escalation processes 
 
Implement a joint transition program to plan, 
monitor, execute, and report on all transition 
switch deliverables and milestones 
 
Establish joint teams (client, incumbent provider, 
and new provider) for all work packages 
 
Implement a change and communication program 
 
Consider hiring external consultants with a 
proven track record in switching ITO providers 
for transition support  
 
Expect and plan for degraded service levels 
during transition 
 
Adapt the retained organization to reflect future 
structures 
 
217
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

C. Financial/budgetary management 
 
Estimate switching costs 
 
Add switching costs on top of the costs for the 
contract with the new provider 
 
Expect hidden costs (e.g. paying incumbent for 
transition of intellectual property)  
In summary, this article has attempted to point up a 
number 
of 
key 
considerations 
for 
organisations 
considering the switching of IT outsourcing providers. 
This can provide significant business benefits but there 
are also many potential pitfalls. As reference [35] 
concludes 
‘‘the 
successful 
leadership 
of 
an 
IT 
implementation will continue to be a subtle craft”, and 
this undoubtedly applies to the switching of outsourcing 
providers as much as it does to any major IT project. 
Trade-offs will have to be made – for example, between 
the long-term and short-term cost implications of 
switching providers; and success is often determined by 
making the right judgements at the right time, and 
implementing key decisions in the right manner -  for 
example, in the phasing in of one provider, and the 
phasing out of another.  It is hoped this analysis will help 
those practitioners involved in this quest to achieve a 
more successful outcome in what remains a difficult 
managerial and operational challenge. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. Olzmann and M. Wynn, "Switching IT Outsourcing 
Providers–a Conceptual Framework and Initial Assessment of 
Critical Success Factors," in The Third International 
Conferences on Advanced Service Computing Rome, Italy, 
2011, pp. 38-45. 
[2] 
E. Beulen and V. Tiwari, "Parallel Transitions in IT 
Outsourcing: Making It Happen," in Global Sourcing of 
Information Technology and Business Processes. vol. 55, I. 
Oshri and J. Kotlarsky, Eds., ed: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
2010, pp. 55-68. 
[3] 
M. Robinson and P. Iannone. (2007, 30.01.2011). 9 Ways to 
Avoid Outsourcing Failure, A three-part approach to 
maximizing the value of an IT outsourcing deal. Available: 
http://www.cio.com.au/article/205186/9_ways_avoid_outsour
cing_failure/?pp=1&fp=4&fpid=15 
[4] 
K. Sia Siew, K. Lim Wee, and K. P. Periasamy, "Switching IT 
Outsourcing Suppliers:Enhancing Transition Readiness," MIS 
Quarterly Executive, vol. 9, pp. 23-33, 2010. 
[5] 
D. Whitten, S. Chakrabarty, and R. Wakefield, "The strategic 
choice 
to 
continue 
outsourcing, 
switch 
vendors, 
or 
backsource: Do switching costs matter?," Information & 
Management, vol. 47, pp. 167-175, 2010. 
[6] 
D. Whitten and D. Leidner, "Bringing IT Back: An Analysis 
of the Decision to Backsource or Switch Vendors," Decision 
Sciences, vol. 37, pp. 605-621, 2006. 
[7] 
C. Chua, W. Lim, S. Sia, and C. Soh, "Threat-Balancing in 
Vendor Transition," in 3rd International Research Workshop 
on Information Technology Project Management, Paris, 
France, 2008, pp. 19-26. 
[8] 
M. Alaranta and S. L. Jarvenpaa, "Changing IT Providers in 
Public Sector Outsourcing: Managing the Loss of Experiential 
Knowledge," in 43rd Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences, Hawaii, 2010, pp. 1-10. 
[9] 
D. Whitten, "Adaptability in IT Sourcing: The Impact of 
Switching Costs," in Global Sourcing of Information 
Technology and Business Processes. vol. 55, I. Oshri and J. 
Kotlarsky, Eds., ed: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 
202-216. 
[10] 
J. Barthélemy and D. Adsit, "The Seven Deadly Sins of 
Outsourcing [and Executive Commentary]," The Academy of 
Management Executive (1993-2005), vol. 17, pp. 87-100, 
2003. 
[11] 
J. Dibbern, T. Goles, R. Hirschheim, and B. Jayatilaka, 
"Information systems outsourcing: A survey and analysis of 
the literature," Data Base for Advances in Information 
Systems, vol. 35, pp. 6-98, 2004. 
[12] 
L. Willcocks, "Machiavelli, Management and Outsourcing: 
Still On The Learning Curve," Strategic Outsourcing: An 
International Journal, vol. 4, p. 13, 2011. 
[13] 
M. C. Lacity, L. P. Willcocks, and J. W. Rottman, "Global 
outsourcing of back office services: lessons, trends, and 
enduring challenges," Strategic Outsourcing: An International 
Journal, vol. 1, pp. 13-34, 2008. 
[14] 
M. Benaroch, Q. Dai, and R. Kauffman, "Should We Go Our 
Own Way? Backsourcing Flexibility in IT Services 
Contracts," Journal of Management Information Systems, vol. 
26, pp. 317-358, 2010. 
[15] 
M. C. Lacity, S. Khan, A. Yan, and L. P. Willcocks, "A 
review of the IT outsourcing empirical literature and future 
research directions," Journal of Information Technology, vol. 
25, pp. 395-433, 2010. 
[16] 
P. Gottschalk and H. Solli-Sæther, "Critical success factors 
from IT outsourcing theories: an empirical study," Industrial 
Management & Data Systems, vol. 105, pp. 685-702, 2005. 
[17] 
R. Hirschheim and M. Lacity, "The myths and realities of 
information technology insourcing," Communications of the 
ACM, vol. 43, pp. 99-107, 2000. 
[18] 
J. K. Halvey and B. M. Melby, Business process outsourcing: 
Process, strategies, and contracts: Wiley, 2007. 
[19] 
D. Whitten and R. L. Wakefield, "Measuring switching costs 
in IT outsourcing services," The Journal of Strategic 
Information Systems, vol. 15, pp. 219-248, 2006. 
[20] 
R. Aron and J. V. Singh, "Getting offshoring right," Harvard 
business review, vol. 83, pp. 135-43, 2005. 
[21] 
N. F. Veltri and C. Saunders, "Antecedents of information 
systems backsourcing," in Information Systems Outsourcing: 
Enduring Themes, New Perspectives and Global Challenges, 
R. Hirschheim, A. Heinzl, and J. Dibbern, Eds., ed: Springer, 
2006, pp. 83-102. 
[22] 
S. Cullen, P. Seddon, and L. Willcocks, "IT outsourcing 
success: a multi-dimensional, contextual perspective of 
outsourcing outcomes," in Second information Systems 
Workshop on global Sourcing: Service, Knowledge and 
Innovation, Val d’Isere, France, 2008, pp. 1-38. 
[23] 
J. H. Bracht van and H. R. Kaufmann, "The Evaluation of the 
Strategic Business Units of Derivatives within German 
Savings Banks against the Background of the current 
Economic Crisis: Systematic Literature Review & Initial 
Approach. ," in Business Research Challenges in a Turbulent 
Era, Elounda, Crete, Greece, 2011, pp. 1895-1913. 
[24] 
D. C. Chou and A. Y. Chou, "Information systems 
outsourcing life cycle and risks analysis," Computer 
Standards & Interfaces, vol. 31, pp. 1036-1043, 2009. 
[25] 
S. Cullen, P. Seddon, and L. Willcocks, "Managing 
outsourcing: the life cycle imperative," MIS Quarterly 
Executive, vol. 4, pp. 229-246, 2005. 
[26] 
M. C. Lacity, S. A. Khan, and L. P. Willcocks, "A review of 
the IT outsourcing literature: Insights for practice," The 
Journal of Strategic Information Systems, vol. 18, pp. 130-
146, 2009. 
[27] 
D. F. Feeny and L. P. Willcocks, "Core IS Capabilities for 
Exploiting Information Technology," Sloan Management 
Review, vol. 39, pp. 9-21, Spring98 1998. 
[28] 
V. Tiwari, "Transition During Offshore Outsourcing: A 
Process Model," ICIS 2009 Proceedings, p. 33, 2009. 
218
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[29] 
S. Cullen and L. Willcocks, Intelligent IT outsourcing: eight 
building blocks to success: Butterworth-Heinemann, 2003. 
[30] 
M. A. Parikh and G. Gokhale, "Legal and Tax Considerations 
in Outsourcing," in Information systems outsourcing: 
enduring themes, new perspectives, and global challenges, R. 
Hirschheim, Heinzl, A., Dibbern, J.(Eds.), Ed., ed Berlin 
Heidelberg: Springer, 2006, pp. 137-160. 
[31] 
J. Barthelemy, "The hidden costs of IT outsourcing," Sloan 
Management Review, vol. 42, pp. 60-69, 2001. 
[32] 
R. Hirschheim, A. Heinzl, and J. Dibbern, Information 
systems outsourcing: enduring themes, new perspectives, and 
global challenges: Springer, 2006. 
[33] 
E. Beulen, P. Ribbers, and J. Roos, Managing IT outsourcing: 
Taylor & Francis, 2011. 
[34] 
E. Beulen, V. Tiwari, and E. van Heck, "Understanding 
Transition Performance During Offshore IT Outsourcing," 
Strategic Outsourcing: An International Journal, vol. 4, pp. 1-
1, 2011. 
[35] 
A. Mcafee ‘When too much IT knowledge is a dangerous 
thing’ MIT Sloan Management Review, Winter, pp 83-89, 
2003 
 
 
 
 
 
 
219
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

