127
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Pro2Screen – High-Fidelity-Prototyping of Mobile Enterprise Applications using
Process Models
Leo Fuhr, Matthias Jurisch, Stephan B¨ohm, Tobias Braumann, Bodo Igler
Faculty of Design – Computer Science – Media
RheinMain University of Applied Sciences
Wiesbaden, Germany
Email: leo.fuhr@hs-rm.de, matthias.jurisch@hs-rm.de, stephan.boehm@hs-rm.de,
tobiasbraumann@gmail.com, bodo.igler@hs-rm.de
Abstract—Mobile Enterprise Applications are becoming more and
more relevant to enterprises as the dissemination of smartphones
has risen over the last decade. However, developing these ap-
plications is a very challenging and resource-intensive task. In
this context, prototyping can lead to several beneﬁts, including
a better app usability. While Mobile Enterprise Applications
are often used to support or carry out business processes, no
low-code mobile prototyping approach exists that is based on
business process models and is adapted to the needs of non-
developers. In this paper, we present the tool Pro2Screen that ﬁlls
this gap. The tool uses a Business Process Model and Notation
(BPMN) model annotated with screen designs as a source for
generating a prototype. The prototype is integrated with a
business process execution engine that runs the business process.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of Pro2Screen, we present a user
study with experts from the ﬁeld of Mobile Enterprise application
development. The user study shows that the approach is able
to tackle important aspects of prototyping in Mobile Enterprise
Application development and enables practitioners with little or
no coding experiences to develop prototypes that closely resemble
functional aspects of a ﬁnal product.
Keywords–Mobile
Enterprise
Application;
BPMN;
Process
Model; Prototyping.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Since the beginning of the decade, mobile applications have
become more and more ubiquitous. This trend also reached
enterprises, where employees expect to use smartphone apps
for their daily work with the high usability they are accustomed
to from using consumer apps. These expectations and the
continuously and fast changing ecosystem of mobile app
development pose a signiﬁcant difﬁculty for the development
of Mobile Enterprise Applications (MEA). In our previous
work, we proposed the prototyping approach Pro2Screen for
MEAs [1] that is extended in this paper.
MEAs differ from regular consumer apps in several ways,
e.g., they are often used to support some kind of business pro-
cess, have only few potential users in comparison to consumer
apps and need to adhere to enterprise speciﬁc guidelines [2].
Integrating business processes into mobile applications means
implementing new interfaces to process engines and adhering
to process guidelines are some of the challenges for MEA
development that are caused by MEA-speciﬁc aspects. Since
other aspects of mobile application development also need to
be taken care of, these factors contribute to developing MEAs
being a time consuming and expensive process.
To reduce the effort required to develop mobile applications
in general, prototyping can be used. A good prototyping pro-
cess can prevent misunderstandings and make the conceptual
phase of the development process prior to coding signiﬁcantly
easier to handle and therefore reduce costs [3][4]. More
important, this can also allow a better usability of the ﬁnal
product which will improve the willingness of employees to
use the ﬁnal MEA. However, no prototyping tool that supports
all of the aforementioned aspects of MEAs exists. To our
knowledge, there is no prototyping approach that caters to the
business process aspect of this type of application and does
not require coding.
This paper is an extension of [1], which presented the
prototyping approach Pro2Screen. Pro2Screen focuses on us-
ing business process models [5] as the primary source for
MEA prototypes. Our approach enables designers and business
engineers to create prototypes with several user roles and
process steps that connect these roles. For the creation of
the prototype, no coding experience or background in formal
modeling is required. This is accomplished by annotating
visual representations of business process models with screen
designs and creating a prototype using code generation and
business process execution engines that can interpret and
automatically execute business processes.
The description of the approach is extended by a discus-
sion of an evaluation with MEA development experts and
a discussion of the results of the approach. The evaluation
consists of a user study, where users were given a task to fulﬁll
using Pro2Screen and answer a survey. This work is embedded
into the scope of the Prototyping Framework for Mobile
App Design in Large Enterprises (PROFRAME) [6]. The
presented work will lay the foundation for the implementation
of PROFRAME.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows:
Section II gives a brief overview on related work and identiﬁes
the research gap. The general approach of this paper is
presented in Section III. Details on the behavioural model-
ing of the prototypes are given in Section III-A, designing
screens is discussed in Section III-B and code generation
and prototype execution are presented in Section III-C. The
implementation is described in Section III-D. A user study
and its results are presented in Section IV. The methodology
of the evaluation is discussed in Section IV-A. Section IV-B
presents the questionnaire. Results of the questionnaire are
discussed in Section IV-C. Section V discusses advantages

128
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Vacation Request
Employee
Human Resources
Supervisor
Apply For
Vacation
Rejected
Vacation
Request
Approve
Vacation Days
Confirm
Vacation
Approval
Make
Administration
Task
Retry
Decline
Cancel
Approve
Okay
Okay
Figure 1. Example Process
and disadvantages of Pro2Screen including ﬁndings from the
evaluation. A conclusion is given in Section VI.
II.
RELATED WORK
According to [2], a huge gap between the development of
MEAs and standard non-mobile enterprise applications can be
observed. However, the demand for MEA development in the
next few years will be much higher than the supply [7]. Hence,
it is important to support a very efﬁcient way of implementing
MEAs.
One way to improve the development of MEAs is improv-
ing the prototyping process. Several models for classifying
prototypes have been proposed in the literature. Nielsen [4]
proposed a distinction between vertical and horizontal proto-
typing ﬁdelity. A horizontal prototype supports most function-
alities of a product, whereas a vertical prototype allows only a
few functionalities but is technically more similar to the ﬁnal
product. The ﬁlter ﬁdelity model [8] adds more dimensions to
this view, e.g., regarding interactivity, data model, weight and
many other dimensions. Breadth and depth of functionality are
also included in this model.
For prototyping mobile applications in general, many prod-
ucts and approaches can be found in the literature. However,
regarding prototyping for MEAs, only a few tools can be found
(e.g., Kony, Verivo Akula and SAP Mobile) [9]. These tools
are often focused on a speciﬁc use case or bound to a speciﬁc
platform. None of them take business process modeling into
account, so the depth of functionality according to the ﬁlter
ﬁdelity model is low.
BPMN/Form 
Modeler
Extended
BPMN File
Code Generation/
Deployment
Business Analyst
/UX-Designer
GUI
Developer
IDE
Server + 
Process 
Engine
REST-
API
User
GUI
Web App
Mobile Device
Webbrowser
Figure 2. Pro2Screen Architecture
Integrating process models into application development
has been discussed in the area of process-driven development.
AgilePDD [10] proposes an agile approach to implementing
business processes. In the prototyping phase of this process,
business process models are used to deﬁne the behaviour of the
prototype. While this approach seems promising, it does not
deﬁne how a prototype should be generated from the process
model or how process steps should be represented as screens.
The approach is in general focused on modeling use cases with
business process models, whereas generating code from these
models is only mentioned as an option to be considered [11].
Similar work has been conducted in the area of model-
driven development using models formulated in the Business
Process Model and Notation (BPMN). BPMN [12] is the most
popular language for modeling business processes [13][14].
This area focusses on supporting the coding of applications
by generating parts of applications from BPMN models. A
platform used in this context is WebRatio [15]. WebRatio
allows the implementation of mobile applications by modeling
them in BPMN. While WebRatio can be used for prototyping,
the platform tries to help developers with a background in
coding and formal modeling and can not be used by users
not experienced with these techniques. Other approaches like
Axon.ivy [16] is a similar approach that is even more tailored
at coders.
From the presented literature, we can conclude that no
prototyping approach or tool for MEAs exists that facilitate
a high ﬁdelity regarding the representation and integration of
business process models into the prototype and cater to the
needs of UX designers and Business Engineers that do not have
a background in coding. Also, there should be no requirement
for a deep understanding of formal modeling approaches prior
to using the tool. This issue is at the core of our research,
since a prototype that better resembles the ﬁnal product can
help improve its usability.
III.
APPROACH
We consider three major requirements for our work: the
tool needs to support (1) modeling a business process, (2)
designing a user interface and (3) generating a platform-
independent prototype that can be executed on mobile devices.
The basic idea of our approach is to use business process
models as the primary source for the prototype. The process
model deﬁnes the behaviour of the app. To add a graphical user
interface, the process model is annotated with screen designs
for speciﬁc parts of the business process. With this information,
a prototype for the app is generated.
In practice, several implementations of process engines
exist. They are able to interpret and execute BPMN models
and integrate business processes with several backend systems.
Therefore, BPMN is used as the process model language in the
presented prototyping tool.
An overview of the prototyping process is given in Figure
2. A Business Analyst/UX Designer uses the BPMN/Form
Modeler to create a model of the process that shall be
implemented with an app including a user interface design.
To model the process itself, one can simply use an existing
process modeling tool that supports BPMN. This can be done
in close coordination with the customer, e.g., at a kick-off-
meeting for a project. The result of this process is an extended
BPMN ﬁle. Internally, this ﬁle can then be used to generate a

129
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Web App that cooperates with a business process engine. The
customer can then use this app as a prototype, which allows
a clear separation of the code generation and the prototype
modeling. For customization, a developer that modiﬁes the
code generation can be included in the process.
To support the described process, answers to the following
questions are required: What aspects of a process should be
represented as screens (Section III-A)? How can screens be
designed and how can data be reused over several screens
(Section III-B)? How are prototypes generated (Section III-C)?
A. Process Model
BPMN in general is well-known for its graphical represen-
tation of business processes. An example model is shown in
Figure 1. The most important element of BPMN is the task
(e.g., Apply for Vacation). Tasks represent any kind of activity.
Several kinds of tasks exist, the kind of task is represented by
a icon at the top of a task. Apply for vacation is a user task and
Check Vacation request is a script task. User tasks require user
interaction whereas script tasks are automatically executed by
the business process engine.
To connect tasks, so called Sequence Flows that are
represented by arrows are used. Gateways (represented by
rhombuses) are used to model situations where the ﬂow is
split, either because of decisions (x) or parallel execution
(+). The swimming pool element (Vacation Request) is used
to structure the control ﬂow. A swimming pool can contain
multiple swimlanes (e.g., Employee) that distinguish different
domains of activity.
Our approach proposes a representation of tasks as screens:
when the model is executed, each user task corresponds to one
screen on the mobile device. A swimming pool corresponds
to an app and a swimlane corresponds to a user role. For the
example shown in Figure 1, users with role Employee would
be shown at most three different screens (Apply for Vacation,
Vacation Request Rejected and Conﬁrm Vacation Approval)
and users with role Supervisor or HR one (Approve Vacation
Days and Start Administrative Task). Sequence ﬂows determine
the control ﬂow of the business process.
B. Form Modeler
To design the forms that correspond to user tasks, a
form modeler is used that is able to store screen designs as
annotations in BPMN ﬁles. The form modeler needs to add a
screen design to each user task and store the design as an
annotation in the BPMN model. A screenshot of the form
modeler that implements this idea is shown in Figure 3. The
user of the form modeler can drag and drop user interface
components (1), e.g., Plain Text, Text Inputs and Radio Buttons,
into the screen layout (2). Properties of components can be
modiﬁed using controls on the right (3).
Our approach uses a grid layout to model the screen design.
By using a grid layout, the prototype is not bound to a speciﬁc
screen size or orientation. The grid is shown as dashed lines in
the screenshot. Users can add and remove rows and columns.
Each cell in this grid can only hold one widget. To improve
the design, the user can modify row height and column width.
By modifying a component’s properties using the box on
the right (3), the user can edit several aspects regarding its
behaviour and appearance, e.g., inputs can be set as editable
and required and their label can be deﬁned. The property
parameter (4) is used to specify parameter IDs that are used to
identify data throughout the complete business process. When
a screen is used to input data into a ﬁeld with a certain
parameter ID and another screen shown later in the process has
a component with a matching parameter ID, the second screen
will show the data entered in the ﬁrst screen. The parameter
IDs are identiﬁers in a global data space bound to a workﬂow.
The screen shown in the example corresponds to the task
Apply for Vacation from Figure 1. To view the data entered
in this screen, e.g., in the task Approve Vacation Days, it is
only required to add an UI component to that task and set its
parameter ID to request_reason, similar to the example
shown in Figure 3 (4).
C. Code Generation and Process Execution
The previously described steps allow the creation of an
annotated BPMN model that contains information about the
behaviour of the application, as well as the UI design. Based
on this information, code generation can be used to create a
prototype.
Besides generating app prototypes, using BPMN as a
foundation for the prototype allows execution of the process
model on a business process execution engine. To exploit
this circumstance, the generated prototype is separated into
two parts: (1) A business process engine that is given the
business process model and executes it and (2) a Web App
that interacts with the business process execution engine. The
engine controls the process and data related to it. This allows
the synchronization between prototypes for different user roles
involved in the process, which are all created in the generation
process. Also, the business process engine can be integrated
with other enterprise systems, which allows accessing real-
world data from the prototype.
D. Implementation
As a component for modeling business processes, Camunda
Modeler [17] is used. Camunda Modeler needed to be extended
to provide an interface to the form modeler. Angular [18] is
used to implement the form modeler from scratch to allow a
seamless integration with the process modeler. These compo-
nents write their data into the shared extended BPMN ﬁle.
Prototype generation form the shared BPMN document is
implemented using XSLT [19]. To support multiple mobile
platforms, the generated code uses the Ionic framework [20], a
HTML and Javascript-based Framework, as SDK. Ionic allows
the visual design of the app to be easily changed using CSS.
This supports the integration of enterprise corporate design
guidelines into the product. To execute the business process,
the Camunda Core Engine [21] is used. To interact with the
engine, the Web App uses the Camunda REST API.
IV.
EVALUATION
The core of the Pro2Screen idea is to support Business
Analysts and UX Designers to develop prototypes in close
coordination with the customers. We want to evaluate the
suitability of this concept in a user study with the help of a
group of practitioners who handle these tasks in their daily
work. This evaluation shall answer the following research
questions:

130
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 3. Form Modeler Screenshot
•
Can Business Analysts and UX Designers that have no
experience in coding mobile apps develop prototypes
using Pro2Screen?
•
Do practitioners see a beneﬁt in working with the tool?
•
Is experience with BPMN-based modeling tools re-
quired to work with Pro2Screen?
As described in Section III Pro2Screen consists of two
parts, the BPMN-modeler and the form modeler. In our ex-
periment, the group of practitioners worked on two subtasks:
First, model a business process using the BPMN-modeler
and second, model the corresponding interactive screens for
the app using the form modeler. Test participants ﬁlled out
questionnaires before and after completing the two subtasks. In
the following subsections the methodology, the questionnaire
and the results are described.
A. Methodology
The evaluation is carried out on two days with a total of
seven test persons. The test persons are employees of a leading
German ICT solution provider and bring along experiences
from their daily work in the process of Mobile Enterprise
Application Development from requirement analysis (Business
Engineers) or User Experience Design (UX Designers and
Consultants).
In total, a test run takes 90 minutes. Each test run is
conducted in a separate room and monitored by two test
supervisors. The test runs are carried out sequentially under the
same conditions. First, the concept of Pro2Screen is presented
by the supervisors. The aim of the testing is explained, too.
Subsequently, the test persons receive a questionnaire about
their personal experiences in the ﬁeld of MEA development.
The experience with prototyping tools as well as the modeling
of a business process in BPMN are also part of this question-
naire.
Next, the test persons watch a three-part video tutorial as an
introduction to the functionality and modeling capabilities of
Pro2Screen. In this tutorial, the business process for a vacation
request from Section III-A is described in more detail. In the
ﬁrst part of the tutorial the ﬁnal BPMN process model with
the corresponding screens is shown. How the BPMN process
can be modeled in Pro2Screen is shown in the second part of
the tutorial. The last part of the video shows how to model the
corresponding screens in the form modeler.
Afterwards, the test persons ﬁll out a pre-test questionnaire
with seven questions before they could use the tool inde-
pendently on the basis of two tasks: First, sketch a business
process in the BPMN modeler and second, model the screens
with the help of the form modeler. As an input for the task
to be completed, the following use case description is given
to the test participants: A procurement process involves the
roles of employee, manager and a member of the purchasing
department. The need for procurement is recognized and
initiated by the employee himself. An employee can choose
between a laptop, PC, or monitor. After successful selection,
this process is transmitted to the manager. The manager can
reject or approve the acquisition request of the employee. If
rejected, the process is sent back to the employee without
explanation. He takes note of this and ends the process. If
the acquisition request is approved by the manager, once the
employee receives a positive response regarding his applica-
tion and on the other hand, the purchasing department on the
acquisition request are informed. Both roles end the assigned
subprocess. The participants have 10 minutes to sketch this
process using the BPMN-modeler and 20 minutes to add forms
to the process using the screen modeler. After solving the

131
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
two tasks, the post-test questionnaire is distributed. The same
questions are asked on the post-test questionnaire as on the
pre-test questionnaire.
B. Questionnaire/Survey
In this Section, the contents of the questionnaires are
presented in detail. During the evaluation three questionnaires
are distributed. The user questionnaire is used to gather infor-
mation regarding the user and experiences with BPMN and
prototyping and opinions on MEA prototyping in general.
A pre-test concept evaluation questionnaire and a post-test
questionnaire try to capture the users opinions and proﬁciency
of Pro2Screen before and after the users execute the task.
The experience values in the user questionnaire relate to
the methods used in this tool. Each question can be answered
on a scale of 1 (very low or never) to 5 (very high or always).
The questions are the following:
1)
UX proﬁciency: How do you rate your skills in UX
Design?
2)
Prototyping tool usage: How many times have you
worked with a mobile app prototyping tool?
3)
BPMN proﬁciency: How do you assess your business
process modeling skills?
4)
BPMN tool usage: How many times have you worked
with a BPMN modeling tool?
Additionally, each user rated the following statements on
a scale of 1 (do not agree at all) to 5 (completely agree).
1)
Existing tools sufﬁciency: Existing app development
tools are sufﬁcient.
2)
Enjoy experimenting with tools: I enjoy experiment-
ing with tools that support app development.
3)
Large enterprise adaption: Existing tools are well
adapted to being used in large enterprises.
4)
Collaboration support: Existing tools support collab-
oration in interdisciplinary teams.
5)
Reuse support: Existing tools support the reuse of
existing results.
The questions asked in the pre- and post-test regarding
Pro2Screen are identical. Each question can be answered on a
scale of 1 (very bad) to 5 (very good).
1)
Conceptual comprehension: How much do you think
you have understood the concept of the new tool so
far?
2)
Concept rating: How do you rate the concept of this
new tool so far?
3)
Enterprise-wide applicability: How do you rate the
usability of this tool in your company so far?
4)
Local applicability: How do you rate the applicability
of this tool in your personal workspace?
5)
Self-assessed proﬁciency: How do you think so far,
will you be able to cope with this tool?
6)
Personal job ease: How do you rate the chances that
this novel tool could make your job easier?
7)
App quality improvement: How do you rate the
chances that this tool will improve the quality of app
development?
C. Results
We executed the aforementioned test plan with seven
users from a large enterprise that work on mobile enterprise
applications. The created solutions of the test persons were
compared with the model solution. These results are presented
in Table I. In the ﬁrst task they should create the BPMN
process diagram for the described task from Section IV-A.
At this task a maximum of 18 points could be achieved. In
each case, one point was awarded for creating one of the
three roles in the swimming lane, setting the correct task for
the corresponding roles and setting the associated connections
between the tasks. On average, each test person scored 12.86
points, which corresponds to 71.43% of the possible points.
In the second task the test persons should model the screens
of the BPMN process diagram described in Section IV-A. Due
to the comparison of the results, they start with the same
BPMN process diagram. This diagram is the model solution
of the ﬁrst task. In the second task a maximum of 24 points
could be achieved. They could receive one point for setting the
correct ﬁelds. Further points could be reached if the necessary
ﬁelds were linked to global variables and the buttons on the
screens were linked to the corresponding outgoing transitions.
The test persons achieved an average of 19.5 points in this
task. This corresponds to 78% of total points. In sum, for both
tasks, the test persons reached an average of 32.36 points out
of 42 possible points. In other words, 75.25% of all possible
points were achieved by the test persons on average.
TABLE I. Completion Rate
Task 1
Task 2
Total
Average number of achieved points
12.86
19.50
32.36
Percentage of achieved points
71.43%
78.00%
75.25%
An overview of their answers to the user questionnaire are
shown in Table II. In these results, we can see that the majority
of the test persons are experienced in UX Design. But on the
other hand, the majority has low experience (the median is one,
meaning no experience using BPMN-based tools) modeling
business processes with a BPMN modeling tool. While the
capability of modeling business processes in general is rated
a little higher than working with BPMN tools, the values are
quite spread out. The answers to this question is quite similar to
the regular usage of prototyping tools, while test persons seem
to use these tools a lot more than business process modeling
tools. Nearly all test persons enjoy experimenting with tools.
Regarding the experts opinions on existing MEA develop-
ment tools, the majority thinks that prototyping tools are not
well adapted to large enterprises. The users did not express
that existing tools are sufﬁcient for MEA development, while
they are not completely unusable for this task. Similar answers
were given regarding the support for collaboration or reuse.
An overview of the pre- and post-test evaluation of these
users is shown in Table III. In nearly all questions, the scores
slightly improve from pre-test to post-test. The results for
conceptual comprehension are at least four in pre- and post-
test. This means that after watching the video tutorial (pre-test)
and after doing the tasks (post-test), the test persons understand
the concept of the tool well. In the post-tests, these values
are even higher. Results for concept rating are similar. The

132
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE II. Results of User Questionnaire
Minimum
Median
Maximum
UX proﬁciency
2
4
5
Prototyping tool usage
1
3
4
BPMN proﬁciency
1
2
4
BPMN tool usage
1
1
4
Existing tools sufﬁciency
2
3
4
Enjoy experimenting with tools
3
4
4
Large enterprise adaption
2
2
4
Collaboration support
2
3
4
Reuse support
2
3
4
results for enterprise-wide applicability show that it is not clear
whether the tool can be used enterprise-wide. Regarding the
local applicability, we can see disagreement in the results.
While the majority of the responses to this question in the
post-test where four or higher, the results are spread out. Post-
test answers to personal job ease show that a majority of test
persons believe that Pro2Screen can beneﬁt their personal job,
with a slight increase from the pre-test. Results for a possible
improvement in app quality are similar.
V.
DISCUSSION
In comparison to prototyping approaches mentioned in
Section II, we see several beneﬁts. One important advantage
of using BPMN as the foundation for prototyping is that it
supports reusing existing process models to create a prototype.
Even an automated transformation from existing ﬁles is sup-
ported. This is not possible for prototyping approaches based
on other models. Another important aspect of this approach is
the option to build applications using more than one user role
easily. Supporting a business process execution engine allows
the integration of existing enterprise systems in the prototype,
since these systems can be integrated into the process engine.
This can allow the prototype to access real-world data, which
give the user of the prototype a better understanding of the
functionality.
A drawback of our approach is the limitation regarding
visual design choices of the form modeler caused by the grid
layout and the limited set of standard components. While
inexperienced users might see the simplicity as an advantage,
especially designers might need more freedom in positioning
components and a broader collection of usable widgets.
Regarding the prototype’s ﬁdelity according to the ﬁlter
ﬁdelity model [8], our approach allows building prototypes
that have a high breadth and depth of functionality and a close
relation to data and appearance of the ﬁnal product. This can
make it easier to demonstrate to customers how an app can
support their business processes and help manage expectations.
This can lead to reduced costs for reworking requirements
and app concepts during the MEA development process and
improve the usability of the ﬁnal product.
From our user study, we can see that there is room for
improvement in the area of MEA-Prototyping in general. Users
in our evaluation stated that existing tools are not well adapted
to the needs of MEA development and did not state that
existing tools are sufﬁcient for this process. Since the majority
of test persons see an applicability of Pro2Screen in their
personal work area, this can indicate that this tool can make a
contribution in MEA development. This effect intensiﬁed after
the test users worked with the tool. Users did also see that
MEA quality could be improved by working with the tool.
Our evaluation also shows that the tool is well adapted to
the needs of UX Designers and Business Engineers. While the
majority of test users were not familiar with prototyping tools
or BPMN modeling, after the test most users believed that they
can work with the tool. Even before the test, the users were
conﬁdent that they can work with it. This shows that the tool
can be used by users with little experience in BPMN modeling
or even prototyping tools, which is especially important when
prototypes are created by users that are not as ”tech-savvy” as
coders.
The presented evaluation has some limitations: While the
size of seven participants is in general considered suitable for
usability testing [22], the ample size is small, and thus the
generalizability of our results to MEA development experts
is questionable. Besides, our evaluation was performed with
test users from only one company. The situation in other large
enterprises might be fundamentally different and thus needs to
be further evaluated.
In general, the presented approach allows creating pro-
totypes by directly mapping screens and process steps. This
supports non-developers in creating high-ﬁdelity prototypes
without the need for learning to code or a background in
formal modeling. Our evaluation indicates that the approach is
adapted to the needs of this group, which makes the approach
an interesting candidate for further research.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have presented the prototyping tool
Pro2Screen for MEAs that is based on the usage of business
process models written in BPMN. Prototypes are created
using a business process annotated with screen designs. The
annotated process is then used to generate a prototype that
consists of an app and a business process execution engine
that executes the process.
Pro2Screen allows fast prototyping of MEAs, since it
is possible to reuse existing BPMN models for prototyping
and integration with other enterprise applications through the
business process execution engine. Generated prototypes can
achieve a high level of ﬁdelity regarding several aspects,
especially the depth of functionality and the visual quality of
the prototype is high.
To evaluate the feasibility of this approach, we have pre-
sented a user study conducted with practitioners from the ﬁeld
of MEA development with a background in user experience
and business engineering. The evaluation shows that users
from our test group where able to work with Pro2Screen and
indicates that Pro2Screen can make a signiﬁcant contribution
in the area of MEA development.
As future work, we plan to further evaluate the beneﬁts
of this prototyping approach regarding the ability to develop
MEAs. Especially ﬁnancial aspects of the approach and pos-
sible improvements of MEA quality need to be examined.
As shown in the discussion, to obtain generalizable results,
a repetition of our evaluation with a larger and more diverse
user group will also be considered. Another next step could
be integrating existing screens from a standard screen library
into the prototyping tool.

133
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 11 no 1 & 2, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE III. Comparison Pre-Test versus Post-Test
Pre-Test
Post-Test
Minimum
Median
Maximum
Minimum
Median
Maximum
Conceptual comprehension
4
4
5
4
5
5
Concept rating
3
4
5
4
4
5
Enterprise-wide applicability
3
3
5
3
3
4
Local applicability
2
3
5
2
4
5
Self-assessed proﬁciency
3
4
4
3
5
5
Personal job ease
3
3
5
3
4
4
App quality improvement
3
3
4
2
4
4
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was funded by the German Federal Ministry
of Education and Research, grant no. 03FH032PX5; the
PROFRAME project at RheinMain University of Applied
Sciences. All responsibility for the content of this paper lies
with the authors.
REFERENCES
[1]
T. Braumann, D. Broll, M. Jurisch, and B. Igler, “Business Process
Models as a Foundation for High-Fidelity-Prototypes of Mobile Enter-
prise Applications,” CENTRIC 2017 : The Tenth International Confer-
ence on Advances in Human-oriented and Personalized Mechanisms,
Technologies, and Services, 2017, pp. 32–35.
[2]
A. Giessmann, K. Stanoevska-Slabeva, and B. de Visser, “Mobile
enterprise applications–current state and future directions,” in System
Science (HICSS), 2012 45th Hawaii International Conference on, Jan
2012, pp. 1363–1372.
[3]
F. Kordon and Luqi, “An introduction to rapid system prototyping,”
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, vol. 28, 2002, pp. 817–
821.
[4]
J. Nielsen, Usability Engineering.
San Francisco, CA, USA: Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 1993.
[5]
R. S. Aguilar-Saven, “Business process modelling: Review and frame-
work,” International Journal of Production Economics, vol. 90, no. 2,
2004, pp. 129–149.
[6]
M. Jurisch, B. Igler, and S. B¨ohm, “PROFRAME: A Prototyping
Framework for Mobile Enterprise Applications,” in CENTRIC 2016,
The Ninth International Conference on Advances in Human-oriented
and Personalized Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services, 2016, pp.
7–10.
[7]
Gartner,
“Gartner
says
demand
for
enterprise
mobile
apps
will
outstrip
available
development
capacity
ﬁve
to
one,”
https://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/3076817,
website
[retrieved:
February, 2018], 2015.
[8]
T. Hochreuter, K. Kohler, and M. Mareen, “Towards a more conscious
use of prototypes in mobile user experience design,” in Prototyping to
Support the Interaction Designing in Mobile Application Development
(PID-MAD), 2013.
[9]
J.
Wong,
V.
L.
Baker,
A.
Leow,
and
M.
Resnick,
“Magic
quadrant
for
mobile
app
development
platforms,”
https://www.gartner.com/doc/3744122/magic-quadrant-mobile-app-
development, website. [retrieved: February, 2018], 2015.
[10]
A. Herden, P. Farias, P. de Andrade, and A. Albuquerque, “Agile
PDD: One approach to software development using BPMN,” in 11th
International Conference Applied Computing, Porto, Portugal, 2014.
[11]
A. Herden, P. P. M. Farias, and A. B. Albuquerque, “An approach
based on BPMN to detail use cases,” in New Trends in Networking,
Computing, E-learning, Systems Sciences, and Engineering.
Springer,
2015, pp. 537–544.
[12]
Object Management Group, “Business process model and notation,
version 2.0,” http://www.omg.org/spec/BPMN/2.0/PDF/, website. [re-
trieved: February, 2018], 2011.
[13]
P. Harmon, “The state of business process management 2016,”
http://www.bptrends.com/bpt/wp-content/uploads/2015-BPT-Survey-
Report.pdf, technical report. [retrieved: February, 2018], 2016.
[14]
M. Brambilla, S. Butti, and P. Fraternali, “WebRatio BPM: A Tool
for Designing and Deploying Business Processes on the Web,” in Web
Engineering, B. Benatallah, F. Casati, G. Kappel, and G. Rossi, Eds.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 415–429.
[15]
WebRatio,
“Webratio
bpm
platform,”
https://www.webratio.com/site/content/en/bpm-application-
development, website. [retrieved: February, 2018], 2018.
[16]
Axon.ivy,
“digitalize
your
business
—
AXONIVY,”
http://www.axonivy.com/,
website.
[retrieved:
February,
2018],
2018.
[17]
Camunda,
“Modeler
-
Camunda
BPM,”
https://camunda.org/features/modeler/, website. [retrieved: February,
2018], 2018.
[18]
Google, “Angular,” https://angular.io, website. [retrieved: February,
2018], 2018.
[19]
W3C,
“Xsl
transformations
(xslt)
version
1.0,”
https://www.w3.org/TR/xslt,
website.
[retrieved:
February,
2018],
1999.
[20]
Drifty Co., “Build amazing native apps and progressive web apps with
ionic framework and angular,” https://ionicframework.com/, website.
[retrieved: February, 2018], 2018.
[21]
Camunda,
“Engine
-
Camunda
BPM,”
https://camunda.org/features/engine/,
website.
[retrieved:
February,
2018], 2018.
[22]
J.
Nielsen,
“How
many
test
users
in
a
usability
study?”
https://www.nngroup.com/articles/how-many-test-users/,
website.
[retrieved: May, 2018], 2012.

