Design of Cognitively Accessible Web Pages
Till Halbach Røssvoll, Ivar Solheim
Norwegian Computing Center (Norsk Regnesentral), Norway
{halbach,solheim}@nr.no
Abstract—Considering the design of universally designed in-
terfaces for static and dynamic web pages, this work focuses on
the group of users with cognitive/intellectual disabilities, while
simultaneously accounting for the needs of users with motor
and sensory deﬁcits. A number of speciﬁc inclusive techniques
are applied to the login mechanism of a web service in the
course of the redesign of this site. The techniques evolve, i.e. are
tested, validated, and reﬁned, over a series of implementation
iterations and subsequent evaluation, involving personas and
scenario testing, an expert panel, and user testing. The testing
shows that the web service’s resulting login mechanism is much
more universally accessible than today’s solution. Generically
applyable, universal design principles are derived for a number
of intellectual deﬁcits, such as problems with linguistics (text and
language), learning and problem solving, orientation, focus and
attention span, memory, and visual comprehension.
Keywords-Cognitive disabilities; intellectual deﬁcits; impairment;
deﬁciencies; accessibility; e-inclusion; universal design; user expe-
rience; web pages.
I. INTRODUCTION
Accessible web sites and online services is a topic of high
concern for industry, public actors, and research likewise.
However, people with sensory deﬁcits are typically in focus
here, while motor and cognitive impairments often are given
less attention. This article concentrates on the latter, sometimes
also referred to as intellectual deﬁciencies, extending the work
presented in [1].
There is a strong rationale to address the topic of cognitively
accessible web pages. In 2006, roughly 22 million people in
the United States were counted to have cognitive disabilities
due to various reasons [2], while world-wide estimates for
2008 range as high as 400 million people [3]. These numbers
include the intellectual challenges typically encountered by a
number of elderly people with various degrees of severity.
The starting point for the project described in this article
was a case provided by the Norwegian public services provider
Altinn [4], involving a redesign of their site [5]. One of the
requirements for the new design and the new functionality
was to accommodate for people with cognitive challenges.
A detailed survey of all requests to Altinn’s help desk had
revealed that 33% of the users had problems with the login
process [6], and the service provider considered it a strategic
goal to reduce the number of help requests by developing a
new page design and an improved service architecture.
The paper is organized as follows. After an introduction
to relevant cognitive impairments (Section II), a brief review
(Section III) of related and previous work summarizes other
research, points at gaps to ﬁll, and names this work’s con-
tributions towards these goals. Next, the status quo of the
current solution is detailed (Section IV) before the develop-
ment method is explained (Section V). This is followed by
the listing of generic design principles with a subsection for
each considered cognitive impairment (Section VI). This also
includes a discussion of the beneﬁts for other user groups
as well (Section VII). After that, the prototype is presented
(Section VIII), with a special section on instruction videos
(Section IX). Finally, there is a general discussion regarding
the consequences of this work’s ﬁndings (Section X) before
the ﬁnal conclusion is drawn.
II. COGNITIVE IMPAIRMENTS
Cognitive impairments can be deﬁned as “(the) substantial
limitation of one’s capability to think, including conceptualiz-
ing, planning, sequencing thoughts and action, remembering,
interpreting subtle social cues, and manipulating numbers and
symbols” [2] and can appear at any age. Causes for these
impairments include prenatal fatal inﬂuences, injuries, and
mental illnesses. Basically, a person with cognitive challenges
has over-the-average difﬁculty succeeding with one or more
types of mental tasks.
There are several ways to classify cognitive disabilities. In
the context of this research it seems appropriate to distinguish
between a clinical-diagnostic and a functional approach. Clin-
ical diagnoses of cognitive disabilities include
• autism,
• Down Syndrome,
• traumatic brain injury (TBI),
• dementia,
• dyslexia,
• dyscalculi, and
• learning difﬁculties in general [7].
Clinical diagnoses are of course helpful and necessary from
a medical perspective, but for the purpose of accessibility,
classifying cognitive disabilities by functional disability is
more useful. Functional disabilities ignore the medial and
behavioral causes of the disability and instead focus on the
resulting abilities and challenges [7], [8]. It is also worth
mentioning that, naturally, any impairment can have various
degrees of severity, ranging from mild variants to extreme
cases. This vast range makes the universal design of web pages
very challenging, and it is obvious that even the most cautious
design cannot cope with all variants of impairments that exist.
303
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

By looking at the aforementioned survey, areas of difﬁculty
with the previous solution could be identiﬁed. E.g., 27% of
the calls to Altinn’s help desk were related to ﬁnding the
right service, and 33% of all users had problems with the
login routine [6]. The close inspection of data also allowed
to classify user groups according to a particular deﬁcit. For
instance, the cognitive requirement needed to ﬁnd the proper
service is the ability to orientate in a website.
The following listing of impairments was identiﬁed as
relevant to represent the target group of users with cognitive
deﬁcits.
• Linguistic (text and language)
• Learning and problem solving
• Orientation
• Focus and attention span
• Memory
• Visual comprehension
One of the most important objectives of the project was to
derive a number of principles for good web design concerning
these given target groups. This process started with a review
of related work.
III. PREVIOUS AND RELATED WORK, AND THIS ARTICLE’S
CONTRIBUTIONS
Works related to the topic of this project include an early
version of this paper which has been presented previously with
preliminary results [1].
In the design guidelines for web design for impaired users,
i.e., without a speciﬁc focus on the cognitively disabled, [9]
give a large number of detailed design instructions. [10] derive
a set of cognitive user characteristics based on neuroscience;
however, the work lacks concrete design suggestions. While
the [11] provides an exhaustive and detailed listing with
concrete design principles, it remains unclear how these are
justiﬁed with regard to the particular cognitive impairments
considered. The same applies to the work by [12], even though
this work is not equally detailed. Next, [13] presents a great
number of design suggestion with a considerable amount of
detail, and [7] lists a set of concrete design guidelines in a
tabular format and marks them as “applies to” with regard to
four major areas of cognitive challenge. On the downside, both
documents lack the justiﬁcation for why particular guidelines
are derived. [14], [15] discuss cognitive accessibility with
regard to concrete examples and list some derived practical
design suggestions. The listings appear to be far from com-
plete, though. And last but not least, parts of the WCAG 1.0
[16] and 2.0 [17] speciﬁcations cover measures for cognitive
impairments, but only to a limited degree [18], [11], [14].
In contrast to the aforementioned research, the contribu-
tion of the present work is to derive generic design princi-
ples/guidelines for people with cognitive deﬁcits from concrete
examples, and by means of testing and user studies. Moreover,
each guideline is associated and hence classiﬁed with regard
to a speciﬁc impairment. Also, in contrast to the cited works,
the focus here includes orientation problems as well, as they
seem to be very common (27%) with the given (Altinn) case.
IV. CURRENT SOLUTION
Figure 1 shows a screenshot of the current login solution
at the time of writing, which was the starting point for
the development of the inclusive design. It illustrates several
problematic areas, including those discussed below.
1) The grayed-out area on top shows inaccessible function-
ality, is irrelevant in the given setting, and does thus
not help users to focus on the login process below in a
satisfactory manner.
2) The user has to choose the preferred login method out
of a list of options on the middle left, such as password,
PIN code from mobile phone, and smart-card. There
may be too many list items to read for users with reading
deﬁcits.
3) The little icon, which is placed after each list item,
and which symbolizes the security level of each login
method, is likely to confuse non-technical users and
those with problem solving challenges. It may further be
problematic for individuals with visual comprehension
deﬁcits.
4) The main login part on the middle right of the page
consists of the ﬁelds for user input such as social
security number and password, and changes according
to the choice of login method on the left. The resulting
two-column layout of the page may be too complex
to understand for users with focus problems, and it
might also be problematic to those with attention span
challenges.
Also the screenshot of the “My page” shown in Figure 2, at
which the user arrives after the login procedure, shows a page
with a number of issues, including the following.
1) The page structure is rather complex and not easily
comprehensible. It is not straight forward to understand
why a particular piece of content is relevant for the user
to reach her goals, and how this content relates to other
content on the page. This is likely to confuse particularly
users with orientation problems and learning difﬁculties.
2) There is too much information to process, and there is a
lot to read for the user to understand the page structure.
This might be problematic especially concerning people
with dyslexia.
By way of conclusion, it appears the technical possibilities
are in the center of today’s solution. Content is grayed out
because it is a “cool” design effect, too many login methods
are presented because — among other reasons — they are
technically possible, the security level is shown, even though
it is only of interest to the minority of users, and parts of the
page are dynamically altered because it is technically possible
to embed all parts of one task in the same page. What is
needed is a solution which puts the human and his and her
needs into the center.
304
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 1.
Screenshot of the current login solution
V. METHODOLOGY
Among the objectives of the project were to build a pro-
totype for a new login solution with improved design and
functionality as compared to the current solution as speciﬁed
in Section IV. Another goal was to derive generic guidelines
concerning the design of web pages with regard to people with
intellectual impairments. It is simultaneously stressed that the
developed solution also accounts for the needs of individuals
with mobility and sensory deﬁcits, as the user interface meets
the requirements of the WCAG 2.0 Recommendation Level
AA.
The design guidelines were formulated as hypotheses, im-
plemented in the prototype, and tested for veriﬁcation. The
guidelines are naturally inﬂuenced by the results of user
testing in other previous projects of our research team. The
implementation was reﬁned in several iterative cycles to reﬂect
the feed-back from each evaluation phase.
There were multiple types of evaluation: First, different
persona proﬁles helped to speed up the implementation and
testing in the beginning of the development process. The ﬁctive
characters, six in total, were given appropriate properties to
cover the spectrum of impairments of the target groups, such as
“has concentration difﬁculties”, “poor memorizing abilities”,
etc. They were associated with scenarios, allowing simple and
cheap cognitive walk-throughs by means of role plays and
methods like “thinking aloud”.
Second, when the prototype had reached a certain degree of
maturity, the evaluation was conducted by a panel consisting
of experts in accessibility, e-inclusion, and universal design.
The experts were presented walk-throughs while discussing
all aspects of the implementation and were able to provide
the latest feed-back from their research areas.
Third, while getting close to the prototype’s completion, a
minor user study with eight users representing the cognitive
target groups was carried out. The users had various cognitive
challenges, such as minor dementia, reading and writing
difﬁculties, focus problems, etc. The number of users was
bound by budget limitations. We believe, however, that viewed
as a complement to the personas and expert evaluation, the size
of the user study is reasonable.
Finally, all design recommendations were collected in an
online best-practices tutorial [19]. As the ﬁnancing institutions
of the projects limited the target to the Norwegian market,
the tutorial currently comes in Norwegian only, but an En-
glish translation is planned in the long-term. Besides topics
addressing
• universal design,
• legal matters,
• cognition,
• on system planning, speciﬁcation, implementation, and
evaluation,
• related recommendations, speciﬁcations, standards, and
standardization organizations,
• useful links and tools,
• glossary, and
• literature
305
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 2.
Screenshot of Altinn’s “My page” (partly in Norwegian)
the tutorial also lists the design guidelines with practical ex-
amples in Hyper-Text Markup Language (HTML), Cascading
Style Sheets (CSS) and JavaScript.
VI. DESIGN RECOMMENDATIONS
The following sections detail the identiﬁed design principles
or guidelines. They are meant as recommendations and “best
practice”. Neither of the principles below are listed in any
speciﬁc order. It is noted that a design measure for a particular
functional area may be in conﬂict with measures from different
functional areas, and it therefore happens in some cases that
opposite measures for different functional areas have to be
balanced against each other.
A. Text and language
Linguistic problems are difﬁculties with writing and in
particular reading larger amounts of text. A dyslectic may
represent this user group. There are no recent statistics, but
numbers for Norway from 2005 indicate that approximately
1/3 of the population have moderate to serious reading and
writing challenges [20], while other sources talk about 15-
20% of the population [21].
The following non-exclusive listing of design principles
accommodates linguistic problems.
• Short paragraphs with a reasonable amount of text
• Text in columns with a limited number of characters per
line. Concurrent research is yet inconclusive concerning
the optimum line length for highest comprehension [22],
but we believe that 60–100 characters is a reasonable
number.
• Short and concise sentences
• Avoidance
of
non-literal
text,
such
as
allegories,
metaphors, slang, and colloquialism
• Avoidance of technical expressions and expert talk
• As few abbreviations and acronyms as possible, and all
with proper explanation
• Use of short or non-compound words in languages were
single words can be assembled to longer words (such as
Norwegian and German)
• Enhancement of semantics by high-quality multimodal
content, e.g., symbols/icons, graphics/images, audio,
video (depending on the context)
• Textual content structured in short and easily compre-
hensive logical units like paragraphs and lists, preferably
with a heading in advance. Units easily separable from
the remaining content
• Choice among several languages for both international
and national sites
• Sufﬁciently long display of subtitles or help text in video
to enable slow readers to capture everything. It is of
advantage if the user can pause play-back, repeat a timed
media sequence, or alter the play-back velocity.
B. Learning and problem solving & orientation
Some individuals lack the mental ﬂexibility to process
information and to apply knowledge in order to solve a
given problem. Combined with a low mental endurance, this
306
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

typically results in frustration and a user turning away from
the task set out. After all, the vast majority of users seeks to
get things done with the least possible effort [23] and thus
expect things simply to work [24]. Many tasks which have to
be solved, such as login, are viewed only as an impediment
before the main objective beyond (for instance, ﬁlling out an
electronic tax statement form) can be accomplished.
Orientation difﬁculties are part of this class of problems. To
cope with these challenges, the design principles listed below
should be followed.
• Standard compliant, working solutions, tested thoroughly
and on a number of different platforms and user agents
(e.g., browsers) to ensure compatibility
• Choice among several alternatives, such as login methods,
to solve a task so that a user can pick the one she is most
familiar with. However, the number of alternatives should
be kept low, depending on the context.
• Multiple modalities for conveyance of content, and pos-
sibility to let the user decide upon the preferred modality.
An example is to accompany an instruction video by
showing a series of key frames from that video with
textual description conveying the same message
• Show only content relevant in a given setting to ease
orientation
• Common design conventions to make processes pre-
dictable, such as hovering effects for responsive user
interfaces, known technologies like drop-downs to com-
pact item listings, and for instance a top-bottom left-right
ordering of information in terms of relevance for users
with a Western background
• Consistent layout and functionality, to give a “learned
once, apply everywhere” effect
• Information about the process, like “what” (description),
“why” (reason) and “how” (clear instructions), as well
as informative error messages and showing potential
solutions to problems aim at supporting the process of
solving a particular task
• Provision of not only links to help and contact infor-
mation but also expert systems and demonstrations to
make the user’s threshold to seek help low enough, and
to enable them to help themselves
• Help and demonstration as speciﬁc as possible
• Content in logical units which are easily distinguishable
from each other
• Information about where in the hierarchy a user currently
is, the so-called bread crumb trail
• Responsive user interface, with hints for content and
functionality, such as so-called tooltips or other hovering
effects on buttons, links, and other page elements, con-
tinuation dots for listing extracts, dynamic mouse pointer
form depending on the underlying content, preﬁlled text
input ﬁelds, etc.
• Classiﬁcation of large amounts of data with regard to
several criteria, with pointers for each classiﬁcation, to
let the user make the preferred mental connection
• Personalized content and functionality in terms of user
proﬁles and sessions, which is essential for functionality
like the user’s “most used services”, “services used last
time”, and “self-chosen services”, as well as state of visit,
in terms of data like recognized user name and date and
time of last visit
• Ability to search the entire site in an intelligent manner in
order to quickly ﬁnd exactly the information or resource
the user has been looking for, for those who prefer to
search rather than to navigate
• A 2-step method concerning the user’s approach to large
quanta of information is often helpful, where a simpliﬁed
view should be the default option, from which a link to
the high-level, i.e., complex, view should be provided
• A personalized “latest news” section, giving service status
information, and an update on changes since the last visit
and on current important issues
• Avoidance of lengthy scrolling, rather provision of links
to additional content
• Links leading to content on the same site should be
opened in the same window/tab as the current page. The
user should be informed before opening new windows or
tabs with content on external sites
C. Focus and attention span
Attention span refers to the ability to focus on what is
important at a particular point in time, and to be able to keep
that focus during a longer time period. Similar aspects are
one’s concentration ability and distractibility.
The design principles identiﬁed to accommodate attention
span deﬁcits include the following items.
• Only content relevant in a given context, in particular no
display of grayed out, irrelevant content
• Use of static page elements, and avoidance of ﬂashing
and scrolling elements
• Visual cues to draw the user’s attention, such as high-
lighting the active input ﬁeld
• Larger processes split up into smaller logical chunks, each
of which can be solved with a low attention span
• Consistent layout and page structure in order not to
distract the user
• Modiﬁcations of the page after it has ﬁnished loading not
too far away from the center of the page to gain the user’s
attention
• Avoidance of long durations of timed media, such as an
audio clip or a video
D. Memory
Memory difﬁculties in general denotes the user’s ability to
recall what has been learned over time. Any memorizing type
can be affected, such as working memory, and short-term and
long-term memory. Important design principles accounting for
these challenges are listed subsequently.
307
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

• Larger processes split up into several logical units/tasks,
each of which as brief and simple as possible, according
to the Divide-and-Conquer principle
• Reminders concerning the overall context (e.g., “You
want to ﬁll out a tax form”), and explanation of the
particular context (“Therefore you have to login”)
• Information about the progress for a particular task, possi-
bly giving it a title as well (“Step 1 of 2: Login method”),
and proper instructions for what has currently to be done,
(“Choose how to login”) and what the requirements are
(“You will need ...”)
• Easy navigation within the process in order to give the
user the possibility to go to arbitrary parts of it and to
acquire information herself, for example by means of
navigation buttons, tabs, or a breadcrumb trail
• Sufﬁciently short play-back of timed media, depending
on the content
E. Visual comprehension
Some cognitive impairments cause difﬁculties in processing
visual information. This demands for the following non-
exclusive list of design principles.
• Use of several modalities to convey a particular message,
leaving it to the user to choose the form that best ﬁts her
needs. Typical examples of modality sets are {text, still
image/graphic} and {text, audio/voice}
• Complementing of still images with offering animations
or video, and vice versa, i.e., offering the modality sets
{text, graphic, image animation} and {text, still image,
slide show, video}
• Voice accompanying a video for improved understanding
ability, as voice accompanying the visuals in a video
decreases the time needed for understanding
• Presentation of video content (and accompanying voice)
in a sufﬁciently calm manner to give users the time to
process the information given
• Screencasts showing a small region of interest instead of
the entire screen to allow users to differentiate between
the video and the actual page
For a discussion of instructions videos, it is referred to
Section IX.
VII. BENEFITS FOR OTHER USER GROUPS
Despite the fact that measures for different intellectual
deﬁcits sometimes have to be balanced against each other, in
general not only a particular target group beneﬁts from certain
design principles but rather the vast majority of users.
For instance, the set of design principles for an individual
with visual impairments greatly overlaps with the sets for those
with language and text difﬁculties and for those with visual
comprehension deﬁciencies. Next, the group of computer
novices shares a considerable number of design measures with
users known to have learning and problem solving deﬁcits.
Computer novices are likely to have a limited amount of web
skills for problem solving and at the same time are untrained
regarding the speciﬁc problem. This leads to situations where
a user is overwhelmed by the technological challenge and
therefore lacks the ability to keep the overview, and to focus
on what is important in the process.
Tired users typically lack the ability to concentrate over
longer periods of time, so they can be categorized as having
attention span impairments. Another example is elderly people
who sometimes suffer from loss of short-term memory and
may have poor concentration skills. This is a compound
functional problem consisting of memory and attention span
deﬁcits. Finally, even expert users and people with good web
skills may be facing challenges when they — being in a new
situation — are untrained for a particular task.
To sum up, the majority of design principles for a user group
with intellectual impairments helps other user groups as well,
and they often are useful for almost any user. This result is
consistent with other recent research [25]. After all, a user’s
cognitive abilities vary over time and typically depend on a
particular situation. For instance, consider the situation of a
car driver who must not let the eyes off the trafﬁc. Any text
message must thus be read out loud to him, which corresponds
to the impairment blindness.
VIII. PROTOTYPE
The ﬁnal login prototype comprises a number of pages,
including pages covering various login methods, a new portal
page, a personalized “My Page”, and a page demonstrating
screencast technology. A screenshot of the ﬁrst step during
the login process is shown in Figure 3.
All pages and all page elements were checked (manually)
throughout the design process against all parts of the design
guidelines to ensure the inclusive result. And as already
mentioned, there were several iterative cycles in which the
requirements speciﬁcation and consequently the page design
were improved by the feedback from the evaluation phases.
It can be seen that all points of criticism, as expressed in
Section IV, have been addressed.
1) Only relevant content is shown.
2) The list of options has to been cut down from 7 options
to 4, while the remaining alternatives are “hidden” in a
drop-down element
3) The security icon has been removed entirely; instead, a
link to more exhaustive security information is provided
(in the right-hand “assistance” box). Also, the status bar
(on top of the page) displays security information, such
as ’insecure connection’
4) The login process has been split up into 2 steps/pages
(of which only the ﬁrst is shown in Figure 3); one where
the login method has to be chosen, and another one with
the main login part (which depends on the choice in step
1)
308
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 3.
Screenshot of the prototype’s ﬁrst step out of two of the login process
The example illustrates also a number of other design
principles as well, such as the use of symbols/icons for fast
comprehension, buttons for quick navigation, easily separable
blocks of content, etc. User with orientation difﬁculties in
addition to low vision will beneﬁt from a ﬂuid/ﬂexible page
layout where the page elements stay approximately in place
compared to each other when zooming into the page, i.e.,
when increasing font and image dimensions. This is also
an advantage when the user has a screen with only small
dimensions available. Figure 4 shows a combination of both
implications.
The prototype also includes a user-speciﬁc personalized
page which matches the “My page” of today’s solution as
mentioned in Section IV. A screenshot of this page is given
in Figure 5. In the prototype, we have addressed all issues
encountered previously, including the following.
1) Now there is a “clean” and simple page structure with
blocks of content which are easily distinguishable.
2) All content irrelevant in the given context has been
removed. Each content block is summarized by a concise
title. Icons are additionally used to convey the meaning
of associated text.
IX. INSTRUCTION VIDEOS
During the building of the prototype, there was a high focus
on multimodality to improve user interface and experience of
the old solution. This involved in particular the use of instruc-
tion videos or so-called screencasts, where an example user
shows and tells how to solve certain problems, e.g., the task of
logging in, by means of screen and voice recordings. Various
versions of screencasts were tested in several development
cycles with hearing impaired / deaf and in particular elderly
individuals in a subproject [26], and the design principles
found regarding cognitive deﬁcits are the following.
• Subtitles and boxes with help texts not to far off the
screen’s middle to catch the user’s attention, and easily
distinguishable from the video content
• Marker / colored area around the cursor to draw the user’s
focus
• Particular regions of interest marked with for instance red
color
• The page with the screencast opening in the same
tab/window, and links for navigating back from the
screencasts
A number of other principles, e.g., “textual” (Section VI-A)
for text and subtitles, “memory” (Section VI-D) for length of
the video, and “visual” (Section VI-E) for the region of interest
apply as well for screencasts. Other principles found mainly
address the needs of people with sensory (visual) deﬁcits. They
are listed here for completion purposes.
• Yellow foreground on black background gives the best
visibility of text and image objects
• Offering of a variety of voice presentation concerning a
309
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 5.
Screenshot of the prototype’s personalized “My page”
speaker’s gender, pronunciation, and dialect
Another important ﬁnding is that the majority of users had
problems interacting with the (Flash) media player. I.e., a large
number of users was unable to play a video, stop it, replay it
if needed, invoke and leave again full-screen mode, etc. One
conclusion is that the controls of the media player remain to be
hinders in particular for people with cognitive challenges. As
the focus of the implementation was on open technologies like
international web standards, it has been viewed as outside the
scope of the project to modify the proprietary code of Adobe’s
Flash media player.
X. DISCUSSION
Concerning the development of static and dynamic web
pages, the remedy is to consider intellectual impairments
throughout the entire design chain for the system to be built,
consisting of
• requirements formulation,
• system architecture and design,
• implementation and integration, and
• testing, evaluation, and veriﬁcation.
The aim must be to build cognitively accessible solutions, to
give users the possibility to participate in the technological
progress, and to achieve a stronger market impact of the
product or service.
Next, the complexity and heterogeneity of the group labelled
cognitively impaired must not be underestimated. As we have
seen, cognitive impairments can arise in several ways, and they
can affect many aspects of human function. However, some
impairments affect only some functions, not others. This has
consequences for the design of ICT for these groups. We ﬁnd
that our results correspond with [27] who underscores in a sur-
vey of the research in the ﬁeld, that “one size does not ﬁt all”.
For example, the principle of simplicity can be recommended
on a general level, as we know from other research that most
users disapprove complex web pages. However, when applied
to speciﬁc groups in speciﬁc contexts, we will ﬁnd that a
feature or interface solution that one user may ﬁnd simple,
would be too difﬁcult for another. Accordingly, we must avoid
deﬁning “simplicity” in general terms and instead understand
it in terms of the cognitive skills and capabilities of the actual
user and user groups.
Likewise, when it comes to practical interface design, “most
users do better with wider interfaces, but some may do better
with narrower interfaces” [27]. We must therefore be careful
in the formulation of design recommendations to account for
the diversity all user groups. This is particularly pertinent
for the development of universally designed solutions where
there must be an increased focus on utilizing the potential for
developing ﬂexible, personalized, and customized solutions.
Successful solutions of the future must be adapted to the
individual needs and capabilities of each single user. Actual ac-
cessibility and usability cannot be reduced to speciﬁc features
and interface affordances. Our list of recommended design
principles is hence not exhaustive and must be applied within
an appropriate framework that provides individualization and
personalization.
310
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 4.
Screenshot of the prototype’s login process with narrow page
dimensions and a zoom factor of ca. 150%
XI. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
The login process of an existing website has been made
more accessible and usable concerning users with intellec-
tual deﬁciencies, and in particular with linguistic, learning
and problem solving, focus and attention span, memory, and
visual-comprehension challenges in mind. Additionally, and in
contrast to other work, the topic orientation problems has been
addressed.
A number of generic accessibility principles was derived for
each deﬁciency, and these principles were implemented in the
improved login solution. This work aims hence at basing the
heuristics and educated guesses typically given in the literature
on concrete examples. The prototype has undergone several
iterations with various testing, including personas, experts, and
user feedback. The ﬁnal testing results show that the prototype
provides a solution which suits the needs of the target group
much better than today’s solution.
Concerning future work, future international standards/re-
commendations should reﬂect the knowledge about cognitive
deﬁcits and technical remedies regarding static and dynamic
web pages in their technical recommendations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to express their gratitude to Riitta Hellman
and Gro Marit Rødevand, both with Karde AS, Norway, for
their contributions in all associated projects.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Halbach, “Towards cognitively accessible web pages,” in Proceedings
of International Conferences on Advances in Computer-Human Interac-
tions (ACHI).
St. Maarten (Netherlands Antilles): IARIA, Feb. 2010.
[2] D. Braddock, R. Hemp, and M. Rizzolo, The state of the states in
developmental disabilities: 2008.
Washington (DC, USA): American
Association Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities, 2008.
[3] M. R. Lightner and D. Erdogmus, “Signal processing challenges in cog-
nitive assistive technology,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 25,
no. 5, pp. 103–108, Sep. 2008.
[4] Altinn, “Altinn — Simpliﬁed electronic dialogue,” 2009, last accessed:
2011-01-20. [Online]. Available: http://altinn.no/
[5] Norwegian Computing Center, Apr. 2009, last accessed: 2011-01-20.
[Online]. Available: http://www.nr.no/pages/dart/project ﬂyer unimod
[6] L.
Udjus,
“Gjør
døren
høy
—
gjør
porten
vid,”
Stat
&
Styring, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 20–22, 2007, last accessed: 2011-01-
20; in Norwegian. [Online]. Available: http://www.karde.no/Lasses%
20artikkel%20i%20Stat%20og%20Styring%202007.pdf
[7] WebAIM,
“Cognitive
disabilities
part
2:
Conceptualizing
design
considerations,” 2010, last accessed: 2011-01-20. [Online]. Available:
http://webaim.org/articles/cognitive/design/
[8] L. Lines, Y. Patel, and K. Hone, “Online form design: Older adults’ ac-
cess to housing and welfare services,” in HCI and the Older Population
Workshop, Leeds (UK), Sep. 2004, pp. 21–22.
[9] K. Pernice and J. Nielsen, “Beyond ALT text: Making the web
easy to use for users with disabilities,” Nielsen Norman Group,
Tech. Rep., 2001, last accessed: 2011-01-20. [Online]. Available:
http://www.nngroup.com/reports/accessibility/beyond ALT text.pdf
[10] M. Laff and M. Rissenberg, “Cognitive ability measures for accessible
web content,” Universal Acess in Human Computer Interaction. Coping
with Diversity, vol. 4554/2007, pp. 722–730, 2007, last accessed:
2011-01-20. [Online]. Available: http://www.springerlink.com/content/
k8340l8137t41705/fulltext.pdf
[11] eGovernment
Resource
Centre,
“Creating
sites
accessible
to
people with cognitive disabilities,” 2009, last accessed: 2011-01-
20. [Online]. Available: http://www.egov.vic.gov.au/index.php?env=-
innews/detail:m2754-1-1-8-s-0:n-1366-1-0--
[12] Access
Computing,
“How
can
web
pages
be
made
accessible
to
individuals
who
have
cognitive
disabilities?”
2009,
last
accessed:
2011-01-20.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.washington.
edu/accesscomputing/articles?358
[13] WebAIM, “Cognitive disabilities part 1: We still know too little, and
we do even less,” 2009, last accessed: 2011-01-20. [Online]. Available:
http://www.webaim.org/articles/cognitive/cognitive too little/
[14] R. Hudson, R. Weakley, and P. Firminger, “An accessibility frontier:
Cognitive disabilities and learning difﬁculties,” 2009, last accessed:
2011-01-20. [Online]. Available: http://www.usability.com.au/resources/
cognitive.cfm
[15] ——, “Developing sites for users with cognitive disabilities and
learning
difﬁculties,”
2009,
last
accessed:
2011-01-20.
[Online].
Available: http://juicystudio.com/article/cognitive-impairment.php
[16] Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 1.0, World Wide Web Consortium
(W3C) Std., May 1999, last accessed: 2011-01-20. [Online]. Available:
http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG10/
311
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[17] Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0, World Wide
Web Consortium (W3C) Std., Dec. 2008, last accessed: 2011-01-20.
[Online]. Available: http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/
[18] L. Seeman et al., “Formal objection to wcag 2.0,” 2006, last
accessed: 2011-01-20. [Online]. Available: http://lists.w3.org/Archives/
Public/w3c-wai-gl/2006AprJun/0368.html
[19] T.
Halbach,
R.
Hellman,
G.
M.
Rødevand,
and
I.
Solheim,
“Utformingsveileder for kognitiv tilgjengelighet av elektroniske tjenester
og innhold,” Feb. 2010, last accessed: 2011-01-20. [Online]. Available:
http://iktforalle.no/
[20] E. Gabrielsen, “IALS/SIALS-prosjektet,” SLF-info, Jun. 2000, in Nor-
wegian.
[21] WebAIM, “Cognitive disabilities,” 2009, last accessed: 2011-01-20.
[Online]. Available: http://www.webaim.org/articles/cognitive/
[22] A. D. Shaikh, “The effects of line length on reading online news,”
Usability News, vol. 7, no. 2, Jul. 2005, last accessed: 2011-01-20.
[Online]. Available: http://psychology.wichita.edu/surl/usabilitynews/72/
LineLength.asp
[23] R. Dhamija and L. Dusseault, “The seven ﬂaws of identity management:
Usability and security challenges,” IEEE Security & Privacy, vol. 6,
no. 2, pp. 24–29, 2008.
[24] T. Leithead, “Handling script errors from three different perspectives,”
The Windows Internet Explorer Weblog, Apr. 2009, last accessed: 2011-
01-20.
[25] W.
Quesenbery,
“Usable
accessibility:
Making
web
sites
work
well
for
people
with
disabilities,”
Feb.
2009,
last
accessed:
2011-01-20.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.uxmatters.com/mt/archives/2009/02/usable-accessibility-
making-web-sites-work-well-for-people-with-disabilities.php
[26] I. Haugan, T. Olsen, and P. J. Blakstad, “Multimedial opplæring,”
Master’s thesis, Høgskolen i Oslo, May 2009.
[27] C. Lewis, “Simplicity in cognitive assistive technology: A framework
and agenda for research,” Universal Access in the Information Society,
vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 351–361, 2006, last accessed: 2011-01-20. [Online].
Available: http://www.springerlink.com/content/1615-5289/5/4/
312
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 3 no 3 & 4, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

