GTS Attack: An IEEE 802.15.4 MAC Layer Attack
in Wireless Sensor Networks
Radosveta Sokullu
Dept. of Electrical and Electronics Eng.
Ege University
Izmir, Turkey
radosveta.sokullu@ege.edu.tr
Ilker Korkmaz
Dept. of Computer Eng.
Izmir University of Economics
Izmir, Turkey
ilker.korkmaz@ieu.edu.tr
Orhan Dagdeviren
Dept. of Computer Eng.
Izmir Institute of Technology
Izmir, Turkey
orhandagdeviren@iyte.edu.tr
Abstract—In the last several years IEEE 802.15.4 has been
accepted as the major MAC layer protocol for wireless sensor
networks (WSNs). It has attracted the interest of the research
community involved in security issues because the increased
range of application scenarios brings out new possibilities for
misuse and taking improper advantage of sensor nodes and
their operation. As these nodes are very resource restrained such
possible attacks and their early detection must be carefully con-
sidered. This paper surveys the known attacks on wireless sensor
networks, identiﬁes and investigates a new attack, Guaranteed
Time Slot (GTS) attack, taking as a basis the IEEE 802.15.4 MAC
protocol for WSN. The GTS Attack is simulated with different
scenarios using ns-2 and the results are evaluated both from the
point of view of the attacked and the attacker.
Keywords—IEEE 802.15.4 MAC; wireless sensor network attacks;
Guaranteed Time Slot; GTS attack
I. INTRODUCTION
Through the developments on micro electro-mechanical sys-
tems (MEMS) to be used as sensor devices [2], many ad-hoc
network researchers have been focusing on Wireless Sensor
Networks (WSNs). WSNs have many potential applications
[3]–[7]. In the ubiquitous environment, WSNs enhanced with
actuator capabilities can materialize the interface between
people and the environment by establishing a context for a
great variety of applications ranging from environmental mon-
itoring to assisted living and emergency measures. In many of
these scenarios, WSNs are of interest to adversaries and are
easily prone to attacks as they are usually deployed in open
and unrestricted environments. In many cases single nodes
might be unattended and can be even physically destroyed
or reprogrammed to work in a way different than their usual
operations.
An attack on a WSN in general is deﬁned as a defective
action on the efﬁcient operation of the whole system or a
malicious invasion on a speciﬁc part of the network [11].
The attacker, as Wood et. al. [8] adapted from the National
Information Systems Security Glossary [9], is mainly the
originator of an attack and is used synonymously with the
term adversary. The attacker can be an adversary within the
network that attacks with the aim of damaging some nodes
or gaining more selﬁsh beneﬁts on the provided services than
the other legitimate users of the WSN. On the other hand the
attacker may exploit protocol weaknesses to obtain network
resources to his own beneﬁt by depriving others or may
simply try to cause disrupt in the operation of the network.
The basic feature of attacks and misbehavior strategies is
that they are entirely unpredictable [12]. Early deﬁnition and
investigation of possible attacks and misbehavior patterns can
provide valuable insight into reliable and timely detection
which is a main prerequisite for ensuring proper operation and
minimization of performance losses in WSNs. These issues
motivated us to research on WSN attacks. Our goals are to
survey the important WSN attacks categorized according to
their target layers and to identify possible new attack types.
This paper extends the work in [1] and dissects the Guaran-
teed Time Slot (GTS) attack. The sequence of communication
for realizing a GTS attack is presented, four different possible
attack scenarios are deﬁned and their ns-2 implementation
results are presented and evaluated. From here on the paper
is organized as follows: Section II covers the related work on
attacks in WSN and their deﬁnitions, Section III discusses
the IEEE 802.15.4 MAC layer security issues and Section
IV identiﬁes the new attack and presents the evaluation from
the point of view of the attacker and the attacked taking
into consideration both incurred damage and related energy
consumption. Finally Section V concludes the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
The known attacks in IEEE 802.15.4 WSNs can be classi-
ﬁed into different categories according to different taxonom-
ical representations. In this section the attacks for wireless
sensor networks are categorized with regards to the different
OSI layers whose operation and functions are attacked, de-
stroyed or damaged. Chan et. al. [13] made this categorization
mainly based on physical layer attacks, MAC layer attacks,
and routing layer attacks; in addition to this, Raymond et. al.
[14] has surveyed the denial-of-service attacks based on all
protocol layers including transport and application layers.
A. Physical Layer Attacks
Physical layer attacks cover mainly the radio jamming or
signal jamming modiﬁcations aiming to corrupt the commu-
nication within the channel due to frequency interferences.
If jamming is carried out by emitting just signals instead of
104
International Journal On Advances in Internet Technology, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/

sending packets, it is called radio jamming at the physical
layer.
Another physical layer attack is node tampering [8], [14],
[15]. An attacker, who has a physical direct access to the
nodes, may tamper with the nodes. In this way, the attacker can
interrogate a node’s memory, can capture private information
including the cryptographic data, can compromise the node’s
function, or can totally destruct the hardware [8], [14], [15].
Regarding the physical security concerns including physical
accesses to sensor nodes or other network resources, wireless
sensor networks are very vulnerable. Since sensor nodes are
generally distributed in a wide area or are used in great num-
bers to realize a fault tolerant application, destructive physical
accessibility to some single sensors, due to its perceivability,
is not considered as very harmful for the whole network
operation.
B. MAC Layer Attacks
MAC layer attacks have attracted a lot of interest and
there are a number of studies in this respect [11], [12],
[17], [29]. IEEE 802.15.4 MAC layer attacks target the data
link layer speciﬁcations to achieve mainly denial of service
(DoS). Attackers generally aim to disrupt the speciﬁed IEEE
802.15.4 procedures for channel use or to consume the chan-
nel resources unfairly through modifying the IEEE 802.15.4
protocol deﬁnitions in a selﬁsh and malicious manner. In
the following we present a brief description of some IEEE
802.15.4 MAC layer attack types.
Jamming is basically constructing radio interference to
cause a DoS on transmitting or receiving nodes. Xu et. al.
[18] classiﬁed the jammers as constant, deceptive, random,
and reactive according to their radio jamming strategies. Link
layer jamming is fundamentally creating collision at the link
layer by jamming packets rather than signals. An intelligent
jammer that knows the link layer protocol logics intentionally
misinterprets the channel use rules to deprive the legitimate
users from gaining access to the medium. Rather than a blind
jammer that emits signals or useless packets randomly without
knowing the protocol logics, an intelligent jammer, from the
point of the energy usage, aims to attack at speciﬁc times to
preserve its energy [19]. Back-off manipulation is deﬁned as
selﬁshly and constantly choosing a small back-off interval in
IEEE 802.11 Distributed Coordination Function (DCF) rather
than applying the rules of the protocol for choosing a random
back-off period [17]. Back-off manipulation is applicable
to both IEEE 802.11 wireless networks and IEEE 802.15.4
wireless sensor networks due to their similar CSMA-CA based
protocols. Same-nonce attack is related to the access control
lists (ACL) identifying the nodes that data can be received
from [20]. In order to be used in an encrypted transmission,
ACL entry includes the destination address, the key, the
nonce and option ﬁelds. If the sender uses the same key and
nonce pairs within two transmissions, an adversary obtaining
those ciphertexts may retrieve useful information [21]. Replay-
protection attack targets the replay protection mechanism
provided in IEEE 802.15.4 speciﬁcation. This mechanism is
used to accept a frame by checking whether the counter of the
recent message is larger than the previous one. If an adversary
sends many frames with large counters to a legitimate node,
the legitimate user using the replay protection mechanism
will reject the legitimate frames with small counters from
other nodes [20]. ACK attack [20] can be accomplished by
eavesdropping the channel. An eavesdropper, ﬁrstly, may block
the receiver node from taking the transmitted packet, then, can
mislead the sender node by sending a fake ACK that it comes
from the receiver. PANId conﬂict attack [11] creates a fake
conﬂict within a Personal Area Network (PAN). The members
of a PAN know the PAN coordinator’s identiﬁer (PANId).
If there exist more than one PAN coordinator operating in
same Personal Operating System (POS), a PANId conﬂict
occurs [10]. An adversary may send fake PANId conﬂict
notiﬁcation messages to PAN coordinator in order to make
PAN coordinator execute conﬂict resolution procedure, which
delays the communication between the PAN coordinator and
the legitimate nodes [11].
C. Routing Layer Attacks
Routing layer attacks are usually designed to hinder the
route selection mechanism or routing strategy. A routing layer
attacker possibly attacks the operation at the network layer at
route discovery time, or at route selection time, or after the
establishment of the routes [29]. For a wireless sensor network,
an example of a routing layer attack on the route discovery
process is the fake route information attack, which provides
incorrect routing data to the network [22]. Some attacks on
routing selection processes are i.) HELLO ﬂood attack [23]
in which the receiving node is convinced that the attacker is
within one-hop transmission range when in fact the attacker
is carrying out high-power transmission and is far away, ii.)
sinkhole attack [23]that convinces the attacker’s neighboring
nodes to forward their packets through the attacker, iii.)
wormhole attack [24], realized by at least two negotiating
attackers using tunneling the packets through a low-delay
path established between them to fool the legitimate users for
relaying the packets earlier, iv.) sybil attack [25] in which the
attacker provides more than one different identiﬁcations to the
network in order to increase his probability of being selected
on many routes. An example of the attacks on established
routes is blackhole attack [26] causing the node to drop all or
selectively some received packets. More details about routing
layer attack types can be found in [22].
D. Transport Layer Attacks
According to the OSI protocol functions, transport layer
provides the data transfer through the management of end-
to-end connections. In this manner, Wood et. al. [8] describe
the ﬂooding and the desynchronization approaches as two
important denial of service attacks.
Based on the classical TCP SYN ﬂood [27] approach, an
attacker may send many connection requests to a legitimate
node.The node’s resources, mainly its memory, shall be con-
105
International Journal On Advances in Internet Technology, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/

sumed to maintain those unnecessary connections unless there
is a defense mechanism speciﬁed in the protocol.
An active connection established between two legitimate
nodes can be deteriorated by the desynchronization attack
[8]. An attacker listening to the connection between two end
points can forge messages to either of them in order to make
the receiver node request retransmission of related messages
from the sender. If the attacker can attack the messages
carrying connection speciﬁc control data at proper times, the
synchronization between the two end points might be lost.
E. Application Layer Attacks
An interesting case for the application speciﬁc sensor net-
works are the attacks targeting the application itself, including
the application data as well as the privacy concerns of the
nodes/devices participating in the application. The wireless
sensor network attacks targeted at the application layer may be
viewed in many and various aspects as the sensor applications
constitute a very large variety, from environmental monitoring
to medical, military and target tracking applications. Among
those attacks, Raymond et. al. [14] discussed the overwhelming
attack and the path-based DoS attack, which aim denial of
service.
The overwhelming attack is related to event-based monitor-
ing applications, such as motion detection, in which sensors
trigger an action upon detection of an event. An attacker or
a group of attackers may try to overwhelm the sensor nodes,
which will cause the network to forward a huge amount of
trafﬁc to the sink [14].
A path-based DoS attack [28] feeds some replayed packets
into the network at the leaf nodes. Through the forwarding
of these packets to the sink node, valuable network resources,
mainly the bandwidth, would be consumed. The attacker may
also decrease the lifetime of the network by making the nodes
consume energy via forwarding irrelevant relayed packets.
Furthermore, other attacks can also be constructed within
application speciﬁc sensor network scenarios. Therefore, var-
ious attack types can be modiﬁed and specialized to the
network application area. In relation to this issue, Misic et. al.
[29], for example, analyzed some possible security attacks on
healthcare related WSNs, whose sensors are usually deployed
on the patients’ body.
Figure 1 summarizes above mentioned sensor network at-
tacks with their target protocol layers.
III. IEEE 802.15.4 SECURITY
In this section some details on security requirements and
security modes of IEEE 802.15.4 MAC layer are presented.
A. Requirements
Access control, conﬁdentiality, frame integrity, sequential
freshness are the four security requirements speciﬁed for IEEE
802.15.4 [20]. Deﬁnitions and additional explanations are
brieﬂy presented below:
• Access Control: Legitimate nodes must be protected from
frames of unauthorized nodes. This security requirement
is achieved by maintaining an ACL of valid devices [20].
Fig. 1.
Sensor network attacks and target layers.
• Frame Conﬁdentiality: To make information conﬁdential,
only the legitimate nodes must share the secret informa-
tion [21]. This is done by encryption. Only the legitimate
devices that share the secret key can decrypt frames for
communication.
• Frame Integrity: The frames generated by legitimate
nodes must not be manipulated by adversary nodes. The
frame integrity is provided by message authentication
code (MAC).
• Sequential Freshness: Legitimate nodes must not accept
old messages (previously replayed). A simple message
counter is provided to ensure sequential freshness.
More details on these deﬁnitions and requirements can be
found in [20], [21].
B. Modes
There are three security modes to cover the security require-
ments of different types of application [20]. An ACL includes
multiple entries. Each entry is composed of an address (source,
destination), a security suit, a shared key, a last initial vector,
and a replay counter. The last initial vector is used by the
source, while the replay counter is used by the destination for
sequential freshness. The modes are listed as follows:
• Unsecured Mode: In this mode, no security service is
provided. It is used for low cost applications that do not
require any security.
• ACL Mode: In ACL mode, each node maintains its ACL.
In this mode, devices only receive message from those
devices in its ACL. No other cryptographic protection is
provided.
• Secured Mode: All the security requirements (access con-
trol, frame conﬁdentiality, frame integrity and sequential
freshness) are provided in this mode according to deﬁned
security suits. It uses all the ﬁelds in the ACL entry
format. According to [20], [21], the security suits are
summarized in Figure 2.
106
International Journal On Advances in Internet Technology, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/

Fig. 2.
Security suits.
IV. GTS ATTACK
This section explains the use of Guaranteed Time Slots in
WSN communication. After introducing the communication
sequences of GTS allocation and deallocation schemes, the
section identiﬁes GTS attack through illustrating various sce-
narios. Besides the attacks stated in Section II, our GTS attack
scenarios contribute WSN attack literature as categorized in
MAC layer attack type.
A. Guaranteed Time Slots of IEEE 802.15.4 MAC Layer
In IEEE 802.15.4 MAC Standards, a superframe structure is
allowed to manage the services with and without contention.
The superframe is managed by the PAN coordinator. The IEEE
802.15.4 generic superframe structure is shown in Figure 3
[10]. The PAN coordinator sends BEACON messages at the
beginning of each superframe thus the superframe interval
is also called the beacon interval. Each BEACON message
includes the network identiﬁer, beacon periodicity and su-
perframe structure in order to help other network devices to
synchronize. The superframe is divided into 16 slots as shown
in Figure 3. The network devices communicate with the PAN
coordinator in the superframe interval. This duration is called
contention access period (CAP) for the generic superframe
shown in the ﬁgure.
The structure of the superframe can be conﬁgured by the
PAN coordinator to meet the needs of various applications. For
nodes running applications with relaxed latency requirements,
the superframe can be partitioned into active and inactive
portions as shown in Figure 4. The nodes sleep in the inactive
portion. The length of the active and inactive portions are
determined in accordance with the application’s requirements.
The inactive portion of the superfame prevents idle listening
thus helps preserving the energy of the battery constrained
nodes.
According to the IEEE 802.15.4 standards the PAN coor-
dinator can assign dedicated slots to one or more separate
network devices [10]. A slot assigned by the coordinator
for communication only with a given device is deﬁned as a
Guaranteed Time Slot (GTS). GTSs support applications with
particular bandwidth requirements or ones with relax latency
requirements. Each GTS can contain a single or an integer
multiple of time slots each one being equal to 1/16 of the
beacon interval. The superframe structure with the contention
free period (CFP), which includes GTSs is shown in Figure
5. There are 7 slots provided for GTS transmission in CFP of
the superframe. GTSs are located after the CAP.
A device must track beacons in order to request and get an
allocation for a GTS. The PAN coordinator decides whether
to accept a GTS allocation request of a device and may
give more than one slot if there are available slots. The
GTS allocation policy is ﬁrst-come-ﬁrst serve. Figure 6 shows
the usual communication sequence of a GTS slot allocation
procedure.
First of all, the node must receive the beacon successfully
in order to synchronize with the coordinator. After receiving
the beacon, the node can communicate with the coordinator in
CAP. Secondly, the node sends a GTS Allocation request to
the PAN coordinator. The GTS request message includes the
length and the direction. The GTS direction can be deﬁned
as either transmit or receive. On receipt of this command, the
PAN coordinator may send an ACK to indicate the successful
reception of the GTS request. Then, the PAN coordinator
checks for available slots in the current superframe within
aGTSDescPersistenceTime superframes time. If there are avail-
able slots, new GTS information is included in the following
beacon. The GTS requesting node receives the beacon and
extracts the GTS transmission time if it is inserted by the PAN
coordinator. In this case, the GTS transmission is successfully
achieved as seen in Figure 6. If no GTS descriptor is found
in the superframe, the node notiﬁes the next upper layer of
failure. The device can deallocate its GTS in the same way as
shown in Figure 7.
The above mentioned GTS management including request,
allocation and deallocation is based on the IEEE 802.15.4
explicit procedure/algorithm [10]. In addition to this proce-
dure, some modiﬁed GTS allocation schemes have also been
proposed. Ji et. al. [30] proposed an efﬁcient GTS allocation
algorithm for IEEE 802.15.4 that is capable of trafﬁc analysis.
Their GTS allocation scheme is based on packet arrival rate
and number of devices in the network. When devices are
transmitting, the ones with the higher packet transmission
rate can cause more collisions and longer delay compared
to the ones with the lower rate. So, their scheme allocates
the GTS slots to devices with the higher packet rates. The
proposed GTS algorithm also takes into consideration the
number of nodes because there are at the most 7 GTS slots
available for allocation. Ji et. al. [30] constructed a 17-
node IEEE 802.15.4 star topology in order to compare their
proposed GTS allocation mechanism with the standard one.
107
International Journal On Advances in Internet Technology, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/

2 3
4 5
6
7
8
10 11 12 13 14 15
1
9
0
BEACON
CAP
Fig. 3.
IEEE 802.15.4 generic superframe structure.
2 3
4 5
6
7
8
10 11 12 13 14 15
1
9
0
BEACON
BEACON
Active
Inactive
Fig. 4.
IEEE 802.15.4 Superframe structure with active and inactive portions.
2 3
4 5
6
7
8
10 11 12 13 14 15
1
9
CAP
CFP
0
BEACON
Fig. 5.
IEEE 802.15.4 superframe structure with GTS.
By tracing the packet delivery rates, it is shown that their
proposed scheme achieves 16 % higher throughput than the
standard one. Additionally, the amount of dropped packets
caused by collisions is decreased signiﬁcantly. By tuning the
algorithm’s parameters, they reach a 18 % improvement on
average throughput.
One of the basic disadvantage of the standard GTS manage-
ment scheme is that the number of nodes having GTS slots is
limited to 7. So, the GTS slots can be quickly consumed by a
few number of nodes and devices with low data rates can cause
the underutilization of the GTS resources. To overcome these
problems, Koubaa et. al. [31], [32] proposed a GTS allocation
approach, which is based on the idea that a slot can be
used by more than one node. By considering the arrangement
of GTS request arrivals with trafﬁc speciﬁcations and the
delay parameters, their algorithm makes a decision about
the slot sharing policy among the nodes sending requests.
They provide a kind of round-robin scheduling mechanism
to prevent starvation, however they indicate that some modi-
ﬁed scheduling schemes can be used. They implemented the
proposed GTS algorithm with nesC on micaZ platforms. Their
experimental test bed includes 1 PAN coordinator and 7 motes
which are located within the transmission range of the PAN
coordinator. The experiment results show that this implicit
GTS management mechanism, i-GAME, is more efﬁcient in
bandwidth utilization than the explicit one deﬁned in IEEE
802.15.4 standard.
B. Identiﬁed GTS attack
As described in [1], GTS attack is based on the inherent
properties of the IEEE 802.15.4 superframe organization in
beacon-enabled operational mode for WSNs. GTS slots create
a vulnerable point which can allow an attacker to disrupt the
communication between a device and its PAN coordinator. A
possible attack scenario using the GTS interval is illustrated in
Figure 8. Assume that all the nodes as well as the adversary,
which is an intelligent attacker device, have achieved synchro-
nization with the coordinator by receiving beacon messages.
A legitimate node may request a GTS slot by sending a
GTS request command to the PAN coordinator including the
GTS descriptor. The PAN coordinator may respond with an
optional ACK for this GTS request. Meanwhile the coordinator
handles the GTS request. The coordinator may accept the
GTS request and allocate demanded GTS slot(s) or may reject
it. The accepted requests are announced in the following
beacon message broadcasted to all nodes. The adversary can
learn the GTS slot times by extracting the GTS descriptor(s)
from the beacon frame. After obtaining the allocated GTS
times, the adversary can create interference at any of these
moments. This interference will cause collision and corruption
of the data packets between the legitimate GTS node and the
coordinator. The collision occurring during the GTS period can
be considered as a kind of DoS paradigm since these slots are
assumed to provide collision-free communication.
C. Evaluation
We have simulated the proposed GTS attack implementation
on ns-2.31 [33]. ns-2.31 comes with IEEE 802.15.4 MAC layer
protocol in which GTS data structures are deﬁned but GTS
management methods are not implemented [34], [35]. In the
simulations, we have implemented and used the explicit GTS
management mechanism deﬁned in IEEE 802.15.4 MAC layer
standard [10].
Two types of attackers are deﬁned in the simulations:
intelligent attacker and random attacker. An intelligent attacker
aims at corrupting the communication in the GTS slot with
108
International Journal On Advances in Internet Technology, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/

Fig. 6.
Communication sequence in GTS allocation.
Fig. 7.
Communication sequence in GTS deallocation.
Fig. 8.
Communication sequence in GTS attack scenario.
maximum length in the CFP, whereas a random attacker
randomly chooses a GTS slot to be attacked. Attacking a
slot, which is allocated for communication between the PAN
coordinator and a legitimate user, can be achieved by creating
a collision through jamming or sending messages in that slot.
In our simulations, both attackers corrupt the communication
by sending a message to the coordinator at the starting time
of the selected GTS slots.
A star network with ten nodes has been simulated, of which
at most two attackers are on duty. Four types of scenarios
are deﬁned: ”one intelligent attacker” (OIA), ”one random
attacker” (ORA), ”two intelligent attackers” (TIA), and ”two
random attackers” (TRA). It is expected that, for the ORA
scenario, the adversary attacks the allocated slot of an average
length communication. In the case of TRA scenario, two
attackers may attack two different communications or may
attack the same communication, in which case the energy of
the attackers is consumed ineffectively to corrupt the same
node communication. In contrast to this, an intelligent attacker
can use its energy in a more efﬁcient manner. It can attack the
ﬁrst slot of the communication with maximum slot length thus
destroying the whole communication. For the TIA scenario,
the adversaries can cooperatively attack the nodes with one of
them attacking the maximum length communication (with the
109
International Journal On Advances in Internet Technology, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/

maximum number of slots allocated) and the other attacking
the communication with the second maximum slot length. For
this last scenario, the common goal of the attackers is to cause
maximum possible decrease in bandwidth utilization within
the CFP period. Table I summarizes the deﬁnitions of the
attack scenarios used in simulations.
TABLE I
ATTACK SCENARIOS
No
Name
Deﬁnition
1
OIA
One Intelligent Attacker
2
ORA
One Random Attacker
3
TIA
Two Intelligent Attackers
4
TRA
Two Random Attackers
In the simulations we have used the predetermined GTS
request schedule of the nodes presented in Table II. According
to this, the request of node 8, which is for 5 slots in length, can
not be granted due to the remaining capacity of 4 out of 7 CFP
slots after the reservation of 3 slots for node 7. The requests of
node 6, node 4, and node 5 are granted for the communication
within the remaining free slots sequentially. It is observed that
the accepted requests are announced in the GTS ﬁeld attribute
of the following beacons as shown in Figure 9.
TABLE II
GTS REQUEST SCHEDULE
NodeID
Request Length(slots)
Request Time(s)
7
3
25
8
5
28
6
2
31
4
1
35
5
1
40
In the attack scenario experiments, node 0 is the PAN
coordinator, nodes 1 and 2 are selected as intelligent attackers,
nodes 3 and 9 are selected as random attackers, and the rest
are the ordinary nodes. The simulation results are gathered for
60 s where the beacon interval is set to 0.98304 s. The number
of total attack messages sent, and corrupted slots for the four
different scenarios OIA, ORA, TIA and TRA respectively are
given in Table III.

(a) One Intelligent Attacker Scenario.
(b) One Random Attacker Scenario.
(c) Two Intelligent Attackers Scenario.
(d) Two Random Attackers Scenario.
Fig. 10.
The collisions on different attacker scenarios
the damaging effects of the attacker and compare the different
scenarios in the following we introduce two new variables.
The ﬁrst one, related to the attacker’s behavior, is called
corruption strength and is deﬁned as the ratio of the number
of damaged slots to the total number of slots of data. The
transmission strength on the other hand describes the node’s
behavior and is deﬁned as the ratio of the number of slots
with successfully completed transmission to the total number
of slots. The corruption strength and the transmission strength
are visualized in Figure 11. Depending on the corrupted slots
per unit time, the best scenario from the attacker’s point
of view is the TIA, the worst scenario is ORA as seen in
Figure 12. Consequently, the intelligent attack method causes
more damage to the sensor network communication than the
random attack, and cooperating attackers decrease bandwidth
utilization in CFP period more than a single attacker.
To evaluate the effectiveness of the atttacks we introduce
another parameter - the energy consumed by the attacker
for achieving a certain degree of damage. ns-2 supports the
simulation of energy use of the sensor nodes, therefore the en-
ergies of the attackers have been traced within the simulations.
Using the scenarios in Table II, the energy consumptions of
one intelligent attacker, one random attacker, two intelligent
attackers, and two random attackers during their 60-second
attack period is plotted in Figure 13. Figure 13 includes the
consumed energies of the attackers for corrupting the com-
munication slots. The energy exhaustion for each corrupted
communication is calculated and recorded at the attacker
node by subtracting the current traced energy level from their
previous values after each attack. As seen in Figure 13, the
slopes of the intelligent attackers’ energy consumption curves
are lower than the ones of the random attackers’. Therefore,
intelligent attackers consume less energy per corrupted slot
than random attackers.
Neither the intelligent attacker nor the random attacker can
be easily detected in GTS attack cases. Since the attackers
are synchronized with the PAN coordinator in a ﬁne-grained
manner, the attack messages, which reveal collisions in the
channel, cannot be received by the coordinator. Therefore,
the coordinator can not perceive the ID of the attacker.
111
International Journal On Advances in Internet Technology, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/

Fig. 11.
Transmission and corruption strength.
Fig. 12.
Corrupted slots per attack messages.
Fig. 13.
Energy consumed vs number of corrupted slots.
112
International Journal On Advances in Internet Technology, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/

However, if the synchronization between the attacker and
the PAN coordinator is not ﬁne-grained but still allowing to
communicate with a small drift in the attacker’s clock, the
adversary can emit regular packets in the GTS interval to
corrupt the communication, but is not able to synchronize
precisely with the CFP slots. This allows the coordinator to
detect the attack and extract his ID by from the source ﬁeld
of the received packets. In other cases, in which the adversary
emits jamming signals instead of regular packets or emits
regular packets with precise synchronization, GTS attack is
considered very hard to detect.
V. CONCLUSIONS
This paper investigates WSN attacks including a brief
survey of physical layer, MAC layer, routing layer, transport
layer, and application layer attacks. Furthermore, a new IEEE
802.15.4 MAC layer attack, the GTS attack [1], is deﬁned
and evaluated with respect to intelligent and random attacker
behavior scenarios.
Based on the deﬁnition of the GTS attack, a sample
communication sequence of this attack, exploring the IEEE
802.15.4 speciﬁcation, is designed. It has been shown that a
GTS attack is quite possible to realize. The implementation of
the suggested approach with different scenarios is built using
ns-2.31. To study their effects on the communication process
during the CFP periods, the number of total corrupted slots and
the number of total collisions are analyzed in various attacker
cases, and the bandwidth utilization and energy consumption
evaluations of the results are presented.
In order to numerically evaluate the effects of the different
attack scenarios two new variables, the corruption strength and
the transmission strength are introduced. It is observed that the
intelligent attacker can achieve a corruption strength of up to
78.37 % which actually means that only one quarter of the
available bandwidth is actually used for the communication
during the CFP period.
Another aspect that has been evaluated is the energy con-
sumption from the point of view of the attacker. An intelligent
GTS attacker uses the energy much more efﬁciently than a ran-
dom GTS attacker. On the whole, the intelligent attack method
causes more damage to the sensor network communication
requiring less energy from the attacker node as compared to
the random attack method.
Future work directions will focus on tunning different pa-
rameters in the GTS attack scenarios. The detection probability
will be investigated when there is a lack of ﬁne-grained
time synchronization between the PAN coordinator and the
GTS attacker. Additionally, a GTS-based application will be
simulated and analyzed under GTS attack conditions.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Sokullu, O. Dagdeviren, and I. Korkmaz, ”On the IEEE 802.15.4
MAC Layer Attacks: GTS Attack”, in Proc. of SENSORCOMM08,
2008, pp. 673-678.
[2] I. F. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. Cayirci,
”A Survey on Sensor Networks”, IEEE Communications Magazine,
vol.40, no.8, 2002, pp. 102-114.
[3] M. Kuorilehto, M. Hannikainen, and T. D. Hamalainen, ”A Survey
of Application Distribution in Wireless Sensor Networks”, EURASIP
Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking, vol.5, no.5,
2005, pp. 774-788.
[4] A. Mainwaring, J. Polastre, R. Szewczyk, D. Culler, and J. Anderson,
”Wireless Sensor Networks for Habitat Monitoring”, in Proc. of
ACM International Workshop on Wireless Sensor Networks and
Applications, 2002, pp. 88-97.
[5] E. Biagioni and K. Bridges, ”The Application of Remote Sensor
Technology to Assist the Recovery of Rare and Endangered Species”,
in Special issue on Distributed Sensor Networks for the International
Journal of High Performance Computing Applications, vol.16, no.3,
2002, pp. 315-324.
[6] L. Schwiebert, S. K. S. Gupta, and J. Weinmann, ”Research Chal-
lenges in Wireless Networks of Biomedical Sensors”, in Proc. of
Mobile Computing and Networking, 2001, pp. 151-165.
[7] M. B. Srivastava, R. R. Muntz, and M. Potkonjak, ”Smart Kinder-
garten: Sensorbased Wireless Networks for Smart Developmental
Problem-Solving Enviroments”, in Proc. of Mobile Computing and
Networking, 2001, pp. 132-138.
[8] A. D. Wood and J. A. Stankovic, ”A Taxonomy for Denial-of-
Service Attacks in Wireless Sensor Networks”, Handbook of Sensor
Networks: Compact Wireless and Wired Sensing Systems, CRC Press,
2004.
[9] Committee on National Security Systems (CNSS), National Infor-
mation Assurance Glossary, NSTISSI no.4009, 2003.
[10] IEEE
Std
802.15.4TM-2003,
IEEE
Standard
for
Information
technology-Telecommuncations
and
information
exchange
be-
tween
systems-Local
and
metropolitan
area
networks-Speciﬁc
requirements-Part 15.4: Wireless Medium Access Control (MAC)
and Physical Layer (PHY) Speciﬁcations for Low-Rate Wireless
Personal Area Networks (WPANs).
[11] R. Sokullu, I. Korkmaz, O. Dagdeviren, A. Mitseva, and N.R. Prasad,
”An Investigation on IEEE 802.15.4 MAC Layer Attacks”, in Proc.
of WPMC, 2007.
[12] S. Radosavac, J.S. Baras, and I. Koutsopoulos, ”A Framework for
MAC Layer Misbehavior Detection in Wireless Networks”, in Proc.
of the 4thACM Workshop on Wireless security, 2005, pp. 33-42.
[13] H. Chan and A. Perrig, ”Security and Privacy in Sensor Networks”,
IEEE Computer, IEEE, vol.36, no.10, 2003, pp. 103-105.
[14] D. R. Raymond and S. F. Midkiff, ”Denial-of-Service in Wireless
Sensor Networks: Attacks and Defenses”, IEEE Pervasive Comput-
ing, vol.7, no.1, 2008, pp. 74-81.
[15] A. Wood and J. A. Stankovic, ”Denial of Service in Sensor Net-
works”, IEEE Computer, vol.35, no.10, 2002, pp. 54-62.
[16] V.B. Misic, J. Fung, and J. Misic, ”MAC Layer Attacks in 802.15.4
Sensor Networks”, Security in Sensor Networks, Auerbach Publica-
tions, Taylor & Francis Group, 2007, pp. 27-44.
[17] S. Radosavac, A.A. Crdenas, J.S. Baras, and G.V. Moustakides, ”De-
tecting IEEE 802.11 MAC Layer Misbehavior in Ad Hoc Networks:
Robust Strategies against Individual and Colluding Attackers”, Jour-
nal of Computer Security, special Issue on Security of Ad Hoc and
Sensor Networks, vol.15, no.1, 2007, pp. 103-128.
[18] W. Xu, K. Ma, W. Trappe, and Y. Zhang, ”Jamming Sensor Net-
works: Attack and Defense Strategies”, IEEE Network, vol.20, no.3,
2006, pp. 41-47.
[19] Y.W. Law, P. Hartel, J. den Hartog, and P. Havinga, ”Link-Layer
Jamming Attacks on S-MAC”, in Proc. of IEEE WSN, 2005, pp.
217-225.
[20] Y. Xiao, S. Sethi, H.H. Chen, and B. Sun, ”Security Services and
Enhancements in the IEEE 802.15.4 Wireless Sensor Networks”, in
Proc. of IEEE GLOBECOM, vol.3, 2005.
[21] N. Sastry and D. Wagner, ”Security Considerations for IEEE
802.15.4 Networks”, in Proc. of the ACM Workshop on Wireless
Security, 2004, pp. 32-42.
[22] Y.C. Wang and Y.C. Tseng, ”Attacks and Defenses of Routing
Mechanisms in Ad Hoc and Sensor Networks”, Security in Sensor
Networks, Auerbach Publications, Taylor & Francis Group, 2007, pp.
3-25.
[23] C. Karlof and D. Wagner, ”Secure Routing in Wireless Sensor
Networks: Attacks and Countermeasures”, in Proc. of IEEE SNPA,
vol.1, 2003, pp. 113-127.
[24] Y.C. Hu, A. Perrig, and D.B. Johnson, ”Packet Leashes: A Defense
113
International Journal On Advances in Internet Technology, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/

against Wormhole Attacks in Wireless Networks”, in Proc. of IEEE
INFOCOM, vol.1, 2003, pp. 1976-1986.
[25] J. Newsome, E. Shi, D. Song, and A. Perrig, ”The Sybil Attack in
Sensor Networks: Analysis & Defenses”, in Proc. of IPSN, vol.1,
2004, pp. 259-268.
[26] H. Deng, W. Li, and D.P.Agrawal, ”Routing Security in Wireless
Ad Hoc Networks”, IEEE Communications Magazine, vol.40, no.10,
2002, pp. 70-75.
[27] C.L. Schuba, I.V. Krsul, M.G. Kuhn, E.H. Spafford, A. Sundaram,
and D. Zamboni, ”Analysis of a Denial of Service Attack on TCP”,
in Proc. of IEEE Symp. Security and Privacy, 1997, pp. 208-223.
[28] J. Deng, R. Han, and S. Mishra, ”Defending against Path-Based
DoS Attacks in Wireless Sensor Networks”, in Proc. of 3rd ACM
Workshop Security of Ad Hoc and Sensor Networks, 2005, pp. 89-
96.
[29] J. Misic, F. Amini, and M. Khan, ”On Security Attacks in Healthcare
WSNs Implemented on 802.15.4 Beacon Enabled Clusters”, in Proc.
of IEEE Consumer Communications and Networking Conference,
2007, pp. 741-745.
[30] Y. Ji, W. Park, S. Kim, and S. An, ”Efﬁcient GTS Allocation
Algorithm for IEEE 802.15.4”, in Proc. of ICCS, 2007, pp. 869-
872.
[31] A. Koubaa, M. Alves, and E. Tovar, ”i-GAME: An Implicit GTS
Allocation Mechanism in IEEE 802.15.4 for Time-Sensitive Wireless
Sensor Networks”, in Proc. of ECRTS, 2006, pp. 183-192.
[32] A. Koubaa, M. Alves, and E. Tovar, ”Time Sensitive IEEE 802.15.4
Protocol”, Sensor Networks and Conﬁguration, Springer, 2007, pp.
19-49.
[33] K.
Fall
and
K.
Varadhan,
”The
ns
manual”,
http://www.isi.edu/nsnam/ns/doc, 2007.
[34] J. Zheng and M.J. Lee, ”A Comprehensive Performance Study of
IEEE 802.15.4”, Sensor Network Operations, IEEE Press, Wiley
Interscience, 2006, pp. 218-237.
[35] I. Ramachandran, A.K. Das, and S. Roy, ”Analysis of the Contention
Access Period of IEEE 802.15.4 MAC”, ACM Transactions on
Sensor Networks, vol.3, no.1, 2007.
114
International Journal On Advances in Internet Technology, vol 2 no 1, year 2009, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/

