93
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Analyzing Personalized Walking in Smart Cities Through a Multi-Modal Transportation 
Simulation Environment 
 
Monsak Socharoentum 
National Electronics and Computer Technology Center, 
National Science and Technology Development Agency 
Pathumthani, Thailand 
e-mail: monsak.soc@nectec.or.th 
Hassan A. Karimi 
Geoinformatics Laboratory, School of Information 
Sciences, University of Pittsburgh 
Pittsburgh, USA 
e-mail: hkarimi@pitt.edu
 
 
Abstract— While current transportation simulations can be 
used to evaluate vehicle trips or neighborhood walkability, 
none is able to evaluate trips that require multi-modal 
transportation when walking is always one mode. In this 
paper, we address this gap by the Multi-Modal Transportation 
(MMT) 
with 
Multi-Criteria 
Walking 
(MMT-MCW) 
simulation. MMT-MCW simulation can be used to evaluate 
various aspects of smart cities, such as walkability. The 
premise of MMT-MCW is based on the observations that: (a) 
walking can be performed for other purposes besides merely 
reaching destinations, such as to maintain or improve health 
and (b) traveler’s characteristics and preferences play an 
important role in determining optimal route choices. Selected 
MMT-MCW scenarios were simulated to evaluate walkability 
of several cities with respect to three criteria: inter-modal 
transfer locations (parking lots and bus stops) elevation of 
walking routes, and walking distance. The simulation results 
show that: (a) despite similar elevation range, cities may 
contain walking routes with significant different average 
calories burn and (b) walking paths connected to parking lots 
and bus stops are not necessarily correlated to number of 
routes, amount of calories burnt, and elevation. 
Keywords-smart 
cities; 
walkability; 
multi-modal 
transportation; routing; multi-criteria walking. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The concept of Multi-Modal Transportation with Multi-
Criteria Walking is discussed in [1]. MMT-MCW is based 
on information and communication technologies and is 
designed to offer personalized transportation services. In its 
initial version, MMT-MCW is built as a simulation 
environment to analyze scenarios where walking is always 
one mode and for various purposes (multi-criteria).  Two sets 
of factors impacting MCW are environmental factors and 
traveler factors.  Environmental factors, compared to driving 
cars or riding public transportation, may have a greater 
impact on walking. For example, people may prefer driving 
cars or riding buses over walking due to rain, snow, hilly 
terrain, or air pollution. Location is also an environmental 
factor that influences walking, for instance, fastest walking 
routes may be based on flat and short routes, which take 
priority over steep and long routes. However, when walking 
is for exercise, the steeper and/or longer route may be 
preferred. 
Traveler 
factors, 
such 
as 
individuals’ 
characteristics, also have an impact on choosing walking 
routes [2]. Several studies, such as [3], reported a correlation 
between individual behaviors and walking. Studies by Leslie 
et al. [4] and Ewing et al. [5] are examples related to the 
urban area evaluation in terms of neighborhood walkability. 
Factors, such as land use and urban design [6], [7], aging [8], 
air pollution [9], body mass index [10], preference for 
passive transport [11], and pedestrian’s preference [12], that 
influence walking have been studied. The findings of various 
research projects highlight the benefits, such as weight loss 
[13], of replacing short motorized trips with walking. In 
other studies, the relationship between the built environment 
and walking has been studied. A longitudinal analysis is 
discussed in [14], itineraries to destinations is considered in 
[15], level of service of urban walking environment and its 
influence are investigated in [16],  GPS-measured walking, 
bicycling and vehicle time in adolescents are analyzed in 
[17]. 
In this work, MMT-MCW is built as a simulation 
environment to find connections between different modes of 
transportation 
by 
utilizing 
public 
transportation 
infrastructures (road networks and sidewalk networks) and 
provide the residents of smart cities with flexible and 
personalized walking places. The following two example 
simulation cases show how MMT-MCW can be used for 
smart cities.  
By simulating various walking scenarios in MMT-MCW, 
walking clusters ("walking hotspots") in a city can be 
identified; these walking hotspots would help urban 
designers and planners determine locations where new 
information and sensors would benefit the residents. For 
example, by knowing locations of walking hotspots in a city, 
real-time information about activities and traffic on 
sidewalks of those hotspots can be made available on a 
website, or directly be sent to the residents. Similarly, 
appropriate sensors, such as those that can assist pedestrians 
with safety issues on sidewalks, can be installed. An example 
sensor could be one detecting within a specified range a 
sharp elevation change between two adjacent sidewalk 
segments. 
In another simulation through MMT-MCW, various 
connection scenarios between road networks and sidewalk 
networks for driving first and then walking (driving-walking) 
can be analyzed in a city in order to identify most usable 
transfer nodes ("transfer hotspots"). By knowing locations of 
transfer hotspots, which could be parking garages or street 

94
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
parking places, sensors can be installed to detect transfer 
node availability and inform the residents, through a website 
or notifications on mobile devices, in real time. An example 
sensor could be video images of specific parking places. 
Such video images when collected over a period of time can 
be mined so that transfer node (parking space) availability 
can be predicted and communicated to interested residents. 
Despite the benefits of MMT-MCW for evaluating 
transportation options in smart cities, currently there is no 
research that is focused on evaluation of city’ transportation 
infrastructures and utilities (e.g., parking locations and 
walking routes). To fill this gap, MMT-MCW simulation is 
proposed to evaluate three basic options: (a) inter-modal 
transfer locations (parking lots and bus stops); (b) elevation 
of walking routes; and (c) walking distance. The first option 
is related to MMT, and the last two are related to MCW.  
MMT-MCW may be implemented in several ways for 
smart cities, for example, as a new service for individuals 
interested in finding routes that include walking components. 
[18] developed a prototype service (called Route2Health) 
that recommends walking sessions, if feasible, for any trip. 
By taking origin, destination, and traveler’s conditions as 
input, 
Route2Health 
recommends 
a 
sequence 
of 
transportation modes along with specific details about each 
mode that is most optimal (personalized). MMT-MCW can 
also be implemented to simulate the design of smart cities.  
The paper’s contribution is a novel integration of new 
and existing Web techniques and technologies for evaluating 
and analyzing transportation options for smart cities. A Web-
based tool (simulation) is developed to analyze mushing up 
data and find transportation solutions based on existing Web 
services (Google Map APIs). The rest of the paper is 
organized as follows. Section II describes MMT-MCW. 
Sections III and IV discuss MMT-MCW simulation and 
example scenarios and their results. The paper ends with a 
summary and suggestions for future research in Section V.  
II. 
MMT-MCW 
MMT-MCW is designed to find: (a) multi-modal 
transportation routes with walking as one mode and (b) 
optimal walking paths by considering multiple criteria. 
Walking transfer node and route score are the two factors 
that MMT-MCW considers in finding optimal solutions 
(routes).  
Three modes of transportation are considered in MMT-
MCW: walking, driving, and riding (bus). We define 
“walking transfer node” as a location where travelers switch 
from a pedestrian network to a vehicular network, or vice 
versa. In MMT-MCW, walking transfer nodes play an 
important role in finding suitable (personalized) routes. For 
example, change of one parking lot to another (as a walking 
transfer node) may result in a different (and desired) 
solution. With respect to public transportation, the choice of 
a bus stop (as a walking transfer node) determines a specific 
bus route. To identify a suitable walking transfer node, 
traveler’s desired walking distance is separated into 
estimated upper and lower limits. The upper limit excludes 
walking transfer nodes that are located beyond a traveler’s 
maximum preferred distance. The lower limit excludes 
walking transfer nodes that are located closer than the 
desired minimum walking distance. Accordingly, one or 
more suitable walking transfer nodes are identified.  
Route score is used to quantify the suitability of a 
walking route in meeting traveler’s criteria. To compute a 
route score, a relevant criterion must be identified and used 
to formulate a suitable metric function. Examples of route 
score criterion are: (1) traveler’s desire to burn a specific 
amount of calories by walking and (2) traveler’s preference 
for a certain level of elevation variation. The route score for 
the first criterion should reflect calories burnt on walking and 
for the second criterion should reflect elevation variation.  
To calculate calories burnt on walking, the ACSM 
walking equation [19] can be used: 
 
EE = (0.1·S + 1.8·S·G + 3.5) ·BM·t·0.005    
(1) 
 
where EE is walking energy expenditure (kilocalories), S is 
walking speed (meters/minute), G is grade (slope) in decimal 
form (e.g., 0.02 for 2% grade), BM is traveller’s body weight 
(kilograms), and t is walking time (minutes). The constant 
0.005 is the amount of energy expenditure burnt per one 
kilogram per one minute.  
To calculate elevation variation, walking surface 
roughness is used. The walking surface roughness refers to 
the standard deviation of the elevations along an entire 
walking route. The standard deviation of a flat walking route 
is zero, and the higher value of walking surface roughness 
refers to higher variation of elevations along the walking 
route. 
III. 
SIMULATION AND DATA COLLECTION 
Several cities within the United States were used in the 
simulation. Twelve cities were selected based on three 
attributes: population, body mass index (BMI), and 
elevation range. The US Office of Management and Budget 
uses population to define a statistical area. A statistical area 
contains one or more cities (and/or counties) and can be 
classified as metropolitan (high-density population) or 
micropolitan (low-density population). Metropolitan has 
population greater than 50,000 and micropolitan has 
population between 10,000 and 50,000. The US Center for 
Disease Control and Prevention’s definitions and categories 
were considered for normal weight (18.5<BMI<24.9) and 
obese (BMI>30.0) where individual’s BMI is calculated by 
dividing the individual’s weight (kilogram) by the square of 
the individual’s height (meter); BMI=weight/(height)2. BMI 
statistics are from the year 2012 provided by the CDC. 
Elevation range was classified into hilly (elevation range 
100 meters) and flat (elevation range  50 meters), where 
elevation range is the difference between maximum and 
minimum elevations of the area. The elevations of 100 
randomly selected positions within the city of interest were 
used to calculate the elevation range. The two threshold 
values (50 and 100 meters) were chosen for separating 
between hilly and flat terrains. The purpose of using the 
three attributes (population, BMI, and elevation range) is to 

95
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
explore their influence on walking routes and walking 
transfer nodes.  
For simulations, cities were selected based on statistical 
areas (ranked in descending order) and on BMI statistics 
(percentage of normal weight and obese people). To have 
realistic representatives for each BMI category, city 
selection was based on rank; a higher rank has a higher 
priority. To include as many states as possible in 
simulations, if the second city is located in the same state as 
the first one, then the next city that is located in a different 
state is selected. The selected cities are categorized and 
shown using a tree diagram in Figure 1. There are six 
possible combinations based on the three mentioned 
attributes (population, BMI, and elevation range), and up to 
two cities were selected for each combination. 
Figure 2 shows the maximum, minimum, and average 
elevations of the selected cities, and the following 
abbreviations are used: Micropolitan (Mi), Metropolitan 
(Me), Obese (O), Normal weight (N), Hilly (H), and Flat 
(F).  
 
 
Figure 1.  City and state selected for each category. 
Two different MMTs were simulated: driving-walking 
and 
riding-walking. 
A 
driving-walking 
trip 
usually 
comprises (in sequence) driving, parking, and then walking, 
and return in the reverse sequence. Unlike driving-walking, 
travelers do not have to begin with riding (public 
transportation) in a riding-walking trip. The trip may start by 
walking from origin to a nearby bus stop then taking bus to 
destination. Walking can also be in the middle to connect 
two different bus routes, and the return trip can be in any 
sequence. For simplicity, the return trips were not considered 
and walking was assumed as the mode connecting the 
walking transfer nodes and destinations. To this end, walking 
transfer nodes and walking routes were simulated. Note that 
the vehicular route computation between origin and walking 
transfer node was not considered since it is not the MMT-
MCW’s main contribution. Parking lots, bus stops, walking 
routes, sidewalk slopes, and points of interest (POIs) were 
other data considered for simulations.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Maximum, minimum, and average elevations of the selected 
cities. 
TABLE I.  
SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
Parameter Names 
Values 
Units 
1. Desired walking distance 
1.0  
kilometer 
2. Inner radius  
0.5  
kilometer 
3. Outer radius 
1.5  
kilometer 
4. Maximum number of suitable 
parking lot locations 
20 
- 
5. Maximum number of suitable 
bus stop locations 
No limit 
- 
6. Body weight trial values 
60, 80, 100, 120 
kilogram 
7. Walking speed trial values 
60, 80, 100 meters/minute 
 
The walking distance between a walking transfer node 
and a destination was assumed to be one kilometer. POI 
locations were selected from OpenStreetMap [20] and 100 
destinations within each city were randomly selected (in case 
the number of POIs in a city was less than 100, all POIs were 
used). To identify suitable parking lots, a buffer (inner 
radius: 0.5 kilometer; outer radius: 1.5 kilometer) around 
each destination was created. For each destination, up to 20 
parking lots within a buffer were selected as suitable walking 
transfer nodes (note that 20 is an arbitrary number and each 
destination may have a different number of parking lots). 
Bus stops and bus routes data were collected from Google 
Transit Feed Specification [21]. For each suitable parking lot 
and bus stop, up to three candidate walking routes were 
generated (ordered by travel time). Parking lot locations and 
walking routes were retrieved from Google Place API and 
Google Direction API, respectively. Once all candidate 
routes were computed, elevation of points along the walking 
route of interest was retrieved from Google Elevation API, 
and then Equation (1) was used to calculate calories burned 
for each candidate walking route. Walking surface roughness 
was also calculated using the elevations of route segments. 
To reflect multiple traveler’s characteristics, four body 
weights (60, 80, 100, and 120 kilograms) and three walking 
speeds (60, 80, and 100 meters/minute) were simulated. Note 

96
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
that these walking speeds are for experimentation; see [22] 
and [23] for research on walking speed. Table I summarizes 
the simulation parameters. 
IV. 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
The simulation results are related to four entities: suitable 
parking lots, suitable bus stops, walking routes that connect 
parking lots and destination (PK routes), and walking routes 
that connect bus stops and destinations (BS routes). Suitable 
parking lots and suitable bus stops are the parking lots and 
bus stops that are located within a ring buffer (inner radius: 
0.5 kilometer; outer radius: 1.5 kilometer) around each 
destination. All 12 cities contain suitable parking lots and 
acceptable PK routes, but only two cities (San Francisco and 
Santa Clara) contain suitable bus stops and acceptable BS 
routes (these are the only two cities, among the selected 
cities, that provide coordinates of their bus stops). PK and 
BS routes are considered acceptable if their distances are 
within 0.9 and 1.1 kilometer from destinations. Based on 
these four entities, results are separated into three sub-
sections: (A) suitable parking lots and acceptable PK routes, 
(B) suitable bus stops and acceptable BS routes, and (C) 
acceptable PK routes vs acceptable BS routes. 
A. Suitable Parking Lots and Acceptable PK Routes 
Figure 3 shows the selected cities (on x-axis), the 
numbers of destinations (on y-axis), and the counts of 
destinations that have suitable parking lots (on y-axis). The 
following abbreviations are used in the figure: Micropolitan 
(Mi), Metropolitan (Me), Obese (O), Normal weight (N), 
Hilly (H), and Flat (F). Most cities in metropolitan areas 
have a large number of destinations with suitable parking 
lots except Bossier (1 out of 72) and McAllen (4 out of 99). 
Four cities (Barre, Kappa, Scottsbluff, and Bossier) have 
zero or only one destination with at least one suitable parking 
lot, which are considered outliers and excluded from the 
analysis. From the figure, both obese and normal weight 
groups fall within cities with both small and large number of 
destinations with suitable parking lots. This indicates that 
there is no obvious separation between the two groups with 
respect to number of destinations. 
Figure 4 shows maximum, minimum, and average 
number of calories burned (top left) and walking surface 
roughness (lower left) for walking routes that connect to 
parking lots (PK routes). On x-axis, the first four cities are 
hilly and the latter four are flat. The graphs indicate that 
hilly cities have wider ranges of both calories burnt and 
walking surface roughness. This is because both calories 
burnt and walking surface roughness are directly related to 
the elevation range of hilly cities and the walking routes. An 
interesting observation is that most cities (except Boulder) 
in the left figure have a similar average calories burnt 
regardless of the elevation range. Although Boulder has a 
similar walking surface roughness compared to other hilly 
cities, its average calories burnt is significantly higher than 
the others. This indicates that walking routes in Boulder are 
better in terms of burning calories. 
 
Figure 3.  Number of destinations and counts of destinations that have  1 
suitable parking lots. 
 
Figure 4.  Comparison of attributes related to PK routes in different cities. 
Figure 4 (top right) shows number of suitable parking 
lots and (lower right) shows number of acceptable walking 
routes. Acceptable walking routes refer to walking routes 
that have their distance within 0.9 and 1.1 kilometer (10% 
of the designated one kilometer walking distance) from 
destinations. The graphs show that San Francisco has the 
highest average number of suitable parking lots, the highest 
number of acceptable walking routes, and the largest range 
on both attributes (largest variation of results); this is 
expected for a metropolitan city where transportation 
infrastructures are dense. Note that San Francisco is the 13th 
most populous city in the United States [24]. 
Figure 5 shows spatial distribution of destinations that 
have acceptable PK routes. Destinations in Augusta and 
Santa Clara have a very small number (between 1 and 3) of 
acceptable PK routes. St. Petersburg reveals a road (north-

97
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
south direction) that has destinations with a high number of 
acceptable PK routes. Destinations in Boulder spatially 
spread across the city and do not show an explicit pattern. 
San Francisco has most of its destinations with a large 
number of acceptable PK routes. Most destinations in San 
Francisco cluster together in the north-east region of the city 
because most of the POIs (which are used as destinations) in 
San Francisco are also located in the north-east region. 
Figure 6 shows average calories burn for the acceptable 
PK routes grouped by destinations. Each map has legends 
showing minimum and maximum values with circle sizes. 
All the cities (except Boulder) have their average and 
maximum value lower than 200. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Destination distributions with number of acceptable PK routes. 
This sub-section discusses and compares suitable 
parking lots and acceptable PK routes in five cities: 
Augusta, Boulder, San Francisco, Santa Clara, and St. 
Petersburg. San Francisco has the highest average numbers 
for both suitable parking lots (11.16) and acceptable PK 
routes (7.2). With similar walking distance and time, 
Boulder offers the best environment in terms of burning 
calories. Augusta has a high amount of calories burn only 
for destinations within the city’s inner area, which has a 
dense road network. Even though Santa Clara is classified 
as a metropolitan city, it does not provide a large number of 
suitable parking lots. Santa Clara has 1.70 suitable parking 
lots on average, while Augusta (a micropolitan city) has 
1.54. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Destination distributions with calories burn for acceptable PK 
routes. 
B. Suitable Bus Stops and Acceptable BS Routes 
Figure 7 shows spatial distribution of destinations in San 
Francisco and Santa Clara. The destinations are classified 
into two groups: (1) destinations that have suitable bus stops 
(circle shape) and (2) destinations that have no suitable bus 
stops (triangle shape). According to Figure 7 (left), there is a 
clear distinction between the two groups in San Francisco. 
The first group densely clusters within the north-east region 
of the city, while the second group is surrounding the first 
group. All destinations in Santa Clara have at least one 
suitable bus stop.   
Figure 8 shows spatial distribution of destinations with 
number of suitable bus stops. None of the destinations in 
San Francisco has more than four suitable bus stops, while 
the destinations in Santa Clara have much larger number of 

98
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
suitable bus stops. Figure 9 shows spatial distribution of 
destinations with number of acceptable BS routes. None of 
the destinations in San Francisco has more than five 
acceptable BS routes, while the destinations in Santa Clara 
have wider range of number of acceptable BS routes. Most 
destinations with large number of acceptable BS routes in 
Santa Clara cluster within the inner region of the city. A 
counter intuitive observation is that despite the denser road 
network (which means a large number of road segment 
connections and route choices), the destinations in San 
Francisco still have fewer number of acceptable BS routes 
compared to Santa Clara. Average number of BS routes is 
2.41 for San Francisco and is 9.29 for Santa Clara. Note that 
destinations that do not have acceptable BS routes were not 
included in calculating the averages. An interesting 
observation related to suitable bus stops and acceptable BS 
routes in Santa Clara is that destinations in the lower region 
of the city have a large number of bus stops but have a small 
number of BS routes, while destinations in the upper region 
have the opposite numbers. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Suitable bus stops availability. 
 
Figure 8.  Number of suitable bus stops. 
Figure 10 shows spatial distribution of destinations with 
number of bus routes. All destinations that have a suitable 
bus stop in San Francisco have four bus routes. Two and 
seventeen are the minimum and maximum numbers of bus 
routes for destinations in Santa Clara, and destinations in the 
northern region tend to have a larger number of bus routes 
than the others. 
 
Figure 9.  Number of acceptable BS routes. 
 
Figure 10.  Number of bus routes. 
This sub-section discusses and compares suitable bus 
stops and acceptable BS routes in San Francisco and Santa 
Clara. Only destinations in the north-east region of San 
Francisco have suitable bus stops, while all destinations in 
Santa Clara have suitable bus stops. Assuming a direct 
relationship between road and sidewalk densities, San 
Francisco, which has a denser road network, is expected to 
have a higher average number of BS routes, however, the 
results show otherwise. This observation indicates that road 
network density does not necessarily correlate with the 
number of acceptable BS routes. 
C. Acceptable PK Routes VS Acceptable BS Routes 
Figures 11 and 12 show the comparisons between 
acceptable PK routes and acceptable BS routes in San 
Francisco and Santa Clara, which are the only two cities 
(among the selected cities) that publish their bus stop 
coordinates. 
Each 
bar 
graph 
represents 
maximum, 
minimum, and average values. In San Francisco, PK routes 
have higher average values than BS routes, while, in Santa 
Clara, it is the opposite. This indicates that PK routes and 
BS routes are not necessarily correlated. Considering 
walking surface roughness, BS routes in San Francisco have 
narrower range than PK routes, meaning that BS routes are 
generally flatter than PK routes. This can be inferred that the 
acceptable BS routes are available mostly in the flat areas. 
However, an interesting observation is that BS routes in 
Santa Clara show opposite behavior such that PK routes are 
flatter than BS routes. It should also be noted that both PK 
and BS routes in San Francisco have a much larger walking 
surface roughness (by around 10 times) than their 
counterparts in Santa Clara, meaning that PK and BS routes 

99
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
in Santa Clara are much flatter. A counter intuitive 
observation from calories bar graphs in both Figures 11 and 
12 is that despite different elevation range (San Francisco: 
Hilly; Santa Clara: Flat) and a large walking surface 
roughness difference, both PK and BS routes in San 
Francisco still have average calories close to their 
counterparts in Santa Clara (120 calories for PK routes; 
140 calories for BS routes). This is because the amount of 
calories burn was estimated using the same walking speed 
(60 meters/minute) in both cities. Therefore, despite the 
close amounts of estimated calories burn, walking routes in 
San Francisco help burn more calories within the same 
period of time compared to the walking routes in Santa 
Clara.  
 
 
Figure 11.  Comparisons between PK routes and BS routes for San 
Francisco. 
 
Figure 12.  Comparisons between PK routes and BS routes for Santa Clara. 
 
Figure 13.  San Francisco: PK routes (left) and BS routes (right). 
Figures 13 and 14 show the spatial distribution of 
destinations and the spatial coverage of PK and BS routes in 
San Francisco and Santa Clara overlaid on the cities’ road 
networks. The maps indicate the inverse behavior between 
the two cities such that PK routes have more coverage than 
BS routes in San Francisco, and vice versa for Santa Clara. 
Figure 
15 
shows 
the 
comparisons 
of 
destination 
distributions with number of acceptable PK and BS routes 
in San Francisco and Santa Clara. The maps indicate the 
inverse behavior between the two cities such that the 
number of acceptable PK routes is much larger than that of 
BS routes in San Francisco, and vice versa for Santa Clara. 
 
 
Figure 14.  Santa Clara: PK routes (left) and BS routes (right). 
 
Figure 15.  Comparisons between destination distributions with number of 
acceptable PK and BS routes. 
In this sub-section, PK routes and BS routes of San 
Francisco and Santa Clara are compared. The results show 
that PK routes and BS routes are not necessarily correlated. 
For driving-walking mode, San Francisco has much more 
parking lots and acceptable PK routes than Santa Clara. For 
riding-walking mode, Santa Clara has much more bus stops 
and acceptable BS routes than San Francisco. Both PK and 
BS routes in San Francisco have much larger walking 
surface roughness (by around 10 times) than their 
counterparts in Santa Clara, meaning that PK and BS routes 
in San Francisco have much higher elevation variations. 
V. 
SUMMARY AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
This paper presented a new simulation approach for 
evaluating smart cities. Scenarios in selected cities were 

100
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 8 no 3 & 4, year 2015, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2015, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
simulated. The simulation results show that: (a) despite 
similar elevation range, cities may contain walking routes 
with significant different average calories burn and (b) PK 
routes and BS routes are not necessarily correlated (e.g., San 
Francisco and Santa Clara).  
Considering that enhancing health and wellbeing of 
people, among other benefits, is one objective for building 
smart cities,  our proposed approach can be used to evaluate 
smart cities for their environment infrastructures (roadways 
and sidewalks) and transportation infrastructures (different 
modes) and as a simulation tool to design new smart cities.  
Some future research directions are: 
 
Investigating and developing MCW optimization 
algorithms for travelers, such as people with 
disabilities (e.g., wheelchair users and people who 
are blind or visually impaired), people with special 
physical 
conditions 
(e.g., 
people 
with 
joint 
problems), and people with health conditions (e.g., 
people who must be less exposed to air pollution or 
sun light). 
 
Investigating and developing a predictive MMT-
MCW methodology that allows route request well 
in advance and can monitor the recommended route 
up to minutes before the route is taken and update 
the 
recommendation 
based 
on 
changes 
of 
environmental and individual factors.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. Socharoentum and H. A. Karimi, “Simulation of Web-
Based Multi-Modal Transportation with Multi-Criteria 
Walking for Smart Cities,” In Proceedings of The Third 
International Conference on Building and Exploring Web 
Based Environments (WEB 2015), Rome, Italy, May 24-29 
2015, pp. 14-18. 
[2] A. W. Agrawal, M. Schlossberg, and K. Irvin,  “How far, by 
which route and why? A spatial analysis of pedestrian 
preference,” Journal of Urban Design, 13(1), 2008, pp. 81-98. 
[3] J. Sun, M. Walters, N. Svensson, and D. Lloyd, “The 
influence of surface slope on human gait characteristics: a 
study of urban pedestrians walking on an inclined surface,” 
Ergonomics, 39(4), 1996, pp. 677-692. 
[4] E. Leslie, B. Saelens, L. Frank, N. Owen, A. Bauman,N. 
Coffee, and G. Hugo, “Residents’ perceptions of walkability 
attributes in objectively different neighbourhoods: a pilot 
study,” Health and Place, 11(3), 2005, pp. 227-236. 
[5] R. Ewing, S. Handy, R. C. Brownson, O. Clemente, and E. 
Winston, “Identifying and Measuring Urban Design Qualities 
Related to Walkability,” Journal of Physical Activity and 
Health, 3, 2006,  pp. s223-s240. 
[6] A. Forsyth and M. Southworth, “Cities Afoot—Pedestrians, 
Walkability and Urban Design,” Journal of Urban Design, 
13(1), 2008, pp. 1-3. 
[7] R. Ewing and S. Handy, “Measuring the unmeasurable: Urban 
design qualities related to walkability,” Journal of Urban 
Design, 14(1), 2009, pp. 65-84. 
[8] A. C. King et al., “Aging in neighborhoods differing in 
walkability and income: associations with physical activity 
and obesity in older adults,” Social Science and Medicine, 
73(10), 2011, pp. 1525-1533. 
[9] J. D. Marshall, M. Brauer, and L. D. Frank, “Healthy 
neighborhoods: walkability and air pollution,” Environmental 
Health Perspectives, 117(11), 2009, pp. 1752-1759. 
[10] K. R. Smith, B. B. Brown, I. Yamada, L. Kowaleski-Jones, 
C.D. Zick, and J. X. Fan, “Walkability and body mass index: 
density, design, and new diversity measures,” American 
Journal of Preventive Medicine, 35(3), 2008, pp. 237-244. 
[11] D. V. Dyck, B. Deforche, G. Cardon, and I. D. 
Bourdeaudhuij, “Neighbourhood walkability and its particular 
importance for adults with a preference for passive transport,” 
Health and Place, 15(2), 2009, pp. 496-504. 
[12] Barbara B. Brown, Ikuho Yamada, Ken R. Smith, Cathleen D. 
Zick, Lori Kowaleski-Jones, and Jessie X. Fan, “Mixed land 
use and walkability: Variations in land use measures and 
relationships with BMI, overweight, and obesity,” Health and 
Place, 15(4), 2009, pp. 1130-1141. 
[13] C. Morency, M. Demers, and E. Poliquin, “Shifting short 
motorized trips to walking: the potential of active 
transportation for physical activity in Montreal,” Journal of 
Transport & Health, 1(2), 2014, pp. 100-107. 
[14] M. W. Knuiman, H. E. Christian, M. L. Divitini, S. A. Foster, 
F. C. Bull, H. M. Badland, and B. Giles-Corti, “A 
Longitudinal Analysis of the Influence of the Neighborhood 
Built Environment on Walking for Transportation The 
RESIDE Study,” American journal of epidemiology, kwu171, 
2014. 
[15] N. Karusisi, F. Thomas, J. Méline, R. Brondeel, and B. Chaix, 
“Environmental conditions around itineraries to destinations 
as correlates of walking for transportation among adults: the 
RECORD cohort study,” 2014. 
[16] T. Muraleetharan and T. Hagiwara, “Overall level of service 
of urban walking environment and its influence on pedestrian 
route choice behavior: analysis of pedestrian travel in 
Sapporo, Japan,” Transportation Research Record: Journal of 
the Transportation Research Board, 2014, pp. 7-17. 
[17] J. A. Carlson, B. E. Saelens, J. Kerr, J. Schipperijn, T. L. 
Conway, L. D. Frank,  J. E. Chapman, K. Glanz, K. L. Cain, 
and J. F. Sallis, “Association between neighborhood 
walkability and GPS-measured walking, bicycling and vehicle 
time in adolescents,” Health & place, 32, 2015, pp. 1-7. 
[18] H. A. Karimi and M. Socharoentum, “Route2Health: A Novel 
Routing Service to Assist in Increasing Physical Activity,” In 
Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on health 
Informatics, Angers, France, 2014, pp. 43-51.  
[19] S. J. Tharrett and J. A. Peterson (Eds.), ACSM’s health/fitness 
facility standards and guidelines. Human Kinetics, 2012, pp. 
141. 
[20] J. G. Benner and H. A. Karimi, “Geo-Crowdsourcing.” In 
Advanced Location-Based Technologies and Services (Ed: H. 
A. Karimi)”. Taylor and Francis, 2013. 
[21] GTFS Data Exchange. Retrieved April 10, 2015 from 
http://www.gtfs-data-exchange.com/ 
[22] R. W. Bohannon, “Comfortable and maximum walking speed 
of adults aged 20—79 years: reference values and 
determinants.” Age and ageing 26.1, 1997, pp. 15-19. 
[23] J. E. Himann, D. A. Cunningham, P. A. Rechnitzer, D. H. 
Paterson, “Age-related changes in speed of walking.” 
Medicine and science in sports and exercise 20.2, 1988: pp. 
161-166. 
[24] U.S. Census Bureau: State and County QuickFacts.  (2010). 
Retrieved 
April 
10, 
2015 
from 
http://www.census.gov/2010census/popmap/. 
 

