Semiotic Annotation of Narrative Video Commercials:  
Bridging the Gap between Artifacts and Ontologies 
 
Elio Toppano 
Dipartimento di Scienze Matematiche,  
Informatiche e Fisiche (DMIF)  
Università di Udine, Italy 
e-mail: elio.toppano@uniud.it 
Vito Roberto 
Dipartimento di Scienze Matematiche,  
Informatiche e Fisiche (DMIF) 
Università di Udine, Italy 
e-mail: vito.roberto@uniud.it
 
 
Abstract—Drawing on semiotic theories, the paper proposes a 
new concept of annotation – called semiotic annotation – whose 
goal is to describe the multilayered articulation of meaning 
inscribed within narrative video commercials by their 
designers. The approach exploits the use of a meta-model of 
the narrative video genre providing the conceptualizations and 
the vocabulary for analysis and annotation. By explicating 
design knowledge embodied in the video, semiotic annotation 
plays the role of intermediate level knowledge between the 
meta-model (an informal ontology) and practice (the concrete 
video artifact). In order to assess the feasibility of the 
approach, a test bed is presented and results are reported. A 
final discussion about the potential contribution of semiotic 
annotation in the fields of Research Through Design, 
Technological Mediation, and Interface Criticism concludes 
the study. 
Keywords-video; content annotation; ontology; semiotics; 
advertising; semantic web. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper is about representation and semantic-based 
content annotation of narrative video commercials during 
production. It is an elaboration and extension of previous 
work presented in the IARIA Fifth International Conference 
on Building and Exploring Web Based Environments [1]. 
Narrative video commercials are multimodal artifacts used in 
the domains of marketing and advertising to communicate a 
product's features, a public service announcement (PSA), or 
abstract concepts such as a brand personality [2] or brand 
identity [3] through a story-like format. The intention is to 
persuade people to buy the product or, in the case of brand 
communication, to resonate with brand meanings (e.g., brand 
core values) [4].  
Nowadays, video advertising covers a wide range of 
products differing in production quality, time length, and 
distribution. Standardization activities made by the IAB 
(Interactive Advertising Bureau) have provided several 
formats and guidelines to improve the development process 
of this genre of artifacts and to enhance the viewer 
experience [5][6]. 
A number of reasons motivate the use of stories in 
advertising. First, humans are storytellers. They use 
narratives as a natural and effective way to understand, 
structure, and communicate their experiences. This is 
because narratives evoke more meaning and emotions than 
bare facts. Narratives are also crucial for our understanding 
of time and time-based events as well as for understanding 
own identities and self [7]. Second, narratives have an 
intrinsic persuasive potential that is related to the extent that 
viewers/readers are "transported" into the world of the 
narrative and become involved with its protagonists [8]. 
Strong immersion into a story reduces counterarguments 
against story assertions, creates a lifelike experience, and 
provides strong connections with characters, all of which 
facilitate narrative persuasion [9][10]. Third, studies show 
that recall of narrative information is twice as likely as 
recall of expository information [9].  
Narrative video commercials demand a careful design 
activity. A critical decision is, for example, how to integrate 
the persuasive message (e.g., information intended to 
influence the audience) with the story told by the video. 
Another decision is how to combine narrative persuasion 
with other non-narrative persuasive mechanisms such as 
reasoned 
arguments, 
statistical 
evidence, 
celebrity 
endorsement, 
etc. 
in 
order 
to 
achieve 
maximum 
effectiveness. Yet, another problem arising in brand 
communication concerns the development of a brand-
specific design language, 
i.e., 
to 
decide 
how 
to 
communicate abstract meanings such as brand values and 
personality by a systematic and consistent use of expressive 
features (e.g., visual shapes, color scheme, auditory timbres 
and 
leitmotifs). 
This 
process 
- 
called 
semantic 
transformation - has been extensively studied in the field of 
industrial design [11] but has received much less attention in 
the field of multimedia design [12]. 
It should be evident from the above discussion that 
describing and annotating the (semantic) content of 
narrative video ads during the design process poses several 
problems due to the density and complexity of meanings 
that are inscribed into these kinds of artifacts. The 
annotation can be reduced neither to the description of what 
is depicted in the video nor to the specification of the 
general theme/claim of the video or the description of basic 
visual and auditory features. Rather, it should be possible to 
capture the entire range of meanings inscribed within the 
product including deep values, narrative structure, figurative 
and 
plastic 
meanings, 
rhetorical 
and 
persuasive 
mechanisms, to name only a few. Most importantly, the 
145
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

annotation should be able to capture the relationships 
existing among all these meanings, i.e., their articulation in 
different conceptual layers within the artifact and their 
distribution across representation modalities (i.e., written 
words, images, sound objects).  
In this paper, we address this problem by exploiting 
contemporary semiotic theories. We wish to evaluate 
whether a semiotic perspective provides a useful meta-
model for the analysis and annotation of audio-visual 
resources and narrative video commercials in particular. 
Semiotics studies signs, meaning, and sense-making. It 
addresses processes of signification by investigating the 
ways meaning arises from mappings among sign structures. 
Therefore, it can be used to model the content and 
expression of a narrative video commercial intended here 
informally as "the sum of meanings that the designer intends 
to communicate through the space/time composition of the 
audio-visual 
resources 
that 
constitute 
the 
video 
presentation". 
An important assumption is that the content of the video 
commercial is the result of an intentional act of designing 
intended as meaning-making or rhetorical argumentation 
[13][14][15]. This assumption does not hold - or only 
partially holds - for other types of audio-visuals such as 
surveillance videos, home videos, documentary and 
scientific videos, news videos, etc. where the content is 
largely determined by what happens in the reality and its 
structure depends on the nature of events being recorded 
rather than on high control over screenplay, editing, and 
filming. In narrative artifacts, in particular, the meaning is 
strictly related to experience and its constitutive components 
namely the sensorial, cognitive and affective component 
[16]. Therefore, designing a narrative video ad means 
embedding, within the artifact, the conditions for affording 
in the viewer an intended experience. The artifact, thus, 
plays the role of mediator (of experience) between the 
intentions of a sender (intended, here, metonymically to 
represent all parties involved in the development of the 
video including sponsors, client, designers, producer) and 
the interpretation of a receiver (the user, consumer) [17]. 
We are interested in the production side of this 
framework: how meaning (e.g., projected experience) is 
intentionally constructed and articulated during the message 
construction process, how it is embedded in the video and 
gives form to it. Consequently, by semantic annotation, we 
refer to a kind of "serious" annotation performed by trained 
professionals in the course of video development [18][19]. 
Its aim is to capture the intended and inscribed meanings in 
order to exploit them not only for retrieval, filtering, and 
browsing tasks but also for explanation, critical evaluation, 
and content (i.e., meaning) reuse. We shall not address 
online user' annotation or social tagging although they 
obviously represent an important contribution to the 
development of the field. 
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II we 
review related work about multimedia semantic-based 
content annotation. Section III introduces the concept of 
Semiotic Annotation that is at the core of our approach. This 
kind of annotation exploits a semiotic compliant informal 
ontology (i.e., a meta-model) of the artifact under 
consideration. A critical discussion of available ontologies 
of narrative videos is presented as well as some basic 
requirements the design of an ontology supporting the 
proposed approach should satisfy. In Section IV, we 
illustrate the meta-model we have developed for semiotic 
annotation. It specializes our previous work on hypermedia 
[20][21] for the narrative video commercial genre. An 
example of application is presented in Section V while 
possible uses and implications for research are discussed in 
Section VI. Finally, Section VII summarizes the strengths 
and limitations of the approach and draws the conclusions. 
II. 
RELATED WORK  
The term "annotation" can denote both an activity (i.e., 
the process by means of which additional data - metadata - 
are attached to existing data) and the result of that activity. 
Models and technologies for annotation have been 
studied within many communities, with different goals and 
perspectives. In the digital library community, for example, 
metadata is seen as a way of supporting cataloging and 
retrieving information in a large collection of documents 
[22]. In the knowledge representation community, the focus 
is, instead, on representing the underlying content of a 
document rather than describing the document that contains 
the content [23]. In the semantic web community, an 
annotation is viewed, first of all, as a tool for representing 
and linking resources together in order to support 
information retrieval, filtering, and browsing [24]. 
Figure 1 represents a basic model of an annotation A in 
terms of a tuple, i.e., A=< as, ao, ar, ac > where as denotes the 
annotated data (i.e., the subject or target of the annotation), 
ao the annotating data (i.e., the object or body of the 
annotation), ar the annotation relation (i.e., a predicate that 
defines the type of relationship existing between annotated 
and annotating data) and ac the context in which the 
annotation is made [25], [26]. The context includes several 
facets such as, for example, who makes the annotation (e.g., 
a single individual, a group, an automatic system; an expert 
annotator of a casual user); when (e.g., during different 
phases of the development process of a resource; during its 
use); why (e.g., for classification, description, retrieval, 
filtering, explanation, browsing, reuse); how (e.g., manually, 
semi-automatically, fully automatically; using free text, 
controlled vocabularies, taxonomies, ontologies); and 
application domain (e.g., entertainment, news, marketing, 
brand management). 
The two most widely known approaches towards 
machine processable and semantic-based content annotation 
are the Semantic Web Activity of the W3C [27] and the ISO 
efforts in the direction of complex media content modeling, 
in particular, the Multimedia Content Description Interface 
(MPEG-7) [28]. 
The Semantic Web approach provides a structured set of 
cooperating languages (e.g., RDF, RDFS, OWL) and 
processing tools to define ontology vocabularies. It supports 
reasoning with ontologies but does not specify any 
collection of specific metadata for multimedia products. 
Andrews, Zaihrayeu, and Pane [24] surveying various 
146
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 1.  Annotation model: as is the target of the annotation, ao the body, 
ar the annotation relation and ac denotes contextual information (i.e., who 
makes the annotation, when, how, and the application domain). 
annotation systems for the web, investigate existing models 
for representing annotations and analyze their different 
characteristics, forms and function. Based on this analysis a 
classification scheme for annotation models was developed 
that distinguishes three main dimensions namely: i) the 
structural complexity of annotations (e.g., simple labels, 
attribute/value pairs, structured collections of concepts and 
relations), ii) the type of vocabulary used (e.g., free text, 
controlled vocabulary, taxonomies, ontologies), and iii) the 
level of user collaboration in sharing and reusing semantic 
annotation, and in the collaborative construction and 
evolution of the underlying vocabulary or ontology. 
MPEG-7 is aimed at providing standardized means for 
describing 
audio-visual 
data 
content 
in 
multimedia 
environments [29]. The standard provides a set of 
descriptors and description schemes specifying the structure 
of the metadata elements, their relationships and the 
constraints a valid MPEG-7 description should adhere. It 
does not incorporate formal semantics and it is based on 
XML encoded metadata. As a consequence MPEG-7 is not 
open to standards that represent knowledge and make use of 
existing controlled vocabularies for describing the subject 
matter. Moreover, its XML schema-based nature has led to 
design decisions that leave the annotations conceptually 
ambiguous 
and, 
therefore, 
prevent 
direct 
machine 
processing of semantic content descriptions. In order to 
overcome these limitations, several approaches have been 
published providing a formalization of MPEG-7 as an 
ontology. A survey of these initiatives is provided by [30] 
where a detailed comparison of MPEG-7 compliant 
ontologies - such as Hunter's ontology, AceMedia, 
SmartWeb, Boemie, Rhizomik and COMM - is made on the 
base of three main dimensions namely: 1) low-level 
descriptors covering  visual and audio features; 2) structural 
descriptions 
pertaining 
to 
the 
decomposition 
and 
localization of content parts; 3) subject matter descriptions 
expressing the semantic conveyed by a multimedia resource. 
What emerges from the analysis is that most of the 
approaches use a modular architecture to mainly represent 
structural issues and low-level features, using OWL DL 
formal languages. Subject matter descriptions are usually 
demanded to external top ontologies such as SUMO or 
DOLCE or domain-specific conceptualizations. The COMM 
ontology (Core Ontology for MultiMedia) [31] constitutes 
one of the more recent approaches to the formalization of 
MPEG-7 
descriptions 
semantics. 
It 
extends 
the 
Description&Situation pattern (D&S) and Ontology of 
Information Objects (OIO) of DOLCE by re-engineering the 
MPEG-7 description tools in order to provide a common 
foundational 
framework 
for 
describing 
multimedia 
documents. 
A comparison between MPEG-7 and several other 
multimedia metadata standards is discussed in [32][33]. The 
analysis is made according to several dimensions including 
the specific media production process - e.g., premeditate, 
capture, archive, query, message construction, organize, 
publish and distribute [34] - during which the metadata are 
intended to be used.  
What emerges from the comparison is that a support for 
describing semantic content linked to premeditate, message 
construction, and organization processes is generally 
missing. The premeditate process is where initial ideas 
about media production, e.g., goals, intentions, target 
audience, subject, genre, deep values are established; the 
message construction and organization processes are where 
the author/designer specifies the message he/she wishes to 
convey and media assets are organized according to the 
message. 
MPEG-7, for example, supports premeditation in the 
CreationInformation 
description 
scheme 
and 
in 
the 
Classification scheme [29]. The former allows the annotator 
to represent date, place, action, material, staff involved in 
the creation of the content entity. The latter allows the 
annotation of the artifact with information about the subject, 
genre, purpose, and market segment. However, these data 
are completely disconnected with respect to content 
structure and semantics. As an instance, the genre is a label 
that is associated to the entire multimedia product; it cannot 
refer in any way to discourse structure or to expressive 
characteristics that are used to materialize that genre in the 
artifact. As a consequence, it is difficult to understand how 
the genre is intentionally constructed and articulated within 
the message during the design process, how it shapes the 
message and how users can infer the designer’s intentions – 
both informative and persuasive. A similar argument can be 
stated for product purpose, intended audience and so forth. 
It is not possible to explain how a purpose is achieved in 
that artifact, how an intended audience is inscribed within 
the artifact itself, or why a specific design decision has been 
made. 
As far as message construction and organization 
processes are concerned, the MPEG-7 standard provides 
very high flexibility by introducing general-purpose 
descriptor schemes for representing a wide collection of 
story-related semantic entities such as objects, people, 
events, concepts, states, places, and time together with their 
properties and relationships [29]. In practice, this flexibility 
is hindered by the fact that the annotator is left alone in 
using these descriptors to model a narrative.  
The problem is that to be a true narrative, a text must 
exhibit a specific quality called narrativity [35]. This 
147
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

quality, that may be present in various degrees, is the result 
of a set of interrelated structural factors (e.g., clear structure, 
genre typicality, affective structure, dramatic mode) [36], 
that are not taken into account by MPEG-7 and the other 
multimedia metadata standards alike.  
In other words, to build a narrative, it is not sufficient to 
have the main ingredients, it is necessary to know how to 
put these ingredients together in order to reflect the specific 
qualities of this kind of genre. MPEG-7 and other standards 
provide the What but do not support the How. 
For the genre of narrative video commercials that are the 
scope of the present article, what is needed is a vocabulary 
(and a conceptualization) that is able to bridge the gap 
existing between abstract concepts such as purpose, 
narrativity, narrative structure, discourse structure, intended 
values, affective states of the story's characters, etc. and 
perceptual qualities such as basic visual and auditory 
features. The aim of the research described in this paper is 
to explore how it is possible to represent this kind of 
meanings and use them to annotate the message in order to 
exploit it for content retrieval, explanation, and reuse. 
III. 
SEMIOTIC ANNOTATION 
In this section, we introduce the concept of semiotic 
analysis and annotation that is at the core of our approach 
[1]. This process exploits a meta-model (i.e., an informal 
ontology) of the narrative video genre. Therefore, we first 
review some relevant conceptualizations that have been 
proposed in the past to describe or annotate narrative videos. 
The analysis and comparison of these conceptualizations 
allowed us to identify a set of requirements for the 
development of our meta-model that will be illustrated in 
Section IV. 
A. Semiotics 
Semiotic studies cover a wide range of theories, models, 
and conceptualizations according to the specific intention 
they try to achieve and the unit of inquiry they address. 
Classical semiotics assumes the concept of sign as the main 
unit of signification and studies languages as sign systems 
[37]; interpretative semiotics focuses on processes of 
interpretation (i.e., semiosis) [38]. Contemporary semiotics 
extends its scope to the text construct intended as a unit of 
interrelated 
sign 
structures 
while 
Social 
Semiotics 
investigates human signifying practices in specific social 
and cultural circumstances [39]. More recent developments 
studies mediated experiences [40], technical artifacts and 
design [41][42].  
What is common to all these approaches, regardless the 
variety of perspectives, is a focus on meaning, meaning 
construction (sense-making) and communication. As stated 
by Scolari [43]: “Semiotics studies objects (texts, 
discourses) to understand processes (sense production and 
interpretation)". From this point of view, semiotics appears 
as a methodology. What it actually does is to reflect on the 
more appropriate methods that can be used to perform the 
analysis of communicative and physical artifacts viewed as 
kind of multimodal texts. As a consequence, it elaborates 
tools (e.g., conceptualizations, models, grids of focal 
queries) for making the analysis and tests the effectiveness 
of these tools with concrete artifacts. 
B. Semiotic analysis and annotation 
By semiotic analysis, we mean a process of knowledge 
acquisition based on decomposition and re-composition of a 
given communicative artifact. Its aim is to unfold the 
articulation of meaning inscribed within the artifact by its 
designer/author. The basic assumption is that the intended 
meaning is spread over different interconnected forms - 
understood, here, as structured sets of relationships among 
content or expression entities - deployed within the artifact. 
The decomposition and re-composition processes are always 
based on some idea or conceptualization - a meta-model or 
(informal) ontology - of the genre of artifact under 
consideration. To be effective, such a conceptualization 
should be capable to capture the internal articulation of 
interconnected forms that are inscribed within the artifact. 
The result of the semiotic analysis is a partial or complete 
instantiation of the meta-model, i.e., a description (model) 
of the artifact that is then used for the annotation.  The 
process can be detailed as follows (Figure 2): 
• 
Step-0. An object - e.g., a clip video in the current 
case - is selected and regarded as a text, i.e., an 
autonomous, multilayered and organic unity having 
a goal/purpose: to produce effects by means of 
signification processes. 
• 
Step-1. A meta-model of the type of object under 
consideration is selected as a reference guide to 
individuate main parts and relationships. The text 
object is decomposed accordingly. 
• 
Step-2. Constituent parts and relationships are 
investigated, in turn, in order to understand how they 
may contribute to the functioning of the whole. To 
this end, a re-composition of the parts into the whole 
is mentally attempted and a description (model) of 
the artifact is produced. Again, the meta-model is 
used to build the description. This step involves a 
back-and-forth movement between pointing out 
material particulars and relating them to interpreted 
wholes. 
• 
Step-3. The result of the analysis is used to annotate 
the object. 
 As shown in the figure, several meta-models of the type 
of object under consideration may be available, at a certain 
time, for supporting analysis and annotation; so the 
selection of an appropriate one depends on specific purposes 
and interests of the analysis. If we assume that the 
considered artifact is an organic unity and we seek to 
explain this unity, not all meta-models are equally 
appropriate for the task. We need a meta-model that 
embodies a hypothesis about the general organization and 
internal coherence of the elements that constitute the 
artifact. This coherence may have several sources, including 
the existing relationships between the artifact's structure and 
its function, the artifact's genre, author's style, the cultural 
meanings associated with multimodal materials. In this way, 
the annotation is not simply used for classifying the artifact 
elements into categories; we want to relate the elements and 
148
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
their respective categories in order to explain its organic 
unity. Moreover, meta-models may change over time 
reflecting the interests and tastes of mainstream research 
communities. As a consequence, also the aspects of an 
object that are deemed relevant change. In the field of 
multimedia design, for example, we have witnessed a shift 
of interest from pragmatic issues related to technology, 
product utility, usefulness, and performance to hedonic 
aspects that are related to the whole human experience such 
as aesthetics, pleasure, fun, values. The meta-models have 
evolved accordingly. 
It should be stressed that the process of semiotic 
annotation does not occur in the vacuum but within a 
specific pragmatic situation and a social and cultural 
context. The result of analysis and thus the annotation are 
simultaneously 
personal 
and 
inter-subjective. 
The 
annotation is personal because it is particular to the 
individual analyst, his/her knowledge, and experience. It is 
inter-subjective because the analysis is driven by a meta-
model that represents a shared conceptualization within a 
community of practice, i.e., it is socially constructed. In this 
way, the personal dimension is balanced both by the 
qualities found in the object itself, and the characteristics of 
the meta-model. The interpretation must start from 
empirical qualities but is completed by the experience of the 
analyst and the knowledge embedded into the meta-model. 
Finally, the process of semiotic analysis and annotation 
is also a process of evaluation of the meta-model itself that 
may be modified and enriched in order to better represent 
concrete artifacts. 
C. Ontologies of narrative videos 
Quoting Gruber [44] an Ontology is an: "explicit and 
formal specification of a shared conceptualization about a 
given domain of interest". We are interested in the 
knowledge level (conceptualization and vocabulary) of an 
ontology 
rather 
than 
its 
symbolic 
level 
(formal 
representation). At this level Ontologies are meta-models. 
They provide the concepts (of entities, properties, and 
relationships) and the vocabulary that can be used to build 
models (e.g., descriptions) of specific things belonging to 
the considered domain of interest. By specifying the 
conceptual primitives, a meta-model implicitly defines the 
set of questions (called competence questions) that can be 
answered using the conceptualization. Ontologies are 
always incomplete and perspectival, i.e., they partially 
represent the domain of interest and they do it from a 
specific point of view that is related to the intended purpose 
of the ontology. 
In this subsection, we briefly review some relevant 
conceptualizations of digital video with specific attention to 
those models aimed at annotation or indexing tasks or 
including narrative features. Before doing that it is worth 
attempting to characterize the nature of a narrative video 
viewed as a cultural artifact (e.g., a semiotic text) rather than 
a technological object featuring specific digital data 
structures, video format, compression algorithms and so 
forth [45]. Therefore, in this paper, a video is conceived of 
as a tangible object, a space-time dynamic configuration ( a 
 
Figure 2.  Analysis and annotation processes: 0) object selection, 1) 
decomposition, 2) re-composition, and 3) annotation steps. Object 
decomposition and re-composition are driven by a meta-model of the genre 
of object under analysis. 
presentation) of visual and auditory signs that are inscribed 
within a material support using specific techniques, and are, 
therefore, available for an activity of visual and aural 
exploration and interpretation by a subject (the user or 
viewer/listener). A narrative video is a video that satisfies 
the conditions of narrativity stated by Ryan [35] or, 
alternatively, that is compliant with one of the definitions of 
narrative proposed by Grimaldi [46]. 
Attempts to exploit narrative theory for describing and 
annotating audio-visual resources date back to the early 90s. 
An example is the research work by Davis [47] at MIT who 
proposed a set of base categories for narrative video 
representation including action, character, object, mis-en-
scene, cinematography. Davis explores annotation for video 
repurposing. More recently [48] illustrates a multilayered 
conceptualization of digital videos for indexing tasks that 
distinguishes among three main levels of analysis: layout, 
content and semantic index. For each level, a core set of 
descriptive concepts has been introduced. A similar 
proposal is the meta-model discussed in [49]. In this paper, 
video analysis and description is articulated into three 
dimensions: a spatiotemporal dimension representing the 
artifact at different levels of structural aggregation; a 
semantic dimension focusing on content (e.g., objects, 
events, plot structure) and an interpretative dimension 
inspired to film semiotics featuring different levels of 
interpretation 
(e.g., 
perceptual, 
cinematic, 
diegetic, 
connotative and sub-textual). Other relevant contributions 
are the research work by Stakelberg [50] and by Lombardo 
et al. [51] in the field of transmedia production and 
storytelling. The former contribution represents a very rich 
conceptualization (not yet an ontology) of transmedia 
narratives. The latter, developed within the CADMIO 
project, is focused on semi-automatic annotation of 
narrative artifacts and illustrates two computational 
ontologies devoted to characters and story respectively. 
Generative Theory by Greimas [52] is actually one of the 
149
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

most widely used frameworks - in the field of contemporary 
semiotics - for the analysis of commercials video [53]. The 
framework distinguishes four interrelated levels of analysis: 
i) the textual level representing the concrete/physical 
manifestation of narrative content in terms of audio-visual 
features ii) the discourse level referring to thematic, 
figurative, rhetorical aspects iii) a shallow narrative level 
describing a story in terms of abstract roles (called actants) 
and narrative schemas (e.g., the narrative canonical schema) 
and iv) a deep narrative level that uses a specific tool called 
semiotic square to articulate deep semantic meanings such 
as narrative values (axiology). Signification unfolds by 
crossing these levels from shallow features of a video to the 
most abstract and deep ones. Although this framework is 
highly popular in the field of semiotic studies there are few 
attempts to transfer it (or parts of it) in the technical fields of 
multimedia analysis, design, and annotation. A notable 
exception is represented by the work illustrated in [54]. The 
authors exploit a framework of consumers' values proposed 
by Floch [55] within generative semiotics for automatic 
classification of videos and retrieval. Finally, the work by 
Bateman [56] and Tseng [57], although not strictly related 
to annotation tasks, are important contributions focusing on 
the application of Metz's semiotics of film and social 
semiotics, respectively, to the analysis of audio-visual 
artifacts. 
What emerges from the analysis of relevant literature 
can be summarized as follows. A common objective of the 
considered works is the attempt to represent the complex 
and multilayered syntactic and semantic structure of video 
artifacts at different abstraction and aggregation levels. 
However, the number of layers, their meaning, the links 
existing between layers, and the conceptualizations 
proposed to describe the semantic content of each layer vary 
from one approach to another. There are differences and 
ambiguities in the use of core terms such as for example, 
narrative, narrativity, discourse, plot, story, as well as their 
conceptual meanings. As an instance, the concepts of story 
and narrative are often used interchangeably and defined in 
various ways along a continuum ranging from the easiest 
definition (e.g., a narrative is a representation of one or 
more events) to the hardest one (e.g., a narrative is an 
emotion-evoking and value-laden representation of one or 
more characters in a series of chronological events that are 
connected by causality or agency and which progress 
through conflicts toward a climax). As a consequence, meta-
models of video artifacts vary in complexity and expressive 
power. The same concept of "event", which recurs in all 
definitions of story or narrative, is actually intended in 
different ways. Sometimes the term is used as a synonym of 
action or happening, i.e., something that - intentionally or 
unintentionally - occurs in time and space and produces a 
state transformation; other times it refers to the effect of an 
action (e.g., the state transformation itself); or to a state of 
affairs. 
These 
conceptual 
ambiguities 
hinder 
the 
development of usable and shared conceptualizations as the 
basis for interoperable ontologies. 
It seems that no one of the forenamed approaches is able 
to 
exploit 
the 
benefits 
of 
contemporary 
semiotic 
conceptualizations in their full potentiality. This is the aim 
of the present work as discussed in the next sections. 
D. Requirements for Semiotic Annotation 
That said, we present a list of requirements for the 
design of a semiotic compliant narrative video annotation. 
Our aim is to integrate concepts belonging to the MPEG-7 
standard with concepts that are drawn from contemporary 
semiotic fields, namely, visual semiotics, social semiotics, 
and generative semiotics. We have taken inspiration from 
classical theoretical papers in order to provide a 
conceptualization that is widely shared among experts in 
these fields. To this end we have aggregated the 
requirements into three main classes namely: syntactic, 
semantic and pragmatic requirements.  
At the syntactic level, the conceptualization should 
enable the annotator:  
- to structurally decompose the video presentation using 
different spatiotemporal aggregation levels. As an instance 
it should be possible to focus on single regions within a 
representative frame; on moving regions crossing a 
sequence of adjacent frames; or look at the video as a 
temporal sequence of more aggregated entities such as 
shots, scenes, sequences, and episodes. We need specific 
mechanisms for the univocal identification of the anchor of 
annotating data; 
- to describe the video using multiple structural 
decompositions. 
As 
an 
instance, 
a 
decomposition 
representing the video as a sequence of shots, another as a 
sequence of scenes and another one representing the same 
video as a sequence of homogeneous sound objects (e.g., 
music, silence, speech, effects) or combination of sound 
objects; 
- to relate together structural entities belonging to the 
same or to different decompositions (e.g., to represent the 
relationships existing between adjacent shots; between shots 
and scenes or between scene boundaries and sound objects); 
Structural decompositions constitute the scaffolding for 
the semantic level. They allow the annotator to represent 
compositional (or organizational) meaning that tells us what 
goes with what, what smaller units belong to what larger 
unit, how parts are related together, and how semantic 
meanings are distributed across the whole video.  
At the semantic level, the conceptualization should 
enable the annotator: 
- to associate basic kinetic and plastic features (e.g., 
shapes, 
colors, 
positions, 
textures, 
sizes, 
cinematic 
movements, visual contrasts, rhythm) to visual regions or 
structured groupings of regions within a frame or across 
frames [58]. To describe spectro-morphological features of 
sound objects (e.g., time features such as amplitude, 
envelope, loudness, tempo, and spectral ones such as pitch, 
timbre, harmony) [59]. 
- to associate a semantic construct (e.g., a figurative sign 
such as an object, subject, action, event, or abstract concepts 
such as goals, deep values, emotions) to visual or auditory 
fragments, and, indirectly to the plastic or spectro-
morphological features that characterize them [60]; to link 
the semantic constructs by several types of relationships 
150
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(e.g., spatial, temporal, logical, rhetorical, typological, 
mereological, causal, teleological relationships); 
- to associate dramaturgical patterns (e.g., the canonical 
narrative schema by Greimas [61], the Hero’s Journey by 
Campbell [62], the Dramatic Arc or Three Acts Model [63]) 
to visual or auditory segments of the video, and, indirectly, 
to the semantic constructs and expressive features that 
represent 
these 
segments 
at 
the 
syntactic 
and 
semantic/figurative levels; 
Semantic annotation allows the annotator to describe 
representational (or ideational) meaning that tells us what 
recognizable existents are represented, who is doing what, 
to whom, and with what means, what is happening and what 
is related to what and how.  
At the pragmatic level, the conceptualization should 
enable the annotator: 
- to identify the images, called simulacra, of all the 
participants involved in the production and use of the video 
(i.e., addresser, addressee, narrator, observer, actor) that are 
inscribed 
within 
the 
artifact 
and 
specify 
their 
interrelationships [64];  
- to describe the kind of relationship the designer/author 
of the video wants to evoke between the various subjects 
inscribed within the video and the intended user. 
Pragmatic annotation allows the annotator to represent 
interpersonal (or orientational) meaning that refers, for 
example, to social distance and intimacy, image acts and 
gazes, narrative engagement and power relationships [65].  
Table I exemplifies focal questions that can be used to 
direct the attention of the analyst to key perspectives and 
issues related to the three main types of meanings taken into 
account by social semiotics [39][66]. 
Finally, the conceptualization should provide the 
annotator with a set of relationships that can be used to link 
all the above aspects together in order to build the desired 
means/ends ladder: deep values with the storyline, the 
elements of the story with discourse segments and 
expressive qualities; expressive qualities with interpersonal 
meanings. 
IV. 
 THE META-MODEL 
We propose an informal conceptualization - a meta-
model not yet a formal ontology - that provides a core set of 
basic descriptors that can be used to perform a semiotic 
annotation according to the above requirements. It has been 
organized into four main related modules (called boxes): the 
text, discourse, story, and agent boxes. Figure 3 (left) shows 
a conceptual schema of the modules and their inter-
relationships. In this schema, and in the following ones, we 
use different graphical representations (i.e., types of arrows) 
to denote three main relationships: hyponymic (i.e., sub-
class-of relation), meronymic (i.e., part-of relation) and 
generic 
etherarchical 
(e.g., 
associative) 
relationships 
between core concepts. 
A. The Text Model 
By Text we mean a concrete manifestation of a 
narrative, i.e., a complex fabric of signs belonging to 
different semiotic modalities (e.g., moving images, sounds,  
TABLE I.  
EXAMPLES OF FOCAL QUESTIONS RELATED TO TYPES OF 
MEANING AND LEVELS OF ANALYSIS   
Type of meaning 
Focal questions (examples) 
Compositional 
(Syntactic level) 
 
What constitutes the whole video text 
under analysis? How do you know what 
is and what is not a part of it? What is 
the most salient visual/auditory element? 
Which parts are related together? Which 
parts are separated? How are parts 
related together? 
Representational 
(Semantic level) 
What recognizable actors or participants 
in actions and relationships are 
presented? Persons? Concrete things? 
Abstract ideas, qualities? What 
relationships are presented among these 
participants? In what common or shared 
action, event, happening are they 
presented? What are le locations, 
settings, causes of, temporal location of, 
these relationships, actions, and events? 
How are actions, events synchronized or 
sequenced in time? What logical, 
rhetorical relationship among actions, are 
presented? What emotions are described? 
How emotions evolve over time? What 
values drive the story? 
Interpersonal 
(Pragmatic level) 
Who is the intended viewer/receiver of 
this video text? What internal features 
index anticipated qualities of the 
receiver? What qualities of the 
sender/author of the video are indexed by 
internal features? How does the video 
position the sender relative to the 
receiver? In a relation of power? 
Dominance? Intimacy? Formality? What 
does the video request or demand of the 
receiver? How? How does the video 
index the stance of the sender (or any 
voice it projects) toward the text itself? 
Toward the receiver? Toward its own 
representational content? 
 
written words) and conveying narrative content to the user's 
interpretation. 
The text model is a key issue of our conceptualization 
since it relates content with expression, according to the 
schema reported in Figure 3 (right). A Text has a T-
Structure composed by T-Segments and relations (T-
SegmentRel). Segments have been classified into several 
classes following MPEG-7 [29]. Relations include spatial 
and temporal relationships as described by Allen [67] and 
Galton [68]. 
A text segment is linked to a discourse segment 
representing its content and points to a set of sensory 
qualities and quality relations representing its expression. 
As sketched in Figure 4 (left), we distinguish between tonal 
- static, persistent - and rhythmic - dynamic, transient - 
qualities. Qualities may have associated facets and quantity 
spaces, i.e., domains of possible values. Color, for example, 
has hue, saturation and lightness as facets, and values in 
YCbCr or RGB color spaces. Sensorial qualities can be 
related together by several kinds of relationships such as 
contrast, affinity, and completion producing higher aesthetic 
effects such as salience, separation, connection, balance, 
151
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  An overview of the proposed meta-model (left);  the Text module (right). 
  
 
Figure 4.  Expression (left) and Discourse (right) modules. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Value module (left) and Agent module (right).
152
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

symmetry, order, complexity or affective states (e.g., 
emotions, feelings, mood or atmospheres). 
From an experiential point of view, the text module is 
intended to capture the sensorial experience the user has 
when viewing/hearing a narrative video. This experience is 
strongly related to the visual and auditory qualities of 
semiotic materials. Plastic forms, in particular, represent an 
autonomous level of signification of the video that can be 
used to make sense [58].  
B. The Discourse Model 
Discourse (also "syuzhet") represents the content of a 
narrative, i.e., what is narrated by the text (e.g., the events of 
a story) and how it has been done (e.g., plot, rhetorical 
structure, stylistic choices). As shown in Figure 4 (right), a 
Discourse has a D-Structure composed of D-Segments and 
relations (D-SegmentRel). A D-Segment consists of D-
Setting and D-NarrativeStructure, the former specifying 
place, time and mis-en-scene; the latter specifying a 
structured set of narrative programs. A narrative program is 
defined in terms of D-Agent performing a D-Action and 
causing a D-Event intended here as a kind of state 
transformation. Narrative programs are related by logical, 
temporal or rhetorical relationships [69]. The concept of 
narrative program is a key concept of the proposed 
conceptualization. It is borrowed from Greimas [52][61]. It 
allows the annotator to represent "who does what": how 
actions are distributed among agents (see Figure 5, right) as 
well as the effects produced by the actions be they external 
physical changes, or internal cognitive, or affective 
transformations of subjects. As an instance, the effect of an 
action can be the acquisition or loss of a concrete object or 
person or of a more abstract entity such as freedom, 
knowledge, happiness. In any case, transformations can be 
interpreted as conjunction or disjunction processes of a 
subject with an object charged with values (object of value). 
Values have been classified according to Floch [55] into 
four classes namely, practical, critical, utopian and ludic 
values (Figure 5, left). Practical values refer to utility, 
usefulness; critical values to convenience, performance, 
quality; utopian values to identity, reflection, social 
relations, 
and 
ludic 
values 
to 
surprise, 
madness, 
astonishment, irony and pleasure including aesthetic 
pleasure. The selection of specific values in the construction 
of the story allows the author to realize specific marketing 
strategies. The discourse model is flexible enough for 
allowing the modeler to represent single actions, aggregates 
of actions occurring simultaneously or in sequence, and 
aggregates of aggregates (an entire story). Actions may be 
performed by the same agent or by different agents; they 
may occur in the same setting or in different settings. For 
narrative texts, several discourse structures have been 
proposed in literature such as [62][63]. Each of them 
decomposes a story in phases that are bounded by specific 
kinds of events and imposes a set of specific constraints on 
the narrative structures constituting each phase. As an 
instance, each dramatic arc of a Dramatic Arc model is 
strictly related to specific rhetorical relationships as 
discussed in [70]. Further constraints exist between 
discourse and text. Major events of a dramatic discourse 
structure such as the inciting incident, climax, resolution, 
etc. should be expressed, at the textual level, by appropriate 
sensorial qualities. Dramatic tension evolution as well as 
affective events (i.e., internal state transformations of main 
characters) should be sensed first, through appropriate 
visual images or melodic contour, then conceptualized. This 
imposes an internal coherence between narrative content 
and expression that is at the core of the semantic ladder we 
want to establish between different forms of meaning 
articulation. 
From an experiential point of view, discourse is intended 
to capture cognitive and affective aspects of the interaction. 
This experience is strongly related to figurative features, 
narrative structures and their spatial and temporal 
configuration. Figurative forms (formants), in particular, 
represent another level of signification of the video that is 
superimposed to plastic qualities [58].  
C. The Story Model 
Most of the literature [71] understands "story" (also 
"fabula" or "histoire") to be the events that constitute the 
content of a narrative. Since the story is embedded within 
discourse we do not specify a new model for it but use the 
conceptualization provided by MPEG-7 with minimal 
variations [29]. This conceptualization represents basic 
components of stories namely, existents (Object DS, 
AgentObject DS), events (Event DS), abstract concepts and 
states (Concept DS, SemanticState Ds), and settings 
(SemanticPlace DS, SemanticTime DS).  
D. The Agent Model 
The agent model takes inspiration from Enunciation 
Theory [64]. This theory suggests that every communicative 
artifact contains, inscribed within it, an image or 
simulacrum (i.e., a constructed representation) of the actual 
sender and receiver. These images are called the addresser 
and addressee respectively. They are embodied in the 
artifact in the sense that they are analytically available to the 
critic by means of a close analysis of the artifact itself. 
The agent model is aimed at representing the addresser e 
addressee and their relationships with the subjects of the 
story and discourse as they are prefigured by the product. 
More specifically, agents - individuals, groups or 
organizations - have been classified into two main classes: 
communication agents and narrative agents (see Figure 5, 
right). The former class includes the actual sender/receiver 
(called empirical agents) and their simulacra, the addresser 
and the addressee. The latter comprises the subjects of the 
story (e.g., actors and actants) and the subjects of discourse 
(e.g., observers and narrators). An observer is an agent 
responsible for physical focalization. It establishes the 
spatial position of the viewer with respect to the story 
world, for example, by selecting, at the expressive level, 
specific shot sizes, camera angles, lighting conditions. A 
narrator is an agent responsible for the cognitive and 
affective focalization. Actually, the viewer/spectator is 
invited not only to perceive what is told by the video from a 
spatial position but, more importantly, to interpret what is 
153
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
happening from a specific conceptual point of view 
(cognitive perspective taking) and to emphasize with some 
characters of the story (i.e., to understand and share their 
perceptual, cognitive, and affective status). Notice, that the 
D-Agent concept belonging to the discourse box can be 
equated to the NarrativeAgent of the Agent-Box (e.g., to an 
Actor or Narrator) thus realizing a connection between these 
two conceptualizations. The agent box is intended to capture 
relational experience, that is, possible relationships (e.g., 
social distance, power relationships, engagement) between 
the sender/receiver of the advertising message and 
narrative/discourse agents arising from their images within 
the text. As an instance, a company (a sender) may be 
associated with a visual or auditory segment that represents 
the company visual or auditory logo within the text. The 
logo plays the role of the addresser. An actor of the story 
may represent the user (addressee) playing a specific 
actantial role (e.g., the hero of the story). An observer may 
adopt the physical position of an actor of the story thus 
showing the story world through the eyes of that actor. 
Analogously, an actor may be associated with a narrator (a 
storyteller) and so forth. The "distance" between the actual 
receiver (the viewer) and the actors of the story is a function 
of two main factors: i) the distance existing between the 
receiver and the observer, and ii) the distance between the 
observer and the actors. The former can be reduced, for 
example, by letting the viewer play the role of an observer, 
i.e., by giving him/her the control of the camera such as in 
interactive videos; the latter by letting the observer 
represents the story world and events from the vantage point 
of an actor of the story. Seeing events from the point of 
view of a story's character makes the viewer aware of the 
character's perspective and his or her interpretation of 
events, and moreover, of the character's motives in relation 
to events and other characters. By adopting a character's 
perspective the viewer can understand and relive the 
character's emotions. This is essentially empathy, a viewer's 
mirroring of a character's emotional experience. Relational 
experience is strongly related to processes of narrative 
engagement such as cognitive perspective taking, empathy, 
presence, flow, and involvement [11]. Narrative experiences 
that are more engaging should result in more enjoyment, 
i.e., fun and pleasure. Therefore, it is important to represent 
these features in order to be able to compare products and 
evaluate their respective hedonic effectiveness. 
V. 
THE CASE STUDY 
We illustrate an example of manual annotation of a 
narrative commercial video clip. The aim is evaluating the 
feasibility of semiotic analysis and annotation. To this end, 
we start by illustrating the annotation tool we have chosen, 
then the procedure we followed and obtained results.  
A. The annotation tool 
A critical comparison of annotation tools has been 
presented in [72]. Among them, the EUDICO Linguistic 
Annotator (ELAN) shows several advantages including its 
relatively shallow learning curve and user-friendly interface 
[73]. 
 
Figure 6.  A screenshot of the ELAN annotation tool. 
 Figure 6 shows a screen shot of the ELAN interface. 
Annotations in ELAN can be grouped into multiple layers 
(called tiers) that are part of tier hierarchies. Annotation 
values are Unicode characters, and the annotation document 
is saved in an XML format based on the ELAN XML 
Schema. The tool can be easily connected with the Praat 
software for the analysis of the audio component of the 
video in the temporal and spectral domains [74].  
ELAN allows the annotator to define a vocabulary of 
descriptors at the beginning of the process; a more recent 
version of the environment, called ONTO-ELAN, is capable 
of importing an ontology to be used in the analysis and 
annotation [75]. A limitation of the tool is that is not 
possible to annotate single regions within frames.  
B. Annotation of a Pepsi Cola clip 
The clip produced in the late 1980’s is based on the 
body copy  “Pepsi Cola. The choice of a new generation”. It 
lasts 29.4 s at a frame rate of 30fps [76]. The story can be 
summarized as follows: 
 
A delivery van of Pepsi–Cola reaches a crowded beach. 
The young driver gets out, opens the side door and switches 
an amplifier on; two loudspeakers emerge from the roof.  
The boy brings a bottle of Pepsi close to the microphone; 
uncaps it; pours the liquid into a glass and drinks emitting 
an ”Ahhhh” of pleasure. People attracted by the puffing of 
gas and boy’s expression rush to the van to quench their 
thirst (and buy the product!). 
 
A characteristic of this clip that makes it a candidate for 
semiotic annotation is that it stages a narrative telling "the 
process itself of advertising and persuasion". The process 
includes three steps (see Figure 7): 1) insert the potential 
viewer into a familiar situation (the delivery van of the 
Pepsi Cola reaches the crowded beach); 2) draw viewer's 
attention on a positive, euphoric experience of consumption 
(loudspeakers attract people; the experience of the boy 
drinking Pepsi is communicated both visually and auditory); 
3) activate into the viewer a desire to live a similar 
154
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
experience assuming a purchase behavior (people rush to 
the van to buy the Pepsi).  
 
The procedure followed for the analysis and annotation 
of the clip consists of the following basic stages: 
 
Stage-0. Annotation of the whole video with its genre 
and purpose. The whole clip is represented by an alignable 
annotation tier linked to a single segment (ClipSegment) 
representing 
the 
root 
of 
a 
hierarchical 
multi-tiers 
decomposition. Alignable tiers in ELAN are directly linked 
to the time axis of the audio-visual and can be further 
segmented. This tier is annotated with the multimedia genre 
(video commercial) and intention/purpose: "To advertise 
Pepsi Cola; to represent a persuasive process". 
 
Stage-1. 
Textual 
decomposition 
of 
the 
video: 
identification of the visual and auditory textual structures in 
terms of audio and video segments and their relationships. 
The ClipSegment is represented by several text structures 
(T-Structure): some of them are associated to the visual 
modality, others to the aural one. A structure (T-Structure1) 
decomposes the ClipSegment into a sequence of T-
Segments representing individual visual shots.  A further 
text structure (T-Structure2) annotates special transitional 
effects/edits like fades, dissolves, overlayed text. Another 
structure (T-Structure3) decomposes the ClipSegment based 
on continuous sequences (T-Segments) of homogeneous 
sound objects (called Audio Segments, AS). The sequences 
include silence, speech, environmental sound, and effects. In 
more complex cases it may be necessary to devote a 
separate text structure to each constituent of a complex 
audio sandwich. Notice how the sonic effect "Frzzzz" of the 
liquid while the boy uncaps the bottle covers several 
adjacent shots of the video, i.e., the two structures are not 
aligned in time.  
 
Figure 7.  Main steps of the process of advertising and persuasion: 1) 
insert the viewer into a familiar situation; 2) draw attention on a euphoric 
experience of consumption; 3) activate a purchase behavior. 
 
Stage-2. Textual annotation: association of expressive 
descriptors to the structures found in the previous stage. 
During this stage, a set of referring annotation tiers are 
introduced and associated to previous visual and aural 
structures to annotate single shots, transitions, and sound 
objects with tonal and rhythmic sensorial qualities according 
to the conceptualization shown in Figure 4 (left). 
 
Stage-3. Discoursive decomposition of the video: 
identification of the discourse structure of the video in terms 
of discourse segments and their relationships. The 
ClipSegment is represented by one or more discourse 
structures (D-Structure), based on scene analysis. A scene 
(D-Segment) is defined as a - not necessarily continuous - 
sequence of frames representing a narrative situation 
characterized by a stable setting (i.e., place, time and mise-
en-scene). In the case under consideration, we use a single 
discourse structure (D-Structure1), which is decomposed 
into 17 D-Segments. Scene boundaries correspond to 
changes in settings from outside to inside the Pepsi Cola van 
and vice-versa. 
 
Stage-4. 
Narrative 
segmentation: 
each 
discourse 
segment is further analyzed in terms of a setting and a 
narrative structure. Each scene (D-Segment) is annotated 
by a narrative structure composed of narrative programs and 
their logical and temporal relationships. 
 
Stage-5. Annotation of narrative programs. A set of 
referring annotation tiers are introduced and associated with 
previous narrative structures to annotate single narrative 
programs. For each narrative program, a set of tiers is used 
to separately describe the main components of the program 
namely the actor, the action, and the event. The event is 
further elaborated in terms of state transformation and value. 
In the example under consideration, D-Segment7 and D-
Segment9 (a scene inside the van) is annotated by a 
narrative structure composed by the temporal sequence of 
two narrative programs. The first program (D-NP4) refers to 
the boy (D-Agent) grasping the bottle of Pepsi (D-Action) 
thus making the user aware of the brand (D-Event). The 
second narrative program (D-NP5) refers again to the boy 
(D-Agent) who uncaps the bottle and pours drinks content 
(D-Action) thus getting the object of value, i.e., the product 
(D-Event). 
 
Stage-6. Relational analysis and annotation. The root 
segment (ClipSegment) is analyzed in order to identify the 
markers of addresser and addressee. In the Pepsi Cola clip, 
the bottle including logo and trademark represents the 
addresser (i.e., the brand Pepsi Cola). The boy and the 
people approaching the van represent the addressee. Three 
types of relationships are shown: i) between the viewer 
(represented by the boy) and the product/brand ii) between 
the viewer (represented by people in the beach) and the boy 
that is consuming the product and iii) between the viewer 
(represented by the real user) and the people on the beach 
who are experiencing a growing desire to drink a Pepsi. A 
set of further tiers have been introduced and linked to the 
155
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

ClipSegment to implicitly represent relational analysis by 
annotating actors' gazes, kind of shot, vertical and horizontal 
camera angle. As already said, these features are related to 
engagement, social distance, power and involvement 
relationships, respectively [65]. In the same way, the tone of 
voice in speech, sound perspective, volume, can be used to 
represent various degrees of intimacy or distance between 
the characters of the story (and indirectly the brand) and the 
user. 
Several temporal relationships among annotations 
belonging to different tiers are implicitly described through 
the relations existing between their corresponding tiers. As 
an instance, all referring tiers associated with the same 
alignable tier inherit its time decomposition. As a 
consequence, their annotations are automatically time 
aligned. Figure 8 summarizes the resulting decomposition 
and annotation structures. The figure also shows the 
articulation of meaning across the various tiers of the 
annotation hierarchy. Compositional meaning is represented 
by the decomposition of the video in terms of shots and 
sound objects and their associated visual and auditory 
qualities. Representational meaning is represented by scenes 
and their associated narrative structures (i.e., settings, 
narrative 
programs, 
relationships 
between 
narrative 
programs). Finally, interpersonal meaning is represented by 
relational annotations (e.g., social distance, engagement, 
simulacra) associated to video shots. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
In this section we view semiotic annotation in a broader 
context by relating it to research work made within 
Research through Design (RtD) [77][78], Philosophy of 
Technology [79] and Interface and Interaction Criticism 
[80][81][82][83]. The aim is to highlight connections with 
these fields and potential contributions. 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  The hierarchy of decomposition tiers used in the Pepsi Cola 
example and their associated meanings. 
A. Semiotic annotation and design knowledge 
Semiotic annotation represents a kind of intermediate 
level knowledge [84] (see Figure 9). It is in-between the 
annotated object (the video) and a conceptualization of the 
object (the meta-model or ontology of the video). On the 
one hand, the annotation, using the concepts of the meta-
model as descriptors {dij}, explicates the conceptual model 
adopted by the designer and, indirectly, the aspects that are 
implicitly deemed important and relevant for the design of 
that artifact according to that meta-model. On the other 
hand, the annotation, by indexing specific parts of the 
concrete artifact, shows how the descriptors - and thus the 
concepts of the meta-model - have been instantiated {vij} in 
that particular artifact. As a consequence, the annotation 
reveals the specific point in the design space (i.e., the space 
of all possible alternative instantiations associated to the 
adopted conceptualization) occupied by that artifact 
{(dij=vij)}. In this sense, we can say that the design 
knowledge embedded in the video is unfolded by the 
annotation that can be seen as a particular type of 
interpretation of the object made according to a meta-model 
(e.g., an ontology) of the object itself.  
The availability of design knowledge provides several 
benefits for the designers and the users as well. It allows 
explaining the way a specific video works from a 
communicative point of view: how meaning is constructed - 
in that video - by the interplay of several elements located at 
different levels of the means-end semiotic ladder. For 
designers, in particular, the annotation affords extraction of 
design knowledge in order to reuse it, evaluate its internal 
coherence or take inspiration from it in developing new 
products. 
They can exploit the annotation to compare two or more 
videos during the phase of competing analysis in order to 
understand why they are designed the way they are and how 
they differ from one to another. They may search for 
redundancies and variations; or aggregate videos on the base 
of similarities in the way they function (i.e., how they 
instantiate the meta-model) with the goal of constructing 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  Annotation A is in-between the video V and the metamodel 
MM. The metamodel provides concepts {ci} and descriptors {di} for 
interpretation and annotation. The video provides specific values {vi} to 
instantiate descriptors. The model echoes Peirce's concept of sign [38].  
156
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

portfolios [85]. Consider, as an instance, the following 
production scenario. 
Scenario-1. Samantha is a video producer. She has to 
design and develop a narrative video commercial for a 
client. The main requirement is that the video advertises a 
new line of products and communicates the core set of 
values that constitute the brand identity of the client's firm 
in a way that is innovative with respect to the videos of 
previous ad campaigns. Different issues are involved in this 
kind of design problem. First, Samantha has to know what 
does it means to design a narrative text and the various ways 
a product can be included in a narrative (e.g., as a prop in 
the setting, as the main character of the story, as an 
helper/instrument that can be used to achieve some abstract 
object of value or as the object of value by itself). Second, 
she must be able to understand how existing videos 
communicate the brand identity through their expressive and 
narrative features. More specifically, how values have been 
inscribed into the videos. To address these issues it is 
important to make explicit the brand design language used 
in the various products. 
Therefore, Samantha downloads from the company net 
the videos belonging to previous campaigns and analyses 
their associated semiotic annotations in order to understand 
how meanings have been articulated and distributed across 
the various semantic layers constituting the artifacts. In 
particular, she wants to identify which design variables have 
been consistently used to communicate brand personality 
and values in the various products under analysis. 
Therefore, she compares the annotations searching for 
similarities 
and 
differences. 
This 
comparison 
is 
inspirational. Samantha discovers that brand values have 
been mainly communicated by the audio tracks, e.g., by a 
leitmotif that recurs in all the videos with different 
orchestrations and sound design [13]. So she decides to 
design a new video where the same values are 
communicated by images (story) instead of by the music. 
 In this scenario, semiotic annotation has been exploited 
to generate insights particularly useful for addressing a 
design problem.  
Semiotic annotation can be useful also for generic users 
in order to make more informed choices, i.e., to better 
understand if a product is adequate with respect to their 
values, 
needs, 
desires, 
preferences. 
Moreover, 
the 
annotation can be an auxiliary to educate to critical analysis 
and evaluation, contributing to cultivate/enhance users' 
perceptual sensitivity (making people better at learning to 
see and hear) and interpretative skills. Consider the 
following use scenario 
Scenario-2. George teaches a course of Multimedia 
Design at his University. During his lectures, he exemplifies 
theoretical claims using existing videos. The search and 
selection of appropriate videos is a difficult and demanding 
task since they must be carefully analyzed before the 
lectures in order to understand if they are (or not) suitable to 
the intended ends. Again design knowledge could be very 
useful to understand how they function, and why they 
function in the way they do. The next lecture will be 
devoted to introduce and discuss various types of narrative 
structures. So George exploits semiotic annotation to search 
the web for commercial videos that represent an instance of 
the Hero's Journey or Greimas' canonical model. The 
annotation is then used to select the segments of the video 
that represent specific phases of each considered model to 
be shown to the students. A critical discussion is then 
started to assess the degree of fit among the visual and 
auditory modalities and their coherence with respect to the 
representational, interpersonal and compositional meanings 
expressed by each segment. 
In this scenario, semiotic annotation has been exploited 
to search for appropriate videos with respect to their 
discursive structure and to support discussion and critical 
judgments. 
Students 
can, 
therefore, 
improve 
their 
understanding and interpretative skills. At the end, they can 
be helped to better master their craft in designing mediated 
experiences. 
B. Semiotic annotation and technological mediation  
An important concept arising from the field of 
Philosophy of Technology is technological mediation. As 
claimed by Verbeek in [86] the use of a particular 
technology or artifact affects the relation between the user 
and the world in two ways: by a process of transformation 
of perception of the world (mediation of perception) and by 
transforming the user's praxis or action in the world 
(mediation of action). The effect of mediation of perception 
is realized by an amplification or reduction of the 
experienced aspects of reality while the effect of mediation 
of action is realized towards an invitation or inhibition to 
perform certain actions instead of others. 
Although all artifacts involved in the semiotic 
annotation (i.e., the meta-model/ontology, the video and the 
annotation itself) exert some kind of technological 
mediation, we are interested, here, in the role played by the 
ontology.  
The ontology realizes a mediation of perception process 
toward 
its 
conceptualization 
and 
axioms. 
The 
conceptualization brings some aspects of the world into 
sharp focus at the expense of blurring other aspects. It 
invites the user to look at the reality through a specific type 
of glasses that amplify or reduce some experienced aspects 
of the domain of application. The mediation of action is 
strictly linked to the ontology's competence questions since 
they specify the functional aspects of the ontology: its 
scope, and possible uses. In other words, the ontology 
invites the user to enquire reality by making certain queries 
instead 
of 
others. 
As 
an 
instance, 
viewing 
(and 
conceptualizing) a video at the computer level as a 
technological artifact (e.g., a set of digital resources and 
execution programs; a functional tool) is different from 
viewing it (also) at the cultural level as a semiotic text (e.g., 
a cultural interface, a work of rhetoric or a mediator of 
experience). In the second case, a set of complex aspects 
related to meaning, ethics, etc. emerge that are usually 
ignored at the computer level. As an instance, if the artifact 
is a tool, ethics is irrelevant since the ethical agency is 
situated in the user. If ontologies can affect people's 
behavior and relationship with the outside world, the design 
157
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

or adoption of an existing ontology is an ethic activity and 
ontology itself is a materialization of values and ethical 
choices [87].  
When ontologies are pushed into artifacts or are 
embedded in working environments/applications as meta-
models they shape them and guide, in this way, the user's 
experience and expectations. Their mediation effect is thus 
indirect; it occurs through the artifact in which the ontology 
is embedded and merges with the mediation effect of the 
artifact itself. The mediation effect is usually made 
transparent (i.e., not visible) during use. Transparency of the 
meta-model during video use is important since it enhances 
the possibility of uncritical and intense processing that is at 
the base of transportation effect and narrative persuasion. 
However, recent studies in the field of Philosophy of 
Technology and Persuasive Design claim that mediation 
effects should be made opaque and comprehensible to users 
[88][89]. A semiotic annotation may support this claim by 
unfolding contextual information that is information around 
the video (e.g., purpose, assumptions, articulation of 
meanings, and intended effects). By separating the narrative 
(video) from the information about how the narrative has 
been constructed (the annotation) we are able to guarantee 
both ease of use (transparency of use) and control of 
mediation effects (opacity of context) that is a kind of semi-
opacity of the video artifact. This is useful for the user in 
order to better understand how the video has been designed 
to satisfy the author's intended goals, why it functions as it 
does, what rhetorical mechanisms are at the base of its 
persuasive and informative functioning, what sort of culture 
it will encourage or resist. In this way, semiotic annotation 
may contribute to the diffusion of a critical attitude toward 
video commercials (and audio-visual products in general) 
and a greater awareness of the social effects this kind of 
products may produce. This opens to the last issue we wish 
to address. 
C. Semiotic annotation and criticism 
Criticism refers to "an expert of a given domain's 
informed exercise of judgment" [82]. Semiotic annotation 
has much to offer to the discipline of interface and 
interaction criticism [80][81]. Quoting Bardzell [81]: "[by 
Interaction Criticism] we mean rigorous interpretive 
analysis that explicates how elements of the interface, 
through their relationships to each other, produce certain 
meanings, affects, moods, and intuitions in people that 
interact with them". Then Bardzell moves into the nature of 
the concept "rigorous": "...we say rigorous to stress that 
interaction criticism, like the best film and literary criticism 
transcends anything-goes subjectivism and offers instead 
systematic, 
evidence-based 
analyses 
of 
subjective 
phenomena ..." 
It should be evident from the above citation that 
semiotic analysis and annotation converges and largely 
overlaps with the notion of criticism [83].  
Another issue that is strictly correlated with criticism, 
concerns the "value" of an artifact intended, here, not in 
economic terms (e.g., exchange value, use value) but more 
specifically, as a quality of the artifact that concerns its 
"inner logic" or the "human good" as discussed by recent 
theories about aesthetics [90] or cultural quality of new 
media [91]. We suggest that the annotation can change the 
value of an artifact. To support this claim we will draw on 
Danto's concept of transfiguration in his Aesthetic Theory 
[92]. As it is known, the issue Danto wants to address is the 
relationships between art and reality. In particular, the 
problem can be stated as follows: how can it happen that 
two objects that are phenomenologically indistinguishable - 
e.g., the Brillo Box artwork by Andy Warhol at MoMA and 
a similar object, the Brillo box containing soap pads at the 
supermarket - have so different values. The answer provided 
by Danto is that an object can change its value by means of 
a transfiguration process that is a particular kind of 
interpretation - called artistic interpretation - made in a 
context or atmosphere of art theory (the Art World). The 
interpretation does not change the physical appearance of 
the object but its ontological status: it changes the object 
into a work of art.  
We can try to apply these concepts to annotated videos. 
Here the video is the object and the annotation is a semiotic 
interpretation playing the role of transfiguration. The 
interpretation is based on a theoretical background, the 
ontology that can be mapped to Danto's atmosphere of 
theory (the context). In our case, the informal ontology 
illustrated in Section IV takes inspiration from several 
semiotic theories (e.g., visual semiotics, enunciation theory, 
narrative semiotics, and social semiotics) as discussed 
beforehand. These theories provide a theoretical scaffolding 
for the ontology and the annotation as well. The video with 
the annotation has a value greater than the video alone 
because the annotation provides a surplus of information 
that can be used to interpret and understand the video, that 
is, to attribute some meanings that are not empirically 
available from the video alone. The value of the video is 
thus embodied in the product but it is external to it (i.e., it is 
in the interpretation materialized by the annotation) and 
cannot be captured by only looking at the tangible object. 
As a consequence, the semiotic annotation should be 
considered as a constitutive part of the video. They are 
strictly correlated and mutually informing: the annotation 
"illuminates" the artifact giving it value; the artifact 
provides the ground for and exemplifies the annotation [93]. 
What is interesting in Danto's theory is that the value is 
linked to interpretation: not a generic interpretation, 
however, but a theoretically grounded one. Moreover, 
Danto, stresses the fact that the interpretation must be 
appropriate to the formal and material characteristics of the 
objects. In other words, the meanings must be embodied in 
the form and materiality of the object. The modality of this 
embodiment affects the quality of the artifact. So, for 
example, the internal coherence is a kind of inner logic and 
a dimension of quality because it refers to how meanings are 
distributed among semiotic materials and how they fit 
together. This discussion opens up interesting research 
perspectives and poses critical problems to automatic 
annotation. If the value rests in an appropriate interpretation 
then it cannot be captured by automatic procedures that refer 
only to existence, i.e., to tangible and empirical features. It 
158
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

must be provided by some human. It is not strictly necessary 
that the interpretation is the designer's one; obviously, the 
designer is in a privileged position to provide this kind of 
knowledge since she is the main source of design choices. 
However, we can envisage other possibilities - and 
associated annotations - such as the exploitation of 
multimedia critics, semioticians, exhibition curators, and 
commentators. If the interpretation is not the designer's one, 
it should be, at least, an interpretation that the designers 
would consider as a possible one. Other important sources 
of information are represented by the script and the 
storyboard of the narrative.  
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we have presented an annotation method 
for narrative videos, along with a worked-out case study in 
the field of advertising and brand communication.  
The standpoint is that of video production. We are 
interested in how purpose and meanings are intentionally 
constructed and articulated during the premeditate and 
message construction phases; how they are inscribed within 
the artifact and materialized through semiotic resources; 
how these meanings can be used to annotate the video for 
content retrieval, filtering, and content reuse. 
The annotation method exploits a semiotic meta-model 
(an informal ontology) of the video genre. The meta-model 
articulates the semantic content of the video according to a 
set of interrelated layers each addressing a specific kind of 
meaning: structural decomposition, visual and auditory 
expression, narrative content (i.e., discourse and story), 
values 
and 
interpersonal 
relationships. 
A 
core 
conceptualization has been provided to represent each layer 
as well as the relationships existing among layers in a 
domain-independent 
way. 
These 
relationships 
are 
responsible for the global unity and consistency of the 
artifact. They form a semiotic ladder covering the 
conceptual gap existing between the shallow and concrete 
audio-visual qualities and the deep and abstract constructs 
related to discourse, story, and axiological values.  
We highlight some features of the meta-model that on 
the base of our actual knowledge seem novel. First, the 
meta-model exhibits a strong separation of concerns that 
results in a modular conceptual architecture. However, what 
is important are the links existing between the various 
conceptualizations since these links are at the base of the 
articulation of meaning inside the product and of its internal 
coherence. They reflect design knowledge. Second, the 
introduction of a discourse model allows the annotator to 
explicitly aggregate basic story elements in a meaningful 
way in order to reflect important aspects of narrative 
products such as their rhetorical and dramaturgical 
structures that are ignored by traditional metadata standards. 
Moreover, the use of the concept of narrative program as the 
building block of discourse forces the annotator to focus 
simultaneously on several interrelated concepts - such as 
agent, action, state transition (event), object of value - that 
are strictly related to narrativity. Third, the introduction of a 
rich classification of agents inspired by Enunciation Theory 
provides the vocabulary for describing various roles 
involved in the development, communication, and use of an 
audio-visual product as well as their interrelationships. 
The role of the meta-model is to guide the annotator 
during semiotic analysis by focusing her attention on 
specific features and relationships. Furthermore, it provides 
the vocabulary and concepts used as descriptors during the 
annotation process. Semiotic annotation is different from 
pure keyword or concept annotation. The task is not simply 
to attach subjective comments, notes, pre-existing opinions 
or remarks to audio-visual segments but to unfold the 
generative process of sense-making inscribed within the 
product.  
We have briefly discussed the potential contribution of 
this kind of annotation for research in the fields of Research 
Through 
Design 
and 
Technology 
Mediation. 
The 
annotation, by unfolding the design knowledge inscribed 
within the product, is proposed as a viable means for 
communicating design thinking in a descriptive yet 
generative and inspirational fashion. It supports moving 
from theory/ideal (the meta-model) and practice/concrete 
(the artifact) and vice versa. Moreover, it makes visible the 
design decisions that were taken during the construction of 
the message opening the door to the assessment of 
technological mediation. This prompts designers and users 
to put particular attention to this issue. 
Much of the job of semiotic annotation resonates with 
criticism. At the heart of criticism is the attempt to explain 
abstract meanings and impressions by referring to the 
properties and forms of the artifact or the way the artifact 
has been produced. This is the case, for example, of past 
research in computational media aesthetics [94] where film 
grammar (i.e., cinematic techniques used during production) 
is used to explain high order qualities of video resources 
such as, for example, rhythm and pace or tempo. Our 
approach is different in two main aspects. First, we use a 
semiotic model of the video genre to guide analysis and 
annotation. Second, while in computational media aesthetics 
design and production knowledge remains hidden in the 
algorithm for the analysis and annotation, in our proposal 
design knowledge is explicated in the annotation itself with 
the benefits we have already explained.   
Semiotic annotation is inevitably complex if we try to 
capture the whole articulation and richness of intended 
meanings inscribed within a communicative artifact. Doing 
it well requires expertise. Automatic tools can be used to 
support low-level analysis of expressive qualities such as 
shot detection, dominant color identification, spectro-
morphological analysis of sound objects, basic video 
statistics, etc. However, for the more abstract levels, the 
human intervention is still needed. We do not claim or 
expect that the average video producer will be able to follow 
the procedure without prior training. To what extent 
semiotic annotations can be replicated? If two or more 
analysts use the meta-model described in Section IV to 
annotate the same product are their results consistent? This 
is an important issue that requires further research. 
Manual annotation is time-consuming but the case study 
we have worked out and our past experience with students 
showed that, for video commercials, it is a feasible approach 
159
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

due to the limited time extension of these kinds of products. 
The effort, in this case, is largely rewarded by the benefits 
connected with the unfolding of new design knowledge as 
discussed beforehand. Moreover, it should be noted that 
completeness of analysis is not always necessary. In many 
cases, only those segments of a video artifact that are 
deemed interesting and relevant for the purpose of the 
analysis are annotated. For longer texts such as films and 
documentaries, the manual approach is surely unfeasible 
without appropriate supporting tools. This is a direction of 
possible future research work, together with the construction 
of a formal ontology based on the proposed meta-model and 
its integration with existing top-level ontologies such as the 
OIO design pattern and DOLCE. 
Semiotic annotation can be very useful during product 
use in order to compare actual interpretations with the 
intended interpretation embodied in the artifact. Intended 
meanings (or experience) is the golden standard in order to 
evaluate the effectiveness of communication. Moreover, the 
means/ends structure of the annotation can be exploited to 
make a kind of "communication diagnosis", i.e., to link 
symptoms 
(e.g., 
discrepancies 
between 
a 
user's 
interpretation and the author's intended meaning) with 
possible causes (e.g., the structural segments of the video 
that could be responsible for the observed symptoms). This 
is another future direction of research.  
A final remark regards the scope of applicability of 
semiotic annotation. Although semiotic theories can be 
fruitfully applied for the analysis of a wide range of genres 
of texts (and recently to physical artifacts as well) we 
consider persuasive discourses (such as video commercials, 
advertising images, learning objects and advergames) the 
most interesting fields of application. Quoting De Sousa: " 
... semiotic methods are often looked upon with skepticism 
and rarely taken into consideration regardless their 
usefulness to address interpretative analysis in a rigorous 
and systematic way..." [95].  We hope that this situation 
could change in the future and more semiotic aware models 
and tools could be proposed for a more effective content 
analysis and annotation. This research aims at being a step 
toward this end. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors thanks the reviewers for their constructive 
and thoughtful critiques. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Toppano, "Semiotic annotation of video commercials: why 
the artifact is the way it is?," Proc. WEB 2017: The Fifth 
International Conference on Building and Exploring Web 
Based Environments, IARIA, Barcelona, Spain, pp. 45-51, 
2017. 
[2] J. L. Aaker, "Dimensions of brand personality," Journal of 
Marketing Research, Vol. 34, No. 3, pp.347-356, 1997. 
[3] F. R. Esch, "Brand identity: the guiding star for successful 
brands," in Schmitt, B.H., Rogers, D.L. (Editors). Handbook 
on Brand and Experience Management. Edward Elgar 
Publishing Limited, UK, Cheltenham, Chapter 4, pp. 58-76, 
2008. 
[4] B. H. Schmitt and D. L. Rogers, Handbook on Brand and 
Experience Mangement, Edward E. Northampton, MA, USA, 
2008. 
[5] IAB, "A digital video advertising overview," Interactive 
Advertising Bureau, 2008. 
[6] IAB, "Digital video in-stream ad format guidelines," 
Interactive Advertising Bureau, 2016. 
[7] J. Bruner, "Life as narrative," Social Research, Vol.71, No. 3, 
pp. 691-710, 2004. 
[8] M. C. Green and T. C. Brock, "The role of transportation in 
the persuasiveness of public narratives," Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, Vol. 79, No. 5, pp. 701-
721, 2000. 
[9] H. Bilandzic and R. Busselle, "Narrative persuasion," in The 
SAGE Handbook of Persuasion, J. P. Dillard and L. Shen 
(Eds.), Sage Publications, Chapter 13, pp. 200-219, 2013. 
[10] R. Busselle and H. Bilandzic, "Measuring narrative 
engagement," Media Psychology, 12, pp. 321-347, 2009. 
[11] T. M. Karjalainen, "It looks like a Toyota: Educational 
approaches to designing for visual brand recognition," 
International Journal of Design, Vol.1, No.1, pp. 67-81. 2007. 
[12] E. Toppano and A. Toppano, "Ethos, in sound design for 
brand advertisement," in Proc. ICMC|SMC, Athens, Greece, 
pp. 1685-1692, 2014. 
[13] K. Krippendorff, "On the essential contexts of artifacts or on 
the proposition that design is making sense (of things)," in 
The Idea of Design, V. Margolin and R. Buchanan (Eds.), The 
MIT Press, pp. 156-184, 1995. 
[14] E. T. Kazmierczak, "Design as meaning making: from making 
things to the design of thinking," Design Issues, Vol. 19, No. 
2, pp. 45-59, 2003. 
[15] R. Buchanan, "Declaration by design: rhetoric, argument, and 
demostration,"  Design Issues, Vol. 2, No. 1, pp. 4-22, 1985. 
[16] P. Desmet and P. Hekkert, "Framework of product 
experience," International Journal of Design, Vol.1, No. 1, pp. 
57-66, 2007. 
[17] N. Crilly, A. Maier, and P.J. Clarkson, "Representing artifacts 
as media: modelling the relationship between designer intent 
and consumer experience," Journal of Design,  Vol. 2, No.3, 
pp.15–27, 2008. 
[18] R. Troncy, B. Huet, and S. Schenk, Multimedia Semantics, 
Metadata, Analysis and Interaction, Wiley, 2011. 
[19] F. M. Nack, "Capture and transfer of metadata during video 
production," CWI Report INS-E0513, 2005. 
[20] E. Toppano and V. Roberto, "Semiotic design and analysis of 
hypermedia," in Proc. 20th ACM Conference on Hypertext 
and Hypermedia,  HT2009, Turin, Italy, 367-368, 2009. 
[21] E. Toppano and V. Roberto, "Semiotic-based conceptual 
modelling of hypermedia," Proc. Image Analysis and 
Processing, ICIAP2013, Napoli, Italy, Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, Vol. 8157, pp. 663-672, 2013. 
[22] M. Agosti and N. Ferro, "A formal model of annotations of 
digital content," ACM Trans. on Information Systems, Vol. 
26, No. 1, Article 3, 2007. 
[23] A. Hanbury, "A survey of methods for image annotation," 
Journal of Visual Languages and Computing, Vol. 19, Issue 5, 
pp. 617-627, 2008. 
[24] P. Andrews, I. Zaihrayeu, and J. Pane, "A Classification of 
semantic annotation systems," Journal of Semantic Web, 
Vol.3, Issue 3, IOS Press, pp. 223-248, 2012. 
[25] E. Oren, K. H. Moller, S. Scerri, S. Handschuh, and M. 
Sintek, "What are semantic annotations,"  Technical Report, 
DERI, Galway, 2006. 
[26] W3C, "Open annotation data model," Open Annotation 
Comunity Group, 2013. 
160
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[27] W3C, "Semantic Web,"  
https://www.w3.org/standards/semanticweb/ Accessed: 11 
Dec. 2017. 
[28] J. 
M. 
Martinez, 
“MPEG-7 
Overview,” 
ISO/IEC 
JTC1/SC29/WG11 N6828, Palma de Mallorca, Spain, 2004. 
[29] A. B. Benitez, J. M. Martinez, H. Rising, and P. Salembier, 
“Description 
of 
a 
single 
multimedia 
document,” 
in 
Introduction to MPEG 7: Multimedia Content Description 
Language,” B.S.Manjunath, P.Salembier, T.Sikora (Eds.), 
Wiley, pp.111-138, 2002. 
[30] S. Dasiopoulou, V. Tzouvaras, I. Kompatsiaris, and M.G. 
Strintzis, "Enquiring MPEG-7 based multimedia ontologies," 
Journal of Multimedia Tools and Applications, Vol. 46, Issue 
2-3, pp.331-370, 2010. 
[31] R. Arnd, R. Troncy, S. Staab, and L. Hardman, "COMM: a 
core ontology for multimedia annotation," Handbook on 
Ontologies, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 403-421, 2009. 
[32] M. Hausenblas, "Multimedia vocabularies on the Semantic 
Web," W3C Incubator Group Report, 2007. 
[33] P. Schallauer, W. Bailer, R. Troncy, and F. Kaiser, 
"Multimedia Metadata Standards," in R. Troncy, B. Huet, and 
S. Schenk (Eds.), Multimedia Semantics, Metadata, Analysis 
and Interaction, Wiley, pp.129-144, 2011. 
[34] L. Hardman, Z. Obrenovic, F. Nack., B. Kerherve B., and K. 
Piersol, "Canonical Processes of semantically annotated 
media production," Multimedia Systems, 14(6), 327-340, 
2008. 
[35] M.L. Ryan, "Narrativity and its modes as culture-transcending 
analytical categories", Japan Forum, 21(3), BAJS, pp. 307–
323, 2009. 
[36] S. Kinnebrock and H. Bilandzic, "How to make a story work: 
introducing the concept of narrativity into narrative 
persuasion," 
International 
Communication 
Association 
Conference, ICA-2006, Dresden, 2006. Retrieved from: 
http://publications.rwth-
aachen.de/record/50885/files/3638.pdf Accessed: 11 Dec. 
2017. 
[37] F. de Saussure, Cours de linguistique generale, Payot, Paris, 
1922. 
[38] C. S. Peirce, Collected Writings, C. Hartshorne, P. Weiss, and 
A. W. Burks (Eds.), Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 
MA, 1931. 
[39] T. van Leeuwen, Introducing Social Semiotics, London: 
Routledge, 2005. 
[40] R. Eugeni, "Media experiences and practices of analysis. For 
a critical pragmatics of media," International Workshop 
“Practicing Theory”, University of Amsterdam, March 2-4, 
2011. 
[41] C. S. de Souza, The Semiotic Engineering of Human-
Computer Interaction, the MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 
2004. 
[42] S. Vihma, "Design semiotics- Institutional experiences and an 
initiative for a semiotic theory of form," in Design Research 
Now: Essays and Selected Projects, R. Michel (Ed.), pp. 219-
232, 2007. 
[43] C. Scolari, "Transmedia storytelling: implicit consumers, 
narrative worlds, and branding in contemporary media 
production", International Journal of Communication, Vol.3. 
pp. 586–606, 2009.  
[44] T. Gruber, "A translation approach to portable ontology 
specification," Knowledge Acquisition, Vol. 5, No. 2, pp. 
199-220, 1993. 
[45] L. Manovich, The language of new media, Cambridge, MA: 
the MIT Press, 2001. 
[46] S. Grimaldi, S. Fokkinga, and I. Ocnarescu, "Narratives in 
design: a study of the types, applications, and functions of 
narratives in design practice," in Proc. DPPI 2013, ACM NY, 
USA, pp. 201-210, 2013. 
[47] M. Davis, " Knowledge representation for video," in, Proc. of 
Twelfth National Conference on Artificial Intelligence 
(AAAI-94), Seattle, Washington, AAAI Press, pp. 120-127, 
1994. 
[48] C. G. M. Snoek and M. Worring, ”Multimodal video 
indexing: a review of the state-of-the-art,” Multimedia Tools 
and Applications, Vol. 25, pp. 5-35, 2005. 
[49] S. Pfeiffer, R. Lienhart, and W. Effelsberg, "Scene 
Determination 
based 
on 
video 
and 
audio 
features," 
Multimedia Tools and Applications, 15, pp.59-81, 2001. 
[50] P. von Stackelberg, "Creating transmedia narratives: the 
structure and design of stories told across multiple media," 
Master's Thesis, State University of New York, 2011. 
[51] V. Lombardo and R. Damiano, "Narrative annotation and 
editing of video," in Proc. ICIDS'10, Third Joint Conference 
on Interactive Digital Storytelling, pp.62-73, 2010. 
[52] A.J. Greimas and P. Courtès, Semiotics and language. An 
analytical dictionary. Indiana University Press, Bloomington, 
IN, 1982. 
[53] C. Bianchi, "Semiotic approaches to advertising texts and 
strategies: narrative, passion, marketing", Semiotica 183, 1/4, 
pp. 243-271, 2011. 
[54] C. Colombo, A. Del Bimbo, and P. Pala, "Retrieval of 
commercials by semantic content: the semiotic perspective," 
Multimedia Tools and Applications13, pp. 93-118, 2001. 
[55] J. M. Floch, Semiotics, Marketing, and Communication: 
Beneath the Signs, the Strategies, Palgrave, Hampshire, 2001. 
[56] J. A. Bateman, "Towards a grande paradigmatique of film: 
Christian Metz reloaded," Semiotica, 167-1/4, pp. 13-64, 
2007. 
[57] C. Tseng, "Analysing characters' interactions in filmic texts: a 
functional semiotic approach," Social Semiotics, 23:5, pp. 
587-605, 2013. 
[58] A. J. Greimas, F. Collins, and P. Perron, "Figurative 
Semiotics and the Semiotics of the Plastic Arts," New 
Literary History, Vol.20, No. 3, pp. 627-649, 1989. 
[59] D. Smalley, "Spectromorphology: explaining sound-shapes", 
Organized Sound, Vol.2, No.2, Cambridge University Press, 
pp.107-126, 1997. 
[60] G. Kress and T. van Leeuwen, Reading images. The grammar 
of visual design. Routledge, New York, 2003. 
[61] L. Hébert, Tools for text and Image analysis: An introduction 
to applied semiotics, Département de lettres Université du 
Québec à Rimouski, Version 3, 2011.  
[62] J. Campbell, The hero with a thousand faces, New World 
Library, 2008. 
[63] B. Rolfe, C. M. Jones, and H. Wallace, "Designing dramatic 
play: story and game structure," Proc. HCI2010, Int. Conf. on 
Human-Computer Interaction, Dundee: British Computer 
Society, pp. 448-452, 2010. 
[64] E. Benveniste, Problemes de linguistique generale, Gallimard, 
Paris, 1966. 
[65] C. Harrison, "Visual social semiotics: understanding how still 
images make meaning," Technical Communication, Vol. 50, 
no. 1, pp. 46-60, 2003. 
[66] J. 
L. 
Lemke, 
"Travels 
in 
hypermodality," 
Visual 
Communication, Vol. 3 (1), pp. 299-325, 2002.  
[67] J. F. Allen, "Towards a general theory of action and time," 
Artificial Intelligence, 23, pp. 123-154, 1984. 
[68] A. Galton, "Towards an integrated logic of space, time and 
motion," in Proc. 13th Int. Joint Conf. on Artificial 
Intelligence (IJCAI-93), Chambery, France, pp. 1550-1555, 
1993. 
161
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[69] W. C. Mann and S. A. Thompson, "Rhetorical Structure 
Theory: toward a functional theory of text organization," Text, 
Vol. 8, No. 3, pp. 243-281,1988. 
[70] A. Gaeta, M. Gaeta, G. Guarino, and S. Miranda, "A smart 
methodology to improve the story building process," Journal 
of e-learning and knowledge society," Vol. 11, No. 1, pp. 97-
124, 2015. 
[71] N.J. Lowe, “A cognitive model,” in Bernstein, M., and Gerco 
D. (Eds.) Reading Hypertext, Eastgate Systems, pp. 35-57, 
2009.  
[72] K. Rohlfing, D. Loehr, S. Duncan, A. Brown, A. Franklin, I. 
Kimbara, J. T. Milde, F. Parrill, T. Rose, T. Schmidt, H. 
Sloetjes, A. Thies, and S. Wellinghoff, "Comparison of 
multimodal 
annotation 
tools," 
Workshop 
report, 
Gesprächforschung 
- 
Online-Zeitschrift 
zur 
Verbalen 
Interaktion, 7, pp. 99-123, 2006. 
[73] B. Hellwing and D. Uytvanck, “EUDICO linguistic annotator 
(ELAN),” Version 2.0.2, software manual, 2004. 
[74] P. Boersmimedia and D. Weenink, "Praat: doing phonetics by 
computer," available from: http://www.fon.hum.uva.nl/praat/ 
Accessed: 11 Dec. 2017. 
[75] A. Chebotko, Y. Deng, S. Lu, F. Fotouhi, and A. Aristar, "An 
Ontology-Based Multimedia Annotator for the Semantic Web 
of Language Engineering," in A. Sheth, M. Lytras (Eds.) 
Semantic Web-Based Information Systems. State-of-the-Art 
Applications, Cybertech Publishing, pp. 140-160, 2007. 
[76] Pepsi 
Cola 
clip 
[online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=edfRG9lREHc Accessed: 
11 Dec. 2017.  
[77] W. Gaver, "What should we expect from research through 
design?," Proc. CHI'12, ACM Press, pp. 937-946, 2012. 
[78] J. Bardzell, S. Bardzell, and L. K. Hansen, "Immodest 
Proposals: research through design and knowledge," Proc. 
CHI'15, ACM Press, pp. 2093-2102, 2015. 
[79] P. Brey, "Philosophy of Technology after the empirical turn," 
Techné: Research in Philosophy and Technology, 14(1), pp. 
36-48, 2010. 
[80] O. W. Bertelsen and S. Pold, "Criticism as an approach to 
interface aesthetics," in Proc. NordiCHI'04, ACM Press, New 
York, pp. 23-32, 2004. 
[81] J. Bardzell and S. Bardzell, "Interaction criticism: a proposal 
and framework for a new discipline of HCI," Proc. CHI-08, 
ACM Press, pp. 2463-2472, 2008. 
[82] J. Bardzell, "Interaction criticism: an introduction to the 
practice," Interacting with Computers, 23, pp. 604-621, 2011. 
[83]  J. Bardzell, "Interaction criticism and aesthetics," Proc. 
CHI'09, ACM Press, pp. 2357-2366, 2009. 
[84] J. Lowgren, "Annotated portfolios and other forms of 
intermediate-level knowledge," Interactions, pp. 30-34, 2013. 
[85] B. Gaver and J. Bower, "Annotated portfolios," Interactions, 
pp. 40-49, 2012. 
[86] P. P. Verbeek, "Materializing morality: design ethics and 
technological mediation," Science, Technology & Human 
Values, Vol. 31, No. 3, pp. 361- 380, 2006. 
[87] L. Anticoli and E. Toppano, “Technological mediation of 
ontologies: the need for tools to help designers in 
materializing ethics,” International Journal of Philosophy 
Study, Vol.1, Issue 3, pp. 23-31, 2013. 
[88] Y. Van Den Eede, "In between us: on the transparency and 
opacity of technological mediation," Found. Sci. 16, pp.139- 
159, 2011. 
[89] D. Berdichevski and E. Neuenschwander, "Toward an ethics 
of persuasive technology," Communication of the ACM, Vol. 
45, No. 5, pp. 51-58, 1999. 
[90] L. Hallnas and J. Redstrom, "From use to presence: on the 
expressions and aesthetic of everyday computational things," 
ACM Trans. on Human-Computer Interaction, Vol.9, No 2, 
pp. 106-124, 2002. 
[91] P. Brey, "Theorizing the cultural quality of new media," 
Techné: Research in Philosophy and Technology, 11(1), pp. 
2-18, 2007. 
[92] A. C. Danto, The transfiguration of the commonplace. A 
philosophy 
of 
art. 
Harvard 
University 
Press, 
CA: 
Massachusetts, 1990. 
[93] J. Bowers, "The logic of annotated portfolios: communicating 
the value of Research Through Design," Proc. DIS 2012, 
ACM Press, pp. 68-77, 2012. 
[94] C. Dorai and S. Venkatesh, "Bridging the semantic gap with 
computational media aesthetics," IEEE MultiMedia, Vol. 10, 
Issue 2, pp. 15-17, 2003. 
[95] C. S. de Souza, "Viewpoint: semiotic perspectives on 
interactive languages for life on the screen," Journal of Visual 
Languages & Computing, Vol. 24, Issue 3, pp. 218-221, 2013.  
 
 
162
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

