Digital Adoption Strategy: A Public Sector Ecosystem 
 
Samantha Papavasiliou and Carmen Reaiche 
Adelaide Business School 
University of Adelaide,  
Adelaide, Australia 
e-mail: samantha.papavasiliou@adelaide.edu.au, 
carmen.reaiche@adelaide.edu.au  
 
 
Abstract—The shift of public sector service provision to digital 
first, has had a considerable impact on how individuals interact 
with public sector entities. Therefore, this research argues for a 
systems approach to explore and understand different 
assistance-seeking behaviours. In particular, there is a need to 
understand the critical points within the system at which 
assistance is sought and the changing behaviours correlated to 
post assistance-seeking outcomes. Evidence for this research is 
presented through a case study on the Australian Taxation 
Office. Observations of the digital lodgement channel were 
undertaken to evaluate the components in which individuals 
sought assistance. Through the application of systems thinking 
and process mapping, this research highlights the critical points 
in which assistance was sought within the lodgement process. 
The results of this research lead to the recommendations that 
ongoing education should be provided for four years post first 
lodgement, and that education should occur at change of 
circumstances. Through the use of strategically placed self-help 
assistance throughout the lodgement process, it is anticipated 
that individuals will be less likely to seek assistance. However, 
this research demonstrates the importance of maintaining 
human interfaces for assistance-seeking to maximise an 
individual’s capacity to interact with the system successfully.  
Keywords- Assistance seeking; Digital Ecosystems; public 
sector; digital lodgement. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The ongoing attention on the importance of a successful 
public sector service offering, and to improve and enhance 
digital service adoption within the public sector, is based on 
the provision of a better client experience. To achieve this, 
public sector entities are putting increasing resources into 
understanding their clients and providing services to meet 
their expectations. This has had an impact on the manner in 
which services are designed, the manner in which data is used 
and shared to increase ease of use, and how entities plan 
future services. With the increased attention on the services, 
the next stage is to understand the human interaction 
components, which include assistance-seeking behaviours, 
why individuals seek assistance, and the points in the process 
that are more likely to require assistance. Since the shift to 
digital first service policies in the public sector, increased 
pressure has been placed on both the service user and 
provider to understand both the process and the digital 
environment [1]. Even with high adoption rates of digital 
services, there are still individuals not interacting digitally 
and those who require ongoing support and assistance once 
going digital.   
The aim of this paper is to identify and understand public 
sector service users, which includes identifying the potential 
barriers to digital adoption, followed by understanding why 
various users seek assistance, and post assistance-seeking 
outcomes. This paper argues that mandatory public sector 
services need to be inclusive, including digital and non-
digital options, this extends to how assistance is provided. 
This research forms part of a PhD and findings and 
recommendations are ongoing.  
Research by the Australian Digital Transformation 
Agency (DTA) [2] indicates the necessity of further research 
of this type, to proactively address digital adoption, 
specifically increased use. In Australia the purpose of the 
DTA is to improve services for the community, expecting 
government to protect citizens personal data and deliver 
digital services [3], and to ensure that digital services keep up 
with ongoing technological change and development. Having 
an increased understanding of the issues facing public sector 
digital service users is of increasing interest in Australia, with 
ongoing service delivery changes from in-person/call centre 
(also referred to as analogue) to digital. With the growing 
complexities in the environment, the factors that impact why 
a service user may require assistance and their post 
assistance-seeking outcomes are becoming more influential 
in their perception of the digital services provided by 
government generally.  Therefore, it is vital that research 
understanding digital adoption provides a more holistic view 
of the various issues facing service users, particularly 
focusing on understanding why they seek support. This paper 
seeks to address knowledge gaps that have been identified in 
the literature, including exploring what the barriers to digital 
adoption are in this specific case, why assistance was sought 
and how the assistance sought influenced their service use.  
Through building and encouraging a user centric 
approach to researching the various interactions between 
individual public sector entities and users, the barriers to 
digital adoption will become more apparent. This is 
becoming increasingly more important due to regulatory 
changes in the public sector space as a result of the inclusion 
of ‘digital first’ policies, which have shifted mandatory 
96
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

services online. These policies have fundamentally changed 
the manner in which service users interact with public sector 
services. For this research mandatory environments are 
classified as “Public Sector Organisations who must by 
legislation provide Digital Platforms for their services” [1] 
[4].  While mandatory interactions are defined as “Users who 
meet certain characteristics and must by legislation interact 
with the public sector service provider to meet these 
obligations” [1] [4]. Therefore, users must engage with 
providers, but under the digital first mandate expectations 
around how they do so has changed.  
This paper focuses on a public sector case study – the 
Australian Taxation Office (ATO) – that was impacted by the 
introduction of the Australian Digital Continuity Policy 2020, 
which mandated the use of digital first channels for all public 
sector services [5].  Through the examination of previous 
literature, ATO corporate research, data analysis and 
responses from ATO staff, a gap was identified between what 
seems to be common knowledge about the mandatory digital 
service user and the profiles of the actual users who are 
required to use them. The impact of shifting mandatory 
public sector services to a digital first platform is still 
unknown. As digital first service provision is the way forward 
for all public sector organisations (especially in Australia), a 
holistic view of users is needed. This paper aims to provide 
this view. Research needs to support and assist users, improve 
services and inform policy to increase long-term voluntary 
compliance obligations in a mandatory service space.  
This paper will review previous literature focusing on 
digital transformation, digital adoption, digital ecosystems 
and eGovernment to understand the background of digital 
transformation in Australia and the basis for digital adoption 
and eGovernment worldwide. At present, the standard 
methods used for evaluating government services are based 
on interviewing or surveying users about their opinions and 
experiences of services provided. However, this style of 
research often results in biased results, as users feel pressured 
to display expected behaviours [6-8]. As a result of this 
contentious and possibly flawed data collection, previous 
research appears to have ignored a number of factors which 
impact service adoption, and seems to have failed to identify 
the barriers to adoption within mandatory environments. 
There is also a gap in understanding how different 
experiences with digital services (both in the public and 
private sectors) can impact long-term adoption and the 
reasons for when and why users seek assistance. The focus of 
this research is on applying systems thinking and digital 
ecosystems theories to understand and validate the need for a 
holistic view of the users and the system, especially when 
seeking to understand assistance-seeking behaviours.  
In this research, systems thinking, particularly a soft 
systems methodology, has been used as a way to understand 
the behaviours and actions in complex public sector 
environments. An important principle is the concept that each 
action within the system causes a reaction in the system. 
These reactions can lead to unintended consequences, ones 
which are critical to explore [9]. This approach has been used 
to explore the planning process the ATO undertook to 
minimise the barriers experienced by taxpayers when 
submitting their returns. Keeping in mind that a core aim of 
the research is to understand the connections within the 
system, and the way in which each part of the system 
influences and is influenced by other parts, systems thinking 
is considered the most appropriate method. Systems thinking 
seeks connections between solutions, systems and society, 
identifying components of systems and intended and 
unintended outputs of the system, providing a holistic view 
of the problem.  
This research explores the assistance-seeking behaviours 
of individuals when they are lodging their income tax returns 
with the ATO. The purpose is to understand the impacts of 
assistance-seeking on lodgement outcomes. Of the over 3 
million individuals who lodged in July 2018, 5.3% sought 
assistance at some point throughout the process. The aim is 
to understand the different drivers of assistance-seeking 
behaviours within a mandatory system. Therefore, this 
research addresses two primary research questions:  
1) What are the critical points in the lodgement 
process/system that are causing individuals to seek 
assistance?  
2) What are the potential policy implications of 
understanding assistance seeking behaviours?  
In applying a systems lens to these two questions, we 
ultimately seek to understand how and why the system as a 
whole functions as it does. 
We have adopted a mixed methods approach to data 
collection and analysis with systems thinking to support the 
end-to-end research. That is to say, identifying who is most 
likely to contact the ATO for support and the critical points 
of assistance-seeking, and understanding post assistance-
seeking behaviours and outcomes.  
The overall approach applied to this paper incorporated 
multiple stages to provide the greatest depth of analysis and 
provide a holistic understanding of the assistance-seeking 
behaviours within the case study. First, systems thinking was 
used to assist with determining links between the different 
components, and understanding the different elements within 
the system and the effects each element could have on the 
outcome. Second, a thematic analysis was used to outline the 
common themes within the assistance-seeking behaviour, 
and understand the points in the system requiring the most 
assistance. Finally, a statistical analysis was considered 
appropriate to determine the behaviour of the actors within 
the system. Specifically, summary statistical methods was 
used to explore the population and understand who may be 
more inclined to require different kinds of assistance, in an 
attempt to provide policy recommendations for self-help 
prompts provided to individuals who meet certain 
characteristics.  
This paper is divided into six sections. Section one 
contains the introduction, section two presents the literature 
review, section three presents the conceptual model, section 
97
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

four outlines the research methods undertaken, section five 
highlights the results and addresses the research questions, 
and section six offers policy recommendations.  
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Previous research demonstrates that the purpose of 
undergoing a digital transformation in the public sector is to 
increase access to provided services, including through  
digital services [10]. This is achieved through a better 
understanding of citizens and service users to improve their 
outcomes, making digital services easier to access, and 
improving the client experience [10]. An interesting 
challenge for the public sector, however, is to overcome the 
clashing expectations over private versus public services, 
which are personalised, modern and responsive. Therefore, 
the public sector must consider the end-to-end digital services 
in line with the private sector. Through the application of 
advanced analytics, governments are able to leverage the data 
collected from users to improve the services provided. The 
purpose of transitioning to digital services is to provide public 
sector services more effectively and efficiently to increase 
public value. For this research public value is ensuring that 
all mandatory public sector services provided are inclusive 
with both digital and non-digital options, ensuring equal 
access for all.  
It is important to consider the variety of challenges facing 
public sector digital services. Firstly, the public sector takes 
advantage of technology that is popular within other 
industries; however, they do not have the time or finances to 
compete with the services provided by private sector entities. 
Secondly, governments are not always able to engage with 
citizens and service users to provide products and services in 
the manner expected. Finally, there are numerous regulatory 
restrictions which complicate the process. Therefore, digital 
technologies provide an opportunity to explore new channels 
for service provision, to improve resource management, 
increase access for users, and boost accountability and trust. 
Digital technologies deliver benefits across the economy and 
society [11], however, government services need to keep 
pace with the opportunities that digital transformations 
provide (including increased value for money for the 
community).  
Digital transformation has empowered users and 
providers, making it possible to choose how services are 
accessed or delivered, how to communicate, when to engage 
on policy areas or issues, which social groups to join or 
business areas to invest in, and how to participate more 
actively in local, national and global challenges [12]. 
Research demonstrates that governments need to understand 
that going digital is no longer an option, but rather an 
imperative maintaining their legitimacy [12]. The adoption 
and use of digital technologies requires applying data more 
efficiently as part of their strategic components to modernise 
the public sector. Technologies are increasingly being used 
to digitise existing government processes and to offer public 
services online [12]. There has been a shift from a 
government-led to a user-driven administration, which is 
focused on end users and citizens expectations [12]. There are 
numerous 
challenges 
facing 
digital 
transformation, 
specifically around improving the digital experience. These 
include citizen security, cultural barriers to engaging with 
digital services, regulatory and legislative barriers (including 
those that restrict data sharing between government 
agencies), resource barriers and capability barriers (both 
public sector employees and users). 
Research shown in Figure 1 outlines the progression 
towards digital transformations in the public sector [12]. The 
process started as analogue, which focused on in-person 
service delivery and paper-based processes. The second stage 
was eGovernment, which was the first stage of digitalisation, 
with the progressive inclusion of digital processes and 
procedures, including services provided to the users. The 
final stage in the progression is digital government, which is 
predominately based on digital first service provision, 
maximising user-driven approaches and citizen centric 
designs. This iteration highlights the value of inclusion, 
whereby exclusion from the digital world can exacerbate 
other forms of social exclusion such as unemployment, low 
education and poverty [11]. Every Australian should benefit 
in the shared digital future, which means that every member 
of the community provides insights into how they would like 
the service designed. This includes incorporating the user’s 
views in the designs of processes and interfaces. The 
incorporation of users views, expectations and requirements 
into the design ensures that provided digital services take into 
account the different life stages and level of digital ability of 
users [11]. The application of systems thinking can assist in 
providing a different viewpoint of the potential barriers and 
their effect on digital adoption.  
FIGURE 1. PROGRESSION TOWARDS THE DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION OF GOVERNMENTS [12] 
98
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A. Digitalisation 
The evolution from traditional analogue services to 
electronic government services, to digital societies of 
interconnected and multichannel digital services has placed 
increased pressure on governments to provide high quality 
and easy to access public sector services [13]. This includes 
overcoming the challenges of meeting service user 
expectations, who commonly benchmark all services 
provided by public sector entities against those of the private 
sector. Users expect convenience and diverse communication 
channels with tailored information [13]. The development of 
digital 
services has 
impacted 
society 
considerably, 
specifically with the creation of eGovernment platforms, the 
shifting expectations to provide efficient, transparent and 
effective services, and to include open data (and 
transparency) and cross channel service options. With this 
shift to digital, the aim of public sector entities utilising these 
channels should be based on creating more efficient 
governments which offer service user’s better services, 
enhancing the services already provided and aiming to 
increase all citizens’ quality of life [14]. This is not a simple 
process, however; the use of digital processes and 
organisational change is the first step to ensure the successful 
implementation of digital first policies. It is shown that in 
countries that have successfully implemented digitalisation 
(e.g. Estonia), the government is able to provide services that 
meet the expectations of users, empower users, and increase 
their engagement with government [14]. 
The literature suggests that technology holds the key to 
shaping the world around us, as it enhances governments’, 
businesses’ and individuals’ opportunities to integrate 
themselves within the global digital society, and enhance 
ongoing inclusion [15]. However, to become a high 
functioning digital government within the global digital 
society, digital adoption needs to be high, therefore, a key 
factor requiring consideration is the user’s perspective. The 
most common determinants of eGovernment and digital 
government services adoption include the level of awareness 
and level of satisfaction of eGovernment services, both linked 
to intention to use [13]. Awareness relates to the extent users 
are aware of the eGovernment services [16] [17]. User 
satisfaction is being used to assess the continual use of 
eGovernment services and the success and failure of new 
eGovernment platforms [16] [18].  
Digital or e-government adoption is most commonly 
defined as the continuous use of a digital service or 
innovation [19]. Therefore, for adoption to be achievable and 
sustainable, the digital service needs to be both appealing and 
useful [20]. This requires consideration of how a user may 
perceive the level of usefulness, ease of use, security level 
and reliability [21]. Furthermore, not all online activities are 
deemed to be of equal importance to an individual, especially 
when they are considering their personal level of human, 
social and financial capital [22]. Research suggests that there 
is a strong relationship between a person’s level of education 
and the type and frequency of digital services utilised [22]. It 
is important to understand, when considering inclusivity of 
services, that technology access does not determine an 
inequality alone, whereby increased experience, exposure, 
digital participation and digital literacy are vital [22].  
Previous research has identified four key barriers 
impacting digital access: (1) lack of basic digital experiences 
due to lack of interest, (2) no computer access, (3) lack of 
digital skills, and (4) lack of opportunities to use digital 
services [23]. Additional barriers impacting digital access 
include lack of access to internet, lack of awareness, language 
barriers, user-friendliness of websites, levels of trust and 
security fears [24]. Therefore, the digital divide is still an area 
that requires understanding and consideration when planning 
digital service provision in all contexts, including social, 
psychological, cultural and non-technological [23].  Thus, 
with the application of a systems view, a holistic 
understanding of these factors can be provided.  
The challenges facing policy-makers going forward is 
understanding and determining the appropriate resources and 
functions necessary in digital services to provide a foundation 
for and to support positive user behaviour [25]. This requires 
ensuring the creation of digitally inclusive services. Digital 
inclusion ensures that all individuals and groups (including 
the disadvantaged), have access and the skills to use 
information and communication technology (ICT), and are 
thus able to participate in and benefit from the growing 
reliance on the digital knowledge and information society 
[26]. Thus, digital inclusion encourages increased access to 
information and communication technology, with the aim of 
increasing social and economic benefits. Digital inclusion 
links back to the digital divide, which is the gap between 
people who have effective access to digital technologies and 
those who have limited or no access. Access and cost become 
barriers impacting digital inclusion, however individual 
factors associated with engagement and confidence are 
affected by digital literacy, relevance, motivation, trust and 
safety.  Therefore, the aim of eGovernment and digital 
government services is to provide information and public 
services to citizens in an easy to access manner that 
encourages platform participation [25]. This highlights the 
vital importance of understanding the users of services, the 
application of systems thinking to break down the different 
interaction points, potential barriers and so forth, so that 
services that meet the needs of the users can be provided. It 
is also important to consider the digital ecosystem impacting 
the users, which includes where the services fit within the 
broader environment, including public and private sector 
services. This links back to the importance of understanding 
different factors impacting the user’s ability or willingness to 
utilise a digital service provided by the public sector. 
 
B. Digital Ecosystem 
When exploring the impacts of digitalisation on public 
service adoption, there are multiple components that need to 
be understood and these elements are commonly identified 
99
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

within the digital ecosystem. There are multiple definitions 
of digital ecosystems, however one of the most widely used 
defines a digital ecosystem as an “open, loosely coupled, 
domain clustered, demand driven, self-organising agents’ 
environment, where each species is proactive and responsive 
for its own benefit or profit” [27, p. 3]. Therefore, each 
species or user who works within or utilises a digital 
ecosystem, is a participant who uses the system with a 
specific goal in mind [28 –30]. Therefore, a digital ecosystem 
can be characterised as consisting of organisational 
interactions, connected digitally, which are enabled by 
modularity, and are not managed by a hierarchical authority.  
Regardless of the definition, ecosystems are large, and they 
encompass numerous interactions between producers, 
suppliers, innovators, customers and regulators, shaping a 
collective outcome [31].  
An ecosystem therefore emerges as a result of 
digitalisation, and through this process it becomes possible to 
connect a broad set of users together through the delivery of 
a singular digitalised customer solution. Thus, demonstrating 
the importance in understanding the creation of digital 
ecosystems within this research. As to ensure multiple 
external factors influencing user’s ability are understood and 
incorporated into the design and planning of public sector 
digital services and policy. 
There are two definitions applied by this research. The 
first defines a digital ecosystem as “an interdependent group 
of actors (enterprises, people, things) sharing standardised 
digital platforms to achieve a mutually beneficial purpose” 
[32, p.1]. The second definition defines a digital ecosystem 
as, “a network of digital communities consisting of 
interconnected, interrelated and interdependent digital 
species” [33, p. 249]. Both definitions include the 
stakeholders, institutions and digital devices situated within 
an environment, that interact as a functional unit and are 
linked together through actions, information and transaction 
flows. These definitions imply that all of the connections 
made by service users to achieve their specific goals within a 
digital platform are incorporated within the digital 
ecosystem. Therefore, digital ecosystems are shared 
communities, with scalable resources used to pursue 
challenges of specific goals and objectives [34]. Finally, the 
level of complexity within a digital ecosystem can be 
attributed to the differences between the participants taking 
part in the system and their objectives [35] [28].   
The different components relevant to the inner workings 
of a digital ecosystem are outlined in Figure 2. At the base 
are the users, who are the people, businesses and entities. 
They consume the services from the available channels 
(through digital platforms, directly or through other channels) 
[36]. The first level is the government, which includes the 
federal, state and local authorities who influence policies and 
legislation, as well as departments, organisations and entities 
that implement policies and provide services to fulfil 
mandatory obligations [36]. The second level is the market, 
which refers to the non-government entities (e.g. academics, 
not-for-profits), intermediaries (such as health providers, tax 
agents), service providers (such as technology companies) 
and industry (such as banks, commercial entities) [36]. 
Finally, the third level is the environment, which includes the 
social norms, cultures, societal interactions and the access to 
the information and technology made available by the other 
levels [36].  
 
 
FIGURE 2.  COMPONENTS OF A DIGITAL ECOSYSTEM [36] 
Considering the different levels and the elements within 
the digital ecosystem under exploration, assists in ensuring a 
holistic understanding of the problem or situation under 
exploration. Through the exploration of the specific digital 
ecosystem relevant to a mandatory system, a testable 
conceptual model was created.  
III. 
CONCEPTUAL MODEL 
 
 
FIGURE 3. CONCEPTUAL MODEL WITH THE USER AS THE CENTRE FOCUS  [3] 
[4] 
A testable conceptual model was designed as a result of 
the analysis of digital, business, technology and innovation 
ecosystems. The purpose of the model is to provide user- 
centred research to guide policy and better support and 
understand the different users. Previous research does not 
focus of factors which impact a user’s ability to adopt and 
participate within a mandatory digital ecosystem. The 
existing research provides minimal discussion on how digital 
• Digital first 
policies 
• Legislative 
compliance 
requirements
•Supports
•Human Capital
•Markets 
•Culture
•Policy 
•Legislation 
•Current 
Government 
•Leadership
•Community
•Social Norms
•Non-
government 
organisation
Environment
Public 
Sector
Mandatory 
Services
Digital 
Ecosystem
User 
100
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

adoption 
can 
differ 
in 
mandatory 
and 
voluntary 
environments. Through a thorough literature review, a 
number of factors within a user’s environment were 
identified as having considerable impact on willingness or 
capacity to adopt mandatory digital services.  
This research is focused on understanding the Digital 
Ecosystem quadrant in Figure 3, to explore the elements of 
supports and human capital within this quadrant, to determine 
what impact different elements components have on the 
Mandatory Services and Public Sector quadrants.  
 
IV. 
METHOD 
The motivation for this study originated from a desire to 
understand barriers to digital adoption in the public sector. A 
comprehensive literature review of research centred on 
environmental ecosystems [1] [4] has revealed that there is a 
lack of inclusiveness in the current mandatory system. The 
method outlined below outlines how the analysis provided 
the rationale for the proposed conceptual model: A Digital 
Ecosystem Quadrant (see Figure 3). 
 
A. Case Study 
The use of a case study method has been applied to this 
research to understand the different issues affecting digital 
adoption in the Australian Public Sector environment. The 
ATO case study was selected for numerous reasons. Firstly, 
the ATO is the lead in the public sector service provision (as 
the first Australian Public Sector (APS) organisation to adopt 
the digital first policy in Australia) [37]. The ATO collects 
considerable amounts of data, including interaction level data 
and mandatory interaction requirements data. The purpose of 
undertaking a case study is to explore and understand the 
uniqueness of a single case, while also understanding how 
findings from a specific case links to similar organisations or 
situations facing similar issues [38][39]. The use of a case 
study encourages greater in-depth exploration of the complex 
issues impacting digital adoption in that case. Therefore, by 
understanding the distinctiveness of the specific entity and 
users within the case under exploration, further research can 
also determine similarities to other cases (and their users and 
entities) [38] [39]. 
A mixed methods approach was applied to this research, 
which was appropriate for ATO case study. Therefore, the 
application of mixed methods encouraged the integration and 
interpretation of qualitative and quantitative data. This 
research carried out exploratory summary data analysis, text 
mining and thematic analysis, and hypothesis testing based 
on experimental design, to understand results from the data 
collection. This approach was applied to obtain an 
understanding of the key barriers impacting digital adoption 
and how they could be overcome. The starting point for this 
research analysis involved a qualitative method to explore 
and understand the different meanings and themes 
individuals or groups link to a problem [40]. An inductive 
approach was applied to this research, which involved a 
process of searching for patterns within observations, which 
was then used to develop explanations or theories, and from 
which a series of hypotheses were created [41] [42]. The 
application of a combination of mixed methods and inductive 
approaches, allowed for the emergence of research questions 
to assist in the identification of themes within the results. A 
pilot study was conducted in 2017, in order to validate the 
umbrella research questions and guide future research 
directions. This included informing feasibility and testing the 
research design. The purpose of the pilot study was to identify 
the potential problems and thus assist with designing and 
undertaking a larger and more informative study [1] [4]. The 
pilot data and analyses [1], informed a number of research 
questions and hypotheses as part of a larger study completed 
in June 2018. This data collection focused on quantitative 
data (both experimental and survey conditions). The 
application of a quantitative approach has been used for 
testing objective theories, through the examination of the 
multitude of relationships between the variables [39]. 
Data collection for this study occurred during a 4-week 
period at the beginning of 2018 Tax Time. This included a 
survey form which consisted of questions, both qualitative 
and quantitative, designed in a manner to explore different 
components and characteristics of a random assortment of 
callers (n = 3,990). The survey queried the reason for call, the 
caller’s demographics, and why assistance was sought. To 
achieve randomisation, the survey collection was provided to 
11 call centre operatives. All assistance-seeking phone call 
data was also collected. This information included what type 
of assistance was being sought, basic demographic 
information and post call outcomes. The total call centre 
population (n= 188,971) provided a large sample to complete 
further quantitative data analysis.  
Post data collection, data was anonymised and 
categorised based on areas of interest and demographics. The 
first analysis utilised descriptive statistics (e.g. mean, 
median, proportions) to identify and understand the features 
within the sample population. Furthermore, through a 
thematic analysis of collected qualitative data, the different 
reasons assistance was sought were identified. The study 
findings address specific factors in relation to the purpose, 
timeframe, lodgement behaviour and number of individuals 
seeking assistance at various points of the lodgement process. 
The key questions used to collate the collected data are 
provided in Table 1.  
TABLE 1. EXAMPLE OF THE QUESTIONS USED TO COLLATE THE DATA 
Questions 
Themes Factors 
Why do individuals seek 
assistance from the ATO?  
Assistance Seeking/ 
purpose/ intentions/ 
motive 
Within the lodgement process 
where do individuals seek 
assistance?  
Assistance seeking/ 
lodgement behaviour/ 
source of support 
101
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

How many questions were 
asked per call?  
How many individuals 
contacted the ATO more than 
once? 
Types of queries/ 
individual profile/ 
assistance seeking 
behaviour 
What are the effects of 
assistance-seeking on 
lodgement timeliness?  
Lodgement behaviour 
timeframe 
How did they lodge post 
assistance-seeking?  
Prediction adoption 
behaviour 
 
B. Thematic Analysis  
A thematic analysis or topic modelling was conducted on 
the qualitative data collected within the survey. The analysis 
was conducted utilising Python statistical software and the 
Natural Language Toolkit (NLTK) package for natural 
language processing. Through the use of this toolkit, the 
different themes or topics were identified and grouped 
together to create broader categories [43]. An extension of the 
standard approach to Gioia analysis was undertaken utilising 
statistical software to validate the process (see [4] for the 
initial Gioia analysis). When conducting the Gioia method for 
qualitative rigour [44] [45], the researcher categorised the 
accounts into three separate phases (first, second and third 
order), however these steps were conducted out of order. The 
first order, ‘Concepts’, is the ‘voice of the user’ (also known 
as ‘voice of the customer’). The second order, ‘concerns and 
statements’, identifies specific sentences from participants 
which are then grouped together to discover the themes and 
patterns in events and accounts. These create themes that are 
more generalised underlying explanatory dimensions, to test 
consistency and patterns [44] [45]. Finally, the third order 
‘aggregate dimensions’, identifies the generic themes 
encompassing all of the first and second order data [44] [45]. 
Significance was measured through counting occurrences of 
first, second and third order elements to identify themes and 
patterns throughout the different accounts. The patterns in the 
text were then linked by connections, highlighting key 
features and emergent concepts or themes that require further 
analysis.  
Starting with the third order or ‘aggregate dimensions’, 
generic themes and topics were identified by word frequency 
through the application of Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA). 
LSA is based on the use of a distributional hypothesis, 
whereby words and expressions occurring within similar 
parts of text have similar meanings [46]. The significance of 
each of these themes was tested in the following stages of 
analysis, whereby counting occurrences identified themes 
and patterns throughout the different accounts. The second 
order was completed next, which seeks ‘concerns and 
statements’, which identify key sentences or phrases through 
the use of Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) to understand 
themes and patterns within the accounts.  LDA utilises 
mathematical probabilities to help define the unknown words 
that represent a known topic, by mapping the known elements 
to the unknown elements in a way that provides the 
probability of a word belonging to a particular topic [47]. 
These were used to create themes which are generalised 
underlying 
explanatory 
dimensions 
that 
demonstrate 
consistencies and patterns within the data [44] [45]. Finally, 
the first order ‘concepts’, or ‘voice of the user’ were 
identified, through the use of Text similarity Metrics. Jaccard 
Similarity calculates how similar two sentences are by 
determining the size of the intersection and the size of the 
union of two sets, identifying the number of words in 
common between sentences and providing a numeric output 
[48]. This identification process was simplified by the 
application of information obtained in the LSA and LDA 
processes. The patterns in the text were linked together 
manually to identify connections, and to highlight key 
features and the emergent concepts or themes not picked up 
by the analysis.  
The results were validated by another independent 
researcher, who conducted their own analysis of the data 
provided and obtained equivalent outputs.  
 
C. Systems Thinking 
Systems Thinking analysis was applied to systematically 
identify and order findings into their respective components 
of the process [49]. This helped to identify the points within 
the process and system that are causing the most issues and 
where support can be implemented. Systems Thinking was 
used to visually convert the findings into simplified figures 
that highlight key emergent findings. 
Process mapping and systems thinking principles were 
utilised to understand the relationships between the different 
steps of the lodgement process and where the different 
assistance-seeking behaviours sit within that process. The 
application of systems thinking, broken down into four key 
steps, was used to assist in providing a clearer understanding 
of the situation. Firstly, how people seek assistance to meet 
their mandatory ATO lodgement requirements was explored. 
This recognised and explored the role of digital systems, non-
digital systems and assistance seeking in the process. 
Secondly, analysis of the assistance-seeking behaviours was 
conducted to understand the decisions and user in greater 
detail. Thirdly, a process map was drawn, which outlined the 
system and how assistance-seeking fits within it. Finally, the 
process map was used to inform the research question idea. 
This final part was an iterative process that was altered and 
added to as understanding about the users experience 
emerged. Process mapping is used to demonstrate, using a 
pictorial representation, the sequence of actions and 
responses between the start and end of a process [49]. This is 
commonly used to determine where there might be issues, 
inefficiencies or opportunities within the current process 
[49].  
102
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

V. 
RESULTS 
Results from this research demonstrate that there are 
multiple reasons why individuals seek assistance when 
undertaking their annual tax lodgement, including both 
digital and non-digital queries. As indicated in a previous 
pilot study [4] many taxpayers would have been unable or 
would have struggled to lodge their tax return without 
obtaining assistance.  
A. Individuals Seeking Assistance 
Firstly, there is no unique type of individual who seeks 
assistance – they differ in age, gender, income, occupation 
and even how many times they have lodged previously. As 
for age, as shown in Figure 4, 49% of individuals were aged 
between 18 and 29 years old, demonstrating that younger 
people are more likely to seek assistance to complete their tax 
return. The least likely age group to ask questions were those 
above 65+ years. In most of the comments from the phone 
contact, the individuals in both age groups, only sought 
assistance due to a change in their circumstance or because 
they were attempting an online lodgement for the first time.  
 
 
FIGURE 4. ASSISTANCE SEEKING BY AGE GROUP 
Interestingly the overall the distribution of genders is 
relatively similar, with slightly more females (48.8%) than 
males (45.1%) seeking assistance overall, as shown in Table 
2. 
TABLE 2. AGE DISTRIBUTION 
Female 
Male 
Undisclosed 
48.8% 
45.1% 
6.1% 
 
In the breakdown of the population by occupation codes 
in Table 3 [50], individuals who indicated being Community 
and Personal Service Workers (10.8%) and Labourers 
(13.1%) sought assistance most frequently. In comparison, 
Trainees, Apprentices and other related workers (3%) and 
Machinery Operators and Drivers (4%) sought assistance less 
frequently than other individuals.  
TABLE 3. OCCUPATION CODES 
Occupation 
% 
1 - Managers 
4.7% 
2 - Professionals 
9.2% 
3 - Technical and Trades Workers 
5.2% 
4 - Community and Personal Service 
Workers 
10.8% 
5 - Clerical and Administrative 
Workers 
7.1% 
6 - Sales Workers 
7.8% 
7 - Machinery Operators and Drivers 
4% 
8 - Labourers 
13.1% 
9 - Trainees, Apprentices and other 
related workers 
3% 
? – Not stated  
35.1% 
TABLE 4. INCOME RANGE 
<$18,200 
$18,201-
$37,000 
$37,001-
$90,000 
$90,001-
$180,000 
>$180,001 
? 
28% 
21% 
21% 
4.4% 
1% 
34.1% 
 
As per the ATO income tax brackets [51], the income 
range of individuals who sought assistance is demonstrated 
in Table 4. The majority of individuals who sought assistance 
earned less than $90,000 in the previous financial year.  
TABLE 5. LODGEMENT 
First 
Lodgement 
Year 
Under 5 
years 
Greater 
than 5 
years 
7.7% 
27.6% 
64.7% 
 
Table 5 demonstrates the number of years individuals 
who sought assistance had been lodging their tax return. 7.7% 
were undertaking their first lodgement, and 27.6% had been 
lodging their tax return for under five years. Interestingly, the 
majority of assistance was sought by individuals who had 
been lodging for greater than five years. The analysis was 
used to determine whether there was a relationship between 
the first year of lodgement, and how many people sought 
assistance.  
B. Reasons For Seeking Assistance and Source of 
Assistance Seefiking by Individuals  
Through the use of a Gioia and thematic analysis, the 
common themes as to why individuals sought assistance were 
identified. As shown in Figure 5, the results demonstrate that 
the majority of individuals (83.7%) sought assistance for 
utilising digital services (including platform support and 
technology support from the ATO). 10.3% of individuals 
sought tax advice (including system education, platform 
awareness and advice). Additionally, 2.9% contacted the call 
centre to obtain paper forms. In most cases individuals sought 
paper forms due to lack of computer skills, a preference for 
utilising paper and language barriers. Finally, 3.1% of queries 
were not related to lodgement of tax returns (including pre-
lodgement and post-lodgement related queries). The thematic 
analysis demonstrates that at multiple points of the process 
individuals would not have been able to lodge their tax return 
without assistance.  
103
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Once the analysis was completed, a process map was 
created to outline the multiple interaction points within the 
system and where the different assistance-seeking points fit 
within it, shown in Figure 6. The diamond shaped points are 
decision points, rectangles are points of the process, and the 
oval shapes are outcomes. There are four key decision points 
where assistance is commonly sought. Contact point 1 is 
commonly where digital service support is sought. This is the 
first component of successfully interacting with the 
mandatory system. Without the appropriate access and 
support, some individuals who are not able to continue the 
digital process or who need to obtain a tax agent or request a 
paper form, do not lodge. Contact point 2 is where individuals 
contact the ATO for assistance in obtaining paper forms 
(publication ordering). Contact point 3 is referred to as the 
component when individuals require tax advice during their 
lodgement process.   
There is a feedback loop associated with this contact point 
(which forms contact point 4) when an individual requires 
additional assistance either for the same or a different issue 
and contacts the ATO again for assistance.  The other options 
for obtaining tax advice is to source the information through 
a google or ATO website search or obtain from a tax agent. 
C. Number of Queries Per Call 
As highlighted in Table 6, even though the majority of callers 
asked one question on average, in 48.4% callers had multiple 
questions. Interestingly 8.3% had four or more questions. For 
individuals who asked more than one question, in 92% of 
cases the questions theme changed. In 78% of these instances, 
the question was not one that had been prepared.  
TABLE 6. NUMBER OF QUESTIONS PER PHONE CALL 
1 
2 
3 
4+ 
51.6% 
26.8% 
13.3% 
8.3% 
 
D. Repetitive (Returning) Individuals 
Of the individuals who contacted the ATO seeking 
assistance, 38.7% did so on more than one occasion within 
the one-month period of data collection. Of those individuals, 
69.9% contacted the ATO twice, 19% three times and 11.1% 
four or more times. Interestingly only 1.2% proceeded to 
lodge through paper forms. Of those remaining, 29.2% 
shifted to the use of a tax agent or intermediary, 32% lodged 
digitally and 37.6% had not yet lodged by October 31st 2018. 
E. Impact and Effect of Lodgement Timeliness and 
Lodgement Process Post Assistance-Seeking 
TABLE 7. POST ASSISTANCE SEEKING INTERACTION/LODGEMENT 
CHANNEL 
 
Total 
Not lodged 
23.7% 
Digital 
lodgement 
51.7% 
Tax agent or 
intermediary 
22.7% 
Paper 
1.9% 
 
TABLE 8. POST ASSISTANCE SEEKING INTERACTION/LODGEMENT 
CHANNEL BY ASSISTANCE TYPE 
 
 
Digital 
Advice 
Other 
Publication 
ordering 
Not lodged 
11% 
24%                                                                   
80.7% 
32.5% 
Digital 
lodgement 
67.7% 
31.1% 
11.7% 
9.4% 
Tax agent or 
intermediary 
20% 
43.5% 
6.6% 
23.2% 
Paper 
1.3% 
1.4% 
1% 
34.9% 
Total 
100% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
 
Individuals may lodges their tax return in Australia via a 
number of avenues. If an individual chooses to self-prepare 
they can lodge at no cost, through the Digital myTax channel, 
via a paper form and in some cases over the phone. If they 
choose, however, an individual can obtain an intermediary or 
tax agent to lodge on their behalf. Individuals who choose to 
complete their lodgement this way, pay for the service. The 
results of the thematic analysis demonstrate that assistance-
seeking fit into four key categories: Digital Services, Tax 
Advice, Publication Ordering and Other non-lodgement 
queries. As shown in Table 7, of those who had sought 
assistance 76.3% had lodged within the expected timeframe, 
and 23.7% had not lodged on time. On-time lodgement 
indicates that an individual has lodged their income tax return 
prior to October 31st 2018, as per legislative requirements. 
The results of the thematic analysis demonstrate key elements 
outlining why individuals sought assistance.  
The majority of those individuals who had not lodged on 
time were seeking support on other non-lodgement related 
queries 
(including 
obtaining 
a 
tax 
file 
number, 
superannuation queries and deceased estates), and in many 
cases those individuals were not required to lodge a tax return 
at all. As highlighted in Table 8, the majority of assistance 
seekers (51.7%) lodged through the digital platform, and the 
majority of these individuals sought assistance for digital 
issues followed by tax technical advice. Interestingly, only 
11% of individuals seeking advice on digital matters had not 
lodged on time; however, 21.3% lodged through non digital 
means, which could imply that they were not able to obtain a 
solution. In contrast, 24% of individuals seeking tax technical 
advice had not lodged on time, and the largest portion of these 
individuals lodged through a tax agent or intermediary. This 
could demonstrate a lack of understanding of the system and 
the confidence they obtained by seeking additional support. 
For those requesting paper forms, 34.9% lodged through that 
method, whereas 32.5% of those individuals requesting paper 
forms had not lodged on time. This could be attributed to the 
additional processing time required for a paper form 
104
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(approximately 50 days, as opposed to 14 days for digital and 
tax agent lodgements).  
VI. 
POLICY IMPLICATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
There are a number of potential policy implications and 
recommendations that have been determined within this 
research. However, it is important to add that this research 
highlights that assistance provided, no matter how well 
presented and in what format, may not provide the 
information in a manner that resonates with the individual 
seeking it. Therefore, it is important to provide a number of 
different channels for information, including different 
languages, the use of visualisations, and a combination of 
over the phone and in person assistance where needed. 
Furthermore, of all individuals who utilise the digital system, 
the number of individuals who sought assistance as part of 
digital system use is low, however we argue that this 
population is still important to understand and explore.  
Our research found that the majority of assistance-
seeking individuals were those who had been lodging for 
greater than five years. Therefore, the education provided to 
the individual regarding system use needs to be on a long-
term basis, on an average of four to five years based on the 
evidence above. Training and policy design should also 
consider providing training to individuals when they have a 
change in circumstances or role in the system to ensure they 
have all information needed to successfully interact with the 
system. This falls into the concept of predictive adoption and 
assistance-seeking which will be explored in future research.  
From the thematic analysis the majority of individuals 
sought assistance for digital advice, including system 
education and platform awareness. While the minority sought 
non-digital means for lodgement due to lack of computer 
skills and a personal preference towards utilising paper 
means of lodgement. This indicates that individuals require 
education systems that are accessible and relevant. 
Furthermore, incremental digital adoption requires system 
education at the point in time that the user requires it. The 
thematic analysis demonstrates that there are multiple points 
at which, without assistance, individuals would not have been 
able to lodge. Therefore, a critical aspect to consider for 
policy design is the identification and full systems integration 
of these key assistance trigger points. For policy-makers it is 
important to consider stronger investment of resources in 
support mechanisms at various points of lodgement (i.e. 
points identified with the system approach and thematic 
analysis. The process map shows where the different 
assistance seeking points fit within the system. Through this 
visual mapping process, it is possible to identify the 
correlations between where assistance was sought and the 
different stages of the lodgement process. These correlations 
highlighted the key points where self-help options or 
additional education could be provided, and this could assist 
in minimising the number of individuals who are required to 
contact the ATO for digital service issues.  
Profiling individuals based on query behaviour will not 
be effective, as there is strong evidence to suggest that 
variations of queries and unpredicted types of questions 
emerge through the dialogue. This demonstrates the value of 
human interface (via phone, in person and chat windows) as 
these support services provide ongoing support and 
education. This research provides support for the notion that 
not everyone will adopt a fully digital system from public 
sector service providers. As highlighted, many individuals 
who sought assistance were able to determine multiple areas 
within the process that they required greater understanding, 
which was possible as a result of a dialogue with a human 
interface (or person). 
  
This was demonstrated through the analysis of 
individuals who called numerous times, to obtain additional 
support from a human interface, even though additional 
information was available from other digital means. As a 
result of these human interactions, 32% of individuals who 
sought assistance more than once, shifted to digital 
lodgement from non-digital means the year before. 
Therefore, repetitive advice can be designed to target 
individuals needing 
reassurance of 
processes. 
This 
component of the research is still underway and will form 
part of future research. Finally, when understanding the 
individual’s post assistance-seeking outcomes, the summary 
statistics demonstrate that additional research and profiling is 
required to understand in depth the different needs of the 
population. Future research will explore predictive adoption 
and assistance-seeking in post assistance-seeking outcomes.  
The framework being developed within this research, 
which will result from more testing of the conceptual model, 
can be applied more broadly within the public sector digital 
services space. This research has explored in detail the 
Digital Ecosystem quadrant of the conceptual model, which 
outlines the importance of supports and human capital on 
digital service use. By providing public sector service 
designers with more information about the service users, the 
greater the level of understanding they will have which 
should lead to more inclusive services. This research 
framework has been applied more broadly to the adoption of 
digital health platforms, specifically exploring the different 
user views and support requirements to utilise and engage 
with these style services. This includes exploring how 
different types of assistance provided by an organisation, 
supports or hinders the use of a service, including available 
information, call operatives providing advice and other 
support 
services 
available 
outside 
of 
government. 
Understanding the broader implications of this research on 
other public sector services is underway and ongoing. Further 
research is being conducted to understand how the model fits 
within the social services space.  
This research and the policy recommendations and 
implications are aimed at providing advice that encourages 
mandatory public sector services to be inclusive, utilising 
both digital and non-digital options, including the provision 
of assistance.  
105
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The policy implications from this study are fundamental 
and rich with possibilities for future longitudinal research. 
The most basic finding is that perceived human support is the 
main predictor of the intent to adopt a digital mandatory 
system, with relevance as the major constituent driver of 
perceived understanding of the digital government system. 
VII. LIMITATIONS  
This study has potential limitations. The first limitation is 
that this research is being conducted as part of a PhD. 
Therefore, the research is ongoing and progressive. The 
second potential limitation is the use of qualitative data and 
analysis may limit the generalisability of the specific findings 
within the research to other areas. The third potential 
limitation is the data collection was conducted within the 
period tax lodgements were due for the Australian Taxation 
Office, therefore some of the results are specific to lodgement 
of income tax returns. Lastly, the results of this research may 
not be completely generalisable. Additional research is 
underway to explore different public sector services and build 
a framework that is relevant across multiple channels and 
public sector services.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The results and views presented in this paper do not 
represent the view of the Australian Taxation Office or the 
Australian Government.  
REFERENCES 
[1] S Papavasiliou, C Reaiche, and P Ricci, ‘Digital Interactions 
Strategy: A Public Sector Case’, The Thirteenth International 
Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments. pp. 19-23. 
2019. ISBN: 978-1-61208-685-9 
[2] L. Reichelt, Gov.AU is a ‘Mental Model’ of Government 
[Online]. Available from: https://www.dta.gov.au/blog/gov-
au-is-a-mental-model-for-government/ 2016. Retrieved 10 
November 2018.  
[3] Digital 
Transformation 
Agency, 
Digital 
Delivery 
of 
Government 
Services: 
Digital 
Transformation 
Agency 
Submission to the Finance and Public Administration 
Committee 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.aph.gov.au/DocumentStore.ashx?id=9d695f6a-
2354-4cc5-be0d-913de41b25de&subId=516630 
2017. 
Retrieved 10 November 2018.   
[4] S. Papavasiliou, C Reaiche and P Ricci, ‘Digital Adoption: The 
Need for Truly Inclusive e-Government Services’, Proceeding 
of the 2019 International Conference on E-Learning, E-
Business, Enterprise Information Systems & E-Government. 
pp. 43-49, 2019. ISBN: 1-60132-495-2 
[5] National Archives of Australia 2015, Digital Continuity 2020 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
www.naa.gov.au/Information.management 
/Digital.Continuity.2020. Retrieved 10 November 2018.  
[6] A. Furnham, ‘Response Bias, Social Desirability and 
Dissimulation’, Personality and Individual Differences. Vol. 7 
(3), pp. 385–400, 1986. doi:10.1016/0191-8869(86)90014-0  
[7] A. J. Nederhof, ‘Methods of Coping with Social Desirability 
Bias: A Review’, European Journal of Social Psychology. Vol. 
15 (3), pp. 263–280, 1985. doi:10.1002/ejsp.2420150303  
[8] M. T. Orne, ‘On the Social Psychology of the Psychological 
Experiment: 
With 
Particular 
Reference 
to 
Demand 
Characteristics 
and 
Their 
Implications’, 
American 
Psychologist. 
Vol. 
17 
(11), 
pp. 
776–783, 
1962. 
doi:10.1037/h0043424  
[9] M Brimble and A Jones, ‘Using Systems Thinking in Patient 
Safety: A Case Study on Medicines Management’, Nursing 
Management (Harrow). Vol. 24(4) pp. 28-33, 2017. doi: 
10.7748/nm.2017.e1621. 
[10] A Bertrand, How Does Digital Government Become Better 
Government 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.ey.com/en_gl/government-public-sector/how-
does-digital-government-become-better-government 
2019. 
Retrieved 10 July 2019.  
[11] Department of Industry, Australia’s Tech Future: Delivering a 
Strong, Safe and Inclusive Digital Economy [Online], 
Available 
from: 
https://www.industry.gov.au/sites/default/files/2018-
12/australias-tech-future.pdf 2018. Retrieved: 10 July 2019.  
[12] OECD, Strengthening Digital Government [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.oecd.org/going-digital/strengthening-
digital-government.pdf 2019. Retrieved: 10 July 2019.  
[13] Y Yang, ‘Towards a New Digital Era: Observing E-
Government Services Adoption in a Chinese Municipality’, 
Future 
Internet, 
Vol. 
9(53) 
pp. 
21-17, 
2017. 
doi: 
10.3390/fi9030053 
[14] B Corydon, V Ganesan, and M Lundqvist, Digital by Default: 
A Guide to Transforming Government [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.mckinsey.com/~/media/mckinsey/industries/publ
ic%20sector/our%20insights/transforming%20government%2
0through%20digitization/digital-by-default-a-guide-to-
transforming-government.ashx 2016. Retrieved: 10 November 
2018.  
[15] World Economic Forum, Our Shared Digital Future; Building 
an Inclusive, Trustworthy and Sustainable Digital Society 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Our_Shared_Digital_F
uture_Report_2018.pdf 2018. Retrieved: 10 July 2019.  
[16] S Al-Jaghoub, H Al-Yaseen and M Al-Hourani, ‘Evaluation of 
Awareness and Acceptability of Using e-Government Services 
in Developing Countries: the Case of Jordan’, The Electronic 
Journal Information Systems Evaluation, vol. 13(10) pp. 1-8, 
2010. ISSN 1566-6379  
[17] A Charbaji and T Mikdashi, ‘A Path Analytic Study of Attitude 
Toward e-Government in Lebanon’, Corporate Governance, 
Vol 1(3), pp. 76-82, 2003. DOI 10.1108/14720700310459872  
[18] A Alawneh, H Al-Refai and K Baitha, ‘Measuring User 
Satisfaction from eGovernment Services: Lessons from 
Jordan’, Government Information Quarterly, vol. 30, pp. 277-
288, 2013. doi: 10.1016/j.giq.2013.03.001 
[19] E.M. Rogers, Diffusion of Innovation, New York: Free Press, 
1995.  
[20] E. Ziemba, ‘The Contribution of ICT Adoption to 
Sustainability: 
Households’ 
Perspective’, 
Information 
Technology and People, vol. 32(3) pp. 731-753, 2018. doi: 
10.110 8/ITP-02-2018- 0090 
[21] M. A. Shareef, Y. K. Dwivedi, S. Laumer and N. Archer, 
‘Citizens’ Adoption Behaviour of Mobile Government 
(mGov): A Cross-Cultural Study’, Information Systems 
Management, 
vol.33(3), 
pp. 
268-283, 
2016. 
doi: 
10.1080/10580530.2016.1188573  
[22] E. Hargitti and A Hinnant, ‘Digital Inequality: Differences in 
Young Adults’ Use of the Internet’, Communication Research, 
vol.35(5), 
pp. 
602-621, 
2008. 
doi: 
10.1177/0093650208321782  
[23] J. Van Dijk, The Network Society, Social aspects of New 
Media, Sage: Thousand Oaks, 1999.  
106
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[24] E. Ziemba, T. Papaj and R. Zelazny, ‘A Model of Success 
Factors for E-Government Adoption – The Case of Poland’, 
Issues in Information Systems, vol.14(2), pp. 87-100, 2013. 
doi:10.18517/ijaseit.7.4.2518  
[25] S. Sawalha, M. Al-Jamal and E. Abu-Shanab, ‘The Influence 
of Utilising Facebook on e-government Adoption’, Electronic 
Government, 
vol.15(1), 
pp. 
1-20, 
2019. 
doi: 
10.1504/EG.2019.096573  
[26] Institute of Museum and Library Services, University of 
Washington 
Technology 
and 
Social 
Change 
Group, 
International City/County Management Association, Building 
Digitally Inclusive Communities: A Guide to the Proposed 
Framework 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.imls.gov/assets/1/AssetManager/DIC-
FrameworkGuide.pdf 2011. Retrieved 10 July 2019.  
[27] E. Chang and M. West, ‘Digital Ecosystem - A Next 
Generation of the Collaborative Environment’, Proceedings of 
iiWAS 2006, Yogyakarta, 2006. 
[28] M Hadzic, T Dillon, and  E Chang, ‘Use of digital ecosystem 
and ontology technology for standardization of medical 
records’, Digital Ecosystems and Technologies Conference, 
2007. DEST '07. Inaugural IEEE-EIS, 21-23 Feb 2007, pp. 
595-601. Cairns, Australia: IEEE. 
[29] LD Serbanati, F Ricci, G Mercurio, and A Vasilateanu. ‘Steps 
Towards a Digital Health Ecosystem’, Journal of Biomedical 
Informatics. Vol. 44(4) 201.  doi: 10.1016/j.jbi.2011.02.011.  
[30] GE Itawa, M Herselman and A Botha, ‘Digital Health 
Innovation Ecosystems: From Systematic Literature review to 
Conceptual Framework’, Procedia Computer Science, vol. 100 
2016. doi: 10.1016/j.procs.2016.09.149 
[31] World Economic Forum, Platforms and Ecosystems: Enabling 
the 
Digital 
Economy 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Digital_Platforms_and
_Ecosystems_2019.pdf 2019. Retrieved: 10 July 2019.  
[32] Gartner, Insights from the 2017 CIO Agenda Report: Seize the 
Digital Ecosystem Opportunity [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.gartner.com/imagesrv/cio/pdf/Gartner_CIO_Age
nda_2017.pdf 2017. Retrieved 10 November 2018.  
[33] J Hausberg, K Liere-Netheler, S Packmohr, S Pakura, and K 
Vogelsang. Digital Transformation in Business Research: A 
systematic literature review and analysis. (April 26, 2018). 
DRUID18, Copenhagen Business School, Copenhagen, 
Denmark. Available from: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3169203 
2018. Retrieved 10 November 2018.  
[34] A Rudolph, Digital Transformation is About Ecosystems and 
Thinking 
Differently. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.digitalistmag.com/digital-
economy/2017/07/12/digital-transformation-about-
ecosystems-thinking-differently-05209209 2017. Retrieved 07 
August 2017.  
[35] G Briscoe, ‘Digital Ecosystems,’ Dissertation Department of 
Electrical 
and 
Electronic 
Engineering, 
2009, 
URL: 
https://arxiv.org/pdf/0909.3423.pdf 
[36] Australian Taxation Office, ATO Leads Digital by Default 
[Online]. 
Available 
from 
https://www.ato.gov.au/media-
centre/media-releases/ato-leads-digital-by-default/ 
2015. 
Retrieved 05 August 2017.  
[37] Australian Digital Transformation Agency, Digital Services 
Platform 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.dta.gov.au/book/export/html/769 2017. Retrieved 
05 August 2017.  
[38] H Simons, Case Study Research in Practice, Sage Publication: 
LA 2009.  
[39] H Harrison, M Birks, R Franklin R and J Mills, ‘Case Study 
Research: Foundations and Methodological Orientations [34 
paragraphs]’, Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung/ forum: 
Qualitative Social Research, vol. 18(1), pp. 1-17. 2017. doi: 
10.17169/fqs-18.1.2655  
[40] JW Creswell JW, Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative 
and Mixed Methods Approach (3rd Edition), Sage: LA, 2009. 
[41] W Goddard and S Melville, Research Methodology: An 
Introduction 2nd Edition, Juta & Co. Ltd: Lansdowe, 2004. 
[42] HR Bernard, Research Methods in Anthropology 5th Edition, 
AltaMira Press: United Kingdom  2011. 
[43] S Bird, E Klein and E Loper, Natural Language Processing 
with Python: Analysing Text with the Natural Language 
Toolkit. O’Reilly Media: United Kingdom 2009.  
[44] D. A. Gioia, K. G. Corley and A. L. Hamilton, ‘Seeking 
Qualiative Rigour in Inductive Research; Notes on the Gioia 
Methodology’, Organisational Research Methods, vol. 16(1), 
pp. 15-31, 2012. doi:10.1177/1094428112452151  
[45] D. A. Gioia and .K Chittipeddi, ‘Sensemaking and Sensegiving 
in Strategic Change Initation’, Strategic Management Journal, 
vol. 12(6), pp. 433-448, 1991. Doi: 10.1002/smj.4250120604  
[46] TK Landauer, PW Foltz and D Laham, ‘An Introduction to 
Latent Semantic Analysis’, Discourse Processes vol. 25, pp. 
259-284, 1998.  doi: 10.1080/01638539809545028 
[47] DM Blei, AY Ng and MI Jordan, ‘Latent Dirichlet Allocation’, 
Journal of Machine Learning Research vol. 3, pp. 993-1022. 
2003. ISSN: 1532-4435.   
[48] A Ritter, M Etzioni and O Etzioni, ‘A Latent Dirichlet 
Allocation Method for Sectional Preferences’,  Proceedings of 
the 48th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics, Uppsala, Sweden, 11-16 July 2010.  
[49] Damaleo R, The Basics of Process Mapping (2nd Edition), 
Boca Raton Florida: CRC Press 2011. 
[50] Australian Bureau of Statistics, Australian and New Zealand 
Standard Classification of Occupations, Available from: 
https://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/mf/1220.0 
2013. 
Retrieved: 10 July 2018.  
[51] Australian Taxation Office, Individual Income Tax Rates. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.ato.gov.au/Rates/Individual-
income-tax-rates/ 2019. Retrieved: 07 August 2019. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
107
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 5. RESULTS OF THE GIOIA AND THEMATIC ANALYSIS 
FIGURE 6. PROCESS MAP OF LODGEMENT PROCESS 
108
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 12 no 3 & 4, year 2019, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2019, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

