Enhanced QoS and QoE Support in UMTS Cellular Architectures Based on 
Application Requirements and Core Network Capabilities 
An Autonomic Resource Management Perspective  
 
Emanuel Puschita, Andra Elena Iulia Pastrav, 
Cristian Androne, Tudor Palade 
Communications Department 
Technical University of Cluj-Napoca 
Cluj-Napoca, Romania 
Emanuel.Puschita@com.utcluj.ro, 
Andra.Pastrav@yahoo.com, 
Cristian.androne@com.utcluj.ro, Palade@com.utcluj.ro 
Alexandru Caruntu 
Research & Development Department  
Nokia Romania SRL 
Cluj-Napoca, Romania 
Alexandru.Caruntu@nokia.com
 
 
Abstract—The goal of this paper is to propose a solution in 
order to enhance the quality of services support inside the 
Internet Protocol-based packet switched domain of an 
Universal Mobile Telecommunications System architecture. 
The originality of this approach lies in the perspective of an 
integrated functionality defined at the conjunction of the 
service requests with the network capabilities. Objective 
quality of services and quality of experience analysis will 
highlight the benefits of the autonomic resource management 
in terms of average end-to-end delay, jitter and mean opinion 
score. 
Keywords-UMTS; QoS support; QoE perception; autonomic 
management. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The success of the Internet Protocol (IP) technology, as 
evidenced by the variety of many types of applications and 
network architectures, has proven its centrality through the 
way it has influenced, and often determined the daily life.  
Continuous user demands for traffic capacity determined 
the operators and infrastructure providers to identify and to 
offer end-to-end solutions including carefully-managed 
connections and high-quality user services and experience. In 
this context, Internet’s ubiquity has revealed a number of 
shortcomings that the current architecture cannot solve.  
Hence a multitude of solutions have been developed to 
approach problems such as addressing, routing, congestion, 
resource management or traffic precedence. 
In a sustained effort to improve resource management for 
mobile network environments, our previous work was 
focused on the benefits offered by an integrated Quality of 
Services (QoS) support inside the Universal Mobile 
Telecommunications System (UMTS) IP packet switched 
(PS) part of the Core Network (CN) domain [1]. Introducing 
a realistic radio access network modeling, the work 
presented in this paper completes over the quality of 
delivered services.  
In this way, we demonstrate the need for a correlation 
between the application request and the network context as 
the basic background of an integrated autonomic resource 
management.  
A similar solution that considers the needs for built in 
quality control functions needed by many applications, 
addresses the resource management issue by combining a 
routing procedure and an information model for the 
representation of connection properties [2]. 
Two major trends can be distinguished in the way the 
scientific community understood solving this set of 
problems, namely: the complete remodeling of the Internet 
architecture (i.e., 4WARD [3], AUTOI [4], 4D [5], GENI 
[6]), and the gradual improvement of functionalities in the 
existing architecture [7] (i.e., Self-NET [8]). 
The complete remodeling of the Internet architecture 
offers a purist approach, a clean slate kind of modeling the 
new architectural elements. On the other hand, the gradual 
development of network architecture, ruled by a pluralistic 
approach, considers that the leap towards a new Internet 
architecture is impossible independently of the existing 
technologies. 
Promoting the functionality promised by a clean slate 
approach (flexibility, reliability, fault-tolerance, autonomy 
and manageability), the authors of this paper believe 
however that passing to an architecture that will integrate all 
these features is progressive, at least for two reasons: the 
perspective of operators and Internet service providers on 
radical changes in the network and the difficulty in testing, 
evaluating and validating the proposed new architectural 
elements.  
Beyond the need for new legislative and normative 
agreements between Internet service providers and network 
operators, agreements required by fundamental architectural 
changes. Therefore, a major issue in the revolutionary 
innovation of the Internet architecture is the difficulty of 
assessing the new concepts in real experimental scenarios.  
In [9], Peterson disputes the promotion of new 
architectural ideas, calling the scientific community to test 
the proposed solutions in the experimental “M-Lab” test-bed 
site [10], a validation site completely different from what 
means the evaluation by simulation or emulation.  
54
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Although the reality of testing on an experimental 
platform is undeniable, the risk is to focus the proposed 
solutions on an single extremely narrow issue.  
Therefore, the authors of this paper believe that prior to a 
live testing phase there are several steps that must be 
completed by simulation and emulation, namely: monitoring 
and highlighting critical situations to identify network 
problems, testing the effect of local parametric adjustments 
on the whole system, development and gradual integration of 
scalable features in a new architecture. Therefore, stepping 
towards a revolutionary architecture is a matter of time; the 
new capabilities added to the existing architectural elements 
represent the prerequisites for success in this matter. Because 
of this, we believe that it is impossible to jump towards an 
architecture, 
which 
is 
independent 
of 
the 
existing 
technologies, the argument of this statement being found in 
the evolutionary pluralist concept.  
Starting from these premises, which combine the 
requirements of a clean slate paradigm with current 
technological reality, the paper aims to investigate and test 
the benefits of integrating autonomic resource management 
capabilities into the UMTS CN architectural domain to 
enhance the QoS support.  
In addition to analyzing QoS parameters such as average 
end-to-end delay, throughput or average jitter experienced by 
time-critical applications in the UMTS radio access network 
domain (UMTS RAN) [11], this paper enhances and extends 
the QoS / Quality of Experience (QoE) support even to the 
UMTS IP PS domain by integrating an autonomic resource 
management through network virtualization.  
As the native UMTS QoS support is based only on 
service level classification in the Radio Access Network 
(RAN) domain, by describing, transmitting and correlating 
particular requirements of the source application with the 
context of IP PS domain, an optimal end-to-end performance 
could be offered through network virtualization in the CN.  
In the context of this paper, by a native UMTS QoS 
support we consider a UMTS system offering QoS traffic 
differentiation by default. It is worth mentioning that the 
UMTS traffic classification covers only a certain part of the 
system and is closer to the physical connection (the RAN 
part), and therefore always has more stringent requirements 
in terms of QoS parameters. 
Section II of the paper describes the radio access 
techniques, the architectural elements and the capabilities of 
the UMTS network domains that support various QoS traffic 
classes.  
A holistic view of the quality of delivered services 
through the UMTS QoS support is completed by a QoE 
perspective. The QoE concept, the evaluation models and the 
parameters involved in the QoS objective analysis are 
presented in Section III.  
Section IV presents the system model calibration for 
UMTS RAN in terms of Cumulative Distribution Function 
(CDF) of the Signal-to-Noise Interference level (SINR) for 
users in one cell that maximize the performances of the 
UMTS air interface. The UMTS RAN system model 
parameters that guarantee an optimal dimensioning of the 
network 
(transmission 
power, 
accepted 
co-channel 
interference levels, radio range and cell capacity) are 
determined. Then, the performances of QoS/QoE support 
traffic 
classes 
for 
applications 
that 
have 
stringent 
requirements concerning the time component are evaluated. 
The UMTS RAN dimensioning is performed by using 
Matlab, while the end-to-end system performance evaluation 
is performed by using QualNet 5.1 network simulator [12]. 
In Section V, the premises for an autonomic resource 
management that ensures a higher quality support in the 
UMTS CN are investigated in terms of QoS/QoE support.  
This fact is accomplished by the ability of the application 
to select an alternative route between UMTS CN entities, the 
Serving GPRS Support Node (SGSN) and the Gateway 
GPRS Support Node (GGSN), based on its knowledge of the 
source requirements.  
Finally, Section IV presents the conclusions of the 
conducted study by showing the perspective of an autonomic 
management of network resources that is based on the 
conjunction of application requirements and network 
context. 
II. 
AN OVERVIEW OF THE UMTS CELLULAR SYSTEM 
We will present the radio access techniques, the 
architectural elements and capabilities of the UMTS network 
domains that support various QoS traffic classes. 
A. UMTS Radio Access Techniques 
The Universal Mobile Telecommunications System is 
one of the third generation (3G) cellular system technologies. 
It uses Wideband Code Division Multiple Access 
(WCDMA), a direct-sequence spread spectrum access 
technology developed by NTT DoCoMo [13].  
NTT DoCoMo submitted WCDMA specification to the 
International Telecommunication Union (ITU) as a proposal 
for the air interfaces of the ITU IMT-2000 family of 3G 
Standards. Therefore WCDMA was selected as an air 
interface for UMTS system, the 3G successor to Global 
System  for Mobile Communications (GSM). 
Since it is GSM down-compatible, some of the UTMS 
key features include the two basic multiplexing modes, Time 
Division Duplexing (TDD) and Frequency Division 
Duplexing (FDD). The advantages offered by the use of 
WCDMA, a time-frequency space multiplexing technique 
were reflected in extended network coverage and increased 
cell capacity. This is a direct consequence of the accepted 
cell interference vs. number of mobile users in the system 
compromise. The benefits of using WCDMA over other 
multiple access techniques also reflect on adaptive power 
control, variable transmission rates and inherent QoS 
support.  
B. UMTS Network Architecture 
The UMTS network architecture consists of three 
interacting parts: the User Equipment (UE) or Mobile 
Equipment (ME), the UMTS Terrestrial Radio Access 
Network (UTRAN) and the Core Network (CN). Due to its 
various radio access supported methods, the UMTS UE is 
capable of working in three modes: Circuit Switching (CS), 
Packet Switching (PS) and hybrid CS/PS mode [14].  
55
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The RAN part consists of the Base Stations (BSs) or 
Node Bs and Radio Network Controllers (RNCs). The main 
functions of the BS are air interface transmission / reception, 
signal modulation / demodulation, while major functions of 
the RNC are power control, admission control, channel 
allocation, radio resource control / management, data 
multiplexing / demultiplexing.  
The CN part provides data switching, routing and handles 
the user traffic. It also contains the network user registries or 
databases and the network management functions. Offering 
both CS and PS, the CN is divided in two domains: CS 
domain and PS domain. The CS domain network elements 
are the Mobile Services Switching Centre (MSC), Visitor 
Location Register (VLR) and Gateway MSC (GMSC). The 
PS elements are the SGSN and the GGSN. Network 
operational and maintenace elements like HLR, VLR, 
Equipament Identifier (EIR) and Authentificantion Center 
(AuC) are shared by both domains.  
Concluding, we have to note that the UMTS CN part is 
based on the GSM network architecture with General Packet 
Radio Service (GPRS) support. 
In order to achieve a certain QoS support, UMTS 
network has defined a so-called “Bearer Service”. A bearer 
service includes all aspects needed to enable the provision of 
a contracted QoS, including the control signaling, user plane 
transport and QoS management functionality.  
C. UMTS QoS Support 
Various types of bearer service were established between 
different parts of UMTS network. In addition, each bearer 
service on a specific layer offers its individual services using 
services provided by the layers below.  
It is worth mentioning that bearers that cover only a 
certain part of a system and are closer to the physical 
connection always have more stringent QoS requirements.  
In order to solve the QoS problem, UMTS defines four 
types of traffic classes: Conversational (CO) Class, 
Streaming 
(ST) 
Class, 
Interactive 
(IN) 
Class 
and 
Background (BK) Class [15]. The main difference between 
these QoS classes is the transfer delay value. Conversational 
QoS Class includes real-time applications that require 
stringent limits for delay value, while Background QoS Class 
is the most delay insensitive traffic class.  
Table I shows the main characteristics of the above- 
mentioned QoS classes and examples of corresponding 
applications. 
TABLE I.  
MAIN CHARACTERISTICS OF UMTS QOS CLASSES 
Traffic classes 
Characteristics 
Application 
Conversational (CO) 
Class 
low delay, low jitter, 
symmetric traffic, no 
buffering 
speech, voice over 
IP (VoIP), video, 
video gaming 
Streaming (ST) 
Class 
moderate delay, 
moderate jitter, 
asymmetric traffic, 
buffering allowed 
multimedia, video 
streaming, audio 
streaming, video 
on demand 
Interactive (IN) 
Class 
moderate jitter, 
asymmetric traffic, 
buffering allowed, 
request response pattern 
web browsing, 
network gaming, 
databases access 
 
Background (BK) 
Class 
destination doesn’t 
expect data within a 
certain time, preserve 
payload content, 
asymmetric traffic, 
buffering allowed 
email, file 
downloading, fax, 
short message 
services (SMS) 
 
In order to define the traffic characteristics, the UMTS 
network architecture introduces a set of QoS attributes. It 
must be mentioned that a particular type of traffic class is 
itself a QoS attribute.  
There are attributes specific to all classes (i.e., maximum 
bit rate, delivery order, maximum SDU (Service Data Unit) 
size) and some attributes that are applied only to a specific 
class (i.e., transfer delay is applied only to conversational 
and streaming classes; traffic handling priority is applied 
only to interactive class). 
III. 
QUALITY OF EXPERIENCE 
QoE is defined by the ITU-T as “the overall acceptability 
of an application or service, as perceived subjectively by the 
end-user” 
[16], 
thus 
it 
measures 
the 
performance 
expectations of the user. It is also stated that QoE includes 
“the complete end-to-end system effects”, meaning that the 
source quality, the effects of the network, protocols, source 
codecs, terminals equipments etc. are reflected in the quality 
perception at the end-user. 
Although it may seem that it overlaps with the QoS 
notion, QoE is not limited to the performances of the 
network. The end-user perception is also influenced by non-
technical aspects such as environmental, sociological, and 
psychological factors, and thus it would be more accurate to 
say that QoE augments QoS by linking the performance of 
the system and the user’s expectations. 
As expected, due to the fact that it reflects the user’s 
opinion regarding the quality of the transmission, QoE 
cannot be easily evaluated. However, two types of evaluation 
methods are usually approached: the subjective and the 
objective one. 
In order to evaluate the quality of a transmission from a 
subjective perspective, different tests and experiments have 
to be conducted using human subjects. This tests directly ask 
the participants to rate their experience regarding a certain 
service. Although this method is the only way of assessing 
the psychological and sociological impacts on QoE, it is 
expensive and time consuming [17]. Consequently, the 
second evaluation method is used in order to implement 
several models that associate the network performance with 
the user's level of satisfaction. 
As described in [18], in the process of developing such a 
model, three main steps have to be considered: (1) analyze 
key QoS parameters that have an impact on the performance 
perceived by the user (e.g. delay, jitter or packet loss [19]) 
and identify the relationship between them and QoE, (2) 
measure the parameters considered in the first step and (3) 
use mapping metrics to rate the QoE based on the QoS 
measured parameters. 
A. Objective QoE Analysis: The E-model 
The most popular model used to predict the quality of a 
voice application is the E-model [20]. It is an objective 
56
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

method used to compute the performances of an end-to-end 
voice transmission and thus anticipate the quality perceived 
by the end-user taking into account the network impairment 
parameters like packet loss and delay.  
The primary outcome of the E-model is the Rating Factor 
R as in (1) 
 
 
A
Ie eff
Id
Is
R
R
+
−
−
−
−
=
0
, 
(1) 
 
where R0 is the Signal to Noise Ratio, Is represents the 
impairments that occur at the same time as the voice signal, 
Id represents the impairments caused by the delay, Ie-eff is the 
effective equipment impairment factor (caused by the low 
rate codecs), and A is the advantage factor, which may 
compensate for some of the impairment factors assuming 
that there are other advantages of access to the user [21]. 
By processing the R factor, an estimation of the user's 
opinion can be obtained. 
B. Mean Opinion Score 
The Mean Opinion Score (MOS) is the most used QoE 
metric and is defined in [16] as “the value on a predefined 
scale that a subject assigns to his opinion of the performance 
of the telephone transmission system used either for 
conversation or only for listening to spoken material”.  
Although this definition reffers to the telephone 
transmission system, the MOS is used in the evaluation of 
voice and video applications too. MOS is expressed as a 
number between 1 and 5, from the lowest to the highest 
perceived quality.  
Table II presents the correspondence between the 
absolute value of MOS, the perceived quality descriptor and 
the degradation of the transmission as perceived by the user. 
TABLE II.  
MOS CORRESPONDENCE TABLE 
MOS 
Quality descriptor 
Degradation 
5 
Excellent 
Imperceptible 
4 
Good 
Perceptible 
3 
Fair 
Slightly annoying 
2 
Poor 
Annoying 
1 
Bad 
Very annoying 
 
A correspondence between the value of the R factor and 
MOS [20] is given in (2): 
 
 
.5.4
,
100
)7 10 6,
60)(100
(
.0 035
1
100,
0
,1
,0
=
>
−
⋅
−
−
+
+
=
<
<
=
<
MOS
R
R
R R
R
MOS
R
MOS
R
 (2) 
 
C. QualNet 5.1 implementation of MOS 
In addition to describing the subjective opinion, MOS is 
also used for scores that originate from objective models, 
like the one implemented by Scalable Networks for QualNet 
5.1 simulator.  
QualNet 
Simulator 
provides 
several 
parameters 
describing the performances of the network in the simulated 
scenarios. Among the usual objective parameters, MOS is 
also computed, based on the ITU-T E-model presented 
earlier. 
The R factor is computed in a simplified manner as in (3) 
 
 
Ief
Id
R
−
−
=
93 2.
, 
(3) 
 
where Id represents the impairment factor due to the delay in 
the network expressed by (4) 
 
 
177 3. )
(
177 3. )
.0 11(
.0 024
−
−
+
=
H d
d
d
Id
. 
(4) 
 
Parameter d is the one-way delay (including coding, 
network and de-jitter delay) and Ief (5) is the impairment 
caused by the low bit rate 
 
 
.0 04)
(
70 )
19ln(1
)
( .0 04
15 )
30ln(1
−
+
+
−
+
=
e H e
e
e H
Ief
, (5) 
 
where e is the error probability and H(x) = 0 for x < 0 and 
H(x) = 1 for x ≥ 0 [12]. The formulae for computing MOS 
by means of the R factor are presented in (2). 
IV. 
UMTS RAN SYSTEM MODEL AND NATIVE UMTS 
QOS SUPPORT EVALUATION 
In this section, the system model calibration for UMTS 
RAN in terms of CDF of the SINR level for users in one cell 
that maximize the performances of the UMTS air interface is 
determined. Then, the performances of QoS/QoE support 
traffic 
classes 
for 
applications 
that 
have 
stringent 
requirements concerning the time component are evaluated. 
A. Radio Access System Model Parameter Calibration 
The air interface calibration scenario considered in this 
paper consists of a 1.4 x 1.4km2 area, in which a UMTS 
RAN has been deployed.  
The UMTS RAN calibration system model considers 
seven Node Bs deployed, each of them having three-sector 
antennas. The Inter-Site Distance (ISD) is considered to be 
500m, as for a typical urban environment. Furthermore, the 
NodeBs transmit powers are set to 20W. 
57
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 The radio propagation model considered in the 
simulations consists of a log-distance path loss model with 
fixed and exponential coefficients taken from [21].  
The amplitude change caused by shadowing is modelled 
using a log-normal distribution with a standard deviation 
according to the log-distance model. The shadow fading 
maps were generated based on the method in [22] with the 
standard deviation parameters taken from [21]. The summary 
of the full range of parameters used in the simulations is 
presented in Table III. 
TABLE III.  
UMTS RAN SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
Path loss 
Path-loss is modelled as 11.81+ 38.63 log10(d) for 
network users, where d is the distance from the base 
station in meters. 
Shadow 
fading 
Shadow fading is modelled as spatially correlated random 
process with log-normal distribution (6dB standard 
deviation), spatial correlation  r(x) = ex/20 for distance x. 
Receiver 
noise 
power 
The receiver noise power is modelled as 10 log10 (kT NF 
W) where the effective noise bandwidth is given as W = 
3.84 ×  106Hz, and kT = 1.3804 ×  10-23 ×  290W/Hz. 
The noise figure at the UE is NF[dB] = 7dB. 
Base 
station 
antenna 
gain 
The base station antenna gain is calculated as 
2
max
max
( )
min 12
,
,     
     with
70 /180      angle where gain pattern is 3dB down from peak
 20dB          sidelobe gain level in dB
 16dB       maximum gain level in
s
s
G
dB
G
G
G
G
θ
θ
π
θ
π
β
β
π
⎡
⎤
⎛
⎞
=
−
−
≤
≤
⎢
⎥
⎜
⎟
⎢
⎥
⎝
⎠
⎣
⎦
=
=
=
 dB
 
Radio system simulations were carried out in order to 
investigate the performances of the UMTS mobile network. 
The simulation parameters were taken from Table III, and if 
not otherwise mentioned they will be the same for all the 
simulations carried out in the paper. 
The received signal strength on the downlink direction is 
calculated as in (6) 
 
 
Pantenna
Pshadow
Ploss
Ptx
PRx
+
+
+
=
, 
(6) 
 
where
tx
P  is the transmit power of the base station; 
Ploss
 is 
the path loss component calculated according to Table III; 
Pshadow
 is the shadow fading component at the user location 
defined by the parameters in Table III; 
Pantenna
 is the 
antenna gain component specific for the three sector antenna 
used at the Node B transmitter. 
In order to have a general view of the system model, 
Figure 1 presents the level of the received signal strength 
throughout the environment. The levels for the received 
signal are calculated according to equation (6). For a better 
understanding and clarity of the figure, the values of the 
signal displayed in Figure 1 are calculated without 
considering any shadow fading. 
The values of the received signal strength are given in 
dBm, according to the colour bar on the right hand side of 
the figure. The resolution of the map is 2m.  
Figure 1 presents the general view of the system model, 
but in order to understand the performances of the network 
we need to analyse it cell-wise. In order to do this, we will 
further concentrate on one of the three hexagonal cells of the 
centre base station. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Received signal strength level for the considered environment 
The analyzed parameter in this case will be the signal to 
interference plus noise ratio (SINR), defined as in (7) 
 
 
)
( int
_ max
Pnoise
erference
P
PRx
SINR
+
−
=
, 
(7) 
 
where 
PRx _ max
is the received signal strength from the best 
server; 
Pint erference
is the sum of the contributions of all the 
other base stations; 
Pnoise
 is the receiver noise power 
defined according to Table III. 
Using (6), the SINR level will be calculated for all the 
positions in the environment with the same location 
resolution. Because the level of the noise power at the user 
location is -101.13dBm, as calculated from the relations in 
Table III, the receiver sensitivity considered in the scenario 
needs to be above this threshold.  
One factor, which has a great impact upon the obtained 
SINR value, is the shadow fading. This phenomenon occurs 
when an obstacle is situated between the transmitter and the 
receiver, in our case base station and mobile terminal, 
respectively. In order to better understand the influence of 
the shadow fading component upon the level of the obtained 
SINR, we will vary the value of the shadow fading standard 
deviation. The analysis we conducted led us to the results 
presented in Figure 3, which illustrates the CDF of the 
obtained SINR value for all the user positions in one of the 
hexagonal centre cells.  
The results are calculated for the instances when we 
have no shadow fading, shadow fading with standard 
deviation 4, 6, 8 and 10, respectively.  
58
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

The analysis reveals that the shadow fading has a 
negative impact upon the obtained SINR value, directly 
proportional to the increase of the standard deviation. 
 
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
SINR [dB]
CDF
 
 
No shadow fading
Sigma shadow = 4
Sigma shadow = 6
Sigma shadow = 8
Sigma shadow = 10
 
 
Figure 2.  CDF of SINR for users in one cell 
Because in our scenario we consider a minimum 
threshold value of the SINR of -6.5dB, the worst case that 
fulfils this condition is that of using a standard deviation of 
6. The minimum value of -6.5dB for the SINR, corresponds 
to a user throughput of 500kbps. 
B. Performance Evaluation of UMTS QoS/QoE Support 
In order to evaluate the QoS support implicitly provided 
by a UMTS network, a scenario including a PLMN (Public 
Land Mobile Network) was simulated using QualNet 5.1 
network simulator, a widely used platform in the defense and 
telecommunication network design and evaluation [12].  
Global parameters configured at the physical UMTS 
RAN level of the simulation are given in Table IV.  
TABLE IV.  
PHY LAYER CONFIGURATION PARAMETERS 
Parameter 
Value 
Terrain dimensions 
1.4 x 1.4 km2 
Up-link channel frequency 
1.95 GHz 
Down-link channel frequency 
2.15 GHz 
Shadowing Mean 
6 dB 
Node B transmission power 
20 W 
Simulation time 
200 s 
 
The system model parameters previously determined 
guarantee an optimal dimensioning of the network in terms 
of signal distribution vs. system capacity. It should be 
noticed that two different radio channels were used in order 
to access the network resources. The frequency values of 
these channels were chosen accordingly with European 3G 
bands for UMTS 2100 recommendations [23].  
The UMTS RAN network scenario includes eight UE 
nodes: four source nodes (UE nodes 6, 8, 10, and 12) and 
four destination nodes (UE nodes 7, 9, 11, and 13), as 
presented in Figure 3.  
 
6
8
10
12
11
9
7
13
CBR
CBR
CBR
CBR
Source 
Node
Destination 
Node
NodeB
Radio Network 
Controller
Home Location 
Register
Serving GPRS 
Support Node 
Gateway GPRS 
Support Node 
Radio Link
 
 
Figure 3.  UMTS evaluation scenario 
Between the source nodes (SN) and destination nodes 
(DN), four CBR (Constant Bit Rate) applications, each of 
them corresponding to one QoS class defined by the UMTS 
network, were considered. The characteristics of all 
applications are summarized in Table V. 
TABLE V.  
CORRESPONDING QOS CLASS FOR EACH CBR 
APPLICATION USED IN THE EVALUATION SCENARIO 
Application 
Type 
SN 
DN 
Items 
to 
Send 
Item 
Size 
(bytes) 
Interval 
(s) 
QoS 
Class 
CBR 
6 
7 
1000 
40 
0.1 
BK 
8 
9 
IN 
10 
11 
ST 
12 
13 
CO 
 
The results of the simulations concerning the average 
end-to-end delay, the average jitter and average MOS for 
each QoS supported class are presented in Figure 4, Figure 5 
and Figure 6 respectively.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Average end-to-end delay experienced by the test applications 
in each QoS support class 
In analyzing the obtained results, it can be noticed that 
application, which corresponds to the Conversational and 
59
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Streaming QoS class, is characterized by the lowest value of 
average end-to-end delay and jitter delay, as expected for the 
type of application corresponding to this class (speech, VoIP, 
video or audio streaming). 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Average jitter experienced by the test applications in each QoS 
support class 
Summarizing, the network complies with the priority 
level imposed on the test applications that were modeled by 
CBR-type traffic sources, and this is reflected in the average 
values of the end-to-end transmission delays and in the jitter 
for each QoS priority class. 
Correlating end-to-end transmission delays with the 
transmission flow rate and with the time interval between 
transmitted packets one can notice the increased flow rate in 
the case of Background class, which is due to transmitting a 
reduced total number of packets in a very short transmission 
time interval. 
If MOS values are compared, it can be seen that the 
application from Conversational QoS class has the highest 
value of this parameter, which corresponds to the lowest 
value for the average end-to-end delay and the average jitter.  
 
 
Figure 6.  Average MOS experienced by the test applications in each QoS 
support class 
Note that the QualNet simulator offers the possibility to 
mark the traffic flows by setting the appropriate IP 
Precedence field. In this way, the applications are identified, 
classified and scheduled in the corresponding queues. 
V. 
PERSPECTIVES TOWARDS AN AUTONOMIC RESOURCE 
MANAGEMENT IN A UMTS NETWORK 
Developed within the 3rd Generation Partnership Project 
(3GPP), the 3G standard suggests an end-to-end QoS support 
based on a policy management system (Policy-Based 
Network Management) [15].  
The network architecture presented by the first 3GPP 
public versions has evolved to an architectural model System 
Architecture Evolution (SAE) [24], which ensures the 
convergence of different access network categories such as 
UMTS, 3GPP, Wireless Local Area Network (WLAN) or 
any other non-3GPP radio access technology. 
The latest public 3GPP version considers the IP 
Multimedia Subsystem (IMS) [23] network architecture to be 
completely separated from the access technology, having the 
specific access functions isolated from the core network. By 
eliminating the hierarchical dependence between the Serving 
RNC (SRNC) and the corresponding SGSN, a more efficient 
resource allocation was offered. 
In order to manage QoS resources, the SAE architecture 
integrates an informational QoS Information Function (QIF) 
function that interacts with all individual network models 
included within the IMS platform. This QoS resource 
management solution is an external part of the network, 
based on the use and interaction between a central entity and 
periferic elements. 
Although in the clean slate approach the resource 
management and the QoS support are considered an 
integrated part of communications networks, this fact is not 
reflected in the characteristics of current systems or by the 
UMTS network architecture.  
Therefore, the perspective of an autonomic resource 
management in a UMTS network proposed in this paper 
suggests the necessity of adding additional information at the 
level of the central UMTS network elements using 
virtualization technique. 
Network virtualization represents a high level abstraction 
process that overlaps the implementation and physical 
network configuration details. Allowing co-existence of 
multiple virtual architectures overlaid on a common substrate 
physically shared, network virtualization promises flexibility 
and security, promoting diversity and increased management 
capacity [24].  
In 
this 
way, 
UMTS 
core 
network 
nodes 
act 
autonomously, being able to sense the environment, to 
perceive the changes, to understand internal changes and to 
react in an intelligent manner by selecting the optimal path 
according to application requirements.  
To demonstrate this, native UMTS QoS support is 
analyzed in comparison to the potential of the autonomic 
management offered through network virtualization, using 
QualNet network simulator [12]. Thus, in the case of an 
autonomic management system, the proposed analysis 
scenarios highlight the ability of selecting the best route 
according to the source application constraints in terms of 
maximum acceptable end-to-end delay. 
60
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A. Scenario description 
According to [13], it is possible for an UMTS network to 
have multiple SGSNs and GGSNs entities, which can be co-
located or can be interconnected via an IP subnetwork in 
order to increase the geographical area served by an operator.  
Considering the second approach, an evaluation scenario 
was developed, in which the SGSN and the GGSN are 
interconnected via a simple IP sub-network that consists of 
seven generic routers denoted R1 to R7, as depicted in 
Figure 7. 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  The architecture of the evaluation scenario 
Obviously, a real-life UMTS IP sub-network would be 
more complex, the motivation for this topology was to better 
illustrate the problems that may arise and the proposed 
solution. 
In this evaluation scenario a CBR test application 
corresponding to Conversational QoS class (highest priority 
QoS class) was considered. The main parameters that 
describe the characteristics for the tested application are 
indicated in Table VI. 
TABLE VI.  
CHARCTERISTICS OF THE MODELED APPLICATION 
 
Application 
Type 
SN 
DN 
Items 
to 
Send 
Item 
Size 
[bytes] 
Interval 
[s] 
QoS 
Class 
CBR 
6 
7 
1000 
40 
0.1 
CO 
 
As we have already mentioned, the motivation behind 
this evaluation is to highlight the benefits of the autonomic 
management offered through a network virtualization 
process. 
In our case, the virtualization process could be illustrated 
by controlling, through the configuration files, the parametric 
values that characterize network architectural elements.    
Knowing the values of these parameters, it is possible to 
indicate a dedicated virtual network that offers the best path 
from source to destination in terms of minimum average end-
to-end delay, maximum throughput, packet loss rate on 
selected route or other stringent requirements specific to a 
certain type of application.   
B. Performance Evaluation 
In order to emphasize the path selection mechanism 
between SGSN and GGSN, core nodes of UMTS IP sub-
network, two different cases were evaluated: a native UMTS 
QoS support selection compared to QoS network support 
provided by an autonomic network management selection, as 
a result of dedicated virtual network generation. 
When it defines the links between two intermediate 
generic routers in the UMTS IP sub-network, the simulator 
allows the association of specific transmission throughput 
and delay on each link, as presented in Figure 8. 
 
R4
R6
R5
R3
R2
Default Route 
Selected Route With Respect 
To Application Requirements
10Gbps
10ms
1Gbps
20ms
10Mbps
2ms
100Mbps
2ms
100Mbps
2ms
100Mbps
5ms
10Gbps
2.5ms
100Mbps
5ms
1Gbps
30ms
R1
R7
1Gbps
10ms
100Mbps
1ms
 
 
Figure 8.  UMTS IP sub-network path selection 
Sending the test application scheduled in Conversational 
Class by the native UMTS QoS support in the RAN domain, 
the path from router R1 to router R7 in the IP PS sub-
network was selected via routers R3, R6 and R4, as 
illustrated in Figure 7. The path selection was based only on 
the use of OSPFv2 routing protocol. However, independently 
of the used routing protocol (e.g., Bellman Ford or RIP), 
simulation results indicates that there is no correlation 
between the application requirements and the network 
selected path. Therefore, the determined path remains the 
same in case of using default QoS support. 
An autonomic network management QoS support should 
consider and accommodate both differentiated application 
requirements and dynamic network context. This mandatory 
integrated capability of the Future Internet (FI) network 
elements is implemented by means of network virtualization.  
The objective of network virtualization process is to 
generate virtual networks and make each of these virtual 
networks appear to the user as a dedicated network 
infrastructure, with dedicated resources and services 
available for application requests. Therefore, the network 
virtualization process invokes a mode of selecting the virtual 
network that best integrates and satisfies the application 
requests at the physical network level.  
It must be mentioned that for the generated virtual 
network, in our case, only the values of average end-to-end 
delay and jitter (as a consecutive delay difference) are 
considered as critical parameters for the source application. 
61
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Results of the simulations validate a virtual path from the 
router R1 to router R7 via routers R4, R3, and R5, a 
corresponding physical network infrastructure that offers 
best performances in terms of requested average end-to end 
delay and jitter. 
Parametric results of the average end-to-end delay, the 
average jitter, and the average MOS, both for native UMTS 
QoS support and autonomic resource management QoS 
support in the IP PS domain, are summarized in Table VII.  
TABLE VII.  
PARAMETRIC EVALUATION OF QOS/QOE SUPPORT 
Selected path 
between ingress-egress 
nodes in UMTS PS domain 
Average 
end-to-end 
delay (s) 
Average 
jitter 
(s) 
Average 
MOS 
(score) 
Native QoS support in the  
UMTS radio access network 
R1 → R3 →  
→ R6 → R4 → R7 
0.109 
0.022 
3.186 
Autonomic resource management based on network virtualization in 
UMTS IP PS domain 
R1 → R4 →  
→ R3 → R5 → R7 
0.045 
0.022 
3.264 
 
As illustrated in Figure 9 and Figure 10, the UMTS IP PS 
domain decisively influences the applications performances 
in terms of average end-to-end delay, jitter and MOS.  
 
 
Figure 9.  Comparative results of the average  end-to-end delay and 
average jitter based on different path selection between ingress-egress 
nodes in the UMTS IP PS domain 
 
Figure 10.  Comparative results of the aveage MOS based on different path 
selection between ingress-egress nodes in the UMTS IP PS domain 
If the application requests are expressed in terms of a 
maximum accepted delay [26], the results illustrated in 
Figure 11 show that the autonomic resource management 
could satisfy these requests by offering an optimal path 
inside the UMTS IP PS domain. 
 
Figure 11.  Delay variation over the simulation time based on different path 
selection between ingress-egress nodes in the UMTS IP PS domain 
The QoE objective analysis based on MOS evaluation 
presented in Figure 12 shows that the user perception of the 
quality of the delivered service is enhanced by the use of an 
autonomic resource management support in the UMTS IP PS 
domain.  
 
Figure 12.  MOS variation over the simulation time based on different path 
selection between ingress-egress nodes in the UMTS IP PS domain 
Therefore, simulation results support the perspective 
towards an autonomic resource management QoS support 
that makes the conjunction between the application's requests 
and the network context by choosing an alternate route in a 
virtualized environment.  
The potential of the autonomic resource management is 
reflected by the capacity to identify an optimal path between 
the source node and the destination node, according to the 
imposed QoS constraints (for example, maximum accepted 
delay, minimum accepted packet loss, maximum accepted 
jitter or minimum requested throughput).  
62
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Some critical conditions or cost constrains could limit the 
resource optimization while using the native QoS support on 
the UMTS radio access network. 
These situations request the adaptation of the source 
application parameters to the network available resources in 
order to still broadcast the information on the channel. 
An implemented and tested solution (i.e., virtualization 
algorithm, virtualized parameters, in-network message flow, 
and source adaptation) for the network virtualization concept 
is offered in [27]. The conjunction between the source 
application requests and the network context is achieved 
through the QoS profiles message exchange and it represents 
the process of network virtualization.  
As in [27], the paper assumes the network overflow by 
probing each UMTS IP PS network link. Nevertheless, the 
potential of the autonomic resource management is reflected 
by lower average end-to-end delay and lower jitter. 
In order to impose the selected network elements on the 
virtual path, we used the Multiprotocol Label Switching 
(MPLS). As the proposed QoS support uses MPLS for route 
maintenance, it can be applied only in the UMTS IP PS 
network domain. Therefore, it cannot offer an end-to-end 
QoS support because RAN domain of the UMTS network 
does not have implemented the IP protocol. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Considering a realistic UMTS RAN domain modeling, 
the paper aims to investigate the potential benefits that could 
reside from the integration of the autonomic resource 
management based on the virtualization process in current 
UMTS IP PS network domain architecture. 
Based on an objective QoS/QoE performance analysis, 
the upper limit of native UMTS QoS support was analyzed, 
in a first stage, in terms of average end-to-end delay, average 
jitter and average MOS. The ability of the UMTS traffic 
classes to offer quality support for constant bit rate time 
critical applications was compared with the QoS support 
resulted from the usage of autonomic resource management.  
The obtained results suggest that, since it is closer to the 
application needs and considering the network context, such 
an autonomic resource management could improve the 
native UMTS QoS support. Thus, the enhanced QoS/QoE 
support would overcome the situations in which the existent 
QoS mechanism would not even accept the service itself. 
As a part of the further work, the authors intend to extend 
this solution also for the radio access part of the cellular 
networks. Moreover, future investigation will validate the 
simulation results through emulation on an experimental test-
bet. This investigation will use the EXata emulation server 
(running the QualNet scenarios) and two operational hosts 
corresponding to the source and to the destination nodes 
(transmitting real-time traffic). In this way, a realistic 
experience of handling live traffic flows will be offered. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This paper was supported by the following projects: 
"Development and support of multidisciplinary postdoctoral 
programmes in major technical areas of national strategy of 
Research - Development - Innovation" 4D-POSTDOC, 
contract no. POSDRU/89/1.5/S/52603, project co-funded by 
the European Social Fund through Sectorial Operational 
Programme Human Resources Development 2007-2013 and 
“Doctoral studies in engineering sciences for developing the 
knowledge 
based 
society-SIDOC” 
contract 
no. 
POSDRU/88/1.5/S/60078, project co-funded from European 
Social Fund through Sectorial Operational Program Human 
Resources 2007-2013. The logistics costs  of the work 
(research infrastructure, conference fee and accommodation 
costs) were supported by CNCSIS-UEFISCSU, project 
number 184/2010. 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Puschita, G. Manuliac, T. Palade, and A. Caruntu, “QoS 
Support in UMTS Networks: Performance Evaluation and 
Perspectives towards an Autonomic Resource Management”, 
The Third International Conference on Advances in Future 
Internet (AFIN 2011), ISBN: 978-1-61208-148-9, 2011, pp. 
25-30. 
[2] M. Yampolskiy, W. Hommel, V. A. Danciu, M. G. Metzker, 
and M. K. Hamm, “Management-aware Inter-Domain 
Routing for End-to-End Quality of Service”, International 
Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 4, no. 1 & 2, 
ISSN: 
1942-2652, 
pp. 
60-78, 
2011. 
http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/index.html 
[3] C. Mingardi, G. Nunzi, D. Dudkowski, and M. Brunner, 
“Event 
Handling 
in 
Clean-Slate 
Future 
Internet 
Management,” 11th IFIP/IEEE International Symposium on 
Integrated Network Management (IM 2009), June 2009, pp. 
275-278. 
[4] L. Mamatas, S. Clayman, M. Charalambides, A. Galis, and G. 
Pavlou “Towards an Information Management Overlay for 
Emerging Networks,” 12th IEEE/IFIP Network Operations 
and Management Symposium (NOMS 2010), April 2010, pp. 
527-534. 
[5] A. Greenberg, et al., “A clean slate 4D approach to network 
control and management,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer 
Communication Review, vol. 35, no. 5, October 2005, pp. 41-
54. 
[6] D.H.C. Du, “Clean Slate Design of Internet for Supporting 
Service-Oriented 
Computing 
and 
Applications,” 
IEEE 
International Conference on Service-Oriented Computing and 
Applications (SOCA 07), June 2007, pp. 3-8. 
[7] C. Dovrolis, “What would Darwin think about clean-slate 
architectures?,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication 
Review, vol. 38, no. 1, January 2008, pp. 29-34. 
[8] A. Kousaridas, et al., “Future Internet Elements: Cognition 
and Self-Management Design Issues”, In ICST (The Institute 
for 
Computer 
Sciences, 
Social-Informatics 
and 
Telecommunications Engineering) (ed.), Proceedings of the 
SAC-FIRE Workshop, Autonomics 2008 (sponsored by the 
European Commission), Turin, Italy, September 23-25, 2008. 
[9] T. Anderson, L. Peterson, S. Shenker, and J. Turner, 
“Overcoming the Internet Impasse through Virtualization”, 
Computer Journal, vol. 38, no. 4, 2005, pp. 34–41. 
[10] PlanetLab platform, http://www.planet-lab.org/, March 2011. 
[11] D. Kaur, P. Rakheja, and A. Kaur, “Analysing Quality of 
Service in UMTS”, International Journal of Computer 
Applications, vol. 11, no. 12, 2010 , pp. 31-34. 
[12] QualNet 
Developer 
5.1 
Network 
Simulator, 
http://www.scalable-networks.com/, March 2011. 
[13] C. Kappler, UMTS network and beyond, John Wiley & Sons, 
West Sussex, 2009. 
63
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[14] 3GPP 
TS  23.101, 
“General 
Universal 
Mobile 
Telecommunications System (UMTS) architecture”, Release 
10, 2010. 
[15] 3GPP TS 23.207, “Technical Specification Group Services 
and System Aspects; End-to-end Quality of Service (QoS) 
concept and architecture, Release 9, December 2009. 
[16] ITU-T 
Reccomendation 
P.10/G.100, 
“Vocabulary 
for 
performance and quality of service”, 2006. 
[17] R. Stankiewicz, P. Cholda, and A. Jajszczyk, “QoX: What is 
it really?”, IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 49, no. 4, 
April 2011, pp. 148-158. 
[18] D. Soldani, M. Li, and R. Cuny, (editors), “QoS and QoE 
Management in UMTS Cellular Systems”, John Wiley & 
Sons, 2006. 
[19] ITU-T Reccomendation G.1010, “End-user multimedia QoS 
categories”, 2001. 
[20] ITU-T 
Reccomendation 
G.107, 
“The 
E-model, 
a 
computational model for use in transmission planning”, 2005. 
[21] 3GPP TR 36.814, “Evolved Universal Terestrial Radio 
Access (E-UTRA); Further advancements for E-UTRA 
physical layer aspects”, Release 9, 2010. 
[22] H. Claussen, “Efficient modelling of channel maps with 
correlated shadow fading in mobile radio systems”, in Proc. 
IEEE International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and 
Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), 2005. 
[23] 3GPP TS  23.228, “IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS); Stage 
2”, Release 10, September 2010. 
[24] 3GPP TR  23.882,  “3GPP system architecture evolution 
(SAE): Report on technical options and conclusions”, Release 
8, September 2008.  
[25] A. G. Prieto, et al., “Decentralized In-Network Management 
for the Future Internet”, IEEE International Conference on 
Communications (ICC’09), 2009, pp. 1-5. 
[26] N. Jingjing Zhang  Ansari, “On assuring end-to-end QoE in 
next generation networks: challenges and a possible solution”, 
IEEE Communications Magazin, vol. 49, no. 7, 2011. 
[27] E. Puschita, T. Palade, A. Moldovan, R. Colda, and I. 
Vermesan, “An Innovative QoS Paradigm based on Cognitive 
In-Network Management of Resources for a Future Unified 
Network Architecture: I-NAME QoS Model”, The Second 
International Conference on Advances in Future Internet 
(AFIN 2010), ISBN 978-0-7695-4091-7, 2010, pp. 37-43.
 
 
64
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

