14
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Military REACH: A University-wide Collaboration
Fatemeh Jamshidi
Department of Computer Science and
Software Engineering
Auburn University
Auburn, Alabama, USA
Email: fzj0007@auburn.edu
Abhishek Jariwala
Department of Computer Science and
Software Engineering
Auburn University
Auburn, Alabama, USA
Email: avj0007@auburn.edu
Bibhav Bhattarai
Department of Computer Science and
Software Engineering
Auburn University
Auburn, Alabama, USA
Email: bzb0079@auburn.edu
Katherine Abbate
Project Manager, Military REACH
Auburn University
Auburn, Alabama, USA
Email: kma0057@auburn.edu
Daniela Marghitu
Department of Computer Science and
Software Engineering
Auburn University
Auburn, Alabama, USA
Email: marghda@auburn.edu
Mallory Lucier-Greer
College of Human Sciences
Human Development and Family Science
Auburn University
Auburn, Alabama, USA
Email: mluciergreer@auburn.edu
Abstract—At the federal level, a partnership composed of the
Department of Defense (DoD), the Department of Agriculture
(USDA), and colleges and universities throughout the United
States of America work toward serving military families. Through
this partnership, cooperative agreements are executed to sup-
port the needs of service members and their families. One
such cooperative agreement between DoD, USDA, and Auburn
University is Military REACH. This project aims to bridge the
gap between military family research and practice by mobilizing
peer-reviewed family science research into practical applications
for military families and those who work on behalf of military
families. At Auburn University, this project is an interdisciplinary
collaboration between the Department of Human Development
and Family Science, the Department of Computer Science, and
the academic libraries. This paper aims to present the Military
REACH website, the new searching functionalities added to the
project to increase the number of active users, and a newly
launched mobile application that is positioned to promote access
to resources and assess the usefulness of the project’s research
summaries. In this paper, we present the functionality and
qualitative data analysis of this additional aspect of the research.
Keywords–Military Families; Applications; Resources.
I.
INTRODUCTION
For the past four years, the Auburn University Libraries and
Computer Science Department have supported the University’s
research enterprise in a new way: by adopting a new collabora-
tive model and serving as a high-level Information Technology
(IT) and data-management consultants to faculty researchers
who are pursuing external funding [1]. A practical example
of this model in action is the Military REACH project at
Auburn University funded by the Departments of Agriculture
and Defense (USDA/NIFA Award No. 2017-48710-27339; PI,
Dr. Mallory Lucier-Greer). The purpose of Military REACH is
to make research accessible to policy makers, helping profes-
sionals, and military families in a manner that is inviting, easily
understood, and meaningful for their everyday context [2]. Our
team works to critically evaluate empirical research related to
military families and translate it into useful tools. These tools
are actively disseminated to policy makers and military helping
professionals to inform their decisions and practices as they
work to support and enhance the lives of service members and
their families. Speciﬁcally, the objective of this project is to
provide high-quality resources to the Department of Defense
(DoD) in the form of research and professional development
tools across the spectrum of family support, resilience, and
readiness. This work is primarily supported by the DoD’s
Ofﬁce of Military Community and Family Policy. The purpose
of this project is achieved through three primary deliverables,
including:
•
Provide timely, high-quality research reports at the
request of DoD.
•
Re-engineer, grow, and promote an online library of
current research and its implications related to the
well-being of military families.
•
Design and market professional development oppor-
tunities, tools, and resources for youth development
professionals.
The Military REACH Project is now in its ﬁfth year and
continuing at Auburn University for the foreseeable future;
indeed, it has highlighted the library’s value as an IT partner
and led to research partnerships and collaborative funding
proposals with other units on campus. This paper describes the
related functions that are designed and implemented for each
operator. The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we
provide pertinent background information about the project.
Section III introduces our efforts to serve military families and
covers the design and implementation of the website. Section
IV demonstrates evaluation methods using Google Analytics.
Section V provides evaluation results of the website. Section
VI presents our mobile app as an important step forward.

15
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Section VII presents the conclusion with suggestions for future
directions.
II.
RELATED WORK
Military REACH started by evaluating existing research
in the context of Research Infrastructures (RI) and Digital
Libraries (DL). Recent reviews of digital preservation [3] and
projects that promote research and awareness in the areas
of digital preservation include Curl Exemplars for Digital
Archives (CEDARS) [4].
Two decades of research have worked to improve aware-
ness of the digital preservation challenge and encouraged
some organizations to improve the longevity of their digital
resources. One of the most signiﬁcant streams of research has
been within cultural institutions, sometimes in collaboration
with industry partners, to develop solutions to operational
problems in these institutions [5]. National, regional, and Uni-
versity archives and libraries in Australia, Canada, Belgium,
Denmark France, Germany, the Netherlands, New Zealand,
Sweden, Switzerland, the U.K., the U.S., and elsewhere have
investigated the implementation of institutional repositories,
preservation, and strategies for Web archiving.
III.
COLLABORATIVE EFFORTS TO SERVE MILITARY
FAMILIES
Working closely with the Military REACH team in the
Department of Human Development and Family Science, the
library’s IT department contributed to the original funding pro-
posal and has guided network architecture, Web development,
IT tools and solutions, sustainability, data management, acces-
sibility, usage statistics, and automated methods for identifying
recently published research.
A. Design and Implementation
The REACH Web application has an architecture that can
be implemented in three layers, as shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. REACH System Architecture.
•
Web-based app: This layer is the front-end of the
application, where we mainly use Hypertext Markup
Language (HTML), Cascading Style Sheets (CSS),
and JavaScript in Java Server Pages (JSP). Also, the
Cascade Content Management System (CMS) used in
this project, to manage the JSP, falls under this layer.
•
Application Programming Interface (API) Wrapper:
This layer is the back-end layer, where we use JAVA
programs to write classes and methods that handle
various functionalities of the website such as search,
ﬁlter, sort, and many more functionalities.
•
DSpace: DSpace is an open-source repository software
package mostly used to create open access reposito-
ries for the scholarly and published digital content.
DSpace is the central database of the application. All
Military REACH related research articles are stored in
this layer. DSpace uses Apache SOLR based search
for metadata and full-text contents, all of which are
stored in a relational database and supports the use
of PostgreSQL. Also, DSpace is used to manage and
preserve all the formats of digital content (PDF, Word,
JPEG, MPEG, TIFF ﬁles). Likewise, it also allows
a group-based access to control the setting of level-
based permission to individual ﬁles.
1) Introduction to the Cascade Content Management Sys-
tems: To make the website easy to control and manage,
Military REACH uses CMS. Cascade CMS is used in the
Web application to manage site content, allowing multiple
contributors to create, edit, and publish new entries. Content
created in a Cascade CMS is stored in Cascade as an XML ﬁle
and displayed in a presentation layer based on a set of tem-
plates. Programming languages such as Extensible Stylesheet
Language Transformations (XSLT), and Velocity [6] are used
to transform the Extensible Markup Language (XML) ﬁle into
HTML/JSP pages.
Fundamental features of Cascade CMS are:
•
Content creation (allows users to easily create and
format content),
•
Content storage (stores content in one place, in a
consistent fashion),
•
Workﬂow management (assigns privileges and respon-
sibilities based on roles such as authors, editors, and
administrators), and
•
Publishing (organizes and pushes content live).
2) Cascade Content Management Systems Advantages:
What makes Cascade particularly beneﬁcial to a Web ap-
plication, such as the Military REACH website, is the ease
of updating resources and predeﬁned pages. The “What You
See Is What You Get” (WYSIWYG) editors included in the
platform allow users to enter text and upload images with less
basic knowledge of HTML or CSS (front end languages to
make the website look appealing).
The other advantage of Cascade CMS is its collaborative
nature. Multiple users can log on and contribute, schedule, or
edit content to be published. Since the interface is browser-
based; therefore, Cascade can be accessed from anywhere
by multiple users. Similarly, Cascade CMS has an efﬁcient,
reliable way of sending frequent alerts to the users and site
administrators of pages that have not been updated for a certain
duration of time.
The use of in-built features such as the daily content report,
task manager, and content review dates help collaborative
teams stay updated on current tasks. Lastly, Cascade has a
community of over 100,000 active users that are frequently

16
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
using the platform and are readily available to voice their
experiences with using features and capabilities of Cascade.
3) Use of Cascade Content Management System in Military
REACH:
•
Two pages of the website, the Team members and
Community Connections pages, are entirely made in
the Cascade CMS. These pages can be easily updated
by members of the team who may not necessarily have
the technical knowledge of creating and updating web
pages.
•
Other pages, such as Home page, Family Focus page,
and Contact Us page, are hybrid pages, where all of
the texts displayed in the pages can be edited from
Cascade. Other major functionalities within the hybrid
pages are handled in the back-end JAVA classes.
•
Therefore, having Cascade pages and hybrid pages
simultaneously provides us with more ﬂexibility for
both the technical and non-technical team members to
be involved in the organization.
IV.
EVALUATION METHODS
Our evaluation methods are listed in this section.
A. Google Analytics
Military REACH has been using Google Analytics to
access the user data since March 1, 2019 until present. Google
Analytics data do not include any personally identiﬁable infor-
mation. They are presented to stakeholders as aggregate data,
making it a practical tool used in research settings without
ethical concerns [7] [8]. The Web development team installed
Google Analytics by adding a tracking tag for Military REACH
to monitor the usability of the website. The tracking tags
are a combination of JavaScript and computer programming
language used to develop the website. The tracking tag code
allows developers to receive data related to the users’ behavior
on the website. The data can proceed from diverse avenues.
For example, the URL of the page and the device used to
access the site. Tracking codes primarily collect data on the
nature of the visit, such as the contents viewed, length of the
session, average time on each page, location, and so on. This
information is in a real-time, interactive dashboard format that
can be viewed by logging in to Google Analytics.
B. User Engagement
This project focuses on several indicators from Google
Analytics to evaluate the level of engagement. These indicators
contain the number of returning users (n), bounce rate, number
of pages accessed per session (n), mean session, and time spent
on each page (minutes, seconds). The number of returning
users reﬂects the number of sessions visited through the same
client IP. A high number of returning users indicates a strong
level of engagement with the Web-based platform [7][9]. The
bounce rate is a percentage of single-page sessions in which
there was no interaction with the page. A high bounce rate
means minimal interaction with the page; however, it could
also mean that users exit the page after ﬁnding what they were
looking for right away. A low bounce rate can refer to a high
overall engagement, especially for a multi-component platform
like Military REACH. For example, there are not many avail-
able resources that would provide mental health support on
the platform’s home page. Therefore, users will often need to
interact with various searching tools and Web pages to access
the required information. The number of pages per session
indicates the number of Web pages that the user viewed in a
single session. The mean session duration (minutes, seconds)
provides information on the average duration of the time users
spend on the website. There are different interpretations of
measuring user engagement. For example, many pages per
session could occur from a high level of engagement, while
it could also cause a superﬁcial exploration of several pages.
Additionally, a long session duration can result from increased
attention, but it could also be because the user keeps the Web
page open while engaging in the other irrelevant activities.
C. Platform Improvement
Military
REACH
considers
multiple
indicators
from
Google Analytics to inform the improvement of the platform.
These indicators include page views, mean duration of visit,
and bounce rate when accessing resources provided on the
website (e.g., Family Focus page, TRIP reports page). The
most visited pages were observed in terms of their overall
average time spent on the page to understand which tools or
pages were most beneﬁcial or viewed.
The entrance rate illustrates a proportion of sessions start-
ing from a given page. In comparison, the exit rate results from
a ratio of sessions ending from a given page. The information
regarding the entrance rate may explain which Web page serves
as the ﬁrst impression for the users. The exit rate may indicate
when users felt disengaged or had consumed adequate data
needed for the session. Google Analytics provides information
on the type of devices users are using to access the website.
Such data can allow us to consider if implementing a mobile
app for Military REACH would be practical or not. The three
primary devices of interest to the current investigation are
desktops, tablets, and mobile phones (counted here as mobile
devices).
D. Marketing Strategy
Military REACH aims to reach as many users as possible.
Therefore, we use a multi-pronged approach to inform our
marketing strategy. The team connects with various military-
connected organizations, especially around the United States.
Twitter, Facebook, and LinkedIn accounts were also created
to distribute awareness about the platform. To improve the
marketing strategy, we also review Google Analytics to ex-
amine how the website is used and where the website it
used. The methods include a direct link (i.e., typing the
Web URL directly into a browser); organic search (i.e., entry
through a search engine); and referrals via another website via
social media via email. Understanding which ways are most
accessible for users can help to improve the marketing strategy.
Military REACH also examines the locations of users from
different countries around the world and their proximity to
military installations.
V.
EVALUATION RESULTS
The ﬁrst version of the website was based on a single
page application (March 2019 - November 2019). However,
to better access our users’ data, we switched to a multiple
page application using Java Server Pages (JSP) and Servlets
(November 2019 - present). The following are the results from

17
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Google Analytics, which show the positive impact of this
change in user engagement and platform functionalities.
A. User Engagement
We recorded a total of 1,806 users from on the initial
iteration of the website platform between March 1, 2019 -
November 2, 2019 (shown in Figure 2), then a total of 3,131
users between November 2, 2019 and June 11, 2020, after we
switched to a multiple page application (shown in Figure 3).
The last year of operation for the Military REACH platform
served 9,059 users from June 11, 2020 - September 12, 2021;
this is a meaningful boost compared to the total of 4,824 users
from March 1, 2019 - June 10, 2020 (shown in Figure 4).
This improvement may be attributed to two fundamental
functionalities focused on increasing user engagement. The
ﬁrst was implementing Android and iOS mobile apps to
promote outreach (discussed in the next section). The second
was adding an opportunity for researchers to share their
own publications; researchers whose publications relate to
military families have an opportunity to request their article
be shared on the Military REACH website. This functionality
has provided provide Military REACH’s active users to be
more involved in the project.
Figure 2. REACH overview presented in Google Analytics (March 1, 2019 -
November 2, 2019).
Figure 3. REACH overview presented in Google Analytics (November 2,
2019 - June 11, 2020).
The results show that user engagement is increasing be-
cause of social media marketing, conferences, and overall
better efﬁciency and effectiveness of the website.
B. Platform Improvement
Table 1 presents details of the top ten most viewed pages.
In March 2019 to November 2019; the Military REACH home
page, which acts as the landing page, accounted for 51.41%
(7,782/15,136) of all entries when the website was still a single
page application using Angular and Typescript. However, after
transforming to multiple page applications, users can access
the resources they are looking for, using shared links on our
Figure 4. REACH overview presented in Google Analytics (June 11, 2020 -
September 12, 2021 Compare to: March 1, 2019 - June 10, 2020).
social media or email. Table II is a representation of pages
view compared in two period of times 2019-2020 and 2020-
2021.
A list of devices used by Military REACH users to access
the site is presented in Table III, indicating that the plat-
form was accessed mostly via desktops (2,112/3,130, 67.43%)
during July 2019 to June 2020. However, last year after
implementing REACH mobile apps, users were more engaged
using their cell phones. Table IV, represent the analysis of
devices used by users two period of times 2019-2020 and
2020-2021. Further- more, sessions completed via desktops
had a higher average session duration than those completed
via other devices.
C. Marketing Strategy
Approximately 89.58% (2,804/3,129) of the users accessed
the website from the United States. Table V shows that the
users accessed the platform from around the world (Figure 5).
Google Analytics was a helpful tool to process the evalua-
tion of the open-access, Web-based Military REACH platform.
The process evaluation provided information about the
ways to keep users engaged, marketing strategies, and the
aspects of the platform that required improvement.
VI.
MILITARY REACH EFFICACY STUDY
To advance the work of the project and examine the useful-
ness of the research summaries created by Military REACH,
our team created a mobile application that provides helping
professionals (e.g., therapists, social workers) access updated
research on military families. Our team has also tracked
analytics for the app to better understand user engagement.
Recently mobile applications have become more reliant on
big data. Machine learning, big data, database, and deep
learning concepts have been utilized not only in almost all the
engineering ﬁelds, but also in other ﬁelds such as economics. It
is a difﬁcult task for Relational Database Management System
(RDBMS) to manage the unstructured data. Firebase is a new
technology to assist handling large amount of unstructured data
[10]. Compared to RDBMS, Firebase is more efﬁcient and
faster. In this section we focus on the application of Firebase

18
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE I. REACH MOST VIEWED PAGES.
TABLE II. REACH MOST VIEWED PAGES.
TABLE III. DEVICES USED TO ACCESS MILITARY REACH
TABLE IV. DEVICES USED TO ACCESS MILITARY REACH
Figure 5. Map overlay about locations of users from Google Analytics.

19
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE V. LOCATIONS OF USERS FROM GOOGLE ANALYTICS 2019-2020.
TABLE VI. LOCATIONS OF USERS FROM GOOGLE ANALYTICS
2020-2021.
with Military REACH Android and iOS mobile apps. The
paper also tries to demonstrate some of the features of Firebase
for developing an Android app.
Firebase uses JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) ﬁles for
storing data. The other servers use a table (rows and columns)
format for storing data. There are a few cloud based servers,
same as Firebase, such as AWS Mobile Hub. It is an integrated
console that helps to create, build, test, and monitor the mobile
apps that leverages AWS services. There is another framework
called Cloud Kit- It, which is an Apple framework helping to
save data and store assets.
Military REACH uses Firebase to build and monitor data
from the participants engaged with the app. In this study, our
goal is to assess the usability of our articles.
A. Firebase
Firebase is a remarkable web application platform to help
app developers build high-quality apps. It stores the data in
JSON format which does not use query for inserting, updating,
deleting, or adding data to it. It is the backend of a system that
is used as a database for storing data [10].
Firebase available services are:
1) Firebase Analytics: It provides insight into app usage,
similar to Google Analytics. It is a paid app measurement so-
lution that helps in providing user engagement data. This main
feature allows the application developer to understand how
users are using the application. The Software Development
Kit (SDK) has the feature of capturing events and properties
on its own and also allows getting custom data.
Figure 6 represents Military REACH user engagement data
including 205 active users and 34 minutes average engagement
time. As presented in Figure 7, most of the participants were
from United States.
Figure 6. Acquisition overview, June 1 - September 13
Figure 7. Location overview, June 1 - September 13
2) Firebase Cloud Messaging (FCM): FCM is a paid
service which is a cross-platform solution for messages and
notiﬁcations for Android, Web Applications, and IOS. Military
REACH uses FCM to notify users whenever a new article is
available to them to review.

20
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
3) Firebase Authentication: Firebase Authentication sup-
ports social login provider like Facebook, Google GitHub,
and Twitter. It is a service that can authenticate users using
only client-side code and it is a paid service. It also includes
a user management system whereby developers can enable
user authentication with email and password login stored with
Firebase [10].
4) Real-time Database: Firebase provides services like a
real-time database and backend. An API is provided to the
application developer allowing application data to be syn-
chronized across clients and stored on Firebase’s cloud. The
client libraries are provided by the company which enables
integration with Android, IOS, and JavaScript applications.
5) Firebase Storage: It facilitates a secure ﬁle transfer
regardless of network quality for the Firebase apps. It is
integrated with Google Cloud Storage which is cost-effective
object storage service. The developer can use it to store a
variety of data types such as images, PDFs, and videos.
6) Firebase Notiﬁcations: It enables targeted user notiﬁ-
cations for mobile app developers and the services are freely
available.
Figure 8. Military REACH App Category Selection
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The Google Analytics results helped Military REACH to
analyze their website’s usage to better serve military families.
It shows that after adding more features to the search functions,
users are interacting with the website in practical ways and
spending more time on the website. Compared to the ﬁrst two
years, website usage almost tripled last year.
According to the Google Analytics results, 31% of users
have access to the website through their phone. In response, to
facilitate the accessibility of Military REACH resources, the
team created a mobile application (app).
Figure 9. Military REACH App Home page
Figure 10. Military REACH Articles Format

21
International Journal on Advances in Intelligent Systems, vol 14 no 1 & 2, year 2021, http://www.iariajournals.org/intelligent_systems/
2021, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 11. Military REACH App Surveys
In the future, Military REACH plans to conduct a pilot
test of a newly developed mobile app that will be used
for the dissemination of REACH reports, mainly Translating
Research Into Practice (TRIP) reports. The team will conduct
an efﬁcacy study to examine the impact of our mobile app
and TRIP reports speciﬁcally for helping professionals who
directly serve military families. Survey data will be collected
from participants (i.e., primary data collection) using Qualtrics
(a survey software used at Auburn University), a secure online
data collection tool. This data will help us understand the
users’ military family knowledge better, their conﬁdence in
serving military families, their satisfaction and reaction to
the app, and make the military family research accessible to
everyone.
REFERENCES
[1]
F. Jamshidi, A. Jariwala, B. Bhattarai, K. Abbate, D. Marghitu, and
M. Lucier-Greer, “Building a web-based environment to support spon-
sored research and university-wide collaborations,” WEB 2020 : The
Eighth International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based
Environments, Sep. 2020.
[2]
L. Nichols, K. Abbate, C. W. O’Neal, and M. Lucier-Greer, “Mobilizing
family research: Evaluating current research and disseminating practical
implications to families, helping professionals, and policy makers,”
Southeastern Council on Family Relations Conference, Jul. 2019.
[3]
H. R. Tibbo, “On the nature and importance of archiving in the digital
age.” Adv. Comput., vol. 57, Jan. 2003, pp. 1–67.
[4]
K. Russell, “Digital preservation and the cedars project experience,”
New review of academic librarianship, vol. 6, no. 1, Apr. 2000, pp.
139–154.
[5]
S. Ross and M. Hedstrom, “Preservation research and sustainable digital
libraries,” International journal on digital libraries, vol. 5, no. 4, Apr.
2005, pp. 317–324.
[6]
A. Deshpande, A. G¨oll¨u, and L. Semenzato, “The shift programming
language and run-time system for dynamic networks of hybrid au-
tomata,” in Veriﬁcation of Digital and Hybrid Systems.
Springer, Jun.
2000, pp. 355–371.
[7]
E. A. Song, “A process evaluation of a web-based mental health portal
(walkalong) using google analytics,” JMIR mental health, vol. 5, no. 3,
Jul. 2018, p. e50.
[8]
D. J. Clark, D. Nicholas, and H. R. Jamali, “Evaluating information
seeking and use in the changing virtual world: the emerging role of
google analytics,” Learned publishing, vol. 27, no. 3, 2014, pp. 185–
194.
[9]
E. A. Vona, “A web-based platform to support an evidence-based
mental health intervention: lessons from the cbits web site,” Psychiatric
Services, vol. 65, no. 11, Jan. 2014, pp. 1381–1384.
[10]
C. Khawas and P. Shah, “Application of ﬁrebase in android app
development-a study,” International Journal of Computer Applications,
vol. 179, no. 46, 2018, pp. 49–53.

