A Suggested Framework for the Evaluation of e-Government Services  
 
Maria Aristea Kalamatianou 
Department of Digital Systems 
University of Piraeus 
Piraeus, Greece 
e-mail: kalam.mar.ar@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—The main objective of every government is to 
provide efficient and effective services to citizens. Recently the 
Greek 
Government 
has 
devoted 
significant 
effort 
to 
streamlining business processes using ICT to better manage 
public administration resources. To this end, public sector 
services are designed so that they are accessed through single 
points, while increasing transparency and reducing cycle time 
for executing processes and disseminating information to civil 
and other agencies. To control the services provided by state 
agencies and to improve them continuously, it seems essential 
that they are continuously evaluated by users. E-government 
needs to be grounded on in-depth understanding of user needs, 
perceptions and other factors influencing its uptake. This 
paper focuses on the field of e-government and more precisely 
describes an evaluation method for investigating the success of 
an e-government project. Specifically, a technology adoption 
model is proposed and developed, which focuses on the specific 
characteristics of users for the on-line services of an 
Independent Authority. The model is essentially based on the 
framework of the Unified Theory of Acceptance and the Use of 
Technology (UTAUT2) model, which has been enhanced with 
four additional criteria. The findings reveal that behavioral 
intention and therefore usage intention are influenced by 
enablers, as effort expectancy, performance expectancy, social 
influence, price value and habit, as well as inhibitors such as 
privacy, profession and user satisfaction. The enhanced model 
furthers the discussion and development of technology 
adoption models and helps the government sectors regulate 
their strategies and future plans to facilitate successful 
adoption and diffusion of e-services in Greece. 
Keywords-e-government; evaluation model; unified  theory 
of  acceptance and  use of  technology; public administration; 
independed authority. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This article, which is an extended version of a conference 
paper entitled “An Extended UTAUT2 Model for e-
Government Project Evaluation”, focuses on the field of 
Electronic Government (e-government) and more precisely 
describes an evaluation method for investigating the success 
of an e-government project, including a review of the recent 
developments in the e-government research field [1]. 
The technological revolution brought about major and 
rapid changes in daily human activities, providing more 
effective ways of communication among stakeholders, as 
well as more efficient working methods. Governments have 
been unfolding the benefits of using Information and 
Communications 
Technologies 
(ICT) 
for 
providing 
electronic public services to citizens, the government itself, 
public officers and businesses. Increased efficiency, 
information and service quality improvement, enhanced 
access 
to 
information, 
increased 
transparency 
and 
accountability, smoother and easier interactions between 
citizens 
and 
public 
agencies, 
enhanced 
democracy, 
empowered citizens and public officers, and openness are 
just a few of the benefits deriving from e-government for the 
different stakeholders [2, 3].  
E-government generally presents many challenges for 
citizens and the community to obtain substantial benefits 
from it. First of all, the administration must have the traits of 
a democratic one and therefore should enjoy the trust of all 
citizens who come into contact with it. The most important 
elements of intervention deemed necessary refer to: meeting 
the needs of large population groups and avoiding exclusion 
for some of them;  reorganizing the administration by 
simplifying the administrative procedures; introducing 
electronic authentication with digital certificates and Public 
Key Infrastructure (PKI); ensuring the transparency of 
procedures, as well as the reliability and usability of IT 
systems; providing access to all its services through a single 
one-stop gateway; ensuring multiple access to services, both 
through traditional methods, as well as using modern ICT 
(internet, telephone, transaction offices, interpersonal contact 
with the employees themselves), etc. 
.E-government allows citizens to interact more directly 
with the government, transforming multiple operational and 
bureaucratic procedures and using a customer-centric 
approach to service delivery. It further allows intra-
governmental communication and also offers numerous 
possibilities for using the internet and other web-based 
technologies to extend online government services [4]. 
Electronic government, also known as digital information 
services and transactions among public administration, other 
government agencies and the citizens of a country, has 
entered dynamically in the new global reality and is growing 
rapidly.  
E-government is defined by the European Union (EU) 
Commission as the use of information and communication 
technologies in public administrations combined with 
organizational change and new skills in order to improve 
public services and democratic processes and strengthen 
support to public policies [5]. Interaction between e-services; 
provided by the government to stakeholders; may be 
classified into four key models, depending on who is 
124
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

involved. 
These 
models 
are: 
government-to-citizen 
/customer 
(G2C), 
government-to-employees 
(G2E), 
government-to-government 
(G2G) 
and 
government-to-
business (G2B) [6][7]. The goal is to improve public services 
and streamline business processes to support public policies. 
Through e-government methods, civil service authorities 
may offer easier access to public information, upgrade 
operations 
to 
facilitate 
citizen 
interaction, 
increase 
productivity and competitiveness, increase transparency and 
accountability, combat corruption, facilitate decision-making 
and promote active participation of citizens, by empowering 
them. In order to achieve this, the supply management of 
goods and services must be improved. The implementation 
of an e-government project can have many benefits, despite 
the high risk of the project failing due to various factors, 
such as user resistance to change and their insufficient 
expertise [8]-[10].  
For successful implementation of the e-government 
services and applications, criteria - such as time, cost, 
quality, satisfaction of e-government stakeholders and 
fulfillment of functional requirements - are deemed critical. 
E-government success means successful ICT implementation 
in government units in order to rebuild government 
processes and provide e-government services. It also means 
effective and efficient use of e-government by all 
government stakeholders (citizens, businesses and other 
government agencies) [11]. Citizens are the primary 
stakeholders and the main beneficiaries and they all are not 
same. To attract citizen interest, trust and aptitude towards 
using websites, the government needs to add value to the 
service delivery mechanism. On the other hand, it also needs 
to take a forward step by letting and allowing citizens to 
participate in the decision-making process, as this would 
help in building trust between both stakeholders [12]. 
User acceptance is one of the main issues involved in e-
government projects; however, other issues (such as 
reengineering of work processes, policy changes and 
management commitment) need also be considered. In 
addition, convenience, citizen empowerment, exclusivity, 
choice and cost saving are parameters of utmost importance 
and relevance for web-based services.  
From 
a 
citizen’s 
perspective, 
availability 
and 
accessibility are the two critical requirements that must be 
met for adopting an e-government project. Services must be 
delivered to them in the easiest and fastest way and be 
available 24/7. This enables citizens to process transactions 
at any time, even outside government office hours [13].  It is 
also important for the user that the e-services offered are 
more user-friendly and less expensive for the taxpayer. 
Therefore, the evaluation of an e-government project 
from the citizens’ perspective is indispensable, since its 
success depends on their acceptance. This can be achieved 
by applying an evaluation model to it.  Through evaluation, 
government agencies understand more easily what factors 
influence the citizens in adopting such projects. With 
systematic evaluation, state agencies promptly understand 
the users’ expectations and improve their services, making 
them friendlier and safer.  
The recent financial and economic crisis has also shown 
that e-government projects and realization of their benefits 
are important for effective crisis response. A large number of 
governments throughout Europe have viewed the economic 
crisis as an opportunity for them to speed up the 
implementation of their e-government services, with the aim 
of improving efficiency and effectiveness, increasing savings 
on public administration operations and enhancing trust-
building with citizens. 
In 2012, the European Commission estimated that all EU 
public administrations using e-procurement procedures could 
save at least €100 billion per year and that e-government 
(online communication between citizens and governments) 
could reduce costs by 15 to 20% [14]. According to the chief 
of UNDESA’s e-Government Branch, “the fact that the 
European Commission’s Digital Agenda forms one of the 
seven pillars of the Europe 2020 Strategy [for growth], 
provides clear evidence on how those countries have set the 
e-government development as one of their national priorities 
and how much they have been implementing” [15].  
In this context, and in Greece in particular, the necessity 
for public services to use e-government became evident and 
imperative, so it may have a positive direct or indirect impact 
on economic recovery at this difficult point in time. This 
paper focuses on the field of e-government services; more 
precisely, on evaluating the G2C services provided by the 
information system (IS) of the Greek Ombudsman, an 
Independent Authority in Greece, and on identifying the 
factors, which facilitate or hinder users in using the e-
government IS. The evaluation model used is based on the 
framework of the extended Unified Theory of Acceptance 
and the Use of Technology (UTAUT2) model, and has been 
enhanced by four additional criteria to achieve more 
insightful results. This study provides useful insights into the 
motivations underlying the user’s intention to use e-
government services in developed countries, that have 
experienced problems due to economic crisis, such Greece, 
and helps gain a better understanding of the factors that 
influence the user to adopt such systems.  
This paper is structured as follows: In Section II, the 
relevant theories and the background research are described, 
along with the main point that this research aims to achieve. 
In Section III, the case study is presented, and the developed 
research model and hypotheses are proposed.  In Section IV, 
the study results are presented and analyzed. Finally, in 
Section V, the conclusions of the study and the future 
projects are discussed. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
There are several models and theories in the literature 
aiming at studying the success of an e-government project 
based on user acceptance.  Many studies focus on examining 
the various factors that might influence the decision of 
users/citizens to adopt and use such systems. Earlier 
evaluation models focused on behavioral intention and 
attitude of the users towards the use of technology, using as 
main criteria the perceived usefulness and perceived ease of 
use [16][17]. Due to the enormous development and 
evolution of digital technology, these models had to be 
125
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

extended to give more accurate results, by adding new 
factors (criteria) for evaluation.   
Because e-government is a technology-based solution for 
government institutions to provide services to citizens, it is 
important for behavioral studies to focus specifically on the 
diversity of citizens in terms of age, language, norms and 
ethics.  As noted in recent literature, many research studies 
have 
proved 
that 
factors 
- 
such 
as 
demographic 
characteristics, social influence, trust, risk perception, quality 
of information, user characteristics and user satisfaction - 
may be instrumental in adopting e-government services [18]-
[21]. Also, the national culture of the population may 
influence the citizens’ intention to use government-offered 
digital services [22]-[25]. Hence, new integrated models that 
combine independent and dependent variables have emerged, 
which use variables such as gender, age, experience and the 
willingness to use in an attempt to examine whether they 
significantly affect digital technology use [26]-[28].  
Among the most widely accepted evaluation models for 
e-government services are the following: the Technology 
Acceptance Model (TAM) [29] and its expanded versions 
models TAM2 [30] and TAM 3 [31]; the Information 
System Success Model (IS Success Model) [32] and its 
refined version [33]; the Unified Theory of Acceptance and 
Use of Technology  (UTAUT) [34] and its extended Unified 
Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology 2 (UTAUT2) 
[35]; the Integrated Success Model (ISM) [36]; the Model 
for Mandatory Use of Technologies (MMUST) [37]; and the 
Diffusion of Innovations Model (DOI) [38]. 
Venkatesh et al. (2003) argue that the situation and 
context of ICT acceptance and use differ widely from 
organizational setup to consumer setup. As such, researchers 
are allowed to add and remove determinants and moderator 
variables to suit different circumstances [34]. 
To investigate and analyze factors that influence the 
adoption and use of an e-government project, researchers 
have most often adopted various forms of the TAM and 
UTAUT models. For instance, the TAM has been extended 
with the self-efficacy measure, to evaluate the use of an e-
government website and more specifically, to investigate and 
understand the fundamental factors that influence the 
citizens’ continued intention to use it. The results of the 
analysis reveal that TAM, together with computer self-
efficacy, can be applied to better understand the citizens’ 
continuous intention to use e-government websites [39].  
Furthermore, the use of an amended version of the 
UTAUT model in the adoption of e-government services has 
been investigated in Kuwait and it was found that 
performance expectancy, effort expectancy and peer 
influence determine the students’ behavioral intention for 
use. Moreover, facilitating conditions and behavioral 
intentions determine the students’ use of e-government 
services [40]. 
 Additionally, an extended version of UTAUT was used 
to investigate a number of factors that affect the Kuwaiti 
citizens’ adoption of the traffic violation e-payment system 
(TVEPS). The results showed that effort expectancy and 
social influence affect the use intention, and the users’ 
internet experience moderated such a relationship. However, 
results revealed that performance expectancy did not 
influence the intention to use TVEPS. Also, facilitating 
condition, trust and use intention were found to influence the 
actual use of the system. It is also stated that, while gender 
moderated the relationship between facilitating conditions 
and actual use of the system, awareness moderated the 
relationship of trust and use intention with the actual use of 
the system [41]. 
To explore the citizens’ behavioral intention to adopt e-
government services and the factors affecting e-government 
adoption in Qatar, a UTAUT model has been used. The 
findings indicate that there is a significant positive 
relationship 
between 
performance 
expectancy, 
effort 
expectancy, social influence and behavioral intention to use 
e-government services for the citizens of Qatar [42][43].  
A model that is essentially a blend of TAM, TAM2 and 
DOI has been used in Greece, along with trust and perceived 
risk as factors, for describing teachers’ behavioral intentions 
to adopt e-government services. The research findings 
revealed that cognitive and intrinsic factors have significant 
effects on the intention to use e-government websites. Out of 
both attitudinal (trust and perceived risk) and operational 
variables (compatibility, advantage and job relevance), it is 
the second set that had a significant effect on the users’ 
intention [44]. 
A more recent study aims at investigating citizen 
behavior and the role of Citizen Service Centers in e-
government adoption in Greece. Since trust and culture 
cannot be considered with TAM, an extended UTAUT 
model was deemed more suitable. The findings revealed that 
performance expectancy, effort expectancy, trust of 
intermediary, trust of the government, trust of the internet 
and finally, social influence are key drivers, influencing 
directly or indirectly the users’ intention. In addition, all the 
demographic variables that were included in the study (age, 
gender, educational level and internet experience) were 
found to be related to the adoption of e-government in 
Greece [45].   
To examine the perspective of trust towards e-
government 
initiatives 
in 
a 
study 
in 
Sri 
Lanka, 
trustworthiness was included as an additional construct to 
TAM. The results showed that the model is well suited to 
investigate the adoption and use of e-government services 
from the perspective of trustworthiness [46].  
A framework that combines TAM, Theory of Planned 
Behavior (TPB) and Information System Success (ISS) was 
introduced as a foundation to examine factors that affect the 
intention to use e-government services. The proposed model 
assumes that personal innovativeness, perceived usefulness, 
perceived ease of use, attitude, subjective norm, perceived 
behavior control and system quality should be the predictors 
of user satisfaction over e-government services [47].     
To investigate the influence of six determinants on 
taxpayer intention to adopt e-file systems in the USA, a 
model, which integrates technology adoption factors from 
the UTAUT model with personal perceptions on trust, 
efficacy, and security was applied. The findings of this study 
revealed that theoretical constructs from the UTAUT model 
are well suited in explaining intentions to use multiple e-
126
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

government services. Specifically, the results indicate that 
three factors from the UTAUT model (performance 
expectancy, effort expectancy and social influence) play a 
significant role in predicting the e-filing intentions of 
taxpayers [48]. 
Among a multitude of models, researchers face 
difficulties in finding the most appropriate and suitable 
model for the evaluation of e-government systems that 
would improve their adoption by the end users. That is 
because the users’ behavioral intention is determined by 
factors that may vary along with the situation studied, such 
as groups in different cultures, level of use and interaction, 
money constraints, and time [19][45][49][50]. In fact, many 
authors propose the UTAUT model as an ideal choice for e-
government evaluation because it has a well-established 
theory in the field of e-government, it is the most 
comprehensive model, it has been extensively used in many 
empirical studies on ICT adoption and utilization, and it 
offers a better understanding of the factors, which determine 
the citizens' intention to adopt [40][51]-[55].  
Based on previous studies, although the UTAUT model 
seems appropriate to evaluate the adoption of e-government 
in Greece, there are factors that have not been explored and 
have a direct impact on the Behavioral Intention of the Greek 
citizens. Recent studies by the Hellenic Statistical Authority 
and the Greek Information Society show that there are many 
factors in Greece that may affect the citizens’ intention to 
adopt e-government systems, including digital technology 
culture, social influence, face-to-face interaction, gender, 
age, etc. In light of these - and in view of analyzing the 
influence of social and demographic characteristics, 
profession, user satisfaction, privacy and continuous usage 
on the adoption of an e-government service in Greece - an 
in-depth study must be conducted using an enhanced 
adoption model. In what follows, an extended version of the 
UTAUT2 model was used, which was enriched with four 
additional criteria, as determinants of user behavioral 
intention. 
III. 
CASE STUDY 
A. The Independent Authority of the Greek Ombudsman 
The Greek Ombudsman is an Independent Authority 
sanctioned by the Constitution, which provides its services to 
the public free of charge. The Authority mediates between 
public administration and citizens to help citizens exercise 
their rights effectively. As a mediator, the Greek 
Ombudsman makes recommendations and submits proposals 
to the public administration (ministries, regions and 
municipalities, social insurance funds, tax offices, hospitals, 
schools and universities, prisons, the police, public utility 
companies and organizations). The Greek Ombudsman’s 
guiding principle and drive as a mediator is its commitment 
to the win-win approach, i.e., visualizing solutions from 
which both the citizens and the administration can benefit. 
Additionally, the Authority's mission is to safeguard and 
promote children's rights and the rights of vulnerable groups; 
to promote equal treatment and fight discrimination based on 
race, ethnicity, religious or belief, disability, age or sexual 
orientation; and to monitor and promote the application of 
equal opportunities and treatment between men and women 
in matters of employment, as well as in matters of access of 
men and women to goods and services [56][57]. Anyone 
facing a problem with a Greek public service, anywhere in 
Greece or abroad, can submit a complaint to the Greek 
Ombudsman, regardless of their nationality. 
The Independent Authority stands by the citizens affected 
by the financial crisis; it investigates problems caused by 
legislation or administrative acts or omissions and 
undertakes targeted initiatives, building on the expertise it 
has developed so far and the enhanced competences it 
enjoys. Until 2009, a complaint to the Greek Ombudsman 
could be submitted to the Ombudsman Office in person, by 
post or by fax. 
From the beginning of its operation, the Authority had a 
modern IT system installed. This was updated in 2009 to 
capitalize on modern technology, by improving its services 
to the citizens. The new Integrated Information System (IIS) 
aimed at providing a more effective and efficient operation 
for citizens, employees and stakeholders, by promoting the 
automation of the Authority’s processes to cope with the 
increased workload created by the citizens. To facilitate and 
expedite the services offered to complainants on its website, 
besides general information about the Ombudsman, the 
system enables a secure two-way communication between 
the Authority and the users.  An on-line form is available by 
following a link, to submit a complaint [58].  Through this 
process, citizens/complainants are able to monitor the 
progress of their complaint online and receive updates about 
it. Thus, each complainant is able to submit complaints and 
send 
additional 
information 
regarding 
his/her 
case 
electronically from anywhere, using their personal e-mail. 
B. Evaluation Model Selection 
Given the diversity of the Authority’s complainants 
(Greek and foreign citizens, refugees, children, prisoners), 
it is hypothesized that complainant behavior on using the 
Authority’s 
website 
is 
affected 
by 
demographic 
characteristics (gender, age, nationality), culture, friends or 
relatives, habits and their skill/experience in using IT 
services. Also, other parameters might determine the users’ 
behavioral intention for the Authority’s website. Thus, it was 
decided to examine the following factors: user privacy, 
satisfaction, profession and continuous usage [59]. 
User privacy:  In the era of automated profiling and 
electronic surveillance, citizens face a serious threat against 
their right to privacy and informational self-determination, 
especially when using the internet and mobile services. The 
lack of transparency regarding the functionality and 
interconnection of such services increases the risk of 
uncontrollable processing of personal data. Data protection 
regulation would be a useful instrument to protect the 
privacy of individuals. [60]. 
 A wide variety of users use the Authority’s services 
(Greek or foreign citizens, children, disabled people, 
immigrants, refugees). Hence, the level of trust between the 
users and the Authority may be crucial, since it is widely 
recognized as very important that the user feels safe and 
127
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

protected when registering personal data. Private data 
protection is an important issue in the evolving relationship 
between digital technology and the legal right to privacy 
when collecting and sharing data. The need for state 
computerization has led to a greater demand for personal 
information from citizens. Concerns about privacy arise 
when sensitive personal data are collected and stored in 
digital form. These concerns relate to how these data are 
collected, stored, modified, transmitted, become available 
(open data) and connected. There are European and national 
obligations for personal data protection and there is also a 
specific legal and regulatory framework on data protection in 
place, based on a European Commission regulation [61]. In 
January 2012, the European Commission adopted a proposal 
for regulation on data protection that would replace the 
existing data protection directive. The proposal for the new 
regulation contains specific provisions relevant to the 
collection and storage of personal data. [62].  On 15 
December 2015, the European Parliament, the Council and 
the Commission reached an agreement on the new data 
protection rules, establishing a modern and harmonized data 
protection framework across the EU [63].  
User satisfaction: E-government adoption requires that 
citizens show higher levels of satisfaction with the online 
service provided by the government [64]. Citizen satisfaction 
with e-government service is related to the use of an e-
government website and it is positively associated with trust 
in the government [65]. A satisfactory project offers users 
the ability to complete their tasks successfully. By asking 
them to reply if they are satisfied by a service, it can provide 
a measure of all the parties’ contribution to the overall user 
experience, such as ease of use, navigation and design.  
User 
profession:  
The 
influence 
of 
profession 
significantly helped explain differences between adopters 
and non-adopters of new technology and especially e-
services [66]. Through this factor, one can specify the types 
of users, in terms of occupation, who consider the e-
government service friendlier due to the same occupation.  
Continuous usage:  Most internet users are reluctant to 
use online methods to interact with public authorities. It is 
remarkable to see, that people participate in social 
networking sites, use e-commerce applications, perform their 
banking transactions online, but hesitate to use the internet to 
communicate with public authorities [67]. This factor 
determines whether users would be willing to use the 
services at a future time. The more satisfied they are by the 
e-government services the more likely it is that they may use 
them. Furthermore, it is interesting to note that according to 
the United Nations e-government survey, there is an indirect 
effect of social media on e-service usage. It seems that 
greater social media usage (through increased transparency) 
may increase trust, and thus also increase e-service take-up 
[68]. 
Figure 1 shows a conceptual model that was created by 
extending the traditional UTAUT2 model with these four 
additional criteria. Gender, age and experience are factors, 
which are already included in the UTAUT2 model, and, as 
has been determined, have a direct impact on behavioral 
intention towards e-government services [69] and play an 
important role to the evaluation of the Authority’s e-
services.  
 
Facilitating Contitions
Effort Expectancy
Performance Expectancy
Social Influence
Hedonic Motivation
Behavioral Intention
Use Behavior
Price Value
Habit
Continuous Usage
Profession
User Satisfaction
Privacy
Experience
Gender
Age
Additional 
Criteria
 
Figure 1. The proposed evaluation model. 
C. Research Hypotheses 
To improve the quality of the results, the research was 
focused on several hypotheses between these variables and 
the behavioral intention: 
H1: Age: Differences in citizen ages have a significant 
effect on e-services adoption. Younger people are more 
inclined to use e-government services compared to older 
ones. 
H2: Gender: Gender of respondents plays an important 
role in influencing behavioral intention and how an 
individual perceives the usefulness of e-government services. 
Ιt is important to understand how gender roles may affect 
participation in e-government, encouraging or deterring 
women and men from e-participation. Gender differences 
affect the opportunities and challenges in connectivity and 
access. Due to the fact that women and men have different 
needs vis á vis public information and e-services, the content 
and use of public information should be tailored to their 
needs to empower both men and women to use such services. 
H3: Experience: There is a significant positive 
relationship between internet experience and behavioral 
intention in the use of e-government services. Internet 
experience is found to significantly predict the perceived 
usefulness of e-services because higher and satisfactory level 
of internet experience increases the rate of e-government 
adoption. 
H4: Privacy: Privacy determines the influence of 
behavioral intention and moderates individual behavior 
towards e-government services. 
H5: User satisfaction: User satisfaction can affect the 
user’s behavioral intention and how an individual perceives 
the usefulness of e-government services. 
H6: Profession: Profession may possibly moderate the 
individual’s influence on behavioral intention to use e-
government services. 
H7: Continuous Usage: The continuous use of electronic 
services and internet positively affects the intention of a 
person to use e-government services. 
128
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

D. Method – Data Collection 
Given that this study examines how end-users perceive 
the usefulness of an Independent Authority’s online services, 
it has been considered necessary that they have already 
visited the Authority’s site at least once, but without 
necessarily having submitted a complain.  
To this end and in view of enabling users to provide their 
feedback in a smooth and effective manner, a questionnaire 
was created in April 2015 and was posted online, on the 
Authority’s home page, for completion on a voluntary 
basis. To maintain confidentiality, individuals responded 
anonymously. For the purpose of speed and convenience, a 
method of multiple choice questions was chosen. Likert's 
five-point scale was chosen for the answers. With this scale, 
the respondent indicated the degree of his/her agreement or 
disagreement to the questions. The questionnaire was 
developed through free online software, specialized for 
specific routing, supplementing and monitoring on-line 
forms-questionnaires [70]. After data submission by users, 
the software stored the collected information in a special 
database, which was processed by the researcher (collector).  
The questionnaire was divided into two main parts. The 
first part contained the individual elements of the user 
associated with the factors of gender, age and profession, as 
well as three additional questions related to the original 
topic. The second part contained general questions referring 
to applying factors for evaluating the model. The individual 
factors are presented as follows:  
Performance Expectancy: The degree to which a person 
believes that using the system will help them benefit 
professionally.  
Effort Expectancy: The degree of convenience associated 
with the use of the system. 
Social Influence: The extent to which an individual 
perceives that important others (family and friends) believe 
they should use the new system.  
Facilitating Conditions: The degree to which a person 
believes 
there 
is 
an 
organizational 
and 
technical 
infrastructure in place to support their use of the system.  
Price Value: The pricing method based on the perceived 
value of the new system was intended. 
Hedonic Motivation: Pleasure or happiness from the use 
of a technology may play an important role in determining its 
adoption.  
Habit: The degree of influence of habit through 
behavioral intention.  
Experience: The acquired experience of someone when 
using technology. 
Additional Factor 1 – Privacy: The degree of safety 
through behavioral intention for technology use. 
Additional Factor 2 - User Satisfaction: How pleased the 
user is with the technology. 
Additional Factor 3 - Continuous Usage: The intention of 
the user to continue using the technology.   
IV. 
RESULTS 
Data from the perspective of users was collected and 
analyzed the. The survey findings of the data analysis show 
that the majority of respondents (81%) believe that using the 
authority’s website helps increase performance and view this 
program positively.  
Most of the respondents (44%), although they use the 
internet extensively and often visit public service websites, 
do not often visit the websites of independent authorities. 
Additionally, the majority of respondents (79%) stated 
that the online services of various authorities contribute 
greatly to saving time because they help users fulfill their 
obligations in the shortest possible time. In particular, 
lodging e-complaint and monitoring its progress online is an 
important factor in saving time and money. They were also 
open to the usefulness of these services because they believe 
that they greatly facilitate the lives of citizens. End-users felt 
satisfied to very satisfied with the navigation of the 
authority’s website and furthermore felt satisfied with the use 
of its electronic services. Moreover, the provision of e-
services by the authority through mobile applications seems 
very user-friendly to them, as most users use their smart 
phones to access the internet. With regard to performance 
expectancy, the findings revealed that the citizens’ intention 
to use e-services was influenced by their expectations of 
their usefulness. Finally, the results proved that behavioral 
intention is strongly associated with privacy, profession, user 
satisfaction and continued use. 
Table 
I 
depicts 
the 
descriptive 
statistical 
data 
(percentage) of this study, obtained through the survey of 97 
users/total respondents to the Authority’s online system.  
TABLE I.  
CHARACTERISTICS OF STUDY SUBJECTS N=97 
Characteristics 
% 
Characteristics 
% 
Characteristics 
% 
 
Effort Expectancy 
Hedonic Motivation 
Gender 
Not at all 
1 
Not at all 
1 
Slightly 
5 
Slightly 
7 
Moderately 
24 
Moderately 
35 
Male 
43 
Very 
48 
Very 
38 
Female 
57 
Extremely 
22 
Extremely 
19 
Age 
Performance Expectancy 
Habit 
Not at all 
0 
Not at all 
5 
Slightly 
3 
Slightly 
8 
Up to 18 
1 
Moderately 
16 
Moderately 
27 
19-29 
21 
Very 
43 
Very 
38 
30-39 
31 
Extremely 
38 
Extremely 
22 
40-49 
36 
Social Influence 
User Satisfaction 
50-59 
6 
Not at all 
5 
Not at all 
1 
Experience 
Slightly 
8 
Slightly 
5 
Moderately 
31 
Moderately 
30 
Very 
34 
Very 
51 
Not at all 
0 
Extremely 
22 
Extremely 
13 
Slightly 
4 
Facilitating Conditions 
Privacy 
Moderately 
17 
Not at all 
0 
Not at all 
12 
Very 
43 
Slightly 
4 
Slightly 
14 
Extremely 
36 
Moderately 
17 
Moderately 
26 
Profession 
Very 
52 
Very 
28 
Extremely 
27 
Extremely 
20 
Price Value 
Continuous Usage 
Private 
Employee 
44 
Not at all 
0 
Not at all 
0 
Public Servant  
23 
Slightly 
5 
Slightly 
7 
Freelancer 
12 
Moderately 
28 
Moderately 
24 
Unemployed 
8 
Very 
39 
Very 
42 
Else 
13 
Extremely 
28 
Extremely 
27 
129
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

   These are the main findings of the study: 
• 
Gender has no specific impact. The difference in 
percentage is relatively small and does not display 
preference of a specific gender group of users. 
• 
Age shows strong impact between the ages of 19 to 
49. If these percentages are associated with the 
"experience" rates, it is concluded that experience is 
very high among these groups. 
• 
Most respondents were private employees, as they 
believed that e-government services help them save 
time and money. The next high percentage are public 
servant users, maybe because they are already 
working in public administration and want to 
reinforce the e-Government project in this way. 
• 
The majority of respondents positively accepted the 
system and believed that the Authority’s online 
services help increase performance. Only a small 
percentage considered that the objective was not 
achieved. It is worth mentioning that a significant 
percentage (16%) had a "moderate" stance towards 
the Authority’s website and web services, which 
questions the need for further improvement.  
• 
Most of respondents believed that the website was 
comprehensible and well organized, provided clear 
information material to guide users and, to a large 
extent, met the needs of its users. Again, there was a 
high percentage of users (24%), who described the 
degree of the Authority’s “ease of use” as 
"moderate", which means that the Authority must 
examine certain details that will enrich the content 
and image of the website.  
• 
According to the factor of “social influence”, 34% of 
users considered that using the Authority’s web 
services enhanced their status in their social system. 
Furthermore, they would recommend the Authority’s 
web services to other people. 
• 
Referring to facility conditions, over half of the 
respondents believed that the Authority's website 
facilitated citizens, and that the information provided 
was accurate and compatible with other technologies 
they use. 
• 
In relation to “price value”, 39% of users believed 
that using the online services significantly decreased 
cost and considered that the cost for providing the 
services was mostly justified. 
• 
As to “hedonic motivation”, while citizens were 
"very" satisfied with the navigation environment on 
the Authority's website and felt satisfaction with the 
use of electronic services, 35% had a "moderate" 
view on this. This rate may mean that users might 
not have the required free time to navigate through 
the Authority’s website. Alternatively, the content of 
the offered services may not correspond to their 
interests or they may not have yet identified the 
benefits that they may gain from the use of e-
governance.  
• 
Regarding the users’ “habit”, most of them felt very 
familiar to website navigation and they considered it 
very important to expand its use through mobile 
equipment. 
• 
The “user satisfaction” from the Authority's website 
and the perceived usefulness of the e-services 
provided were significant.  The users appeared 
"very" satisfied with the overall service system, 
which indicates a positive view for the service and 
obviously reinforces the attitude that they will 
continue using it in the future. 
• 
Concerning “citizen privacy” and the “sensitive data 
protection”, users seemed to have a more "moderate" 
view associated with the security of the e-services 
when a complaint was submitted to the Authority.  
• 
69% of the respondents were positive to the factor of 
“continuous usage” and only 24% continued to have 
"moderate" intent to use.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
An e-government project was evaluated to extract 
descriptive statistical data and to deal with any problems 
regarding specific features of an e-government system. Since 
citizens are the primary stakeholders and the main 
beneficiaries, the importance of citizen feedback regarding e-
government evaluation is indisputable.  
The study aimed at producing better products and 
services, as well as at enhancing the existing situation and 
the intention of the end users. By increasing the productivity 
and effectiveness, the project evolves towards quality and 
success. 
This 
study 
used 
a 
specific 
evaluation 
framework/model (an extended UTAUT2) to evaluate the 
design and effectiveness of an e-government project owned 
by an independent Greek Authority - specifically, the Greek 
Ombudsman service. The study also made an initial attempt 
towards understanding the adoption of on-line web services 
from the users’ perspective.  
The proposed model proved to be a well-fitted model, 
which fully met the evaluation requirements of the 
Authority’s online services. 
 Amongst the adoption factors considered, performance 
expectancy, effort expectancy, facilitating conditions, age, 
Internet experience, profession, privacy and continuous 
usage had a significant impact on user behavior for use. On 
the contrary, factors such as gender, social influence and 
hedonic motivation did not seem significant predictors of 
behavioral use. 
The results show that the above-mentioned e-government 
project largely covers the success criteria of people 
saving time and money. User satisfaction - through 
their navigation on the Authority’s website, the convenience 
of the services offered, but also the familiar and secure 
environment offered by the specific website- was the 
driving force and seemed to meet initial expectations and 
needs. The respondents’ answers showed that citizens 
consider the system beneficial with regard to the e-services 
and consequently encouraged e-government adoption. It is 
worth mentioning that most of the website users assessed 
positively the usability of the system, as well as the security 
offered 
to 
them 
and 
had 
a 
positive 
attitude 
130
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

towards encouraging others to use it. However, formal 
statistical methods must be implemented so as to examine 
the significance of the factors considered. The results of this 
study should only be considered as indications of factor 
significance.  
Finally, user satisfaction increases the intention for future 
use of the system. This puts an extra key to the concept of 
success of this project and is related to the sustainability of 
the Independent Authority’s website. Moreover, the success 
of the project is characterized by its complete acceptance by 
the complainants and end users, through the satisfaction of 
their initial expectations, the cost savings and the protection 
of their personal data. The fact that the specific Authority 
project and the practices implemented are considered 
successful encourages administrators to further enhance the 
functional and technical design of system.  
The findings of this study can be further extended to 
cover more e-government projects in the Greek Public 
Administration.  
We believe that the proposed extended UTAUT2 model 
covers a wide range of evaluation models for e-government 
evaluation. It can also be used for the evaluation of any e-
service, which may not necessarily belong to an e-
government sector, but is citizen-focused. 
A future research study may be undertaken, which would 
expand on this one, by thoroughly and extensively analyzing 
additional crucial independent variables, which may affect 
the citizens’ intention to use e-government services.  Some 
of the key factors that future research work must focus on 
include natural culture, subjective norm, user attitude and 
trust in the government. In addition, e-government 
accessibility for people with disabilities is another factor that 
must be investigated in future studies, to ensure the inclusive 
access of these people to information. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. A. Kalamatianou and F. Malamateniou, “An extended 
UTAUT2 Model for e-Government Project Evaluation,” 
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on 
Digital Society and eGovernments (ICDS 2017), IARIA, Mar. 
2017, pp. 48-54, ISSN: 2308-3956, ISBN: 978-1-61208-537-
1. 
[2]  J. Rowley,  “e-Government stakeholders—Who are they and 
what do they want?,” International Journal of Information 
Management, 31 (1), pp. 53-62, 2011. 
[3] R. D. Atkinson, and D. Castro, “Digital Quality of Life. The 
Information Technology and Innovation Foundation,”  2008,  
pp. 137–145.  
[4] D. B. Gant, J. P. Gant, and C. L. Johnson., “Enhancing e-
Service Delivery,” E-government series, state web portals: 
delivering and financing e-service,  2002. 
[5] Communication from the Commission to the Council, the  
European Parliament, the European Economic and Social 
Commttee and the Committee of the Regions – The role of 
eGovernment 
for 
Europe’s 
Future, 
2003, 
Available: 
http://balkantenderwatch.eu/btw/uploaded/EU%20eng/Docum
ents/com2003_0567en01.pdf,  [retrieved: December, 2017]. 
[6] D. G. Garson, “Public Information Technology and E-
governance,” Sudbury, MA: Jones and Bartlett Publishers, 
The vision of e-governance, 2006, pp. 23. 
[7] M. M Brown and J. L. Brudney, “Achieving advanced 
electronic government services: An examination of obstacles 
and implications from an international perspective,” Paper 
presented at the National Public Management Research 
Conference, Bloomington, IN, October 2001. 
[8] OECD E-Government Task Force, The Case for E-
Government: Excerpts from the OECD Report “The E-
Government 
Imperative,” 
2003 
Available 
from: 
https://www.oecd.org/gov/budgeting/43496369.pdf, [retrieved 
December, 2017].   
[9] United Nations E-Government Survey, “Expanding usage to 
realize the full benefits of e-government,” chapter Six, 2012. 
[10] J. Nograšek, “Change Management as a Critical Success 
Factor in e-Government Implementation,” Business Systems 
Research, Vol.2, No.2, 2011, pp. 1-56. 
[11] E. Ziemba, T. Papaj, and M. Jadamus-Hacura, “E-government 
Success Factors: A Perspective on Government Units,” Issues 
in Information Systems Volume 16, Issue II, 2015, pp. 16-27. 
[12] M. Butt, “Result-oriended e-government evaluation: Citizen’s 
perspective,” Webology, Volume 11, Number 1, June 2014. 
http://www.webology.org/2014/v11n2/a124.pdf 
[retrieved: 
December, 2017]. 
[13] T. Almarabeh and A. AbuAli, “A General Framework for E-
Government: Definition Maturity Challenges, Opportunities, 
and Success,” European Journal of Scientific Research, ISSN 
1450-216X Vol.39 No.1, © EuroJournals Publishing, Inc., 
2010, pp. 29-42 
[14] European Comission, Digital Agenda for Europe. Available 
from: http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-12-1389_en.htm 
[retrieved: December, 2017]. 
[15] United Nations, United Nations Public Administration 
Network (UNPAN),  United Nations, e-Government Survey 
2016, E-governmetn in support of sustainable development, 
Available 
from: 
http://workspace.unpan.org/sites/Internet/Documents/UNPAN
96407.pdf. [retrieved: December, 2017]. 
[16] N. M. Suki and T. Ramayah, “User Acceptance of the E-
government Services in Malaysia: Structural Equation 
Modelling 
Approach,” 
Interdisciplinary 
Journal 
of 
Information, Knowledge, and Management, Volume 5, 2010. 
[17] F. D. Davis, "Perceived usefulness, perceived ease of use, and 
user 
acceptance 
of 
information 
technology," MIS 
Quarterly 13 (3), 1989, pp.319–340, doi:10.2307/249008.  
[18] M. Alruwaie, “The role of social influence and prior 
experience on citizens' intention to continuing to use E-
government systems: A conceptual framework,” International 
Journal of Electronic Government Research, 2014, pp. 1-20. 
[19] T. D. Susanto, “Individual Acceptance of e-government: A 
Literature Review,” The Second International Conference on 
Informatics 
Engineering 
& 
Information 
Science 
(ICIEIS), 2013, pp. 334-342. 
[20] A. - A. Al Athmay, “Demographic Factors as Determinants of 
E-governance Adoption: A Field Study in the United Arab 
Emirates 
(UAE),” 
Transforming 
Government: 
People, 
Process and Policy, 9 (2), 2015, pp. 159-180. 
[21] V. Kumar, B. Mukerji, I. Butt,  and A. Persaud, “Factors for 
Successful 
e-government 
Adoption: 
a 
Conceptual 
Framework,” The Electronic Journal of e-government, 
Volume 5, Issue 1, 2007, pp. 63-76. 
[22] O. Al-Hujran, M. Al-dalahmeh, and A. Aloudat,  "The Role 
of National Culture on Citizen Adoption of eGovernment 
services: An Empirical Study,” 2011, pp. 93-106. 
[23] K. Bagchi, R. Cerveny, P. Hart, and M. Peterson,  “The 
Influence of National Culture in Information Technology 
Product 
Adoption,” 
Ninth 
Americas 
Conference 
on 
Information Systems,  2003, pp. 967-965. 
131
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[24] Z. J. Kovačić, “The Impact of National Culture on Worldwide 
eGovernment Readiness,” Informing Science Journal Volume 
8, 2005, pp. 143-158. 
[25] A. Aida and M. Majdi, “National Culture and E- Government 
Services adoption Tunisian case,” International Journal of 
Business & Economic Strategy (IJBES), Vol.1, 2014.  
[26] S. A. Alateyah, R. M. Crowder, and G. B. Wills, “Towards an 
integrated model for citizen adoption of E-government 
services,” International Journal of Information Technology & 
Computer Science (IJITCS), (ISSN No : 2091-1610), Volume 
6 : Issue on November / December, 2012, pp. 47-57. 
[27] R. Raudah and A. Akilah, “User's Satisfaction on E-
government Services: An Integrated Model,” International 
Conference on Accounting Studies 2014, ICAS, 2014, pp. 18-
19 .  
[28] S. Alateyah, “An integrated model for citizens to adopt e-
government 
services 
in 
the 
Kingdom 
of 
Saudi 
Arabia,” University of Southampton, Physical Sciences and 
Engineering, Doctoral Thesis, 2014, pp. 225. 
[29] F. D. Davis, R. P. Bagozzi, and P. R. Warshaw, "User 
acceptance of computer technology: A comparison of two 
theoretical models," Management Science 35, 1989, pp. 982–
1003, doi:10.1287/mnsc.35.8.982. 
[30] V. Venkatesh and  F. D. Davis, "A theoretical extension of the 
technology acceptance model: Four longitudinal field 
studies," Management Science 46 (2), 2000, pp. 186-204,  
doi:10.1287/mnsc.46.2.186.11926. 
[31] V. Venkatesh and H. Bala, "Technology Acceptance Model 3 
and a Research Agenda on Interventions," Decision 
Sciences 39 (2), 2008, pp. 273–315, doi:10.1111/j.1540-
5915.2008.00192.x. 
[32] W. H. DeLone and E. R. McLean, “Information systems 
success: the quest for the dependent variable,” Information 
systems research, 3(1), 1992, pp. 60-95. 
[33] W. H. DeLone and E. R. McLean, “The DeLone and McLean 
Model of Information Systems Success: A Ten-Year Update,”  
Journal of Management Information Systems, 19(4), 2003, 
pp. 9-30. 
[34] V. Venkatesh, M. G. Morris, G. B. Davis, and F. D. Davis, 
"User acceptance of information technology: Toward a 
unified view," (PDF), MIS Quarterly 27 (3), 2003,  pp. 425–
478. 
[35] V. Venkatesh, J. Y. L. Thong, and X. Xu, “Consumer 
acceptance and use of information: extending the unified 
theory of acceptance and use of technology,” MIS Quarterly 
36(1), 2012, pp. 157- 178. 
[36] B. H. Wixom and P. A. Todd, “A Theoretical Integration of 
User Satisfaction and Technology Acceptance,” Information 
Systems Research 16 (1), 2005,  pp. 85 – 102. 
[37] C. E. Koh, V. R. Prybutok, S. D. Ryan, and Y. A. Wu, “A 
Model for Mandatory Use of Software Technologies: An 
Integrative Approach by Applying Multiple Levels of 
Abstraction of Informing Science,” Informing Science: the 
International Journal of an Emerging Transdiscipline, 13, 
2010, pp. 177-203.. 
[38] E. M. Rogers, “Diffusion of innovations,” 4th ed. New York: 
Free Press,  pp. 1-453, 1995. 
[39]  S. Wangpipatwong, W. Chutimaskul, and B. Papasratorn, 
“Understanding Citizen’s Continuance Intention to Use e-
government Website: a Composite View of Technology 
Acceptance Model and Computer Self-Efficacy,” The 
Electronic Journal of e-government, Volume 6, Issue 1, pp. 55 
– 64, 2008. 
[40] S. Al Awadhi and A. Morris, “The use of the UTAUT model 
in the adoption of e government services in Kuwait,” 41st 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences,  2008, 
pp. 219-230. 
[41] O. Khalil and A. Nasrallah, “The Adoption of the Traffic 
Violation E-payment System (TVEPS) of Kuwait,” The 
Electronic Journal of Knowledge Management, 12 (1), pp. 3-
22, 2014. 
[42] S. Al-Shafi, and V. Weerakkody, “ Understanding citizens’ 
behavioral intention in the adoption of e-government services 
in the state of Qatar,” 17th European Conference on 
Information Systems - EMCIS, 2009.  
[43] S. Al-Shafi and V. Weerakkody, “Factors Affecting E-
government Adoption in the State of Qatar,” European and 
Mediterranean Conference on Information Systems - EMCIS,   
2010, pp. 1-23. 
[44] I. Karavasilis, K. Zafiropoulos, and V. Vrana, “Assessing the 
Adoption of e-Government Services by Teachers in Greece,” 
Future 
Internet,  
4(2), 
2012, 
pp. 
528-544,  
doi:10.3390/fi4020528 
[45] A. Voutinioti, “Determinants of user adoption of e-
government services in Greece and the role of citizen service 
centres,” Procedia Technology 8, 6th International conference 
on ICT in agriculture, food and environment (HAICTA 2013), 
pp. 238–244, 2013. 
[46]  H. Ranaweera, “Perspective of trust towards e-government 
initiatives in Sri Lanka,” SpringerPlus. 2016, 5(1), pp.1-11, 
2016. 
[47] R. Danila and A. Abdullah, “User's Satisfaction on E-
government Services: An Integrated Model,”  Procedia-Social 
and Behavioral Sciences, vol. 164,  pp. 575-582, 2014. 
[48] L. Carter, L. C. Shaupp, J. Hobbs, and R. Campbell, “The role 
of security and trust in the adoption of online tax filing,” 
Transforming Government:  People, Process and Policy, 5 (4), 
pp. 303-318, 2011.  
[49] M. Alshehri, S. Drew, and R. AlGhamdi, “Analysis of 
Citizens’ Acceptance for E-government  Services: Applying 
the UTAUT Model,” International Conference Internet 
Applications and Research, Lisbon, Portugal:  IADIS, 2012, 
pp.  95-105. 
[50] H. Al-Khatib and H. Lee, “E-government Systems Success 
and User  Acceptance in Developing Countries: The Role of 
Percieved Support Quality,” International Journal Of 
eBusiness and eGovernment Studies, Vol 3, No 2, pp. 69-78,  
2011. ISSN: 2146-0744. 
[51] I. B. Hassan and M. A. A. Murad, “Acceptance of Health 
Information Application in Smart National Identity Card 
(SNIC) Using a New IP Framework,” World Academy of 
Science, Engineering and Technology International Journal of 
Social, Behavioral, Educational, Economic, Business and 
Industrial Engineering, Vol:8, No:12, pp. 3767-3775, 2014.  
[52] N. P. Rana, Y. K. Dwivedi, Β. Lal,  M. D. Williams, and M. 
Clement., “Citizens’ adoption of an electronic government 
system: towards a unified view,” Inf Syst Front, pp. 1-20, 
2015.  doi:10.1007/s10796-015-9613-y. 
[53] M. A. Mahfuz, L. Khanam, and W. Hu,  “Examine Website 
Quality on M-Banking Services Adoption in Bangladesh,” 
International Journal of Computer Science & Information 
Technology, 8 (2), pp. 33-50, 2016. 
[54] J. Tavares  and T. Oliveira,  “Electronic Health Record 
Patient Portal Adoption by Health Care Consumers: An 
Acceptance Model and Survey,” Journal of Medical Internet 
Research, 18 (3),  pp. 49-55, 2016. 
[55] Y. H. Al-Mamary, M. Al-nashmi, Y. A. G. Hassan, and A. 
Shamsuddin, “A Critical Review of Models and Theories in 
Field of Individual Acceptance of Technology,” International 
Journal of Hybrid Information, Technology, 9 (6), pp. 143-
158, 2016. 
[56] The 
Greek 
Ombudsman 
site, 
Available 
from: 
http://www.synigoros.gr/?i=stp.en/2017.12.01 
132
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[57] The Greek Ombudsman- Department of Children’s Rights 
and the Institute of Child Health site, Available from: 
http://www.0-18.gr/paidikiprostasia/statement-of-principles-
for-child-protection-in-greece/ 2017.12.01 
[58] The Greek Ombudsman, Complaint Submission, Available 
from: 
http://www.synigoros.gr/?i=submission-
system.en/2017.12.01 
[59] A. Omari, “Technology Adoption in the Arabian Gulf 
Countries: The Case of E-government,” International Journal 
of Computer Science and Information Technology (IJCEIT), 
vol.3, No 3, 2013, pp. 1-8,  DOI : 10.5121/ijcseit.2013.3301.  
[60] The European Union Agency for Network and Information 
Security 
(ENISA), 
[Online]. 
 Available 
from: 
https://www.enisa.europa.eu/topics/data-
protection/2017.12.01 
[61] European Commission – Justice, [Online]. Available from:   
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data-protection/2017.12.01 
[62] European Comission, Proposal for a regulation of the 
European Parliamnet and of the Counsil. Available from: 
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data-
protection/document/review2012/com_2012_11_en.pdf 
[retrieved: December, 2017].   
[63] European Comission, Justige, Data Protection, Reform of EU 
data 
protection 
rules. 
[Online}. 
Avalable 
from: 
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data-
protection/reform/index_en.htm/2017.12.01 
[64] M. M. Komba and P. Ngulube, “An Empirical Application of 
the DeLone and McLean Model to Examine Factors for E-
Government Adoption in the Selected Districts of Tanzania,” 
Emerging Issues and Prospects in African E-Government, pp. 
118, 2014. 
[65] H. AlShibly and R. Chiong, “Customer empowerment: does it 
influence electronic government success? a citizen-centric 
perspective,” 
Electronic 
Commerce 
Research 
and 
Applications, Volume 14, Issue 6,  pp. 393-404, 2015. 
[66] Y. K. Dwivedi and B. Lal, “Socio-economic determinants of 
broadband adoption,” Industrial Management & Data 
Systems, vol. 107, pp. 654-671, 2007. 
[67] C. Akkaya, M. Obermeier, P. Wolf, and H. Krcmar, 
“Components of trust influencing e-government adoption in 
Germany,” In M. Janssen, H. Scholl, M. Wimmer and Y.-h. 
Tan, eds., Proceedings of IFIP EGOV Springer Verlag, 2011, 
pp. 88- 99. 
[68] United Nations Public Administration Network (UNPAN),  
United Nations e-Government Survey 2012,  E-governmet for 
people. 
Available 
from: 
https://publicadministration.un.org/egovkb/Portals/egovkb/Do
cuments/un/2012-Survey/unpan048065.pdf 
[retrieved: 
December, 2017]. 
[69] A. Touray, A. Salminen, and A. Mursu, “The Impact of 
Moderating factors on Behavioural intention towards internet: 
A transnational perspective,” International Journal of 
Computer and Information Technology, vol. 2(6), 2013, pp. 
1035-1041. 
[70] https://www.jotform.com/ [retrieved: December, 2017]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
133
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 10 no 3 & 4, year 2017, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2017, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

