Focusing on Older Web Users: An Experience in Patagonia Argentina 
Viviana Saldaño, Adriana Martin, Gabriela Gaetán, and Diego Vilte 
Department of Exact Sciences, Caleta Olivia 
University of Patagonia Austral (UNPA-UACO) 
Santa Cruz, Argentina  
e-mail: vivianas@uaco.unpa.edu.ar, adrianaelba.martin@gmail.com, 
 ggaetan@uaco.unpa.edu.ar, dvilte773@yahoo.com.ar
 
Abstract—Older Web users are now facing one of the most 
difficult challenges of their lives. The Web changes every day 
and they cannot keep up with it. As older age comes, 
individuals experience gradual and fluctuating decline in 
capabilities. These physical impairments make usage of the 
Web even more difficult. Web accessibility is an area devoted 
to solve accessibility problems of disabled people. However, as 
older people suffer disabilities, although less severe ones, they 
can profit from Web accessibility solutions. In this article, we 
review some of the most common impairments that affect older 
Web users, we analyze how these impairments are considered 
by Web Accessibility standards, and explore different 
approaches that improve Web user interface, in particular 
Email systems. Finally, we introduce our ideas to overcome 
unsolved Web accessibility barriers for older users describing 
an experience carried out at our University in Argentinean 
Patagonia. 
Keywords - Web Accessibility, Older Web users, User 
Interface (UI).   
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper is an improved and expanded version of the 
ICSEA 2013 conference paper “Web Accessibility for Older 
Users: A Southern Argentinean View” [1]. 
The fact that the number and proportion of older people 
in the world population is progressively increasing arises as a 
critical factor to the present and future of civilizations, which 
are developing a strong dependence on Information and 
Communication Technologies (ICT). Particularly, the Web 
has become an essential tool and older Web users are 
struggling to keep up with technological changes and their 
demands of use in day-to-day life. 
Most older adults experience age-related changes to their 
functional abilities (vision, hearing, cognition and mobility). 
These changes may complicate Web use [2], particularly for 
poorly designed sites. In Table I, we show some common 
functional impairments affecting older Web users, which we 
extracted from the literature review published by the W3C 
[3]. 
The study presented by Sayago and Blat [4] revealed that 
the accessibility barriers that had a more negative effect on 
the daily interactions of older people with the Web were 
remembering steps, understanding computer jargon and 
using the mouse. 
Besides, from this study, we acknowledge that older Web 
users desire two conditions: independency and inclusiveness. 
Independency is the ability to use the Web on their own and 
inclusiveness is the need to interact with the Web using 
ordinary technology, as they do not intend to be different 
from the rest of users. 
 
TABLE I.  
FUNCTIONAL IMPAIRMENTS AFFECTING OLDER WEB USERS 
Ability 
Impact 
Difficulties 
 
Vision 
 
Screen 
Keyboard 
1. Decreasing ability to focus on near 
tasks 
2. Changing color perception and 
sensitivity 
3. Pupil shrinkage and decreasing 
contrast sensitivity 
 
Hearing 
Audio 
Multimedia 
4. Increasing inability to hear higher-
pitched sounds 
 
Motor skill 
Mouse 
Keyboard 
5. Slowness of movement, trembling 
 
Cognitive 
 
Overall Web 
use 
6. Short 
term 
memory 
problems, 
concentration 
difficulties, 
distraction, change blindness 
 
Another problem that older people have to face is social 
isolation [5]. Factors like diminished personal social 
networks, bereavement and health problems contribute to 
social isolation. Using the internet has significant value for 
elderly people, since it helps avoiding loneliness, boredom, 
helplessness, and decline of mental skills and it may increase 
the self-confidence, ability to learn, and memory retention. 
Traditional communication technologies, such as the 
telephone, have played an important role in mitigating social 
isolation and supporting group gatherings. Also, the World 
Wide Web offers potential benefits for older adults, but its 
uptake is yet extremely limited. 
One of the most used online communications is email. As 
of August 2011, Pew Research Center’s report [6] observes 
that 34% of online seniors use social networking sites like 
Facebook and LinkedIn and 86% use email. We do not have 
detailed statistics in Argentina about older adults and online 
communications, the only fact is that 34.5% of adults who 
are ages 60 and older use internet. 
There are many reasons why older adults do not use the 
Web [7]. Firstly, they tend to see the Internet as a tool to 
achieve functional goals such as bill payment, and not as a 
social or entertainment source [8]. Besides, they need an 
incentive to get and stay online [9]. It is often younger 
people who encourage technology use by older adults. 
Staying connected with geographically remote grandchildren 
is a major motivation for older adults in using technology 
172
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

(such as email, chat, blog, video call and social network 
applications). An interesting finding was reported in [10], 
where it is suggested that given the right trigger many older 
people (even those previously uninterested) will make 
tentative steps towards some technology. In this case, the 
trigger was a disaster, the “ash cloud”, which caused large 
scale disruption for air travel across Europe in 2010, and it 
motivated the need for computer usage. 
Once older people are online they discover the 
advantages, such as being able to maintain existing social 
relationships and perhaps renew old ones that distance had 
precluded. Over two thirds of “silver surfers” say that using 
the Internet has improved their lives [11].  
Other reasons for non-use of the Web include those 
involved with age-related impairments, such as the ones 
presented before in Table I.  
In this paper, we analyze senior needs at the Web and 
explore different proposals to improve their Web interface 
experience [12]. Taking into account the state-of-the-art and 
the experience gained by our group while teaching 
computing to older people, we describe our ideas and show 
the improvements achieved during the delivery of the 
courses for elderly Web users. Since many fields are 
concerned on improving human-technology interaction, such 
as information retrieval and data mining, Human-Computer 
Interaction (HCI) and GUI, at this point, we have to clarify 
how we decided to face this work. We have been working for 
a while on accessible UI design to conform the W3C 
accessibility recommendations [13] [14]. Our knowledge 
gathered about UI design and Web Accessibility standards, 
permitted us to explore practical techniques to reinforce 
accessibility and usability and focus on the interaction 
between our seniors and the Web, using a real experience on 
Yahoo mail. 
 The rest of the paper is structured as follows: in Section 
II, we review Web accessibility standards and their relation 
with age related disabilities. Then, in Section III, we 
overview different useful approaches to improve older users’ 
Web interface. After that, in Section IV, we examine three of 
the most popular email systems and analyze the 
accomplishment 
of 
their 
interfaces 
with 
desired 
characteristics of an older adult’s oriented design. Then, in 
Section V we describe an experience performed at our 
University and explain our ideas for improvement. In Section 
VI, we introduce some discussion based on our experiences. 
Finally, in Section VII, we conclude and present some 
further work. 
II. 
WEB ACCESSIBILITY INITIATIVE GUIDELINES AND 
AGING 
The next few decades will see an unparalleled growth in 
the number of people becoming elderly compared with any 
other period in human history. The United Nations estimates 
that by 2050 one out of every five people will be over 60 
years of age, and in some countries the proportion will be 
much higher than this [15]. 
There are some initiatives that provide advice addressing 
Web accessibility and usability for all people. As regards 
older users, many requirements are already considered by 
these initiatives.  
The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) Web 
Accessibility Initiative (WAI) [16] brings together people 
from industry, disability organizations, government, and 
research labs from around the world to develop guidelines 
and resources to help make the Web accessible to people 
with disabilities including auditory, cognitive, neurological, 
physical, speech, and visual disabilities. 
Among these series of guidelines developed by WAI, 
widely regarded as the international standard for Web 
accessibility, are: Authoring Tool Accessibility Guidelines 
(ATAG), User Agent Accessibility Guidelines (UAAG) and 
Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG). 
 
The 
Authoring 
Tool 
Accessibility 
Guidelines 
(ATAG) documents define how authoring tools 
should help Web developers produce Web content 
that is accessible and complies with Web Content 
Accessibility Guidelines. 
 
The User Agent Accessibility Guidelines (UAAG) 
documents explain how to make user agents (Web 
browsers, media players, and assistive technologies) 
accessible to people with disabilities, particularly to 
increase accessibility to Web content.  
 
The WCAG documents explain how Web content 
can be made accessible for people with disabilities. 
The WCAG 2.0 [17] has twelve guidelines, grouped 
in four fundamental principles of accessibility: 
perceivable, operable, understandable, and robust. 
Each guideline is in turn decomposed in a set of 
success criteria, which are classified within three 
levels of conformance: A (lowest), AA, and AAA 
(highest). 
As we have said previously, many requirements for older 
Web users are already covered by these initiatives. But 
recently, the WAI [16] has moved a step forward to provide 
valuable recommendations related to older Web users.  
The WAI project, Web Accessibility Initiative: Ageing 
Education and Harmonization (WAI-AGE) project [18] 
analyzed the Web accessibility requirements of older Web 
users based on the research and investigation of many 
people.  
WAI-AGE has identified that the existing WAI 
accessibility guidelines address the majority of requirements 
of older people for Web use [19]. It also identified that many 
Web designers and researchers are not considering the WAI 
guidelines when making recommendations about Website 
design for older people.  
Although the guidelines developed by WAI were not 
written with older users’ problems in mind, they provide 
solution to many of them. In Table II, we show the results of 
performing a matching analysis between most common older 
people accessibility barriers, presented before in Table I, and 
the corresponding guideline in WCAG 2.0. 
 
 
173
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE II.  
OLDER WEB USERS DIFFICULTIES AND CORRESPONDING 
WCAG 2.0 GUIDELINES 
Difficulty 
WCAG 2.0 
Guideline 
1. Decreasing ability to focus on near tasks 
1.4 
2. Changing color perception and sensitivity 
1.4 
3. Pupil 
shrinkage 
and 
decreasing 
contrast 
sensitivity 
1.4 
4. Increasing inability to hear higher-pitched sounds 
1.2 – 1.4 
5. Slowness of movement, trembling 
2.1 – 2.2 
6. Short term memory problems, concentration 
difficulties, distraction, change blindness 
2.2 – 2.4 – 3.2 
– 3.3  
 
We can see that the first three difficulties, which are 
visual impairments, are addressed by WCAG 2.0 in 
guideline 1.4. The fourth barrier, a hearing disability, is 
tackled by guidelines 1.2 and 1.4. The fifth difficulties, 
motor impairments, are addressed by guidelines 2.1 and 2.2. 
Finally, the sixth barriers, cognitive difficulties, are 
considered by guidelines 2.2, 2.4, 3.2, and 3.3. 
The former considerations show that WCAG 2.0 
guidelines meet most of older Web users’ requirements. The 
problem is that few developers conceive Websites design 
with these guidelines in mind. In any case, there are already 
useful proposals to explore for providing better practices 
addressing senior needs, as we have highlighted when 
introducing the bases of our ideas for improvements (see key 
issue (2) in Section I) 
However, having proposals to explore and apply for 
implementing/developing improvements, attends only part of 
the problem. Again, as we have highlighted (see key issue 
(1), finding best proposals to involve elders in the process of 
discover good improvements, is another challenge.  
On this spot, (WAI-AGE) project [18] proposes a 
working draft, Web Accessibility for Older Users: A 
Literature Review [3], which is an output particularly focus 
on Europe but relatively speaking, this document could also 
apply internationally as well. In particular, Section 3.7 
emphasizes older Web users’ participation and provides 
some insights for involving the elderly in Web design and 
development. For example, some of these basic advises are: 
making the participants comfortable; keeping them on track; 
listen for their beliefs about computers and the Web; avoid 
computer jargon; give them time; thinking aloud; etc. 
III. 
DIFFERENT WEB SOLUTIONS THAT IMPROVE SILVER 
SURFERS' EXPERIENCE 
Many Web solutions have been developed to address 
cognitive, perceptual, and physical changes related to aging. 
 Aula et al. [20], designed a simplified search interface, 
called Etsin. This study showed that a simple design makes 
the search experience less problematic and more manageable 
for older adults. Dickinson et al. [7] developed a proof of 
concept search and navigation system focused on the 
usability of the interface, which demonstrated that 
appropriate software could provide a more positive initial 
experience of the web and could increase elderly persons’ 
confidence in their ability to master the Internet.  
In [21], an email system for older people with no 
experience of Internet use was developed. The system, 
named Cybrarian system, had reduced functionality and a 
simple interface. It was meant to attract older people, who 
were unconfident in the use of computers, to use the Internet 
and encourage them to progress to more sophisticated 
Internet use. Hawthorn [22] developed SeniorMail, an email 
system based on Microsoft’s Outlook Express, which 
addressed the problems older novice have remembering how 
a system works by having a list of possible actions presented 
in a simplified menu system. Another solution developed to 
improve elders Web experience is ElderMail [23]. This 
system allows seniors to communicate easily with others via 
a Web based email system designed with a very simple 
interface that uses only three color coded buttons to send and 
receive email.  
Nevertheless, older people’s functional impairments are 
very different in type (vision, hearing, mobility, cognitive) 
and severity, and usually change over time. Thus, it is very 
difficult to specify a unique Web interface that meets the 
requirements for all of them [24]. So, the solution could be 
that each individual older user would be able to select the 
appropriate configuration by themselves. 
There are some very interesting works related with this 
idea such as the IBM’s Web Adaptation Technology [25], 
which 
develops 
a 
browser 
extension 
that 
allows 
manipulating Web content by combining and applying a 
number of page transforms and adaptations according to user 
preferences without requiring Web designers and developers 
to rewrite their Web content. A similar approach is proposed 
in [26], an ActiveX-based accessibility solution called Easy 
Web Browsing was developed to add senior-friendly features 
to existing Web sites. This solution does not require Web site 
owners to change their existing Web content. This design 
allows Web site owners to keep their Web content stylish for 
the younger people, while enabling senior citizens to access 
them with the assistive technologies provided by this 
ActiveX object.  
Another tool is the Senior Citizen on the Web 2.0 
(SCWeb2) Assistance tool [27], which is designed to assist 
older users as they use Web 2.0 content. For some users, 
dynamic content can be problematic due to the many 
updating components throughout the page, causing them 
hesitancy, stress, and frustration about unexpected situations. 
This tool provides help only when users require it, avoiding 
assistance and browsing the page in the usual manner when 
support is not needed. 
There are many other solutions that provide Web 
accessibility not specifically oriented to older people. For 
example, Garrido et al. [28] propose improving Web 
accessibility 
in 
client 
browsers 
through 
interface 
refactorings. This approach is called Client-Side Web 
Refactoring (CSWR), it allows to automatically create 
different, personalized views of the same application. The 
refactorings proposed are compliant with W3C guidelines. 
Besides, there are tools that allow users to change the 
way Web content is presented. GreaseMonkey [29] is a 
174
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Firefox extension that allows writing scripts to alter visited 
Web pages. It can be used to make a Website more readable 
or more usable, Web applications can be modified by adding 
content and/or controls to them. For instance, Mirri et al. [30] 
describe GAPforAPE (GreaseMonkey And Profiling for 
Accessible Pages Enhancement), an augment browsing 
system based on GreaseMonkey, which allows Web users to 
set up their preferences at client side and thus modifying 
content on the browser interface. 
A. Summary 
There are many methods that have been developed to 
facilitate access to the Internet to older people. Some of them 
are specialized solutions, such as simplified browsers or 
email systems. However, this approach does not consider 
inclusiveness, one of the two desired conditions in ageing. 
The second kind of solution is personalization of appropriate 
features in Web pages. They can be easily selected if the user 
needs to use them. There are repositories with many of these 
personalizations available, but it is necessary to find the most 
suitable solution.  
In our work, given most elders prefer to use standard 
Web applications, although they have difficulties when they 
use them, we chose this second approach to improve the 
application interface. As we could not find a complete built 
solution 
in 
the 
repositories, 
we 
developed 
some 
personalizations that make older users’ experience easier.  
These personalizations instantiate solutions to the barriers 
faced by older people. 
IV. 
E-MAIL INTERFACES FOR OLDER PEOPLE 
Although elders meet various barriers to computer use, 
there is considerable evidence that a significant number of 
older people do use email. Given the importance of positive 
experiences 
for 
allowing 
continuing 
computer 
use, 
appropriately designed interfaces would be very helpful. 
In [21], a research on email for older novices was 
performed. As result, researchers concluded that such an 
email system should have a reduced set of functionality 
presented in a non-cluttered way without menu systems, 
page-specific help and instructions for the user, and a one-
click paradigm where a mouse-click always led to a new 
screen in order to reduce user confusion. Besides, the default 
system appearance should have larger text and higher 
contrast between foreground and background. 
With these constraints in mind we evaluated the 
interfaces of three email systems: Outlook, Gmail and 
Yahoo. Through this analysis we could observe the 
following: Outlook interface is the most simple one, good 
contrast, large text and big buttons, only the necessary 
options on each screen. One problem detected is the banner 
of publicity that may distract or confuse the user. On the 
other hand Gmail interface is the most cumbersome. In the 
main screen there is a lot of information, different tabs, and 
buttons without labels. When a message is selected to read, 
the layout of the screen is very confusing. To write a new 
mail, a new small window opens, leaving the previous screen 
partially behind. The button options do not have labels, 
unless the mouse is over them. Last, Yahoo interface is 
rather simple. Main screen layout is very similar to that of 
Outlook, although it shows more options and tabs. In screens 
to write a new mail or answering, there are unlabeled 
buttons. Besides, it also shows a publicity banner. A problem 
detected for all of the three email systems is about closing 
user session. There is not a button option for this task, it is 
implemented as a menu option on user menu. 
Since we teach Yahoo email to older adults who take 
courses at University, we decided to make our own 
experience with our elders and evaluate the usability of this 
email system. 
V. 
EVALUATION OF  OLDER USERS’ EXPERIENCE IN 
PATAGONIA 
Since 2009, the National University of Patagonia Austral 
and the National Institute of Social Services for Pensioners 
(PAMI) have signed an agreement [31] for teaching 
computing, music, and theatre courses to older people. 
These courses are taught twice a week and last three 
months. Computing courses are the most crowded, having 
about 20 pupils each. 
Older people who assist to computing courses have 
expressed that they come to learn computing because they 
want to keep in touch with their families, with their 
grandchildren who live in other country regions.  
Here, in Patagonia, distances between cities or towns are 
extremely long; besides, we are 1242 miles away from the 
capital city, Buenos Aires. Moreover, the weather is a critical 
factor, too. Winters are very long and cold, and strong winds 
blow. As a result, older people spend most of their time 
inside their houses, and they often feel lonely. Thus, getting 
online can have positive benefits for them. Tools like Email, 
FaceBook and Skype can empower older adults to stay 
connected with their friends and family.  
In this study the purpose is to find out, which are the 
accessibility failures that the email’s Web interface has got 
and evaluate if a more accessible interface would allow older 
people to utilize it more frequently and without suffering 
frustration for not remembering how to use the application. 
A. Experiment 1 
During the second half of 2012, teachers taught email 
classes. At the beginning of 2013, when computing classes 
started again, teachers noticed that most pupils did not use 
this communication tool. When asked for the reason of not 
using it, most pupils said that they did not remember how to 
use it, a few said that they were not interested in sending or 
receiving mails, and the rest, only some of them, said that 
they still used it. So, the purpose of this experiment is to 
investigate what accessibility difficulties has got the email’s 
Web interface design. 
1) Participants:  
Eighteen older adults ranging in age from 64 to 73 years 
old (eleven women and seven men) were recruited for this 
activity. All of them took computing courses between April 
and June of 2013 and also during the second half of 2012.  
2) Materials:  
For this experiment, we used Yahoo mail application 
(Figure 1), which was also used during email classes.  
175
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Figure 1.  Yahoo mail inbox. 
 
It is important to highlight that the courses are taught in a 
25 desktops Lab equipped with 15 LCD monitors of 19-inch 
and 10 LCD monitors of 17-inch, whose resolutions are 
WXGA 1366 x 768 and XGA 1024x768, respectively. 
Although changing terminals settings (font sizes and colors) 
is posible, the Lab is used intensively every day to adopt this 
practice as usual. 
3) Procedure:  
Usability testing with the think-aloud method was 
conducted [32]. The evaluations were pair-based because 
older people feel more relaxed and confident about their 
work. Each evaluation was recorded, in order to analyze 
participants’ behavior and comments.  
4) Tasks:  
Five tasks were proposed to explore the interface 
usability: 
a) Read an email 
b) Reply an email 
c) Write a new email 
d) Delete an email 
e) Close user session 
5) Results:  
Of the 9 couples of participants, all could finish Tasks a) 
and c), 6 could not complete Task b), 2 could not conclude 
Task d) and 8 could not end Task e). These results are 
detailed in Table III. 
From these results, we have found three problems 
throughout Tasks a)-e):  
a) Problem 1: Advertisements 
All participants complained about being distracted or 
even confused with the advertisements that appeared on the 
right side of the screen. They were afraid of clicking by error 
on these ads and causing an unexpected behavior of the 
email application, like closing, or losing the work being 
done. 
b) Problem 2: Visual presentation difficulties 
Besides, participants experienced other difficulties 
involving visual presentation of pages. Three couples of 
participants in Tasks a) and b) could not differentiate 
selected emails, because of light color contrast. Three 
couples of participants in Task a), three in Task b), and five 
in Task c) had difficulties in visualizing text because of font 
size, style, and inter-letter spacing. Also, 6 couples of 
participants in Task d) and 9 in Task e) made a great effort to 
distinguish available commands in menu bar. 
TABLE III.  
RESULTS ACHIEVED BY OLDER USERS IN EMAIL USAGE 
EXPERIMENT 1 
Task 
Couples Error Ratio 
a) Read an email 
0/9 
b) Reply an email 
6/9 
c) Write a new email 
0/9 
d) Delete an email 
2/9 
e) Close user session 
8/9 
 
c) Problem 3: Not understandable buttons 
Participants also had trouble identifying buttons that 
represented email actions like “Reply” or “Forward”. Eight 
couples of participants had difficulties identifying the button 
to conclude Task b), and 6 couples could not complete the 
task because of this problem. All participants had difficulties 
in Task e), remembering how to leave the application or 
“Sign Out”, and only one couple could complete this task. 
All the difficulties suffered by older users, are age-related 
issues like cognitive and visual impairment. Another factor 
involved is the lack of knowledge of technology and Web 
applications. Evaluating the WCAG 2.0 guidelines, we found 
that all these problems are considered within WCAG 
guidelines as we demonstrated before in Table II. Problems 1 
and 3 correspond to difficulty number 6 detailed in Table II, 
which involves short term memory problems, concentration 
difficulties, distraction, and Problem 2 involves visual 
accessibility barriers shown as difficulties 1, 2, and 3 in 
Table II.  
Hence, Yahoo email application is not compliant with 
this standard. However, this application provides solution to 
some of them, by setting appropriate configurations. But this 
is a very complex task to be performed by older users. 
B. Experiment 2 
The purpose of Experiment 2 is to evaluate an 
improvement to the email Website interface, which we 
developed to solve the problems found in Experiment 1. 
  In this improved interface, vertical banner ads have 
been deleted, and labels have been added for “Reply” and 
“Forward” buttons. Also, a button was added at the top of the 
form to allow users closing their sessions. 
Figure 2 shows the modified interface of Yahoo mail 
inbox, including both adaptations: for Problem 1 vertical ads 
banner removement and for Problem 3 a button (“2” in 
Figure 2) labeled “Cerrar Sesión” to close user session, and 
the two labels “Responder” y ”Reenviar” (“1” in Figure 2) 
for replying and forwarding, respectively. 
1) Participants:  
Fourteen older adults ranging in age from 66 to 74 years 
old (eight women and six men) were recruited for this 
activity. All of them took computing courses during the first 
half of 2012, and now they are taking theatre but not 
computing classes. However, they were willing to participate 
in this experiment. 
176
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
Figure 2.  Yahoo mail inbox after interface improvement. 
2) Materials:  
We modified Yahoo interface by applying two 
adaptations [33]. One of them is a script for deleting vertical 
ad banners that we downloaded from a scripts repository and 
the other one is a script developed for us in JavaScript to 
solve problems with buttons.  
a) Problem 1: Advertisements 
Although this vertical banner ad can be removed, this 
was not a permanent solution and became an annoyance to 
older pupils. In order to give solution to this problem, we 
chose GreaseMonkey. There are many add-ins that provide a 
number of features for visual and navigational enhancements 
to Web pages, which may fill usability gaps for older users.  
Figure 2 shows the modified interface of Yahoo mail 
inbox where the vertical banner has been deleted. This 
modification was achieved by the installation of a 
GreaseMonkey script, CleanUp 1.1 that we downloaded 
from the scripts repository [34]. 
b) Problem 2: Visual presentation difficulties 
Here, there are solutions provided by the browser and 
also by the operating system. The browser (Mozilla Firefox) 
allows modifying default settings for font size and style, and 
the operating system (Windows 7) provides an Accessibility 
Center that allows improving visual presentation, mouse 
setting and color contrast. 
c) Problem 3: Not understandable buttons 
At this point, we did not find any GreaseMonkey script, 
which solves difficulties with buttons’ understanding or 
‘Sign Out’ explicit inclusion in the application interface. So, 
we developed a script named “Oldie 1.0” that added labels to 
“Reply” and “Forward” buttons and a button to allow users 
closing their sessions. 
3) Procedure and Tasks:  
The same as for Experiment 1, detailed in Sections 
V.A.3) and V.A.4), respectively.  
4) Results:  
Of the 7 couples of participants, all could finish Tasks a), 
c) and e), 1 could not complete Task b), and 1 could not 
complete Task d). These results are detailed in Table IV. In 
this experiment, Problems 1, 2 and 3 detected previously 
have been eliminated. A couple of participants could not 
finish tasks b) and d) because they did not remember how to 
perform those tasks. 
Therefore, we observe that this improved interface 
contributed to increasing task completion rates. But, for 
further analysis of the findings we performed statistical 
analysis of the number of participants that completed each 
task on each Yahoo interface. 
TABLE IV.  
RESULTS ACHIEVED BY OLDER USERS IN EMAIL USAGE 
EXPERIMENT 2 
Task Id 
Task Description 
Couples Error Ratio 
a) 
Read an email 
0/7 
b) 
Reply an email 
1/7 
c) 
Write a new email 
0/7 
d) 
Delete an email 
1/7 
e) 
Close user session 
0/7 
 
A significant Shapiro-Wilk test of normality indicated 
that the data were not normally distributed, in addition as the 
two samples are independent of each other, a Mann-Whitney 
U test was used. It demonstrated that there was not a 
significant difference in the median number of tasks 
completed on the original Yahoo mail application (Mdn = 7) 
and the modified Yahoo interface (Mdn = 7); the U-value is 
11.5, the critical value of U at p ≤ 0.05 is 4. Therefore, the 
result is not significant at p ≤ 0.05.  
Consequently, we decided to make a new experiment 
with a greater number of couples participating, in order to 
obtain more accurate results. 
TABLE V.  
NUMBER OF PARTICIPANTS ACHIEVING TASKS 
Task Id 
Yahoo 
Modified Yahoo 
a) 
9 
7 
b) 
3 
6 
c) 
9 
7 
d) 
7 
6 
e) 
1 
7 
 
C. Experiment 3 
The purpose of Experiment 3 is to perform a new 
evaluation 
of 
partipants’ 
accomplishments, 
as 
they 
successfully complete pre-defined tasks on both Yahoo mail 
application versions, the original one and the modified one. 
Besides, we are interested in comparing the usability 
provided by each interface. 
1) Participants:  
Fifty older adults ranging in age from 56 to 82 years old 
(thirty five women and fifteen men) were recruited for this 
activity. All of them participated in some UPAMI course 
previously, but they did not have the same computing level. 
Some of them had participated in several computing courses 
and others only once. Nevertheless, the idea of our 
experiment was to evaluate the usability in both versions of 
the application. If participants were not familiar with the 
original interface, then the new one would help them to 
accomplish tasks. In relation with the aging impairments, 42 
participants suffered vision difficulties, 3 were affected with 
cognitive problems (short term memory) and 2 had a motor 
177
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

disability (trembling). They were grouped in couples to 
perform the tasks. 
2) Materials:  
We used the two Yahoo interfaces that were already used 
in Experiment 1 and Experiment 2. Each Yahoo version run 
in a separate computer.  Every couple of participants had two 
computers, one running the original Yahoo mail application 
and the other running the modified Yahoo mail application. 
 In addition, participants got a Likert questionnaire [35]  
asking what version they preferred completing each task on. 
This 5 point Likert question ranged from “Original” (original 
Yahoo) to “Modified” (Modified Yahoo) with a neutral point 
of “No Opinion”. This resulted in five of these answers for 
each couple of participants (one for each task). The Likert 
questionnaire is detailed in Figure 3. 
Besides, participants received two System Usability 
Scale (SUS) questionnaires [36], one per Yahoo interface 
version, which provided a 0-100 score relating to the 
usability of the corresponding Yahoo version (Figure 4). 
 
3) Procedure and Tasks:  
Each couple of participants was asked to attempt 5 tasks 
on both Yahoo versions: 
a) Read an email 
b) Reply an email 
c) Write a new email 
d) Delete an email 
e) Close user session 
These tasks were the same that the ones assigned in 
previous experiments. Participants attempted each task on 
one of the two Yahoo versions before moving on to the 
second Yahoo version. 
After each task was performed, we noted whether a 
participant successfully completed the task, allowing 
completion rates to be investigated.  
Then, after each task was completed on both systems, 
participants answered a Likert questionnaire on paper about 
what version they preferred completing the task on. This 
resulted in five of these answers for each couple of 
participants (one for each task). The Likert questionnaire is 
detailed in Figure 3. 
After all tasks were attempted, participants completed 
two System Usability Scale (SUS) questionnaires [36], one 
by each Yahoo version, which provided a 0-100 score 
relating to the usability of the corresponding Yahoo version 
(Figure 4). 
4) Results:  
 
a) Task Completion Rates 
In Table VI, we can observe the improvement of 
participants’ performance when using the modified Yahoo 
mail application.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Likert questionnaire for expressing Yahoo version preference. 
In Table VI, we can observe the improvement of 
participants’ performance when using the modified Yahoo 
mail application. 
Figure 4.  System Usability Scale (SUS) questionnaire. 
 
 
178
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

A significant Shapiro-Wilk test of normality confirmed 
that the assumptions of a paired t-test were not met. Besides, 
as this experiment samples are paired, the Wilcoxon signed-
rank test was used, which shows that a statistically 
significant difference exists between the median number of 
tasks completed on the original Yahoo application (Mdn=16) 
and the Modified Yahoo interface (Mdn=24). The W-value is 
0. The critical value of W for N = 5 at p≤ 0.05 is 0. 
Therefore, the result is significant at p≤ 0.05. 
TABLE VI.  
NUMBER OF PARTICIPANTS ACHIEVING TASKS IN 
EXPERIMENT 3. TOTAL NUMBER OF PARTICIPANTS: 25 
Task Id 
Yahoo 
Modified Yahoo 
a) 
20 
24 
b) 
12 
18 
c) 
20 
24 
d) 
16 
22 
e) 
11 
25 
 
b) Preference Per Task 
In Figure 5, we show the results of the Likert 
questionnaire, which illustrates participants’ preference for 
Yahoo versions in each task. 
 
Figure 5.  Bar chart showing Yahoo version preference responses for each 
task. 
As we can see, no participant chose Yahoo in its original 
version for any task performed. The most preferred options 
were “Modified Yahoo” (Slightly or Greatly) and “No 
Opinion”.  
In Figure 6, a summary of Yahoo version preference 
responses is shown for all tasks performed. 
The high frequency of “No Opinion” being selected may 
be partially explained by considering that some tasks were 
not directly affected by the modified Yahoo interface. This 
resulted in some tasks having the same steps to completion 
on both versions of the interface. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Pie chart summarizing Yahoo version preference responses. 
For further analysis of the Likert-based preference 
questionnaire, we categorized answers into 3 categories: (1) 
Original Yahoo is preferred (“greatly”or “slightly”), (2) 
Modified Yahoo is preferred (“greatly”or “slightly”) or (3) 
“No Opinion” is selected. We grouped the Likert points 
together to compare the three overall perspectives. 
A Friedman test was used after the assumptions of a 
one-way repeated ANOVA were not met. The results of the 
Friedman test show that there was a statistically significant 
difference between the number of instances where 
participants preferred either the Original Yahoo interface 
(Mdn = 0), the Modified Yahoo interface (Mdn = 15) or 
“No Opinion” (Mdn = 10); χ2(2. 5) = 6.3, p = 0.0429. We 
can therefore conclude with considerable confidence that the 
observed differences among the mean rankings for the three 
categories of preferences reflect something more than mere 
random variability, they reflect a clear predilection for the 
Modified Yahoo interface. 
 
c) System Usability Scale Scores 
In this Experiment, we generated two SUS scores (one 
for each Yahoo version) per participant.  
SUS yields a single number representing a composite 
measure of the overall usability of the system being studied. 
Note that scores for individual items (questions) are not 
meaningful on their own. 
To calculate the SUS score, firstly the score 
contributions from each item must be added. Each item's 
score contribution will range from 0 to 4. For items 1,3,5,7, 
and 9 the score contribution is the scale position minus 1. 
For items 2,4,6,8 and 10, the contribution is 5 minus the 
scale position. 
Then, the sum of the scores must be multiplied by 2.5 to 
obtain the overall value of system usability. SUS scores 
have a range of 0 to 100. 
 
 
179
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

In Table VII, we show the corresponding scores 
obtained from each of  the 25 participants  in each Yahoo 
version. It can be appreciated that the Modified interface has 
got better usability scores than the original one. 
TABLE VII.  
CALCULATED SUS SCORES PER PARTICIPANT AND YAHOO 
VERSION  
Participant 
Original 
Yahoo 
SUS Scores 
Modified Yahoo 
SUS Scores 
1 
45 
75 
2 
62.5 
75 
3 
60 
100 
4 
50 
70 
5 
62.5 
90 
6 
67.5 
82.5 
7 
67.5 
82.5 
8 
47.5 
87.5 
9 
60 
85 
10 
67.5 
82.5 
11 
67.5 
82.5 
12 
45 
75 
13 
62.5 
75 
14 
62.5 
75 
15 
60 
85 
16 
75 
75 
17 
55 
87.5 
18 
55 
87.5 
19 
42.5 
90 
20 
50 
75 
21 
50 
75 
22 
55 
87.5 
23 
67.5 
82.5 
24 
63 
90 
25 
68 
82.5 
 
Using a Wilcoxon signed-rank test, we can show that 
there was a significant difference in the SUS scores for the 
Original Yahoo interface (Mdn = 60 ) and the Modified 
Yahoo interface (Mdn = 82.5); Z = -4.2857, p = 0. The 
result is significant at p ≤ 0.05. 
Table VIII shows the median response to each SUS 
question per interface version. These detailed individual 
questions of the two SUS scales allow for more specific 
comparisons into the different components of the SUS’s 
usability model over just the score alone. For example, 
participants strongly agreed that they would like to use the 
Modified Yahoo interface frequently, but had no opinion 
about the same question regarding the Original Yahoo 
interface. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
Many of the difficulties suffered by older Web users are 
already solved. However, as older people do not recognize 
their disabilities, they miss the opportunity to use the Web in 
a more comfortable way. 
There are many accessibility tools provided by the 
operating systems and also by the Web browsers. But as they 
are classified as ‘Accessibility Tools’, most users believe that 
they are targeted to help people with severe disabilities that 
do not include the elderly.  
Besides, there are some useful accessibility tools 
developed and available in Web repositories.  
We have worked with some email accessibility 
requirements detected while teaching computing courses to 
older adults. Experiment 1 allowed for gaining a significant 
experience to develop our ideas, while Experiment 2 applied 
for testing these ideas on the field. Afterwards, in 
Experiment 3 we performed a more complete execution of 
both Experiments 1 and 2, including additional activities to 
allow usability comparison and evaluate interface preference 
between participants.  
We found that some of the detected requirements could 
be solved by modifying the Web browser or the operating 
system configuration. Other requirements were accomplished 
by installing some scripts that provide the desired 
accessibility adaptations, like the scripts (CleanUp 1.1 and 
Oldie 1.0) we proposed and developed to solve Problems 1 
and 3, respectively. 
However, all these solutions require assistance from a 
computing specialist, or at least, from someone with the 
required skills, who must configure or install the appropriate 
add-ins. 
Thus, we are working on a pragmatic research approach 
and applying an iterative incremental process to develop a 
tool that includes all the accessibility adaptations and allows 
older people select the appropriate configuration by 
themselves. Besides, this tool must be able to provide help to 
older users, who are not familiar with application concepts 
and hence avoiding hesitation and frustration. This will 
contribute to increasing quality of life of our Patagonian 
older Web users. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
Older adults represent the fastest growing portion of the 
world’s population. Most older adults have got some 
declines that affect computer use, as difficulties with vision, 
hearing, mobility or cognition.  
The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) has got some 
initiatives like Web Accessibility Initiative (WAI) and Web 
Accessibility 
Initiative: 
Ageing 
Education 
and 
Harmonization (WAI-AGE), which provide solutions to 
many of the problems of older people. However, many Web 
designers do not consider WAI recommendations when 
designing Websites. 
So, there are some approaches focused on improving 
Websites’ accessibility. Some of them consist on Web 
adaptations that provide solution to a varying amount of 
accessibility issues. 
180
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

TABLE VIII.  TABLE SHOWING THE MEDIAN RESPONSES TO THE 
INDIVIDUAL LIKERT QUESTIONS IN THE SYSTEM USABILITY SCALE FOR 
EACH YAHOO INTERFACE VERSION. 
SUS Question 
Original Yahoo 
Median 
Modified Yahoo 
Median 
1. I think that I would like to 
use this system frequently 
No Opinion 
Strongly Agree 
3 
5 
2. I found the system 
unnecessarily complex 
No Opinion 
Strongly 
Disagree 
3 
1 
3. I thought the system was 
easy to use 
Strongly Agree 
Strongly Agree 
5 
5 
4. I think that I would need 
the support of a technical 
person to be able to use the 
system 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
2 
1 
5. I found the various 
functions in this system were 
well integrated 
No Opinion 
Agree 
3 
4 
6. I thought there was too 
much inconsistency in this 
system 
Disagree 
Disagree 
2 
2 
7. I would imagine that most 
people would learn to use this 
system very quickly 
No Opinion 
Agree 
3 
4 
8. I found the system very 
cumbersome to use 
No Opinion 
Disagree 
3 
2 
9. I felt very confident using 
the system 
Agree 
Strongly Agree 
4 
5 
10. I needed to learn a lot of 
things before I could get 
going with this system 
No Opinion 
Disagree 
3 
2 
 
In this article, we showed different solutions provided to 
solve distinct older pupils’ requirements. However, from our 
experience, we must highlight two issues about these 
solutions: (i) they do not cover all needs and, (ii) they are not 
usable enough for elderly citizens. Due to these reasons, new 
solutions should be developed and these solutions must 
prevent older people having to get help from someone else 
who can configure or install suitable accessibility settings to 
grant our seniors one of their main wishes: “independence”. 
As regards social requirements of our older students, our 
next goal is exploring difficulties experienced by them with 
social networks and finding appropriate solutions. This is a 
high priority requirement of our older citizens since our 
distant 
geographical 
situation 
and 
extreme 
weather 
conditions deprive them of enjoying many current activities 
that older people in other geographies can perform. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by the UNPA project 29/B144 
(Diseño y Evaluación de Portales Web) and project 29/B167 
(Identificación, Desarrollo y Uso de Soluciones Web 
Centradas en el Usuario). 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Saldaño, A. Martin, G. Gaetán, and D. Vilte, “Web 
Accessibility for Older Users: A Southern Argentinean 
View,” The Eighth International Conference On Software 
Engineering Advances (ICSEA 2013), October 27-November 
1, Venice, Italy. ISBN: 978-1-61208-304-9. 
[2] V. Hanson, “Age and web access: the next generation,” 
Proceedings of the 2009 International Cross-Disciplinary 
Conference on Web Accessibililty (W4A '09), ACM, USA, 
April 2009, pp. 7-15.  
[3] A. Arch, “Web accessibility for older users: a literature 
review,” W3C Working Draft, World Wide Web Consortium 
(W3C), May 2008, accessed 1st December 2014. 
http://www.w3.org/TR/wai-age-literature/ 
[4] S. Sayago and J. Blat, “About the relevance of accessibility 
barriers in the everyday interactions of older people with the 
Web,” Proceedings of the 2009 International Cross-
Disciplinary Conference on Web Accessibililty (W4A '09), 
ACM, USA, April 2009, pp. 104-113. 
[5] S. Pedell, F. Vetere, L. Kulik, E. Ozanne, and A. Gruner, 
“Social isolation of older people: the role of domestic 
technologies,” Proceedings of the 22nd Conference of the 
Computer-Human Interaction Special Interest Group of 
Australia on Computer-Human Interaction (OZCHI '10), 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, November 2010, pp. 164-167. 
[6] K. Zickuhr and M. Madden, “Older adults and internet use,” 
Pew Research Center’s Internet & American Life Project, 
2012. 
[7] A. Dickinson, M. Smith, J. Arnott, A. Newell, and R. Hill, 
“Approaches to web search and navigation for older computer 
novices,” Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '07), ACM, New York, 
NY, USA, May 2007, pp. 281-290.  
[8] N. Selwyn, “The information aged: A qualitative study of 
older adults’ use of information and communications 
technology,” Journal of Aging Studies, 18(4), November 
2004, pp. 369-384. 
[9] E. Hartnett, S. Minocha, J. Palmer, M. Petre, S. Evans, C. 
Middup, K. Dunn, B. Murphy, T. Heap, and D. Roberts, 
“Older people and online social interactions: an empirical 
investigation,” The UKAIS International Conference on 
Information Systems (UKAIS), Worcester College, University 
of Oxford, March 2013.  
[10] L. Gibson, P. Forbes, and V. Hanson, “What can the ash 
cloud tell us about older adults’s technology adoption?,”  
Proceedings of the 12th international ACM SIGACCESS 
conference on Computers and accessibility (ASSETS '10), 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, October 2010, pp. 301-302. 
[11] L. Gibson, W. Moncur, P. Forbes, J. Arnott, C. Martin, and A. 
Bachu, “Designing social networking sites for older adults,” 
Proceedings of the 24th BCS Interaction Specialist Group 
Conference (BCS '10), British Computer Society, Swinton, 
UK, September 2010, pp. 186-194. 
[12] S. Sayago, L. Camacho, and J. Blat, “Evaluation of 
techniques defined in WCAG 2.0 with older people,” 
Proceedings of the 2009 International Cross-Disciplinary 
Conference on Web Accessibililty (W4A '09), ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, April 2009, pp. 79-82. 
[13] A. Martin, V. Saldaño, G. Miranda, and G. Gaetan, “AO-
WAD: A Generalized Approach for Accessible Design within 
the Development of Web-based Systems,” Proceedings of The 
7th International Conference on Software Engineering 
Advances, ICSEA 2012, IARIA, Portugal, November 2012, 
pp. 581-587. 
 
181
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[14] A. Martín, G. Rossi, A. Cechich, and S. Gordillo, 
“Engineering Accessible Web Applications. An Aspect-
Oriented Approach,” World Wide Web Journal, 13(4), 2010, 
pp. 419-440. 
[15] United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs 
Population Division, “World population ageing, 1950-2050,” 
UN, 2002,  accessed 1st December 2014. 
http://www.un.org/esa/population/publications/worldageing19
502050/index.htm 
[16] Web Accessibility Initiative, accessed 1st December 2014. 
 http://www.w3.org/WAI/ 
[17] Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 2.0, accessed 
1st December 2014. http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG/ 
[18] Web 
Accessibility 
Initiative: 
Ageing 
Education 
and 
Harmonisation (WAI-AGE), accessed 1st December 2014.  
 http://www.w3.org/WAI/WAI-AGE/ 
[19] A. Arch, “Web accessibility for older users: successes and 
opportunities,” 
(keynote) 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
2009 
International 
Cross-Disciplinary 
Conference 
on 
Web 
Accessibililty (W4A '09), ACM, USA, April 2009, pp. 1-6.  
[20] A. Aula and M. Kaiki, “Less is more in Web search interfaces 
for older adults,” First Monday [Online], Volume 10 Number 
7,  2005. 
[21] A. Dickinson, A. F. Newell, M. J. Smith, and R. L. Hill, 
“Introducing the Internet to the over-60s: Developing an 
email system for older novice computer users,” Interacting 
with Computers, 17(6) (2005), 621-642. 
[22] D. Hawthorn, “Possible implications of aging for interface 
designers,” Interacting with Computer, 12, (2002), 507-528. 
[23] Eldermail, accessed 1st December 2014.  
http://www.eldermail.net/ 
[24] D. Sloan, M. Atkinson, C. Machin, and Y. Li, “The potential 
of adaptive interfaces as an accessibility aid for older Web 
users,” Proceedings of the 2010 International Cross 
Disciplinary Conference on Web Accessibility (W4A '10), 
ACM, New York, NY, USA, April 2010, Article 35.   
[25] J. Richards and V. Hanson, “Web accessibility: a broader 
view,” Proceedings of the 13th international conference on 
World Wide Web (WWW'04), ACM, USA, May 2004, pp. 
72-79.  
[26] H. Muta, T. Ohko, and H. Yoshinaga, “An activeX-based 
accessibility solution for senior citizens,” Proceedings of the 
Center On Disabilities Technology And Persons With 
Disabilities Conference 2005, accessed 1st December 2014. 
http://www.csun.edu/cod/conf/2005/proceedings/2227.htm. 
[27] D. Lunn and S. Harper, “Improving the accessibility of 
dynamic web content for older users,” Proceedings of the 
2011 International Cross-Disciplinary Conference on Web 
Accessibility (W4A '11), ACM, New York, NY, USA, March 
2011, Article 16.  
[28] A. Garrido, S. Firmenich, G. Rossi, J. Grigera, N. Medina-
Medina, and I. Harari, “Personalized Web accessibility using 
client-side refactoring,” Internet Computing, IEEE, 17(4), 
July-August 2013, pp. 58-66. 
[29] Greasemonkey, accessed 1st December 2014.  
http://www.greasespot.net/ 
[30] S. Mirri, P. Salomoni, and C. Prandi, “Augment browsing and 
standard 
profiling 
for 
enhancing 
Web 
accessibility,” 
Proceedings of the 2011 International Cross-Disciplinary 
Conference on Web Accessibililty (W4A '11), ACM, New 
York, NY, USA, March 2011, Article 5. 
[31] http://www.unpa.edu.ar/noticia/la-unpa-y-el-inssjp-firmaron-
convenios-por-capacitacion-y-continuidad-del-programa-
upami, accessed 1st December 2014. 
[32] J. Dumas and J. C. Redish, “A Practical Guide to Usability 
Testing,” (1st  ed.), Intellect Books, Exeter, UK, 1999. 
[33] P. Brusilovsky, A. Kobsa, and W. Nejdl, “The Adative Web: 
Methods and Strategies of Web Personalization,” Springer, 
2007. 
[34] http://userscripts-mirror.org/, accessed 1st December 2014. 
[35] W. Trochim, "Likert Scaling," Research Methods Knowledge 
Base, 2nd Edition, 2006, accessed 1st December 2014. 
  http://www.socialresearchmethods.net/kb/scallik.php 
[36] J. Brooke, “SUS: A quick and dirty usability scale,” In 
Usability evaluation in industry. Taylor and Francis, London, 
1996. 
 
182
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 3 & 4, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

