On Designing Semantic Lexicon-Based Architectures for Web Information 
Retrieval 
 
Vincenzo Di Lecce, Marco Calabrese 
DIASS 
Politecnico di Bari – II Faculty of Engineering 
Taranto, Italy 
e-mail: {v.dilecce, m.calabrese}@aeflab.net 
Domenico Soldo 
myHermes S.r.l. 
Taranto - Italy 
e-mail: domenico.soldo@myhermessrl.com
 
 
Abstract—In this work, a novel framework for designing Web 
Information Retrieval systems with particular reference to 
semantic search engines is presented. The key idea is to add the 
semantic dimension to the classical Term-Document Matrix 
thus having a three-dimensional dataset. This enhancement 
allows for defining a lexico-semantic user interface where the 
query process is performed at the conceptual level thanks to 
the use of a Semantic Lexicon. WordNet Semantic Lexicon is 
used here as golden ontology for handling polysemy and 
synonymy, hence it is useful for disambiguating user queries at 
the semantic level. A layered multi-agent system is employed 
for supporting the design process. Particular emphasis is given 
to formal system knowledge representation, the interface layer 
managing user-system interaction and the markup layer 
performing the semantic tagging process. 
Keywords-component; 
information 
retrieval; 
semantic 
lexicon; WordNet; MAS; semantic query 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Since its advent, the World Wide Web (hereinafter WWW 
or simply the Web) has increased dramatically in size and 
number of interlinked resources. This trend enforces search 
engine developers to adopt Web document indexing 
techniques, 
which 
exchange 
scalability 
for 
fair 
precision/recall performances. Surveying the literature of the 
latest years it is easy to notice the growing consensus about 
the need for involving semantics in retrieval systems. 
Approaches that employ low-level features as indexing 
parameters are prone in fact to a number of pitfalls,  like the 
inherent ambiguity of polysemous query words. At the 
present time,  commercial search engines provide relevant 
responses if the user is good enough when submitting the 
right query. Therefore, the access to high-quality information 
on the Web may be still problematic for unskilled users. 
Traditional search engines are conceptually based on a 
term-document look-up table (also known as Term-
Document Matrix or TDM for short). Lexical terms 
conveyed by the user query play the role of entries; 
documents populate a (ranked) list of weblinks that match 
user query terms according to a given metric. The user is 
required to discern among the given options and choose the 
one that is supposed to be closest to his/her intentions.  
A more sophisticated type of Web information retrieval 
systems is represented by meta-search engines, which relay 
user query to several search engines, collect their responses 
and finally propose them to the user according to certain 
criteria. Meta-search engines, however, have still to deal 
with the problem of mixing information coming from 
different sources, which is an awkward task to accomplish, 
unless some semantic approach is pursued.  
Semantic search engines should attempt to understand the 
user query at the ontology level. They should also offer a 
pictorial representation of the retrieved dataset, letting the 
user have the impression to move within a semantic search 
space. In  order to be really effective, they require a strong 
theoretical knowledge model, which has to be sufficiently 
robust to allow for indexing heterogeneous data scattered 
across the Web. 
In this work, a novel framework for designing textual 
information retrieval systems with particular reference to 
semantic search engines is presented. A semantic dimension 
is added to the classical term-document matrix thus having a 
three-dimensional dataset. In this view, the user is forced to 
adopt a new semantic query paradigm, which is closer to 
human understanding than to traditional keyword-based 
techniques. The query process is performed at the conceptual 
level thanks to the use of a Semantic Lexicon considered as a 
golden ontology useful for the sense disambiguation task. A 
layered Multi-Agent System (MAS) is employed for 
supporting the whole design process. 
    This article is an extension of a previous work presented in 
the ICIW 2009 Conference [1] specifically focused on 
semantic tagging of Web resources using MAS architecture.  
In the present paper, the critical point of including semantics 
in text retrieval systems is handled under a more general and 
complete perspective that involves Web ontology modeling. 
The final aim is to bridge the gap between traditional search 
engines based on term-document indexing and emerging 
semantic requirements by means of a suitable model, which 
embeds terms, documents and semantics into a single 
knowledge representation. 
The outline of the paper is as follows: Section II reports 
related work in Information Retrieval with particular 
reference to search engines and semantic tagging aspects; 
Section III describes WordNet architecture [2] and its 
usefulness for the scope of this work; Section IV proposes 
the new three-dimensional information retrieval framework; 
Section V presents the used multi-agent system architecture; 
Section VI comments the carried out experiments and 
170
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
prototypal implementations; conclusions are sketched in 
Section VII. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Information Retrieval (IR) is finding material (usually 
documents) of unstructured nature (usually text) satisfying 
an information request from within large collections (usually 
stored on computers) [3]. Automated IR systems are 
conceptually related to object and query. In the context of IR 
systems, an object is an entity, which keeps or stores 
information in a database, i.e. in a structured repository. User 
queries are then matched to objects stored in the database. A 
document is, therefore, an opportune collection of data 
objects.  
Often the documents themselves are not kept or stored 
directly in the IR system, instead they are represented in the 
system by document surrogates automatically generated by 
the same IR system by means of a document analysis. 
Nowadays there are two approaches to document analysis: 
statistical and semantic.  
The statistical approach was initially proposed by Lhun. 
In 1958 he wrote: “It is here proposed that the frequency of 
word occurrence in an article furnishes a useful 
measurement of word significance. It is further proposed that 
the relative position within a sentence of words having given 
values of significance furnish a useful measurement for 
determining the significance of sentences. The significance 
factor of a sentence will therefore be based on a combination 
of these two measurements” [4]. It is interesting to note that 
this approach is still used in many modern IR systems.  
On the other hand, a Semantic Information Retrieval 
system exploits the notion of semantic similarity (based on 
lexical and semantic relations) between concepts to 
determine the relevancy of a certain document. One way of 
incorporating semantic knowledge into a representation is 
mapping document terms to ontology-based concepts. In [5], 
for example, a formal ontology-based model for representing 
Web resources is presented. Starting from semantic Web 
standards as well as established ontologies the authors 
reformulate the IR task into a data retrieval task assuming 
that more expressive resources and query models allow for a 
precise match between content and information needs. In this 
work instead, the term-concept mapping is provided by a 
golden ontology expressed in the form of a Semantic 
Lexicon like WordNet.  The usefulness of this choice will be 
explained throughout the text further on. 
A. Traditional IR  techniques 
    The most widespread and popular applications of IR are 
Web search engines. They are designed to answer to a 
human query with an HTML page containing a ranked list of 
links to Web sites or documents. Every traditional Web 
search engine represents each retrieved webpage in its own 
search space by using a set of sentences that are considered 
as relevant to the user query. The relevancy of the retrieved 
documents is essentially dependent upon the chosen metric 
and the ranking strategy. As far as now, the most common 
document retrieval approach is searching for word-to-word 
correspondences (after stemming and stop-word procedures) 
between the set of query keywords and the set of document 
terms. Although the query search may be restricted by using 
Boolean and/or operators (thus providing a more selective 
filtering on the search space), the quality of document 
retrieval is significantly affected by the ranking strategy. A 
simple comparison among the principal Web search engines 
shows in fact how different the retrieved document could be, 
even in response to the same user query word.  
The well-known Page Rank Algorithm [6] has been one 
of the keys to success for the Google Web search engine. It 
represents undoubtedly one of the most single important 
contributions to the field of IR in the latest years. The Page 
Rank Algorithm employs a fast convergent and effective 
random-walk 
model 
for 
ranking 
graph 
nodes 
like 
hyperlinked Web resources [7]. It is based on the bright 
assumptions that weblinks may be interpreted as “votes” 
given from the source page to the destination page. The vote 
expressed by a link is in fact weighted by the “reference” 
(Page Rank value) of the pages from where the links come, 
in accordance with the formula provided by the authors:  
 
( ) (
)
( )
( )
( )
( ) ⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
+
+
∗
+
−
=
n
n
C T
PR T
C T
PR T
d
d
PR A
K
1
1
1
  (1)  
where PR(X) function gives the Page Rank value of page X, 
A is the webpage pointed by T1, T2,... Tn webpages, C(Ti) is 
the number of links outgoing from page Ti and finally d is a 
properly set constant value. The previous formula is 
recursive. By highly ranking the most referenced pages, Page 
Rank represents a good prior filter to the enormous 
heterogeneous search space. In addition to this, the simple 
graphic view provided by Google home page can be easily 
understood by a great variety of users. In many real cases, 
Google apparent precision, however, can be partially 
ascribed to the poor syntax underpinning the user query and 
to the self-influence it has had on users in the way they 
formulate the query. Everyone can experience how much the 
retrieval performances decrease with more complex human-
like queries.  
    The adoption of more sophisticated retrieval functions can 
help reduce the misbalance now pending on the ranking 
algorithms.  
B. Semantic IR  techniques 
To overcome the limits of the traditional approaches, new 
semantics based techniques are being investigated in the 
latest years, although there is no ground-breaking technology  
at the moment that can be considered sufficiently mature to 
compete with traditional IR systems on a large scale. In the 
preface to the proceedings of a late international workshop 
on semantic search held in 2008 [8] it is explicitly stated: 
“…the representation of user queries and resource content 
in existing search appliances is still almost exclusively 
achieved by simple syntax-based descriptions of the resource 
content and the information need such as in the predominant 
keyword-centric paradigm.”. A recent study [9] shows that 
171
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
retrieval performances are still low for both keyword-based 
search engines and the semantic search engines. 
Provided this, one of the most relevant semantic 
techniques which has had a number of useful applications in 
various fields spanning from information discovery to 
document classification is Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI). 
LSI implements a strictly mathematical approach based on 
applying Single Value Decomposition (SVD) to the TDM. 
SVD decomposes the TDM into the product of three 
matrices: 
 
0
0
0
D
S
T
TDM
′
∗
∗
=
 
(2) 
T0 and D0 are the matrices of left and right singular 
vectors and S0 is the diagonal one with its elements 
representing singular values in decreasing order. D0’ is the 
matrix transpose of D0. Taking only the largest values offers 
a good approximation of the original TDM, thus reducing the 
whole search space to a relatively smaller “concept space” 
called LSI [10]. From this point of view, LSI is more 
powerful than a traditional document search algorithm: it 
overcomes the limits of Boolean query allowing for 
clustering documents semantically. LSI represents a right 
compromise 
between 
simplicity 
and 
good 
retrieval 
performance (measured as recall/precision values). This 
makes it a powerful, generic technique able to index any 
cohesive document collection in any language. It can be used 
in conjunction with a regular keyword search, or in place of 
one, with good results.  Unfortunately, LSI suffers from 
scalability problems since large document sets require heavy 
computing on massive matrices. Furthermore, although it has 
been shown that LSI is able to handle correctly data 
structured into taxonomic hierarchies [11], it is not suited to 
make these taxonomies explicit in the search results. In other 
words, LSI is a good tool for finding semantic similarities, 
but it clusters output data in a flat (nonhierarchical) manner.  
To deal with both semantics and lexical issues, a more 
comprehensive approach than TDM-based techniques is 
needed. This work grounds on the idea that, for an efficient 
information retrieval, lexical forms must be endowed with 
semantic tags in order to disambiguate their meaning. To 
carry out the disambiguation task, WordNet Semantic 
Lexicon is used. 
C. Semantic Tagging 
    Semantic tagging (or markup) is conceived to define 
metadata for describing a given resource. A tag can be 
interpreted as a placeholder that helps user (human or 
computer) understands the context in which to interpret the 
tagged resource. An HTML tag, for example, lets browser 
interpret how to render a webpage; an XML tag instead 
allows for defining an entity name in a syntactically 
structured way. However, despite the initial enthusiasm  
around this new (meta)language [12], XML alone proved to 
be insufficient for most ontology-driven applications. XML 
in fact supplies a well-defined syntax (which is a desirable 
for data integration) but lacks in providing semantics.  For 
example, XML does not resolve the lexical ambiguity that 
may arise when two applications share data having the same 
tag names, unless a Document Type Definition (DTD) or a 
XML Schema Definition (XSD) file is attached.  
    The authors are confident that any kind of semantic 
application cannot exist without prior defining the 
knowledge representation model, which is suitable and 
sufficient to express the given problem ontology. In the 
semantic 
engineering 
process, 
the 
ontology 
that 
conceptualizes (ideally in the best way) the common body 
knowledge is generally called  golden or gold standard 
ontology. Its counterpart is the individual ontology, which 
strongly depends on the person who actually performs the 
ontology engineering process. 
Generally, 
Web 
ontology 
modeling 
requires 
an 
engineering effort that can be yielded only by experts with 
the aid of auxiliary ontology editing tools [13][14]. In the 
last decade much attention has been devoted to designing 
layered XML-based languages such as RDF(S) [15], DAML-
OIL and OWL [16], all based on formal semantics. The final 
attempt was to find out a good compromise among 
expressiveness, inferential capabilities and computability to 
use in the Web context.  
    The gap between software engineering methodologies 
based on the above languages and real-world ontology 
modeling is still a debated issue [17]. Web ontology 
representations have to deal with a spectrum of drawbacks 
spanning from language inherent ambiguity to context 
dependency, presence of incoherent statements, scattered 
pieces of information, difficulty in ontology matching and so 
on. It seems that all these issues have twofold reason: they 
lay both on the semantic (ontology) level and on the lexical 
(language) level. Consequently, semantic annotation of Web 
resources is prone to produce weak structure metadata. This 
is particularly true for collaborative (wiki) approaches [18] 
where personal conceptualizations are rather difficult to be 
mapped 
one 
another. 
Although 
such 
collaborative 
environments represent a challenge for the research 
community, they are still tailored to generic semantic 
services [19]. A top-down solution is to provide the tagging 
system with a well-defined and widely-accepted ontology: 
choosing the right ontology may be demanding in complex 
environment like the whole Web.  
This work employs an agent-based architecture model for 
supporting the whole information retrieval process, from the 
user interface to the semantic tagging of Web resources. The 
agents that perform the annotation task use a Semantic 
Lexicon (hereinafter SL) as their golden ontology. In its 
actual implementation, the chosen SL was WordNet 3.0. 
III. 
USING WORDNET AS GOLDEN ONTOLOGY 
    The golden ontology paradigm focuses on comparing how 
well a given ontology resembles the gold standard in the 
arrangement of instances into concepts and the hierarchical 
arrangement of the concepts themselves [20]. A copious 
literature exists on golden ontologies [21][22][23]. In [24] Di 
Lecce and Calabrese address the new emerging approach of 
SL-based systems for modeling semantic Web applications. 
Starting from a preliminary survey on the different use of the 
172
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
concepts ‘taxonomy’ and ‘ontology’ in the literature, they 
identify SL as a good mediator between the two extremes. 
The authors also provide a SL-based abstract model suitable 
for multi agent system implementation. According to the 
authors’ view, an indicative exemplar for the SL class is 
WordNet [2]. 
    WordNet is a SL purposely engineered for text mining 
and information extraction. For example, it has been used to 
carry out Word Sense Disambiguation (WSD), for an 
overview of such characteristic the reader can refer to 
[25][26]. WordNet is referred to in the literature in several 
ways: 
• 
Lexical Knowledge Base [27][28] 
• 
Lexical Taxonomy [29][30] 
• 
Lexical Database [31][32] 
• 
Machine Readable Dictionary [33][34] 
• 
Ontology [35][36] 
• 
Semantic Lexicon [1][37] 
Although, the above definitions can be considered 
synonyms, they emphasize different aspects of the same 
object. In this paper, only the latter definition will be used, 
since it accounts for the two elements (lexicon and 
semantics) which are relevant for the IR task, as explained 
forth. In this view, an important WordNet feature supplied 
by its underpinning data model is the capability of handling 
polysemy and synonymy. To this end, the concept of ‘Sense 
Matrix’ is introduced. 
A. Defining the Sense Matrix 
Two prominent causes of language ambiguity are 
polysemy and synonymy. Synonymy decreases recall and 
polysemy decreases precision, leading to poor overall 
retrieval performances [38]. It is interesting to note that 
synonymy represents a lexical relation among word forms 
while polysemy occurs when the same lexical form has 
multiple meanings. To define the relation among lexical and 
semantic entities at a finer grain, the definition of Sense 
Matrix is due. Thereby, a (feasible) sense is defined as 
particular element of such a matrix. Formally: 
 
Def. (Sense Matrix). If L represents the set of lexical 
entities and C the set of concepts of a given SL, a Sense 
Matrix 
S 
is 
defined 
as 
the 
matrix 
L ×C
such 
that
1
[ , ]
S i j =
if 
SL
c
l
j
i
)∈
( ,
and 
0
[ , ]
S i j =
 
otherwise. The set of feasible senses  is defined as: 
 
{
1}
| [ , ]
:
=
=
S i j
s
FS
ij
 
(3) 
Throughout the text only feasible senses will be considered.  
    The concept of Sense Matrix is not new in the literature. 
In 2006 Swen [39] introduces almost the same notion. There 
is however some difference in terminology. The term 
‘sense’ for Swen corresponds to our ‘concept’, thus, for 
Swen, a ‘sense’ is a term-document matrix. Our model can 
be considered as a specification to that of Swen assuming 
that  senses are provided by a golden ontology.  
    It is noteworthy that S induces a binary matrix M on the 
Cartesian product L x C that is generally called ‘lexical 
matrix’ in the literature [40][41]. In [42], the lexical matrix 
is presented as an integral part of the human language 
system. Since there is no preference between the two 
dimensions represented by M (lexical and semantic), the 
authors prefer to refer to M as a Sense Matrix. This matrix 
can be considered as the base computational support for 
dictionary-based retrieval systems. Actually, it works as a 
look-up table that allows for switching from one dimension 
to another. An illustrative example of matrix M is provided 
in Table I. 
TABLE I.  
EXAMPLE SENSE MATRIX . SENSES ARE DEFINED AS 
MATCHES BETWEEN LEXICAL ENTITIES (ROWS) AND CONCEPTS (COLUMNS) 
CONCEPTS 
SENSE 
MATRIX 
c1 
c2 
C3 
c4 
l1 
0 
0 
0 
1 
l2 
0 
1 
1 
0 
LEXICON  
l3 
1 
1 
0 
0 
 
B. WordNet data model  
WordNet is organized around the idea of synsets, i.e. 
group of cognitive synonyms, each one representing a 
specific concept in a given context. Synsets are interlinked 
by means of conceptual-semantic and lexical relations. Any 
synset pertains to the concept layer, i.e. it is an instance of 
the set of concepts. The one-to-one relation between the 
synset and the word form produces the sense. Hence, a 
synset can be defined as the union of senses sharing the same 
concept entity (i.e. synonyms). 
The ‘sense’ table combines tuples of the ‘word’ table 
with tuples of the ‘synset’ table. According to SL definition, 
the three tables define respectively the Sense Matrix, the set 
of lexical entities and the set of concept entities. 
The WordNet taxonomic hierarchies (comprising the set 
of lexical and semantic relations) are covered by the two 
tables ‘lexlinkref’ and ‘semlinkref’. Semlinkref defines only 
semantic relations, while lexlinkref defines lexico-semantic 
relations. In other words, lexlinkref provides recursive 
relations over the set of senses. An index to all kind of 
relations is contained in the  ‘linkdef’ table. 
WordNet is an ongoing project, since minor bugs and 
refinements characterize new version releases (in this work 
WordNet 3.0 was finally adopted). An excerpt of WordNet 
3.0 class diagram is reported in Figure 1.  
173
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
Figure 1.  An extract of WordNet data model. Tables belonging to sense 
matrix and lexico-semantic taxonomy are grouped separately. 
C. Formal Knowledge Representation  
    A formal representation of WordNet SL can be adapted 
from Dellschaft and Staab [21]. Referencing to a previous 
work on the subject [43], they provide a simple, but formal 
definition of a Core Ontology as the triplet:  
CO = <C, root, ≤C > 
 
 (4a) 
where C represents the set of concepts, root the uppermost 
superordinate concept and ≤C  a partial order on C (hence a 
taxonomical relation). Core Ontology seems to be an 
effective representation because it synthesizes the different 
layers constituting an ontology  [44]. As a consequence of 
the introduction of the Sense Matrix, the Core Ontology 
definition used in this paper slightly changes. The set C is 
substituted by the set of feasible senses FS: 
CO = <FS, root, ≤C >  
 
(4b) 
It is evident that Core Ontology definition still has a 
taxonomical structure (actually a directed acyclic graph 
form)1.  
    In WordNet, nouns, verbs, adjectives and  adverbs can be 
considered as four lexical categories (also known as part-of-
speech in the literature) each one defining a corresponding 
sub-ontology. Thus, the following partition generally2 holds 
for a generic SL:  
adv
adj
v
n
O
O
O
O
SL
⊕
⊕
⊕
=
  
(5) 
                                                           
1 This complies with some relations like hypernymy/hyponymy and may be 
not sufficient for others where cyclic relations may occur. For the aim of 
this paper however, DAG structures only are considered. More complex 
grap-like structures are left to future work on the subject. 
2 It can happen that some relations (especially the morphological ones, like 
derivational forms) make this assumption not valid. In this sense, the 
provided partition should be intended as an opportune simplification for a 
working hypothesis. 
The overline is used to stress that the ontology is a golden 
one.  
    WordNet considers different semantic and lexical relation 
among 
concepts 
such 
as 
hyponymy/hypernym, 
meronym/holonym, antonyms, entailment and so on. Some 
relations are specific to certain categories like entailment for 
verbs; moreover, there are some relations having a single-
rooted structure while some others are not. 
n
O  is the only 
one having one single root (the synset conceptualizing the 
‘entity’ lexical entry) hence, it suits the formal (4b) 
definition perfectly.  
 
Notation. For the sake of conciseness, the following 
notation is introduced:  
rel
Oconc
 
 
 
(6) 
where rel represents a lexico-semantic relation, i.e. one 
element of the set {hyponymy, hypermymy, holonymy, 
meronymy,…}and conc is one of the four lexical categories, 
i.e. one element of the set {nouns, verbs, adjectives, 
adverbs}. 
hyper
On
, for example, indicates an ontology 
defining hypernymy (relation) among nouns (concept 
nodes).  In this paper only hypernymy has been employed in 
the considered golden ontology:  
hyper
n
n
O = O
 
 
 
(7) 
In [26] more WordNet relations are used with the aim of 
building semantic graphs. The authors adopt these structures 
in the Structural Semantic Interconnection (SSI) algorithm 
for the word sense disambiguation task. The semantic 
context is used in each iteration of the algorithm to 
disambiguate the lexical terms. Thus the accuracy of the 
algorithm is strictly related to the chosen context. The major 
difference between SSI and our approach is that, in the latter, 
the context is not an input for the sense disambiguation 
system. 
IV. 
PROPOSED IR MODEL 
The perfect search engines should respond to user query 
by listing exactly what the user actually queried for. 
Provided that this desirable situation is an ideal one, it is 
more feasible to reason about what current search engines 
generally do. They provide a ranked list of websites 
matching the user query according to a given algorithm. 
Upon search engines response, user chooses the website to 
browse, occasionally coming back to the search engine 
webpage to submit another query (Figure 2 reports an UML 
representation of the whole mechanism). Since the most of 
currently available search engines are not semantic-based, 
they index Web documents in a way similar to the Sense 
Matrix reported in Table I. User query is performed only at 
the lexical layer, being exposed to misinterpretation due to 
erroneous synonymy and polysemy interpretation. This 
means that the semantic gap is left totally to the user 
understanding. 
word 
- worid:long 
- lemma:string 
lexlinkref 
- synset1id:long 
- word1id:long 
- synset2id:long 
- word2id:long 
- linked:int 
linkdef 
- linked:int 
- name:string 
- recourses:boolean 
synset 
- synsetid:long 
- pos:char 
- categoryid:int 
- definition:string 
sense 
- worid:long 
- casedwordid:long 
- synsetid:long 
- rank:int 
- lexid:int 
- tagcount:int 
semlinkref 
- synset1id:long 
- synset2id:long 
- linked:int 
refers to 
has 
has 
has 
refers to 
refers to 
SENSE 
MATRIX 
LEXICO-SEMANTIC 
TAXONOMY
174
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
In fact, in general a small text preview is fed back to the 
user, to let him/her decide the best option, basing on the 
semantics he/she gives to the displayed preview. This is an 
elegant way of bridging the semantic gap: the lack of this 
approach is that semantics is pushed in the query-response 
mechanism only from the user side. However, this “try and 
look” paradigm can be overcome in the light of the proposed 
IR system (Figure 3 depicts an UML representation of the 
mechanism characterizing the proposed IR system). 
 
 
Figure 2.  UML representation of the mechanism characterizing traditional 
search engines. The searching process starts with the user’s query. 
Keywords are the entry points for the search engine alghoritm. 
 
 
Figure 3.  UML representation of mechanism characterizing the proposed 
semantic search engine. As in figure 2, the searching process starts with the 
user’s query. In this case, instead, senses related to the keywords are the 
entry points for the proposed semantic search engine alghoritm. 
In the proposed system, as in traditional keyword-based 
systems, the user enters one or more keywords that he/she 
considers as significant for the kind of document he/she is 
searching for. Contrarily to retrieval systems based on term-
document matrix, our IR system queries the golden ontology 
in order to get all possible senses related to (lexical) user 
query. The sense is explained by means of a short gloss, 
which is actually a meta-description of the sense itself. Once 
that the user has chosen the sense he/she wants to search for, 
the system retrieves all documents previously indexed by 
that sense. 
 
A. New Browsing Paradigm 
Our approach is based on a three dimensional dataset 
comprising respectively term, synset and document 
dimensions (Figure 4). 
User query begins at the lexical level and then moves 
towards semantics thus becoming a two-step request/reply 
process: 
1. The first step is a traditional keyword-based query 
performed at the lexical level. The system replies by 
listing the possible related senses. 
2. The second step consists in user choosing the right 
sense thus entering the ‘semantic browsing mode’ 
which also allows for selecting the semantically 
indexed documents. 
In this new framework, documents are indexed by senses. 
This does not affect the chosen document ranking criteria 
(like Page Rank) since dimensions are orthogonal. The real 
difference from traditional IR models is that user moves 
within a semantic space, eventually deciding to open a sense-
related webpage (as examples related to a gloss in a 
dictionary).  
    System response in the first step is not possible unless 
some sense disambiguation technique is applied. For a 
previously published sense disambiguation technique, the 
readers may refer to the work of Di Lecce et al. [25]. 
 
Figure 4.  The proposed 3-dimensional IR model. It can be considered as 
the 3d space projection of the tuple f(t, s, d) characterized by term, synset 
and document. 
175
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
V. 
SEMANTIC LEXICON-BASED MAS 
MAS design has been gaining the attention of research 
community for  many years [45]. Software agents are 
designed to cooperate (either with other agents or with 
humans) for managing the system knowledge base (KB) in 
different situations.  In this paper a MAS implementation 
that employs WordNet as golden ontology is used to support 
the design of the proposed SL-based information retrieval 
system. The used MAS architecture is a hierarchical one [46] 
and is composed of the following layers:  
• 
Interface Layer: it responds to user query. User 
may be human or computer such as crawlers and 
parsers; 
• 
Brokerage 
Layer: 
it 
mediates 
among 
computational resources according to environment 
constraints; 
• 
Markup Layer: it performs the tagging and other 
related activities.  
• 
Knowledge Layer: it manages system knowledge 
base. 
    This agent-based approach is scalable because many 
features can be added to the SL-based system without 
affecting the underpinning model. For example, an inference 
engine may be added to the system in order to inference on 
new semantic relations among concept words.  Tests in this 
direction are currently under way. Their aim is to assess the 
feasibility of domain-specific search engines that would 
enhance domain browsing and document retrieval.  
    The used MAS architecture has been inspired by previous 
works in other fields (see for example [46]). An overview of 
the proposed MAS architecture is depicted in Figure 5.  
 
 
Figure 5.  Multilayered MAS architecture used for semantically tagging  
Web resources. It is noteworthy the use of SL as golden ontology for the 
system knowledge. 
    Hereinafter an insight into the proposed MAS architecture 
is provided. Each different layer is described, with particular 
emphasis to the interface layer which handles user-system 
interaction, on the markup layer, which provides the Web 
resources semantic tagging process, and on the knowledge 
layer formally before presented. 
A. User Level 
It is the top level of the hierarchy and interacts with the 
MAS. It represents the communicational channel from and 
towards the system’s environment. The user level is suitable 
composed of the three following elements: user interface – 
i.e. the human-machine interface; spider – a computer 
program that analyses the taxonomy structure of considered 
websites;  parser – a computer program that extracts the 
relevant 
information 
from 
Web 
documents. 
The 
crawling/parsing processes are thoroughly described in [47]. 
Instead, a prototypal version of the user interface has been 
developed and presented in this paper (Figure 8 represents its 
actual implementation). 
B. Interface Layer 
The semantic browsing options handled by the interface 
agent are synthesized by the following Extended-BNF 
representation. 
<interface> ::= <frame_header> <frame_www>  
<frame_semantics> 
<frame_header> ::= {<sense>} 
<frame_www> ::= {<href>} 
<frame_semantics> ::=  [<forward_sense>]  
[<backward_sense>] 
<forward_sense> ::= {<sense>} 
<backward_sense> ::= {<sense>} 
<sense> ::= <word> <gloss> 
The interface is composed of three frames: 
1. Header: reporting the considered sense i.e. word-
synset pair. The sense is described by means of the 
gloss associated to it; 
2. WWW (traditional browsing): lists all Web resources 
indexed by the current sense; 
3. Semantics (semantic browsing): allowing the user to 
move within the semantic space; 
    The choice of the extended version of the Backus Normal 
Form is due to the need to easily represent the cardinality for 
both elements sense and href. While curly brackets indicate 
the cardinality of a symbol, the square brackets represent the 
optional element in the derivation rule. Forward_sense and 
backward_sense are the parts of semantic space linked to the 
header sense. A graphical illustration explaining the BNF is 
presented in the next Section. 
    It is noteworthy that this interface shows recursive 
characteristics. The user can perform semantic browsing 
moving towards similar concepts in the query refinement 
process. In the experiment Section a screenshot of the 
prototypal implementation is commented in more detail. 
Semantic 
Lexicon
User 
interface 
Semantic 
Lexicon 
User 
level 
Interface 
layer 
Brokerage 
layer 
Markup 
layer 
Knowledge 
layer 
Crawler 
Parser 
Interface 
Agent 
Broker 
Agent 
Coach 
Agent 
Tag 
Agent 
Tag 
Agent
MAS ARCHITECTURE 
176
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
C. Brokerage Layer 
The MAS is triggered by user query submitted to the 
interface agent. Once the query has been correctly decoded, 
the interface agent leaves control to the Brokerage Layer. 
This layer is managed by two agents: broker and coach. 
Broker Agent analyses which Tag Agents can satisfy the 
requirement. It manages all inbound communication coming 
from the Interface Agent. Starting by one query, it relays 
user service request to available resources of the lower layer, 
according to the chosen scheduling policy. 
Coach Agent receives message from all the Tag Agents, 
collects and ranks the results. Next, it sends a message to the 
Broker Agent to inform that service request has been  
fulfilled. 
Both agents of this layer are poorly detailed because that 
goes beyond the scope of this paper. 
D. (Semantic) Markup Layer 
In [25], a WSD algorithm was proposed to find the 
nearest common WordNet subsumer among words extracted 
from two link texts (also known as anchortexts). These 
couples of textual descriptions are taken from any possible 
pair of inbound and outbound links of a given webpage. If a 
concept subsumer (which is a synset) is found, lemmas, 
which lexicalize it, are used to tag the webpage. 
 
Figure 6.  Actions performed by a Tag Agent. For any couple of inbound 
and outbound text links (step 1) the nearest common subsumer is searched 
in the WordNet database (step 2) according to the semantic relation 
pertaining the agent (e.g. hypernymy). If such synset element is found, its 
related lemmas are used to tag the corresponding webpage (step 3). 
A tag agent (Figure 6 helps explaining how Tag Agent 
actually works) repeatedly performs this tagging activity on 
the list of webpages received by the Broker Agent. 
For modularity purposes, each Tag Agent searches for 
semantic tags exploiting one of the possible semantic 
relations provided by the chosen SL. There can be one or 
more Tag Agents for hypernymy, others for holonymy and 
so on. 
E. Knowledge Layer 
Starting from the notations given in Section III.C, the 
system KB can be then formally expressed as follows: 
{
}
U
i
i
href
n
n
O
KB = O
 
 
(8) 
{
href }i
On
represents the individual ontology of the i-th 
inspected webpage; n represents the nouns (webpage 
semantic tags) identified by the tagging agent, finally href 
represents the HTML hyperlinks connecting tagged 
webpages. As shown in Figure 5 the Knowledge Layer can 
be split in many Semantic Lexicon units as much as Tag 
Agents exist in the upper layer. This ensures more flexibility 
and scalability of the system too. 
VI. 
EXPERIMENTS 
Our experiments have been carried out on a data set of 48 
distinct websites clustered in four semantic domains. Table 
II reports the number of analyzed websites for each 
semantic domain. 
TABLE II.  
NUMBER OF INSPECTED WEBSITES FOR THE CHOSEN 
SEMANTIC DOMAINS 
Semantic Domain 
# inspected websites 
University 
17 
Low-cost airline 
10 
Seaport 
8 
Airport 
13 
 
The crawling and the parsing phases have been limited to 
the analysis of the crawled first one hundred webpages for 
each website. This choice ensured the coverage of the main 
taxonomical structures of the inspected websites (general 
categories). 
 
A. Prototypal Interface Implementation 
According 
to 
the 
previously 
presented 
E-BNF 
representation a prototypal Web-based user interface has 
been implemented. Apache, PHP, MySQL and Ajax 
technologies have been used for this scope. Figure 8 shows 
an example screenshot of the user interface developed for the 
proposed semantic search engine. The interface can be 
divided into the following three frames: 
1. header frame: it supports the user in the sense 
disambiguation process as specified in the UML of 
Figure 3. Thanks to this frame, the user selects the 
right sense in the synset-word (WordNet) plain 
depicted in Figure 4. 
Text 1 
Text 1 
Text j 
Text M 
webpage 
Text i 
Text N 
WN 
Inbound 
anchortexts 
Outbound 
anchortexts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Step 2: 
search near 
common 
subsumer 
in WN 
Step 1: nearest common subsumer 
Step 3: semantic tagging 
177
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
2. www frame: this area lists the hyperlinks indexed by 
the sense that results from the user query. By 
clicking one of the listed hyperlinks the user is 
redirected to the corresponding webpage as in 
traditional search engines (UML of Figure 2). 
3. semantics frame: it allows the user for browsing the 
WordNet plain. The user is supposed to be in the 
sense chosen in header frame and can move forward 
or backward towards “neighbour” senses. Given two 
senses a and b they are considered here as 
neighbours if they exhibit a common subsumer. 
When the user selects a new sense the interface is 
reset (i.e. the user “is moved” to the new sense), thus 
showing a recursive behaviour. 
 
B. Semantic tagging experiments 
The semantic tagging process has been applied to the 
experiment set according to what was explained in the 
previous section. The considered semantic relations were 
hypernymy extracted from WordNet 3.0 release. The 
inspection depth in the WordNet taxonomy for finding the 
nearest common subsumer was thresholded to 5. This choice  
was affected by these reasons: 
• Higher depth level in taxonomy accounts for very 
general concepts that are conceptually distant from 
the analyzed domain 
• Computational effort may increase more than 
proportionally as depth level increases. 
To evaluate the proposed architecture the presented 
results refer to the hypernym (IS-A) relation. Two different 
evaluations have been carried out during the test process. 
One of these is related to the evaluation of human 
agreement with the automatic markup system (qualitative 
test). The other one evaluates the amount of results given by 
the proposed system regarding the completeness of 
information (quantitative test). 
 
Quantitative test. Figure 7 depicts the coverage index (in 
percentage) of the semantic markup grouped by the 
semantic domains defined in Table II. This value is useful to 
understand how much of the WordNet taxonomical structure  
is retrieved in the link-based architecture of a website. 
Coverage index (ci) has been computed for any webpage 
according to the simple formula: 
w
t
ci
#
% = #
  
 
(9) 
where the numerator stands for the number of tagged 
webpages and the denominator equals the total number of 
inspected webpages for the website. Then, data have been 
grouped by domain. A box plot representation is adopted to 
have a synoptic view of mean, variance, minimum and 
maximum values for each domain. Moreover, it also 
represents outliers for the data set. It is noteworthy that 
nearly 25% of webpages are tagged by IS_A relations. As 
shown in Figure 7 the semantic domains of University, 
Seaport and Airport have a ci near to 28%, while semantic 
domain of low-cost airline has a lower ci. This is because 
inspected low-cost airline websites provide a flat cross-
domain semantic structure (many heterogeneous services 
like car rental, hotel booking, tours, etc.). 
 
Figure 7.  Coverage of IS-A relation for the considered semantic domains. 
The coverage values are considered in percentage. Any represented element 
is characterized by a continuous line (mean value) in a rectangle (variance 
range) and by two broken line ending with horizontal lines (minimum and 
maximum coverage for the data set). 
 
Qualitative test. Table III reports an extract from the 
semantic mark-up process on the Manchester University 
website. Yet considering IS-A relation, the table is 
characterized by the uniform resource location (URL) of 
webpage, the lemmas associated to the sense markup and 
the anchortexts that caused the webpage to be tagged. The 
results are grouped by the URL identifier, in order to 
underline all sense markups assigned to a Web document. 
Table IV reports the semantic neighbors in WordNet 
semantic plain for data listed in Table III. 
C. Evaluation of the proposal 
The current semantic search panorama is quite a 
fragmented one. Although a lot of proposals can be found 
especially in recent years [49], they are still tailored to 
solving engineering aspects rather than being focused on 
performance. This conclusion can be fairly drawn by 
observing that even in the preface of the recent SemSearch 
2008 International Workshop on semantic search [50] one of 
the major questions pointed out is: how can semantic search 
systems be evaluated and compared with standard IR 
systems? 
Generally, small-sized comparison among the two 
approaches result in traditional IR systems largely 
outperforming semantic counterparts, at least for the recall 
performance. In [51] an attempt is made to fuse the two 
approaches by preserving the moderate recall of traditional 
system with the improved precision of the semantic-based 
ones. However, overall performances are still quite low and 
evaluation is confined to restricted datasets. In fact, one of 
the major pitfalls of corpus-based evaluation is the cost 
associated to the annotation. While in natural language 
178
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
processing (NLP) and word sense disambiguation (WSD) 
such datasets already exist and allow for good performances 
[52], in the general framework of Semantic Web it is 
currently impossible to think to a wide-covering semantic 
annotation for Web resources, at least until  new standards 
like OWL will be sufficiently spread. In the meanwhile 
(which the authors think will last for many years ahead), the 
solution should be based on using available information at 
the maximum possible extent but from a different 
perspective, possibly by using new user-system interaction 
paradigms. 
With reference to this paper, the focus was on the 
architecture that may leverage the simple mechanism of 
knowledge extraction and semantic annotation from the 
linked structure of the Web. This is an easy to run process 
which contributes to building a skeleton of semantic 
structures to which append (index) the crawled web pages. 
This allows the user to exploit a different navigation 
paradigm based on surfing a semantic graph rather than a 
web graph, thus reducing the semantic gap between the user 
and the retrieval system. Such an enhancement shifts the 
problem of retrieval to sense tagging and semantic 
disambiguation. More detailed numerical assessments of the 
proposed semantic tagging technique along with WSD 
aspects can be found in [47]. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
In a recent survey on existing semantic search 
technologies [48], the authors categorize the 35 reviewed 
systems under three main facets: query, system, result. They 
conclude that a next step for the semantic search community 
is to foster the use of semantics in each of the three places. 
They also point out three main hinders to the evolution of 
semantic approaches: (1) lack of evaluation of semantic 
search algorithms, (2) lack of user evaluation of user 
interfaces, (3) lack of API and middleware support. The 
approach proposed in this work attempts to provide a way 
out to all these points by proposing a holistic framework 
centered on the idea of the SL-based architecture for Web 
IR. The main idea is to enlarge traditional TDM indexing 
structure up to a third dimension by adding a semantic layer. 
In this new model the user experiences a novel query 
paradigm which requires two consecutive steps: first to 
identify the sense related to documents he/she is querying for 
and then to access the semantically indexed document. In the 
line of a previous work specifically focused on semantic 
tagging of Web resources, this article proposes a MAS 
approach to Web IR design. Particular emphasis has been 
given to the interface layer managing user-system interaction 
and the markup layer performing the semantic tagging 
process. Since the proposed approach is highly modular, 
enlarging the experiment set will be the subject of our 
prospective research on this matter. The user interface will 
be also enriched and optimized in order to be effective for an 
extended number of inspected websites. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors thank Prof. Roberto Peluso for his useful 
remarks that helped us to better define several concepts 
during the writing of the paper. The authors would also like 
to thank the anonymous referees which allowed for 
improving, by their useful comments, the overall quality of 
the paper. 
 
Figure 8.  Screenshot of the prototypal interface. The three frames described in the text are confined in separate blocks. In the “semantics frame” each sense 
is quoted with a semantic relevance degree (star icons). Sense definition, along with original inbound and outbound anchortexts are also provided. 
header frame 
www frame 
semantics frame 
179
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
TABLE III.  
EXCERPT FROM THE SEMANTIC TAGGING PROCESS APPLIED TO MANCHESTER UNIVERSITY WEBPAGES ON NOVEMBER 2008 [1]. THE FIRST 
COLUMN REFERS TO THE URL OF THE TAGGED RESOURCES. THE NEXT COLUMN SHOWS THE FOUND SEMANTIC TAGS. THE 3RD AND 4TH COLUMNS REPORT THE 
INBOUND AND OUTBOUND ANCHORTEXTS RESPECTIVELY. IN PARTICULAR THE LEXICAL ENTRIES (WORDS) THAT PRODUCED THE SEMANTIC TAG ARE 
CAPITALIZED AND BOLDED. IT IS NOTEWORTHY THAT THE SAME WEBPAGE MAY BE REFERRED TO BY MORE THAN A COUPLE OF ANCHORTEXTS; HENCE IT MAY 
BE ANNOTATED BY MORE SENSE TAGS. 
Url 
WordNet Sense Tag       
{# synset_id} 
Anchortext 1 
Anchortext 2 
ability, power                  
{105616246} 
computer SCIENCE 
FACULTY of engineering 
and physical sciences 
bailiwick, discipline, field, 
field of study, study, 
subject, subject area, 
subject field             
{105996646} 
computer SCIENCE 
faculty of 
ENGINEERING and 
physical sciences 
http://www.eps.manchester.ac.uk 
body                                    
{107965085} 
physics and 
astronomy SCHOOL 
of 
FACULTY of engineering 
and physical sciences 
body                                    
{107965085} 
construction, structure         
{104341686} 
educational institution           
{108276342} 
languages linguistics 
and cultures 
SCHOOL of 
UNIVERSITY language 
centre 
building, edifice                    
{102913152} 
languages linguistics 
and cultures 
SCHOOL of 
university language 
CENTRE 
http://www.langcent.manchester.ac.uk 
cognitive content, content, 
mental object                   
{105809192} 
find an academic 
department or 
DISCIPLINE 
language CENTRE 
http://www.manchester.ac.uk/aboutus/jobs/research 
work                                    
{100575741} 
JOB opportunities 
RESEARCH jobs 
activity                                
{100407535} 
ART and museums in 
manchester 
SPORT 
activity                                
{100407535} 
diversion, recreation           
{100426928} 
nightlife and 
ENTERTAINMENT SPORT 
activity                                
{100407535} 
http://www.manchester.ac.uk/aboutus/manchester/sport 
diversion, recreation           
{100426928} 
NIGHTLIFE and 
entertainment 
SPORT 
artefact, artifact                     
{100021939} 
ART and museums in 
manchester 
university STRUCTURE 
body                                    
{107965085} 
GOVERNANCE 
UNIVERSITY structure 
construction, structure         
{104341686} 
UNIVERSITY 
structure 
university STRUCTURE 
construction, structure         
{104341686} 
university 
STRUCTURE 
UNIVERSITY structure 
construction, structure         
{104341686} 
SUPPORT services 
UNIVERSITY structure 
construction, structure         
{104341686} 
SUPPORT services 
university STRUCTURE 
http://www.manchester.ac.uk/aboutus/structure 
construction, structure         
{104341686} 
chancellors of the 
UNIVERSITY 
university STRUCTURE 
180
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
TABLE IV.  
SUBSUMPTION HIERARCHY FOR NEIGHBOUR SENSES EXTRACTED FROM TABLE III. SENSE NEIGHBOURS ARE REPORTED IN THE LEFT COLUMN, 
WHILE THE RIGHT COLUMN ACCOUNTS FOR FIRST OR SECOND LEVEL COMMON SUBSUMER. SOME SENSE NEIGHBOURS SHARE THE SAME SYNSET SUBSUMER 
BOTH AT FIRST LEVEL AND SECOND LEVEL SYNSET DISTANCE. 
WordNet Synset Common Subsumer 
Neighbour WordNet Sense 
First Level Distance 
Second Level Distance 
‘Science’, {105636887} 
‘Faculty’, {105650329} 
{105616246} 
 
‘Science’, {105999797} 
‘Engineering’, {106125041} 
{105996646} 
 
‘School’, {108275185} 
‘Faculty’, {108287586} 
{107965085} 
 
‘School’, {108275185} 
‘University’, {108286163} 
{107965085} 
 
‘School’, {102913152} 
{104146050} 
‘University’, {103297735} 
{104511002} 
{104341686} 
‘School’, {108277393} 
‘University’, {108286569} 
{108276342} 
 
‘School’, {104146050} 
‘Centre’, {102993546} 
{102913152} 
 
‘Discipline’, {105999266} 
{105996646} 
{105809192} 
‘Centre’, {105921123} 
{105809192} 
 
‘Job’, {100576717} 
{100575741} 
 
‘Research’, {100633864} 
{100636921} 
{100575741} 
‘Art’, {100908492} 
{100933420} 
‘Sport’, {100582388} 
{100433216} 
{100407535} 
‘Entertainment’, {100426928} 
{100429048} 
‘Sport’, {100582388} 
{100433216} 
{100407535} 
‘Entertainment’, {100429048} 
‘Sport’, {100523513} 
{100426928} 
 
‘Nightlife’, {100426928} 
{100582388} 
‘Sport’, {100431292} 
{100433216} 
{100407535} 
‘Nightlife’, {100431292} 
‘Sport’, {100523513} 
{100426928} 
 
‘Art’, {103129123} 
{102743547} 
{100021939} 
‘Structure’, {104341686} 
{100021939} 
 
‘Governance’, {108164585} 
‘University’, {108286163} 
{107965085} 
 
‘University’, {103297735} 
{104511002} 
{104341686} 
‘Structure’, {104341686} 
{104341686} 
 
‘Support’, {104361095} 
{104360501} 
‘University’, {103297735} 
{104511002} 
{104341686} 
‘Support’, {104361095} 
{104360501} 
{104341686} 
‘Structure’, {104341686} 
{104341686} 
 
181
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
V. Di Lecce, M. Calabrese, and D. Soldo, “Semantic Lexicon-
Based Multi-Agent System for Web Resources Markup”, In 
Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference on Internet and 
Web Applications and Services (ICIW 2009), May 2009, Mestre, 
Italy (ISBN: 978-0-7695-3613-2), pp. 143-148. 
[2] 
C. Fellbaum, WordNet: An electronic lexical database, MIT Press, 
Cambridge, (1998). 
[3] 
C. D. Manning, P. Raghavan, and H. Schütze, Introduction to 
Information Retrieval, Cambridge University Press, (2008). 
[4] 
H. P. Luhn, “The automatic creation of literature abstracts”, IBM 
Journal of Research and Development, Vol. 2, No. 2, pp. 159-165, 
(1958). 
[5] 
D. T. Tran, S. Bloehdorn, P. Cimiano, and P. Haase, “Expressive 
Resource Descriptions for Ontology-Based Information Retrieval”, 
In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on the Theory 
of Information Retrieval (ICTIR’07), October 2007, Budapest, 
Hungary, pp. 55-68. 
[6] 
S. Brin and L. Page, “The Anatomy of a Large-Scale Hypertextual 
Web Search Engine”, In Proceedings of the Seventh Internation 
World-Wide Web Conference (WWW 1998), April 1998, 
Brisbane, Australia, Computer Networks and ISDN Systems, Vol. 
30, No. 1-7, pp. 107-117. 
[7] 
A. Esuli and F. Sebastiani, “Page Ranking WordNet Synsets: An 
application to Opinion Mining”, In Proceedings of the 45th Annual 
Meeting of the Association of Computational Linguistics, June 
2007, Prague, Czech Republic, pp. 424-431. 
[8] 
S. Bloehdorn, M. Grobelnik, P. Mika, and D. T. Tran (editors), 
Preface to the Proceedings of the International Workshop on 
Semantic Search, located at the 5th European Semamntic Web 
Conference (ESWC 2008), June 2008, Tenerife, Spain. 
[9] 
D. Tumer, M. A. Shah, and Y. Bitirim, “An Empirical Evaluation 
on Semantic Search Performance of Keyword-Based and Semantic 
Search Engines: Google, Yahoo, Msn and Hakia”, In Proceedings 
of the Fourth International Conference on Internet Monitoring and 
Protection (ICIMP 2009), May 2009, Mestre, Italy (ISBN: 978-1-
4244-3839-6) , pp. 51-55. 
[10] S. Deerwester, S. T. Dumais, G. W. Furnas, T. K. Landauer, and R. 
Harshman, “Indexing by Latent Semantic Analysis”, Journal of the 
American Society for Information Science, Vol. 41, No. 6, pp. 
391-407, (1990). 
[11] A. Graesser, A. Karnavat, V. Pomeroy, and K. Wiemer-Hasting, 
“Latent Semantic Analysis Captures Causal, Goal-oriented, and 
Taxonomic Structures”, In Proceedings of the Twenty-Second 
Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society (CogSci 
2000), August 2000, Philadelphia, PA, USA, pp. 184–189. 
[12] R. Khare and A. Rifkin, “XML: a door to automated Web 
applications”, in Internet Computing, IEEE, Vol. 1,  Issue 4, 
July/August 1997, pp. 78-87. 
[13] M. Vargas-Vera, et al., “MnM: Ontology-driven tool for semantic 
markup”, In Handschuh, Mr Siegfried and Collier, Mr Niegel and 
Dieng, Miss Rose and Staab, Dr Steffen, Eds., Proceedings of the 
Workshop on Semantic Authoring, Annotation & Knowledge 
Markup (SAAKM 2002), Lyon, France, July 2002, pp. 43-47. 
[14] K. Siorpaes and M. Hepp, “MyOntology: the marriage of ontology 
engineering and collective intelligence”, Proceedings of the 
Workshop on Bridging the Gap between Semantic Web and Web 
2.0 (SemNet 2007), at the 4th European Semantic Web Conference 
(ESWC 2007), Innsbruck, Austria, June 2007, pp. 127-138. 
[15] S. Luke, L. Specter, and D. Rager, “Ontology-based knowledge 
discovery on the World Wide Web”, In A. Franz & H. Kitano 
(Eds.), Working Notes of the Workshop on Internet-Based 
Information Systems at the 13th National Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence (AAAI96), AAAI Press, Portland, Oregon, August 
1996, pp. 96-102. 
[16] G. Antoniou and F. van Harmelen, “Web Ontology Language: 
OWL”, in S. Staab and R. Studer, Handbook on Ontologies in 
Information Systems, Springer-Verlag, pp. 76-92, (2003). 
[17] M. Diouf, K. Musumbu, and S. Maabout,  “Methodological aspects 
of semantics enrichment in model driven”, In Proceedings of the 
Third International Conference on Internet and Web Applications 
and Services, 2008 (ICIW '08), Athens, Greece, June 2008, pp. 
205-210. 
[18] R. Abbasi, S. Staab, and P. Cimiano, “Organizing resources on 
tagging systems using T-ORG”, In Proceedings of the Workshop 
on Bridging the Gap between Semantic Web and Web 2.0 (SemNet 
2007), at the 4th European Semantic Web Conference (ESWC 
2007), Innsbruck, Austria, June 2007, pp 97-110. 
[19] C. Lange, “Towards scientific collaboration in a semantic wiki”, In 
Proceedings of the Workshop on Bridging the Gap between 
Semantic Web and Web 2.0 (SemNet 2007), at the 4th European 
Semantic Web Conference (ESWC 2007), Innsbruck, Austria, June 
2007, pp. 119-126. 
[20] J. Brank, D. Mladenic, and M. Grobelnik, “Gold standard based 
ontology evaluation using instance assignment”, In Proceedings of 
the 4th Workshop on Evaluating Ontologies for the Web 
(EON2006), May 2006, Edinburg, Scotland.  
[21] K. Dellschaft and S. Staab, “On how to perform a gold standard 
based evaluation of ontology learning”, Proceedings of the 5th 
International Semantic Web Conference, (ISWC 2006) , November 
2006, Athens, GA, USA, pp. 173-190. 
[22] S. Farrar and D. T. Langendoen, “A linguistic ontology for the 
semantic Web”, GLOT International Vol. 7, No. 3, March 2003, 
pp. 97-100. 
[23] E. Zavitsanos, G. Paliouras, and G. A. Vouros, “A Distributional 
Approach to Evaluating Ontology Learning Methods Using a Gold 
Standard”, 3rd Workshop on Ontology Learning and Population 
(OLP3), at the 18th European Conference on Artificial Intelligence 
(ECAI 2008), July, 2008, Patras, Greece. 
[24] V. Di Lecce and M. Calabrese, “Taxonomies and ontologies in 
Web semantic applications: the new emerging semantic lexicon-
based model”, Proceedings of  the IEEE International Conference 
on Intelligent Agents, Web Technologies and Internet Commerce 
(IAWTIC’08), December 2008, Vienna, Austria, (ISBN: 978-0-
7695-3514-2), pp. 277-283. 
[25] V. Di Lecce, M. Calabrese, and D. Soldo, “A Semantic Lexicon-
based Approach for Sense Disambiguation and Its WWW 
Application”, International Conference on Intelligent Computing 
(ICIC 2009), September 2009, Ulsan, Korea, pp. 468-477. 
[26] R. Navigli and P. Velardi, “Structural Semantic Interconnections: 
A Knowledge-Based Approach to Word Sense Disambiguation”, 
In IEEE Transactions on Patter Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 
Vol. 27, No. 7, July 2005, pp. 1075-1086. 
[27] R. Basili, et al., “Knowledge-Based Multilingual Document 
Analysis”, Proceedings of the International Conference On 
Computational Linguistics (COLING 2002) on SEMANET: 
building and using semantic networks - Volume 11, August 2002, 
Taipei, Taiwan,  pp. 1-7. 
[28] D. Inkpen, “Building A Lexical Knowledge-Base of Near-
Synonym Differences”, In Proceedings of the Workshop on 
WordNet and Other Lexical Resources: Applications, Extensions 
and Customizations (NAACL 2001), June 2001, Pittsburgh, PA, 
USA, pp. 47-52. 
[29] J.J. Jiang and D.W. Conrath, “Semantic Similarity Based on 
Corpus Statistics and Lexical Taxonomy”, In Proceedings of the 
International 
Conference 
on 
Research 
in 
Computational 
Linguistics (ROCLING X), September 1997, Taipei, Taiwan, pp. 
19-33. 
[30] A. Gangemi,  N. Guarino,  A. Oltramari, and  R. Oltramari, 
“Conceptual Analysis of Lexical Taxonomies: The Case of 
WordNet Top-Level” In Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Formal Ontology in Information Systems (FOIS-
2001), October 2001, Ogunquit, Maine, USA, pp. 285-296. 
182
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
[31] G. Miller, “WordNet: a lexical database for English.”, 
Communications of the ACM, Volume 38, Issue 11 , pp.39-41 
(1995). 
[32] N. Ordan and S. Wintner, “Representing Natural Gender in 
Multilingual Databases”, International Journal of Lexicography, 
Vol. 18, No. 3, pp. 357-370 (2005). 
[33] J. Kegl, “Machine-readable dictionaries and education.” Walker, 
Donald E., Antonio Zampolli and Nicoletta Calzolari, eds., 
Automating the Lexicon: Research and Practice in a Multilingual 
Environment, Oxford University Press, New York, NY, USA, pp. 
249 – 284 (1995). 
[34] Y. Hayashi and T. Ishida, “A Dictionary Model for Unifying 
Machine Readable Dictionaries and Computational Concept 
Lexicons”, In Proceedings of the fifth international conference on 
Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2006), May 2006, 
Genoa, Italy, pp.1-6. 
[35] V. Snasel, P. Moravec, and J. Pokorny, “WordNet Ontology Based 
Model for Web Retrieval”, Proc. Of International Workshop on 
Challenges in Web Information Retrieval and Integration, (WIRI 
‘05), April 2005, Tokyo, Japan, pp. 220-225. 
[36] E. Nichols, F. Bond, and D. Flickinger, “Robust ontology 
acquisition from machine-readable dictionaries”, In Proceedings of 
the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence 
(IJCAI-2005), August 2005, Edinburgh, Scotland, pp. 1111–1116. 
[37] T. Qian, B. Van Durme, and L. Schubert, “Building a Semantic 
Lexicon of English Nouns via Bootstrapping”, In Proceedings of 
the NAACL HLT Student Research Workshop and Doctoral 
Consortium, June 2009, Boulder, CO, USA, pp. 37–42. 
[38] G. L. Kowalski and M. T. Maybury, “Information Storage and 
Retrieval Systems. Theory and Implementation”, Springer, The 
Information Retrieval Series , Vol. 8, 2nd ed., (2000). 
[39] B. Swen, “Sense Matrix Model and Discrete Cosine Transform”, 
In Proceedings of the first Asia Information Retrieval Symposium 
(AIRS 2004), October 2004, Beijing, China, LNCS 3411, 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 202-214. 
[40] N. Ruimy, P. Bouillon, and B. Cartoni, “Inferring a Semantically 
Annotated Generative French Lexicon from an Italian Lexical 
Resource”, in Bouillon and Kanzaki (eds), Proceedings of the 
Third International Workshop on Generative Approaches to the 
Lexicon, May 2005, Geneva, Switzerland, pp. 27-35. 
[41] B. Magnini, C. Strapparava, F. Ciravegna, and E. Pianta, A Project 
for the Construction of an Italian Lexical Knowledge Base in the 
Framework of WordNet, IRST Technical Report #9406-15, (1994). 
[42]  N. L. Komarovaa and M. A. Nowak, “The Evolutionary Dynamics 
of the Lexical Matrix”, Bulletin of Mathematical Biology, Vol. 63, 
No. 3, May 2001, pp. 451-485, Springer. 
[43] A. Maedche and S. Staab, “Measuring similarity between 
ontologies”, In Proceedings of the 13th International Conference 
on Knowledge Engineering and Knowledge Management. 
Ontologies and the Semantic Web (EKAW ‘02), October 2002, 
Siguenza, Spain, pp. 251-263. 
[44] J. Brank, M. Grobelnik, and D. Mladenić, “A survey of ontology 
evaluation techniques”, In Proceedings of the Conference on Data 
Mining and Data Warehouses (SiKDD 2005), at 7th International 
Multi-conference on Information Society (IS’05), October 2005, 
Ljubljana, Slovenia, pp. 166-169. 
[45] M. Wooldridge and N. R. Jennings, “Agent theories, architectures, 
and languages: a survey”, Intelligent Agents, Series Lecture Notes 
in Computer Science, Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial 
Intelligence, Vol. 890, No. 8, Springer-Verlag, 1995, pp. 1-39. 
[46] A. Amato, V. Di Lecce, C. Pasquale, and V. Piuri, “Web agents in 
an environmental monitoring system”, Proceedings of the 
International Symposium on Computational Intelligence for 
Measurement Systems and Applications (CIMSA 2005), July 
2005, Taormina, Italy, pp. 262-265. 
[47] V. Di Lecce, M. Calabrese, and D. Soldo, “Fingerprinting Lexical 
Contexts over the Web”, Journal of Universal Computer Science, 
vol. 15, no. 4 (2009), pp. 805-825. 
[48] M. Hildebrand, J. van Ossenbruggen, and L. Hardman, “An 
analysis of search-based user interaction on the semantic Web”, 
Technical report. Information Systems. Centrum voor Wiskunde en 
Informatica (NL) (2007). 
[49] M. Hildebrand, J. van Ossenbruggen and L. Hardman. “An 
Analysis of Search-based User Interaction on the Semantic Web”. 
Hildebrand, REPORT INS-E0706 MAY 2007. Centrum voor 
Wiskundeen Informatica Information Systems. 
[50] S. Bloehdorn, M. Grobelnik, P. Mika, T. T. Duc, Preface of 
SemSearch 2008, CEUR Workshop Proceedings, online at CEUR-
WS.org/Vol-334/ 
[51] F. Giunchiglia, U. Kharkevich, I. Zaihrayeu , “Concept Search: 
Semantics Enabled Syntactic Search”, SemSearch 2008, CEUR 
Workshop Proceedings, Vol-334, pp.109-123. 
[52] R. Navigli, “Word Sense Disambiguation: a Survey”. ACM 
Computing Surveys, 41(2), ACM Press, 2009, pp. 1-69. 
 
 
183
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 3 no 1 & 2, year 2010, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2010, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

