A Reference Model for Improving an
Inter-Organizational IT Management Tool
Mark Yampolskiy
Vanderbilt University
1025 16th Ave S, Nashville
TN 37212, USA
Email: myy@isis.vanderbilt.edu
Silvia Knittl
msg systems ag
Robert-Bürkle-Straße 1
85737 Ismaning/München, Germany
Email: silvia.knittl@msg-systems.com
Feng Liu
Leibniz Supercomputing Centre (LRZ)
Boltzmannstraße 1
85748 Garching, Germany
Email: liu@lrz.de
Abstract—In recent years, the number of collaborations be-
tween IT service providers beyond national borders has been
increasing tremendously. From the organizational point of view,
all participants of such collaboration are independent domains.
The participation of organizations in such collaborations is
motivated by different factors. These factors include, but are
not limited to, specialization on different technical domains, cost-
optimization through usage of shared infrastructure and services,
and regulation policies imposed by national laws. The IT service
provisioning is always fostered by IT service management. In
order to enable the collaborative service provisioning, the IT ser-
vice management should be able to operate across organizational
borders, including coordination of intra-domain activities. The
capability to provide a holistic view of service infrastructures is
one of the key factors that contribute to the success of an inter-
domain collaboration. As a consequence, relevant information
and events should be shared among the involved domains. In
this paper, we present the use case driven tool I-SHARe as well
as the theoretical framework inter-organizational (io) CMDB,
both focused on the information sharing among collaborating
organizations. The results of the I-SHARe pilot deployment in
the pan-European collaboration Géant proves the necessity of
such tools. Meanwhile, the evaluation of I-SHARe against re-
quirements elaborated in the ioCMDB reference model identiﬁes
the tool’s signiﬁcant optimization and improvement potential.
Keywords - IT Management, IT Service Provider Collabora-
tions, CMDB, e-Infrastructures
I. INTRODUCTION
In our previously published work [1] we discussed the
necessity of developing an inter-organizational information
exchange system using the Géant project as an example.
Géant is a pan-European collaboration of over 30 national
grade network providers, also known as National Research
and Educational Networks (NRENs). Under this collaboration,
NRENs provide the network infrastructures for international
research projects such as the world’s largest particle physics
project, the Large Hadron Collider (LHC), located at CERN,
or Grid collaborations such as Enabling Grids for E-sciencE
(EGEE). The Géant collaboration offers networking services
ranging from conventional IP connectivity with the best-effort
connection quality up to dedicated optical End-to-End Links
(E2E Links), which are provisioned to deal with data deluge
that needs to be transported over networks.
Establishment of dedicated E2E Links per user requests
often involves activities including planning, procurement, in-
LRZ
TUM
LMU
NREN
GEANT
PRACE
CINECA
DFN
local, regional
national
international 
Scope
EU
Germany
Munich Hybrid Cloud
NREN
Italy
SARA
similar 
set up
( … )
NREN
Netherlands 
similar 
set up
( … )
DORII
( … )
D-Grid
Service 
dependencies
Fig. 1.
Organizational scope of e-Infrastructure projects
stallation and conﬁguration of the required network devices. In
order to avoid deadlocks in such a rather complex process and
guarantee the compatibility of involved devices, a tool support
for the information sharing becomes a crucial inﬂuencing
factor for a successful provisioning process. I-SHARe (Infor-
mation Sharing across Heterogeneous Administrative Regions)
is speciﬁcally designed and implemented to fulﬁll this purpose.
As a successor to our previous work, in this paper we not
only present the in-depth knowledge about I-SHARe, we also
intend to provide a retrospective view and empirical experi-
ences gained after its pilot operation. Most importantly, we
systematically identify improvement potentials of the current
version of I-SHARe for the future development. These could
be regarded as improvements that are complementary to the
user requests we received. The applied analytical methodology
is based on the well-established design science [2]. Aligned
with this method we introduce our problem ﬁeld based on
the actual observations of the tool aspects in the Géant
case, for which I-SHARe is designed and implemented for
a better support of IT service management. Although our
discussion is conducted based on the Géant scenario, our
ﬁndings are not restricted to this special use case. We see
the possibility to reuse our results in other tools aiming to
support inter-organizational IT service management (ioITSM)
in collaborations. Potential application examples for further
e-Infrastructure related projects are illustrated in Figure 1.
As shown in the ﬁgure, the institutional scope of the listed
projects is divided into regional, national and international
34
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

levels. The arrows indicate dependencies both within (e.g.,
NREN to NREN) and between the layers (e.g., Géant to
DFN to LRZ). The Leibniz Supercomputing Centre (LRZ)
for example is involved in e-Infrastructure projects on every
level, like the Munich Hybrid Cloud environment on the local
level with participation of the Munich universities (LMU,
TUM), Grid projects (D-Grid) on the national or the Géant
and PRACE project on the international level (see also [3][4]).
In other countries similar institutional setups can be found.
These listed projects have been previously strictly focused
on operational aspects. With ever-increasing number of user
base and scope, ioITSM issues become more compelling.
Thus, a professionally operated IT service management with
appropriate tool support is needed more than ever.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: after giving a
rather detailed discussion on a case study based on the Géant
project in Section II, we outline our tool concept to assist
ioITSM in Section III. This concept is mainly based on the
results described in [5] and can be used as a reference model
to either build a new tool from scratch or to evaluate existing
tools according to their possible usage as an ioCMDB. We then
discuss the latter aspect in Section IV. Our discussion mainly
concentrates on a systematic analysis of an inter-organizational
management approach developed in the Géant project. A brief
survey on the related work is provided in Section V. We
conclude this paper with a perspective for the future work
in Section VI.
II. CASE STUDY: I-SHARE IN GÉANT
In this section we ﬁrst outline the challenges by establishing
and operating Géant network service E2E Links. Then we
present an information sharing tool called I-SHARe, which
is developed in the Géant project to support and coordi-
nate manual handling processes of multi-domain E2E Links.
We conclude this section with a discussion of experiences
gained during the pilot operation with I-SHARe and our
further development plan. The discussion provides the basis
for the understanding of the challenges faced by the inter-
organizational information sharing tools.
A. Géant Service E2E Links
The purpose of Géant is to interconnect NRENs and
therefore to foster international research projects, in which
participating organizations are connected through different
NRENs. The portfolio of Géant includes various services
among others conventional IP connections. However, such
services cannot always fulﬁll all the challenging requirements
of modern research collaborations. One of the most prominent
examples of such a challenge is the Large Hadron Collider
(LHC) project, which produces over 15 petabytes of raw
experimental data per year [6] and related Worldwide LHC
Computing Grid (WLCG) [7] built with the purpose of data
processing and analyzing for the LHC experiment.
For a dependable and robust operation, such projects often
rely on network connections with rigorous quality assurance.
Realizing high-quality high-bandwidth connections in general
purpose IP networks is a challenging task, many reasons
can deteriorate network quality, for example communication
ﬂows can interfere with each other and lead to an inferior
connection quality. In order to cope with user’s challenging
demands, a novel End-to-End (E2E) Link service has been
introduced in Géant. E2E Links are dedicated optical point-
to-point connections realized at ISO/OSI layers 1 and 2, with
connection segments provided by one or more NRENs [8].
An E2E Link across multiple domains differentiates from its
single domain counterpart in its quality requirements, variety
on the participating networking technologies and geographical
dimensions. E2E Links are multi-domain backbone connec-
tions, in which – in opposite to classical backbones – multiple
network providers are involved and heterogeneous network
technologies can be used. The E2E Link structure is presented
in Figure 2 in principle.
Domain 1
Domain 2
Domain 3
(native Ethernet)
(Ethernet 
over SDH)
(Ethernet over MPLS)
Segment 1: 
IEEE 802.1Q VLAN
Segment 2: 
SDH path (using GFP-F)
Segment 2: 
MPLS LSP
EndPoint A
EndPoint B
E2E Link A-B
Fig. 2.
Typical E2E Link Structure [9]
A main feature of a multi-domain E2E Link service is that
a new connection can be requested and ordered independently
from the actual availability status of required infrastructures.
If a new infrastructure is needed to sustain the customer’s
request, it can be procured, installed, and conﬁgured according
to the corresponding requirements of the new E2E Link.
Consequently, all route planning procedures can only be done
manually and require intensive interactions and task trackings
between the involved NRENs.
Empirical experiences gained during the ﬁrst years of the
E2E Link service has revealed that exchanging and main-
taining connectivity information determine the time efﬁciency
of planning and installation of a particular E2E Link across
domains. Information exchange via e-mail and planning via
Excel sheets has proven to be error prone with a high proba-
bility of information losses or missing events, e.g., the delivery
of the procured infrastructure by neighboring NRENs. This
causes a high ﬂuctuation on the time needed to plan and install
new links. In order to improve this situation, a tool supporting
the information exchange among participating NRENs was
introduced for the E2E Links service.
B. Sharing Information with I-SHARe
The design and development of the I-SHARe tool has been
performed by an international team of researchers working for
different NRENs. I-SHARe covers information exchange for
35
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

a complete life cycle of an E2E Link service instance, from
its planning up to the decommissioning of the link.
Handling of single-domain and multi-domain information is
clearly distinguished in I-SHARe at system architecture level
(see Figure 3). Information such as operational groups and
group members, their responsibility areas and contact data
are handled in the domain part or in a NREN’s domestic
management tool. In both cases the single-domain information
is propagated to I-SHARe via the I-SHARe Domain Interface.
I-SHARe Central Server stores the copy of the provided
information, so that it can be incorporated in the supported
processes.
Fig. 3.
System architecture of I-SHARe [10]
Multi-domain information like the route of an E2E Link
through NRENs, interfaces of the adjacent connection parts
provided by neighboring NRENs, and states of various oper-
ations are stored directly in the I-SHARe Central Server. This
information can be accessed and edited via a web-based GUI.
All information stored in I-SHARe Central Server can be
accessed from other applications through the I-SHARe Multi-
Domain Management Interface. This interface is designated
to facilitate the integration of I-SHARe with other tools, e.g.,
with other workﬂow management systems or analysis tools, so
that relevant information regarding network connectivity can
be reused and shared among different tools.
I-SHARe is designed to support the multi-domain manual
management processes for a whole life cycle of E2E Links.
According to speciﬁcations of the E2E Links service, one has
to distinguish between four phases: (i) Ordering of a new E2E
Link, (ii) Setting up of the ordered E2E Link, (iii) Operation
of E2E Links in-service, and (iv) Decommissioning of no
longer needed E2E Links. E2E Links in different phases can
be accessed through different views (see top-level tabs in the
GUI in Figure 4) of the I-SHARe Central Server.
Views on different phases of an E2E Link must be dis-
tinguished as the tasks in the corresponding phases require
different knowledge, skills and competences, which are gener-
ally provided by different teams. Furthermore, the information
Fig. 4.
I-SHARe’s list of ordered links [11]
Fig. 5.
Install and conﬁgure the network infrastructure [11]
needed in various phases are logically arranged in a sequential
manner and overlap only partially. Therefore every view
contains the list of E2E Links in the particular phase as well
as set of status check boxes speciﬁc for the particular phase.
In the detailed view of a single E2E Link, only actions that
are speciﬁc for the particular phase can be performed. For
instance, during the ordering phase the E2E Link route through
NRENs as well as interconnection points between NRENs (so
called Demarcation Points, DPs) can be speciﬁed. During the
installation phase this information can be reﬁned with further
details. For example the progress on – or difﬁculties of –
36
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

installation can be speciﬁed for every single interface (see
Figure 5).
One of the most important advantages of I-SHARe is
the possibility to coordinate efforts between NRENs. As all
NRENs are independent organizations and often use hardware
from different vendors and/or prefer different network tech-
nology, the compatibility of interconnected interfaces becomes
one of the most critical factors.
Even if I-SHARe is designed as an information exchange
rather than a workﬂow tool, however, some operation logic
restrictions are already integrated. For instance, the button
for declaring an E2E Link operational becomes enabled only
after checkboxes of all involved interfaces are set to the state
indicating that the setup is completed.
C. I-SHARe: Empirical Experiences and Future Plans
A detailed description of I-SHARe version 1.0 can be found
in [1][10]. After the initial release in 2010, a user survery has
been conducted among seleted NRENs during the pilot phase
of operation. Feedbacks obtained from participating NRENs
show a high acceptance of I-SHARe for its functionalities and
usabilities. However, the survey also reveals several deﬁcien-
cies that the users wish to be improved in the next version
[12].
Improvements
not needed
Workflow
support
Tool Integration
Other
improvements
0% 
50% 
75% 
75% 
Fig. 6.
Survey result on user requested improvements [12]
Among the requested I-SHARe improvements workﬂow
support and tool integration are weighted as the most important
feature (see Figure 6). As I-SHARe is a supporting tool, it
should be ﬂexible enough to sustain established workﬂows in
the project. It also implies that the tool should be adaptive to
changing workﬂows, which is a common case as shown by
empirical experiences. For instance, during the time elapsed
from the requirements analysis until the deployment of the tool
in its pilot phase, the role model used in manual workﬂows
has been changed. This change has introduced the necessity
to change the role model implemented in I-SHARe.
Tool integration is a further critical issue that requires
careful consideration. As I-SHARe supports manual processes,
it should prevent users from the daunting tasks of re-entering
same data in different tools. A technical solution for this prob-
lem is an extended communication interface. This interface
should allow external tools to communicate with I-SHARe
V2.0 in order to access existing or publish new data. For
instance, it is planned that the E2E Link monitoring software
E2Emon [13] will access the information about physical links
from I-SHARe. In contrast, in the future it should be also
possible to propagate the information about planned E2E
Link segment maintenance from NREN-internal tools to the
I-SHARe so that this information can be seen and considered
in the multi-domain planning.
The pilot survey has also disclosed the necessity for sev-
eral new features that were not identiﬁed during the initial
requirements analysis process. For instance, in I-SHARe V2.0
a further communication capability should be implemented,
so that stakeholders of a particular links can be automatically
informed about the current status via e-mail notiﬁcation in
cases of network anomalies. This feature allowss I-SHARe to
provide assistance to the manual management processes even
if the network operators are not necessarily logged into the
tool.
III. IOCMDB REFERENCE MODEL
Motivated by the aformentioned use case, there is a com-
pelling need for a tool support of ioITSM. I-SHARe is
designed and developed to address such needs. In order
to systematically identify and formally derive improvement
potentials of I-SHARe, in this section we apply a reference
model of ioCMDB based on the concept discussed in
[5].
This concept is fully in alignment to de-facto standards of
ITSM, such as IT Infrastructure Library (ITIL, see: [14] and
Section V). As suggested by ITIL, a Conﬁguration Man-
agement Database (CMDB) acts as an information nexus to
provide relevant management information to all disciplines of
ITSM. The entities stored in a CMDB are Conﬁguration Items
(CI), which represent information about software, hardware,
services, related documents and their corresponding interrela-
tions. A readily available information repository as such will
greatly improve the efﬁciency of IT management. Incident
management, for example, uses speciﬁcations of CI priorities
for the controlling of waiting queues, Change management is
able to anticipate the impact of planed changes on potentially
affected CI by having an overview of the CI relationships, and
Availability management is able to identify the occurrence of
single points of failures [15].
Whereas the conventional CMDB concept is well-studied
and mature for IT services in a single organization, a compar-
ative approach need to be elaborated and advised to take inter-
organizational aspect into consideration. Our efforts toward
this kind of approach is called inter-organizational CMDB
(ioCMDB).
The applied research method is based on the principles
of design science
[2], which is a formal approach to build
artifacts. Our claim is to create a reference model of an
ioCMDB. As a reference model possesses both descriptive as
well as prescriptive characteristics, the requirements identiﬁed
within the design process in
[5] will be used as a basis
for the evaluation of I-SHARe. This evaluation will show
whether I-SHARe is an appropriate tool to serve the purpose of
37
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Cooperation
inter-organizational ITSM (ioITSM)
Organization
ITSM
ITSM-Tools
CMDB
MDR
ITSM-Processes
...
Incident-
Managment
Service-
Request-
Managment
Business 
Processes
ioITSM-
Tools
ioCMDB
Stakeholder
field of 
observation 
field of 
investigation 
Fig. 7.
Field of investigation and observation
information-sharing across the organizational boundaries. The
more elaborated discussion is presented in Section IV. Note
that, besides its critical role in building a new system complete
from scratch, a reference model also prevails in evaluating an
existing framework [16]. The initial step in our methodology
is to deﬁne a frame of reference, in which a relationship
between ioITSM and ITSM is intended to be established.
Figure 7 illustrates a view on the ﬁelds of investigation and
observation. As shown there, our investigation comprises all
elements relevant for the designing goal of ioCMDB. The
ﬁeld of observation contains all related topics, which inﬂuence
our investigation. Those include, e.g., relationships to other
tools, ITSM processes, business processes, organizational set
up, etc. The fundamental need for an ioCMDB is not limited
to the problems as we demonstrated in the Géant case, we
also observe the same problem area in similar structured IT
service provider collaborations [3][17]. For an ioCMDB, a
comprehensive list of requirements has been elaborated in
[5]. All these requirements are structured according to the
management architecture domains deﬁned in [18] into infor-
mation, organization, communication and functional model
related requirements. In this way, all derived requirements are
structured into manageable building blocks. A crucial input of
this analysis is a set of ioITSM processes observed from var-
ious case studies and investigations, e.g., inter-organizational
Fault or Change management [19][20].
In Section IV we demonstrate the usage of our ioCMDB
reference model as a basis for evaluating the I-SHARe tool.
IV. MAPPING BETWEEN IOCMDB REQUIREMENTS AND
I-SHARE
In our current work, we apply the elaborated ioCMDB
requirements on the actual I-SHARe implementation. We
summarize the results of the evaluation in a table form. For
conciseness, we show here merely the evaluation results for
a selected subset of the requirements. The results of the
evaluation are presented on the right side of the column named
"I-SHARe." Every evaluation entry consists of two ratings:
on the left side of an arrow, the evaluation of the current
implementation is presented; on the right side, the rating of I-
SHARe after implementing planned changes is presented (see
Section II-C for the description of planned changes). Thus, the
rating scheme in the last column of the tables can be read as
[actual rating] → [improved rating].
This comparison will also show, that not all potential aspects
of optimization have been identiﬁed within the internal Géant
evaluation itself. Therefore, the remaining gaps identiﬁed in
this paper can then be used by the Géant project management
as a foundation for the deﬁnition of a new I-SHARe develop-
ment road map.
A. Information model related requirements
An essential prerequisite of IT service management is to
have an overview of the entities being managed as well as their
dependencies. Such information is necessary for assessing,
e.g., the effects of future changes. These aspects are covered
within an information model (IM). The IM enables a logical
view on the IT infrastructure, even if this infrastructure is
stretched over multiple domains. In Table I the results of
the evaluation with respect to an IM of an ioCMDB are
listed. A description of the foundation of our information
modeling concept, which is based on established standards
in the Business-to-Business (B2B) environment is outlined in
[17].
Label
Requirement
I-SHARe
IM-1
Ability to model CIs
0 → +
IM-2
Ability to model Interrelationships
0 → +
IM-3
Ability to model dynamic information
0 → +
IM-4
Ability to model meta data
+ → +
IM-5
Ability of unique identiﬁcation
0 → 0
++ : fully covered, +: partly covered, 0: not covered at all
-: irrelevant for this Scenario
TABLE I
REQUIREMENTS CONCERNING INFORMATION MODEL
1) Evaluation of information model requirements: An im-
portant requirement an ioCMDB has to meet is its capability
to model different classes of CIs and different types of inter-
relationships between these CIs. The IM for planning E2E
network connection with quality assurance is shown in [21], in
which speciﬁc CIs and their inter-relationships are described,
e.g., Domain, LinkProperties or CompoundLink. In
the current I-SHARe implementation such kind of entity in-
formation is predeﬁned and hard coded. Thus, a corresponding
Conﬁguration Manager is not capable of deﬁning new or alter
existent CI types. Consequently if new types are requested the
programmers have to extend them accordingly, build a new
release of I-SHARe and make a roll out of this release in all
participating organizations.
Another requirement concerning IM is the possibility to
apply meta data, i.e., the data about the data. These can be
distinguished according to [22] in the following functional
areas:
• administrative, like data about the source information;
in our case it would be the service access point of the
38
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

connected domain speciﬁc CMDB or rather any other
Management Data Repository (MDR),
• descriptive, e.g., annotations by users,
• preservation, like data refreshing cycles,
• technical, as for example data related to how a system
functions like it’s software documentation,
• use, metadata related to the level and type of use of
information resources, like log ﬁles.
In the actual I-SHARe release, meta data used for further
description of extrinsic or intrinsic features of CIs like owner
or status lifecycle are hard coded and thus, evaluated to ’partly
applicable’ in Table I.
2) Identiﬁed improvements in information modeling: The
need for being ﬂexible in deﬁning dedicated CI classes has
been identiﬁed as an action item to be implemented in the
next release of I-SHARe. However, in contrast to our ioCMDB
requirement for having an explicit role model, i.e., for the role
of an inter-organizational Conﬁguration Manager, any person
is allowed to create CI types. As it is assumed presently that
the tool is operated in a environment of dedicated services, cur-
rently such CI types are only representing the type interface.
Thus, the evaluation remains on ’partly applicable’. According
to our concept, a more dynamic modeling means must be im-
plemented in I-SHARe to support various cross-organizational
scenarios and services. In the actual improvement plan, the
need for having meta data in place to improve the I-SHARe’s
operational capabilities is not recognized. This is the reason,
for which the rating will remain the same for the next planned
release cycle.
B. Organizational model related requirements
While IM addresses the modeling aspects of CIs and their
relations, the focus of an organizational model (OM) lays
on the governance structure. This is especially important
for our intended use cases of cross-organizational provider
collaborations. Thus, OM aspects have to be reﬂected in an
ioCMDB. The requirements for a mapping of this structure as
well as the adequate mapping of the user’s roles are met to a
high degree by the actual implementation of I-SHARe as can
be seen in Table II.
Label
Requirement
I-SHARe
OM-1
Mapping of the governance structure
+ → +
OM-2
Mapping of roles/users
+ → +
++: fully covered, +: partly covered, 0: not covered at all
-: irrelevant for this scenario
TABLE II
REQUIREMENTS CONCERNING ORGANIZATIONAL MODEL
1) Evaluation of organizational model requirements: The
governance structure within the actual I-SHARe release allows
mapping users to groups and groups to roles. These roles are
hard coded. Thus, this fact is rated as ’partly covered’. Due to
organizational changes in such environments the correspond-
ing governance structure might change as well. This aspect
has not yet been addressed within the project.
2) Identiﬁed improvements in organizational model: The
need for having roles in place for enabling a dedicated man-
agement of controlling issues has been identiﬁed also within
the project itself. The actual release planning in the I-SHARe
project is discussing the implementation of a transaction based
role model. This will allow a transaction and role based
logging, which again permits analyzing of log ﬁles. But here
again, the role model itself will remain hard coded, and
won’t be changeable on a ﬂexible base as suggested by our
requirement catalogue.
C. Communication model related requirements
The mechanism, how management information are ex-
changed between the ioCMDB and related local CMDBs are
subject of the communication model. In Table III the require-
ments concerning communication mechanism are shown.
1) Evaluation of communication model requirements: One
important issue is the channels the exchanged messages of
management information are taking. It is a requirement, that
such channels can be speciﬁed according to the corresponding
need. We will further describe the interaction characteristic in
more detail in future work. At the moment, this requirement
is not fulﬁlled completely by the actual I-SHARe release.
This leads to the fact, that I-SHARe cannot support ioITSM
processes efﬁciently. At present the requirement KM-2 for
having web based communication means is fully covered by
using e-mail and web services. Although, there is no way
to deﬁne the communication characteristics as requested by
requirement KM-4. Having a registry mechanism in place,
where new or changed members or roles can be registered
is of minor relevance for this scenario, since we are facing a
stable organizational structure and its changes is the matter of
long term planning.
Label
Requirement
I-SHARe
KM-1
registry
-
KM-2
web based communication
++
KM-3
deﬁne direction of communication
0 → ++
KM-4
deﬁne communication mechanism
0 → +
++: fully covered, +: partly covered, 0: not covered at all
-: irrelevant for this scenario
TABLE III
REQUIREMENTS CONCERNING COMMUNICATION MODEL
2) Identiﬁed improvements in communication modeling:
According to the actual I-SHARe release planning, it is
intended to send messages containing information about, e.g.,
state changes of inter-organizational relevant CI like the status
of an E2E Link within the order process via e-mail to all
participating members within Géant. The disadvantage of such
a mechanism is a potential information ﬂooding of all the
recipients instead of informing only the affected responsible
persons, resulting in rather ignoring such e-mails than reacting
consequently.
Due to the requirements identiﬁed in [5] it should be possi-
ble to deﬁne both the direction of the communication and the
mechanism, i.e., in case of state changes only the responsible
39
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

roles should be informed via appropriate mechanism, which
can be for example alerts or warning e-mails. The need
for deﬁning the communications directions, e.g., information
provided by a local partner, that is propagated to I-SHARe
and from there to relevant recipients in other organizations
has also been identiﬁed as an open issue in the project. Thus,
the introduction of roles should enable to support actions
of the I-SHARe Domain Part, where an interface allows for
the subscription of dedicated information with either push
or pull mechanism. The need for having such subscription
mechanism in place has also been recognized and is actually
under discussion.
D. Functional model related requirements
Table IV outlines functional requirements a tool has to
meet, if it is used as an ioCMDB. To assist ioITSM via an
appropriate tool, it has to cover the lifecycle issues both of
organizational as well as information related entities. Thus,
the manipulation of roles and CI, the support of state changes
of the cooperating partners, the possibility of adding, changing
or deleting CI are vital aspects. Further, the users of the tool
can have an easier insight at the management information, if
there is appropriate visualization means offered.
These functional requirements are evaluated below.
Label
Requirement
I-SHARe
FN-2-2
manipulation of roles
0 → 0
FN-2-3-0
manipulation of conﬁguration items
FN-2-3-1
maintenance of conﬁguration items
0 → ++
FN-2-5
visual representation of content
++
FN-2-6-1
data maintenance: transformation rules
0 → ++
FN-2-7
data maintenance: interfaces
+ → ++
++: fully covered, +: partly covered,
0: not covered at all -: irrelevant for this scenario
TABLE IV
REQUIREMENTS CONCERNING FUNCTIONAL MODEL
1) Evaluation of functional model requirements: The cur-
rent rating of the I-SHARe tool with respect to the functional
model necessities can be seen in the Table IV. Examples of the
I-SHARe information visualization are illustrated above (see
Figures 4 or 5). The maintenance of conﬁguration items itself,
like adding new CI and their interrelations are implemented
as quite complex procedures at the moment. Maintenance
processes for ﬁlling in ioCMDB contents automatically are
important in complex environments, since manual changes are
leading to higher error rates and are raising the possibility of
having not synchronized data pools. To update the contents in
I-SHARe, no automatic updating mechanism between other
tools like CMDBs from the participating members exist.
Almost all data have to be maintained by hand. A CI that has
been associated with a dedicated type of relationship can’t be
changed, once it has been introduced. In case, there would
be automatic updating procedures in place, such procedures
need to have a transformation mechanism in place resulting
from autonomously deﬁned data schemes of existent tools at
the members’ site. Such transformation rules are not covered
at all by the actual I-SHARe implementation. One additional
aspect is to identify the ownership of the data. This can be also
part of visualization aspects [23]. Other Interfaces, as the ones
for the e-mail based notiﬁcation mechanisms, are currently not
in place.
2) Identiﬁed improvements in functional model: The further
release planning of the I-SHARe tool is addressing the need
for having transformation rules in place. Then, an information
model will be deﬁned on a global level and all necessary
transformations have to be implemented at the level of the
member sites. This will change the future rating to ’fully
covered’. The need for having better interfaces in place has
been discovered. New releases will have interfaces, e.g., to
monitoring tools and thus, the rating will be raised to ’fully
covered’.
E. Nonfunctional requirements
Table V outlines an excerpt of non-functional requirements,
i.e., all requirements concerning the operation and usage of
the ioCMDB regarding the I-SHARe tool. A substantial need
is to have access control and audit mechanisms in place to
improve security issues, since the ioCMDB users are associ-
ated with the collaboration partners and acting in different
roles. We have proposed an access control solution based
on federated identity mechanism in [24]. Audit mechanism
facilitates inspections resulting from compliance or regulatory
requirements. By taking cultural considerations into account
as for example different language versions or other dedicated
cultural characteristics the user acceptance can be certainly
improved.
Label
Requirement
I-SHARe
NF-4-1
security: access control
+ → +
NF-4-2
security: audit mechanism
+ → ++
NF-7
cultural requirements
0 → 0
++: fully applicable, +: partly applicable,
0: nonexistent
TABLE V
NONFUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
1) Evaluation of nonfunctional requirements: The actual
state of access control in I-SHARe only allows authentication.
Authorization means are missing and therefore, a rating to
’partly applicable’ is justiﬁed. Since there is no authorization,
audit mechanisms are used instead to be able to afterwards
reconstruct performed transaction. Although Géant is an in-
ternational project, no country speciﬁc characteristics, like
different language or currency codes, have been introduced.
2) Identiﬁed improvements in nonfunctional modeling:
In the near future access control mechanisms and cultural
requirements are not planned for I-SHARe. Thus, the eval-
uation will remain on the same level. Cultural topics are
considered of minor importance because all participants are
expected to understand the English version of I-SHARe. The
audit mechanisms have been undertaken an additional review
process and will be improved both in structure as well as
usability.
40
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

iSHARE:
Service 
A
Service 
B
Service-specific
ioCMDB Functionality
general
ioCMDB Functionality
GEANT
Other 
eInfrastructure,
E.g. MHC, 
PRACE
Fig. 8.
As is portability of I-SHARe
iSHARE:
Service 
A
Service 
B
Service-specific
ioCMDB Functionality
general
ioCMDB Functionality
GEANT
Other 
eInfrastructure,
E.g. MHC, 
PRACE
Fig. 9.
To be portability of I-SHARe when adhering ioCMDB concept
F. Evaluation summary
In this section, we evaluated I-SHARe based on the re-
quirements established for an ioCMDB. Further, we have
considered the actual release planning of the I-SHARe. Despite
its success in the pilot operation phase, there is still room
for improvement observable for I-SHARe, as we showed and
discussed in great details in this section. Such improvements
will mainly affect scalability issues, as have been for exam-
ple identiﬁed within the information model needs of having
variable mechanisms of mapping new and changed types of
CIs and relationships. The lack of having such mechanisms
implemented leads to the fact that the actual I-SHARe is
supporting the management of only a single type of service at
the moment. Other ITSM related management processes have
to be implemented separately.
Our evaluation shows that even if there have already been
many desirable extensions identiﬁed in the Géant project,
there is still potential for further improvement. Such im-
provement potentials need to be discovered and approached
systematically. The actual usage spectrum of I-SHARe is
shown in Figure 8. I-SHARe has been designed to support
service and project speciﬁc purposes. Consequently, resulting
in poor means of portability to manage other services as
well and therefore, making it difﬁcult to use it a) for other
services respectively IT service management processes within
the Géant project and b) for other similar structured projects,
which have the same requirements. Indeed, there can be no
synergy effects found to reuse this platform for ITSM related
purposed within other e-Infrastructure projects as have been
illustrated above.
If the concepts created in [5] will be used for further ex-
tension of the I-SHARe tool, a tremendously better portability
can be established as can be seen in Figure 9. Consequently,
this platform can be used to support cross-organizational IT
Service management within other projects as well.
V. RELATED WORK
Having introduced the reference model for the ioCMDB
above, in this section, we now review some key researches,
including existing frameworks, methods and models, which
are relevant to our work.
Well-established frameworks exist in the realm of ITSM,
one of the prominent examples is the IT Infrastructure Library
(ITIL) [14]. In ITIL the concept of the Conﬁguration Manage-
ment Database (ITIL version 2) or Conﬁguration Management
System (ITIL version 3) has been introduced as an information
platform supporting all other ITSM disciplines. Nevertheless,
although there are some marginal descriptions concerning
outsourcing relationships, ITIL itself does not consider the
cross-institutional case in terms of collaborations between
IT service providers. Furthermore, even if a CMDB should
possess additional interfaces for tools from external suppliers,
no available proposal concerning the design of such interfaces
is currently known to us.
Other conﬁguration management researches verify neces-
sities of a new concept for an ioCMDB. The suggested
information models for building up an intra-organizational
CMDB are however not suitable for direct applications in real-
world usages. CMDB tools currently applied in large scale
intra-organizational environments do have – in the most cases
– a focus on the visualization of monitoring aspects. Issues
regarding global writing access to distribute data sources in a
federated environment have not yet been fully covered [25].
Network speciﬁc CMDB tools that are capable to integrate
data from different sources [26] are not directly applicable to
our use cases, due to its lacking of considerations on the inter-
organizational information models and functional requirements
as we have identiﬁed.
A concept of CMDB federation (CMDBf) is proposed
in [27]. The main focus of the suggested approach is on
the integration of tools of different vendors (Management
Data Repositories, MDR) into a single CMDB. To serve
that purpose, a set of web-services are speciﬁed to facilitate
data communication within a single organization. Concerning
our requirements on the communication model, the suggested
approach provides an useful reference and can be extended as a
viable building block for the inter-organizational scenario. The
extension should concentrate on implementing the CMDBf
interface for all connected tools. According to the analysis in
[28] the CMDBf will become a standard for heterogeneous
CMDB integration and federation by the year 2013. But
as it has been stated in [29] this standard only covers the
data exchange aspect without specifying data types and their
corresponding information models.
According to [30] the CMDBf is based on having a central
management CMDB in place, it does not cover use-cases in
cross-domain environments, e.g., in Cloud computing. Due to
the fact that an universal access to any CMDB cannot be pre-
sumed in real-world IT operations, the authors propose a cross-
organizational CMDB concept, in which a domain can expose
individual CI information as RESTful web services. These
resources can then be referred to and read by other domains
in the context of service management processes. Nevertheless,
this concept concentrates solely on communication related
issues. Aspects of inter-organizational information modeling
and a concept of authentication or authorization have not been
considered.
41
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

In [31][32] concepts of federated or distributed databases
are introduced. However, the design goal of ioCMDB is to
assist the inter-organizational ITSM (ioITSM) processes and
workﬂows. Despite its crucial role in ioCMDB, a distributed
or rather federated database cannot be directly applied as one
might expect it. Even if they share some similar characteristics
such as distributed locations, autonomy and heterogeneity,
however the access at database level to every connected
CMDB or MDR still cannot be always presumed. Contrary
to their approaches, dedicated interfaces between ioCMDB
and CMDB or MDR must be implemented in our proposed
solution. Instead of manipulating the contents of ioCMDB
at databases level, our approach suggests to perform such
alternations through speciﬁed functional areas, as we outline
in Section IV-D. In this way, an alignment between ioCMDB
contents and speciﬁcations of information models can be
ensured.
Finally, data warehouse technique
[33] has been applied
as a viable approach to support complex analytical processes.
Even though some commonalities can be identiﬁed between
data warehouse and our use cases, e.g., analysis in incident or
change management, however, data warehouse is optimized
for read-only access. Modifying data at the global level and
propagating such modiﬁcations to all connected participating
CMDBs, as required by our scenario, are not well-supported
by data warehouse.
VI. CONCLUSION
Recent proliferation of large scale IT-collaborations at a
global level require highly efﬁcient processes to cope with
intricate tasks of infrastructure management. Whereas best-
practice recommendations such as ITIL provide guidelines
for designing management processes within a single organi-
zational unit, more elaborations and research are needed to
investigate issues regarding the management across multiple
organizations. They not only differ in their geographical lo-
cations, they are also administratively independent entities,
which exaggerate the difﬁculty to design and deploy efﬁcient
management processes. In fact, the management of infras-
tructures across organizational boundaries has not yet been
fully understood and thoroughly investigated. To address this
research issue, in this paper we discuss one of the fundamental
elements that is designed to facilitate as well as to provide tool
support for inter-organizational ITSM processes - ioCMDB.
Our discussion is motivated by an inter-organizational IT
management scenario in the Géant project, which is a pan-
European collaboration on high-performance networks as the
e-Infrastructure to support international research cooperation
in areas such as high-energy physics. To provide sufﬁcient
capacity for communication of data deluge generated by
scientiﬁc experiments, dedicated E2E Links have to be provi-
sioned across different organizations in order to transport huge
amount of research data in a timely manner.
In this paper, we show the challenges of managing complete
life cycle of such E2E Links across various management
domains. To tackle such challenges, a management tool called
I-SHARe is designed and developed for Géant speciﬁcally.
The goal of I-SHARe is to provide a centralized repository of
management information of links throughout their life-cycle.
Any changes of a link, such as changes of routes, should
be reﬂected accordingly and information must be updated in
a timely manner. In our previous work, a holistic reference
model is derived with the intention to generate new artifacts
or evaluate an existing artifact. In this paper, however, we
concentrate on the evaluation of the I-SHARe in accordance to
the ioCMDB reference model. The ultimate goal of this work
are manifold: on one hand, the ioCMDB generated reference
model are applied as an auxiliary mean to identify the potential
improvement opportunities to make I-SHARe a better tool
for inter-organizational management; on the other hand, the
practical aspect of an ioCMDB approach is put under tests in
a real-world situation.
Through a careful evaluation and optimization, improve-
ment opportunities for the current version of I-SHARe are
identiﬁed consequently. As our future work, these achieved re-
sults will be reﬂected in the next version and will furthermore
inﬂuence our future design of I-SHARe. With considerations
of the identiﬁed improvement potentials, I-SHARe will grad-
ually evolve into a tool that could serve generic inter-domain
e-Infrastructure management purposes rather than being spe-
cially tailored for a set of rather limited use cases.
Acknowledgment The authors thank the members of the Munich
Network Management Team for valuable comments on previous
versions of this paper. The MNM-Team, directed by Prof. Dr. Heinz-
Gerd Hegering and Prof. Dr. Dieter Kranzlmüller, is a group of
researchers from the University of Munich, the Technische Universität
München, the German Federal Armed Forces University in Munich,
and the Leibniz Supercomputing Center of the Bavarian Academy
of Sciences. The web server of the MNM Team is located at
http://www.mnm-team.org/.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Yampolskiy, W. Fritz, W. Hommel, G. Vuagnin, and F. Galeazzi,
“Manual multi-domain routing for géant e2e links with the i-share tool,”
in INTERNET 2011, The Third International Conference on Evolving
Internet, 2011, pp. 98–103.
[2] A. R. Hevner, “The three cycle view of design science research,”
Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 87–92,
2007.
[3] S. Knittl and K. Beronov, “E-Infrastructure Projects from a Bavarian
Perspective: Potentials of Standardization,” in eChallenges 2011, Flo-
renz, Italy, 2011.
[4] “European Commision - ICT reaserch in FP7 - eInfrastructure,” avail-
able online at http://cordis.europa.eu/fp7/ict/e-infrastructure/projects_en.
html, access on 2011-09-12.
[5] S.
Knittl,
“Werkzeugunterstützung
für
interorganisationales
IT-
Servicemanagement – ein Referenzmodell für die Erstellung einer
ioCMDB,” Ph.D. dissertation, Technische Universität München, 2012.
[6] J. Knobloch and L. Robertson, “LHC computing Grid, Technical design
report,” CERN, http://lcg.web.cern.ch/LCG/tdr/, Tech. Rep., 2006.
[7] “WLCG website,” http://lcg.web.cern.ch/LCG/public/, 2011.
[8] K. Schauerhammer and K. Ullmann, “Operational Model for E2E links
in the NREN/GÉANT2 and NREN/Cross-Border-Fibre supplied optical
platform,” Géant, Tech. Rep., 2006.
[9] P. Marcu, D. Schmitz, W. Fritz, M. Yampolskiy, and W. Hom-
mel, “Integrated monitoring of multi-domain backbone connections–
operational experience in the lhc optical private network,” Arxiv preprint
arXiv:1101.3896, 2011.
42
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[10] G. Cesaroni, M. Hamm, F. Simon, G. Vuagnin, M. Yampolskiy,
M. Labedzki, and M. Wolski, “I-SHARe: Prototype speciﬁcation,”
Géant, Tech. Rep., 2008.
[11] “I-SHARe pilot installation,” cs.ishare.geant.net/, 2011.
[12] M. Yampolskiy, G. Vuagnin, and M. Łab˛edzki, “I-SHARe: End-of-Pilot
Review and Future Steps,” GÉANT, Tech. Rep., 2011.
[13] M. Yampolskiy and M. Hamm, “Management of multidomain end-
to-end links; a federated approach for the pan-european research net-
work géant 2,” in Integrated Network Management, 2007. IM’07. 10th
IFIP/IEEE International Symposium on.
IEEE, 2007, pp. 189–198.
[14] OGC, ITIL V3 complete suite - Lifecycle Publication Suite.
The
Stationery Ofﬁce Ltd, 2007.
[15] W. Hommel, S. Knittl, and D. Pluta, “Availability and Continuity
Management at Technische Universität München and the Leibniz Su-
percomputing Centre,” in 15th International Conference of European
University Information Systems (EUNIS 2009), Santiago de Compostella,
Spanien, Juni 2009.
[16] P. Fettke and P. Loos, Reference Modeling for Business Systems Analysis.
IGI Publishing, 2006.
[17] S. Knittl and M. Brenner, “Towards a conﬁguration management system
for hybrid cloud deployments,” in 6th IFIP/IEEE International Workshop
on Business-driven IT Management (BDIM 2011), Dublin, Irland, Juni
2011.
[18] H.-G. Hegering, S. Abeck, and B. Neumair, Integrated Management
of Networked Systems - Concepts, Architectures and their Operational
Application.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1999.
[19] P. Marcu and W. Hommel, “Inter-organizational fault management:
Functional and organizational core aspects of management architec-
tures,” CoRR, vol. abs/1101.3891, 2011.
[20] S. Knittl, T. Schaaf, and I. Saverchenko, “Change management in e-
infrastructures to support service level agreements,” in Managing and
Delivering Grid Services (MDGS 2011), Bordeaux, Frankreich, August
2011.
[21] M. Yampolskiy, W. Hommel, P. Marcu, and M. K. Hamm, “An in-
formation model for the provisioning of network connections enabling
customer-speciﬁc end-to-end qos guarantees,” in IEEE International
Conference on Services Computing (SCC), Miami, FL, July 2010, pp.
138 – 145.
[22] A. J. Gilliland-Swetland, “Setting the stage: Deﬁning metadata,” in
Introduction to Metadata: Pathways to Digital Information, M. Baca,
Ed.
Getty Publications, 2008. [Online]. Available: http://nsdl.niscair.
res.in/bitstream/123456789/954/1/Introduction+to+Metadata.pdf
[23] L. Brodner, “Visualization of management information in cloud com-
puting,” Thesis, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, 2011.
[24] W. Hommel and S. Knittl, “An access control solution for the inter-
organizational use of itil federated conﬁguration management databases,”
in Workshop of HP Software University Association (HP-SUA), 2008.
[25] H. von Jouanne-Diedrich, J. Blechinger, C. P. Neumann, S. Schwarz,
and R. Lenz, “Integration verteilter und heterogener Conﬁguration-
Management-Datenbanken - Eine Anforderungs- und Marktanalyse,”
Informatik Spektrum, vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 351–362, 2010.
[26] H. Yamada, T. Yada, and H. Nomura, “Developing network conﬁguration
management database system and its application - data federation for
network management,” Telecommunication Systems, pp. 1–8, September
2011. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11235-011-9607-0
[27] F. Carlisle, B. Day, S. Donohoo, S. Dublish, and et. al., “Cmdb
federation (cmdbf) - committee draft - version 1.0b,” Website, Januar
2008. [Online]. Available: http://cmdbf.org/
[28] D. Scott, D. Williams, and R. J. Colville, “The future of it operations
management suites,” Gartner, Tech. Rep. ID:G00163656, Januar 2009.
[29] R. J. Colville and G. Spafford, “Four pitfalls of the conﬁguration
management database and conﬁguration management system,” Gartner,
Tech. Rep. ID:G00210078, Januar 2011.
[30] L. Pasquale, J. Laredo, H. Ludwig, K. Bhattacharya, and B. Wassermann,
“Distributed cross-domain conﬁguration management,” in Service-
Oriented Computing, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, L. Baresi,
C.-H. Chi, and J. Suzuki, Eds.
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2009, vol.
5900, pp. 622–636.
[31] H. Kozankiewicz, K. Stencel, and K. Subieta, “Implementation of
federated databases through updatable views,” in Advances in Grid
Computing - EGC 2005, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
P. Sloot, A. Hoekstra, T. Priol, A. Reinefeld, and M. Bubak, Eds.
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2005, vol. 3470, pp. 393–396.
[32] M. T. Özsu and P. Valduriez, Principles of Distributed Database Systems.
Springer, 2011.
[33] A. Bauer and H. Günzel, Data-Warehouse-Systeme: Architektur, En-
twicklung, Anwendung, 3rd ed.
dpunkt, 2009.
43
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 5 no 1 & 2, year 2012, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2012, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

