A Mobile Mashup for Accessing Distributed Recycling Knowledge
S¨onke Knoch
German Research Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Research Department Intelligent User Interfaces
Saarbr¨ucken, Germany
Soenke.Knoch@dfki.de
Alexander Kr¨oner
Georg Simon Ohm University of Applied Sciences
Department of Computer Science
Nuremberg, Germany
Alexander.Kroener@th-nuernberg.de
Abstract—From the consumer perspective, classifying a product
regarding its environmental impact is a difﬁcult task because
relevant knowledge is usually not only diverse, but also distributed
over several information sources. In this work, an analysis of
mobile ”green” applications formed the basis of a mobile appli-
cation, which aims at providing all recycling-related information
in-situ. Its domain model integrates recycling knowledge from
several information sources and is capable of disassembling a
product into its elementary parts. An information extraction
approach allows the automatic integration of relevant content
from new Web sources, which were suggested by the user. The
mobile application enables the user to initiate interaction with this
model over three different ways of describing a product. Beside
insights concerning information access and user interaction, a
ﬁrst evaluation of the prototype indicates that the employed fused
domain model may outperform results achieved with a traditional
approach to web-based information search concerning recycling
information. Based on the outcomes of the evaluation, a revised
user interface is presented.
Keywords-Sustainability, decision support, domain model, mo-
bile mashup, mobile computing, case study.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Limitation of natural resources affects everyday decision
making in diverse ways: indirectly through increasing costs for
products, e.g., based on oil, or directly due rationale insight and
ecological awareness. Unfortunately, such sustainable decision
making is a non-trivial task for various reasons. For instance,
a product has to be chosen that is ”easy” to recycle. From the
viewpoint of sustainability, recycling is affected by materials
the product is consisting of, the recycling process for disas-
semble the product, the extent such disassembly is possible,
and even the (potentially future) context that determines efforts
needed to insert the product into the recycling process.
In order to make an informed decision, a human deci-
sion maker has to acquire all of that knowledge—and to
fuse it. Information technology may support the user in this
task in various ways (cf. [1]). This is reﬂected by related
research and development activities ranging from integrating
sustainability-related information along the supply chain (e.g.,
[2]) to community-driven information hubs for recycling tips
(see e.g., [3]).
This complexity partially explains why expert advice in-
situ may increase people’s will to do such decisions [4]. In-
formation has to become more available [5], and be explained
to the user [6]. Thus, it is little surprising that there exists
a considerable amount of ”green” mobile applications, which
seek to support their user in-situ in solving tasks related to
sustainability.
This article extends previous work (see [1]) concerning a
mobile application and a linked information service, which aim
at supporting decisions concerning consumable products based
on recycling-related information.
The following Section II reviews typical characteristics
of such mobile applications. Then, Section III reports on a
data mashup, which fuses different kinds of recycling-related
knowledge from distributed sources in a single domain model.
Section IV describes a mobile information service, which em-
ploys that domain model in order to combine services of var-
ious previously reviewed applications. Section IV summarizes
the underlying system architecture, and provides further de-
tails concerning back end and mobile application. Afterwards,
Section V summarizes feedback obtained in a comparative
experiment, in which participants acquired recycling-related
information with the new service as well with traditional
information offers. That feedback affected the redesign of the
system’s user interface, which is presented in Section VI.
Finally, the article closes in Section VII with a summary of
achieved results and an outlook on future work.
II.
RELATED WORK
In 2011, a preparatory internal study addressed the state-of-
the-art of mobile applications supporting sustainable decision
making. The survey comprised mobile applications offered at
the Android Market and the Apple App Store. Search terms
were ”energy consumption”, ”energy efﬁciency”, and ”green
life” and led to a result of 23 relevant mobile applications in the
Android Market and 25 mobile applications in the Apple App
Store. The result was sorted into four categories promotion,
education and information, calculators, and monitoring and
controlling. Figure 1 shows the amount of matches for each
category in the respective marketplace. The detailed result for
each category is described in the following:
Promotion (4 mobile applications). Mobile applications
in this category, typically, promote energy saving technologies,
such as solar energy systems, low-energy devices of certain
product classes (e.g., fridges, air conditioning systems, etc.),
124
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

or energy saving techniques (e.g., monitoring tools and pro-
grammable thermostats). For example, the mobile application
Lennox [7] calculates the energy savings achievable by a
new air conditioning system, provides product information and
directs the user to the next local dealer.
Education and Information (20 mobile applications).
References, encyclopedia, decision support systems, and
games form a category on its own. The majority of such mobile
applications provide information in form of references, tips, or
links and news collections. For example, the mobile application
”this is green” [8] offers information that is thematically
organized by a picture of a layout of a common one family
house. If the user tabs on the garage he will ﬁnd information
on fuel consumption of the car, if he tabs on the bathroom
information on how to save water is provided. The application
”low carbon life” [9] is a collection of little games that tries
to teach the user, e.g., how to use the washing machine in an
efﬁcient way and how to recycle trash that occurs in a common
household.
Calculators (9 mobile applications). Other mobile ap-
plications support the user in calculating balances concerning
sustainability-related factors. They can be distinguished in
mobile applications meant for the private and for the business
domain. The former ones focus on an individual’s habits and
objects, e.g., ﬂights and TV. The latter ones focus on business
branches such as architecture or lamp industry. In general,
the user has to enter data manually into the respective mobile
application, which is a major difference to mobile applications
classiﬁed as ”monitoring and controlling”. For example, the
”green footprint calculator” [10] is ﬁlled manually with data
such as monthly bills (oil, gas, and electricity), number of
ﬂights, and recycling behavior. Once ﬁlled with this data, the
mobile application calculates the yearly carbon footprint and
visualizes it with a maximum of six green trees if the carbon
footprint is very good/small. The application ”MeterRead”
[11] captures energy consumption. The number of kilo watts
is synchronized manually with the electrical meter over a
graphical meter that looks similar to the one that can be found
in households. After data gathering, the mobile application
provides a prediction for the consumption over the next 30
days.
Monitoring and Controlling (15 mobile applications).
Finally, there are mobile applications, which connect to energy
consuming devices in the private and the business domain.
In the private domain, they focus on devices common for an
individual’s environment, e.g., house, car, and mobile phone.
In the business domain, such mobile applications focus on
branches, e.g., IT, manufacturing industry, and facility man-
agement. For example in the private domain, the ”power tutor”
[12] analyzes system and power usage of the mobile device
and provides chart views, e.g., for the consumption of the
LCD, CPU, and Wi-Fi. The ”green gas saver 1.0” [13] shows
the greenest way of acceleration in a car. A lot of mobile
applications visualize energy consumption (electricity, oil, and
gas) and provide remote control features (e.g., switch on/off,
timer conﬁguration, etc.). Alarms are set off when consumption
exceeds a deﬁned threshold. One example from the business
domain is ”GSH ienergy” [14]. ”DONG Energy eFlex” [15]
controls home environments in the private domain. Community
features are included in some mobile applications, where the
2
5
6
10
2
4
9
10
Education and Information
Promotion
Calculators
Monitoring and Controlling
Android Market
Apple App Store
Figure 1.
Related Mobile Applications.
user’s green performance can be compared to the performance
of the user’s friends.
General observations included that mobile applications for
sustainable decision making were either highly specialized
(focus on product advertisement or industrial applications)
or generalized (dictionaries, household / lifestyle consulting).
Furthermore, the reviewed applications rely on data from a
single information source, which does not reﬂect diverse and
distributed character of such information mentioned in the
beginning. Finally, despite the mobile platform, there was little
use of the mobile sensing capabilities.
In May 2014, both marketplaces were revisited in order to
extract changes in categories identiﬁed in the previous study. In
both cases, the top 10 applications returned in response to the
query (”recycling”) were brieﬂy reviewed. In 2011, the same
query led to irrelevant results, e.g., desktop recycling bins.
Compared to the search in 2011, an higher amount of ”green”
recycling applications (60-70%) was registered in 2014. Of
the overall 20 applications, about 30% now provide location-
based recycling recommendations for products that are scanned
via barcode. For instance, ”RecyclingScanner” recommends a
trash can in the vicinity or a supermarket for a given product.
The application, developed for the German market, was tested
and delivered good results. Also of interest and different to the
previous study, there were now applications (10%) offering
recommendations about creative ways of recycling. Finally,
new game applications aim at informing and teaching people
the proper way of recycling certain packaging. Nevertheless,
these solutions share the narrow application focus observed
in the 2011 study. This suggests that the mashup concept
proposed in this article is still relevant and can provide a beneﬁt
for both user and environment.
This article reports on how these still existing gaps could be
addressed for a speciﬁc application scenario: an ”Eco-Advisor”
should support consumers in ranking products according to
their environmental impact, and in making informed decisions
concerning recycling options regarding a product at hand using
information from distributed recycling knowledge.
125
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

III.
FUSION OF RECYCLING KNOWLEDGE
According to the previously introduced classiﬁcation of
related work, the Eco-Advisor could be categorized in the ﬁrst
place as an information and education service, which includes
aspects of a calculator. While the service as such could be
employed also for user support in non-mobile scenarios, its
particular focus is on decision support concerning a product
”at hand”.
Therefore, the service has to support the user in establish-
ing a link between the subject of interest—a physical product
instance—and relevant information concerning this individ-
ual artifact. This information may originate from distributed
sources, and may differ in format and semantics. It may
describe aspects of the artifact, this kind of artifacts, resources
used for creating the artifact, and related services. Efforts
needed in performing this task strongly depend on the way
data are organized and structured by the service—its domain
model.
A. Requirements
As the mobile application is meant to provide information
for products, its domain model has to be capable to represent
a product’s most important properties. The model is kept as
generic as possible because it is a storage for all kinds of data,
structured and unstructured.
A product is deﬁned in an economic sense as the result
of a transformation that was initiated by humans. This trans-
formation consumes scarce resources, such as materials and
energy. In this article, we will focus on physical products and
exclude virtual products, such as information or services.
The information about a product, its components, and
resources that is necessary to provide decision support before
or after product usage is distributed and hard to ﬁnd. This
challenge lead to three core requirements for the model, which
are explained in the following:
•
Requirement 1: The domain model has to carry
information in form of various data patterns from
distributed sources on an abstract and a concrete level
and is open for extensions.
•
Requirement 2: The domain model has to enable a
disassembly of products in terms of kind and amount
of materials included in the product’s (current) phys-
ical form.
•
Requirement 3: The domain model has to support the
interaction implemented by the mobile application.
Requirement 1 asks for a domain model, which supports the
mapping of a product at hand to recycling-related information.
As recycling information is not provided by all manufacturers,
such information can be found on the abstract level in the
absence of manufacture speciﬁc information. If product spe-
ciﬁc information is available, it is stored on the instance level.
Additionally, the model has to ensure a degree of extensibility
that allows an adaption for speciﬁc needs. The last criterion is
related to the open/close design principle from object-oriented
programming. To integrate data from distributed sources, the
model has to be able to carry data in heterogeneous patterns,
and to make information available in a uniﬁed format.
recyclingObjects
component
material
Instance:colaCan
subClassOf
type
Can
consistsOfSubstance
Aluminum
(Metal)
Figure 2.
Ontology representation of the product structure.
Requirement 2 demands a domain model able to reveal
product’s components and materials down to an elementary re-
source level. For example, a beverage can consist of aluminum,
which is a chemical element in the boron group with the
symbol Al, the third most common element, and most abundant
metal in the Earth’s crust. Such information can be employed
by the service in order to perform calculations involving a
product’s durability, kind of resources used, and recycling
potential. Thus, while a resource used within a product may be
scarce, this may be less crucial if the resource can be extracted
with limited efforts during recycling for later reuse.
Requirement 3 demands that the domain model supports the
particular kind of user-product-service interaction that forms
the background of the envisioned kind of support. The quality
of recommendations expressed by the service strongly depends
on knowledge about the product the user is interested in.
Ideally, this object is at hand and capable to describe itself, e.g.,
on the basis of data linked by identiﬁcation (RFID) referenced
as ISO 14443 or Quick Response (QR) Code referenced as ISO
18004 describing the individual product instance. However,
other situations may require the user to describe the product
with less precise means. In order to support the user in this
task, the system’s user interface provides diverse ways of
describing products. The domain model has to reﬂect this
diversity with an organization, which facilitates information
retrieval starting from unique identiﬁers, visual features, key-
words and product categories.
B. Domain Model
The assembly information on a product was modeled in the
Ontology Web Language (OWL) [16]. In the model shown in
Figure 2, a product is an instance of a sub class of recycling
objects, which consist of one or multiple substances of a
certain type.
126
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Object
Material
abstract object world
specific recycling world
Tip
Location
concrete product world
Brand
part-of
Product
consists-of
Figure 3.
Entity Relationship Model (ERM) of the domain model (most
relations and attributes are faded out).
According to Requirement 1, the ﬁnal domain model is
open for extensions; it was developed as an onion layered
architecture. In the innermost layer lies the core, most abstract
model, which is the nucleus of the model that is visualized in
Figure 3, the ”abstract object world”. Objects consist of differ-
ent Materials, the bill of materials, and have thereby a certain
composition (Requirement 2). This kind of product assembly
is discussed for electromechanical products by Rachuri et al.
[17], an extension of the Core Product Model 2 (cf. Fenves et
al. [18]) that covers a product’s function, form, and behavior.
The entities in the next layer, the ”concrete product world”,
form the world of products and contain all entities from the
object world. Objects are manufactured differently by different
companies under different Brands. The combination of the
entities Brand, Object, and Material forms a Product. These
two worlds, the object and the product world, represented by
the two innermost layers can be transferred on numerous use
cases where product data is involved. Two kinds of products
are allowed: products with a structure of certain materials and
products that provide a structure under a certain brand. All
products can contain sub-modules. This hierarchical modeling
approach, indicated by the part-of relation, allows the subordi-
nation of sub-products, which are produced under a different
brand by a certain supplier. A similar classiﬁcation hierar-
chy was provided by Pels [19], which distinguishes between
product instances, classes, and types to reduce the complexity
of product models. In a similar way substances, contained in
a material are modeled, which allows the disassembly of a
product in its most atomic elements. In the outermost layer,
the most speciﬁc one (”speciﬁc recycling world”), the entities
for the use case at hand are modeled and set in relation to the
entities in the other layers. The entity Tip contains creative
recycling tips, the transformation of old objects into something
new, for Products, Objects, and Materials. Location contains
recycling points where Products, Objects, and Materials can
be recycled. The speciﬁc (recycling) world is open for more
extensions to extend the Object and Product worlds according
to speciﬁc needs. The decision for an onion layered design
of the domain model supports extension of the model: it is
possible to add layers for specializing the model and to remove
layers for generalizing the model. A similar way of abstraction
was provided by Lee et al. [20], which proposed a generic and
independent multilevel product model that is divided into data,
model, and metamodel level.
To support the interaction (Requirement 3), textual deﬁ-
nitions from WordNet [21] are used to identify the entities
Object, Material, and Brand that are denoted as things follow-
ing the notion ”Internet of Things”. This kind of identiﬁcation
allows text searches on the IDs and users to ﬁnd the Object,
Brand, or Material of interest. The relation among those three
entities allows the presentation of related Materials and Brands
when an Object is searched, the presentation of related Brands
and Objects when a Material is searched, and the presentation
of related Objects and Materials when a Brand is searched.
Related products from the overlapping of all three entities
can be presented. Additionally to the concept of deﬁnitions,
word forms—a set of synonyms—are assigned to Objects,
Materials, and Brands, respectively. These synonyms support
a query expansion mechanism that guarantees search results
for a set of valid search terms. For example, ”Al” leads to the
same result as ”aluminum”, ”aluminium”, or ”atomic number
13”. Recycling Tips are assigned to Objects and Materials. A
product taxonomy is used to categorize Products, which allows
a search for products by category. Products have additional
attributes that are amount and unit. This allows for storing
information on the quantity of materials, which are obstructed
in one object. Locations own the additional ﬁelds latitude and
longitude to store the GPS position.
IV.
ACCESS TO RECYCLING KNOWLEDGE
The system is divided in two parts: the mobile application
that makes information available to the user and the back end
that provides an interface to the Web and pre-processes data
for fast information access. Overall, the system implements
a mashup [22] of tools and resources in order to realize one
particular service. The client forms a mobile mashup because it
combines contextual information provided by mobile devices
with a mashup’s capability to integrate web resources and
process data (cf. [23], [24]). The back end alone is denoted
as a data mashup. An overview of related work in the area of
mobile mashups is provided in previous work (cf. [25]).
Figure 4 provides an overview of the system’s main com-
ponents: The data mashup on the back end side, its information
extraction component, and the mobile application.
A. Back End
The data mashup combines the contents of multiple hetero-
geneous and distributed Information Sources that can be seen
on top of Figure 4. It integrates these sources in one database
in order to speed up query processing. Responsible for this
integration is the Information Integration component. The
latter one is responsible for processing semi-structured data
obtained from Information Extraction components, which wrap
the actual Information Sources. The Information Integration
stores its result in the Domain Model database and translates
the Information Management’s requests into database queries.
The Domain Model database contains the ontology model
depicted in Figure 2 that was transferred to a relational
database according to the ERM in Figure 3 for performance
reasons. In the database, per default, each entry consists of
the 4-tuple < ID, Name, Description, Image >. The ID is
127
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

Mobile Application
Back End
Information 
Source 1
Information 
Source N
Information 
Management
Client
...
Query 
Expansion
Location-
based 
Service
Image 
Recognition
Tools
Information 
Extraction
<<instance>>
Information 
Integration
Domain Model
Information 
Extraction
<<instance>>
Components
Web
Figure 4.
Components of the system architecture.
a unique identiﬁer, Name represents the designation of the
data entry, and Description contains a long text that helps
to characterize the thing. An Image visualizes the entity and
can be stored in form of a ﬁle path. Each entity is expandable
by additional attributes that might be appended to the 4-tuple.
Additional attributes concerning an entity may be appended
to the tuple. For instance, GPS coordinates are added to the
location entity.
The Query Expansion tool is used to increase the hit rate
of search terms received from the Client side. These client
requests are handled by the Information Management that
receives HTTP requests over a REST interface. To process
image data, an Image Recognition component is connected and
delivers describing strings via Web hook (cf. Figure 6), as the
Information Integration component processes only textual data.
The Query Expansion tool expands search terms from all
three ways of interaction (search by text, search by category,
and search by image) by synonyms from the WordNet [21]
dictionary to match additional entries in the database. The
Image Recognition component was realized by using the
IQEngines API, which delivered acceptable results (in most
cases the labels and not the things are recognized) that can be
improved by training the image recognition algorithm. Since
IQEngines was acquired by Yahoo! in 2013, its service is no
longer available. Instead, we will use the visual search engine
Macroglossa [26].
The system’s modular architecture seeks to support adding
and removing Information Sources as well as exchanging back
end components. Technical details concerning the integration
and adaptation of information in this framework (e.g., the way
how recycling tips from World.org [3] are fused with other
Information 
Integration
NLP
Clean Up
Content 
Analysis
Text Mining
HTML
(semi-structured information)
HTML
(cleaned)
Textual Content, Metadata,
and Language Identification
Relevant Content
(structured information)
Domain 
Ontology
Grammatical structure
Query 
Expansion
Domain Model
Information 
Source
Figure 5.
Extracting information from user deﬁned Web sources.
recycling information) have been subject of previous work (see
[25]).
B. Information Extraction
In the ﬁrst prototype, the information source was made
available by a wrapper module. The source-speciﬁc wrapper
parsed the content of the respective Web page, structured the
information, and delivered the data to the domain model to
receive a program-friendly structure. JAXB was used to make
the data from the database available at the REST interface. It
autogenerates class representations of the database entities and
of the corresponding schema ﬁles. The Information Manage-
ment component used this meta information to generate XML
structured data and delivered it to the mobile device.
After the ﬁrst version was realized and the case study that
is described in Section V was conducted, it was recognized
that it would be useful to have a feature that allows the user to
128
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

add and share new information sources by simply providing the
URL. In order to achieve this goal, an approach to information
extraction without speciﬁc wrappers needs to be added to
the aforementioned Information Extraction (IE) component.
In the following, a concept for the realization of such an IE
mechanism that represents work in progress is suggested.
The process of IE is outlined in Figure 5 and was in parts
inspired by the system suggested by Germesin and Romanelli
[27]. The task of the process is the extraction of relevant
information and the transformation of semi-structured into
structured information that can be added to the database and
is merged with existing content. On top of the process, the
Information Source is deﬁned by an URL that points to semi-
structured information usually encoded in HTML. Then, the
preparation phase that contains the process steps Clean Up,
Content Analysis, and NLP (Natural Language Processing)
starts. During the Clean Up phase the main textual content
of the Web page is extracted and surplus ”clutter” is removed.
For the realization, it is planned to use the Readability
API or the boilerpipe JAVA library. The Content Analysis
process determines the document type, in most cases HTML,
and extracts the textual content and metadata. Additionally,
the language of the document is identiﬁed. It is planned to
use Apache Tika for this task. Afterwards, it has to be distin-
guished between structured information, such as HTML tables
and unstructured information, such as free text. Structured
information is directly passed to the Text Mining process
while free text is parsed by the NLP process. We plan to
use the Stanford Parser for this task, which works out the
grammatical structure of sentences that is used in the Text
Mining process. Finally, the data preparation phase is ﬁnished
and the Text Mining starts. It uses the knowledge of the
Domain Ontology whose concepts were shown in Figure 2.
The ontology describes the content that is relevant for the IE
process and provides the domain knowledge that is compared
to the Information Source.
The existing Query Expansion component is used to pro-
vide synonyms for the entities in the ontology. These synonyms
are added to search patterns that are formulated based on
the ontology containing the materials, products, and brands of
interest. It is planned to use Apache Lucene to solve the search
task. The grammatical structures from the NLP process help to
discover relations between multiple search terms. For instance,
the sentence ”A cola can has a carbon footprint of 170g” sets
the pattern ”cola can” and ”carbon footprint” into relation
to each other. The low distance of both patterns indicates a
match. When such a relation is discovered, it is passed over
to the Information Integration component, which stores it in
the Domain Model database. Multiple relations for the same
entities can be stored. The source of the information is added
to the tuple to be able to provide the origin of the information
on the user interface.
C. Mobile Application
The mobile mashup was realized as a mobile application
that presents the contents provided by the data mashup that is
encapsulated by the back end and adds additional information
from the Location-based Service. It provides the user interface
components with an interface for data search and retrieval that
provides abstraction from the underlying actual data sources.
Back End
Image Recognition
image
image_resized
result
result_formatted
resize(image)
recognize(image)
Mobile Application
format(result)
Figure 6.
Client–server communication.
The mobile application runs on a mobile device with
Internet connection. It communicates via a REST interface
with the back end, which is implemented as a Web service.
The user interacts with the mobile device and things—in our
scenario for the experiment an aluminum can, a plastic or a
glass bottle. Three ways of interaction were realized, search by
text, search by category, and search by image. A navigation
tree containing screen shots from the mobile application is
presented in Figure 7 and shows the search result for an
aluminum can manufactured by a certain brand.
When the user starts the application he sees the home
screen that is labeled with A. The three buttons trigger the
three interaction methods. Search by text leads to screen B,
which provides a text ﬁeld and a search button. A drop down
list shows a list of recent search terms. Search by image starts
the camera application of the phone and allows the user to
take a picture from an object or to choose a picture from the
phone’s ﬁle system. Once an image is selected, it is sent to
the back end. The back end resizes the image and forwards it
to the associated image recognition API that is invisible to the
user, and waits for a response (Web hook). When the response
is arrived it is immediately passed over to the mobile device.
The whole process is outlined in Figure 6. The processing time
strongly depends on quality of image and Internet connection
(in our setup 2-5 seconds). For a given object, search by
text and search by image may result in a broad range of
search terms, since users may follow different approaches
to describing or photographing objects. The search result is
visualized on screen E and shows a deﬁnition of the object
in the headline. If multiple deﬁnitions are matching the query
the user has to choose a deﬁnition from a list of deﬁnitions
that the system considers as relevant. The object’s composition
is viewed in four categories on screen E. The drop down list
Products contains products in the database for a given object.
Aluminum can is an example for a product related to the object
can. The Objects list contains the objects, in this case a can.
Materials lists all materials that are contained in the listed
products. Finally, all brands that are selling the products under
the selected deﬁnition are listed in the Brands list. Another
search mechanism is the Search by category that was built
using the Google product taxonomy and can be seen on screen
D. It allows to browse for products by category. Screen F
shows the results for the category soda pops. Aluminum cans,
glass bottles, and plastic bottles are listed.
In the next step, the user can select one entry: a product, an
object, a material, or a brand. If the user selects an object, the
application displays a description of the object and creative
recycling tips on screen G. Recycling tips are structured in
categories. If the user selects a category, then the application
responds with a list of tips. The list is sorted by relevance. If
129
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

OR
OR
Interaction
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
Figure 7.
Screens and navigation.
the user selects a product, screen H and K show the product’s
description and recycling locations nearby. When the user se-
lects a certain location, the application loads the Google Maps
view (screen L). For each location the distance to the user’s
current position, an estimation about the emissions associated
with the trip to the location, and the deposit to receive for
this product is presented in a bubble. If the user selects a
material, the application presents a detailed description about
the material and its recycling behavior (screen I). Selecting
brands, the user receives a list about associated product’s
carbon emissions provided by the respective company.
The
mobile
application
was
implemented
platform-
independently using HTML5 on top of the frameworks jQuery
mobile and PhoneGap. A prototype running on an Android
device was publicly demonstrated [25]. It is subject of the
study described in the following.
V.
CASE STUDY
In the following, a survey is presented that evaluates the
mobile mashup and its underlying data mashup built on top of
the domain modeling terms of usability and usefulness. First,
the user interface is evaluated to check if the navigation and
interaction method is easy to handle for the user. Second, the
data mashup stored in the aforementioned domain model is
evaluated to ﬁnd out if the integrated information sources are
helpful (1) in the way they are presented, (2) while the user
has to solve different tasks from the recycling domain.
A. Research Question and Experimental Design
When the ﬁrst running prototype of the Eco-Advisor
mobile application was ﬁnished, feedback was gathered by
involving a small probe of people in order to validate concept
and basic design decisions. The main question the experiment
sought to answer was the following one:
Do the mobile mashup and the domain model help a user
to achieve recycling goals more efﬁciently compared to a
stationary Web browser?
Here, ”efﬁciency” comprises various facets of the original
task, including quality of result (subjective measures such
as user satisfaction, objective quality of recycling), efforts
required to perform this kind of recycling, as well as efforts
needed to deal with the application (time, interaction steps).
In addition, the experiment aimed at gathering information
concerning the preferred way of interaction with such a service.
Acquiring information from such a service can be realized in
quite different ways of interaction ranging from search by text,
category, to image taken from the subject of interest.
In order to address these questions, three experimental tasks
were deﬁned, which had to be executed by participants of an
experiment. These tasks had to be solved with the mobile
application on a mobile device (”app variant”), and with a
regular web browser (”browser variant”), respectively. The web
browser was installed on a regular desktop PC in order to
remove effects from potential issues speciﬁc to the interaction
with mobile web browsers from the experiment (e.g., entering
URLs, need for zooming gestures). Furthermore, the web
browser was pre-conﬁgured in order to support participants
in the requested tasks. This setup was chosen based on
the assumption that users interested in recycling would have
created bookmarks and other pointers to knowledge relevant
for performing such tasks. Thus, the browser conﬁguration
seeks to reduce search for information sources as such, and
instead to leverage search for information using these sources.
During Task1 (Conventional Recycling), the participant
130
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

is confronted with an object that has to be recycled in a
conventional way in the vicinity. In the browser variant, the
participant will ﬁnd his or her location in an opened Google
Maps tab and additional tabs with websites about recycling.
The offer of opened websites on a workstation instead of an
empty browser on the mobile phone makes the comparison
between browser and app variant fairer and prevents the
occurrence of a bias. During the study of results, the reader
should keep in mind the difference between the two settings.
During Task2 (Environmental Impact), the participant
is confronted with a set of objects and is asked to choose
the most environmental-friendly one among them. During task
execution in the browser variant, the participant can continue
his or her Web browser session from Task1.
During Task3 (Creative Recycling), the participant is
confronted with one of the objects from Task2. For this object,
the participant should search a creative way of recycling, which
stands in contrast to conventional ways of recycling in Task1.
During the three tasks, the main factor is the Search
for Information regarding the domain of sustainability. Every
participant interacts on both levels Web browser and mobile
application. Each task is related to one particular hypothesis:
•
H1: The mobile application supports a more efﬁcient
search for conventional ways of recycling than a
common stationary Web browser.
•
H2: The mobile application supports the user in judg-
ing an object’s environmental impact more efﬁciently
than a common stationary Web browser.
•
H3: The mobile application supports a more efﬁcient
search for creative recycling methods than a common
stationary Web browser.
For measuring support of these hypotheses in the respective
tasks, the study relies on several parameters: one measurement
is time. The time a participant takes to accomplish one task
is measured and allows for comparing, which kind of search
method (stationary browser/mobile application) leads faster
to results. Another measurement is the satisfaction of the
user concerning search result and interaction comfort. The
participants are asked to rank their opinion in both categories
(satisfaction and comfort) on a ﬁve point Likert scale (ranging
from 1 (disagree) over 3 (neutral) to 5 (fully agree). To check
a user’s preference, the participant has to select the preferred
search variant per task (stationary browser/mobile application).
To check if the domain model and the information it provided
was helpful, each participant speciﬁed the criteria taken into
consideration for the decision eventually made at the end of
each task.
To receive feedback on usability related aspects, a user
rating in the dimensions usefulness, readability, navigation, and
visualization is gathered on a 5 point Likert scale, respectively.
Questions about the preferred search mechanism (by text
/ by category / by image) and ideas for improvement are
meant to provide the developer some feedback for further
improvements.
The (potential) persuasive nature of the mobile application
is tested by asking about the inﬂuence of the mobile application
on the participant’s current recycling behavior: if the infor-
mation offered by the mobile application would be available
during decision making, would people expect a change in their
behavior?
Finally, at the end of the study, an overall preference
(stationary browser versus mobile application) is asked for.
B. Setup
The experiment was conducted in-lab under the supervision
of one instructor. The participants sat at a table in front of
a common PC workstation. On the workstation, participants
ﬁlled out questionnaires and solved the tasks in the browser
variant. The instructor guided through the experimental pro-
cedure, explained the tasks, and answered questions. For the
mobile setting the mobile device Google Nexus S by Samsung
was used. The objects during task execution contain three
objects from the category soda pop beverages. It was decided
to use beverages from one well-known brand, to allow a brand
speciﬁc search and to avoid that an unknown product will
confuse a user. As questions of the survey are answered on
the workstation, it can be proﬁted by the advantage of fast
result analysis and automated time measurements during the
experiment. Most of the questions were of closed nature, while
in some cases open questions were asked where the participant
had to ﬁll in an answer into the text ﬁeld, for example the
result of each task. All questions were mandatory, except
the questions for problems during execution and ideas for
improvement. During operations in the browser variant, the
browser’s history was used to log visited pages and used search
terms. During operations on the mobile phone, search terms
and navigation paths were logged on server-site.
C. Procedure
The experiment was divided into three phases: In the ﬁrst
phase, the participant had to answer a set of questions on
his or her demographical background, the experience level
concerning computer, mobile phone, and Internet usage, and
the knowledge about recycling. In the second phase, all par-
ticipants had to solve three tasks. To solve these tasks two
tools were provided: a Web browser on the workstation and a
mobile phone with an application. For each task the participant
had to use the Web browser in the ﬁrst run and the mobile
application in the second. After each run the participant had
to answer a set of questions. In order to balance competition
of mobile application and browser variant, in the latter one,
7 Web pages were already open in the browser’s tabs once a
session started. Those pages contained the same content that is
integrated in the data mashup behind the mobile application.
However, during task execution the participants were allowed
to open new tabs and to start an own free search.
In the third phase, the study concluded with questions about
the preferred search method, problems during task execution,
and ideas for improvement. Additionally, it was asked if the
presented mobile application could inﬂuence the participants
recycling behavior, and if the mobile application would be
preferred over the stationary browser.
131
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

D. Result
The study lists 22 records, 2 experts and 20 non-experts.
The average participant was 26 (median) years old. In the
following presentation of the results percentages are rounded
to integers. 13 female (59%) and 9 male people (41%) took
part. Regarding the occupation, among the participants were
2 pupils (9%), 18 students (82%), and 2 professionals (9%,
one software engineer and one researcher). Areas of work are
wide spread and include linguistics and translation, computer
science and IT, literature and culture, business administration
and economics, and education.
The technical experience level regarding the usage of
stationary and moveable computers was relatively high. 22
(100%) use a computer that is connected to the Internet, 16
(73%) use a mobile phone with Internet. On the stationary
computer 8 (36%) surf more than 20 hours per week and 8
(36%) less or equal than 10 hours per week. On the mobile,
only 4 (25%) spent more than 10 hours per week in the
internet, while 8 (50%) are only between 0 and 2 hours online.
While browsing the Web on the mobile, 4 out of 16 (25%)
use predominantly applications. 4 (25%) additionally search
for information about products during a shopping trip.
The participants’ recycling knowledge was diverse. 19
(86.36%) are recycling their trash, 13 (68%) self-motivated,
and 11 (58%) through regulation (multiple selections possible).
13 (68%) consider a product’s environmental impact while
coming to a decision during a shopping trip. Those who do,
consider all different kinds of factors, energy consumption
during operation as well as production and packaging. Those
who do not, do not have time, are not informed enough, or
have other reasons. Additionally, 8 (36%) knew what a carbon
footprint is and were able to explain it, in most cases precisely.
Task1: Browser. All participants except one (the par-
ticipant was not really motivated to spend some minutes
on a location search) found a location for the glass bottle.
The average distance to the user location was 0.71 miles.
Two locations (9%) were subtracted out, one location was
a container service and the other a junk hauling service. 4
(19%) identiﬁed trash cans, 5 (24%) chose supermarkets, and
10 (48%) identiﬁed a recycling center as point of disposal.
Decision criteria were distance in most cases (15 / 71%),
deposit value in 4 cases (19%), the ”fastest result” in 2 cases
(9%), and missing information on trash cans in 1 case.
Task1: Mobile application. All participants found a
location for the glass bottle. The average distance to the
user location was 0.36 miles, 0.35 miles lower compared to
the results from the browser search. Distance was the most
frequently mentioned decision criteria. Only one participant
named carbon emissions associated with the trip as a decision
criterion.
The preferred search method for Task1 was the mobile
application (15 votes out of 22 / 68%).
Task2: Browser. All participants except one were able
to identify one product out of three (glass bottle/plastic bot-
tle/aluminum can) as the most environmental friendly one. 12
(57%) decided for the glass bottle, 6 (29%) for the plastic
bottle, and 3 (14%) for the aluminum can. The decision criteria
were carbon footprint (17 / 77%), the product’s composition
TABLE I.
AVERAGE EXECUTION TIME IN MINUTES
Browser
Application
Task1
8:17 min.
7:10 min.
Task2
7:09 min.
5:17 min.
Taks3
6:26 min.
5:25 min.
into materials (6 / 27%), and studies found through a search
engine (1 / 5%). One participant said: ”glass bottle is re-usable
and I am safe from molecules from the plastic bottle entering
my drink”.
Task2: Mobile application. All participants were able
to identify one product out of three (glass bottle/plastic bot-
tle/aluminum can) as the most environmental friendly one. 9
(41%) decided for the glass bottle, 10 (45%) for the plastic
bottle, and 3 (14%) for the aluminum can. While 43% of the
participants changed their mind, 57% kept the decision from
the browser variant.
The preferred search method for Task2 was the mobile
application (16 votes out of 22 / 73%).
Task3: Browser. All participants except one (95%) found
a creative way of recycling for the aluminum can. Several
creative ways of recycling were discovered: potting plants,
lanterns, aluminum boat, pen and pencil holder, build a
children’s telephone, tinker decorative items, sculptures, art,
camping cooker, solar furnace, ashtray, money box, and so
on. Asked, if the knowledge about reusing a product would
inﬂuence the participant’s buying decision was approved by 5
out of 21 / 24%).
Task3: Mobile application. All participants identiﬁed a
creative way of recycling for the aluminum can. Additional
results were a children’s drum set, a candy box, a seed storage,
a picture frame, gift wrapping, hooks, and ﬁlm canisters. All
participants except 3 (86%) found a new creative way of
recycling different from the one they found in the browser
variant. Knowledge about reusing the product could inﬂuence
the participant’s buying decision in 9 (41%) out of 22 cases,
17% more compared to the browser variant.
The preferred search method was the mobile application
(14 votes out of 22 / 64 %).
Satisfaction and Comfort during the tasks is shown in
Figure 8. The time measurement during the tasks resulted in
the values that are presented in Table I.
The concluding questions showed that most participants
preferred the traditional search mechanisms ”search by text”
(13 / 59%) to the ”search by category” (4 / 18%) and
the uncommon ”search by image” (5 / 23%). In the four
categories usefulness, readability, navigation, and visualization
the lowest average rating received the navigation (3.27) on a
scale between 1 (worst) and 5 (best). Visualization was rated
with 3.36, usefulness with 4.05, and readability with 4.14.
Many participants experienced problems to ﬁnd information
placed at the leaf level of the navigation tree although a
legend with hints on the underlying content was given on
the screen. Room for improvement was seen in the navigation
(”too complicated”, ”less clicking”). One participant suggested
placing favorites on the home screen. Another one suggested
integrating more pictures to improve the visualization, e.g., to
visualize the creative ways of recycling. Asked if the mobile
132
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

0
1
2
3
4
5
Task 1
Task 2
Task 3
Satisfaction
Stationary Browser
Mobile Application
Stationary Browser
Stationary Browser
Stationary Browser
Stationary Browser
Stationary Browser
Mobile Application
Mobile Application
Mobile Application
Mobile Application
Mobile Application
Satisfaction
Satisfaction
Comfort
Comfort
Comfort
Figure 8.
Satisfaction and comfort during task execution (satisfaction: 1=not
satisﬁed, 2=satisﬁed in parts, 3=indifferent, 4=satisﬁed, 5=very satisﬁed; com-
fort: 1=not comfortable, 2=comfortable in parts, 3=indifferent, 4=comfortable,
5=very comfortable).
application could inﬂuence the participants recycling behavior,
73% responded with ”yes”. After all, the mobile application
was mentioned as the preferred method of acquiring recycling
information (15:7 / 68% : 32%).
E. Findings and Discussion
Feedback obtained in the categories navigation and vi-
sualization indicates that potential for improving the mobile
application lies in the optimization of navigation concept and
the presentation of content. For example, some participants had
difﬁculties to ﬁnd the content that was necessary to solve the
task. Especially pieces of information on recycling locations,
which is provided in bubbles on the map, for example infor-
mation on carbon emissions associated with a trip from the
user location to the recycling location, are hard to discover.
This information lays 5 navigation steps away from the start
screen and hidden behind a 4 categories menu, which is too
far. Especially users not familiar with mobile applications in
general became frustrated very fast, as they did not understand
the mobile application’s concept.
An interesting phenomenon is the development of time that
was necessary to solve the tasks (cf. Table I). The ﬁrst task
took in average 7:10 minutes on the mobile application. For
Task2 and 3 the duration lowered by about 2 minutes. This fact
supports the statement of one participant who said, ”after I was
used to the mobile application I found it very helpful”. How-
ever, since a mobile application might be installed right before
a situation where its support is needed, it should be usable with
little to no training. Therefore, this barrier has to be overcome.
It has to be mentioned that in this experimental setting only a
brief introduction to the mobile application was given. Usually,
the user reads a description from the app store and may have
a better understanding of the mobile application in advance.
Thus, further experiments should start with an informing page
about the mobile application as it is common in the big mobile
application portals. Nevertheless, having a look on the average
task execution times in the stationary browser and the app
variant, the app variant outperforms the browser variant in all
three tasks. This result underlines that, after understanding
the mobile application, the participants were able to ﬁnd
TABLE II.
HYPOTHESE MEASUREMENTS APPLICATION VS BROWSER
Time
Satisfaction
Comfort
Preference
H1
-1:07 min.
+0.71
+0.36
+36%
H2
-1:52 min.
+0.05
+0.53
+46%
H3
-1:01 min.
+0.45
+0.15
+28%
Avg.
-1:20 min.
+0.40
+0.35
+37%
0
1
2
3
4
5
Visualization
Navigation
Readability
Usefulness
Figure 9.
Usability.
information faster using the mobile application than using
the Web browser. Having a look at the level of satisfaction
concerning the investigated result in Figure 8, the level of
satisfaction was higher for the mobile application in all tasks.
The perceived comfort during task execution was also higher
when searching with the mobile application. The fact that the
average distance to the identiﬁed recycling location during
Task1 was about 0.35 miles lower in the app variant, while
distance was the most important criterion for the participants
shows that the implemented map visualization was easy to
understand. These aforementioned results show that the three
task-related hypotheses are supported in all categories, time,
satisfaction, comfort, and user preference. Table II depicts the
”delta”, Measurement(Browser) - Measurement(Application),
in all categories that were used to measure hypotheses support.
Only some users used the uncommon search method ”search
by image”. People with a great interest in technics found this
search variant ”very nice”.
16 out of 22 (73%) participants reported that the mo-
bile application could inﬂuence their recycling behavior. 15
(68%) participants reported that the mobile application is the
preferred method of research for the tasks given. Both facts
together support the appropriateness of the provided kind of
support and indirectly of the employed domain model.
VI.
USER INTERFACE IMPROVEMENTS
Since the usability dimensions visualization and navigation
performed not so well in the case study (cf. Figure 9), a revised
version of the user interface (UI) is provided in Figure 10. The
design was inspired by the Google Play Store. In the ﬁgure,
only the most relevant screens are presented. The remaining
screens are designed using the same style. Welcome screen
and the three search methods (search by text, search by image,
133
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

I
II
III
IV
V
Figure 10.
Revision of the user interface based on feedback obtained in the experiment and on metaphors from state-of-the-art mobile applications.
search by category) are left out. They all lead to the new screen
I. On screen I, the categories Products, Materials, and Brands
are visualized by colors to allow a better orientation. The
category Objects was removed because many users in the case
study did not understand the concept of abstract objects, which
lead to confusion by many participants. The text search ﬁeld
is embedded in the bar on top of the screen (a loupe indicates
the search function) to allow an edit. It enables initiating a
new search at any time, which directs back to screen I. When
a product is selected (in the ﬁgure an aluminum can) a screen
with four different tabs is presented (screens II–V). Some
participants were confused by organization of information
behind the categories Products, Materials, and Brands. For
them, it was not intuitive that an Object leads to recycling
tips and a product to recyclinglocations, for instance. The
new interface addresses this issue with a display of all search
categories for each category. The ﬁrst two tabs, description and
impact, contain a short textual description of the selected object
and its environmental impact. The tab Creative Recycling
contains a list of recycling tips. New are the pictures that
visualize the tips and a ﬁve star user rating that allows users
to rate a recycling tip and to see how other users rated it. The
tab Recycling Locations contains a list of recycling locations
nearby. Deposit value to receive, distance to the location, and
estimated carbon emissions associated with the trip to this
location by public transportation and by car are presented for
each list entry. This information was hard to ﬁnd on the old
UI, as it was hidden in the bubbles on the map visualization.
Now, the user has the possibility switch between list and map
view (screens IV and V). Compared to the UI in Figure 7, the
depth of the navigation tree was reduced by one, which can be
ascribed to the fact that the user now simply switches between
list and map view of recycling locations.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Sustainable behavior requires people to take a consider-
able amount of diverse information from distributed sources
into account for decision making. This article reported on a
domain model for a mobile mashup, which integrates such
sources automatically. In order to gain feedback concerning
the appropriateness of model and system architecture, a case
study was conducted. In an experimental setup, participants
had to perform recycling-related tasks with a mobile applica-
tion implementing the mobile mashup approach, and with a
browser-based solution on a desktop PC providing similar, but
non-integrated features. Findings include that participants were
able to ﬁnd faster more accurate results when using the mobile
application. Beyond, they were more satisﬁed with the mobile
application’s results and with the way of interaction provided
by the mobile application.
Thus, the mobile mashup concept turned out to be of value
for supporting people in making recycling-related decisions.
However, this conclusion is limited in some ways. For instance,
the user group shares certain demographic aspects, and the
experiment did not involve true real-world interaction, where
time pressure, interruption, and cognitive load might inﬂu-
ence the results. Consequently, potential directions of future
research should include a revision of the proposed interaction
method in order to support new users in getting familiar
with the mobile application. Furthermore, positive feedback
obtained during the experiment indicates that persuasive tech-
nics might combine well with the mobile application concept.
A context model could help to involve more user related
constraints during decision support.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was funded in part by the German Federal
Ministry of Education and Research under grant number
01IA11001 (project RES-COM). The responsibility for this
publication lies with the authors.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Knoch and A. Kr¨oner, “Enabling mobile access to distributed
recycling knowledge,” in The Seventh International Conference on
Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, Systems, Services and Technologies,
UBICOMM ’13, W. Narzt and A. Gordon-Ross, Eds.
IARIA, Sept.
2013, pp. 30–37.
[2]
A. Schifﬂeitner, T. Bley, R. Schneider, and D. Wimpff, “Stakeholder
perspectives on business model requirements for a sustainability data
exchange platform across supply chains,” in Electronics Goes Green
2012+ (EGG), Sept. 2012, pp. 1–5.
[3]
WORLD Environmental Organization, “Recycling database
reduce,
reuse, recycle,” July 2013. [Online]. Available: http://www.world.org/
weo/recycle
134
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

[4]
S. Burn and S. Oskamp, “Increasing community recycling with persua-
sive communication and public commitment,” Journal of Applied Social
Psychology, vol. 16, no. 1, Feb. 1986, pp. 29–41.
[5]
E. M. Huang and K. N. Truong, “Sustainably ours: Situated sustainabil-
ity for mobile phones,” ACM Interactions, vol. 15, no. 2, Mar. 2008,
pp. 16–19.
[6]
V. Margolin, “The waste manifesto,” ACM Interactions, vol. 16, no. 4,
Nov. 2009, pp. 12–15.
[7]
Lennox Industries, “Lennox,” June 2013. [Online]. Available: https:
//play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.lennox.len
[8]
This Is Green, Inc., “This is green,” June 2013. [Online]. Available:
https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/this-is-green/id337495391
[9]
Adbrownies Advertising Ltd., “Low carbon life,” June 2013. [Online].
Available: http://www.appleapp.com/low-carbon-life.html
[10]
SampathG, “Green footprint calculator,” June 2013. [Online]. Avail-
able:
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.virdea.mobile.
android.carbonfp
[11]
M.
Barton,
“MeterRead,”
June
2013.
[On-
line].
Available:
http://www.macworld.com/product/71548/
meterread-sale-gogreen-save-money-save-earth-.html
[12]
PowerTutor.org, “PowerTutor,” June 2013. [Online]. Available: https:
//play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=edu.umich.PowerTutor
[13]
The
Apple
Seed
Store,
“Green
gas
saver
1.0,”
June
2013. [Online]. Available: http://iphone-apps.toptenreviews.com/green/
3015-green-gassaver-screenshot4.html
[14]
GSH
Group,
“GSH
ienergy,”
June
2013.
[Online].
Available:
https://itunes.apple.com/en/app/gsh-ienergy/id377909195
[15]
GreenWave Reality, Inc., “DONG energy eFlex,” June 2013. [Online].
Available: http://dong-energy-eﬂex.topapp.net
[16]
S. Bechhofer, F. van Harmelen, J. Hendler, I. Horrocks, D. L.
McGuinness,
P.
F.
Patel-Schneider,
and
L.
A.
Stein,
“OWL
web
ontology
language,”
Dec.
2013.
[Online].
Available:
http:
//www.w3.org/TR/owl-ref/
[17]
S. Rachuri, Y.-h. Han, S. Foufou, S. C. Feng, U. Roy, F. Wang,
R. D. Sriram, and K. W. Lyons, “A model for capturing product
assembly information,” Journal of Computing and Information Science
in Engineering, vol. 6, Mar. 2006, pp. 11–21.
[18]
S. Fenves, S. Foufou, C. Bock, and R. Sriram, “CPM2: a core model
for product data,” Journal of Computing and Information Science in
Engineering, vol. 8, no. 1, 2008, p. 014501.
[19]
H. J. Pels, “Classiﬁcation hierarchies for product data modelling,”
Production Planning & Control, vol. 17, no. 4, 2006, pp. 367–377.
[20]
J. H. Lee, S. J. Fenves, C. Bock, H.-W. Suh, S. Rachuri, X. Fiorentini,
and R. D. Sriram, “A semantic product modeling framework and its
application to behavior evaluation,” IEEE Transactions on Automation
Science and Engineering, vol. 9, no. 1, 2011.
[21]
G. A. Miller, “WordNet: a lexical database for english,” Communica-
tions of the ACM, vol. 38, no. 11, 1995, pp. 39–41.
[22]
D. Merrill, “Mashups: The new breed of web app,” in developerWorks.
IBM Corporation, July 2009.
[23]
E. Maximilien, “Mobile mashups: Thoughts, directions, and chal-
lenges,” in IEEE International Conference on Semantic Computing,
ICSC ’08, Aug. 2008, pp. 597–600.
[24]
K. Xu, X. Zhang, M. Song, and J. Song, “Mobile mashup: Architecture,
challenges and suggestions,” in International Conference on Manage-
ment and Service Science, MASS ’09, Sept. 2009, pp. 1–4.
[25]
S. Knoch and A. Kr¨oner, “A mashup supporting sustainable decision
making,” in 9th International Conference on Intelligent Environments,
IE ’13, 2013, pp. 274–277.
[26]
Macroglossa, “Macroglossa,” Feb. 2014. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.macroglossa.com
[27]
S. Germesin and M. Romanelli, “terkait: semantic interactions with
web content,” in 8th International Conference on Semantic Systems,
I-SEMANTICS ’12, V. Presutti and H. S. Pinto, Eds.
ACM, 2012, pp.
169–172.
135
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 7 no 1 & 2, year 2014, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2014, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

