46
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A Review on IoT Frameworks Supporting Multi-Level Interoperability – The 
Semantic Social Network of Things Framework
 
Antonios Pliatsios, Christos Goumopoulos 
Information and Communication Systems Engineering 
Dept., University of the Aegean  
Samos, Greece 
e-mail: icsdd18007@icsd.aegean.gr, goumop@aegean.gr 
 
Konstantinos Kotis 
Dept. of Cultural Technology and Communication  
University of the Aegean  
Mytilene, Greece 
e-mail: kotis@aegean.gr
Abstract— The Internet of Things (IoT) paradigm advocates 
the massive use of sensing and communication technologies 
embedded in the physical world, which provides the potential to 
collect huge volumes of data and connect them to intelligent 
systems. As the number of IoT devices is increasing with 
geometric progress, ensuring interoperability and handling of 
the big heterogeneous data they generate is of major importance 
for the development of smart applications and services. In this 
context, a systematic review of contemporary IoT frameworks 
based on a multi-level interoperability consideration is 
performed and findings are critically discussed. Challenges and 
open issues that emerge in this research area are pointed out, 
and research opportunities and insights are suggested. 
Motivated by the shortcomings of the current solutions to 
support open, interoperable, intelligent and collaborative IoT 
environments, the concept of Semantic Social Network of 
Things (SSNT) is introduced. SSNT specifies the integration of 
device-to-device collaborative services which semantically 
enable heterogeneous objects to (socially) interact and 
participate in communities of smart objects. By establishing 
social relationships and taking collaborative actions, such 
communities can support users to achieve their goals. A 
middleware-based framework architecture is presented to enact 
the SSNT abstraction, and a proof-of-concept application in the 
smart agriculture domain is outlined to demonstrate important 
features of this approach. 
Keywords- Review; Internet of Things; Interoperability; IoT 
frameworks; Ontologies; Semantic Social Network of Things 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
The Internet of Things (IoT) is the up-and-coming big 
step in the field of technology. The IoT concept, initially 
utilized as an umbrella term for a range of various emerging 
technologies such as “embedded internet” and “pervasive 
computing”, is currently paving its way for being the key 
driver for digital transformation in several application 
domains among which manufacturing, automotive, health, 
smart cities and smart farming.  
IoT growth is explosive and there are already billions of 
connected smart objects, embedded systems, sensors and 
microcontrollers that have penetrated our world connecting 
home users, businesses, public facilities and enterprise 
systems. New technologies are being developed to meet the 
continuous incremental requirements of a new digital world 
where heterogeneous devices have been connected, forming 
a part of the IoT ecosystem. Since the density of IoT systems 
and technologies is becoming increasingly high, ensuring 
interoperability and handling of large-scale heterogeneous 
data is turning into a vital key factor in the development of 
successful smart applications [1]. 
Undoubtedly, there are still many challenges to overcome 
in order to fully realize the IoT vision [2][3]. The vast number 
of interconnected devices gives rise to scalability, 
heterogeneity and several interoperability issues [4]. One of 
the crucial issues is that IoT landscape is made up of 
proprietary devices and platforms that were created to 
provide a single service and act as "vertical silos" [5]. These 
silos require the creation of cross-domain, cross-platform and 
cross-organizational 
services 
due 
to 
their 
lack 
of 
interoperability and openness. Thus, there is an important 
need to revise the philosophy of IoT platforms and focus on 
trying to build synergies between different IoT platforms. 
This will lay the foundation for interconnecting IoT devices 
and services that collaborate together to achieve a common 
goal defined implicitly or explicitly by people. 
In this paper, a review of contemporary IoT frameworks 
is performed to analyze and evaluate relevant contributions 
related to the establishment of open, interoperable, intelligent 
and collaborative IoT environments. Accordingly, a 
classification scheme is proposed to effectively represent the 
results of the related literature review analysis. The 
classification is based on the four interoperability levels, i.e., 
technical, syntactic, semantic and organizational, explored in 
our previous work [1], extended by the broader scope of the 
systematic literature review performed. The comparative 
analysis of the explored IoT frameworks allows us to identify 
important limitations, challenges and open issues that future 
research needs to address. Our investigation on the topic can 
be framed by the following research questions: 
 
RQ1: Do the current IoT frameworks provide solutions 
supporting multi-level interoperability? 

47
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
RQ2: What is missing from current IoT frameworks in order 
to fully support open environments/spaces of heterogeneous 
but collaborative smart objects? 
RQ3: What are the open issues that future researchers should 
focus on in terms of smart objects interoperability? 
RQ4: How collaboration and social interaction mechanisms 
can at a conceptual level address multi-level interoperability 
issues in open IoT environments? 
 
The literature review follows a systematic approach 
consisting of three phases as suggested by [6]:  
1) Review planning: specification of research questions and 
classification scheme; and development of the review 
protocol which includes the research strategy (literature 
databases, research keywords) and the definition of 
inclusion/exclusion criteria. 
2) Review running gathering of scientific publications 
according to the research strategy; and selection of 
relevant work by applying the selection criteria. 
3) Review reporting: overview of the selected work; and 
comparative analysis of the explored solutions based on 
the specified classification scheme. 
Regarding the review protocol, several academic 
bibliography sources were used such as Web of Science, 
Google Scholar, IEEE Xplore Digital Library, Elsevier 
Scopus, ACM digital library, Citeseer library, Science Direct, 
and arXiv.org in order to search for relevant scientific 
contributions of the last 10 years. Search keywords were 
limited to the following terms: Internet of things, Web of 
Things, Interoperability, Ontologies, Semantics, and Social 
IoT. In addition, the following search expressions were used: 
IoT 
Frameworks 
addressing 
interoperability 
OR 
Interoperability OR Internet of Things OR Semantic Web of 
Things 
AND 
Semantic 
Web 
Technologies 
OR 
Interoperability OR ontology. 
Besides the chronological filtering, other selection criteria 
for the bibliography collection included the publication 
language (studies had to be written in English) and the 
pertinence to the research agenda of the review. Selected 
studies had to present initiatives related to interoperability in 
the IoT domain, as well as current IoT frameworks that 
provide solutions improving interoperability, covering at 
least one of the research questions stated. Both conference 
and journal papers were eligible but not short studies.  
Motivated by the identified shortcomings of the reviewed 
solutions to support open, interoperable, intelligent and 
collaborative IoT environments the concept of Semantic 
Social Network of Things (SSNT) is introduced. SSNT 
specifies the integration of device-to-device collaborative 
services which semantically enable heterogeneous objects to 
(socially) interact and participate in communities of smart 
objects. By establishing social relationships and taking 
collaborative actions, such communities can support users to 
achieve their common goals. In a sense, the interoperable 
societies of things, services and people are forming an SSNT 
structure that allows scalable object/service discovery as in 
the case of social networks of humans.  
Towards realizing the SSNT concept, a framework is 
proposed for the establishment and exploitation of social 
relationships among heterogeneous but interoperable smart 
things. A high-level architecture is presented specifying the 
main components that enable things/objects to be identified 
as potentially able to participate in communities of smart 
things/objects, creating groups of common interest and 
working collaboratively towards achieving common goals. 
Furthermore, a proof-of-concept application in the smart 
agriculture domain is outlined to demonstrate important 
features of this approach. In this example scenario, 
summaries of sensor data are translated to the RDF modeling 
language based on the Semantic Sensor Network (SSN) 
ontology. When the sensor data streams are semantically 
annotated, semantic techniques (e.g., SPARQL queries and 
reasoning) can be used for efficient processing. Then, social 
groups of objects (generating and consuming the annotated 
data) are created that aim to achieve common goals, and new 
knowledge is produced from their interaction. 
The contributions of this paper can be summarized as 
follows: 
• 
We provide an extensive review of the up-to-date 
research progress on contemporary solutions regarding 
interoperability in the IoT domain. 
• 
We propose a classification which contributes to 
representing a deep analysis of a comprehensive 
literature review, as well as comparing IoT frameworks 
with a view to providing solutions supporting multi-level 
interoperability. 
• 
We identify a number of limitations, challenges and open 
issues that future studies in this research area of IoT need 
to focus on. 
• 
We introduce the concept  of Semantic Social Network 
of Things (SSNT) to describe a network of things that 
'speak', 'behave', 'collaborate' and 'co-exist' just like a 
'social 
network' 
of 
people, 
establishing 
social 
relationships and taking collaborative actions to support 
users to achieve their common goals. 
• 
We propose an architectural design for the SSNT 
framework that specifies the main software components 
to seamlessly confront the problem of multi-level 
interoperability tackling also the constraints of devices 
with limited resources. An evaluation scenario of the 
SSNT 
framework 
in 
the 
agricultural 
domain, 
representing an instantiation of the SSNT framework, is 
also provided.   
The structure of the paper is as follows. Section II presents 
background knowledge and motivation. In Section III state of 
the art approaches confronting interoperability in the IoT 
domain are reviewed and reported. Section IV outlines 
essential 
design 
requirements 
to 
develop 
a 
novel 
interoperable IoT framework and highlights open research 

48
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
challenges, as it also discusses the architecture and main 
modules of the proposed SSNT framework, with an aim to 
enhance 
interoperability 
and 
collaboration 
in 
IoT 
environments. Finally, Section V concludes the paper.  
II. 
BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION 
This section outlines the evolution of existing approaches 
in the direction of establishing interoperable and cooperative 
IoT 
environments. 
In 
addition, 
the 
multi-level 
interoperability taxonomy that is used in the systematic 
review of IoT frameworks is presented. 
A. From the Internet of Things to the Semantic Social 
Network of Things 
The IoT concept implies that all things are harmoniously 
connected so they can communicate, and they are also easily 
accessible from the Internet to deliver services to end-users 
[7]. Presently, one of the biggest problems which the IoT is 
facing, concerns the lack of interoperability, arising from the 
heterogeneity of devices, systems, protocols and platforms. 
Consequently, it is necessary to focus on an interoperable and 
collaborative IoT. A first step in this direction is provided by 
Web of Things (WoT) [8]. WoT provides an Application 
Layer that simplifies the development of IoT applications 
composed of multiple devices across different platforms and 
application domains. WoT develops IoT with a common 
stack based on web services. Unlike IoT that focuses on the 
Network Layer, WoT assumes that connectivity between 
devices is achieved and focuses on how to build IoT 
applications. But even if the problem of interconnection with 
the help of web protocols such as HTTP (Hypertext Transfer 
Protocol Secure) and CoAP (Constrained Application 
Protocol) has been resolved, the problem of perception and 
context awareness in IoT ecosystems remains.  
For this reason, the Semantic Web of Things (SWoT) is 
proposed [9]. SWoT is a current exploration area targeting to 
assimilate Semantic Web-based technologies with the IoT. It 
can also be considered as a transformation of the WoT by 
incorporating semantics. SWoT targets the ability to 
exchange and use information among data and ontologies. 
However, the challenges to move from the IoT and WoT 
towards the SWoT are numerous; some of these are to define 
a common description that allows data, and device 
description to be universally understandable, create 
extensible annotations, i.e., from minimal semantic 
descriptions towards more elaborate ones.  
Currently, there are significant ongoing efforts for the 
definition of common semantics to collaborate on different 
data modelling approaches. Cross-domain interoperability is 
expected to be one of the main drivers for the realization of 
the next state of IoT computing paradigm which is already 
getting shape under the term of Internet of Everything (IoE). 
The IoE “is bringing together people, processes, data, and 
things to make network connections more relevant and 
valuable than ever before-turning information into actions 
that create new capabilities, richer experiences, and 
unprecedented 
economic 
opportunity 
for 
businesses, 
individuals, and countries” [10]. Figure 1 depicts the IoE data 
management model. 
 
Figure 1. Data Management Model for the Internet of Everything [10]. 
 
Another 
approach 
towards 
a 
collaborative 
and 
interoperable IoT is the Social Internet of Things (SIoT). In 
social IoT, different devices work together to create social 
relationships with each other (such as social relationships on 
social network of people) [11][12]. The basic idea is to utilize 
human social networks (e.g., Twitter) as service discovery 
and provisioning infrastructure. However, the proposed 
notion does not align with the fundamental concept of IoT in 
which the ubiquitous connectivity of objects is envisioned to 
provide services to humans. Another attempt is made in a 
related work where authors discussed the integration of IoT 
with social networks [13]. An important step in laying down 
the vision of SIoT is taken in [14][15]. Therein, the various 
policies to determine the establishment and management of 
relationships among IoT objects are discussed. Different 
perspectives between human and IoT social networks are 
outlined in Figure 2. 
SIoT defines several forms of socialization between 
objects. Firstly, the parent-object relationship is defined 
between objects manufactured by the same company. In 
addition, between objects there are relationships of people 
who share experiences, for example in a discussion or in their 
work or in any interaction. Another type of relationship is 
defined for objects owned by the same user such as 
smartphones, computers, smart TVs, etc. This relationship is 
called the object-ownership relationship. Finally, social-
object relationship is defined when devices come in contact 
with their owners, such as smartphones belonging to friends. 
To manage the resulting network and relationships, a 
foreseen SIoT architecture is made of four major components 
[15] among others. Relationship management enables SIoT 
to begin updating and terminating relationships between 
objects. The service discovery identifies which items can 
provide the required service in the same way that people 
search for friendships and information. The composition of 

49
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
services allows for interaction between objects. Reliability 
management aims at understanding how information is 
processed by other members. 
 
Figure 2. Comparison between Social Network of Humans and SIoT [14]. 
   
In this paper an approach that seeks to provide 
mechanisms to create interoperable, collaborative and open 
IoT environments is proposed and captured in the concept of 
Semantic Social Network of Things (SSNT). SSNT entails a 
network of things that 'speak', 'behave', 'collaborate' and 'co-
exist' just like a 'social network' of people.  For example, 
different intelligent objects that are able to interconnect and 
make decisions in an interoperable way, without human 
intervention, constitute an SSNT. This should not be 
misinterpreted as smart objects in a social network. Even a 
more elaborated case is that these devices may not only 
inform each other but negotiate a result. For example, smart 
home sensors working together to adjust the power 
consumption to suit the user preferences and concurrently 
optimize cost based on electricity provider charging policies.  
An everyday life application scenario is described next to 
make the SSNT more understandable. Let us consider a 
businesswoman named Rafaela, who lives in Athens and 
employs an SSNT network and an SSNT recommendation 
system.  Rafaela plans to invite her colleagues, who are based 
in other countries, to Athens for a critical meeting next week. 
She wants to make an appointment that should be accessible 
to all of her partners based on their availability. For this 
purpose, she initiates an appointment using her system which 
is based on an SSNT network containing all the information 
available to Rafaela and her associates. It is important to note 
that by the time Rafaela uses the SSNT network, IoT devices 
have already maintained social relationships with other IoT 
devices using the SSNT perception layer. The system 
coordinates with the affiliate scheduling systems and 
proposes an appointment time for her and other affiliates 
based on their availability, and the availability of airline 
flights. This is done by overcoming problems of lack of data 
interoperability as her colleagues are located in countries 
where the date and time system is different (e.g., USA, 
China). 
 In addition, Rafaela has some health problems, the most 
important of which is asthma, so there is information on her 
health in a system based on an SSNT network via wearables 
and sensors mounted in indoor and outdoor environments. In 
this way, an SSNT network can recommend that at the 
meeting location the air quality is acceptable or not. Again, 
data interoperability problems are overcome as city/building 
sensors measure their parameters, for example, in different 
units of measurement. Based on these recommendations from 
the SSNT networks, the proper recommendations of the 
meeting place and time can be provided. When all users 
confirm this appointment, the system sets it and sends an 
invitation to everyone. 
Table I summarizes the evolution route from IoT to the 
proposed SSNT. It shows the key features and objectives of 
the approaches discussed such as WoT, SWoT, IoE, SIoT up 
to the SSNT. As shown in Table I, WoT attempts to reuse and 
adapt existing web technologies to build new applications 
and services [9]. SWoT focuses on machine-understandable 
data and in the description of data with common 
vocabularies, concentrating on the reuse of domain 
knowledge. SIoT targets to utilize human social networks as 
service discovery and provisioning infrastructure [11][12]. 
Finally, the proposed SSNT framework focuses on a network 
where different intelligent objects are able to interconnect 
and make decisions without human intervention leveraging 
on semantically annotated information. 
B. IoT Interoperability Levels 
 There are numerous definitions in the literature for 
interoperability. The IEEE defines interoperability as "the 
ability of two or more systems or components to exchange 
information and use the information exchanged" [16]. 
Moreover, interoperability can be defined as a measure of the 
degree to which diverse systems, organizations, and/or 
individuals are able to work together to achieve a common 
goal [17]. IoT interoperability is a multifaceted issue and the 
solutions to be addressed must be in line with many factors 
that are also referred to in the literature as interoperability 
levels.  A taxonomy of interoperability for IoT is based on 
four levels: technical, syntactic, semantic and organizational 
interoperability [18][19]. In the following each level is 
analyzed explicitly. 
1) 
Technical Interoperability 
Technical Interoperability includes three sublevels of 
classification, namely, the interoperability of devices, the 
interoperability of networks and the interoperability of 
platforms. 
a) Device Interoperability 
Typically, an IoT system or IoT Sensor Network 
communication is designed using one of the popular low-
level standard technologies like Zigbee, Bluetooth Mesh, Z-
wave, WiFi, etc. for devices to collaborate with each other. 
One of the current IoT challenges is to add a new device in 
an existing network that is having a different communication 
protocol to collaborate compared to the existing device 
network. 

50
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
TABLE I. FROM SOCIAL NETWORK AND IOT TO SSNT. 
 
Source 
Nodes 
Connection 
Enabling 
Technologies/Services 
Target 
World Wide Web 
[2] 
Web pages 
Hyperlinks 
HTML, XML 
Share resources 
Social Network 
[11][12] 
Persons 
Social Relations 
Network analysis, 
Community detection 
Analysis relation 
principles and 
evolution 
 
IoT 
[2][3][4][7] 
Devices/ Objects/ Things 
Wireless signals 
 
RFID, LoRaWan, Bluetooth, 
GPS, IPv6, … 
Remote detection and 
control 
 
WoT 
[7][8]  
Web-enabled objects 
 
Web, Smart Gateways 
 
REST, HTTP, CoAP, JSON, 
Web sockets 
 
WoT attempts to reuse 
and adapt existing web 
technologies to build 
new applications and 
services 
 
SWoT 
[7][8][9] 
Machine-
Understandable Objects 
 
Semantic Web, Smart 
Gateways 
 
JSON-LD, linked data, 
Ontologies, Linked Open 
Vocabularies, Reasoners 
Machine-
understandable data - 
Describe data with 
common vocabularies - 
Reuse domain 
knowledge - Link to 
other data - Ease the 
reasoning 
IoE 
[10][11] 
People, Things, Data 
 
Internet, TCP/IP 
 
IPv6 extensions 
(MIPv6, GLoWBAL IPv6) 
 
Intelligent connection. 
Machines will become 
more intelligent and 
cognitive by having 
more access to data 
and expanded network 
opportunities. 
SIoT 
[12][13][14][15] 
Objects, Humans, Data 
 
Social Relations of 
Things’ owners 
Relationship management, 
Service discovery, Service 
composition, Trust 
management 
Utilize human social 
networks (e.g. Twitter) 
as service discovery 
and provisioning 
infrastructure 
SSNT 
this work 
Objects, Humans, Data 
Social Relations and 
semantic links of Things, 
Platforms, Networks 
SSNT Architecture Layers 
and Framework Modules  
A social network where 
heterogeneous 
intelligent objects are 
able to interconnect 
and make decisions 
without human 
intervention 
 
Interoperability of the IoT devices is hence becoming 
more and more important to build a scalable, adaptable and a 
seamless IoT device network [20]. The IoT ecosystem needs 
interoperability to create seamless programmability or 
configurability of the various products or devices or sensors 
to connect and collaborate. There is a need for a consolidated 
common standard that makes devices communicable, 
operable, and programmable, regardless of make, model, 
manufacturer, or industry. For example, consider a smart 
home scenario where the light bulbs and thermostats use 
ZigBee, speakers communicate with Bluetooth, and switches 
communicate through WiFi. Interoperability in this example 
enables different devices to understand and translate between 
these disparate communications technologies. An ideal IoT 
platform would offer a pool of standardized communication 
protocols where the device manufacturers may select the 
appropriate protocols [20] (e.g., CoAP for constrained 
devices). In the literature, device level interoperability relies 
either on a gateway solution (sometimes called protocol 
converters) that can be extended using plug-ins, to support 
new communication protocols or by instructing the device 
vendors to only use the protocols that are supported (such as 
Fosstrak). For example, the Apple HomeKit, If-This-Then-
That (IFTTT) Eclipse Ponte and Light-Weight M2M 
(LWM2M) are some of the gateway solutions in the literature 
[21]. 
Devices that are integrated into the world of IoT are 
becoming more and more ubiquitous. These smart devices / 
things are either devices with a lot of computing power like 
smartphones and Raspberry Pi, or devices with built-in 
microswitches and low-power actuators, such as Arduino, 
Wispmote, Libelium, and others [22]. The problem of 
interoperability at this level is due to the inability of all these 
devices with different architectures and power levels to 
interact properly. 
 

51
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
b) Network Interoperability 
Moreover, due to the variety and heterogeneity of IoT 
devices, many communication protocols have been 
developed to cover all requirements in the IoT market.  Home 
appliances, such as smart air conditioners, refrigerators, 
televisions, etc., use WiFi and 2G / 3G / 4G cellular 
communications. Other mobile devices use more low-power 
and short-range wireless technologies, such as Bluetooth, 
ZigBee, Beacons, RFID belonging to the WBAN IEEE 
802.15.6 family. While a new category created for sensor 
applications is that of long-range and Low-Power Wide-Area 
Networks (LPWAN). Some of them are the wireless 
technologies LoRaWan, SigFox and NB-IoT [23]. This level 
of interoperability refers to the difficulty of communication 
of the IoT devices using different communication protocols. 
At this level of interoperability, mechanisms are used that 
allow the continuous exchange of messages between systems 
across different heterogeneous networks. These include 
issues such as addressing, routing, resource optimization, 
security, QoS and mobility support. 
c) Platform Interoperability 
The IoT platform is a comprehensive suite of services that 
facilitates services, such as development, maintenance, 
analysis, visualization and intelligent decision-making 
capabilities in an IoT application. Interoperability issues of 
IoT platforms appear because many of these systems are 
tailored for specific IoT applications. Some of the most 
popular platforms are Google Cloud Platform, IBM Watson 
IoT, ThingWorx, oneM2M, Microsoft Azure Cloud, 
ThingSpeak [24]. Each of the above platforms follows its 
data sharing policy, it has its operating system, and this has 
the effect of creating heterogeneous IoT systems and 
increasing the problem of interoperability. 
Today, the IoT environment comprises vertically oriented 
platforms for things. Developers who want to use them need 
to negotiate access individually and adapt to the platform-
specific API and information models. Having to perform 
these actions for each platform often outweighs the possible 
gains from adapting applications to multiple platforms. This 
fragmentation of the IoT and the missing interoperability 
result in high entry barriers for developers and prevent the 
emergence of broadly accepted IoT ecosystems. 
Today, we are dealing with various vertically oriented and 
mostly closed systems. Architectures for IoT are built on 
heterogeneous standards [25][26][27] (e.g., IETF CoAP, 
OASIS MQTT, OMA LWM2M, OGC SWE, or OneM2M) 
or even proprietary interfaces. As a result, most existing and 
emerging IoT platforms offer heterogeneous ways of 
accessing things and their data. This causes interoperability 
problems when overarching, cross-platform, and cross-
domain applications are to be built, and eventually prevents 
the emergence of vibrant IoT ecosystems  
For example, the Apple HomeKit supports its own open 
source language Swift, Google Brillo uses Weave, and 
Amazon AWS IoT offers SDKs for embedded C and NodeJS 
[24]. This non-uniformity causes hindrance for application 
developers to develop cross-platform and cross-domain IoT 
applications. Developers need to obtain extensive knowledge 
of the platform specific APIs and information models of each 
different platform to be able to adapt their applications from 
one platform to another. A cross-platform IoT application can 
access different IoT platforms and integrate data from various 
platforms. After cross-platform interoperability is enabled, 
cross-domain interoperability can be achieved in which 
different platforms within heterogeneous domains are 
federated to build horizontal IoT applications. For example, 
a smart home platform can provide domain-specific enablers 
such as air temperature and lighting conditions. These 
enablers can then be exploited by other IoT platforms, such 
as smart healthcare, to provide more innovative applications 
and scenarios.  
2) 
Syntactic Interoperability 
Syntactic interoperability refers to the interoperability of 
data formats and encodings used in any exchange of 
information or services between heterogeneous systems and 
IoT entities. Such forms of standardization are, for example, 
XML (Extensible Markup Language), JSON (JavaScript 
Object 
Notation) 
and 
RDF 
(Resource 
Description 
Framework) [28]. The encoding and decoding of messages 
are done using editorial rules, defined by a grammar. The 
problem of syntactic interoperability arises due to the great 
variety of grammars that each architecture employs and 
consequently, the IοT devices could not communicate 
properly. 
Syntactic interoperability, provided, for instance, by 
XML or the SQL (Structured Query Language) standards 
[29], is a prerequisite to semantic definitions. It involves a 
common data format and common protocol to structure any 
data so that the manner of information processing will be 
interpretable from the structure. It also allows detection of 
syntactic errors, thus allowing receiving systems to request 
resending of any message that appears to be garbled or 
incomplete. No semantic communication is possible if the 
syntax is garbled or unable to represent the data. However, 
the information represented in one syntax may in some cases 
be accurately translated into a different syntax. Where 
accurate translation of syntaxes is possible, systems using 
different syntaxes may also be interpreted accurately. In some 
cases, the ability to accurately translate information among 
systems using different syntaxes may be limited to one 
direction, when the formalisms used have different levels of 
expressivity (ability to express information). 
3) 
Semantic Interoperability 
Semantic interoperability is characterized as the ability to 
transmit information, data and knowledge among agents, 
services and applications in a meaningful way, inside and 
outside the Semantic Web [30][31]. It is the description of 
smart devices according to their data, services, and 
capabilities in mechanically comprehensible form using a 
common vocabulary. Semantic interoperability is achieved 

52
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
when the exchange of data is made harmoniously 
independent of the structure of the original data giving a 
common meaning [32]. This can be done either by existing 
standards or agreements on the form and importance of data 
or can be done using a common vocabulary either in a schema 
and/or in an ontological approach [33]. 
The use of an ontology is the most common way of adding 
semantics to the IoT data. It is a way of modelling 
information that extends the concept of the Semantic Web 
into the IoT. The most important Semantic Web technologies 
have been standardized by the World Wide Web Consortium 
and are: Resource Description Framework RDF - a 
lightweight data metadata model for describing ontology 
properties, SPARQL, and the RDF Query Language. 
Existing solutions [35][36] suggest the use of unified 
ontologies to address semantic interoperability issues and 
automation related to the heterogeneity of data. However, the 
multiple possible consolidations developed by field experts 
pose many challenges as each consolidated ontology 
proposes its autonomous classification. It is therefore 
imperative to improve ontology matching and ontology 
alignment [37] to discover the most appropriate strategies 
that can overcome the heterogeneity problem in the IoT and 
bridge the semantic gap between IoT entities at the level of 
Information / Applications. 
4) 
Organizational Interoperability 
Organizational interoperability refers to the successful 
organization of a system to communicate effectively and to 
transmit the information in a harmonious manner [37]. To do 
this, the other three levels of interoperability, i.e., technical, 
syntactic and semantic interoperability, must be ensured. 
High organizational interoperability means that information 
has 
been 
properly 
transmitted 
irrespective 
of 
the 
heterogeneity of devices, networks, types of compilation and 
modelling of information [38]. 
Organizational interoperability is concerned with the 
coordination and alignment of business processes and 
information architectures that span both intra- and inter-
organizational 
boundaries. 
Coordination 
of 
business 
processes across organizational boundaries is essential if a 
single, aggregated view of a service from the customers' 
perspective is to be achieved. It is suggested that 
administrations could develop an exemplar scheme that 
would define standard approaches to each of the main 
requirements of any public service and use this exemplar to 
benchmark all other services; that common functionality 
could be provided on a shared basis through a broker service 
to reduce development, deployment and operational costs to 
the public administration and to each service fulfilment 
agency. Furthermore, it ensures consistency of experience for 
users of services across all agencies in the public sector 
through the use of agreed standards across all services; that 
expenditure reviews could be undertaken to ensure that 
financial priority is given to those schemes that comply with 
the structured customer support services set out above and 
with interoperability standards; and that each administration 
could develop a central programmed of organization 
development assistance and funding to bring this change 
about.  
Table II provides a summary of the aforementioned 
interoperability levels analysis. 
 
TABLE II. SUMMARY OF THE ANALYSIS OF THE INTEROPERABILITY LEVELS. 
Interoperability 
Level  
Source 
Aim  
Objects  
Solutions  
State of Knowledge  
Technical  
[20][21][22][23][24]
[25][26][27] 
Technically 
secure data 
transfer  
Signals  
Protocols of data transfer  
Almost developed  
Syntactic  
[28][29] 
Processing of 
received data  
Data  
Standardized data 
exchange formats,  
e.g. XML  
Almost developed  
Semantic  
[30][31][32][33] 
[34][35][36][37] 
Processing and 
interpretation of 
received data  
Information/ 
Knowledge  
Common directories, data 
keys, ontologies  
Theoretically developed, but practical 
implementation problems  
Organizational  
[37][38] 
Automatic 
linkage of 
processes among 
different systems  
Processes  
(workflow)  
Architectural models, 
standardized process 
elements  
Conceptual clarity still lacking, vague 
concepts with large scope of 
interpretation  
 
 
 

53
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
III. 
REVIEW OF IOT FRAMEWORKS ADDRESSING 
INTEROPERABILITY  
This section presents our comprehensive review on 
existing IoT frameworks. The research was launched at a 
previous conference paper and is enriched with more 
information. The section concludes with a discussion on 
the technologies described and summarized their 
limitations and challenges. 
A. Examined Solutions 
A significant research effort has been devoted to 
providing solutions in the direction of increasing 
interoperability at all four levels presented in Section II. In 
this section, we examine solutions provided by eight 
related research efforts: BiG-IoT, INTER-IoT, VICINITY, 
AGILE, Open-IoT, Machine-to-Machine Measurement 
(M3) Framework, FIESTA IoT and SymbIoTe. These 
projects are developing interoperability solutions at 
different interoperability levels and for this purpose were 
chosen to be analyzed in this work.  
1) 
BIG-IoT 
BiG-IoT [38][39] focuses on addressing the semantic 
and organizational levels of IoT interoperability issues by 
creating the BiG-IoT API. It is about a generic web 
platform that unifies multiple platforms and different 
middleware. The Web API and semantic information 
representation models are defined in cooperation with the 
Web of Things Interest Group at W3C, expanding the 
standards of this community. The project has chosen 
schema.org as a basic vocabulary of concepts.  
Through the API, which has a defined architecture, it is 
easier to create applications and services for heterogeneous 
platforms. To increase the level of interoperability at 
semantic, but especially at the organizational level the IoT 
API is framed by the following functions [40]: 
• 
Identity management for registering resources. 
• 
Discover resources according to user-defined search 
criteria. 
• 
Access metadata, and data (download data as well as 
publish / record feeds). 
• 
Vocabulary management for semantic descriptions of 
concepts. 
• 
Security, 
including 
identity 
management, 
authorization and key management. 
• 
Billing that allows you to make money through 
payment and billing mechanisms. 
2) 
INTER-IoT 
The INTER-IoT project aims to comprehensively 
address the lack of interoperability in the IoT realm by 
proposing a full-fledged approach facilitating "voluntary 
interoperability" at any level of IoT platforms and across 
any IoT application domain, thus guaranteeing a seamless 
integration of heterogeneous IoT technology [41].  
INTER-IoT is based on the following main 
functionalities 
to 
address 
technical 
and 
syntactic 
interoperability:  
• 
Methods and tools for providing interoperability 
among and across each layer of IoT platforms. 
• 
A 
global 
framework 
called 
INTER-FW 
for 
programming and managing interoperable IoT 
platforms, 
including 
INTER-API 
and 
several 
interoperability tools for every layer. 
• 
Engineering Methodology based on the CASE tool for 
IoT platforms integration/interconnection. 
Three main types of interoperability (i.e., technical, 
syntactic and semantic) are enabled by INTER-IoT 
[24][42]. Universal syntactic and semantic interoperability 
among any platform with different data formats and 
ontologies is possible through the INTER-IoT DS2DS 
(Data & Semantics-to-Data & Semantics) solution. 
Moreover, other INTER-IoT layers like D2D (Device-to-
Device) and N2N (Networking-to-Networking), can 
provide organizational interoperability among smart 
elements, enabling connectivity to the network. 
3) 
VICINITY 
The VICINITY project aims at interfacing cloud-based 
platforms from various application domains by providing 
"interoperability as a service" for the IoT [43]. The 
proposed interoperable platform is presented as a virtual 
neighborhood, a “social network” where users can share 
access to their smart objects without losing control. The 
project team has thoroughly reviewed all existing standards 
and platforms, selecting those needed to build a service or 
increase interoperability. 
The project is not so concerned with technical 
interoperability. For communication between devices, 
wireless networks like WiFi and ZigBee are mainly used.  
Main goal of the VICINITY project is to increase semantic 
interoperability. Using the standard W3C Web Language 
Ontology, specific ontologies are developed in a variety of 
areas, such as ontologies for energy and building, 
extending 
the 
SAREF 
reference 
ontology 
[44] 
interoperability.  
The VICINITY ontology network is composed of 
cross-domain ontologies, addressing the modelling of 
general concepts like time, space, Web of Things. It will 
represent the information for exchanging IoT descriptor 
data between peers. Domain-oriented ontologies aim to 
cover vertical domains, such as Health, Transport, 
Buildings, etc. 
4) 
AGILE 
The AGILE project builds a modular open-source 
interoperable Gateway solution (hardware and software 
gateway) for the IoT focusing on the physical, network 
communication, processing, storage, and application layers 
[24][45]. The AGILE software modules are addressing 

54
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
functions, such as device management, communication 
networks like area and sensor networks and solutions for 
distributed storage. Moreover, the AGILE approach 
includes security features that allow users to share data in 
a trusted way. 
The 
AGILE 
project 
focuses 
on 
technical 
interoperability both at hardware and software levels. 
Within the project, various popular and low-cost 
technologies, such as Raspberry Pi are being developed 
and expanded. This creates the "Gateway Maker", a 
proposal to create interoperable gateways that will be used 
for multi-purpose and heterogeneous purposes. At the same 
time, the project provides open-source code and a web-
based environment (Node-Red) for developers to develop 
new, innovative applications. The project does not address 
any approach to the semantic and organizational level of 
interoperability. The architecture comprises four layered 
domains. 
5) 
Open-IoT 
Open-IoT 
focuses 
on 
increasing 
semantic 
interoperability [46][47]. In the framework of the project, 
a middleware platform was created that allows semantic 
integration of applications on the cloud. For information 
modelling, the ontology of W3C sensor networks (SSN) 
are used as a common standard for the semantic integration 
of various IoT systems. Appropriate infrastructures collect 
and semantically comment on the data of the different 
sensors. Also, another semantic technique called Linked 
Data is used to enrich the data and interface it.   
Open-IoT innovates with other programs as it 
implements a platform with modules for collecting data 
and applications in cloud computing infrastructures, 
modules 
for 
creating 
semantically 
interoperable 
applications, and applications for mobile sensors. The 
implementation of semantic techniques in the cloud is 
something that adds value to the project and makes it stand 
out from other similar solutions. These functionalities 
provide a basis for the development of novel applications 
in the areas of smart cities and mobile crowdsensing, while 
also enabling large scale IoT experimentation and increase 
the level of organizational interoperability. The project 
does not address any approach to the technical and 
syntactic level of interoperability. 
6) 
Machine-to-Machine 
Measurement 
(M3) 
Framework 
The M3 Framework project focuses on addressing the 
lack of semantic interoperability in IoT. The framework of 
the project assists the developers in semantically 
annotating M2M data and in building innovative 
applications by reasoning on M2M data originating from 
heterogeneous IoT systems and domains. To increase the 
level of interoperability at syntactic, but especially at the 
semantic level the M3 Framework is framed by the 
following layers [48][49]:  
• 
Perception layer, which consists of physical IoT 
devices, such as sensors, actuators and RFID tags. 
• 
Data acquisition layer, which focuses on collecting 
raw data from IoT devices/sensors and converting 
them in a unified way, such as RDF/XML compliant 
with the M3 ontology.  
• 
Persistence layer, which takes over to store M3 in a 
database to store semantic sensor data which is called 
the triple store. 
• 
Knowledge management layer, which is responsible 
for finding, indexing, designing, reusing and 
combining domain-specific knowledge, such as 
ontologies and datasets to update M3 domain 
ontologies, datasets and rules.  
• 
Reasoning layer, which infers new knowledge using 
reasoning engines and M3 rules extracted from 
Sensor-based Linked Open Rules (S-LOR) [49].  
• 
Knowledge query layer executes SPARQL (an SQL-
like language) queries on inferred sensor data. 
• 
Application layer, which employs an application 
(running on smart devices) to parse and display the 
results to end-users. 
7) 
FIESTA IoT  
The FIESTA-IoT project is a Research and Innovation 
Action under the European Horizon 2020 Programme 
addressing the topic ‘Future Internet Research and 
Experimentation’. The project focuses on large-scale 
experiments in the IoT domain that will utilize data and 
resources from heterogeneous IoT platforms [50]. These 
experiments provide a variety of tools and good practices 
to increase the interoperability of IoT heterogeneous 
platforms. FIESTA project promotes researchers and 
experimenters to share and reuse data from diverse IoT 
testbeds using semantic technologies seamlessly and 
flexibly. 
The FIESTA-IoT architecture is a set of functional 
blocks allowing [51]: 
• 
Testbed data streams and resources to be plugged into 
FIESTA-IoT; be discoverable using FIESTA-IoT and 
be accessible via FIESTA-IoT services. 
• 
Semantic querying of both linked data sets (of 
collected testbed data) and IoT service APIs. 
• 
Secure access to testbed resources by authenticated 
and authorized experimenters.  
8) 
SymbIoTe 
The SymbIoTe project (symbiosis of smart objects 
across IoT environments) focuses on the implementation 
of a flexible and secure interoperability middleware across 
IoT platforms. The main goal of the project is to create IoT 
applications on IoT platforms as well as dynamic and 
adaptive smart spaces that they can collaborate [51][52]. 
This is accomplished by:  

55
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
• 
A semantic IoT search engine for connected 
(virtualized) smart objects (i.e., IoT resources) 
registered by platform providers; 
• 
An abstraction layer for unified and secure usage of 
those resources across platforms;  
• 
High-level, domain-specific APIs (“Enablers”) for 
rapid cross-platform application development; 
• 
IoT platform federations, i.e., associations between 
two platforms facilitating their secure interaction, 
collaboration and bartering of resources; 
• 
Dynamic and self-configurable smart spaces offering 
interoperability for collocated devices and gateways;  
• 
A secure interworking protocol between the IoT 
platforms, gateways and smart devices.  
The SymbIoTe is built around the concept of virtual IoT 
environments provisioned over various cloud based IoT 
platforms. Virtual IoT environments are an abstraction 
composed of virtual representations of actual sensors and 
actuators being exposed by their host platforms to third 
parties. The symbIoTe framework is built around a 
hierarchical IoT stack and spans over different IoT 
platforms. Smart objects are expected to be connected to 
IoT gateways within the smart spaces which also host 
various computing and storage resources. The local 
infrastructure shares the available local resources 
(connectivity, computing and storage) and is connected to 
platform services running in the cloud. The architecture 
comprises four layered domains. 
B. Discussion 
 The 
existing 
solutions 
are 
dealing 
with 
the 
heterogeneity of devices, data and services. Some of them 
integrate 
semantic 
web 
technologies 
to 
enhance 
interoperability [41][42][46][47][48][49]. The absence of 
standardized activities, life cycles and methodologies as 
well as a set of techniques and tools hinder an interoperable 
IoT. To all existing solutions interoperability challenges 
remain still present. For instance, they neither use the same 
model to structure the data produced by objects/things nor 
the same reasoning approach to deduce new knowledge 
from data produced by objects/things. To assess the degree 
of interoperability maturity and answer research question 
RQ1, Table III summarizes the results of the state-of-art 
IoT frameworks that were analyzed in this review. 
At technical and syntactic level AGILE, VICINITY 
and INTER-IoT attempt to provide solutions by creating 
Generic Gateways and device-to-device modules that 
integrate several wireless and wired technologies. All of 
these need to be incorporated into supported technologies 
like families of Low Power and Wide Area wireless 
networks (LoRaWan, SigFox, etc.), as well as other short-
range wireless indoor technologies, such as Beacons.  
A recurring aspect is that most efforts are focused on 
addressing the semantic interoperability challenge. The 
VICINITY platform uses the standard W3C Web 
Language Ontology and implements cross-domain 
ontologies, whereas Open-IoT extends SSN ontology, and 
uses semantic tools such as Linked Data. BiG-IoT expands 
the standards of WoT and uses vocabulary management for 
handling semantics tools. Moreover, INTER-IoT increases 
semantic interoperability compared to the rest of the 
platforms by introducing different data formats and 
ontologies through the INTER-IoT DS2DS solution. In 
addition, the M3 Framework project addresses the 
semantic interoperability by the use of innovative semantic 
tools, such as M3 ontology tools, reasoning engines and 
M3 rules extracted from S-LOR. In addition, FIESTA-IoT 
project provides a blueprint of experimental infrastructure, 
software tools, semantic techniques, certification processes 
and best practices enabling IoT testbeds/platforms to 
interconnect their facility resources in an interoperable 
semantic way. Finally, symbIoTe, support fair and 
trustworthy interactions between platforms without a 
centralized mediator, so that IoT platform owners can 
engage in direct partnering relationships by use of 
symbIoTe platform federations. 
At organizational level, BiG-IoT creates a common and 
generic API (Application Programming Interface) between 
the different IoT middleware platforms. Open-IoT 
implements a cloud-based middleware platform with 
innovative tools and functionalities. Also, VICINITY 
project creates a framework that follows the philosophy of 
interoperability as a service for “IoT Neighborhood” with 
many modules and tools. Moreover, the INTER-IoT 
platform 
increases 
the 
levels 
of 
organization 
interoperability with INTER-API, which includes several 
interoperability tools for every layer. Moreover, M3 
Framework project with innovative semantic engines and 
solutions at the application layer, which parses and 
displays 
the 
results 
to 
end-users, 
increases 
the 
organizational 
interoperability 
level. 
Furthermore, 
FIESTA-IoT enables execution of experiments across 
multiple IoT testbeds, based on a single API for submitting 
the experiment and a single set of credentials for the 
researcher and the portability of IoT experiments. The 
focus is on resource sharing in the form of mutual 
registration, resource announcement, and subscriptions to 
information about resources offered by different platforms. 
However, features for the management of platform 
federations and collaboration mechanisms for fair and 
social interactions are not defined in most of the projects. 
Only VICINITY, and SymbIote have moved clearly in the 
philosophy of collaborative and open IoT Environments. 
Thus, 
by 
adopting 
this 
approach, 
organizational 
interoperability is increased, which, as we have argued, is 
not largely addressed by existing solutions. However, the 
tools that they proposed are still at an early stage and need 
to be evaluated in the future.  
 

56
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
TABLE III. INTEROPERABILITY LEVELS COVERAGE BY THE EXAMINED IOT FRAMEWORKS. 
 
SOURCE 
Technical level 
Syntactic level 
Semantic level 
Organizational level 
AGILE 
[24][45] 
Yes 
(Makers Gateway) 
Yes 
(Makers Gateway) 
No 
No 
Open-IoT 
 
[46][47] 
No 
No 
 
(Extend SSN ontology, 
Linked Data) 
 
(Extend SSN ontology, Linked 
Data) 
 
VICINITY 
 
 
[43] 
Yes  
(Generic Gateway 
supports common 
networks: Wifi, ZigBee) 
Yes 
(OWL Language) 
Yes 
 (VICINI-TY Ontologies) 
Yes 
 (Interoperability as a service) 
BiG-IoT 
 
[38][39][40] 
No 
No 
Yes 
(Expand the standards of 
WoT, vocabulary 
management for handling 
semantics) 
Yes 
(BiG-IoT API) 
INTER-IoT 
 
[24][41][42] 
Yes  
(DS2DS) 
Yes  
(DS2DS) 
Yes 
 (DS2DS) 
Yes 
(INTER-API) 
Machine to 
Machine 
(M3) 
Framework 
 
[48][49] 
No 
Yes  
(Data acquisition layer) 
Yes 
(Knowledge management 
layer, Reasoning layer) 
Yes 
(Application layer) 
FIESTA IoT 
Project 
 
[51] 
Yes 
(Increase interoperability 
among platforms)  
No 
Yes 
(Reasoning and Linking 
technics) 
Yes 
(FIESTA API, Middleware-
Application layer) 
SymbIoTe 
 
 
 
[51][52] 
Yes  
(Interworking protocol 
between the IoT 
platforms, gateways and 
smart devices) 
Yes 
 (Interoperable 
language)  
Yes  
(A semantic IoT search 
engine) 
Yes 
 (IoT platform federation) 
 
To resolve research question RQ2, we summarize in 
Table IV the shortcomings of the examined IoT 
Frameworks, 
by 
classifying 
them 
based 
on 
the 
interoperability level. At the technical interoperability 
level, a typical drawback of many frameworks, is the lack 
of focus on common communication standards between 
devices and systems. Furthermore, in several architectures 
it is imperative to implement interoperable IoT gateways, 
where raw data will be collected from different 
heterogeneous sensors supporting open source, and 
messaging systems. Moreover, at the level of syntactic 
interoperability, a common gap identified between these 
frameworks, is the lack of syntactic translation tools that 
convert the heterogeneous data in a unified way, such as 
RDF, XML and JSON.  
At the semantic level, the ontologies that are created in 
most of the IoT frameworks are complicated and are not 
interoperable with each other and focus mainly on the 
interoperability regarding specific fields rather than on a 
general solution. Besides that, tools for ontology alignment 
and ontology merging have not been particularly 
emphasized on solutions that can radically improve 
interoperability levels. Certain future research should focus 
on this direction so that future ontology engineers are given 
powerful and “lightweight” tools, such as ontology 
alignment tools for low-power devices, tools to implement 
“lightweight” ontologies for cross-domains, and semantic 
reasoning tools. 
At the organizational interoperability level, there is a 
lack of IoT platform federations, i.e., associations between 
more than two platforms facilitating their secure 
interaction, collaboration and bartering of resources. 
Moreover, 
collaboration 
and 
social 
interaction 
mechanisms that provide open and cooperative IoT 
systems have not been particularly emphasized.  It is 
considered necessary to create tools that will manage the 
collaborations between IoT devices and systems, as well as 
manage the social relationships between IoT devices, with 
the aid of semantic techniques. Consequently, supporting 
collaboration and social interaction mechanisms between 
IoT 
systems 
will 
improve 
the 
organizational 
interoperability (research question RQ4). 
 
 
 
 

57
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE IV. SHORTCOMINGS OF THE EXAMINED IOT FRAMEWORKS. 
Technical level 
Syntactic level 
Semantic level 
Organizational level 
 
Ιncompatibility of different 
versions. 
 
Different communication 
protocols or formats (IEEE 
802.11, IEEE 802.15, 
LoRaWan, SigFox). 
 
Lack of a common standard 
of communication between 
devices and systems. 
 
Lack of interoperable IoT 
Gateways. 
 
Not well-defined syntactic 
metadata schema and their 
mapping mechanisms. 
 
Lack of syntactic translation 
tools that convert the 
heterogeneous data in a 
unified way, such as RDF, XML 
and JSON. 
 
Solutions include the 
messaging protocols CoAP, 
XMPP, AMQP, MQTT offer 
cross-domain compatibility. 
 
Lack of a common syntactic 
format identification, 
registration and management 
mechanisms. 
 
Semantically incompatible 
information models 
(incompatible general 
ontologies) 
 
Lack of common standards 
 
Lack of ‘lightweight’ semantic 
tools. (Ontology alignment, 
ontology matching, reasoning), 
and lightweight interoperable 
ontologies. 
 
Incompatible reasoning 
approaches to deduce new 
knowledge from data produced 
by objects/things. 
 
Lack of Collaboration 
Mechanisms. 
 
Lack of collaboration 
management methods. 
 
IoT platform federations, i.e., 
associations between more 
than two platforms facilitating 
their secure interaction, 
collaboration and bartering of 
resources. 
 
IV. 
TOWARDS AN  INTEROPERABLE AND 
COLLABORATIVE IOT FRAMEWORK  
In this section, we report design requirements and open 
research challenges that our review of the existing 
frameworks has highlighted. Moreover, we present a high-
level design description of the proposed IoT framework (the 
SSNT framework). Although the evaluation of this 
framework is not covered in this paper, a proof-of-concept 
implementation scenario is provided. 
A. Requirements and Open Research challenges 
Existing IoT Frameworks have the potential to provide 
numerous 
solutions 
for 
improving 
multi-level 
interoperability, but many challenges have not yet been fully 
addressed and require collaboration from standardization 
committees, hardware manufacturers, software developers 
and IoT stakeholders. This section discusses several 
challenges related to multilevel interoperability in the context 
of IoT. Moreover, our review on the existing frameworks 
answers research questions RQ2, and RQ3, and suggests that 
a novel IoT framework needs to support specific functional 
features, as the ones outlined in the following paragraphs. 
1) 
IoT Resource Management 
IoT Systems collect data from different distributed 
sensors. These data are multimodal, including heterogeneous 
data, such as video streams, images, audio, and simple text 
[2]. How to integrate these distributed data from multiple 
sources is a key challenge for IoT development and for the 
implementation of new innovative smart applications.  
Moreover, 
communication 
between 
heterogeneous 
devices generates a large volume of real-time, high-speed, 
and uninterrupted data streams. These data streams include 
structured, semi-structured and unstructured data. When 
heterogeneous and various sensor data are acquired, 
multisource data should be merged to create a comprehensive 
and meaningful view for further utility [53]. 
2) 
Lightweight Semantic Tools  
As mentioned in the previous section, ensuring semantic 
interoperability is very important to address the inability to 
exchange and reuse data. Unfortunately, even today, IoT 
systems consist of semantically incompatible information 
models, such as incompatible general ontologies that offer 
different descriptions or even understandings of resources 
and processes, and thus are a barrier to the development and 
adoption of the IoT.  
Most of the existing semantic tools and techniques, such 
as Linked Data, ontology alignment and ontology matching 
[54][55] have been created primarily for Internet resources. 
Existing models provide the basic description frameworks, 
but alignment between different models and frameworks are 
required. In addition, the capacity of the natural environment 
and the resource constraints on IoT systems have not been 
taken into account [56]. Future work in this area should 
provide lightweight semantic tools that are easily adapted to 
environments with limited and distributed resources. 
3) 
Standardization 
In the new world of IoT, standards will be more important 
due to the greater interoperability demands. As more systems, 
devices, systems and platforms are connected we will see that 
this is only possible if all agree on common standards 
[29][40][57].  
 Firstly, one standard has no direct control over other 
standards, which means that changes for one standard will not 
automatically be propagated to other standards. Secondly, in 
order to support interoperability among several standards, a 
large number of adapters have to be developed, which is 
clearly inefficient. There are distinct missing standardization 
activities related to data models, ontologies, and data formats 

58
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
to be used in IoT applications for service-level interfaces and 
protocols. 
Machine-to-Machine 
Measurement 
(M3) 
framework [48][49] is offered to supplement existing 
semantic standards by adding common format, nomenclature 
and methods for data interpretation. A semantic approach is 
aimed at resolving the issue of lack of standardization by 
introducing 
common 
ontologies, 
data 
models, 
and 
vocabularies; however, currently the application methods are 
non-unified, complicated, and require further improvement. 
So, a novel IoT framework should be based on common 
standards only and refrain from developing its own 
proprietary solutions. 
4) 
Scalability 
The exponential growth of connected objects to the 
Internet produces a massive quantity of data called” Big 
data”. According to [58][59][60], the big data generated by 
IoT has different characteristics like large-scale data, 
heterogeneity, strong time and space correlation. Therefore, 
the main challenges encountered during the development of 
IoT applications/systems are the semantic IoT event 
processing, real-time processing of data streams and 
reasoning in a complex and dynamic context (spatiotemporal 
reasoning) in a scalable and secure way, etc. Consequently, 
these new requirements drive the need for the deployment of 
a scalable IoT system. Thereby, applying Semantic Web 
technologies (SPIN rules, SWRL, SPARQL, DL safe rules, 
RIF, etc.) to the IoT domain faces a new challenge on how to 
manage and interpret such heterogeneous data during a 
limited period in a scalable way.  
5) 
Collaboration Mechanisms  
Providing collaborative smart objects with interpretation 
and analytics methods to process and evaluate events in their 
surroundings is important for building new IoT-based 
applications [61]. Semantic descriptions serve the purpose of 
transforming large amounts of observed and perceived data 
created by users and things/objects into high-level concepts 
that are meaningful for establishing automated decision-
making processes. However, the non-human perception 
contributes to existing pool of challenges in IoT. Similar to 
problems faced by the artificial intelligence research 
community, in IoT the challenges are data integration and 
amalgamation from different sources, rules of data 
aggregation, defining borders and thresholds, as well as 
describing events, actors and objects. Solutions are needed to 
integrate data from various environments, and patterns for 
further fusion of new knowledge based on learnt rules. So, a 
novel IoT Framework must have innovative mechanisms of 
cooperation between IoT devices and systems, not only to 
connect and interact, but also to socialize and collaborate 
with each other to achieve some specific task(s). In this way 
the organizational interoperability will be increased, an 
element that is missing from the IoT framework so far. This 
kind of social interaction requires cooperation among IoT 
devices. 
B. SSNT Framework  
To address the multifaceted problem of interoperability, 
and partially answer the research question RQ4, equal 
emphasis should be placed on all levels of interoperability as 
they have been presented in this work. It is necessary to create 
tools and software modules that will seamlessly confront the 
interoperability problem targeting all levels, and also provide 
solutions that are available for devices with constrained 
resources. In this vision, an indispensable, interoperable, 
global IoT ecosystem can be created in the form of an SSNT. 
Taking under consideration the open issues and shortcomings 
of the state-of-art frameworks, as discussed previously, an 
SSNT framework is proposed that consists of modules and 
tools to overcome interoperability issues. 
Firstly, at the level of technical interoperability, new data 
collection and raw data filtering tools should be added to the 
system, so that data transferred to the cloud can be edited with 
edge computing techniques. Additionally, these new 
technologies should be also compatible with the new wireless 
technologies of the LPWAN family (LoRaWan, SigFox, NB-
IoT). Following, at the level of syntactic and semantic 
interoperability, the SSNT architecture should include new 
tools creating interoperable ontologies that will extend the 
existing solutions. Initially, it is necessary to create an 
interoperable middleware framework with new semantic 
modules, through which heterogeneous devices will be 
interconnected. 
Moreover, 
with 
the 
successful 
implementation and development of the SSNT framework 
through which heterogeneous devices and systems can 
communicate seamlessly, many innovative applications 
could be spawned in various fields leveraging on the raw data 
collected. Consequently, the level of organizational 
interoperability will increase rapidly. For example, platforms 
can be enabled to perform collaborative sensing/actuation 
tasks to complement each other’s infrastructure, and to 
interact directly in a decentralized way without exposing their 
business relationship to a centralized authority. Reasons for 
such a collaboration can vary e.g., similar IoT platforms that 
operate in different locations can federate to offer seamlessly 
to their clients IoT services in other locations, or collocated 
platforms can benefit from each other by forming 
partnerships to offer cross-domain solutions.  
 The SSNT architecture, as shown in Figure 3, is 
structured on four layers: Perception, Transmission, 
Middleware and Application.  
The Perception Layer contains all the IoT heterogeneous 
physical devices, such as Beacon sensors, ZigBee sensors, 
LoraWan 
sensors, 
actuators, 
etc. 
from 
which 
all 
heterogeneous data are derived.  
The Transmission Layer includes the following modules:    
1. SSNT Data Acquisition, which gets data from different 
types of sensor devices.  
This module is responsible for the collection and filtering 
of raw IoT data from various heterogeneous IoT devices with 
IoT Gateways. It consists of two components: 

59
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
• 
Data Collection: Obtains raw data from various 
heterogeneous sensors using interoperable architectures 
that support distributed, open-source and messaging 
systems (Apache Kafka, ThingsSpeak etc.). This section 
supports different data sources and executes multiple 
processes at the same time.  
• 
Data Filtering: Verifies the field of data collected from 
the previous section. Filtering requires a database search 
and applies filtering rules. With this function, the "bad" 
values are discarded minimizing storage costs and 
ensuring fast data transmission. 
2. SSNT 
Data 
Integration, 
which 
converts 
the 
heterogeneous data in a unified way, such as RDF, XML 
and JSON. It consists of four components: 
• 
Metadata Creation: Some important metadata objects 
are obtained, like data type, measuring units, time stamp, 
and geolocation. This module also describes the specific 
industrial environment, data, and applications. 
• 
Communication Interface: Communication between 
each module of the data collection component is 
organized. Various types of data are translated into a 
single format so that the system can understand. For 
example, the data coming from various devices with 
different formats are translated into JSON message 
structure first and then sent to the next phase for data 
aggregation. 
• 
Data Aggregation: The pre-processed data is transmitted 
to the aggregation component for further summarization. 
The aggregated data is more significant than the raw data 
collected by factory devices. The data stream coming 
from the physical layer is separated into data 
summarization modules as described below. 
• 
Data Summarization: The datasets of various devices are 
represented into groups according to time-period. It 
reduces computational and storage cost and improves 
consultation performance by minimizing the volume of 
data. So, the event table generated by the data collection. 
The SSNT Middleware Layer contains components and 
functionalities that can be divided into several functional 
modules as follows: 
1. Data Storage, which contains a) tools for storing 
semantic IoT data to a cloud database and to NoSQL 
databases 
such 
as 
GraphDB, 
Cassandra; 
b) 
functionalities for querying and searching in a different 
kind of databases. 
2. Lightweight 
Ontology 
Creator/Annotator, 
which 
contains: 
• 
Tools 
for 
designing 
interoperable 
“lightweight” 
ontologies and semantic structures, according to 
standard ontologies that can be interpreted, shared and 
reused by other ontologies 
• 
Methods to change an isolated ontology to a reusable and 
interoperable ontology (such as IoT-Lite, SSN ontology) 
• 
Methods to enrich metadata and create reusable data, to 
enable semantic interaction and interoperability between 
the 
various 
heterogeneous 
“things”, 
offering 
a 
significant advantage compared to existing syntactic 
interactions. 
3. Connector, which provides Open Linked Data interfaces 
e.g., SPARQL (SPARQL Protocol and RDF Query 
Language) over ontologies for internet-connected 
objects within the physical world abstracted by the 
middleware to interact with an SSNT. 
4. Reasoner, which includes tools and components for the 
automated data configuration filtering, fusion and 
reasoning mechanisms, which obtain higher-level 
actionable knowledge from low-level sensor data 
5. Ontology 
Alignment 
for 
Resource-Constrained 
Devices, which includes tools for ontology merging, 
matching, and alignment related to the dynamics and 
complexity of the IoT systems. 
6. Social Collaboration Generator / Manager  
This component is responsible for building and 
managing 
social 
relationships 
between 
various 
heterogeneous IoT devices. The social relations that will 
be created at each level will improve the various issues of 
interoperability as mandated by the research question 
RQ4. It consists of tools for automatically building 
relationships between things, and methods to manage 
SSNT relationships. These tools integrate information 
into IoT devices so that they can make “friends”, start a 
relationship, update a situation, and terminate a 
relationship. It is our proposed approach in the context of 
the answer to the 4 questions. The social relations that will 
be created at each level will improve the various issues of 
interoperability. 
These relationships between IoT devices are classified 
according to the level of interoperability that they are 
addressed as follows: 
i. 
Relationships between things in the level of device 
interoperability. 
These relationships take place for example between 
IoT devices that are on a different IoT network but 
are close together and can work together to achieve 
a common goal. 
ii. Relationships between things in semantic and 
syntactic interoperability levels. 
  
These relationships are made at the level of semantic 
or syntactic interoperability   and relate to IoT 
devices 
that 
represent 
data 
with 
common 

60
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
vocabularies, ontologies (shared ontologies) or in a 
different way (different ontologies). 
iii. Relationships between things in the organizational 
interoperability level. 
These relationships are made at the level of 
organizational interoperability between IoT devices 
belonging 
to 
different 
IoT 
platforms 
of 
organizations. Relationships between platforms can 
be 
enabled 
to 
perform 
collaborative 
sensing/actuation tasks. 
Finally, the Application Layer leverages on the solutions 
provided by the underlined layers to accomplish disparate 
applications of IoT devices. The Application Layer is a user-
centric layer which executes various tasks for the users. It 
represents innovative smart applications in various fields, 
such as smart homes, smart cities, smart healthcare, smart 
agriculture, smart buildings, etc. The provision of end user 
tools that enable people to engage in the formation of such 
applications by affording high level metaphors are also 
important [62]. 
 
 
Figure 3. SSNT architecture overview. 
 
A simple application scenario is given to illustrate part of 
the SSNT framework functionality. A smart lightweight 
application is designed as a result of the collaboration of 
different smart objects. In this case the SSNT consists of a 
smart desk, a smart chair, a smart book and a smart lamp. The 
application logic is that when the chair is occupied and is 
nearby the desk and the book is open above the desk the 
application infers that a study activity takes place and as 
service the application regulates the light depending on the 
brightness sensed on the book. Each smart object is described 
by properties in the form of an ontology (Figure 4, Figure 5, 
Figure 6, and Figure 7). Such ontologies may be 
independently developed and thus can be heterogeneous. The 
semantic interoperability support of the SNNT framework 
through ontology alignment may be required in this case to 
deduce the use of similar terms or structures between the 
ontologies.  
 
 
Figure 4. eChair Ontology. 
 
  
 
Figure 5. eDesk Ontology. 

61
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 6. eLamp Ontology. 
 
 
Figure 7. eBook Ontology. 
 
In this context, an automatic ontology alignment module 
may apply linguistic and graph matching techniques [29]. 
Figure 8 shows an example of a linguistic similarity between 
two given ontologies based on descriptive information, like 
the property names. These similarities form the linking basis 
between smart object ontologies and provide the support 
mechanism to answer service discovery requests for a 
specific functionality that is required to instantiate an 
application. Similar questions may involve, for example, 
looking up a device that provides a light service or whether 
an IoT entity is of type desk. Such questions can be answered 
via the ontologies detailing semantically the smart objects 
and their alignments. 
 
 
Figure 8. Example of similarities between two smart objects ontologies. 
 
More rich knowledge can be acquired when individual 
ontologies are merged. Figure 9 illustrates the result of the 
merged ontology acquired using the ontologies of the smart 
objects involved in the smart light application. This merged 
ontology reflects the interconnected entities and can be used 
to infer knowledge regarding the collective behavior which 
can appear from the collaboration of the smart object 
services. Consequently, composite questions can be 
answered like whether a specific IoT environment is suitable 
for fulfilling the requirements of the smart light application.  
 
 
Figure 9. Merged ontology for the smart light application. 
 
Figure 
10 
shows 
our 
future 
proof-of-concept 
implementation of SSNT in the domain of smart agriculture. 
The raw data streams will be collected by IoT sensors as they 
will be enriched with semantic annotation and will be 
modeled in ontologies with SSNT framework tools. Then, 
with semantic reasoning rules, social semantic groups will be 
created between the semantic data that aim to achieve a 
common goal, such as Greenhouse automation, crop 
management, and Monitoring of climate conditions. Finally, 
with SSNT semantic tools such as SPARQL queries, 
ontology alignment module etc., and new knowledge will be 
produced, and new services and applications will be created.  
 

62
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 10. SSNT Framework in Smart Agriculture.  
 
 The SSNT framework has the capabilities of combining 
and analyzing data streams helping the farmers or 
agronomists in more informed decision-making in near real-
time and fast reaction to changes and unpredictable events. 
For example, by automatically integrating sensory data about 
soil humidity with web services for weather forecasting, 
better decisions could be made about more precise irrigation 
and fertilization of the crops. 
A basic application scenario of a smart crop management 
system is given to illustrate part of the SSNT framework 
functionality. We assume that an SSNT is deployed in a rural 
area. The system consists of various sensors (temperature, 
humidity, and thermal cameras), web services for weather 
forecasting, and actuators that help in the smart management 
of crops. Initially, heterogeneous IoT data streams are 
collected via the SSNT Data Acquisition module. Then, with 
the SSNT Data Integration module, the heterogeneous data 
are converted in RDF format. In this way, the raw IoT data 
modelled in interoperable ontologies that will be created with 
the Lightweight Ontology Creator/Annotator module. 
Furthermore, Data Storage module, storing semantic IoT data 
to a cloud database such as GraphDB, which is an enterprise-
ready Semantic Graph Database, compliant with W3C 
standards. 
Furthermore, with the application of semantic techniques 
using the appropriate tools of the SSNT framework, it is 
possible to create social groups of common interest which 
will be responsible for achieving a specific user goal. For the 
needs of the scenario, let us assume that two of the goals of 
the crop management system are: to increase fertility and to 
predict crop disease. After the goals are set by the user, 
through the Social Collaboration Generator / Manager 
Module, two social smart objects groups of interest will be 
created. In these groups, social relationships between things 
are created at the level of device interoperability, as well as 
relationships between things at semantic and syntactic 
interoperability levels.   The first group will consist of soil 
humidity sensors, temperature sensors, data from web 
services for weather forecasting, and actuators such as 
solenoid valves. This group of smart objects will aim to 
collaboratively increase soil fertility. Through semantic 
functionality (SPARQL queries, reasoning rules), the 
semantically annotated data will feed special agricultural 
applications that will achieve the goal of increasing crops 
fertility. The second group of smart objects will consist of a 
thermal camera, and leaf wetness sensor. In the same way, 
the goal of disease control of cultivated plants will be 
pursued. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In contrast to other surveys of IoT research, this review 
study focuses on interoperability achieved by approaches in 
a multilevel perspective. Contemporary IoT frameworks 
have been systematically researched and their capability to 
achieve multi-layer interoperability between applications, 
services, and software platforms has been reported. Different 
solutions addressing interoperability issues at discrete levels 
have been studied, analyzed and compared to identify their 
limitations, such as lack of semantic lightweight tools, poor 
scalability and lack of collaboration mechanisms, while open 
issues and challenges were also identified. These limitations 
provide research opportunities and have motivated the 
Semantic Social Network of Things (SSNT) framework 
design. In this context, the concept of SSNT has been 
introduced for specifying device-to-device collaborative 
services based on the social interaction between smart objects 
while supporting interoperability at different levels and 
taking into account the limitations of IoT systems. 
Furthermore, a proof-of-concept application in the smart 
agriculture domain has been discussed to demonstrate 
important features of the presented approach. 
Future activities will focus on implementing, deploying 
and evaluating the modules of the SSNT framework in real 
IoT environments. For instance, Generator / Manager social 
collaboration software will be evaluated in the agricultural 
domain where many heterogeneous IoT devices can be found. 
Software libraries and APIs related to the semantic data 
management (e.g., Jena, http:// https://jena.apache.org/), and 
open source IoT frameworks (e.g., openIoT framework, 
http://www.openiot.eu/), will be used to implement the proof-
of-concept system of SSNT. Our future work aims also to 
address limitations of existing solutions such as the lack of 
lightweight semantic tools and the lack of tools for evaluating 
collaboration and social interaction mechanisms in order to 
assess how effectively such mechanisms can address multi-
level interoperability issues in open IoT environments.    
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Pliatsios, C. Goumopoulos, K. Kotis, “Interoperability in IoT: A 
Vital Key Factor to Create the Social Network of Things,” The 
Thirteenth International Conference on Mobile Ubiquitous Computing, 
Systems, Services and Technologies UBICOMM 2019, pp. 63-69, 
Porto, Portugal, 2019. 
[2] L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “The Internet of Things: A 
Survey,” Comput. Networks, pp. 2787–2805, 2010. 

63
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[3] F. Shi, Q. Li, T. Zhu, and H. Ning, “A survey of data semantization in 
internet of Things,” Sensors, vol. 18, no 1, pp. 313, 2018. 
[4] I. Lee, and K. Lee, “The Internet of Things (IoT): Applications, 
investments, and challenges for enterprises,” Business Horizons, vol. 
58, no 4, pp. 431-440, 2015. 
[5] K. N. Kumar, V. R. Kumar and K. Raghuveer, "A Survey on Semantic 
Web Technologies for the Internet of Things," 2017 International 
Conference on Current Trends in Computer, Electrical, Electronics and 
Communication (CTCEEC), Mysore, pp. 316-322, 2017. 
[6] B. Kitchenham, “Procedures for performing systematic reviews,” 
Keele, UK, Keele University, vol. 33, pp. 1-26, 2004. 
[7] A. Gyrard and M. Serrano, "A Unified Semantic Engine for Internet of 
Things and Smart Cities: From Sensor Data to End-Users 
Applications," 2015 IEEE International Conference on Data Science 
and Data Intensive Systems, Sydney, NSW, pp. 718-725, 2015.  
[8] D. Guinard, V. Trifa, F. Mattern, and E. Wilde, “From the internet of 
things to the web of things: Resource-oriented architecture and best 
practices”, in Architecting the Internet of things, Springer, Berlin, 
Heidelberg,pp. 97-129, 2011. 
[9] A. Gyrard, P. Patel, S.K. Datta, and M. I. Ali, “Semantic web meets the 
Internet of Things and Web of Things,” in Proceedings of the 26th 
International Conference on World Wide Web Companion, pp. 917-
920, 2011. 
[10] Cisco [online], “The Internet of Everything” Available from: 
www.cisco.com/c/dam/en_us/about/ac79/docs/innov/IoE_Economy_
FAQ.pdf. 19.2.2020.  
[11] B. Afzal, M. Umair, G. A. Shah, and E. Ahmed, “Enabling IoT 
platforms for social IoT applications: vision, feature mapping, and 
challenges,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 92, pp. 718-
731, 2019. 
[12] A.M. Ortiz, D. Hussein, S.  Park, S.N. Han, and N. Crespi, “The cluster 
between internet of Things and social networks: Review and research 
challenges,” in IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. no. 3, pp. 206-
215, 2014. 
[13] Y. Saleem, N. Crespi, M.H. Rehmani, R. Copeland, D. Hussein, and E. 
Bertin, “Exploitation of social IoT for recommendation services,” In 
2016 IEEE 3rd World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT), pp. 359-
364, 2016. 
[14] L. Atzori, A. Luigi, et al., "The social internet of Things (siot)–when 
social networks meet the internet of Things: Concept, architecture and 
network characterization," in Computer networks vol. 56, no 16, pp. 
3594-3608, 2016. 
[15] L. Atzori, A. Iera, and G. Morabito, “Siot: Giving a social structure to 
the internet of Things,” IEEE communications letters, vol. 15, no 11, 
pp. 1193-1195, 2011. 
[16] J. Radatz, A. Geraci, and F. Katki, “IEEE standard glossary of software 
engineering terminology,” IEEE Std, vol. 610121990, no. 121990, pp. 
3, 1990. 
[17] A. Tolk, and J. A. Muguira, “The levels of conceptual interoperability 
model,” In Proceedings of the 2003 fall simulation interoperability 
workshop, Citeseer, vol. 7, pp. 1-11, 2003.  
[18] M. Noura, M. Atiquzzaman, and M. Gaedke, "Interoperability in 
internet of things: Taxonomies and open challenges," Mobile Networks 
and Applications, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 796-809, 2019. 
[19] A. Glória, F. Cercas and N. Souto, "Comparison of communication 
protocols for low cost Internet of Things devices," 2017 South Eastern 
European Design Automation, Computer Engineering, Computer 
Networks and Social Media Conference (SEEDA-CECNSM), 
Kastoria, pp. 1-6, 2017.  
[20] K. Rose, S. Eldridge, and L. Chapin, “The internet of Things: An 
overview,” The Internet Society (ISOC), pp. 80, 2015. 
[21] M.A Razzaque, M. Milojevic-Jevric, A. Palade, and S. Clarke, 
“Middleware for internet of Things: a survey,” in IEEE Internet of 
Things journal, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 70-95, 2015. 
[22] P.P. Ray, “A survey on Internet of Things architectures,” in Journal of 
King Saud University-Computer and Information Sciences, vol. 30, no. 
3, pp. 291-319, 2018. 
[23]  R. S. Sinha, Y. Wei, and S. H Hwang, “A survey on LPWA 
technology: LoRa and NB-IoT” Ict Express, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 14-21, 
2017.  
[24] A. Bröring et al., "Enabling IoT Ecosystems through Platform 
Interoperability," in IEEE Software, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 54-61, 2017.  
[25] C. Bormann, A. P. Castellani, and Z. Shelby, “CoAP: An Application 
Protocol for Billions of 8 https://www.w3.org/WoT Tiny Internet 
Nodes,” IEEE Internet Comput., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 62–67, Mar. 2012.  
[26]  IBM and Eurotech, “MQTT V3.1 Protocol Specification.” [Online]. 
Available: 
http://public.dhe.ibm.com/software/dw/webservices/ws-
mqtt/mqtt-v3r1.html. [Accessed: 24- Apr-2014].  
[27]  Open Mobile Alliance, “Lightweight Machine to Machine Technical 
Specification, Candidate,” OMA, 2015.  
[28] A. Bröring, J. Echterhoff, S. Jirka, I. Simonis, T. Everding, C. Stasch, 
S. Liang, and Rob Lemmens, “New Generation Sensor Web 
Enablement,” Sensors, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 2652– 2699, 2011.  
[29] J. Swetina, G. Lu, P. Jacobs, F. Ennesser, and J. Song, “Toward a 
standardized common M2M service layer platform: Introduction to 
oneM2M,” Wirel. Commun. IEEE, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 20–26, 2014. 
[30] L. Seremeti, C. Goumopoulos, and A. Kameas, “Ontology-based 
modeling of dynamic ubiquitous computing applications as evolving 
activity spheres,” Pervasive and Mobile Computing, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 
574-591, 2009. 
[31] M. Noura, A. Gyrard, S. Heil and M. Gaedke, "Automatic Knowledge 
Extraction to build Semantic Web of Things Applications," in IEEE 
Internet of Things Journal, 2019. 
[32] P. Murdock et al., “Semantic interoperability for the Web of Things,” 
2016.  
[33] H. Veer, and A. Wiles, "Achieving Technical Interoperability-the ETSI 
approach, European Telecommunications Standards Institute," 
Accessed: Sep 2008, 20, 2017. 
[34] P. Barnaghi, W. Wang, C. Henson and K. Taylor, “Semantics for the 
Internet of Things,” Int. J. Semant. Web Inf. Syst. vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–
21, 2012.  
[35] K. Kotis, A. Katasonov, and J. Leino, “Aligning smart and control 
entities in the IoT,” In Internet of Things, Smart Spaces, and Next 
Generation Networking, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 39-50, 2012.  
[36] M. Ma, P. Wang and C. Chu, "Ontology-Based Semantic Modeling and 
Evaluation for Internet of Things Applications," 2014 IEEE 
International Conference on Internet of Things (iThings), and IEEE 
Green Computing and Communications (GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, 
Physical and Social Computing (CPSCom), Taipei, pp. 24-30, 2014. 
[37] I. P. Zarko et al., "Towards an IoT framework for semantic and 
organizational interoperability," 2017 Global Internet of Things 
Summit (GIoTS), Geneva, pp. 1-6, 2017.  
[38] T. Jell, A. Bröring and J. Mitic, "BIG IoT – interconnecting IoT 
platforms from different domains," 2017 International Conference on 
Engineering, Technology and Innovation (ICE/ITMC), Funchal, pp. 
86-88, 2017. 
[39] G. Hatzivasilis et al., "The Interoperability of Things: Interoperable 
solutions as an enabler for IoT and Web 3.0," 2018 IEEE 23rd 
International Workshop on Computer Aided Modeling and Design of 
Communication Links and Networks (CAMAD), pp. 1-7, Barcelona, 
2018. 
[40] S. Žitnik, M. Janković, K. Petrovčič and M. Bajec, "Architecture of 
standard-based, interoperable and extensible IoT platform," 2016 24th 
Telecommunications Forum (TELFOR), Belgrade, pp. 1-4, 2016.  
[41] G. Fortino et al., “Towards multi-layer interoperability of 
heterogeneous IoT platforms: The INTER-IoT approach,” In: 
Integration, interconnection, and interoperability of IoT systems. 
Springer, p. 199-232, Cham, 2018. 

64
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[42] M. Elkhodr, S. A. Shahrestani, and H. Cheung, “The Internet of 
Things: New Interoperability, Management and Security Challenges,” 
2016.  
[43] Y. Guan et al., "An open virtual neighbourhood network to connect IoT 
infrastructures and smart objects — Vicinity: IoT enables 
interoperability as a service," 2017 Global Internet of Things Summit 
(GIoTS), Geneva, pp. 1-6, 2017. 
[44] L. Daniele, F. den Hartog, and J. Roes, “Created in close interaction 
with the industry: the smart appliances reference (SAREF) ontology,” 
In International Workshop Formal Ontologies Meet Industries, 
Springer, Cham, 2015. 
[45] G. Hatzivasilis et al., "The Interoperability of Things: Interoperable 
solutions as an enabler for IoT and Web 3.0," 2018 IEEE 23rd 
International Workshop on Computer Aided Modeling and Design of 
Communication Links and Networks (CAMAD), pp. 1-7, Barcelona, 
2018. 
[46] J. Soldatos et al., “Openiot: Open source internet-of-Things in the 
cloud. In Interoperability and open-source solutions for the internet of 
Things,” Springer, Cham, pp. 13-25, 2015.  
[47] OpenIoT 
Consortium. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.openiot.eu/ 2019.07.25. 
[48] A. Gyrard, S. K. Datta, C. Bonnet and K. Boudaoud, "Standardizing 
generic cross-domain applications in Internet of Things," 2014 IEEE 
Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), Austin, TX, pp. 589-594, 2014.  
[49] A. Gyrard, M. Serrano, J. B. Jares, S. K. Datta, and M. I. Ali, “Sensor-
based linked open rules (S-LOR): An automated rule discovery 
approach for IoT applications and its use in smart cities,” In 
Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on World Wide Web 
Companion, pp. 1153-1159, 2017. 
[50] R. Agarwal, D. G. Fernandez, T. Elsaleh, A. Gyrard, L. Sanchez, and 
V. Issarny, “Unified IoT ontology to enable interoperability and 
federation of testbeds,” In 2016 IEEE 3rd World Forum on Internet of 
Things (WF-IoT), pp. 70-75, 2016. 
[51] F. Carrez, T. Elsaleh, D. Gómez, L. Sánchez, J. Lanza, and P. Grace, 
“A Reference Architecture for federating IoT infrastructures 
supporting semantic interoperability,” in 2017 European Conference 
on Networks and Communications (EuCNC), pp. 1-6, IEEE, 2017. 
[52] I. Gojmerac, P. Reichl, I.P. Žarko, and S. Soursos, “Bridging IoT 
islands: the symbIoTe project,” in e & i Elektrotechnik und 
Informationstechnik, vol. 133, no. 7, pp. 315-318, 2016. 
[53] C. Agostinho, Y. Ducq, G. Zacharewicz, J. Sarraipa, F. Lampathaki, R. 
Poler, 
and 
R. 
Jardim-Goncalves, 
“Towards 
a 
sustainable 
interoperability in networked enterprise information systems: trends of 
knowledge and model-driven technology.” Computers in Industry, vol. 
79, pp. 64-76, 2016. 
[54] G. Hatzivasilis, K. Fysarakis, O. Soultatos, I. Askoxylakis, I. 
Papaefstathiou, and G. Demetriou, “The industrial internet of Things 
as an enabler for a circular economy Hy-LP: a Novel IIoT protocol, 
evaluated on a wind park’s SDN/NFV-enabled 5G industrial network,” 
Computer Communications, vol. 119, pp. 127-137, 2018.  
[55] P. Barnaghi, W. Wang, C. Henson, and K. Taylor, “Semantics for the 
Internet of Things: early progress and back to the future,” International 
Journal on Semantic Web and Information Systems (IJSWIS), vol. 8, 
no. 1 pp. 1-21, 2012.  
[56] M. B. Doumbouya, B. Kamsu-Foguem, H. Kenfack, and C. Foguem,” 
Telemedicine using mobile telecommunication: towards syntactic 
interoperability in teleexpertise,” Telematics and informatics, vol. 31, 
no 4, pp. 648-659, 2014. 
[57] M. Marjani, F. Nasaruddin, A. Gani, A. Karim, I.A. Hashem, A. 
Siddiqa, and I. Yaqoob, “Big IoT data analytics: architecture, 
opportunities, and open research challenges,” IEEE Access, vol. 5, pp. 
5247-5261, 2017. 
[58] Y. Ai, M. Peng, and K. Zhang, “Edge computing technologies for 
Internet of Things: a primer. Digital Communications and Networks,” 
vol. 4, no 2, pp. 77-8, .2018. 
[59] O.B. Sezer, E. Dogdu, M. Ozbayoglu, and A. Onal, “An extended iot 
framework with semantics, big data, and analytics,” In 2016 IEEE 
International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), pp. 1849-1856, 
IEEE, 2016. 
[60] H. Cai, B. Xu, L. Jiang and A. V. Vasilakos, "IoT-Based Big Data 
Storage Systems in Cloud Computing: Perspectives and Challenges," 
in IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 75-87, 2017.  
[61] I.P. Žarko, J. Iranzo, C. Ruggenthaler, J. a. S. Murillo, J. Garcia, P. 
Skočir, & S. Soursos, “Collaboration mechanisms for IoT platform 
federations fostering organizational interoperability,” In 2018 Global 
Internet of Things Summit (GIoTS), pp. 1-6, 2018. 
[62] C. Goumopoulos, and I. Mavrommati, “A framework for pervasive 
computing applications based on smart objects and end user 
development,” in Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 162, p.110496, 
2020. 
 

