 
 
Technology as a Tool to Promote Nontechnical Skills in Surgical Training
Line Lundvoll Warth 
Norwegian Centre for E-health Research 
Tromsø, Norway 
University of Tromsø, The Arctic University of Norway 
Tromsø, Norway 
email: line.lundvoll.warth@ehealthresearch.no 
 
 
Abstract—Surgeons require strong mentorship as part of their 
training because many of their skills cannot be readily 
acquired from textbooks; instead, their competence is a result 
of excellent hand practice. Access to mentors for education in 
surgical subspecialties is a challenge in many hospitals. 
Videoconferencing, which enables real-time communication 
between mentors and mentees at different geographical 
locations, can overcome this challenge and make the best 
knowledge available for surgeons in training. This study 
examines a practice in Norway in which videoconferencing was 
used to provide education on a laparoscopic surgical 
procedure. Specifically, the study explores the characteristics 
of communication between a mentor and mentee using 
videoconferencing and how this practice allows for both the 
learning and feedback of mentorship and nontechnical skills. 
The empirical material consists of video recordings of an 
educational trajectory comprising eight patient cases and 
related focus group meetings. Their communication reveals 
knowledge gaps and their closure through the establishment of 
a shared understanding. In this way, videoconferencing 
supported the learning of technical skills while enabling 
feedback on nontechnical elements. Both the mentor and 
mentee were able to reach their full potentials, expanding their 
own communicative skills and reflecting on their own abilities. 
Videoconferencing also affected the relationship between the 
mentor and mentee, who were peers and colleagues rather than 
participants in a traditional mentee–mentor relationship. 
Hence, videoconferencing practice is an activity that can 
expand knowledge and be used to evaluate both the mentor 
and mentee, assessing their nontechnical skills in surgical 
training.  
Keywords—knowledge sharing; nontechnical skills; surgical 
training; 
mentorship; 
feedback; 
communication; 
videoconferencing; qualitative study. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Although technical skills in surgery are obviously 
important, communication in the operating room (OR) plays 
an important role in patient safety because operations are 
social situations in which tasks are accomplished through 
communication between team members. The current study 
focuses 
on 
a 
practice 
in 
Norway 
during 
which 
videoconferencing 
(VC) 
was 
used 
as 
a 
tool 
for 
communication in surgical education in a specific 
laparoscopic hernia procedure. The present paper is an 
extended version of a paper in which we explored the 
characteristics of communication between a mentor and 
mentee using VC and how it affected communication [1]. In 
the previous paper, we concluded that VC supports the 
learning of technical skills and enables feedback on 
nontechnical elements. Both the mentor and mentee had the 
opportunity to reach their full potentials, expanding their 
own communicative skills and reflecting on their own 
abilities. Here, the paper extends that previous work, 
focusing on the use of VC in relation to nontechnical skills, 
with a view to the use of VC technology for the learning of 
technical skills [1] [2] but also as an assessment tool for 
feedback on the mentor and mentee’s nontechnical skills 
relationship in surgical training.  
The life of a surgeon is unique and often challenging. 
Because surgical training requires skills not readily available 
from textbooks, surgeons in training require a strong 
guidance from mentors who can transfer their knowledge to 
them. A good mentor can be the difference between a 
surgeon who is skilled and fulfilled and one who is merely 
competent. The changing surgical environment requires a 
style of mentorship that is distinct from that in other forms of 
medicine [3]. This paper argues that VC promotes a style of 
mentorship in which nontechnical skills can be practised and 
reflected on, thereby placing greater emphasis on these skills 
in training. Indeed, the quality of collaboration and 
teamwork allows for improvements in practice beyond 
technical skills and performance. 
The rest of this paper is organised as follows: Section II 
explores the field of surgical training, Section III describes 
the theoretical framework of the study, Section IV describes 
the methods used, Section V present the results, and Section 
VI presents the discussion. The article ends with conclusions 
and acknowledgements. 
II. 
SURGICAL TRAINING 
Within surgical teams, communication errors have been 
studied in terms of communication failures [4], and studies 
have attempted to explain how surgical procedures are 
influenced by the quality and efficiency of teamwork. 
Results have shown that deficiencies in teamwork in the OR 
contribute significantly to adverse events and patient harm 
[5] because there is a strong relationship between teamwork 
failure and technical errors [6]. In other words, a good 
surgeon is more than just a good ‘pair of hands’ [7]; he or 
she must be a good team player, must listen and 
communicate with colleagues and must empower colleagues 
to reach their full potential [7]. These qualities are related to 
134
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
collective and cognitive competence, which are defined as 
nontechnical skills. 
Nontechnical skills are gaining importance in surgery and 
surgical training [7]. The Royal College of Surgeons of 
Edinburgh defines nontechnical skills as those skills and 
behaviours related to situational awareness, decision making, 
communication, teamwork and leadership [8]. Others have 
defined 
nontechnical 
skills 
as 
interpersonal 
(e.g., 
communication, 
teamwork), 
cognitive 
(e.g., 
decision 
making, situational awareness) and personal resource skills 
(e.g., coping with stress and fatigue) [9]. Communication 
and teamwork related to decision making are also important 
nontechnical skills. All these skills are essential for surgeons 
to operate safely in the OR, and although they are developed 
in an informal and tacit manner [8], they need to be explicitly 
addressed in training. 
Surgical training involves the individual work and 
guidance of an expert mentor. Mentees gain significant skills 
and experience by participating in simulated environments 
with virtual simulators and models prior to performing 
procedures on patients in the OR. Work in the OR involves 
collaboration; each team member has his or her own tasks to 
perform. Although each team member’s individual technical 
skills are important, good collaboration is necessary for a 
good surgical outcome [10][11]. Hence, both mentors and 
mentees need to develop nontechnical skills in surgical 
training to promote best practice.  
Surgical training is an educational process in which the 
competence and work of both mentor and mentee serve as 
parts of a collective activity and communicative process. 
Both communication and teamwork are important for 
modern surgical education and practice; indeed, a review of 
the role of nontechnical skills in surgery showed that the key 
root cause of surgical errors worldwide is a lack of 
nontechnical skills [6]. The review also provided evidence 
that nontechnical skills have an effect on technical 
performance and suggested that training that is focused on 
improving nontechnical skills can improve teamwork, 
performance and safety in the OR, thereby positively 
contributing to patient outcomes [6]. This indicates that there 
is a need to focus on the development of nontechnical skills 
in surgical training. 
Because surgery strongly depends on a good pair of 
hands, surgeons in training are dependent on access to 
mentors with specialist knowledge. This access to local 
mentors for surgical subspecialties is a challenge in many 
hospitals. However, in such cases, VC is a technology that 
can enable real-time communication between mentors and 
mentees, even if they are in different geographical locations. 
Thus, it can help to overcome the issue of a lack of access to 
local experts.  
Research on VC has stressed its educational benefits [12] 
and has described VC for mentoring as an effective way to 
develop surgical skills [13]. Recently, however, a review of 
surgical tele-mentoring reported a limited understanding of 
VC in surgical practice; the review concluded that little 
attention has been paid to the educational and nontechnical 
elements and that focus has instead been placed on piloting 
the technology [12][14]. Within this field, a special focus on 
communication and team performance is needed to better 
understand the factors that influence surgical outcomes [15].  
Research on communication in terms of feedback 
between mentors and mentees reveals that supervisors tend 
to talk about the trainees’ actions and their own frames rather 
than attempting to understand the trainees’ perceptions [16]. 
Consequently, such comments were only loosely tied to the 
concrete actions of the trainees. To reach the full potential of 
feedback, supervisors may benefit from training techniques 
that would stimulate deeper reflection in trainees [16]. This 
reflects the need to pay attention to communication and 
feedback as a two-way knowledge process between mentors 
and mentees, but communication about both mentors’ and 
mentees’ work is not that common. 
A wider literature search on communication in the OR 
concluded that further detailed observational research that 
provides detailed transcripts and analyses of communication 
patterns is needed to gain a better understanding of 
nontechnical skills [17]. Addressing this gap, the current 
study explores communication and teamwork between a 
mentor and mentee using VC and the knowledge needed to 
complete the surgery. The use of VC and the communication 
between mentor and mentee are followed in real-time 
surgical training through the educational trajectory of a 
laparoscopic hernia procedure. Even though it is important to 
gather information about the outcomes of work in the OR, it 
is also necessary to gain a detailed understanding of the 
processes and communication patterns that lead to those 
outcomes. These are often overlooked in favour of technical 
skills. Therefore, the current study aims to provide insights 
into how mentors and mentees organise and accomplish 
collaborative work using VC in the OR by exploring the 
characteristics of communication in the relationship between 
them. It also investigates the feedback in the knowledge 
sharing between mentor and mentee, focusing on the process 
of nontechnical skills. 
The present study investigates knowledge sharing 
between a mentor and mentee – specifically, the way in 
which individual knowledge is shared and constructed to 
ensure that the mentee applies best practices. It expands upon 
previous work by exploring VC as an assessment tool for 
feedback on the activity and nontechnical elements in 
surgical training. 
III. 
FRAMEWORK 
Laparoscopy is a visual technique that uses several small 
ports in the abdomen, with an instrument inserted through 
each. The procedure is visual because a small camera is 
inserted into the patient’s abdomen. The images obtained 
from the camera are transmitted to a monitor in the OR but 
also enable communication with participants outside the OR. 
In the cases examined in the current article, the mentee and 
the surgical team used VC to communicate with a 
geographically distant mentor. The mentee was experienced 
in surgery and laparoscopy; before practising this procedure 
on patients, the mentee underwent the traditional education 
pathway for a new procedure (i.e., simulations using models 
and videos of the procedure). The mentor was an 
international expert in this specific procedure. The surgical 
135
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
training examined in the current study was organised as three 
onsite sessions in which the mentor performed, assisted with 
and observed the procedure and five distant sessions in 
which the mentor and mentee collaborated. 
Communication in the OR was framed using an activity 
theoretical perspective [18], focusing on the complex 
interactions between individual subjects and their wider 
context (i.e., educational activities) [19]. Activity theory is a 
theoretical framework for analysing and understanding 
human interactions through the use of tools. The mentor and 
mentee (subjects) were part of a collaborative educational 
and communicative process (object) mediated by VC (tool). 
These elements comprise the individual unit of analysis. 
Expanding the unit of analysis of education and learning 
beyond the individual action [20] includes an additional unit: 
the activity as the unit of analysis. The sets of conditions 
(rules) that help determine how and why surgeons act as they 
do and the distribution of tasks (division of labour) among 
the community of workers (community) frame the human 
activity as both individual and collective. Rules and division 
of labour affect the community; through this, the activity can 
be analysed. Collaborative activity happens between the 
activity system of the mentor and mentee, enabling the use of 
VC in practice. VC is thus a tool that mediates social action 
(illustrated in Figure 1).  
Using activity theory as a framework, educational 
situations are seen as having a significant historical and 
cultural context, in which the activity of mentor and mentee 
is hierarchical in nature and culturally and historically 
located. The activity is the basic unit of analysis used to 
understand individual actions in a social context in which the 
outcome is a new expert and local practice. 
 
IV. 
METHODS 
This is an ethnographic study [21] that explores the use of 
VC for communication between a mentor and a mentee 
within an educational process. The study was carried out 
from 2014 to 2016 in Norway and involved observations, 
interviews, focus groups and field notes. Five semi-
structured interviews, which lasted a total of six hours, took 
place in 2015 and 2016, and all were transcribed and 
analysed. For three months in 2014 and 2015, surgical 
training of the mentee in a specific hernia procedure was 
observed and videotaped.  
 
Figure 1. Collaborative activity. 
 
The dataset covers the entire educational trajectory, 
which includes eight cases and six hours of video 
observations. The whole dataset was transcribed. All 
involved participated in two focus group meetings to discuss 
the procedure. These meetings were also videotaped and 
transcribed. The mentor was a native English speaker, and 
the mentee had English as a second language. 
The analysis focused on the interactions between the 
mentor and the mentee, particularly when tensions appeared 
[21] and knowledge gaps needed to be closed. These 
interactions shaped the opportunities for expanding verbal 
decision making and nontechnical skills [22]. The 
observations in the OR allowed the communication and the 
team performance to be studied (as opposed to individuals). 
The eight sessions revealed communication patterns and 
nontechnical skills (but not individual deficiencies) in a 
series of operations that utilised VC for educational 
purposes. The focus group meetings made it possible to 
study the communication as it arose in the technical 
performance and reflection.  
The study applied for approval from the Regional 
Committee for Medical and Health Research Ethics, but it 
was not required for this study. The data-protection officer 
at the specific hospital approved the study, and all the 
participants signed an informed consent form. 
 
V. 
RESULTS 
The surgical training examined in the current study was 
organised into eight sessions. The first three sessions 
occurred onsite in the OR and involved preparation for the 
VC, and the next five sessions used VC. After the eighth 
session, the mentee was considered an expert in this 
procedure, and the VC sessions ceased [2]. 
A. Communication using VC 
The characteristics of communication using VC are 
illustrated in Figures 2 and 3.  
In Figure 2, we start from the four-minute mark of the 
seventh session, which was videotaped for about 25 
minutes. On the basis of previous sessions, the mentee 
referred to earlier communication by suggesting a course of 
action for the day. Specifically, he suggested cauterisation 
and pulling the sac into the abdominal cavity. He then asked 
the mentor what he thought about the suggestion (utterance 
1). The mentor supported the proposal but had a hunch, 
based on his own practice with stitches, that simply pulling 
out the sac would not be adequate (utterance 2). 
The mentee referred to the hernia as deep and 
acknowledged the suggestion to use stitches (utterance 3). 
The mentor then confirmed that it might be hard to just 
cauterise (utterance 4). The mentee considered going deep 
with the instrument (utterance 5), and the mentor elaborated 
on the depth (utterance 6). 
 
136
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
Figure 2. Communication using VC. 
After this reflection, the mentee decided to use stiches 
(utterance 7), a decision that was supported by the mentor 
(utterance 8). The mentee reconsidered his decision to try to 
pull the sac into the abdominal cavity and asked the mentor 
to support this decision (utterance 9). The mentor did 
support the decision and elaborated on the opportunity to 
perform cauterisation without injuring the patient (utterance 
10). The mentee confirmed that he shared this understanding 
(utterance 11). 
The characteristics of communication in this extract 
involved skills related to choosing an appropriate course of 
action and a shared understanding. First, the mentee 
presented a knowledge gap (i.e., whether to use stiches). 
This tension between the mentor’s knowledge and the 
mentee’s knowledge provided an opportunity to close the 
knowledge gap, thereby expanding the collective activity of 
decision making. The mentor supported the suggestion 
while mentioning the tension between the possible actions 
(i.e., pulling the sac or using stiches). Drawing on the 
mentor’s experience and knowledge, the mentor and mentee 
communicated, closing the knowledge gap by establishing a 
shared understanding. This shared understanding was based 
on a collective activity in which the participants were able 
to bridge the gap and perform a successful procedure. 
The communication in Figure 3 includes data starting 
from the 13-minute mark of the eighth session, which was 
videotaped for about 28 minutes. This extract is a discussion 
about use of the needle when performing the hernia 
procedure. 
 
Figure 3. Communication using VC. 
The mentor recommends that the mentee move more 
medially and explains that the mentee needs to take the 
needle back and out and then slide it in under the skin 
(subcuticular). Thus, he guides the mentee in the right 
direction by saying ‘go more medial’ and ‘you’re too 
lateral’ (utterance 1). The mentee slides the needle and asks 
if he is still too lateral (utterance 2). The mentor cannot 
confirm this because he cannot see the tip of the needle 
(utterance 3). The mentee moves a bit of the needle under 
the skin and asks if the mentor can see it now (utterance 4). 
The mentor, who now sees the needle, recommends that the 
mentee take the needle back, out of the subcutis, and slide 
the tip medially (utterance 5). This is a follow-up statement 
to the mentor’s suggestion in utterance 1. The mentee 
follows the recommendation, and both the mentor and the 
mentee agree that the method is better than the first method 
used by the mentee (utterances 5 and 6). 
Extract from the eighth session: (A: mentee, B: 
mentor) 
1 
B: 
You have to go a little bit more medial. So 
just take the – eh – needle back out a little 
bit. Then move, and slide in subcuticular 
(…). Go more medial. Yeah, eh – no, you’re 
too lateral. 
2 
A: 
Still? 
3 
B: 
I can’t see the tip of your needle now. 
4 
A: 
You can see it there? 
5 
B: 
Yeah, I think you’re … just go … come out 
of the subcutant a little bit, and just slide the 
tip of the needle over more medially. Don’t 
be af … Yes, that’s better! 
6 
A: 
That’s better, yeah. 
7 
B: 
Yeah. Angle it a little … angle it a little 
more laterally now, so you don’t get the 
epigastrium. Turn it. La … Laterally. 
8 
A: 
It’s just – eh – sticking to the peritoneum 
now. 
9 
B: 
Mhm, just push it, even if it pops out, you 
can always come back in again. 
10 
A: 
I’m on my way now. There it pops. So, I 
think maybe just leave the vas. 
11 
B: 
Yeah, I think, I … You’re almost there. Just 
pop, you can pop out. 
12 
A: 
Okay, this was actually one of the – eh – 
cases that I have learned the most. Because – 
ehm – the second opening was really tight. 
13 
B: 
Yup! 
14 
A: 
And the thing with the peritoneum vessels 
and the … it was one of the stickier vasa 
deferentes I’ve known. 
15 
A: 
Looks good? 
16 
B: 
That looks great, nice work! 
 
Extract from the seventh session: (A: mentee, B: 
mentor) 
 
 1 
A: 
I thought maybe today we could try just to 
cauterise it, if it’s possible to – eh – pull the sac 
out into the abdominal cavity. Or what do you 
think? 
 2 
B: 
Yeah. You can see. You can try. Ehm – it 
depends. You can try. I always start by turning 
and, and then if it seems like it’s not adequate, 
then I put a stitch in. 
 3 
A: 
It’s quite deep, you see … 
 4 
B: 
Yeah, it might be hard to do with just cautery. 
 5 
A: 
Yeah, I think so to. Because it goes into the … 
 6 
B: 
All the way down. 
 7 
A: 
Labia majora. Yeah. Okay, I think we will go for 
… 
 8 
B: 
Yeah. 
 9 
A: 
I don’t think it’s even necessary to try. Do you 
agree? 
10 
B: 
You … but the good thing is, you could do a lot 
of cautery, you don’t have to worry about … Eh 
... injuring it. 
11 
A: 
That’s good. Okay. 
 
137
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
In the new attempt, the mentor guides the mentee by 
recommending that he ‘angle it a little more laterally now’ 
and turn it laterally so that he does not become too close to 
the epigastrium (utterance 7). The mentee reports that the 
needle is sticking to the peritoneum (utterance 8). The 
mentor asks him to push the needle, and by drawing on his 
experience, he says that the needle can always be brought 
back if it pops out (utterance 9). The mentee tries to push 
the needle, and the needle pops out as the mentor said. The 
mentee suggests leaving the vas (without cauterising) 
(utterance 10). The mentor supports the mentee about 
leaving the vas and encourages the mentee by saying ‘you 
are almost there’ and recommends that he ‘pop out’ 
(utterance 11).  
At this moment, the most challenging part of the 
procedure is over, and the mentee reflects that this case was 
the one in which he has learned the most from the guidance 
of the mentor (utterance 12). Since the opening (hernia) was 
tight, the mentor’s knowledge about how to wield the needle 
was essential for the mentee’s method. The mentor confirms 
that the hernia really was tight (utterance 13) and that the 
mentee did nice work in this case (utterance 16). The 
mentee reflects further on why this case was hard: the 
opening was tight (utterance 12) but also included peritoneal 
vessels and a sticky vas deferens (utterance 14). The mentee 
asks if the mentor thinks the result looks good (utterance 
15), and the mentor replies ‘looks great, nice work’ 
(utterance 16), confirming that the mentee had performed 
well. 
The characteristics of the communication in Figure 3 
involve skills related to choosing the right way of using the 
needle and establishing a shared understanding between the 
mentor and mentee. First, the mentor offers the mentee 
knowledge about the method for how to handle the needle 
(i.e., back and slide in), and the mentee reveals the 
knowledge gap between his knowledge and the mentee’s 
with regard to the working method. The differences in the 
methods for using the needle offers an opportunity to close 
the knowledge gap, thereby expanding the collective 
activity of decision making. The mentee asks ‘still?’ and the 
mentor bridges the knowledge gap by explaining the course 
of action and establishing a shared understanding. Thus, the 
knowledge gap is closed through the opportunity to learn a 
new procedure.  
The activity is conducted through the actions of 
individuals, and by exploring the characteristics of the 
communication in the relationship between the mentor and 
mentee, we can obtain insights into how they organise and 
accomplish collaborative work using VC in the OR. This 
communication establishes a new work practice. 
B. Reviewing the procedure 
After each of the eight sessions, the mentor and mentee 
reviewed the session, as illustrated in Figure 4. 
  
 
Figure 4. Reviewing the procedure. 
 
When reviewing the session, it came to feedback about 
the mentee’s technique with the needle and how he handled 
the bend of the needle. The mentor opens up the discussion 
on the bend of the needle by saying he is not sure whether 
he likes the bend (utterance 1). The mentee asks if the 
mentor thinks the bend is too much (utterance 2). The 
mentor does not refer to the curve of the needle but to an 
alternative method for handling the needle, ‘the other way’ 
(utterance 3). The mentee suggests a method using all the 
curve length and confirms that he understands that he can 
handle the needle going with the curve (utterance 4). The 
mentor verifies that the mentee’s suggestion is good and that 
he can try the other method next time and find out which 
method he likes best. 
Overall, this extract illustrates how the mentor and 
mentee reflect on their working methods, that is, their 
technical skills, including methods for using the needle. At 
the end, the mentor allows the mentee to decide which 
method he wants to use in his own practice, the mentor’s 
method or the one he performed himself during the 
procedure. 
After the training sessions, focus group meetings was 
held to review the sessions and allow the mentor and mentee 
to discuss the content and how VC affected their 
communication. Figure 5 illustrates how this meeting 
progressed. 
In the excerpt, the mentor asks the mentee about the 
latter’s experience in one of the sessions and how the former 
could improve as a mentor (utterance 1). The mentee points 
out the tension between anticipated and ‘comfortable’ 
knowledge, referring to the fact that the mentee had watched 
the training videos of the procedure (utterance 2). 
Reviewing a session (A: mentee, B: mentor) 
 
1 
B: 
I am not sure I like the bend [of your needle]. 
2 
A: 
Too much? 
3 
B: 
No, I like it the other way I think. 
4 
A: 
Ah, ok. Yeah, yeah. With all the curve? 
5 
B: 
Yeah, yeah ... Try next time and see if you like 
it better. 
 
138
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
 
Figure 5. Reviewing the procedure. 
 
The mentor asks if the mentee felt that the former had 
provided too little instruction during the session (utterance 
3). Because the session went well, the mentee was not sure 
whether there was a gap in the knowledge between them but 
that guidance would have made the mentee feel ‘safer’ 
during decision making (utterance 4). The mentor then 
reflects on the communication between the mentor and 
mentee, illustrating the tension between the traditional way 
of locally training mentees (in which the expert mentor 
holds a more powerful position) and the use of VC as a pre-
planned tool for distributed collaborative work, in which the 
mentor and mentee act as colleagues (utterance 5). 
Overall, the extract shows the mentor’s and mentee’s 
reflections on their own communicative skills, that is, their 
nontechnical skills, including how the mentor relates to 
those around him. By exchanging reflections after the 
surgical procedure, the mentor was better able to understand 
his performance as a mentor. This learning activity led to a 
shared understanding between the activity systems of the 
mentee and mentor, thereby establishing a new practice for 
hernia procedures at this hospital.  
 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
The purpose of the current study was to explore the 
characteristics of communication between a mentor and 
mentee using VC in training, and of communication in the 
feedback about the VC training sessions. By using activity 
theory as a framework for studying human practices and 
artefacts in use, the training is understood as a process of 
development, with both the individual and social levels 
interlinked. Observing the communication when using VC 
(Figure 1 and Figure 2) made it possible to identify 
successful communication and teamwork. This educational 
process was a collective activity mediated by VC as a 
cultural tool. Tensions in the work illustrated the limitations 
of 
the 
mentee’s 
individual 
knowledge, 
providing 
opportunities to bridge the knowledge gap between the 
expert mentor and mentee. Collective decision making led to 
learning opportunities that allowed the mentee to become an 
expert in this specific procedure. Thus, communication using 
VC supported the learning of technical skills. 
VC also has the capacity to support collaborative (i.e., 
nontechnical) skills. The communication examined here 
refers to previous sessions (a history) and the progress made 
in expanding the mentee’s knowledge. The mentor reflected 
on his earlier actions and modified his teaching according to 
the mentee’s needs. 
The emphasis on decision-making skills in the training 
allowed the mentee to develop skills related to assessing 
situations and agreeing on an appropriate course of action 
within the team. Even though there was a gap in the 
mentee’s knowledge that the mentor had to bridge, the 
mentor and mentee discussed the options in a balanced way, 
considering the consequences and benefits of each option 
and staying flexible while making a shared decision. 
Afterwards, the mentor explained why he had recommended 
a specific course of action.  
The communication built upon traditional problem-
solving in the OR. Laparoscopy is a visual procedure in 
which a small camera is inserted into the patient’s abdomen, 
and the image is transmitted to a monitor in the OR. In this 
case, VC was used to show the mentor the same images seen 
by the mentee. In contrast to traditional training, in which 
both the mentor and mentee are in the OR, this training 
occurred using VC. This created tension between the 
traditional method of local training, in which the mentor and 
mentee are both at the patient’s bedside and are aware of all 
activity in the OR, and remote guidance, in which the mentor 
has expert knowledge of the procedure but not complete 
knowledge of all the activity in the OR. 
The problem-solving process is based on the same 
information, which comes from using the monitor. 
Consequently, the technical skills are based on the shared 
knowledge. Nevertheless, there is teamwork in the OR that 
cannot be experienced by the mentor using VC. Both the 
mentor and mentee develop awareness of the situation, 
which includes all the activities in the OR and the pre- and 
postoperative conditions of the patient. The mentee, who is 
at the patient’s bedside, has the overall picture of the patient. 
The mentor has expert knowledge and is expected to guide 
the mentee to deliver high-quality procedures. Thus, because 
both have great responsibilities, the mentee is more of a 
colleague than a resident. As the mentor notes in Figure 4, 
these cases have their own collaborative method that differs 
from that of traditional mentoring. The mentor acts 
differently with a colleague than with his own resident, 
reflecting on what he communicates and trying not to be too 
talkative and disruptive (i.e., annoying). Using activity 
theory as a framework, educational situations have a 
Reviewing two sessions: (A: mentee, B: mentor) 
 
1 
B: 
What was not good? Don’t be polite … What 
could I have done better as a mentor? 
2 
A: 
We just assumed that I had seen the video that I 
knew …  You just let me do it, and then you 
corrected me … 
3 
B: 
I didn’t give enough instructions (…)? You wish 
I had given more instructions? 
4 
A: 
I don’t know if it was necessary, but maybe it 
would (…) feel more safe, in a way. 
5 
B: 
This is a problem that ... Not feeling comfortable 
as a mentor, knowing not to say too much. When 
I have a relationship with a resident, I say 
whatever I want. He is my resident. But when it is 
a colleague, I am a little bit more shy about being 
too talkative. Does that make sense? The fact that 
different relationships exist between me and a 
trainee, a resident, and another surgeon. I don’t 
want them to be annoyed too much … 
 
139
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
significant historical and cultural context, such that the 
activity of the mentor and mentee are hierarchical in nature 
and culturally and historically located. VC allows the 
relationship between the mentor and mentee to be more of 
one between equal colleagues, rather than like the traditional 
hierarchical mentor–resident relationship. The traditional 
distribution of tasks and rules are challenged because the VC 
as a tool mediates social action in a new manner. 
When reviewing the procedure, the mentor and mentee 
discussed both technical skills and the dynamics of the 
communication patterns (i.e., nontechnical skills). This 
allowed the mentor to support the mentee while improving 
his own communication skills through reflection. This 
activity also supported the mentee in reflecting on his own 
communication skills. VC was used because the mentee was 
an experienced surgeon but not in this specific procedure; the 
competencies of the mentor and mentee were thus unequal in 
this respect. However, the collaborative activity seemed to 
affect the historical inequality between the mentor and 
mentee and redefine the traditional mentee/resident–
mentor/expert relationship into one between colleagues. 
Under the division of labour during surgery, the mentee held 
the leadership position in the OR, but the mentor was the 
expert on the procedure. This allowed nontechnical skills, 
rather than just technical skills, to be developed, 
subsequently enabling the participants to reflect on how 
teamwork could be improved. 
The use of VC in this setting is not the traditional way of 
practising training, making it a new tool for this purpose. 
This may permit more attention to be paid to the problem-
solving process and quality than under the traditional way of 
supervising. Following the trajectory of this training, the 
team decided to review the technology used to ensure the 
quality of this supervisory method. This process became 
more than an evaluation of the technology itself and its 
capacity for this specific purpose. Reviewing the sessions 
enabled feedback of the work performed in the VC sessions 
(Figures 3 and 4). Although it is quite normal to review 
video films of technical skills during training, it is not that 
common to include the evaluation of nontechnical activity, 
that is, the mentor’s performance and the communication 
between the mentor and mentee.  
Communication is shaped by organisational culture and 
historical activities, which play an important role in how 
work is performed. Communication problems can be 
attributed to a lack of clarity regarding roles and power 
relationships [14]. Implementing VC for collaboration in 
surgical education challenges the traditional surgical training 
and communication patterns between mentors and mentees. 
Specifically, the results of the current study illustrate that VC 
promotes effective reasoning and good communication 
between mentors and mentees. Communication and 
teamwork related to decision making are characterised by 
reflection on the performed work, leading to the 
development of nontechnical skills and the ability to 
emphasise nontechnical skills as important in surgical 
training. 
Initially, VC was a tool used to overcome distance. This 
procedure illustrates how VC has become something more, 
however, enabling expert knowledge to be shared with 
mentees who are geographically dispersed. It also illustrates 
how VC can be used as a tool for feedback on mentorship 
and collaborative methods. In their study, Entezami et al. [3] 
called for methods to overcome barriers to effective 
mentorship, such as a lack of qualified mentors and the lack 
of an assessment tool to evaluate mentorship in the surgical 
environment. The present study exemplifies how VC 
provides a means of assessment for qualified mentors and 
can educate surgeons, who can then work as mentors for 
other mentees. In addition, the access to new techniques 
disperses expert knowledge over geographical distances. 
Moreover, the current study shows how VC mediates social 
action, acting as an assessment tool to evaluate mentorship 
and promote nontechnical skills, encouraging reflection on 
the communication process. Introducing VC as a tool for 
communication creates the possibility of offering both 
traditional and new ways of practising mentorship, enabling 
the development of an activity for nontechnical skills to 
become relevant when using VC. 
 
VII. CONCLUSION 
In the mentor–mentee relationship studied, contextually 
embedded interactions occurred between the activity systems 
of the mentor and mentee. VC allowed knowledge exchange 
during surgical training, resulting in the mentee becoming an 
expert in the procedure. The results provide insights into the 
way in which surgical training and practice are performed, 
into the communication in training sessions and into the 
expansion of technical skills. 
Because the use of VC as a tool for education in this 
procedure was new, the surgical team decided to review the 
technology used to ensure the quality of this method of 
supervision. This process became more than an evaluation of 
the technology itself and its capacity for this specific 
purpose. Reviewing the sessions enabled feedback on the 
work performed in the VC sessions. The use of VC within 
surgical 
training 
facilitated 
the 
development 
of 
communication skills because it promoted reflection on both 
the mentor’s and mentee’s performance. VC acted as a tool 
mediating social action, with feedback on the mentee’s 
performance evaluating both the mentor and mentee and 
assessing the nontechnical skills used in surgical training. 
The literature has called for an assessment tool to evaluate 
mentorships in a surgical environment. In this case, VC 
mediated the evaluation of mentorship and nontechnical 
skills. Hence, both the mentor and mentee were able to reach 
their full potential, expanding their own communicative 
skills and reflecting on their own abilities.  
Integrating VC into surgical training within the current 
training paradigm would allow for both technical and 
nontechnical elements to be included in the feedback 
provided to mentees. VC can promote a new style of 
mentorship in which nontechnical skills can be practised and 
reflected on while the relevant training is provided. This 
could be a step towards raising both mentors’ and mentees’ 
awareness of nontechnical skills, facilitating changes in the 
workplace and emphasising collaborative skills (i.e., 
140
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

 
 
communication and teamwork) in the educational process 
(and, later, in daily work). In this way, VC could help 
produce a new generation of surgeons who are competent in 
all the skills required for knowledge expansion and safe, 
high-quality patient care.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Thanks are due to the Northern Regional Health 
Authority, Norway for funding this project (HST-1181-14) 
and to all the surgeons who participated in the study. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. L. Warth, “Communication between Mentor and Mentee 
Using Videoconferencing in Surgical Training,” IARIA Proc. 
The 
Twelfth 
International 
Conference 
on 
eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, 2020, pp. 4–8, ISBN: 
978-1-61208-763-4, ISSN 2308-4359. e-ISSN 2308-4359. 
[2] L. L. Warth, “Creating learning opportunities by using 
videoconferencing in surgical education,” Stud Health 
Technol 
Inform., 
vol. 
262, 
pp. 
15–18, 
2019, 
doi:10.3233/SHTI190005. 
[3] P. Entezami, L. E. Franzblau, and K. C. Chung. “Mentorship 
in surgical training: a systematic review,” Hand (NY), vol. 7, 
no. 1, pp. 30–36, 2012, doi:10.1007/s11552-011-9379-8. 
[4] L. Lingard et al., “Communication failures in the operating 
room: an observational classification of recurrent types and 
effects,” J. Qual. Saf. Health Care, vol. 13, pp. 330–334, 
2004. 
[5] N. Sevdalis et al., “Quantitative analysis of intraoperative 
communication in open and laparoscopic surgery,” Surg. 
Endosc., vol. 26, pp. 2931–2938, Oct. 2012. 
[6] L. Hull et al., “The impact of nontechnical skills on technical 
performance in surgery: a systematic review,” J. Am. Coll. 
Surg., vol. 214, pp. 214–230, 2012, doi:10.1016/j.jamcollsurg. 
2011.10.016. 
[7] R. A. Agha, A. J. Fowler, and N. Sevdaliscet, “The role of 
non-technical skills in surgery,” Ann. Med. Surg., vol. 4, pp. 
422–427, Published online 2015 Oct 9. doi: 10.1016/j.amsu. 
2015.10.006. 
[8] The Royal College of Surgeons of Edinburgh. NOTSS: Non-
technical Skills for Surgeons. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.abdn.ac.uk/iprc/notss/ 2020.01.21. 
[9] R. Flin, P. O’Connor, and M. Crichton, Safety at the Sharp 
End: A Guide to Nontechnical Skills. Aldershot: Ashgate, 
2008. 
[10] B. S. Nedrebo et al., “Survival effect of implementing 
national treatment strategies for curatively resected colonic 
and rectal cancer,” Br. J. Surg., vol. 98, pp. 716–723, 2011. 
[11] N. J. Birkmeyer et al., “Safety culture and complications after 
bariatric surgery,” Ann. Surg., vol. 257, pp. 260–265, 2013. 
[12] K. M. Augestad et al., “Surgical telementoring in knowledge 
translation—clinical outcomes and educational benefits: a 
comprehensive review,” Surg. Innov., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 273–
281, 2013. 
[13] P. Lamba, “Teleconferencing in medical education: a useful 
tool,” Australas. Med. J., vol. 4, pp. 442–447, 2011. 
[14] L. Panait et al., “Telementoring versus on-site mentoring in 
virtual reality-based surgical training,” Surg. Endosc., vol. 20, 
pp. 113–118, 2006. 
[15] K. M. Augestad et al., “Educational implications for surgical 
telementoring: a current review with recommendations for 
future practice, policy, and research,” Surg. Endosc., vol. 31, 
pp. 3836–3846, 2017. 
[16] L. Spanager, P. Dieckmann, R. Beier-Holgersen, J. 
Rosenberg, and D. Oestergaard, “Comprehensive feedback on 
trainee surgeons’ non-technical skills,” International Journal 
of Medical Education, vol. 6, pp. 4–11, 2015. ISSN: 2042-
6372, doi:10.5116/ijme.54b4.2196. 
[17] C. Vincent, K. Moorthy, S. Sarker, A. Chang, and A. W. 
Darzi, “Systems approaches to surgical quality and safety: 
from concept to measurement,” Ann. Surg., vol. 239, pp. 475–
482, 2004. 
[18] Y. Engestrӧm, “Expansive learning at work: towards an 
activity theory reconceptualization,” J. Educ. Work, vol. 14, 
pp. 133–156, 2001. 
[19] S. M. Weldon, T. Korkiakangas, J. Bezemer, and R. 
Kneebone, “Communication in the operating theatre,” Br. J. 
Surg., 
vol. 
100, 
pp. 
1677–1688, 
Dec. 
2013, 
doi:10.1002/bjs.9332. 
[20] Y. Engeström and H. Kerosuo, “From workplace learning to 
inter-organizational learning and back: the contribution of 
activity theory. Guest editorial,” J. Workplace Learn., vol. 19, 
pp. 336–342, 2007. 
[21] D. Silverman, Interpreting Qualitative Data: Methods for 
Analysing Talk, Text and Interaction. London: Sage 
Publications, 2001. 
[22] P. Linell, Approaching Dialogue: Talk, Interaction and 
Contexts in Dialogical Perspective. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins, 1998. 
 
 
141
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 3 & 4, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org

