11
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Security Risk Analysis of the Cloud Infrastructure of Smart Grid and IoT -
4-Level-Trust-Model as a Security Solution
Katrin Neubauer
Dept. Computer Science and Mathematics
Ostbayerische Technische Hochschule
Regensburg, Germany
email:
katrin1.neubauer@oth-regensburg.de
Sebastian Fischer
Secure Systems Engineering
Fraunhofer AISEC
Berlin, Germany
email:
sebastian.ﬁscher@aisec.fraunhofer.de
Rudolf Hackenberg
Dept. Computer Science and Mathematics
Ostbayerische Technische Hochschule
Regensburg, Germany
email:
rudolf.hackenberg@oth-regensburg.de
Abstract—The digital transformation has found its way into
business and private life. It consists of digitization and digitaliza-
tion. Digitization means the technical process and digitalization
is the socio-technological process. Technologies of digitization are
Cloud Computing (CC), Internet of Things (IoT) and Smart
Grid (SG), which are separate technologies. The increasing
digitalization in the private sector and of the energy industry
connect these technologies. Actually, there is no connection
between the CC infrastructure and the SG infrastructure at
the moment, because in Germany the SG is currently under
construction. If one looks at the CC and IoT, it must be stated
there is an connection between the IoT infrastructure and the CC
infrastructure as a service provider. To connect the technologies
CC, IoT and SG and also build an SG cloud for innovative
services, the new laws for privacy must be implemented. For
privacy and security analyses it is important to know which
data can be stored and distributed on a cloud. To illustrate this
analysis, we connect the SG infrastructure with the IoT. An IoT
device (car charging station) should be able to transfer data to
and from the SG. SG is a critical infrastructure and the IoT
device a potential insecure device and network. We show the
communication between the smart meter switching box and the
IoT device and the data transferred between their clouds. The
charging station is connected to the SG to get the current amount
of renewable energy in the grid. This is necessary to create a new
smart service. But this service also generates private data (e.g.,
name, address, payment details). The private data should not be
transferred to the IoT cloud. For the connection of SG and IoT,
availability, conﬁdentiality and integrity must be ensured. A risk
analysis over all the cloud connections, including the vulnerability
and the ability of an attacker, the resulting risk and the 4-Level-
Trust-Model for security assessment are developed. Furthermore,
we show the application of the 4-Level-Trust-Model in this paper.
Keywords—Smart Grid; Internet of Things; security analy-
sis; safety-critical infrastructure; cloud computing; 4-Level-Trust-
Model
I. INTRODUCTION
This paper extends the already published paper “Risk Anal-
ysis of the Cloud Infrastructure of Smart Grid and Internet
of Things” [1] with more detailed information of the risk
analysis and the 4-Level-Trust-Model as a security solution
for the main problem with the different data.
With the increasing digitalization in our world, new tech-
nologies, like the Internet of Things (IoT), have a great
inﬂuence on our future way of life. Non-technical user are
using connected technologies to improve their comfort without
knowing about the possible risks.
But not only private technologies are increasing their digital-
ization, the future Smart Grid (SG) is also a highly networked
system. In order to use these innovative services, which emerge
from the digitalization, a third technology, Cloud Computing
(CC) is necessary. With all three technologies combined, new
services can be offered and the transformation of the energy
system can be successfully implemented.
In Germany, the integration of the intelligent energy supply
system (SG) is creating a new IT infrastructure. The intelligent
measuring system (iMSys), containing a basic meter (smart
meter) and the smart meter gateway (SMGW) [2] are currently
installed in many households and companies in Germany. But
other countries like Italy or Sweden are already further ahead
with the development of the SG infrastructure.
The digitalization of the electricity grid brings new dangers
and challenges in the area of IT-Safety and -Security. These
can even allow attacks from the internet where no physical
access to the network is necessary. Besides the SG, all kind of
devices are getting a connection to the internet. These devices
can range from smart refrigerators to connected cars and are
called IoT. Most of the time, existing devices are getting a
communication interface and are connected to the internet over
a gateway or directly.
IoT, just like SG, also brings new IT-Security and -Safety
dangers. For consumer devices, the damage is normally not
high, but the lack of IT-Security in consumer devices, which
are connected to other networks, can lead to serious damage
in other (critical) infrastructures. One big challenge is the high
number of newly connected devices. Services for only a few
devices, are getting new ones on a large scale, which are not
necessary persistent. They are very ﬂexible and appear and
disappear quickly in their lifetime. This volatility is a big
challenge for the security of existing and new services.
Beside of all dangers, new technologies are emerging and
the new challenges must be solved. The smart services are
required for future applications and the connection between

12
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
SG and IoT is necessary, to regulate the amount of energy in
the grid. For these services, the cloud platform is needed as a
connection between both technologies. It can be described as
a data hub, for data storage, analysis and the services.
Both technologies, SG and IoT, are implementing their own
cloud platform with the corresponding infrastructure. These
independent clouds must be connected in order to offer new
services with the desired added value. The potential insecure
device and infrastructure of IoT should be able to communi-
cate in both directions with the critical infrastructure of the SG.
The security objectives availability, conﬁdentiality, integrity
and privacy must nevertheless still be ensured. Therefore, new
risks and attack vectors emerge and new requirements for
authentication and authorization are needed.
In this paper, we connect a IoT and SG cloud and perform
a risk analysis over our example architecture to see the new
problems and dangers of this connection. In the next step, a
security model, based on IoT security standards and a new 4-
Level-Trust-Model is developed. Finally, the model is applied
to the example, to show the beneﬁts of our security model.
The paper is structured as follows. Section II covers the
related work and existing publications. In Section III, we
describe our architecture and the corresponding challenges
for the connection between the two technologies. In the next
section, the security analysis is performed and Section V,
describes the security model, which is applied in Section VI
to our example. Finally, the conclusion is given.
II. RELATED WORK
IoT devices are potential insecure devices. The security gaps
in IoT devices can be protected with known principles. The
problem is that they are not used by the manufacturers. One
reason for this could be problem of costs. It is important for
research to respond to new challenges in this ﬁeld.
One challenge is the scarce resources of IoT devices.
Already known encryption algorithms need to be adapted
or changed to work more effectively and operate acceptably
with low-performance hardware (e.g., PRINCE [3]). As an
alternative, the new development of suitable algorithms can
be considered (e.g., Secure IoT - SIT [4]).
Some publications cover the details about the necessary
encryption and communication protocols, but do not classify
the different data, e.g., [5] and [6]. The publication “Enabling
privacy and security in Cloud of Things: Architecture, applica-
tions, security & privacy challenges” [7] describes an architec-
ture for the combination CC and IoT, the “Cloud of Things”.
With the 4-Level-Trust-Model, a solution is developed to deal
with the the mentioned security and privacy threats.
Currently, insecure devices are in use. For this situation,
solutions must be found to continue the operation. The “Quad9
DNS Privacy and Security Service” is an example for this
problem. Several companies (including IBM) have developed
a special DNS server (Quad9 DNS Privacy and Security
Service), which should ensure the security as well as privacy
of the IoT devices. Quad9 automatically blocks requests to
infected sites. As a last challenge, manufacturers must be
“forced” to improve IT security. This can be accomplished
by guidelines and certiﬁcations.
For SG exist an European architecture model so called
Smart Grid Architecture Model (SGAM). This model was
developed in the context of the European standardization man-
date M/490. The SGAM includes the visualization, validation
and structuring of SG projects from the beginning of the
project as well as for the standardization of SG. The model
was also used for the SG architecture development at different
organizational levels. In this model, security is not explicitly
considered. This publication describes security as a cross-
cutting topic [8]. The architectural models of the countries
differ in principle, but they are mostly based on the SGAM.
In Germany, the SG itself is regulated by the speciﬁcations
of the Federal Ofﬁce for Information Security (BSI) and is
regarded as the state of the art (communication) [9]. The BSI
was commissioned by the legislator to develop speciﬁcations
for a SMGW in order to guarantee a secure infrastructure for
intelligent measuring systems [10]. The intelligent measuring
systems will be integrated into a communication network with
the central element SMGW as a communication unit [11]–[13].
Security and privacy considerations for IoT application on
SG with a focus on survey and research challenges presented
are shown in [14] and [15]. The publication gives a brief
insight SG and IoT application on SG. Furthermore, the
publication identiﬁes some of the remaining challenges and
vulnerabilities related to security and privacy. A security and
communication analysis of SG, IoT and CC in Germany are
shown in [16]–[18]
Classical models for IT security assessment are the BSI-
Standards (BSI-Standards 200-1, 200-2 and 200-3 [19]–[21])
or ISO/IEC 27000:2018 [22], which classically consider the
IT processes within a company. With highly scalable and
distributed systems (such as CC, IoT and SG), the entire IT
process must be considered. In [23]–[26] security is considered
during the development process of software. The security
evaluation of data is based on a 2-level trust model shown
in [27]. These known models for security modeling as well
as the 2-level trust model are not suitable for cyber physical
systems (CPS).
The handling of data when they leave the “SG”, require-
ments for authentication and authorisation in future SG-IoT-
cloud application and how to deal with service provider who
access data (service charging station) in critical infrastructures
are open questions. For this open question there is no related
work.
III. ARCHITECTURE CHALLENGES FOR SMART GRID AND
IOT
First, we describe the challenges in SG and IoT individually,
then we present our example architecture with the communi-
cation and the corresponding data.

13
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE I. Energy-Supply: Today - Future
today
future
central supply
decentralized supply
bilateral and wholesale trade (lo-
cal markets)
centralization (regional market)
transfer energy
transfer energy and data
reading of the meter content: once
a year (manual)
smart metering: transfer data all
15 minutes
Figure 1. Application example Smart Grid
A. Smart Grid
In the future SG (compare Table I), large amounts of data
are generated daily when meter data are read out on a regular
basis. These data have to be stored, archived and analyzed.
The conversion of the entire energy supply system from a
centralized supply to a decentralized supply is progressing
continuously in Germany [28]. The transformation of the
energy supply to an intelligent energy supply system creates
numerous new opportunities and challenges. The changeover
to renewable energies alone, such as wind power or solar
energy, creates new challenges for future systems in the SG.
The SG infrastructure is not only used for the use case
“energy” like smart metering (see Figure 1). Further ﬁled
of application are smart home, gas, water and value-added
service. The energy supplier (EVU) operates a data platform
to connect the users. In this case, user are producer, consumer
and customer. The SMGW is the secure interface and com-
munication unit between the household and the EVU.
The conversion is not only taking place in Germany, but also
in other European countries. Pioneers are countries like Italy
and Sweden [28]. However, these rollouts have already been
carried out the dangers from a security and safety perspective.
With regard to security of supply, attacks on control systems
of the power grid via the Internet represent a growing threat,
because on the one hand, the power grid can be controlled
or manipulated over it. On the other hand, data requiring
protection about the consumer and their behaviour can be
accessed. This is because data of varying origin and quality is
processed and analysed in real time. As a result, access to the
systems must be guaranteed for different groups of people.
B. Internet of Things
The
Internet
of
Things
is
deﬁned
in
the
ISO/IEC
20924:2018 standard as a infrastructure, which connects enti-
ties with services which react to information from the physical
and virtual world [29]. This includes all connected devices
nowadays, regardless if they are connected to the Internet
or not. In our paper, we restrict this deﬁnition to common
IoT devices, which beneﬁt from a connection with the SG.
This mainly includes smart home devices with a high energy
consumption like a smart charging station.
Especially smart home devices are currently highly insecure,
because of the increasing amount of devices [30] and the
cheap price. Nearly every home appliance devices needs a
connection to some smartphone application and the internet
to control them remotely. This leads to a fast development
of new features and connection points without enough time
to care about the security. The second security issue is price,
because no customer is willing to pay more for a device just
because it was designed to be secure. The cheapest device
with the most features is usually always bought.
Botnets like Mirai [31] and other malware are using insecure
IoT devices, to attack other networks. The security problems
of IoT are not new and the majority of them can be solved
with common IT-Security methods. This shows the OWASP
IoT Project. The top vulnerabilities in IoT devices, like default
or weak passwords, are simple to ﬁx [32].
Because of this, we consider IoT devices as insecure. There
are too much insecure devices in operation and there is no
prove of security of new devices. Nevertheless, we connect an
insecure IoT network to a probably insecure cloud and this
cloud ﬁnally to the SG.
C. Architecture Smart Grid and IoT
The SG reference architecture consist of the Local Metro-
logical Network (LMN), the Wide Area Network (WAN) and
the Home Area Network (HAN). The connection between
these networks takes place through the SMGW. The LMN
consists of all the gas meter, electricity meter, etc. The WAN
is outside of the building and describes the connection over a
wider range. The Gateway-Administrator and the energy sup-
plier (Energieversorgungsunternehmen in German, short EVU)
are located in the WAN. The last network, the HAN, is the
local network in the building with the connected (smart home)
devices. The SG cloud extends the common SG reference
architecture, as shown in Figure 2.
The IoT network is located in the HAN with all connected
IoT devices. Some devices are connected over a gateway to
the Internet. The IoT Cloud and the user can access theses
devices over these HAN connections.
New services can use the central stored data of the cloud
platforms and make it available to the user. As shown in Figure
2, the connection between IoT and SG can be established

14
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 2. Architecture Cloud Application on Smart Grid with IoT
between the two clouds (IoT Cloud and SG Cloud). It is the
main focus of this paper, as this is where the two technologies
are combined and data exchange takes place.
D. Application Example
For a realistic and useful example, we use a smart car
charging station with a cloud connection. The charging sta-
tion is considered as insecure, as well as the whole IoT
network (Gateway, Cloud, Applications). The SG network is
as extensive as described in the previous section with all the
components. As meter, a electrical meter is used, because the
smart service should connect the charging station cloud and
the SG cloud. The service can load the electric car, connected
to the charging station, at the most suitable times. The grid
can charge the car, when a lot of energy is produced and
therefore in the grid. If the grid is low on energy (can be
detected by the current frequency), the car can supply the grid
with stored energy to stabilize it. The smart service connects
the two clouds, because at this point it is possible to get all
necessary data from both technologies.
E. Communication between Smart Grid and IoT
By connecting the two clouds, data is exchanged. To de-
termine the risk of the connection, it is necessary to know
which data is transferred. There are only the communication
data from IoT and SG listed, because not all stored data is
exchanged.
1) Communications data Internet of Thing: The following
data is stored in the IoT cloud and transmitted to the smart
service as needed:
• ID Connected car
• ID gateway (charging station (CS))
• IP-Address gateway (CS)
• Sum of energy consumption (CS)
• Current energy consumption / supply (CS)
• History of energy consumption / supply (CS)
• Time to load the car
• User data (CS)
– Name
– E-Mail
The connected car and the history can be used to create a
proﬁle of the user. This includes the times, the user is normally
at home or at work. This data is private data and should be
protected.
2) Communications data Smart Grid: The following data
is generated and stored in the SG cloud, as well as transmitted
to the smart service:
• Information about the smart meter (ID, IP-Address)
• Current energy consumption
• Current price for electricity
• Information about the customer
– Name
– Address
– Payment details
The information about the smart meter or the current energy
consumption can be used to create a proﬁle of the household
(user). This is partly equal to the proﬁle of the connected
car, but can be extended to the whole household an therefore
other people. In conclusion, like the connected car data, this
data is also private data and should be protected. Special
data protection precautions must be taken, as this may allow
conclusions to be drawn about third parties (other people in
the household).
IV. SECURITY ANALYSIS FOR SAFETY-CRITICAL SYSTEMS
The security analysis starts with the description of the
attack vectors. From these vectors, the threads are derived.
In the next step, the risk is shown for every thread, based on
the ability of the attacker and the possible damage. Finally,
practical examples show the potential danger in our example
architecture.
A. Attack vector Smart Grid and Internet of Thing
There are four kind of attack vector categories: hardware
manipulation attacks (physical attacks), software manipulation
attacks, network-based attacks and privacy related attacks [33]
[34]. Each attack tries to get unauthorized access to the
infrastructure or inﬂict some damage to it [35].
Hardware manipulation or physical attacks are performed
locally on the device. It is possible to change the hardware and
the software. Mostly malware is installed, which leads to data
manipulation and snifﬁng. In context SG, a complete shutdown
of the grid would be possible in the worst case. However,
sensitive (private) data can also be tapped and modiﬁed. In

15
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
the case of IoT devices, for example, the software can be
modiﬁed so that the device acts as a spy and forwards all data
to the attacker. Hardware attacks thus open up all possibilities
for an attacker, but are very difﬁcult to execute.
With software manipulation attacks, it is possible to change
the software (or ﬁrmware) of the device. These attacks can
be done remotely over the internet or any other network. The
attacker uses a weakness in the running software (e.g., buffer
overﬂow, code injection) to execute his own code or tries
to manipulate the administrator of the device to install the
malicious software. As with hardware manipulation attacks, in
the worst case the SG can be shut down or sensitive (private)
data can be modiﬁed or tapped.
Network-based attacks like identity theft, denial of service,
cascading malware propagation (Business IT & Plant Control)
and monitor, trafﬁc analysis (passive attacks) are using the
network to inﬂict damage. They can be used to get data or to
disable the service. These attacks are difﬁcult to protect from,
because the hole network (internet) is not controlled.
The last category are privacy related attacks. With these
attacks, user-speciﬁc data are collected and used to inﬂict
personal damage to the customers or the energy supplier. They
can be combined with other attacks or used to trick the ad-
ministrator to install malicious software (social engineering).
According to IoT and SG, the following risks are possible:
manipulation of measured values and time, manipulation of
the communication between IoT cloud and SG cloud, misuse
of energy data and/or sensitive data, sabotage of the power
grid and sabotage of mobility (example: charging station).
B. Security threats: Infrastructure Smart Grid and Internet of
Things
The risk analysis for both, the IoT cloud and the SG
cloud, are including the ability of an attacker and the potential
damage, which are leading to a risk for the associated attack.
With a lower ability, it is more likely for an attacker, to use
this kind of attack [36]. The potential damage of an attack is
related to the real damage (destroy some parts of the grid or
the unavailability of services) and the personal damage, caused
by stolen private information. For example, an attacker gets
private data from the SG, the ability needs to be high, but the
damage is high, too. This lead to a high risk overall [37].
Because of strict speciﬁcations and regulations of the SG in
Germany, the ability of an attacker must be high in the most
cases.
1) DoS and DDoS: A (distributed) denial of service (DDoS
or DoS) attack tries to ﬂood the device or network with too
much data, so the service becomes unavailable. This kind of
attack can be performed distributed with a lot devices from a
botnet at low costs.
For IoT devices there is low damage, because most of them
are just for comfort features. Necessary devices, like electric
cars, are not available in high amounts at the moment, so not
many of them are affected. For the SG, such an attack can
lead to a shutdown of the grid, because the SG is unable to
broadcast the current amount of energy in the grind and all
connected cars start charging. The medium and high damage,
combined with the low ability needed, are leading to medium
to high risks for both technologies.
Ability of an attacker
IoT:
low
SG:
low
Damage
IoT:
medium
SG:
high
Risk
IoT:
medium
SG:
medium / high
2) Malware: For using a malware, the attacker needs to
know or ﬁnd a vulnerability in the software. This can be very
easy in IoT devices, because of the bad security situation. For
eamxple, the mirai botnet started by using easily guessable
login credentials to compromise the devices [31].
The SG is strictly regulated in Germany by the Federal
Ofﬁce for Information Security with the technical regulations
TR-03109 [8]. This certiﬁcation is needed to operate the
devices, so they can be declared as secure and the ability of
an attacker has to be high to attack them.
The damage for IoT is similar to the one for the DoS
and DDoS attacks. But the SG can be compromised and the
attacker can shutdown the hole grid or even damage hardware
components.
The derived risk of a malware attack is therefore medium
for IoT and medium to high for SG.
Ability of an attacker
IoT:
low
SG:
high
Damage
IoT:
medium
SG:
high
Risk
IoT:
medium
SG:
medium / high
3) Broken Authentication: Like shown at malware attacks
above, the broken authentication is very similar. The IoT
devices are not secure and the SG is considered as secure,
because of the certiﬁcation.
The damage and the risk were also assessed as in the
malware section. A broken authentication can lead to a full
compromisation of the device or the network.
Ability of an attacker
IoT:
low
SG:
high
Damage
IoT:
medium
SG:
high
Risk
IoT:
medium
SG:
medium / high
4) Broken Encryption: The broken encryption is also very
similar to the malware attacks. The IoT devices are not secure
and the SG is considered as secure, again because of the
certiﬁcation.
The damage is not so high as malware or broken authen-
tication, because only the data send over the network can
be attacked. Depending on the content of the data, personal
information may be included, but the conﬁdentiality of the

16
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
data is not necessary for the operation. The damage at IoT
can be low to medium, because of the different device types.
The SG can expose more personal information, so the damage
is medium.
Because of the low ability and the low to medium damage,
the risk of IoT is medium. In the SG a high ability is
needed, which leads to medium damage, the risk is declared
as medium.
Ability of an attacker
IoT:
low
SG:
high
Damage
IoT:
low / medium
SG:
medium
Risk
IoT:
medium
SG:
medium
5) Data leakage: When a part of the data or all data are
exposed, the damage and the risks are the same as by broken
encryption. The ability is also rated the same, but can be a bit
lower, because sometimes no encryption at all is used for IoT
devices.
Ability of an attacker
IoT:
low
SG:
high
Damage
IoT:
low / medium
SG:
medium
Risk
IoT:
medium
SG:
medium
6) Data manipulation: As mentioned before, data manipu-
lation can be easily performed in IoT environments, because
of missing regulations. For example, the IoT Cloud can be
attacked and adopted, because easy to guess passwords are
used. As the last sections, the SG network is secure and no
data can be manipulated.
In the most cases, the manipulation of data for IoT devices
is only possible for one kind of device or one manufacturer.
This limits the damage and therefore has no great effect on the
SG. If SG data are manipulated, it can lead to some damage,
but not for all user, just for the affected ones. Therefore, the
damage for IoT is low and for SG medium.
The risk was assessed as before. A low ability and a low
damage are leading to a low risk. A high ability and a medium
damage to a medium risk.
Ability of an attacker
IoT:
low
SG:
high
Damage
IoT:
low
SG:
medium
Risk
IoT:
low
SG:
medium
7) Hardware manipulation: It is very difﬁcult to get access
to the hardware. The cloud server are most of the times under
good protection, especially in the SG and the devices are
installed in the house. If an attacker gets access to one house, it
is only one device affected and not the whole network. These
points are leading to a medium and a high ability for the
attacker.
If it is possible to get hardware access to the cloud, the
damage can be medium to high. For an IoT device, the attacker
Figure 3. Summary of the risks
only gets access to one or some manufacturer. But the SG
cloud can be used to shutdown the whole grid.
The risk is straight forward for IoT, because the ability and
the damage are both medium. For the SG, the risk is medium
because it is difﬁcult to attack the server infrastructure.
Ability of an attacker
IoT:
medium
SG:
high
Damage
IoT:
medium
SG:
high
Risk
IoT:
medium
SG:
medium
C. Summary of the security analysis
As shown in Figure 3, the summary of the risks shows that
the SG is always exposed to at least medium risk (sometimes
medium to high), while for IoT, the maximum is medium. This
shows a need for action, especially for SG.
D. Examples
In the following, we show a few examples of how the
problems by connecting IoT and SG can be recognized. The
ﬁrst two examples are from [1]. As an IoT device and the
according infrastructure are currently highly insecure [38], all
problems are realistic and the data from IoT can be considered
easily accessible.
Example 1: The user can register his IoT device in the
IoT cloud only with a valid E-Mail address and a username.
No further information is needed. The IoT provider only
knows that this username has loaded his car 20 times per
month. By exchanging data with the smart meter, detailed
information(name, address) about the user can be transferred.
Now it is possible to identify the user.
Example 2: The energy service provider does not need
any information of the connected car of the user. But with
additional information from the IoT charging station, it is
possible to tell when the user is at home or if he gets visited by
another person with an electric car. This part is very important.
A third user can be tracked with his car, without knowing it.
Example 3: The SG customer does not wish to disclose any
personal information about his purchasing behaviour or ﬁnan-
cial situation. If, however, data of the car (cheap or expensive

17
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
car) and the charging points (e.g., at which supermarket the
car is charged) are exchanged, an exact proﬁle of the user can
be created with the additional personal information from the
SG.
Example 4: A hacked charging station can be made by
software to charge at times when the electricity price is high.
This can also result in ﬁnancial damage for the user.
All four examples are showing the importance of a security
and privacy orientated connection. As default no data should
be transferred between the clouds. The user should have to
conﬁrm each data exchange.
V. SECURITY MODEL
We are presenting two parts, to improve the security of our
example. The ﬁrst part consists of security standards for IoT,
which are currently under development and the second part
shows a 4-Level-Trust-Model. The security standards are just
a overview, but the 4-Level-Trust-Model is a development by
our own.
A. IoT Security Standards
In order to increase the security of IoT devices, security
and privacy must be taken into account during the develop-
ment phase (Security- and Privacy-by-Default). Since most
manufacturers are currently foregoing such measures because
of the costs, guidelines and standards must be developed to
implement a minimum level of security.
In Germany, DIN SPEC 27072 was published in 2019
[39], which sets minimum security requirements for consumer
devices. These include a secure password, encryption, updates,
etc. This standard is currently not mandatory and manufac-
turers of IoT devices can voluntarily develop their products
according to it.
In 2020, the UK Government has published a guideline,
which is also aimed at consumer devices and will be binding.
It focuses on three aspects [40]:
• IoT device passwords must be unique and not resettable
to any universal factory setting.
• Manufacturers of IoT products provide a public point of
contact as part of a vulnerability disclosure policy.
• Manufacturers of IoT products explicitly state the min-
imum length of time for which the device will receive
security updates.
Besides these local standards, the European Telecommu-
nications Standards Institute (ETSI) is working on EN 303
645 - Cyber Security for Consumer Internet of Things. This
standard is currently available as a draft and has similar
requirements according to the DIN standard. The main focus
are also consumer devices, but with less restrictions.
The current EN 303 645 draft consists of requirements,
grouped into the following thirteen topics [41]:
• No universal default passwords
• Implement a means to manage reports of vulnerabilities
TABLE II. New ability of an attacker and new risk by applying standards
ability
ability new
risk
risk new
DoS und DDoS
low
low
medium
medium
Malware
low
medium
medium
medium
Broken Authentication
low
high
medium
medium
Broken Encryption
low
high
medium
low
Data leakage
low
medium
medium
low
Data manipulation
low
medium
low
low
Hardware manipulation
medium
medium
medium
medium
• Keep software updated
• Securely store sensitive security parameters
• Communicate securely
• Minimize exposed attack surfaces
• Ensure software integrity
• Ensure that personal data is protected
• Make systems resilient to outages
• Examine system telemetry data
• Make it easy for consumers to delete personal data
• Make installation and maintenance of devices easy
• Validate input data
In the future, when IoT devices will be developed with the
help of security standards, the risk analysis will no longer
have to assume that the attacker needs little effort to attack the
device and the risk will be signiﬁcantly reduced. Furthermore,
for most use cases, considerably less personal information can
be collected and stored, making it more difﬁcult to obtain
sensitive information. For example, a networked refrigerator
does not have to identify its user exactly (with name, address,
etc.). Authentication without further user details or a social
media account is sufﬁcient.
The risk analysis for IoT changes with the improvements
of the standards. The requirements about passwords, updates,
encryption, authentication and data minimization are leading
to higher abilities and therefore to a lower risk. The new
values for the ability of an attacker and the risk can be seen in
Table II. These new values are just assumptions, because some
requirements are not mandatory and can improve the security
even more, depending on whether they are implemented.
B. 4-Level-Trust-Model for safety-critical systems
Data are to be regarded as endangered property. The 4-
level trust model is intended to protect the data (depending
on its speciﬁcation). For example, all smart meter data are
data worthy of protection [42]. This is a statement of the
state conference of data protection ofﬁcers. It means that
all data (IP adress, frequency, customer data, etc.) must be
specially treated during processing, transmitting and storing.
Data generator and user are human and machine also. The
processing of data is in real-time not now but in future. SG
is a variant of CPS. The requirements of future Systems like
SG are:
• High scalable:
The use case data logging electricity shows us the Data
ﬂaw from ﬁnal consumers to the energy supplier. This

18
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
means 2 million participants and 192 million consump-
tion values per day.
• Volatile:
If we have a look inside the communication. There are
data transfer every 15 minutes.
• High data volume:
For example, 2 million households generating 22 gigabyte
data per day.
• Different types of data:
Customer data, power consumption, IP address, etc.
Security assessment must be adapted with regard to these
additional requirements. The 4-Level-Trust-Model for safety-
critical systems was developed based on the requirements. The
4-Level-Trust-Model for safety-critical systems is one option
of the role-based trust model for safety-critical systems [43].
This is a model for security assessment for CPS. Classically,
data are divided into two categories - secure and insecure.
This is described as the classical security model. In the new
4-Level-Trust-Model for safety-critical systems the data are
categorized in 4 categories. The categorization depends on the
requirements analysis for CPS. The 4-Level-Trust-Model for
safety-critical systems is deﬁned as follows.
1) Category: non sensitive data
• All data that do not contain any personal reference
or have been made anonymous.
• There are no effects of damage or damage that has
occurred for the affected person.
• The security level is low.
2) Category: high sensitive data I
• All data which, through the combination of several
data in category 2 and 3, have a personal reference,
but do not have a direct reference themselves (e.g.,
network status data).
• The damage effects are limited and manageable.
Any damage that has occurred is relatively easy to
heal for the affected person.
• The security level is minimal.
3) Category: high sensitive data II
• All data which, through the combination of a further
date in categories 2 and 3, have a personal reference,
but do not have a direct reference themselves (e.g.,
status data of a meter).
• The impact of the damage can be assessed as
signiﬁcant by one person. Damage that has occurred
for the person affected can be healed with increased
effort.
• The security level is intermediate.
4) Category: high sensitive data III (personal data)
• All data that are personal data or data worth pro-
tecting according to the Federal Data Protection Act
(e.g., name, address).
• The effects of the damage have reached an existen-
tially threatening, catastrophic extent. Damage that
has occurred to the affected person cannot be healed.
• The security level is high.
Table III shows the 4-Level-Trust-Model for safety-critical
systems with the coding and the security level. The 4-Level-
Trust-Model for safety-critical systems permits to consider the
security assessment of data.
TABLE III. Evaluation criteria data security
category
description
security level
coding
1. Category
non sensitive data
low
0
2. Category
high sensitive data I
minimal
1
3. Category
high sensitive data II
intermediate
2
4. Category
high sensitive data III
high
3
With the 4-Level-Trust-Model it is possible to evaluate
data and information of a use case in CPS with regard to
security. By subdividing the data worthy of protection, a
further gradation between personal data and sensitive data is
made. With this model, appropriate security measures can be
selected. The security measures for SG must be taken from
the respective standards of the BSI. Security measures for IoT
must be taken from the corresponding standards (see above).
The proposed model is an extension of the 3-Level-Model
(such as security evaluation according to the BSI standards)
and is a possibility to perform security evaluation in CSP. The
4-level model has proven itself in application.
VI. APPLICATION EXAMPLE: 4-LEVEL-TRUST-MODEL
FOR SAFETY-CRITICAL SYSTEM
In the following section, we present the security assessment
based on the 4-Level-Trust-Model for safety-critical systems.
The application example is SG and IoT: charging station (see
Section III, part D). Table IV shows the security assessment
in detail. We categorized the data and matched the security
level.
For example, the “ID connected car” is a data type for the
third category. The security level is “intermediate” and the
coding is “2”. In combination with one data of the second
category is an personal reference possible. Another example
is the assessment of the history of energy consumption / supply
CS. This is a data type for the second category. The security
level is “minimal” and the coding is “1”. In combination with
several data (e.g., ID Gateway CS, IP-address) of the third
category is an personal reference possible. For example, the
information about the customer are a data type from the fourth
category. The security level is “high” and the coding is “3”.
The data are personal data like name or street.
This security analysis enables the selection of appropriate
security measures (e.g., authentication). For the authentication
of devices which transmit data such as ID Gateway CS
(category 3), a procedure that guarantees a high level of
security can be selected. On the other hand, a minimum level
of security can be ensured for the authentication of devices
that transmit data assigned to the category 2 (e.g., history of
energy consumption / supply CS).

19
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE IV. Evaluation of the data security: use case charging station (SG
and IoT)
data
category
security level
coding
ID connected car
3. Category
intermediate
2
IP-Address Gateway (CS)
3. Category
intermediate
2
ID Gateway (CS)
3. Category
intermediate
2
IP-Address smart meter
3. Category
intermediate
2
IP-Address smart meter
3. Category
intermediate
2
Sum of energy consumption
CS
2. Category
minimal
1
Current energy consumption /
supply CS
2. Category
minimal
1
History of energy consump-
tion / supply CS
2. Category
minimal
1
Time to load the car
2. Category
minimal
1
User data CS
4. Category
high
3
smart meter ID
3. Category
intermediate
2
IP-Address smart meter
3. Category
intermediate
2
SMGW ID
3. Category
intermediate
2
IP-Address SMGW
3. Category
intermediate
2
Current energy consumption
(SG) smart meter ID
2. Category
minimal
1
IP-Address smart meter
3. Category
intermediate
2
Current price for electricity
smart meter ID
2. Category
minimal
1
IP-Address smart meter
3. Category
intermediate
2
smart meter ID
3. Category
intermediate
2
IP-Address smart meter
3. Category
intermediate
2
Information about the cus-
tomer
4. Category
high
3
IP-Address smart meter
3. Category
intermediate
2
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we show different challenges for the digi-
tization and digitalization. New connected technologies, like
the SG and IoT are getting connected. This can result in
some serious security issues, because the SG is a critical
infrastructure and current IoT devices are insecure. In our
application example, a car charging station with its corre-
sponding cloud (IoT) is connected to the SG infrastructure.
For this use case example, we carried out a security analysis
for safty-critical infrastructures. We show the attack vectors
of SG an IoT and the security threats. The SG is always
exposed to at least medium risk (sometimes medium to high),
while for IoT, the maximum is medium. Due to these high
risks, security by connecting the two technologies must be
signiﬁcantly improved. Four examples were presented of why
lack of security is a problem.
For improvement, IoT devices can be secured by applying
standards, like the DIN 27072 or the European version from
ETSI - EN 303 645. As an advanced solution, we introduced
the 4-Level-Trust-Model for safety-critical systems. The 4-
Level-Trust-Model is one option of role-based trust model.
With this model, data and information of a system can be
evaluated. A distinction is made between personal data and
sensitive data. With this security assessment, CPS can be
evaluated. This model offers assistance in the selection of
appropriate security measures. We have shown the application
of the 4-Level-Trust-Model using the application example
“connect a charging station with a cloud to SG infrastructure”.
The security standards and our trust model can only help
to decrease the risks. To establish a highly secure connection
between IoT and SG, more considerations are needed. The
interfaces must be clearly deﬁned and communication must be
restricted accordingly. A detailed risk analysis on the concrete
architecture is as necessary as extensive penetration tests.
The 4-Level-Trust-Model provides a good basis and the next
step is to implement the model to demonstrate its functionality
in practice. It will be some time before the two technologies
(IoT and SG) are connected in Germany and by then, a
complete secure infrastructure model can be developed.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Neubauer, S. Fischer, and R. Hackenberg, Risk Analysis of the Cloud
Infrastructure of Smart Grid and Internet of Things, The Tenth Interna-
tional Conference on Cloud Computing, GRIDs, and Virtualization, pp.
82-87, 2019.
[2] M. Irlbeck, Digitalisierung und Energie 4.0 Wie schaffen wir die digitale
Energiewende?, Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden GmbH, pp. 135-148,
2017.
[3] H. Kim and K. Kim, Toward an Inverse-free Lightweight Encryption
Scheme for IoT, Conference on Information Security and Cryptography,
2014.
[4] M. Usman, I. Ahmed, M. I. Aslam, S. Khan, and U. A. Shah, SIT: A
Lightweight Encryption Algorithm for Secure Internet of Things, CoRR
abs/1704.08688, 2017.
[5] I. Ben Dhaou, A. Kondoro, A. Kelati, D. S. Rwegasira, S. Naiman, N. H.
Mvungi, and H. Tenhunen, Communication and Security Technologies
for Smart Grid, International Journal of Embedded and Real-Time
Communication Systems (IJERTCS), 8(2), pp. 40-65, 2017.
[6] D. G. Korzun, I. Nikolaevskiy, and A. Gurtov, Service Intelligence
and Communication Security for Ambient Assisted Living, Interna-
tional Journal of Embedded and Real-Time Communication Systems
(IJERTCS), 6(1), pp. 76-100, 2015.
[7] A. A. A. Ari, O. K. Ngangmo, C. Titouna, O. Thiare, A. Mohamadou,
and A. M. Gueroui, Enabling Privacy and Security in Cloud of Things:
architecture, applications, security & privacy challenges, Applied Com-
puting and Informatics, 2019.
[8] M. Uslar, C. Rosinger, and S. Schlegel, Application of the NISTIR 7628
for Information Security in the Smart Grid Architecture Model (SGAM),
VDE Kongress, 2014.
[9] Bundesamt fuer Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik, Technische
Richtlinie, BSI TR-03109, 2015.
[10] P. Peters and N. Mohr, Digitalisierung im Energiemarkt: Neue Chancen,
neue Herausforderungen, Energiewirtschaftliche Tagesfragen, pp. 8-12,
2015.
[11] V. C. Gungor et al., A Survey on Smart Grid Potential Applications and
Communication Requirements, IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf. 9 (1), pp. 28-42,
2013.
[12] X. Li et al., Securing smart grid. Cyber attacks, countermeasures, and
challenges, IEEE Commun. Mag. 50 (8), pp. 38-45, 2012.
[13] C. Wietfeld, C. Muller, J. Schmutzler, S. Fries, and A. Heidenreich,
ICT Reference Architecture Design Based on Requirements for Future
Energy Marketplaces, 1st IEEE International Conference on Smart Grid
Communications, pp. 315-320, 2010.
[14] F. Dalipi and S. Y. Yayilgan, Security and Privacy Considerations for
IoT Application on Smart Grids. Survey and Research Challenges, IEEE
4th International Conference on Future Internet of Things and Cloud
Workshops (FiCloudW), pp. 63-68, 2016.
[15] M. Yun and B. Yuxin, Research on the architecture and key technology
of Internet of Things (IoT) applied on smart grid, International Confer-
ence on Advances in Energy Engineering, pp. 69-72, 2010.
[16] B. Genge, A. Beres, and P. Haller, A survey on cloud-based software
platforms to implement secure smart grids, 49th International Universi-
ties Power Engineering Conference (UPEC), pp. 1-6, 2014.
[17] S. Bera, S. Misra, and J. Rodrigues, J.P.C: Cloud Computing Applica-
tions for Smart Grid. A Survey, IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst. 26
(5), pp. 1477-1494, 2015.

20
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 13 no 1 & 2, year 2020, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2020, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[18] Y. Simmhan, A. G. Kumbhare, B. Cao, and V. Prasanna, An Analysis
of Security and Privacy Issues in Smart Grid Software Architectures
on Clouds, IEEE 4th USENIX International Conference on Cloud
Computing (CLOUD), pp. 582-589, 2011.
[19] Bundesamt
fuer
Sicherheit
in
der
Informationstechnik,
BSI-Standard
100-1
Managementsysteme
fuer
Informa-
tionssicherheit
(ISMS),
2008,
[Online].
Available
from:
https://www.bsi.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/BSI/Publikationen/
ITGrundschutzstandards/BSI-Standard 1001.pdf?
blob=publicationFil
e&v=2 [retrieved: 02, 2020].
[20] Bundesamt
fuer
Sicherheit
in
der
Informationstechnik,
BSI-
Standard 200-2 IT-Grundschutz Methodology, 2017. Available from:
https://www.bsi.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/BSI/Grundschutz/
International/bsi-standard-2002 en pdf.pdf?
blob=publicationFile&v=
1 [retrieved: 02, 2020].
[21] Bundesamt fuer Sicherheit in der Informationstechnik, BSI Standard
200-3: Risk Analysis based on IT Grundschutz, 2017. Available from:
https://www.bsi.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/BSI/Grundschutz/
International/bsi-standard-2003 en pdf.pdf?
blob=publicationFile&v=
2 [retrieved: 02, 2020].
[22] ISO/IEC Information Technology Task Force, ISO/IEC 27000:2018
Information technology
Security techniques
Information security
management systems Overview and vocabulary, 2018.
[23] R. Matuleviius, N. Mayer, H. Mouratidis, E. Dubois, P. Heymans, and
N. Genon, Adapting Secure Tropos for Security Risk Management in
the Early Phases of Information Systems Development, International
Conference on Advanced Information Systems Engineering, pp. 541-
555, 2008.
[24] P. Bresciani et al., Tropos: An Agent-Oriented Software Development
Methodology, Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems 8, pp.
203236, 2004.
[25] D. Mellado, C. Blanco, and L. Sanchez, A systematic review of se-
curity requirements engineering, Computer and Standards & Interfaces,
Volume 32, Issue 4, pp. 153-165, 2010.
[26] L. Compagna et al, How to integrate legal requirements into a require-
ments engineering methodology for the development of security and
privacy patterns, Artif Intell Law 17, pp. 130, 2008.
[27] K. Boroojeni, M. Amini, and S. Iyengar, Smart Grids: Security and
Privacy Issues, Springer International Publishing, 2017.
[28] Ernst u. Young GmbH, Kosten-Nutzen-Analyse fuer einen ﬂaechendeck-
enden Einsatz intelligenter Zaehler, 2013.
[29] International Organization for Standardization, ISO/IEC 20924:2018
Information technology - Internet of Things (IoT) - Vocabulary, 2018.
[30] Heise
Medien,
Wachsende
Bedrohung
durch
unau-
torisierte
IoT-Geraete,
2020.
[Online].
Available
from:
https://www.heise.de/ix/meldung/Wachsende-Bedrohung-durch-
unautorisierte-IoT-Geraete-4668472.html [retrieved: 02, 2020]
[31] B. Herzberg, I. Zeifman, and D.Bekerman, Breaking Down Mirai:
An IoT DDoS Botnet Analysis, 2016. [Online]. Available from:
https://www.imperva.com/blog/malware-analysis-mirai-ddos-botnet [re-
trieved: 01, 2020].
[32] The OWASP Foundation, OWASP Internet of Things, 2018. [Online].
Available from: https://owasp.org/www-project-internet-of-things/ [re-
trieved: 02, 2020].
[33] R. Sichler, Smart und sicher
geht das?, Springer Fachmedien Wies-
baden, pp. 463-494, 2014.
[34] S. Babar, A. Stango, N. Prasad, J. Sen, and R. Prasad, Proposed
embedded security framework for Internet of Things (IoT), Electronic
Systems Technology (Wireless VITAE), 2010.
[35] C. Eckert, IT-Sicherheit, Konzepte - Verfahren - Protokolle, Boston De
Gruyter, 2012.
[36] L. ben Othmane, H. Weffers, and M. Klabbers, Using Attacker Capa-
bilities and Motivations in Estimating Security Risk, Symposium On
Usable Privacy and Security, 2013.
[37] The OWASP Foundation, OWASP Risk Rating Methodology, 2019.
[38] The OWASP Foundation, Internet of Things Project, IoT Vulnerabilities,
2019.
[39] Deutsches Institut fuer Normung, DIN SPEC 27072: Informationstech-
nik - IoT-fhige Gerte - Mindestanforderungen zur Informationssicherheit,
pp. 1-16, 2019.
[40] United Kingdom Department for Digital, Culture, Media & Sport,
Government response to the Regulatory proposals for consumer Internet
of Things (IoT) security consultation, 2020.
[41] European Telecommunications Standards Institute, Draft ETSI EN 303
645 V2.0.0, pp. 1-30, 2019.
[42] Konferenz
der
Datenschutzbeauftragten
des
Bundes
und
der
Lnder
und
Dsseldorfer
Kreis,
Orientierungshilfe
daten-
schutzgerechtes
Smart
Metering,
2012.
[Online].
Available
from:
https://www.datenschutz.rlp.de/ﬁleadmin/lfdi/Dokumente/
Orientierungshilfen/oh smartmeter.pdf [retrieved: 02, 2020].
[43] K. Neubauer, S. Fischer, and R. Hackenberg, Work in Progress: Se-
curity Analysis for Safety-critical Systems: Smart Grid and IoT, ARCS
Workshop, 32nd International Conference on Architecture of Computing
Systems, pp. 1-6, 2019.

