57
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Securely connecting Electric Vehicles to the Smart Grid
Rainer Falk and Steffen Fries 
Corporate Technology 
Siemens AG 
Munich, Germany 
e-mail: [rainer.falk | steffen.fries]@siemens.com 
 
 
Abstract—Rechargeable 
electric 
vehicles 
are 
receiving 
increasing attention from 
different stakeholders: from 
customers as gas prices are constantly rising, from car 
manufacturers 
to 
address 
customer, 
market, 
and 
environmental demands, and also from electric energy utilities 
for integrating them into smart electric grids. While in the first 
step, the emphasis is placed on electric vehicles as energy 
consumers, using their battery for storing energy and feeding it 
back to the energy network will be the consequent next step. 
Batteries of electric vehicles will realize a distributed energy 
electric storage for stabilizing the electric power grid. Thus the 
electric vehicle will participate as a mobile energy node within 
the smart grid having two types of interfaces, one for 
electricity and one for data communication for charging and 
feedback control, information exchange, and for billing. Since 
IT security in the smart grid is already considered as a major 
point to be addressed, the enhancement of the smart grid with 
electric mobility has to address IT security as well. This article 
describes example interactions of electric vehicles with the 
charging 
infrastructure 
and 
it 
shows 
which 
security 
requirements have to be fulfilled in important use cases. 
Moreover, security considerations of current standardization 
activities in ISO/IEC and SAE are described. 
Keywords—eMobility security; Smart Grid security; charging 
infrastructure; IEC 61851; IEC 15118 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The Smart Grid can be roughly characterized as a 
combination of two infrastructures, the electrical grid 
carrying the energy, and the information infrastructure used 
to supervise and control the electrical grid operation. The 
importance of information security for the power systems 
communication infrastructure has increased tremendously 
over the last couple of years. Until recently, automation has 
mainly targeted the transmission network to address the 
multilateral exchange of energy from different providers. 
With the advent of decentralized energy resources like wind 
parks and solar cells and their interaction with the electric 
grid there is a higher demand for automation in the 
distribution network. These energy resources show a high 
fluctuation depending on the environmental conditions and 
also go along with the possibility to influence energy 
demand. This will require supporting demand response 
services. The introduction of electric vehicles as flexible 
load, and in the future potentially as decentralized energy 
resource (power feedback), emphasizes this development 
(see also [1]).  
 
Figure 1.  Potential Smart Grid Scenarios. 
Figure 1 shows a high level view on typical smart grid 
scenarios, also targeting the integration of electric vehicles. 
The four center domains shown are the typical domains, used 
to describe a smart grid: 
- (Bulk) Energy Generation is the process of converting 
non-electrical energy into electricity, and is the first step 
in the process of delivering power to consumers. Besides 
classical energy generation like coal- or gas-fired power 
plants or nuclear power plants, decentralized energy 
generation using photovoltaic, block heat and power 
plants, or windmills are getting more and more integrated 
into the power grid for bulk energy generation.  
- Power Transmission is the bulk transfer of electric 
power to substations. A power transmission network 
connects power plants generating electrical energy with 

58
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
substations and typically works on high voltage level 
(e.g., 380 kV). 
- Energy Distribution: Substations distribute the electrical 
energy further down to industrial, commercial, or 
residential consumers in the range of medium voltage 
(typically covers the range between 20kV to 100kV). 
Substations provide the transition to the low voltage area 
(typically around 400V). The energy distribution level is 
likely to provide connection points for vehicle charging, 
especially, when high power AC or DC charging spots 
are used.  
- Customer: The customer role as consumers of electric 
energy was typically the endpoint for the energy transfer. 
Within the Smart Grid, this role may change due to the 
option to move from pure consumption of energy to 
producing and storing energy in residential areas. Then 
the customer would become a so-called prosumer. As 
visible in Figure 1, electric vehicles may connect to the 
customer or the distribution domain. 
There exists further Smart Grid domains like operation 
and service of the four domains stated above as well as the 
market, which enables the interaction between energy 
generators an energy consumers. The number of electric 
vehicles as bicycles, motorcycles, and cars is expected to 
increase significantly. Electric vehicles will be connected 
with the Smart Grid for charging or even for power 
feedback. Typically, they connect to the Smart Grid through 
charging stations or charging points. Charging points in 
public or corporate places provide the possibility for high 
power AC or DC charging. Other connection points may be 
provided by combined service stations, e.g., for parking lots 
or common home power plugs in residential areas. Closely 
linked with the pure flow of energy is the management and 
control of the energy demand for charging electric vehicles. 
It allows matching the energy demand for the charging 
process with the energy available at the specific location 
within the energy grid. A defined part of the vehicle battery’s 
capacity can also be used as energy storage to stabilize the 
energy grid when needed by feeding back energy from the 
vehicle to the electrical grid. Besides the control of energy 
flow there may be a second communication channel for the 
billing for consumed or provided energy.  
The charging infrastructure as a part of the critical 
infrastructure Smart Grid requires integrated protection 
against unintentional and intentional attacks. Safety and IT 
security measures, which are already being part of the Smart 
Grid core (e.g., defined as standard or realized in proprietary 
deployments), need to be enhanced to cover also the Smart 
Grid access infrastructure. This Smart Grid access 
infrastructure is provided for electric vehicles through the 
charging infrastructure. While current deployments do not 
feature an information exchange between the electric vehicle 
and the charging infrastructure beside a minimum local 
control of the charging process through pilot signals, 
upcoming standards and proposed scenarios provide feature 
rich communication options. The Smart Grid communication 
and control network of an energy utility is increasingly 
opened to various nodes not being under control of any 
energy network operator and thereby exposed to attacks. 
Highly dependable management and operations of the 
information infrastructure are prerequisites for a highly 
reliable energy network as the power system increasingly 
relies on the availability of the information infrastructure. 
Therefore, the information infrastructure must be operated 
according to the same level of reliability as required for the 
stability of the power system infrastructure to prevent any 
type of outage. Especially consumers and utility companies 
can both benefit from managing this intelligently, and 
standards anticipating the new environment are emerging 
from many directions (see [2]). The immediately apparent 
security needs target the prevention of financial fraud and 
ensure the reliable operation of the power grid. Both are 
complex objectives. But surely all of the security 
ramifications of the charging infrastructure have not been 
discovered yet. Especially the interaction between new 
market participants and value added services is currently 
under investigation. In any case, ensuring privacy, safety, 
and assuring that the charging service is operating correctly 
are basic objectives to derive related 
IT security 
requirements. Hence, integrated information security is a 
central part of the charging infrastructure.  
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: 
Section II describes use cases around the electric vehicle 
charging infrastructure. Section III discusses information 
assets derived from the use cases, threats to these assets and 
also defines first security requirements. Section IV gives an 
overview about the security standardization for the vehicle to 
grid interface, while Section V concludes the document.  
II. 
USE CASES 
The electrical vehicle charging infrastructure consists of 
a combination of power services for electric vehicles and 
value-added services based on the information and 
communication infrastructure as illustrated in Figure 2.  
One main goal of this information and communication 
infrastructure is to offer customers a choice of service 
options beneficial to all three, the utility company, the 
mobility operator as power (service) provider, and the 
customer. The utility can operate most efficiently when 
energy demand is fairly constant over time. Price incentives 
can be offered towards those customers having a flexible 
vehicle charging schedule with the objective to smooth out 
energy demand variations. This requires the analysis and 
consideration of several variables, e.g., schedule, equipment, 
location, payment options, and additional services.  
The variety of peers in a charging infrastructure as 
depicted in Figure 2 shows the complexity, but also the 
manifold of possibilities for optimized service offerings.  
 

59
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
Figure 2.  Communication among Actors of an Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure. 
While not shown in Figure 2, there are different protocol 
frameworks being used for the communication between the 
different participants in the scenario.  
The following list provides a short overview of potential 
protocol candidates: 
• ISO/IEC 15118 – Communication between electric 
vehicle and charging spot (cf. [6], [7], and [8]) 
• IEC 61850 – Communication between charging spot 
and energy provider (cf. [11]) 
• OCPP (Open Charge Point Protocol) for the 
communication between charging spot and mobility 
operator. Note, as OCPP is not yet a standardized 
protocol per se, work is currently ongoing to define 
an infrastrucutre related protocol. It is likely, that this 
will enhance the exisiting IEC 61850 protocol series.  
• OCSP (Online Certificate Status Protocol) between 
charging spot (or mobility operator) and certification 
authority. 
Further protocols exist, which are not stated here, 
allowing user interaction with the electric vehicle or the 
charging infrastructure as well as protocols for the 
provisioning of value added services. Value added services 
may be for instance the firmware update of the infotainment 
system during charging. 
The following subsections provide an overview on 
potential use cases surrounding the charging infrastructure. 
Each subsection provides potential realization options for the 
considered use case. Note that the use case discussion stems 
mainly from standardization work currently done in ISO 
(International 
Standardization 
Organization), 
IEC 
(International 
Electrotechnical 
Comission), 
and 
SAE 
(Society of Automotive Engineers). but the use cases show 
the potential of a Smart Grid charging infrastructure to be a 
flexible platform to realize a variety of known and upcoming 
service offerings.  
A. Control of the Electric Vehicle Charging Environment 
Connecting 
electric 
vehicles 
with 
the 
charging 
infrastructure provides flexible control of the charging 
process through enhanced communication between electric 
vehicle, charging spot, and the energy provider in the 
backend, e.g., to adapt the charging to the current energy 
provisioning situation. It also covers scenarios with limited 
control of the charging operation through the charging spot 
or backend. Charging in these scenarios may be controlled 
completely by the electric vehicle to the limits set by the 
environment. This is typically the case for AC (alternating 
current) charging, while in DC (direct current) charging 
control is being performed by the charging spot. 
B. Connecting to the Charging Infrastructure 
Connecting a vehicle to the charging infrastructure may 
use a portable cord set to be provided by either the electric 
vehicle owner or the charge spot operator. This cord set and 
the connectors may be different depending whether charging 
is being done using AC or DC , or depending on the country. 
An alternative is provided through wireless (inductive) 

60
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
charging avoiding any power cord to the car. Special 
consideration of the physical charging environment is 
necessary here, to ensure safe operation. 
C. Billing and Payment for Charging Service 
Billing and payment for consumed energy or value added 
services can be performed through various options: 
- At the charging spot, including money, prepaid, credit 
cards, combination with parking ticket, etc. 
- From within the vehicle (e.g., via a contract-related 
credential stored within the car). This option includes 
identification of the electric vehicle as well as charging 
contract verification. 
Besides the direct customer interaction, there is also the 
interaction with clearinghouses that settle accounts between 
different energy providers. These become necessary when 
using contract based payment from within a car at a charging 
spot belonging to a different mobility provider.  
D. Negotiated Incentive Rate Plan 
Negotiating incentive rate plans may depend on, e.g., the 
contract between the customer and the mobility provider. 
Thus different realization options may be: 
- Time of use (TOU): The utility provides a price 
incentive to charge a vehicle at times of lower demand 
typically based on time of day, day of week, and season 
of year. Prices are set ahead of time, in an attempt to shift 
load towards a more favorable time of day. 
- Direct load or price control through utility: The 
customer receives a price incentive to give the utility 
direct control over the charging process. Normally, the 
customer is given a fixed, reduced price, and the utility 
has the option to interrupt or delay charging at critical 
times. 
- Dynamic tariffs: This is a variation of time of use 
sometimes 
called 
real-time 
pricing 
(RTP). 
Price 
schedules vary more frequently, usually daily. Once 
delivered, the prices are firm and the customer, not the 
utility, controls the load. 
- Critical peak pricing (CPP): This is another variation 
on time of use, in which the utility retains the right to 
override the price schedule with higher prices on a 
limited number of days having particularly high demand 
or other unusual events. 
- Optimized charging: The customer gives the utility 
control of the charging load in turn for a price incentive. 
The utility may, at critical times, reduce or interrupt 
charging, based in part on the state of charge of the 
vehicle. 
E. Charging Location 
The charging location may vary effecting potentially also 
the provided service and payment options: 
- Charging in private environments like the vehicle 
owner’s home or another’s home within the same 
utility’s service area or another’s home within a different 
utility’s service area. The charging location may not be 
directly connected with the charging infrastructure in 
terms of dynamic charging control. Hence, certain 
options for tariffs or value added services may not always 
be available. 
- Charging at public charge spot can also be distinguished 
based on the contractual relation of the vehicle owner to 
the charging spot operator or mobility operator like: 
charging spot belonging to the same utility as customer 
contracted, different utility (comparable to “roaming”) or 
charging without a contractual relationship (payment 
based on money, pre-paid card, credit card, etc.). 
- Fleet operator premises may not require a contractual 
relationship per vehicle directly. They may be based on 
the fleet operator, providing an energy “flat rate”. Control 
of the charging process may be distinguished as 
described above. 
F. Value Added Services  
Connecting the vehicle with a charging spot featuring a 
communication interface provides the opportunity to 
leverage this communication connection also for value added 
services. Examples comprise: 
- Software updates for Engine Control Unit (ECU) or 
infotainment systems 
- Remote diagnosis and maintenance 
- Multimedia service during charging 
G. Electricity Feedback 
While in the first place charging is the main service 
provided for electric vehicles, it is also envisioned to use 
electric vehicles as dynamic energy storage. The electric 
vehicle could feed back energy into the Smart Grid upon 
request. Here, a distinction of the use cases can be done in a 
similar way as for charging: 
- Based on the feedback locations, e.g., for integration 
within micro grids, to increase their independence from 
the main grid allowing the local usage of stored energy. 
- Based on a local feedback plan, where the customer 
configures, e.g., a certain amount of energy, which is 
required as minimum capacity of the vehicle battery. 
- Based on backend scheduling / needs. 
These use cases show a variety of different services for 
the electric vehicle charging infrastructure. They illustrate 
how valuable the transmitted information is for the 
availability and reliable operation of the services, but also for 
the safety and privacy of the end user. 
III. 
INFORMATION ASSETS, POTENTIAL THREATS, AND 
DERIVED SECURITY REQUIREMENTS  
As just shown in the previous section, various use cases 
exist in which different peers exchange information to realize 
a dedicated service. Experience with the existing data 
communication infrastructure can be leveraged to analyze 
the charging infrastructure regarding potential threats as well 
as to determine suitable countermeasures. This may 
especially 
comprise 
security 
protocols 
or 
security 
mechanisms, which have been proven effective in the current 
communication infrastructures. Examples comprise security 
protocols like TLS (Transport Layer Security [4]) and digital 
signatures. 

61
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
A. Information Assets in Charging-Related Communication 
The 
information 
transported 
over 
the 
different 
connections is the asset that may motivate attacks against the 
charging infrastructure. The following table summarizes 
important information assets and their criticality for the 
system. The majority of these information assets are 
expected to be transmitted especially over the vehicle-to-grid 
interface. 
 
TABLE I.  
INFORMATION ASSETS IN THE ELECTRIC VEHICLE 
CHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE 
Information 
asset 
Description, potential content 
Security 
relation 
Customer ID 
and location 
data 
Customer name, vehicle identification 
number, charging location, and 
charging schedule 
Affects 
customer 
privacy  
Meter Data 
Meter readings that allow calculation 
of the quantity of electricity consumed 
or supplied over a time period. These 
are generated by the charge spot and 
may be validated by the vehicle. 
Affects system 
control and 
billing 
Control 
Commands 
Actions requested by one component 
of other components via control 
commands. These may also include 
inquiries, alarms, or Notifications. 
Affects system 
stability and 
reliability and 
also safety  
Configuration 
Data 
Configuration data (system operational 
settings and security credentials, also 
thresholds for alarms, task schedules, 
policies, grouping information, etc.) 
influence the behavior of a component 
and may need to be updated remotely. 
Affects system 
stability and 
reliability and 
also safety 
Time, Clock 
Setting 
Time is used in records sent to other 
entities. Phasor measurement directly 
relates to system control actions. 
Moreover, time is also needed to use 
tariff information optimally. It may also 
be used in certain security protocols.  
Affects system 
control 
(stability and 
reliability and 
also safety) 
and billing 
Access 
Control 
Policies 
Determination whether a 
communication peer is entitled to send 
and receive commands and data. 
Such policies may consist of lists of 
permitted communication partners, 
their credentials, and their roles. 
Affects system 
control system 
stability, 
reliability, and 
also safety 
Firmware, 
Software, 
and Drivers 
Software packages installed in 
components may be updated 
remotely. Updates may be provided by 
the utility (e.g., for charge spot 
firmware), the car manufacturer, or 
another OEM. Their correctness is 
critical for the system reliability. 
Affects system 
stability and 
reliability and 
also safety 
Tariff Data 
Utilities or other energy providers may 
inform consumers of new or temporary 
tariffs as a basis for purchase 
decisions. 
Affects 
customer 
privacy and 
competition 
 
 
B. Potential Threats 
Some example threats are described in the following to 
illustrate the need to integrate security measures into the 
charging infrastructure right from the beginning. The 
described threats focus on the specifics of electric vehicle 
charging and connected communication. 
1) Eavesdropping / Interception 
Eavesdropping 
is 
a 
passive 
attack 
to 
intercept 
information, which may compromise privacy or be used to 
gain more information for additional, active attacks. 
Eavesdropping requires the adversary to have either physical 
or logical access to the communication connection. Both the 
link to the vehicle and to the backend may be intercepted 
(Figure 3). 
 
Home Gateway or  
Backend Services  
(Billing, etc.) 
Electric Vehicle 
Charging Spot 
 
Figure 3.  Potential Locations for Eavesdropping.  
Communication with the charging spot in general can be 
done using different technologies, like Wireless or Powerline 
Communication (PLC). Common to these technologies is 
that the radiation of the communication transfer (through the 
frequency used) is high enough that it is sufficient for an 
adversary to be in closer vicinity to the communication 
instead of having direct physical access. Missing security 
measures will enable an adversary to eavesdrop the 
communication. 
As 
shown 
above, 
charging 
related 
communication may include a variety of information being 
valuable for an attacker like tariff information, charging 
status information, or billing relevant information. 
2) Man-in-the-Middle Attack 
An attacker may intercept communication on the 
interface between the vehicle and the charging point and 
modify this information. An example may be tariff options 
provided by the mobility operator and send via the charging 
spot to the vehicle. This may be accomplished in the easiest 
case through a modified charging cable. 
Another example is the usage of a faked charge spot as 
depicted in Figure 4: A potential adversary may use its own 
(faked) charging spot to which honest customer connect. The 
adversary’s charge spot is connected to an official charge 
spot and only routes the communication between the honest 
customer and the original charge spot. The adversary can 
then consume the charging energy partially, so that the 
honest customer receives only a fraction of her purchased 
energy, but pays for the complete consumption by her 
vehicle plus the adversary’s vehicle. 
 
 
faked charging spot  
offers service 
Control and Billing 
Infrastructure 
pays all 
charges for free 
OEM charging spot 
Electric 
Vehicle 
 
Figure 4.  Man-in-the-Middle Attack to steal Energy.  
Interesting in this attack is that the adversary actually 
performs the manipulation on the energy provisioning path 
and not on the communication path. The latter one is 

62
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
untouched. This attack shows the need for connecting the 
flow of energy to the flow of information. 
3) Transaction Falsifying or Repudiation 
The 
customer 
himself 
may 
intentionally 
or 
unintentionally claim to have received less energy than stated 
on the billing record. Likewise, the utility may claim to have 
delivered more energy to the customer. 
4) Attack network from within vehicle (and vice versa) 
If the electric vehicle is connected to the charging 
infrastructure, e.g., using a value added service, an adversary 
(software) may inject or modify application-level traffic 
intentionally (as an attack) or unintentionally (faulty 
software component, malware). 
5) Tampered or substituted component 
A customer may manipulate a component trusted by the 
utility to provide accurate billing or control information. This 
affects both components in the charging spot and within the 
electric vehicle. Examples are pirated or faked replacement 
parts. 
C. First Set of Security Requirements 
Basic security requirements of the electric vehicle 
charging infrastructure have to be addressed. They target the 
availability and reliable energy provisioning. Moreover, they 
aim to limit attack effect (geographical and functional), 
enforce authorized control actions on the smart grid, and 
correct billing of energy transactions between involved peers 
(customer, charging spot operator, market, utility).  
Based on the stated information assets and depicted 
threats, the basic security requirements can be addressed 
more specifically by requiring dedicated cryptographic 
measures as there are:  
- Mutual authentication of end-to-end communicating 
entities. The authentication may be performed on 
different layers of the OSI reference model, e.g., on 
transport layer and on application layer. This is especially 
useful, if the peer to authenticate against is either a local 
communication peer or a backend peer, depending on the 
online state of the charging spot. Hence, end-to-end 
authentication strongly relates to the related OSI layer 
and its terminating end points. 
- Non-repudiation of billing and tariff information to 
ensure secure transactions and the connected payment 
process.  
- Protected communication between the electric vehicle 
and the charging spot, the electric vehicle and backend 
services, the charging spot and backend services, 
between backend services.  
- Privacy preserving communication between the electric 
vehicle, the charging spot, and the backend 
- Authorization, especially for control of the charging. 
- Integrity-protected, 
authenticated 
and 
authorized 
software updates to avoid malfunctions through software 
from unauthorized sources  
- Logging of security relevant events to enable auditability 
of the system. 
- Security failure and exception handling, to support 
system reliability, also in case of security breaches. 
- In general confidentiality and integrity of sensitive data.  
- Support of a secured key management to support all of 
the requirements above. 
These security requirements typically lead to technical 
and organizational security measures. Hence, to ensure a 
thorough security approach supporting the interaction of 
different peers using equipment from different vendors, 
standardization of an appropriate security approach as part of 
the overall system approach is necessary. 
 
IV. 
STANDARDIZATION LANDSCAPE FOR THE 
CONNECTION TO THE CHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE 
This section details the standardization activities focusing 
on the communication interface between the electric vehicle 
and the charging spot, but further connections to the backend 
are also considered. The main focus is placed on 
standardization activities from the ISO/IEC. An overview 
about related SAE activities is given as well. 
As shown in Figure 5, standardization activities of ISO/IEC 
and SAE can be divided into four categories: charging 
connector, charging communication, charging topology, and 
safety. The following table summarizes more information 
about relevant standards. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Communication Standards for the Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure [1]. 
 
Charging Connector
IEC 62196-1/2/3
SAE J1772
Charging Communication
ISO 15118
ISO 61851-24
SAE J2293-2
SAE J2847
SAE J2836
Charging Topology
IEC 61851-1/21/22/23/24
IEC 61439-5
Safety
IEC 61140
IEC 62040
IEC 60529
IEC 60364-7-722
ISO 6469-3
SAE J1766
ISO 61850
Charging Connector
IEC 62196-1/2/3
SAE J1772
Charging Communication
ISO 15118
ISO 61851-24
SAE J2293-2
SAE J2847
SAE J2836
Charging Topology
IEC 61851-1/21/22/23/24
IEC 61439-5
Safety
IEC 61140
IEC 62040
IEC 60529
IEC 60364-7-722
ISO 6469-3
SAE J1766
ISO 61850

63
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE II.  
COMMUNICATION STANDARDS AND THEIR SCOPE  
FOR THE ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE  
Standard 
Scope 
Content 
IEC 
62196 
Charging 
Connector 
Plugs, socket-outlets, vehicle couplers 
and vehicle inlets – Conductive charging  
SAE 
J1772 
Charging 
Connector 
Electric Vehicle Conductive Charge 
Coupler 
ISO 
15118 
Charging 
Communication 
Road vehicles - Communication protocol 
between electric vehicle and grid 
SAE 
J2293 
Charging 
Communication 
Energy Transfer System for Electric 
Vehicles 
SAE 
J2836 
Charging 
Communication 
Use Cases for Communication between 
Plug-in Vehicles and the Utility Grid (-1), 
Supply Equipment (EVSE) (-2), Utility Grid 
for Reverse Power Flow (-3)  
SAE 
2847 
Charging 
Communication 
Communication between Plug-in Vehicles 
and the Utility Grid (-1), Supply Equipment 
(EVSE) (-2), Utility Grid for Reverse 
Power Flow (-3) 
IEC 
61850 
Power Systems 
Communication 
Communication networks and systems in 
substations 
IEC 
61851 
Charging 
Topology 
Electric vehicle conductive charging 
system 
IEC 
61439 
Charging 
Topology 
Low-voltage switchgear and control gear 
assemblies 
 
The following sections describe ISO/IEC activities 
related to charging communication and their IT-security 
considerations. 
This 
overview 
shows 
the 
increasing 
consideration of IT security requirements in the definition of 
evolving charging communication protocols. This is 
especially the case for new protocols like ISO/IEC 15118 
targeting the communication for charging control and value 
added services between electric vehicles and charging spots. 
A. Simple Communication EV/EVSE – IEC 61851 
IEC 61851 (cf. [12][11]) defines a conductive charging 
system and was standardized in 2001. The standard 
addresses equipment for charging electric road vehicles at 
standard AC supply voltages (as per IEC 60038) up to 690 V 
and at DC voltages up to 1000 V, and for providing electrical 
power for any additional services on the vehicle if required 
when connected to the supply network. The standard 
comprises different parts addressing specific charging 
options: 
- IEC 61851-1: Electric 
vehicle 
conductive 
charging 
system – General requirements 
- IEC 61851-21: 
Electric 
vehicle 
conductive 
charging system - Electric vehicle requirements for 
conductive connection to an A.C./D.C. supply 
- IEC 61851-22: 
Electric 
vehicle 
conductive 
charging system - A.C. electric vehicle charging station 
- IEC 61851-23: 
Electric 
vehicle 
conductive 
charging system - D.C electric vehicle charging station 
- IEC 61851-24 Electric 
vehicle 
conductive 
charging 
system - Control communication protocol between off-
board D.C. charger and electric vehicle 
IEC 61851 targets four different charging modes: 
- Mode 1 (AC): slow charging from a standard household-
type socket-outlet 
- Mode 2 (AC): slow charging from a standard household-
type socket-outlet with in-cable protection device 
- Mode 3 (AC): slow or fast charging using a specific EV 
socket-outlet and plug with control and protection 
function permanently installed  
- Mode 4 (DC): fast charging using an external charger  
The communication between the vehicle and the 
charging spot depends on the mode applied. There is no data 
communication in Mode 1 and Mode 2. In Mode 3 only the 
control pilot communication exists, while in Mode 4 
additional communication functions are available to allow 
battery management. Common to all modes is that IT-
security is not provided. Therefore, there is no protection 
against any threats discussed in section III.B. Nevertheless, 
for the vehicle integration into a smart-grid-connected 
charging infrastructure, (secure) communication is required 
for tariff exchange, billing, optimization of charge cost and 
grid load, value added services, etc. To support these 
functions in the future, ISO/IEC 15118 is currently being 
specified addressing these communications needs, including 
an integrated security concept (see next section). 
B. Enhanced Communication EV/EVSE – ISO/IEC 15118 
ISO/IEC 15118 is being standardized in an ISO/IEC joint 
working group. Its main focus is the interface between an 
electric 
vehicle 
and 
a 
charging 
spot 
interface. 
Communication with the backend infrastructure is not 
directly targeted. The specification is split into different 
parts, which are all still work in progress: 
- ISO 
15118-1: 
General 
information 
and 
use-case 
definition [6] 
- ISO 15118-2: Technical protocol description and Open 
Systems Interconnections (OSI) layer requirements [7] 
- ISO 15118-3: Physical layer and Data Link layer 
requirements [8] 
Security is integral part of the standard and has been 
considered right from the beginning of the design phase. 
ISO/IEC 15118-1 contains a security analysis, which 
investigates in specific threats, which are partly stated in 
section III above. This security analysis is the base for the 
security requirements and resulting security measures 
targeting the specified use cases.  
The security measures defined in ISO/IEC 15118-2 build 
upon existing standards as far as possible. The access media 
for AC and DC charging will be power line communication 
in the first step. Support of inductive charging will most 
likely use wireless communication. As both feature different 
OSI layer 1 and 2, security measures have been placed on 
higher layers, to allow an independent solution. Besides the 
AC and DC profiles, charging options also exists regarding 
the authentication means. In general, authentication can be 
performed at the charging spot (External Authentication 
Means – EAM) or from within the car (plug&charge, or 
PnC).  
 

64
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
 
 
Figure 6.  Information Exchange for Electric Vehicle Charging.  
While in the first case the user typically may pay directly 
at the charging spot using either coins or credit cards. 
Alternatively, authentication can also be done using Near 
Field Communication (NFC), e.g., an RFID tag (Radio 
Frequency IDentification) or a mobile phone featuring a 
NFC interface. In case of PnC, the EV features a security 
credential allowing it to authenticate itself. While this 
security credential is typically applied to authenticate 
towards the charging infrastructure, it may also be used to 
identify stolen vehicles while charging.  
As shown in Figure 6, ISO/IEC 15118-2 applies TCP/IP 
for the communication between the vehicle and the charging 
spot. Consequently, security is applied on transport layer 
using TLS (cf. [4]) ensuring a protected channel between 
both. Since ISO/IEC 15118 targets the communication 
between the vehicle and the charging spot, this might be 
sufficient at the first glimpse. But security measures on 
application layer have also been defined applying XML 
security (digital signatures and encryption). 
Application layer security became necessary, as the 
communication also targets billing and payment relevant 
information, which are exchanged with the backend in 
contract based payment scenarios. Moreover, to enable 
contract based payments, the vehicles need authentication 
means. 
 
Tear Down 
Energy Provider with Control and Billing 
Functionality, Clearinghouse, Charge 
Spot Provider 
Charging Spot 
Connection establishment 
Charging Cycle 
Charging Finished 
TLS Session establishment 
Service Discovery 
TLS protected Communication 
TLS Session Termination 
Connection termination 
Signed meter readings for billing 
Initialization 
TLS Session establishment 
Otional: Request Tariff for Contract ID 
TLS protected communication (may be a temporary or a permanent connection to exchange Information.  
In special use cases the TLS connection to the backend may not be available during the charging period.  
Exchange of security relevant 
information (Certificate Updates, etc.) 
Note also that the signed meter reading 
contains the meter reading itself, but also 
session related information like the session ID 
as well as the communication partner IDs. 
This is explained in the document. 
Electric 
Vehicle 
Payment Details (optional with 
encrypted Tariff Information) 
Signed Contract Authentication 
Meter Status 
Signed Meter Receipt  
Meter Status 
Signed Meter Receipt  

65
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
To enable secure communication with the backend, the 
electric vehicle possesses a digital vehicle certificate and a 
corresponding private key. Here, X.509 certificates [9] are 
being applied. These security measures go beyond the 
communication hop between the electric vehicle and the 
charging spot. The direct data interaction of the electric 
vehicle with the backend is shown in Figure 6 in the 
charging cycle loop. Here, charging spot meter readings are 
signed by the vehicle and forwarded by the charging spot to 
the backend. They build the base for the billing process later 
on. Note that the general data exchange in Figure 6 has been 
simplified and mainly security related exchanges are shown.  
The proposed security solution takes the connection state 
of a charging spot into account to support charging spots that 
have very limited or even no online connectivity. In general, 
the charging spot is assumed to be online at least once a day. 
This online period may coincide with the charging period of 
an electric vehicle. Therefore, explicit precautions have to be 
given to the exchanged data, especially, if the backend 
depends on these.  
To enable secure transmission of data from the backend 
to the vehicle (e.g., updates of credential or of tariff 
information), a secret needs to be established between the 
vehicle and the backend allowing an end-to-end encrypted 
transfer. The vehicle certificate is an ECDSA certificate, 
where the public key can be considered as static Diffie-
Hellman parameters to enable an easy setup of a session 
based encryption key with a communication peer. Only the 
backend needs to generate fresh per-session Diffie-Hellman 
parameters that are used to calculate a fresh Diffie-Hellman 
secret, which can then be used as session secret. This has the 
advantage, that the backend can pre-calculate session keys 
for vehicle communication, once the vehicle’s certificate is 
known at the backend. This approach is known from many of 
today’s web server applications, which use the same 
technique. 
For the normal operation the vehicle certificate will be a 
contract-based credential. Thus the backend already 
possesses the certificate information, once the customer 
enrolled for a contract. For setup operation, the vehicle may 
possess an OEM credential installed during manufacturing of 
the car and used for bootstrapping the contact based 
credential. Notably, the used security mechanisms target 
elliptic curve cryptography (ECC) for authentication (during 
key management phases) and for digital signatures. The 
digital signature standard ECDSA based on ECC provide 
comparable security to RSA but uses significantly shorter 
cryptographic key sizes. As the certificates support ECDSA, 
the Diffie-Hellman key agreement is performed in its elliptic 
curve variant ECDH. Moreover, elliptic curves can be 
implemented efficiently in hardware. As ISO/IEC 15118 
targets especially electronic control units (ECU) in vehicles 
and charging sports, memory and calculation constraints are 
evident and pose further implementation requirements.  
The call flow as depicted in Figure 6 is based on the 
application of unilaterally authenticated TLS, where the 
electric vehicle implements the client part. Hence, the client 
is required to check the certificate validity including the 
issuer. The standard ISO/IEC 15118 requires vehicles to 
store only a fixed, limited number of root certificates to 
enable issuer verification. Moreover, it also restricts the 
number of supported intermediate certification authorities. 
Besides the validity and issuer, the client also needs to check 
the certificate revocation status.  
One option to avoid the handling of certificate revocation 
lists is the usage of short term certificates from the server 
side. Another option is the provisioning of the revocation 
state by the server itself, e.g., by attaching a fresh Online 
Certificate Status Protocol (OCSP) response to the certificate 
during the authentication phase. To keep a balance regarding 
the implementation and operational effort, the current 
ISO/IEC 15118 proposal features both, short term certificates 
for the server side certificates and OCSP responses for 
intermediate CAs. 
As said before, all of the security functionality in 
ISO/IEC 
15118 
builds 
on 
X.509 
certificates 
and 
corresponding private keys. Hence, an infrastructure is 
necessary to manage this key material. It has to be noted, that 
there are different trust relations for the application and 
utilization of the key material. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Information Exchange for Electric Vehicle Charging.  
Energy Provider with Control and Billing 
Functionality, Clearinghouse, Charge 
Spot Provider
Charging Spot
Electric Vehicle
e.g., contract related data, meter reading, tariffs, etc.
authentication, transport protection
contract authentication
Application
Trapo
XML Security
TLS Security
contract authentication

66
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
As shown in Figure 7 for the transport connection the 
trust relation exists between the electric vehicle and the 
charging sport. On application layer there are some 
messages, which are bound to the communication between 
the same peers. This applies for instances to the 
acknowledgement of cyclic meter readings through the 
electric vehicle by applying a digital signature.  
Nevertheless, to get this security on an operational level, 
electric vehicle and charging spot, both have to get at least 
the X.509 certificates from a 3rd party. At least, as the 
generation of public key pairs may be either directly at the 
component or at the 3rd party. The 3rd party for issuing the 
certificates may be different. While the electric vehicle will 
get its contract certificates from a mobility operator, the 
charging spot will be equipped with a certificate also from 
potentially another mobility operator. Having different 
mobility operators relates to the typical situation of having 
different energy providers depending on the geographic area.  
Figure 8 provides an overview of the certificates used by 
the different actors. Note that this figure reflects the current 
draft status of ISO/IEC 15118-2. Especially the certification 
path of the contract certificate may allow also other root 
certificates as the V2G Root CA in the future. On the vehicle 
site, the OEM is expected to provide an initial certificate 
during manufacturing. This certificate is used to enable the 
secure bootstrapping of operational credentials through the 
mobility operator. The mobility operator will issue contract 
based certificates, if the electric vehicle is going to 
participate in plug&charge scenarios, which allow the 
payment directly out of the vehicle, without additional 
identification and authentication at the charging spot. On the 
infrastructure side, the charging spot needs to possess a 
certificate and a corresponding private key. The certificate is 
also issued by the mobility operator, which is not necessarily 
the same as for the electric vehicle (the mobility operator 
issuing the contract certificates may be different in roaming 
scenarios). As the charging spot may be offline during 
charging and the electric vehicle may not have another 
communication path to the backend, certificate revocation 
needs to be addressed in some way. The one depicted in 
Figure 8 uses short term certificates for the charging spot. 
Another option is the utilization of multiple OCSP stapling. 
This approach avoids the handling of short term certificates 
as an OCSP for both, the charging spot certificated and the 
issuing sub certification authority certificate can be 
transmitted to the vehicle.  
As described above, digital certificates for the charging spot, 
and, depending on the use case, also for the electric vehicle, 
are 
the 
basis 
for 
protecting 
the 
charging 
control 
communication. Common to all components for charging 
control is that the certification path of the certificates applied 
has a common set of (at east) five root certificates. Five root 
certificates have been agreed on to address the memory 
restrictions within an electric vehicle. To enable a smooth 
operation a dedicated credential management infrastructure 
(Public Key Infrastructure – PKI, cf. also [9]) handling the 
initial provisioning, but also the revocation and update of 
certificates and cryptographic keys is required. 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Credential Handling according to current state of ISO/IEC 15118 (DIS), cf. [7].
V2G Root CA, validity 
max 40, min 35 years
V2G  1st Sub CA 
(e.g., country level) 
V2G 2nd Sub CA 
(e.g., EVSE Operator) 
V2G 2nd Sub CA 
(e.g., Mobility Operator) 
EVSE
EV
Issues CA Certificate 
for V2G 1st Sub CA
Issues OCSP 
Response at least 
once a month
Issues EVSE Certificate, Provides 
OCSP Response for 2nd Sub CA, 
at least once a month
Issues Contract Certificate if 
Plug&Charge is provisioning 
secured with OEM credential
Authentication of EVSE 
using short term certificate 
and OCSP response on 
transport layer, certificate 
selection indicated by EV 
Authentication of EV using 
contract certificate on 
application layer
Queries CRL, 
e.g., once a day
Verification of EVSE 
certificate and OCSP 
response  using V2G 
Root CA
Verification of EV 
certificate using V2G 
Root CA
OEM CA
Fetches V2G 
Root Certificate 
Provisioning of OEM specific credential 
during production for bootstrapping of 
Contract Certificates during operation 
EVSE may need to support 
up to 10 own certificates to 
cope with the lifetime 
requirement of the root CA
V2G 2nd Sub CA may need to 
support up to 10 own certificates 
to cope with the lifetime 
requirement of the root CA
V2G 1st Sub CA may need to 
support up to 10 own certificates 
to cope with the lifetime 
requirement of the root CA
Issues CA Certificate 
for V2G 2nd Sub CA
Issues CA Certificate 
for V2G 2nd Sub CA

67
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 6 no 1 & 2, year 2013, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2013, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
As ISO/IEC 15118 is in the process of getting finalized, 
it is expected that the application of certificates will be 
further optimized to address security on one hand and 
operation and maintainability on the other.  
With 
the 
proposed 
mechanisms 
ISO/IEC 
15118 
addresses most of the threats depicted in section III B, with 
the focus of the interface between EV and EVSE. What is 
not addressed is the detection tampered of falsified 
components, which would support the system integrity 
monitoring. Also, authentication of the EV is only performed 
in the PnC use cases, which still leaves some possibilities for 
attacks from rogue EVs. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The focus of this paper has been the discussion of 
security requirements and solution approaches for the 
interface between an electric vehicle and a charging spot. 
Especially the standard ISO/IEC 15118 was in focus here 
addressing a variety of use cases while considering security 
right from the beginning. Nevertheless, to enable online 
control of the charging operation and also value added 
services, at least the charging spot needs to be connected to 
the Smart Grid core.  
One standard, which can be directly applied for the 
energy automation communication is IEC 61850 [10], 
already 
applied 
in 
substation 
automation. 
This 
communication can be protected by security measures 
according to IEC62351 [11]. The security in IEC 62351 
features similar protection means for TCP/IP based 
communication which are based on TLS as well. This eases 
the 
secure 
interworking 
between 
the 
Smart 
Grid 
communication core and the access via the charging 
infrastructure. All of these standards employ X.509 
certificates. Thus, the key management as enabling 
functionality becomes a crucial point. The operational 
handling of an infrastructure providing and revocation 
information to a multitude of components can be seen as 
challenge here.  
Another communication protocol to be named in this 
context is OCPP (Open Charge Point Protocol, cf. [14]), 
which can be used as a protocol between the charging points 
and the management station. This protocol uses TCP/IP for 
communication and XML for encoding of messages. Hence, 
existing security mechanism like TLS and XML security, 
which are also being employed to protect ISO/IEC15118 as 
described above, can be utilized here too.  
Besides pure charging control, there may be also value-
added services provided through the charging spot like 
multimedia services, software or firmware updates, remote 
diagnosis, and so on. All of these services have to be 
protected appropriately. The intrinsic complexity of this 
overall Smart Grid vehicle charging system requires a 
systematic approach to include required security measures 
right from the beginning that can be used and managed 
efficiently. It is expected that new use cases will enhance the 
existing security requirements and also influence the further 
development of communication standards. 
 
VI. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  
The base version of this report (see [13]) compiled in 
June 2011 has been supported by the German Federal 
Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation and 
Nuclear Safety within the Harz.EEmobility project under 
contract 03KP623 (see [3] for more information). The further 
research and investigation leading to this update of the initial 
report is part of the FINSENY (Future INternet for Smart 
ENergY) project (see [4] for more information). The authors 
gratefully acknowledge the contributions of all FINSENY 
project partners. FINSENY is partly funded by the European 
Commission within the FI-PPP, which is part of the 
Framework Program FP7 ICT. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R.Falk and S.Fries, “Electric Vehicle Charging Infrastructure 
– Security Considerations and Approaches”, Internet 2012, 
June 2012, ISBN: 978-1-61208-204-2, pp.58-64 
[2] The German Standardization Roadmap for Electromobility, 
http://www.elektromobilitaet.din.de/sixcms_upload/media/33
10/Normung-Roadmap_Elektromobilit%E4t_en.pdf, 
last 
access April 2012  
[3] HarzEE-mobility, 
https://www.harzee-mobility.de/, 
last 
access February 2013 
[4] FINSENY – Future Internet for Smart Energy: http://www.fi-
ppp-finseny.eu/, last access February 2013  
[5] T. Dierks and E. Rescorla: “The Transport Layer Security 
(TLS) Protocol Version 1.2”, RFC5246, IETF, 2008. 
[6] ISO/IEC 15118-1: Road vehicles — Vehicle-to-Grid 
Communication Interface — Part 1: General information and 
use-case definition, Work in Progress 
[7] ISO/IEC 15118-2: Road vehicles — Vehicle-to-Grid 
Communication Interface — Part 2: Technical protocol 
description and Open Systems Interconnections (OSI) layer 
requirements, Work in Progress 
[8] ISO/IEC 15118-3: Road vehicles — Vehicle-to-Grid 
Communication Interface — Part 3: Physical layer and Data 
Link layer requirements, Work in Progress 
[9] D. Cooper, S. Santesson, S. Farrell, S. Boeyen, R. Housley, 
and W. Polk: “Internet X.509 Public Key Infrastructure 
Certificate and Certificate Revocation List (CRL) Profile”, 
RFC 5280, May 2008 
[10] ISO-IEC 
61850, 
Part 
1-9, 
http://www.iec.ch/cgi-
bin/procgi.pl/www/iecwww.p?wwwlang=E&wwwprog=sea2
2.p&search=iecnumber&header=IEC&pubno=61850, 
last 
access February 2013 
[11] ISO-IEC 
62351, 
Part 
1-8, 
http://www.iec.ch/cgi-
bin/procgi.pl/www/iecwww.p?wwwlang=E&wwwprog=sea2
2.p&search=iecnumber&header=IEC&pubno=62351, 
last 
access February 2013 
[12] IEC 
61851, 
Part 
1, 
www.iec.ch/cgi-
bin/procgi.pl/www/iecwww.p?wwwlang=E&wwwprog=sea2
2.p&search=iecnumber&header=IEC&pubno=61851, 
last 
access February 2013 
[13] R. Falk and S. Fries: Securing the Electric Vehicle Charging 
Infrastructure – Current status and potential next steps, Oct 
2011, Berlin, VDI-Berichte 2131, VDI-Verlag Düsseldorf. 
ISBN 978-3-18-092131-0. 
[14] OCPP – Open Charge Point Protocol, http://www.ocpp.nl, last 
access February 2013  

