136
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Health Monitoring and User Proﬁling for Sports Activities: Evaluating Heart Rate
Measurements and Activity Recognition
Toon De Pessemier, Enias Cailliau, and Luc Martens
imec - WAVES - Ghent University
Technologiepark-Zwijnaarde 15
9052 Ghent, Belgium
Email: toon.depessemier@ugent.be enias.cailliau@ugent.be luc1.martens@ugent.be
Abstract—Wearables are often equipped with an accelerometer
and heart rate sensor. However, the accuracy of the generated
heart rate measurements is still unclear. This paper evaluates
heart rate measurements during various physical activities per-
formed by test users and compares three types of wearable
devices: the specialized sports device with chest strap, the ﬁtness
tracker, and the smart watch. Consistent heart rate measurements
are obtained with all wearables during activities that require no
or very little wrist movements, such as sitting in a chair, cycling,
walking, or even squat exercises. In contrast, wearables worn
around the wrist (smart watches and ﬁtness trackers) and sport
devices worn around the chest measure signiﬁcantly different
heart rates during activities that require a lot of movement of
the wrist, such as dumbbell biceps curl and push up exercises.
These movements of the user’s wrist were measured using
the accelerometer of the wearable, and allow the detection of
repetitions of a physical activity with a typical movement pattern,
such as a dumbbell biceps curl. Based on accelerometer and
heart rate data, a user proﬁle is created for a rule-based ﬁlter
to generate personal recommendations for physical activities.
A mobile app demonstrates that heart rate measurements and
activity recognition can be used to assist and guide users during
workouts.
Keywords–Activity Recognition; Wearable; Health Information;
Recommendation; Personalization.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Obesity due to insufﬁcient physical activity is an ever
growing problem in modern society [1]. Obesity can induce
amongst others, heart diseases and stroke, diabetes, gallbladder
disease, and gallstones. Research has shown that the majority
of health care costs [2] are directly or indirectly due to physical
inactivity [3]. Recent studies in health care support the theory
that a healthy diet and regular physical activity are much
more effective than traditional medication to cure diabetes [4].
Nutrition and training schedules are online available, but are
often not personalized to the user’s training goals or physical
capacities and are static without taking into account the user’s
progress.
To tackle this problem, new efforts are made to decrease
national obesity levels [5], thereby using technology such
as data mining, web frameworks, and multi-modal sensors.
Multi-modal sensors enable real-time monitoring of physical
activities performed by the user. In the domain of public health
monitoring, most of these sensor applications keep track of
energy expenditure while performing daily activities [6][7].
Recent wearable devices are often equipped with accel-
erometers for measuring movements and heart rate sensors.
However, the accuracy of heart rate measurements using these
devices is still unclear. Manufacturers choose not to assert
claims regarding the accuracy of the detection of heart rate
patterns; otherwise their gadget would get classiﬁed as a
medical device and would have to undergo FDA (Food and
Drug Administration) regulatory scrutiny [8].
Therefore, this study investigates the accuracy of heart
rate measurements performed with different types of wear-
able devices. The heart rate measurements are evaluated in
rest condition, as well as during different physical activities.
This paper presents an extension of our previous research on
wearables [1]. Compared to this previous study, one additional
wearable device, the Polar M600, was evaluated. Moreover,
this paper provides a more extensive comparison of the heart
rates. The following additional activities are considered: inter-
val training (cycling), rest (sitting in a chair), walking, squats,
and push ups. The results of this study are important for
(mobile) applications and services that rely on heart rate data
generated by these wearables.
Besides heart rate measurements, wearables can perform
activity recognition based on the motion detected by the
accelerometer. This typically results in a few statistics about
the user’s physical activity, such as the number of steps taken
or the average speed of a running session; but the recognition
of speciﬁc physical exercises is often still missing. More
advanced solutions for activity recognition are often relying on
multiple sensors placed on different parts of the body, e.g., on
the chest and on the hip, composing a body sensor network [9].
However, this is often considered too intrusive for daily activit-
ies. Therefore, this study investigates activity recognition using
popular wearable devices (Section VI). More speciﬁcally, the
number of repetitions of an exercise is counted through activity
recognition. Compared to our previous research [1], this papers
provides more in depth results by making a distinction between
fast execution and slow execution of the exercise.
The goal of this study is to investigate the accuracy of heart
rate measurements obtained with different wearables, and to
analyze if measurements of heart rate sensor and accelero-
meter can be combined for an accurate activity recognition.
According to our knowledge, this is one of the ﬁrst studies
that compares wearables worn around the wrist and a sports
device with a chest strap for heart rate measurements during
a physical activity with a lot of movement of the wrist. These

137
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
measurement data are the input of recommender systems,
which can improve human-web interaction by personalizing
interfaces of web applications with tailored suggestions for
physical activities. This study presents a rule-based ﬁlter as
recommender system.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II refers to interesting related work. Section III discusses
the different methods to measure heart rate. An overview of the
wearable devices used in this study is provided in Section IV.
The next sections discuss the measurements of the wearables:
the heart rate measurements are discussed in Section V, activity
recognition is the topic of Section VI, and the usage of the
combination of both is covered in Section VII. Section VIII
is about the rule-based ﬁlter to generate personalized recom-
mendations. Section IX discusses the results and Section X
draws conclusions and points to future work.
II.
RELATED WORK
The last decade, many digital healthcare services have
emerged, also on the mobile platform, to deliver services
such as health monitoring, medical consultations, diagnosis,
and prescriptions [10][11]. Despite the security and privacy
risks [12], more formal and informal health information has
become available, with the perspective of a new genera-
tion of well-informed, healthy individuals. This phenomenon
turns users into health information producers and consumers
by offering a multitude of health information services and
data [13][14].
To cope with the problem of information overload incurred
by this growing availability of data, recommender systems are
used as an effective information ﬁlter and at the same time
as a tool for providing personal suggestions [15][16]. These
recommenders may suggest a speciﬁc ﬁtness activity or a
running trail out of the many available physical activities. But
good recommendations should match the physical capabilities
of each individual.
To assess the physical load of an activity for a user,
measuring the user’s physical movements (e.g., using a pedo-
meter) is insufﬁcient, since this neglects the user’s effort with
respect to his/her physical capacities. The user’s physical limits
and the intensity of an activity for a user can be estimated
by the combination of heart rate measurements and motion
sensors [17].
The rising interest in health-related data and applications
strengthens the need to monitor heart rate and automatically
recognize physical activities on a daily basis. Although the
commercial sports devices and wearables are equipped with
the necessary hardware to accomplish this challenging task,
their accuracy is still unclear.
For commercially available breast belt measuring devices,
detailed evaluations of the accuracy have been performed [18].
But for recent wearable devices, only a limited number of
studies investigated the accuracy of heart rate data, often
in speciﬁc conditions. In non-moving conditions, heart rate
monitoring using a wrist-worn personal ﬁtness tracker has been
evaluated with patients in an intensive care unit [19]. The
measured values were slightly lower than those derived from
continuous electrocardiographic monitoring, i.e., the medical
method for heart rate monitoring. The authors concluded that
further evaluation is required to investigate if personal ﬁtness
trackers can be used in hospitals, e.g., as early warning sys-
tems. Another very related study has investigated the accuracy
of step counts and heart rate monitoring with wearables [20].
Test subjects were asked to walk a speciﬁc number of steps
during the measurements. The accuracy of the heart rate
measurements with the tested wearable devices showed to
be very high. Our paper contributes to the domain of health
monitoring with wearables by studying the accuracy of heart
rate measurements during intensive physical activities, and
with various types of wearable devices.
In the domain of activity recognition with wearables, the
focus is often on the classiﬁcation of movement or transport-
ation types. Hidden Markov models have been proposed [21]
to recognize different physical activities, such as driving a car,
riding a bicycle, walking, or standing still. In recent Android
versions, similar activity recognition functionality is available
through Google’s activity recognition API [22].
To classify activities such as walking, race walking, and
running based on unlabeled data, an unsupervised method for
recognizing physical activities using accelerometers of smart
phones has been proposed [23]. Two additional smart phones
were attached to the upper arms of the user to recognize
speciﬁc actions while playing basketball, such as passing or
bouncing the ball, or a free throw. Although the accelerometer
hardware in smart phones might be very similar for wearables,
the speciﬁc position of a wearable around the wrist can provide
very different data reﬂecting movements of the hand and wrist,
additional to the arm movements.
Other studies investigated how simple actions can be used
to recognize more complex activities, which are semantically
more representative for a human’s real life [24]. The algorithm
is based on temporal patterns (such as actions occurring after
other actions, or actions that overlap) and a multi-task learning
approach [25].
In contrast, our research targets activities that cannot be
classiﬁed based on the movement speed, but are characterized
by speciﬁc hand or arm movements, such as dumbbell biceps
curl exercises. Our focus is on recognizing the number of
repetitions in view of tracking the physical load, rather than
on classifying the activities.
The growing availability of these health data on the
World Wide Web has brought the problem of information
overload [26] to the ehealth domain. For instance, too many
sports schedules are available in online databases, but only a
minority is matching the physical capabilities and preferences
of an individual. This emphasizes the need to personalize
health information and services, which is ongoing since the
mid-90s [27] and is demonstrated for example in Computer-
Tailoring Health Education Systems [26]. Personalization in
the health domain is described as “adapting the content of
the materials, with the aid of computers, to the speciﬁc
characteristics of a particular person” [28].
Personalization can be achieved by using a recommender
system. Personalized recommendations, tailored messages, and
customized information have shown to be far more effective
than the non-personalized alternative [15][16].
Health promotion and wellness driven applications often
use collaborative ﬁltering techniques to cope with the overload
of health data and identify the most relevant information [29].

138
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Collaborative ﬁltering makes a selection of the available in-
formation for the user based on actions of the community, and
does not rely on a central agency or individual expert. As a
result, the quality of the selection is depending on the size and
engagement of the community using the service. Alternative
content-based solutions do not rely on community activity, but
require speciﬁc metadata to assess the suitability of informa-
tion items. Our proposed recommender is a combination of a
rule-based and content-based system to ﬁlter the content for
the users based on their preferences and physical capabilities.
Unfortunately, many of the existing recommender systems
rely on the manual input of users reporting their performed
exercises. In contrast, our solution combines automatic activity
recognition and heart rate measurements, which are used as
input for the rule-based recommender system.
III.
HEART RATE MONITORING
For heart rate monitoring, various methods exist. For this
study with wearables, the two most important methods are
electrocardiography and photoplethysmography.
Electrocardiography (ECG) is the process of recording the
electrical activity of the heart using electrodes placed on the
skin [30]. These electrodes detect the small electrical changes
on the skin that arise from the heart muscle’s electrophysiolo-
gic pattern of depolarizing during each heartbeat. For medical
purposes, e.g., in hospitals, this technique is applied with 10
electrodes, placed on the patient’s limbs and on the surface of
the chest.
Photoplethysmography (PPG), also known as optical heart
rate sensing, is monitoring heart rate using photo diodes and
LEDs [31]. Green light is absorbed by blood, hence its red
color. When a light source is covered by a body part (e.g., the
wrist in case of a wearable), the light is partially absorbed by
the blood and partially reﬂected. The photo diode captures the
reﬂected light. During a heart beat, more light is absorbed and
the photo diode detects a reduction in green light intensity.
Although a green LED provides the most accurate results, an
infrared LED is often used since this consumes less energy.
PPG is a cheap method for measuring heart rate, often used
in wearables, but has some disadvantages. Motion artifacts
can reduce the accuracy during exercises and free living
conditions. Person-dependent variations may also inﬂuence
the measurements, e.g., a different blood perfusion induces
a different absorption of light.
Many wearables are equipped with one or more LEDs
to measure heart rate using PPG. The LEDs (light emmitor)
and photo diodes (light detector) are typically located on
the back of the smart watch or ﬁtness tracker and in direct
contact with the skin. The popularity of this technique for
wearables is largely due to the convenience and low cost of the
hardware. But manufacturers often label their devices as “not a
medical device” or “not intended to match medical devices or
scientiﬁc measurement devices” [32]. This paper discusses the
use of PPG in wearables for heart rate measuring in different
situations (Section V).
IV.
WEARABLE DEVICES
For measuring heart rate, three types of wearables were
used: a smart watch, a ﬁtness tracker, and a specialized device.
A. Smart Watch
Smart watches are equipped with various sensors but are
not medically approved. The smart watch is a general purpose,
fashionable device with features such as tracking physical
activities and informing users. From a commercial viewpoint,
the target group of customers is not limited to sports people,
but includes also a broader group of people who like the design
or the extra features of the gadget. Smart watches often have
hardware capabilities allowing to extend their functionality
with additional apps. Smart watches are typically equipped
with a light sensor to enable heart rate measurements based
on photoplethysmography.
In this study, the Huawei Watch was used as smart watch
for the measurements because of its popularity and typical
smart watch characteristics (e.g., Android Wear). This is a
smart watch with a classic design that is not focused on sports
activities.
In addition, the Polar M600 smart watch was used as an
alternative wearable device that has a clear focus on tracking
sports activities. It is equipped with the typical hardware
sensors such as an accelerometer and gyroscope. In contrast
to the Huawai watch, the Polar M600 also has a built-in
GPS. It is water resistance and can capture swimming metrics.
An important characteristic for this research is that optical
heart rate measurements are performed with 6 LEDs. These
multiple LEDs should improve the accuracy of the heart rate
measurements of the Polar M600.
To capture heart rate data in real time, a special Android
Wear app was developed for the smart watches. This app
communicates with our developed Android app running on
a smartphone through the Wearable Data Layer API.
B. Fitness Tracker
These devices, typically worn around the wrist, measure
movements and behavior, such as the number of steps taken,
sleeping patterns, and sports activities, e.g., a light jog or a mad
sprint. As with smart watches, ﬁtness trackers are seldom ap-
proved for medical purposes. They are equipped with multiple
sensors, such as a 3-axis accelerometer to monitor movement
in every direction, an altimeter to measure altitude and keep
track of the traveled height, and sometimes a gyroscope to
measure orientation and rotation. Compared to smart watches,
ﬁtness trackers are more focused on tracking physical activit-
ies. In this study, the Microsoft Band 2 was chosen as ﬁtness
tracker because of two reasons. It allows real time analysis
of sensor data (heart rate data using photoplethysmography
and movement data through the accelerometer) and Microsoft
provides a comprehensive API. The API offers functionality,
such as aggregating the results of a query, thereby shifting the
computational load to the Microsoft servers.
C. Specialized Device
The main purpose of this type of device is measuring heart
rate. Typical examples are pulse-oximeters, blood pressure
monitors, and heart rate chest straps. These often have only
a limited number of sensors and a limited number of features.
In this study, the Polar H7 was used as specialized sports
device. This is a popular heart rate chest strap, which produces
very accurate measurements (correlation of 0.97 with true heart
rate [33]). Heart rate is measured using electrodes in the chest
strap that detect heart pulse via an electronic signal.

139
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
V.
HEART RATE MEASUREMENTS
To gather, store, and analyze heart rate measurements of
these three device types, an Android app was developed and
deployed on a Google Nexus 6P smartphone. Figure 1 shows a
screenshot of this app. The wearable devices have a Bluetooth
communication link with this smartphone and the app has a
separate service running for each device to transfer the raw
data to the smartphone and store the data in a Realm IO
database. Realm is an alternative solution for SQLite and
delivers real time performance [34]. The evaluations of the
heart rate measurements have been performed in a controlled
environment.
Figure 2 shows the data ﬂow through the different compon-
ents of the system. The data of accelerometers are processed
and repetitions of speciﬁc movements are detected by activity
recognition (Section VI) . The types of activities, the number
of repetitions, and the intensity (speed of execution) are used
for creating a user proﬁle. Subsequently, a ﬁltering with a
rule-based system (Section VIII) is performed to match the
intensity of an activity to the physical capabilities of the user
(as estimated by the measured heart rate). The best matching
activities are offered to the user as personal suggestions.
Figure 1. Screenshot of the Android app for gathering heart rate data.
A. In Rest Condition
To evaluate the accuracy of heart rate measurements of
the three device types, these heart rate measurements were
compared with the measurements of a specialized device
that is approved for medical purposes, i.e., the Omrom M6
Comfort [35]. The Omrom M6 is a blood pressure monitor,
which has to be attached around the upper arm for measuring
the heart rate.
Figure 2. Flow chart showing the data through the different components of
the system.
Heart rate was measured for two persons, in a rest con-
dition, in a home environment, at two different times. The
ﬁrst test subject (male) had a low natural heart rate, whereas
the second test subject (female) had a rather high heart rate
in rest condition. Demographic and physical characteristics
have an inﬂuence on the absolute value of the heart rate, but
this research focuses on comparing measurements of different
devices and variations in the heart rate, rather than on the
absolute value of the heart rate.
The measurements of the heart rate during rest condition
(Table I) were performed in a home, indoor environment.
These test users were wearing the four devices simultaneously
during the measurements. The Huawei Watch and Microsoft
Band were worn around the wrist (one device per wrist), the
Polar H7 around the chest, and the Omrom M6 around the
upper arm. For optimal measurement results, test users wore
only one smart watch per wrist; so the Polar M600 was not
used in this experiment. Test users were asked to sit in a chair,
doing nothing, while the devices measure their heart rate.
Table I shows for each device the mean, standard deviation,
and median, indicating that all devices provide consistent res-
ults. The mean values and small standard deviation show that
in rest condition, heart rate measurements obtained with these
devices can be considered as reliable. The measurements of
the Omrom M6, which is medically approved, are considered
as the correct heart rate. The measurements of the Polar H7
are the most similar to the measurements of the Omrom M6.
Since a blood pressure monitor is rather expensive and not
practical during sports activities, the Omrom was not suitable
to measure heart rate during physical activities. Therefore,
the Polar H7 was considered as the reference device during
physical activities.
B. During Dumbbell Biceps Curl
Figure 3 shows the heart rate measurements obtained with
the different devices during physical activity, more speciﬁcally
during the dumbbell biceps curl exercise. This exercise for
bicep muscles was performed in a ﬁtness room by two people.
Similar results are obtained for both persons (results are shown
for only one person). Before each experiment, a rest period
of 10 minutes was imposed to avoid inﬂuence of previous
activities and the coupled heart rate.

140
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
TABLE I. MEAN ¯x, STANDARD DEVIATION σ, AND MEDIAN ˜x OF THE HEART RATE IN REST CONDITION WITH TWO USERS AT TWO TIMES
User 1 - Test 1
User 1 - Test 2
User 2 - Test 1
User 2 - Test 2
Device
¯x ± σ
˜x
¯x ± σ
˜x
¯x ± σ
˜x
¯x ± σ
˜x
Smart Watch (Huawei Watch)
55±2.0
55
55±2.0
56
73±3.3
73
72±3.2
71
Fitness Tracker (Microsoft Band)
50±2.9
50
64±6.0
64
75±3.3
75
76±1.7
76
Specialized Sports Device (Polar H7)
56±1.7
56
59±1.4
59
77±3.0
76
80±3.7
79
Specialized Blood Pressure Monitor (Omrom M6)
55±2.8
55
58±2.9
58
76±2.5
76
84±4.2
84
During physical activities, such as dumbbell biceps curl,
measuring heart rate cannot be performed with the blood
pressure monitor due to body movements and the non-wearable
characteristic of the Omrom M6. Since the user was wearing
the Microsoft Band 2 on one wrist and the Huawai Watch
on the other, the Polar M600 smart watch was not evaluated
in this experiment. For the three wearable devices that were
used (Polar H7, Microsoft Band 2, and Huawai Watch), a
signiﬁcantly different measurement signal of the heart rate can
be witnessed during this physical activity.
Figure 3. Heart rate measurements during dumbbell biceps curl.
The heart rate signal produced by the Polar H7 clearly
shows a repetitive pattern that corresponds to the repetitions of
the dumbbell biceps curl exercise. The accurate measurements
can be explained by the use of the chest strap, which is less
inﬂuenced by movements than the devices worn around the
wrist.
The heart rate registered by the Microsoft Band 2 is
consistently lower than the values measured by the Polar
device. Moreover, rapidly varying heart rates due to periods of
intensive physical activity are difﬁcult to detect. As a result, the
subsequent repetitions of the physical exercise are not clearly
visible in the graph of the Microsoft Band in Figure 3.
With the Huawei Watch, less measurement samples are
obtained compared to the Polar H7 and the Microsoft Band.
Movements of this device, which is worn around the wrist,
cause interruptions in the measurement process. Changes in
the device’s position relative to the wrist induce a sensor
recalibration and can be noticed in Figure 3 as the time periods
without measurement data from the Huawei Watch. Periods of
intensive physical activities are noticeable by the variations in
the data of the heart rate measurements. But the interruptions
in the measurement data might be a problem for detailed heart
rate monitoring during physical activities.
C. During various Physical Activities
Based on the results of our previous study [1], this section
further investigates the differences in the heart rate meas-
urements between the smart watch and a specialized device,
such as the Polar H7, as witnessed in Section V-B. For this
experiment, heart rate measurements obtained with the Polar
H7 were compared to the measurements of the Polar M600.
Since, the Polar M600 smart watch is designed for sports
activities, the measurements are performed during different
physical activities. Special attention is paid to the activities that
involve a lot of movement of the wrist in contrast to activities
with limited movement of hands and arms.
Although both devices are connected to the same smart-
phone, as illustrated in Figure 2, a comparison of the raw data
shows that the measurements are not synchronous. This can
be illustrated by Figure 4, which shows the heart rate meas-
urements during interval training. In this test setup, periods of
intensive physical activity and rest periods alternate, which is
reﬂected in a rising and falling heart rate. Figure 4 indicates a
lower responsiveness of the Polar M600, which measures heart
rate at the wrist, compared to the Polar H7, which measures
heart rate at the chest. Sudden increases or decreases in heart
rate are only visible a few seconds later with the Polar M600.
This is important to take into account for users or application
developers that intent to use these data for monitoring activities
with rapidly varying heart rate.
By shifting the measurements of the Polar M600 with 9
seconds in time (by subtracting 9 seconds from the timestamp),
the measurements appear to be synchronous with the measure-
ments of the H7 chest strap. Figure 5 shows the measurements
of both devices after this time shift. To compare the values of
the heart rate measurements of both devices during various
physical activities, this time shift is applied to all subsequent
graphs visualizing heart rate (Figures 5 - 9).
Figure 6 shows the heart rate measurements during rest.
The test users are sitting in a chair doing nothing, while
wearing both devices to measure the heart rate for a period
of 5 minutes. During this period, the measured heart rate
varies between around 55 and 70 beats per minute (bpm). The
measurements of both devices are very similar, except around
second 120 and 195, differences up to 12 bpm are witnessed.
This discrepancy was not due to movement of the wrist or
body of the user, but might be due to inaccuracies of the
measurement process. However, for most of the measurement
period, the differences between both devices are small.
Table II lists the mean difference (Mean diff), the mean
absolute difference (Mean abs diff), the median absolute dif-
ference (Median abs diff) and the maximum absolute differ-
ence (Max abs diff) between the measurements with the two
devices.
The low values of the mean difference might be an in-
dication that both devices report a reliable heart rate. The

141
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
measurements of one of the devices are not consistently higher
than the ones of the other device. The mean absolute difference
is a measure for the average error between both. The low value
in rest condition shows that measurements are very accurate.
The maximum absolute difference stands for the largest error
between both measurements. In rest condition, this error is
obtained around second 195. The median absolute error is
less inﬂuences by these extreme values. In rest condition, the
typical difference between both devices is only 1 bpm.
Figure 7 shows the heart rate measurements while doing
a light activity. In this test setup, the users were asked to
walk while measuring heart rate. Users were is rest condition
(sitting) before the test and during the ﬁrst 30 seconds, so
that an increase in heart rate could be detected during the ﬁrst
minutes. At timestamp 30, users started walking for 7 minutes.
Subsequently, the users returned to their seat (rest condition),
which can be seen by the decreasing heart rate during the
last 3 minutes. Compared to rest condition, the differences in
Table II are slightly higher for walking, but still small.
Figure 5 shows the heart rate during interval training. In
this test setup, the accuracy is evaluated in case of peaks in the
heart rate. The users were ﬁrst in rest condition for 30 seconds.
Next, the users were cycling on a home trainer during 1 minute,
followed by 1 minute of rest. Subsequently, this pattern of 1
minute cycling and 1 minute resting was done 2 times more
(so, 3 times in total). Again, Table II shows small differences
between the measurements of both devices.
In the last two test setups, test users were performing
muscle strengthening activities. This way, the accuracy of the
heart rate can be evaluated during intensive physical activities,
which are characterized by many body movements and a rapid
variation of the heart rate.
Figure 8 shows the measurements obtained while per-
forming squats. The squat is a compound, full body exercise
that trains multiple types of muscles. For this, users have to
bend the knees and move their arms, but wrist movements
are limited. A similar test setup is used here. During the
ﬁrst 30 seconds, the users were doing nothing in order to
measure their heart rate in rest. Next, the users were executing
squat exercises during 30 seconds, followed by 30 seconds of
rest. Subsequently, the users were asked to do a new set of
squats during 30 seconds, rest 30 seconds, doing a last set
of squats during 30 seconds, and rest 30 seconds. Although
this exercise involves a lot of movement with arms and legs,
thereby increasing the heart rate rapidly, the measurement
differences remain small, as shown in Table II.
Figure 9 shows the heart rate measurements while doing
push ups. The push up exercise is performed in a prone position
by raising and lowering the body using the arms. It involves
a lot of pressure on the wrists and subsequent repetitions
implicate some movement of the wrists. Again, the test started
with a period of 30 seconds in rest condition. Subsequently,
the user performs push ups during 30 seconds, followed by 30
seconds of rest. This pattern (30 seconds push ups, 30 seconds
rest) is executed 3 times.
For this activity, Table II and Figure 9 show large dif-
ferences between the two different devices. These differences
can be explained by the movements of the wrist, which are
characteristic for this activity and much more prominent com-
pared to the other activities, such as squats or interval training
Figure 4. Heart rate measurements during interval training without a time
shift.
Figure 5. Heart rate measurements during interval training with a time shift.
(cycling). The range of the heart rate is similar for interval
training, squats, and push ups, starting at approximately 70
bpm and increasing until 120 - 140 bpm. For interval training
and squats, the differences between the Polar H7 and M600 are
typically only 1 bpm (median value), whereas for push ups the
median difference is 18 bpm with maximum differences up to
58 bpm. Figure 9 shows that the two devices provide consistent
measurement values during rest periods: during the ﬁrst and
last 30 seconds of the test, the heart rates of both devices are
very similar. In contrast, during periods of push up activities,
the two devices output very different measurement results. The
Polar H7 shows a heart rate increase with peaks up to 130 bpm
and active periods can be clearly detected, whereas the M600
measures only a slight heart rate increase up to 100 bpm and
active periods can hardly be distinguished. This conﬁrms the
hypothesis that heart rate measurements with smart watches
are less accurate during physical activities that involve a lot of
movement of the wrist, such as push ups or dumbbell biceps
curl exercises.
TABLE II. COMPARATIVE STATISTICS FOR THE HEART RATE
MEASUREMENTS OF THE POLAR H7 AND POLAR M600.
Activity
Mean diff
Mean abs diff
Median abs diff
Max abs diff
Rest
0.36
1.40
1
12
Walking
0.75
1.48
1
18
Interval
0.61
1.88
1
9
Squats
1.32
2.11
1
15
Push Ups
19.39
19.56
18
58

142
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 6. Heart rate measurements during rest.
Figure 7. Heart rate measurements during walking.
Figure 8. Heart rate measurements during squats.
Figure 9. Heart rate measurements during push ups.
VI.
ACTIVITY RECOGNITION
Many studies have tackled the challenge of activity recog-
nition by using multiple sensors placed on different parts of the
body, e.g., on the hip and the chest [9]. But, the placement of
these sensors can be considered too expensive and invasive for
daily sports activities. In contrast, this study performs activity
recognition using wearables.
The aim is to assist users in coaching tasks such as
checking the proper execution of physical exercises or counting
the number of repetitions of an exercise, rather than classifying
the physical activities by type. Repetitions of an exercise
are detected by real-time processing of the raw data of the
accelerometer of the wearable worn around the wrist. The
dumbbell biceps curl exercise is a typical activity that allows
detection of repetitions of this exercise by using data of
the accelerometer. This exercise is characterized by speciﬁc
movements of the arm and wrist, which enable the detection.
Figures 10 and 11 show the pattern of the accelerometer
data, gathered with the ﬁtness tracker around the wrist, during
the execution of this exercise. As an extension to our previous
research [1], the accelerometer data was gathered during fast
execution as well as slow execution. Figure 10 visualizes
the accelerometer data gathered during a fast execution of
the exercise. A slow execution, with a clearer pattern, is
visible in Figure 11. The comparison of Figures 10 and 11
demonstrates that higher maximum and lower minimum values
are reached with a fast execution. Although the execution speed
of the activity and the body characteristics of the user may
have an inﬂuence on the absolute values of the data of the
accelerometer, the typical pattern consisting of local minimums
and maximums can be witnessed for every repetition.
Figure 10. Measurements of the accelerometer of a wearable during fast
execution of a dumbbell biceps curl exercise.
For each repetition of the dumbbell curl activity, 5 local
optima on the Z-axis and 3 on the X-axis can be witnessed as
visible in Figure 12: 1) a maximum on the Z-axis co-occurring
with a maximum on the X-axis, 2) a minimum on the Z-axis,
3) a maximum on the Z-axis co-occurring with a minimum on
the X-axis, 4) a minimum on the Z-axis, and 5) a maximum on
the Z-axis co-occurring with a maximum on the X-axis. The
red cross marks in Figure 12 denote the beginning and end
of a repetition of the exercise, the green check marks indicate
the intermediate optima. Recognizing the dumbbell biceps curl
execution based on the identiﬁcation of a sequence of these
5 events has some beneﬁts. The recognition process requires
limited processing power, allowing real-time recognition (e.g.,
for e-coaching purposes) and making it usable on devices

143
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
Figure 11. Measurements of the accelerometer of a wearable during slow
execution of a dumbbell biceps curl exercise.
Figure 12. Detailed view on the local optima in the accelerometer data
during slow execution of a dumbbell biceps curl exercise.
with limited processing power, such as wearables. Moreover,
the detection of local optima makes the recognition method
directly usable for different variations of the dumbbell curl,
such as concentration curl, hammer curl, and barbell curl.
VII.
HEART RATE AND ACTIVITY RECOGNITION
COMBINED
Monitoring heart rate and simultaneously recognizing re-
petitions of an activity with the accelerometer allow a better
health monitoring and e-coaching during workouts. Since raw
data streams of both sources (heart rate sensor and accelero-
meter) are suffering from inaccuracies, the combination of both
can improve health monitoring. For example, the intensity of
a physical activity for an individual can be estimated based on
the heart rate data. But in case of measurement interruptions in
the heart rate data, accelerometer data can be used to estimate
the performed physical activities.
For e-coaching purposes, our Android app uses both data
sources to instruct the user during physical exercises thereby
maintaining a healthy heart rate. Repetitions of an exercise
are recognized and through text-to-speech techniques the re-
petitions are counted aloud or shown on the screen of the
wearable. Each physical activity has a target range of the heart
rate that can be expected during the execution. If the measured
heart rate is out of this range, the user is warned by a clear
indication on the screen of the wearable. After performing an
activity, the app evaluates the intensity of the physical exercise
as “too intensive”, “to easy”, or “just good”.
VIII.
USER PROFILING AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The physical exercises measured with the accelerometer,
the heart rate, and the characteristics of the exercises are
stored online in a user proﬁle. Users can access their proﬁle
using a web application to analyze their history of physical
activities. Moreover, this user proﬁle is used for personalization
of suggestions for new activities in our Android app, such as a
set of dumbbell biceps curl exercises, a running track, a cycling
track, etc. Figure 13 shows a screenshot of the recommended
activities for one of the users.
Figure 13. Screenshot of the Android app showing the recommended
activities.
To match the user’s preferences and physical capabilities
to the physical activities and select the most suitable ones
as recommendations, the activities of each type are processed
by a specialized rule-based ﬁlter. This rule-based ﬁlter makes
a selection of the activities based on characteristics of that
type of activity, e.g., the distance for a running activity or
the weight and number of repetitions for dumbbell biceps

144
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
curl. For each type of activity, a separate rule-based ﬁlter is
used in order to take into account the user’s experience level
for each activity individually. For example, suppose a user is
an excellent runner. Recommendations for intensive running
activities will be the most suitable, given the user’s physical
capabilities and history. Now, suppose that this user visits the
gym for the ﬁrst time with the goal of training the arm muscles.
The user’s body is not used to intensive dumbbell biceps curl
activities. Recommendations at the level of starting users might
be appropriate here. Therefore, a separate rule-based ﬁlter is
assigned to each activity type to handle these differences in
training level for users. In future work, explanations about the
recommendations can be added in order to further convince
the user to adopt one of the offered recommendations [36].
These explanations can be expressed in terms of (the progress
of) the physical capabilities of the user.
The rule-based functionality is implemented based on
Drools [37]. Drools is a business rules management system
with business rules engine that is scalable and extendible
through the use of drl ﬁles containing the rules. The goal of
these rules is to ﬁlter the available activities in order to come up
with the most suitable activity for the user taking into account
the conditions/context at the moment of the recommendation.
Figure 14. Graphical overview of the rule-based ﬁltering of the activities.
Figure 14 gives a graphical overview of the rule-based
ﬁltering that is applied to the activities. The rules check
the following conditions: 1) User proﬁle: Do the length and
intensity of the cycling or running track match the user’s
physical capabilities and habits? The target length of a track
is similar to the length of the tracks in the user’s history,
but a small difference is tolerated. The intensity of the track
is estimated based on the difference in altitude meters. For
gym exercises, the intensity is estimated based on the weight
or resistance of the ﬁtness equipment and the number of
repetitions. 2) Environmental Context: Does the activity match
the current weather conditions? For example, outdoor running
activities are not recommended when it rains. To retrieve
weather data at the user’s location, the OpenWeatherMap.org
REST API [38] is used. 3) Energy Level: Does the activity
match the user’s energy level of the moment? The energy level
is a value reﬂecting the user’s current energy mood, ranging
from 0 to 5, that users can specify in the Android app to
express their current feeling, e.g., energetic, tired, or something
in between.
IX.
DISCUSSION
During intensive physical activities with limited movement
of the wrist, such as walking, cycling, or even squat exercises,
the experiments showed accurate heart rate measurements
(Section V-C). In contrast, a discrepancy in the measurements
of the wearables is witnessed during intensive physical activ-
ities with a lot of wrist movements (dumbbell biceps curl
and push ups). Shifts of the wearable with respect to the
position of the wrist induce inaccuracies or even interruptions
in the measurement process thereby hindering the monitoring
of heart rate variations. The resulting measurements obtained
with wearables around the wrist are often lower than the heart
rate measured with a specialized sports device.
Specialized sports devices, using a sensor with chest
strap, produce more accurate heart rate measurements, even
during intensive physical activities, and enable recognizing
subsequent repetitions of a physical activity based on the
periodic peaks in the heart rate. Therefore, our advise is to
use a device with a chest strap for heart rate measurements in
case of physical activities that involve a lot of movement of
the wrist.
Besides, raw data produced by the accelerometer of wear-
ables can be used to recognize repetitions of physical exercises
with characteristic movements of the wrist/hand/arm. E.g., the
dumbbell biceps curl exercise can be recognized based on
a speciﬁc pattern with 5 local optima on the X and Z-axis
of accelerometer data. Both raw data streams (heart rate and
accelerometer data) can be combined for further analysis, but
also to assist the user in coaching tasks, such as counting the
number of times an exercise is performed, or instructing to
decrease or increase the intensity of the exercise. Automatic
activity recognition can help the user by reducing the burden of
providing input about the performed activities in digital health
services or ﬁtness apps. Moreover, recognized activities can
be stored in a user proﬁle, which can be used as an indicator
for the user’s physical capabilities, habits or preferences for
sports activities. Based on this proﬁle, the current weather,
and the user’s mood (energy level as speciﬁed by the user),
personalized recommendations are generated using a set of
rule-based ﬁlters.
X.
CONCLUSION
This study discussed the usage of wearables for heart
rate measurements and the automatic recognition of physical
activities. Measurements with a ﬁtness tracker and a smart
watch showed to be very accurate in case of limited physical
movement, e.g., in a state of rest. During intensive physical
activities with a lot of wrist movements, measurements per-
formed with wearables might be disturbed. Simultaneously

145
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
measured accelerometer data showed to be useful for re-
cognizing repetitions of physical exercises with characteristic
movements of the arm, hand, or wrist. The combination of
heart rate measurements and activity recognition allows to
create a use proﬁle that reﬂects the user’s physical capabilities
in view of generating personal recommendations. In future
research, we will investigate the recognition of other physical
exercises and relate the resulting accelerometer data to heart
rate data more in depth.
REFERENCES
[1]
T. D. Pessemier, E. Cailliau, and L. Martens, “Heart rate monitoring
and activity recognition using wearables,” in Proceedings of the Sixth
International Conference on Building and Exploring Web Based Envir-
onments (WEB2018), May 2018, pp. 1–6.
[2]
T. Bodenheimer, E. H. Wagner, and K. Grumbach, “Improving primary
care for patients with chronic illness,” Jama, vol. 288, no. 14, 2002, pp.
1775–1779.
[3]
F. W. Booth, C. K. Roberts, and M. J. Laye, “Lack of exercise is a
major cause of chronic diseases,” Comprehensive Physiology, vol. 2,
no. 2, 2012, p. 1143.
[4]
S. Hammer, J. Kim, and E. Andr´e, “Med-styler: Metabo diabetes-
lifestyle recommender,” in Proceedings of the Fourth ACM Conference
on Recommender Systems, ser. RecSys ’10.
New York, NY, USA:
ACM, 2010, pp. 285–288.
[5]
S. A. Khan et al., “Gethealthyharlem.org: developing a web platform
for health promotion and wellness driven by and for the harlem com-
munity.” AMIA. Annual Symposium proceedings / AMIA Symposium.,
vol. 2009, 2009, pp. 317–321.
[6]
S. Chen, J. Lach, O. Amft, M. Altini, and J. Penders, “Unsupervised
activity clustering to estimate energy expenditure with a single body
sensor,” in 2013 IEEE International Conference on Body Sensor Net-
works, May 2013, pp. 1–6.
[7]
F. Dadashi et al., “A hidden markov model of the breaststroke swimming
temporal phases using wearable inertial measurement units,” in 2013
IEEE International Conference on Body Sensor Networks, May 2013,
pp. 1–6.
[8]
J.
Kim,
“Wearable
heart
rate
monitors
enter
the
consumer
mainstream,”
2014,
[Online]
Retrieved
March,
2018,
from
http://internetofthingsagenda.techtarget.com/feature/Wearable-device-
heart-rate-monitoring-entering-the-consumer-mainstream.
[9]
G. Plasqui, A. Bonomi, and K. Westerterp, “Daily physical activity
assessment with accelerometers: new insights and validation studies,”
Obesity Reviews, vol. 14, no. 6, 2013, pp. 451–462.
[10]
D. G. Korzun, A. Y. Meigal, A. V. Borodin, and L. I. Gerasimova-
Meigal, “On mobile personalized healthcare services for human involve-
ment into prevention, therapy, mutual support, and social rehabilitation,”
in 2017 International Multi-Conference on Engineering, Computer and
Information Sciences (SIBIRCON).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 276–281.
[11]
Y. V. Zavyalova, D. G. Korzun, A. Y. Meigal, and A. V. Borodin,
“Towards the development of smart spaces-based socio-cyber-medicine
systems,” International Journal of Embedded and Real-Time Commu-
nication Systems (IJERTCS), vol. 8, no. 1, Jan. 2017, pp. 45–63.
[12]
G. Kambourakis, E. Klaoudatou, and S. Gritzalis, “Securing medical
sensor environments: the codeblue framework case,” in The Second
International Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security, 2007.
ARES 2007.
IEEE, 2007, pp. 637–643.
[13]
G. Eysenbach, “Consumer health informatics,” British medical journal,
vol. 320, no. 7251, 2000, p. 1713.
[14]
R. J. Cline and K. M. Haynes, “Consumer health information seeking
on the internet: the state of the art,” Health education research, vol. 16,
no. 6, 2001, pp. 671–692.
[15]
V. J. Strecher et al., “The effects of computer-tailored smoking cessation
messages in family practice settings,” Journal of Family Practice,
vol. 39, no. 3, 1994, pp. 262–270.
[16]
M. K. Campbell et al., “Improving dietary behavior: the effectiveness of
tailored messages in primary care settings.” American journal of public
health, vol. 84, no. 5, 1994, pp. 783–787.
[17]
P. S. Freedson and K. Miller, “Objective monitoring of physical activity
using motion sensors and heart rate,” Research quarterly for exercise
and sport, vol. 71, no. sup2, 2000, pp. 21–29.
[18]
M. Weippert et al., “Comparison of three mobile devices for measuring
r–r intervals and heart rate variability: Polar s810i, suunto t6 and an
ambulatory ecg system,” European journal of applied physiology, vol.
109, no. 4, 2010, pp. 779–786.
[19]
R. R. Kroll, J. G. Boyd, and D. M. Maslove, “Accuracy of a wrist-
worn wearable device for monitoring heart rates in hospital inpatients:
A prospective observational study,” Journal of medical Internet research,
vol. 18, no. 9, 2016, p. 253.
[20]
F. El-Amrawy and M. I. Nounou, “Are currently available wearable
devices for activity tracking and heart rate monitoring accurate, precise,
and medically beneﬁcial?” Healthcare informatics research, vol. 21,
no. 4, 2015, pp. 315–320.
[21]
J. Lester, T. Choudhury, N. Kern, G. Borriello, and B. Hannaford, “A hy-
brid discriminative/generative approach for modeling human activities,”
in Proceedings of the 19th International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial
intelligence.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 2005, pp. 766–772.
[22]
Google, “Activity Recognition API,” 2018, [Online] Retrieved March,
2018,
from
https://developers.google.com/android/reference/com/
google/android/gms/location/ActivityRecognitionApi.
[23]
Y. Lu, Y. Wei, L. Liu, J. Zhong, L. Sun, and Y. Liu, “Towards unsuper-
vised physical activity recognition using smartphone accelerometers,”
Multimedia Tools and Applications, vol. 76, no. 8, Apr 2017, pp.
10 701–10 719.
[24]
Y. Liu, L. Nie, L. Han, L. Zhang, and D. S. Rosenblum, “Ac-
tion2activity: Recognizing complex activities from sensor data.” in Pro-
ceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
(IJCAI), 2015, pp. 1617–1623.
[25]
Y. Liu, L. Nie, L. Liu, and D. S. Rosenblum, “From action to
activity: Sensor-based activity recognition,” Neurocomputing, vol. 181,
no. Supplement C, 2016, pp. 108 – 115, big Data Driven Intelligent
Transportation Systems.
[26]
L. Fernandez-Luque, R. Karlsen, and L. Vognild, “Challenges and
opportunities of using recommender systems for personalized health
education.” Studies in health technology and informatics, vol. 150, 2008,
pp. 903–907.
[27]
K. Binsted, A. Cawsey, and R. Jones, Generating personalised patient
information using the medical record.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 1995, pp. 29–41.
[28]
H. de Vries and J. Brug, “Computer-tailored interventions motivating
people to adopt health promoting behaviours: Introduction to a new
approach,” Patient Education and Counseling, vol. 36, no. 2, 1999, pp.
99–105.
[29]
D. Jannach, M. Zanker, A. Felfernig, and G. Friedrich, Recommender
Systems: An Introduction, 1st ed.
New York, NY, USA: Cambridge
University Press, 2010.
[30]
L. N. Katz and A. Pick, Clinical electrocardiography.
Lea & Febiger,
1956.
[31]
A. Reisner, P. A. Shaltis, D. McCombie, and H. H. Asada, “Utility
of the photoplethysmogram in circulatory monitoring,” The Journal of
the American Society of Anesthesiologists, vol. 108, no. 5, 2008, pp.
950–958.
[32]
T. Collins, I. M. Pires, S. Oniani, and S. Woolley, “How reliable is
your wearable heart-rate monitor?” 2018, [Online] Retrieved November,
2018, from https://medicalxpress.com/news/2018-06-reliable-wearable-
heart-rate.html.
[33]
M. Altini, “Heart Rate Variability for Training,” 2013, [Online] Re-
trieved March, 2018, from http://www.marcoaltini.com/blog/heart-rate-
variability.
[34]
Realm, “Realm - create reactive mobile apps in a fraction of time,”
2018, [Online] Retrieved March, 2018, from https://realm.io/.
[35]
Omron, “Automatic Blood Pressure Monitor - Model M6 Comfort
IT,” 2015, [Online] Retrieved March, 2018, from http://www.omron-
healthcare.com/en/support/manuals/download/m6-comfort-it-hem-
7322u-e-en.
[36]
N. Karacapilidis, S. Malefaki, and A. Charissiadis, “A novel framework
for augmenting the quality of explanations in recommender systems,”
Intelligent Decision Technologies, vol. 11, no. 2, 2017, pp. 187–197.

146
International Journal on Advances in Internet Technology, vol 11 no 3 & 4, year 2018, http://www.iariajournals.org/internet_technology/
2018, © Copyright by authors, Published under agreement with IARIA - www.iaria.org
[37]
J. Community, “Drools - Business rules management System,” 2018,
[Online] Retrieved March, 2018, from http://www.drools.org/.
[38]
OpenWeatherMap, “Current weather and forecast,” 2018, [Online] Re-
trieved March, 2018, from http://openweathermap.org/.

